F=i=l 

Ex  LIBRIS 

UNIVERSITATIS 

ALBERT/ENSIS 

X-'L-  t^.AA ''  >■ 


m.£/_ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  20t6;>/ 


j 


V 


https://archive.org/details/elementsofeuclidOOeucl_0 


(taatott  Smeo  ol  School  $ooko. 


THE  ELEMENTS  OF 


EUCLID 

FOR  THE  USE  OF  SCHOOLS  AND  COLLEGES ; 

COMPRISING  TEE  FIRST  TWO  BOOKS  AND  PORTIONS  OF  TEE 
ELEVENTH  AND  TWELFTH  BOOKS  ; 

WITH  NOTES  AND  EXERCISES. 


\K 

I.  TODHUNTER,  M.A.,  F.R.S 

NEW  EDITION. 


'Cormtt# : 

COPP,  CLARK  & CO.,  FRONT  STREET. 

1882. 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  the  Parliament  of  Canada,  in  the  year  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy-six,  by  Copp,  Clark  & Co.  Toronto* 
Ontario,  in  the  Office  of  the  Minister  of  Agriculture. 


UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  ALBERTA 


EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS. 


BOOK  I. 


DEFINITIONS. 


1.  A point  is  that  which  has  no  parts,  or  which  has  no 
magnitude. 

2.  A line  is  length  without  breadth. 

3.  The  extremities  of  a line  are  points. 

4.  A straight  line  is  that  which  lies  evenly  between 
its  extreme  points. 

5.  A superficies  is  that  which  has  only  length  and 
breadth. 

6.  The  extremities  of  a superficies  are  lines. 

7.  A plane  superficies  is  that  in  which  any  two  points 
being  taken,  the  straight  line  between  them  lies  wholly  in 
that  superficies. 

8.  A plane  angle  is  the  inclination  of  two  lines  to  one 
another  in  a plane,  which  meet  together,  but  are  not  in  the 
same  direction. 


1 


2 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


9.  A plane  rectilineal  angle  is  the  inclination  of  two 
straight  lines  to  one  another,  which  meet  together,  but  are 
not  in  the  same  straight  line. 

Note.  When  several  angles  are  at  one  point  B,  any 
one  of  them  is  expressed  by  three  letters,  of  which  the 
letter  which  is  at  the  vertex  of  the  angle,  that  is,  at  the 
point  at  which  the  straight  lines  that  contain  the  angle 
meet  one  another,  is  put  between  the  other  two  letters, 
and  one  of  these  two  letters  is  somewhere  on  one  of 
those  straight  lines,  and  the  other  letter  on  the  other 
straight  line.  Thus,  the  angle  which  is  contained  by  the 


straight  lines  AB,  CB  is  named  the  angle  ABC,  or  CBA  • 
the  angle  which  is  contained  by  the  straight  lines  AB,  DB 
is  named  the  angle  ABD,  or  DBA  ; and  the  angle  which 
is  contained  by  the  straight  lines  DB,  CB  is  named  the 
angle  DBC,  or  CBD  ; but  if  there  be  only  one  angle  at  a 
point,  it  may  be  expressed  by  a letter  placed  at  that  point; 
as  the  angle  at  E. 

10.  When  i straight  line  standing 
on  another  straight  line,  makes  the  adja- 
cent angles  equal  to  one  another,  each  of 
the  angles  is  called  a right  angle  ; and 
the  straight  line  which  stands  on  the 
other  is  called  a perpendicular  to  it. 


11.  An  obtuse  angle  is  that  which 
is  greater  than  a right  angle. 


12.  An  acute  angle  is  that  which 
is  less  than  a right  angle. 


DEFINITIONS.  3 

13.  A term  or  boundary  is  the  extremity  of  any  thing. 

14.  A figure  is  that  which  is  enclosed  by  one  or  more 
boundaries. 

15.  A circle  is  a plane  figure 
contained  by  one  line,  which  is 
called  the  circumference,  and  is 
such,  that  all  straight  lines  drawn 
from  a certain  point  within  the 
figure  to  the  circumference  are 
equal  to  one  another : 

16.  And  this  point  is  called  the  centre  of  the  circle. 

17.  A diameter  of  a circle  is  a straight  line  drawn 
through  the  centre,  and  terminated  both  ways  by  the  cir- 
cumference. 

[A  radius  of  a circle  is  a straight  line  drawn  from  the 
centre  to  the  circumference.] 

18.  A semicircle  is  the  figure  contained  by  a diameter 
and  the  part  of  the  circumference  cut  off  by  the  diameter. 

19.  A segment  of  a circle  is  the  figure  contained  by  a 
straight  line  and  the  circumference  which  it  cuts  off. 

20.  Rectilineal  figures  are  those  which  are  contained 
by  straight  lines : 

21.  Trilateral  figures,  or  triangles,  by  three  straight 
lines : 

22.  Quadrilateral  figures  by  four  straight  lines : 

23.  Multilateral  figures,  or  polygons,  by  more  than 
four  straight  lines. 

24.  Of  three-sided  figures, 

An  equilateral  triangle  is  that  which 

has  three  equal  sides : 


1—2 


4 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


25.  An  isosceles  triangle  is  that 
which  has  two  sides  equal : 


26.  A scalene  triangle  is  that 
which  has  three  unequal  sides : 


27.  A right-angled  triangle  is  that 
which  has  a right  angle : 

[The  side  opposite  to  the  right 
angle  in  a right-angled  triangle  is  fre- 
quently called  the  hypotenuse.] 

28.  An  obtuse-angled  triangle  is 
that  which  has  an  obtuse  angle : 


29.  An  acute-angled  triangle  is 
that  which  has  three  acute  angles. 

Of  four-sided  figures, 

30.  A square  is  that  which  has 
all  its  sides  equal,  and  all  its  angles 
right  angles : 


31.  An  oblong  is  that  which  has 
all  its  angles  right  angles,  but  not  all 
its  sides  equal : 


32.  A rhombus  is  that  which  has 
all  its  sides  equal,  but  its  angles  are 
not  right  angles : 


DEFINITIONS 1 


33.  A rhomboid  is  that  which  has 
its  opposite  sides  equal  to  one  another, 
but  all  its  sides  are  not  equal,  nor  its 
angles  right  angles : 


Z7 


34.  All  other  four-sided  figures  besides  these  are 
called  trapeziums. 

35.  Parallel  straight  lines  are  such  __ 

as  are  in  the  same  plane,  and  which 

being  produced  ever  so  far  both  ways  — 

do  not  meet. 

[Note.  The  terms  oblong  and  rhomboid  are  not  often 
used-  Practically  the  following  definitions  are  used..  Any 
four-sided  figure  is  called  a quadrilateral.  A line  joining 
two  opposite  angles  of  a quadrilateral  is  called  a diagonal. 
A quadrilateral  which  has  its  opposite  sides  parallel  is 
called  a parallelogram.  The  words  square  and  rhombus 
are  used  in  the  sense  defined  by  Euclid ; and  the  word 
rectangle  is  used  instead  of  the  word  oblong. 

Some  writers  propose  to  restrict  the  word  trapezium 
to  a quadrilateral  which  has  two  of  its  sides  parallel ; and 
it  would  certainly  be  convenient  if  this  restriction  were 
universally  adopted.] 


Let  it  be  granted, 

1.  That  a straight  line  may  be  drawn  from  any  one 
point  to  any  other  point : 

2.  That  a terminated  straight  line  may  be  produced  to 
any  length  in  a straight  line  : 

3.  And  that  a circle  may  be  described  from  any  centre, 
at  any  distance  from  that  centre. 


POSTULATES. 


0 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


AXIOMS. 

1.  Things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal 
to  one  another. 

2.  If  equals  be  added  to  equals  the  wholes  are  equal. 

3.  If  equals  be  taken  from  equals  the  remainders  are 
equal. 

4.  If  equals  be  added  to  unequals  the  wholes  are 
unequal. 

5.  If  equals  be  taken  from  unequals  the  remainders 
are  unequal. 

6.  Things  which  are  double  of  the  same  thing  are 
equal  to  one  another. 

7.  Things  which  are  halves  of  the  same  thing  are 
equal  to  one  another. 

8.  Magnitudes  which  coincide  with  one  another,  that 
is,  which  exactly  fill  the  same  space,  are  equal  to  one 
another. 

9.  The  whole  is  greater  than  its  part. 

10.  Two  straight  lines  cannot  enclose  a space. 

11.  All  right  angles  are  equal  to  one  another. 

12.  If  a straight  line  meet  two  straight  lines,  so  as  to 
make  the  two  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  of  it  taken 
together  less  than  two  right  angles,  these  straight  lines, 
being  continually  produced,  shall  at  length  meet  on  that 
side  on  which  are  the  angles  which  are  less  than  two  right 
angles. 


PROPOSITION  1.  PROBLEM. 


To  describe  an  equilateral  triangle  on  a given  finite 
straight  line. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line:  it  is  required  t© 
describe  an  equilateral  triangle  on  AB, 


From  the  centre  A,  at  the  distance  AB,  describe  the 
circle  BGZ>.  [Postulate  3. 

From  the  centre  B,  at  the  distance  BA,  describe  the 
circle  AGE.  [Postulate  3. 

From  the  point  G,  at  which  the  circles  cut  one  another,  draw 
the  straight  lines  GA  and  GB  to  the  points  A and  B.  [Post.  1. 
ABC  shall  be  an  equilateral  triangle. 

Because  the  point  A is  the  centre  of  the  circle  BGD, 
AG  is  equal  to  AB.  [Definition  15. 

And  because  the  point  B is  the  centre  of  the  circle  AGE, 
BG  is  equal  to  BA.  [Definition  15. 

But  it  has  been  shewn  that  GA  is  equal  to  AB ; 
therefore  GA  and  GB  are  each  of  them  equal  to  AB. 

But  things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to 
one  another.  [Axiom  1. 

Therefore  GA  is  equal  to  GB. 

Therefore  GA,  AB,  BG  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Wherefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equilateral,  [Def.  24. 
and  it  is  described  on  the  given  straight  line  AB.  q.e.f. 


8 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  2.  PROBLEM. 

From  a given  point  to  draw  a straight  line  equal  to  a 
given  straight  line. 

Let  A be  the  given  point,  and  BC  the  given  straight 
line : it  is  required  to  draw  from  the  point  A a straight 
line  equal  to  BC. 

From  the  point  A to  i?draw 
the  straight  line  AB ; [Post.  1. 
and  on  it  describe  the  equi- 
lateral triangle  DAB , ,[L  1. 

and  produce  the  straight  lines 
DA,  DB  to  E and  F.  [Post.  2. 

From  the  centre  B,  at  the  dis- 
tance BC,  describe  the  circle 
CGH,  meeting  DFsA  G.  [Post.  3. 

From  the  centre  D , at  the  dis- 
tance DG,  describe  the  circle 
GKL,  meeting  DE  at  L.  [Post.  3. 

AL  shall  be  equal  to  BC. 

Because  the  point  B is  the  centre  of  the  circle  CGH, 
BC  is  equal  to  BG.  [Definition  15. 

And  because  the  point  D is  the  centre  of  the  cirele  GKL, 
DL  is  equal  to  DG ; [Definition  15. 

and  DA,  DB  parts  of  them  are  equal ; [Definition  24. 

therefore  the  remainder  A L is  equal  to  the  remainder 
BG.  [Axiom  3. 

But  it  has  been  shewn  that  BC  is  equal  to  BG ; 
therefore  AL  and  BC  are  each  of  them  equal  to  BG. 

But  things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to 
one  another.  [Axiom  1. 

Therefore  AL  is  equal  to  BC. 

Wherefore  from  the  given  point  A a straight  line  AL 
has  been  drawn  equal  to  the  given  straight  line  BC.  Q.e.f. 

PROPOSITION  3.  PROBLEM. 

From  the  greater  of  two  given,  straight  lines  to  cut  off 
a part  equal  to  the  less 

Let  AB  and  C be  the  twq  given  straight  lines,  of  which 


BOOK  I.  3,  4. 


9 


AB  is  the  greater : it  is  required  to  cut  off  from  AB,  the 
greater,  a part  equal  to  G the  less. 

From  the  point  A draw 
the  straight  line  AD  equal 
to  C ; [I.  2. 

and  from  the  centre  A,  at 
the  distance  AD,  describe 
the  circle  DBF  meeting  AB 
at  E.  [Postulate  3. 

AB  shall  be  equal  to  C. 

Because  the  point  A is  the  centre  of  the  circle  DBF 
AB  is  equal  to  AD.  [Definition  15. 

But  G is  equal  to  AD.  [Constmction. 

Therefore  AB  and  G are  each  of  them  equal  to  AD. 
Therefore  AB  is  equal  to  G.  [Axiom  1. 

Wherefore  from,  AB  the  greater  of  two  given  straight 
lines  a part  AB  has  been  cut  off  equal  to  G the  less,  q.e.f. 

PROPOSITION  4.  THEOREM. 

If  two  triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one  equal  to  two 
sides  of  the  other , each  to  each , and  have  also  the  angles 
contained  by  those  sides  equal  to  one  another,  they  shall 
also  have  their  bases  or  third  sides  equal;  and  the  two 
triangles  shall  be  equal,  and  their  other  angles  shall  be 
equal,  each  to  each,  namely  those  to  which  the  equal  sides 
are  opposite. 

Let  ABG,  DBF  be  two  ti'iangles  which  have  the  two  sides 
AB,AC equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  DF,  each  to  each,  namely, 
AB  to  DE,  and  AG  to 
DF,  and  the  angle  BAG 
equal  to  the  angle  EDF : 
the  base  BG shall  be  equal 
to  the  base  EF,  and  the 
triangle  ABG  to  the  tri- 
angle DEF,  and  the  other 
angles  shall  be  equal,  each 
to  each,  to  which  the  equal 
sides  are  opposite,  namely,  the  angle  ABG  to  the  angle 
DEF,  and  the  angle  AGB  to  the  angle  DFE. 


10 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


For  if  the  triangle  ABC  be  applied  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
so  that  the  point  A may  be  on  the  point  D,  and  the 
straight  line  AB  on  the 
straight  line  DE,  the 
point  B will  coincide  with 
the  point  E,  because  AB 
is  equal  to  DE.  [Hyp.  , 

And,  AB  coinciding  with 
DE,  AC  will  fall  on  DE ',  L 

because  the  angle  BAG  ^ 
is  equal  to  the  angle  EDF.  [Hypothesis. 

Therefore  also  the  point  C will  coincide  with  the  point  F, 
because  AC  is  equal  to  DF.  [Hypothesis. 

But  the  point  B was  shewn  to  coincide  with  the  point  E, 
therefore  the  base  BC  will  coincide  with  the  base  EF ; 
because,  B coinciding  with  E and  C with  F,  if  the  base  BC 
does  not  coincide  with  the  base  EF,  two  straight  lines  will 
enclose  a space  ; which  is  impossible.  [Axiom  10. 

Therefore  the  base  BC  coincides  with  the  base  EF,  and  is 
equal  to  it.  [Axiom  8. 

Therefore  the  whole  triangle  ABC  coincides  with  the  whole 
triangle  DEF,  and  is  equal  to  it.  [Axiom  8. 

And  the  other  angles  of  the  one  coincide  with  the  other 
angles  of  the  other,  and  are  equal  to  them,  namely,  the 
angle  ABC  to  the  angle  DEF,  and  the  angle  ACB  to  the 
angle  DFE. 

Wherefore,  if  two  triangles  &c.  q.e.d. 

PROPOSITION  5.  THEOREM. 

The  angles  at  the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  are  equal 
to  one  another ; and  if  the  equal  sides  be  produced  the 
angles  on  the  other  side  of  the  base  shall  be  equal  to  one 
another. 

Let  ABC  be  an  isosceles  triangle,  having  the  side  AB 
equal  to  the  side  AC,  and  let  the  straight  lines  AB,  AC 
be  produced  to  D and  E : the  angle  ABC  shall  be  equal  to 
the  angle  ACB,  and  the  angle  CBD  to  the  angle  BCE. 

In  BD  take  any  point  F, 

and  from  A E the  greater  cutoff  AG  equal  to  A/7  the  less,  [1.3. 


BOOK  I.  5. 


II 


and  join  FG,  GB. 

Because  ^4  i^is  equal  to  A G,  [Constr.  x 

and  A B to  AC,  [ Hypothesis . / \ 

the  two  sides  FA , AG  are  equal  to  the  / \ 

two  sides  (3^4,  ^42?,  each  to  each ; and  / \ 

they  contain  the  angle  2^4  G common  B/  V 
to  the  two  triangles  AFC,  AGB ; /5>^\ 

therefore  the  base  FG  is  equal  to  the  u'L^' 
base  GB,  and  the  triangle  AFC  to  j \ 

the  triangle  AGB,  and  the  remaining  / \ 

angles  of  the  one  to  the  remaining  / \ 

angles  of  the  other,  each  to  each,  to  D E 

which  the  equal  sides  are  opposite, 
namely  the  angle  AGF  to  the  angle  ABG,  and  the  angle 
AFC  to  the  angle  A GB.  [I.  4. 

And  because  the  whole  AF  is  equal  to  the  whole  AG, 
of  which  the  parts  AB,  AG  are  equal,  [ Hypothesis . 

the  remainder  BF  is  equal  to  the  remainder  CG.  [Axiom  3. 
And  FG  was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  GB ; 
therefore  the  two  sides  BF,  FG  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
GG,  GB,  each  to  each ; 

and  the  angle  BFG  was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  the  angle  CGB ; 
therefore  the  triangles  BFG,  CGB  are  equal,  and  their 
other  angles  are  equal,  each  to  each,  to  which  the  equal 
sides  are  opposite,  namely  the  angle  FBG  to  the  angle 
GGB,  and  the  angle  BCF  to  the  angle  CBG.  [I.  4. 

And  since  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  whole  angle  ABG 
is  equal  to  the  whole  angle  AGF, 

and  that  the  parts  of  these,  the  angles  GBG,  BGF  are  also 
equal ; 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  ABG  is  equal  to  the  remain- 
ing angle  AGB,  which  are  the  angles  at  the  base  of  the 
triangle  ABG.  [Axiom  3. 

And  it  has  also  been  shewn  that  the  angle  FBG  is 
equal  to  the  angle  GGB,  which  are  the  angles  on  the  other 
side  of  the  base. 

Wherefore,  the  angles  &c.  q.e.d. 

Corollary.  Hence  every  equilateral  triangle  is  also 
equiangular. 


12 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


LI.  3. 


[Construction. 


PROPOSITION  6.  THEOREM. 

If  two  angles  of  a triangle  be  equal  to  one  another , the 
sides  also  which  subtend , or  are  oppo- 
site to,  the  equal  angles,  shall  be  equal 
to  one  another. 

Let  ABC  be  a triangle,  having  the 
angle  ABC  equal  to  the  angle  ACB  : the 
side  AC  shall  be  equal  to  the  side  AB. 

For  if  AC  be  not  equal  to  AB,  one 
of  them  must  be  greater  than  the  other. 

Let  AB  be  the  greater,  and  from  it 
cut  off  DB  equal  to  AC  the  less, 
and  join  DC. 

Then,  because  in  the  triangles  DBC,  ACB , 

DB  is  equal  to  A C, 
and  BC  is  common  to  both, 

the  two  sides  DB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  AC,  CB, 
each  to  each ; 

and  the  angle  DBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  A CB ; [Hypothesis. 
therefore  the  base  DC  is  equal  to  the  base  AB,  and  the 
triangle  DBC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ACB,  [I.  4. 

the  less  to  the  greater ; which  is  absurd.  [Axiom  9. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  unequal  to  AC,  that  is,  it  is  equal  to  it. 

"Wherefore,  if  two  angles  &c.  q.e.d. 

Corollary.  Hence  every  equiangular  triangle  is  also 
equilateral. 

PROPOSITION  7.  THEOREM. 

On  the  same  base,  and  on  the  same  side  of  it,  there  can* 
not  be  two  triangles  having  their 
sides  which  are  terminated  at  one 
extremity  of  the  base  equal  to  one 
another,  and  likewise  those  which 
are  terminated  at  the  other  ex- 
tremity equal  to  one  another. 

If  it  be  possible,  on  the  same 
base  AB,  and  on  the  same  side  of 
it,  let  there  be  two  triangles  ACB, 

ADB,  having  their  sides  CA,  DA, 
which  are  terminated  at  the  extremity  A of  the  base,  equal 


BOOK  I.  7,  a is 

to  one  another,  and  likewise  their  sides  CBt  DB,  which  ar® 
terminated  at  B equal  to  one  another. 

Join  CD.  In  the  case  in  which  the  vertex  of  each  tri- 
angle is  without  the  other  triangle ; 

because  AC  is  equal  to  AD,  {Hypothesis, 

the  angle  ACD  is  equal  to  the  angle  ADC.  [I.  5. 

But  the  angle  ACD  is  greater  than  the  angle  BCD,  [Ax.  9. 
therefore  the  angle  ADC  is  also  greater  than  the  angle 
BCD  j 

much  more  then  is  the  angle  BDC  greater  than  the  angle 

BCD. 

Again,  because  BC  is  equal  to  BD,  [Hypothesis-* 

the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD.  [I.  5. 

But  it  has  been  shewn  to  be  greater ; which  is  impossible. 

But  if  one  of  the  vertices  as 
D,  be  within  the  ether  triangle 
ACB,  produce  AC,  AD  to  E.  F 
Then  because  AC  is  equal  to 
AD,  in  the  triangle  ACD,  [Hyp. 
the  angles  BCD,  FDC,  on  the 
other  side  of  the  base  CD,  are 
equal  to  one  another.  [I.  5. 

But  the  angle  BCD  is  greater 
than  the  angle  BCD, 
therefore  the  angle  FDC  is  also  greater  than  the  angle 
BCD; 

much  more  then  is  the  angle  BDC  greater  than  the  angle 
BCD. 

Again,  because  BC  is  equal  to  BD,  [Hypothesis. 

the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD.  [I.  5. 

But  it  has  been  shewn  to  be  greater ; which  is  impossible. 

The  case  in  which  the  vertex  of  one  triangle  is  on  a side 
of  the  other  needs  no  demonstration. 

Wherefore,  on  the  same  base  &c.  q.e.o. 

PROPOSITION  8.  THEOREM. 

If  two  triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one  equal  to 
sides  of  the  other , each  to  each,  and  have  likewise  their 


14 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS, 


bases  equal , the  angle  which  is  contained  by  the  two  sides 
of  the  one  shall  be  equal  to  the  angle  which  is  contained  by 
the  two  sides , equal  to  them , of  the  other. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles,  having  the  two  sides 
AB,  AG  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  DF \ each  to  each, 
namely  AB  to  DE,  and  AC  to  DF,  -and  also  the  base  BC 
equal  to  the  base  EF:  the  angle  BAG  shall  be  equal  to  the 
angle  EDF. 

A 


B t 

For  if  the  triangle  ABC  be  applied  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
so  that  the  point  B may  be  on  the  point  E,  and  the  straight 
line  BC  on  the  straight  line  EF,  the  point  C will  also  coin- 
cide with  the  point  F,  because  BC  is  equal  to  EF.  [Hyp. 
Therefore,  BC  coinciding  with  EF,  BA  and  AC  will  coin- 
cide with  ED  and  DF. 

For  if  the  base  BC  coincides  with  the  base  EF,  but  the 
sides  BA,  CA  do  not  coincide  with  the  sides  ED,  FD,  but 
have  a different  situation  as  EG,  FG ; then  on  the  same 
base  and  on  the  same  side  of  it  there  will  be  two  triangles 
having  their  sides  which  are  terminated  at  one  extremity 
of  the  base  equal  to  one  another,  and  likewise  their  sides 
which  are  terminated  at  the  other  extremity. 

But  this  is  impossible.  [I.  7. 

Therefore  since  the  base  BC  coincides  with  the  base  EF, 
the  sides  BA,  AC  must  coincide  with  the  sides  ED,  DF. 
Therefore  also  the  angle  BAG  coincides  with  the  angle 
EDF,  and  is  equal  to  it.  [Axiom  84 

Wherefore,  if  two  triangles  &c.  q.b.». 

PROPOSITION  9.  PROBLEM. 

To  bisect  a given  rectilineal  angle,  that  is  to  divide  it 
into  two  equal  angles. 


BOOK  I.  9,  10. 


15 


Lei  BAG  he  the  given  rectilineal 
angle : it  ia  required  to  bisect  it 
Take  any  point  D in  AB,  and 
from  AC  cut  off  AE  equal  to 
AB;  £1.  3. 

join  DE,  and  on  DE,  on  the  side 
remote  from  A , describe  the  equi- 
lateral triangle  DEF £1. 1. 

Join  AF,  The  straight  line  AF  shall  bisect  the  angle  BAG 
Because  AD  is  equal  to  AE,  ,[ Construction. 

and  AF  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  DAF,  EAF ' 
the  two  sides  DA,  AF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  EA,  AF, 
each  to  each ; 

and  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  EF;  £. Definition  24. 

therefore  the  angle  DAF  is  equal  to  the  angle  EAF.  £1.  8. 

Wherefore  the  given  rectilineal  angle  BAG  is  bisected 
by  the  straight  line  AF.  q.e.f. 

PROPOSITION  10.  PROBLEM . 

To  bisect  a given  finite  straight  line,  that  is  to  divide  it 
into  two  equal  parts. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight 
line : it  is  required  to  divide  it  into 
two  equal  parte. 

Describe  on  it  an  equilateral 
triangle  ABC,  [L  1. 

and  bisect  the  angle  AGB  by  the 
straight  line  GD,  meeting  AB  at 
D.  [1.9. 

AB  shall  be  cut  into  two  equal  parte  at  the  point  D. 

Because  AC  is  equal  to  CB,  [Definition  24. 

and  CD  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  A CD,  BCD, 
the  two  sides  AC,  CD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BC,  CD, 
each  to  each ; 

and  the  angle  ACD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD ; [Constr. 

therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  DB.  [I.  4. 

Wherefore  the  given  straight  line  AB  is  divided  into 
two  equal  parts  at  the  point  D.  Q.E.F. 


16  EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  11.  PROBLEM. 


To  draw,  a straight  line  , at  right  angles  to  a ' givm 


straight  line,  from  a given 
point  in  the  same. 

Let’  AB  be  the  givers 
straight  line,  and  C the  given 
point  in  it*  it  is  required  to 
draw  from  the  point  C a 
straight  line  at  right  angles 
to  AB. 


Take,  anya  point  D in  AC,  and  make  CE  equal  to  CD.  [I.  3, 
On  DE  describe, the,  equilateral  triangle  DFE,  [L  1> 
and  join  CF. 

The  straight  line  CF  drawn  from  the  given  point  C.shalL 
be  at  right  angles  to  the  given  straight  line  AB. 


Because  DC  is  equal  to  CE,  . [ Construction 

an  d CF  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  DCF,  ECF; 
the  two  sides  DC,  CF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  EC,  CF, 
each  to  each ; 


and  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  EF ; [ Definition  24, 

therefore  the  angle  DCF  is  equal  to  the  angle  ECF;  [I.  8. 
and  they  are  adjacent  angles. 

But  when  a straight  line,  standing  on  another  straight 
line,  makes  the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  one  another,  each 
of  the  angles  is  called  a right  angle ; [: Definition  10. 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  DCF,  ECF  is  a right  angle. 


Wherefore  from  the  given  point  C in  the  given  straight 
line  AB,  CF  has  been  drawn  at  right 1 angles  to  AB.  q.e.f. 

Corollary.  By  the  help  of  this  problem  it  may  be  shewn 
that  two  -straight  lines  cannot 
have  a common  segment. 

If  it  be  possible,  let  the 
two  straight  lines  ABC,  A BD 
have  the  segment  AB  com- 
mon to  both  of  them. 

From  the  point  B draw 
BE  at  right  angles  to  AB. 

Then,  because  ABC  is  a straight  line,  [Hypothesis. 

the  angle  CBE  is  equal  to  the  angle  EBA.  [Definition  IQ. 


BOOK  I.  11,  12. 


17 

[Hypothesis. 


Also,  because  ABD  is  a straight  line, 
the  angle  DBE  is  equal  to  the  angle  EBA. 

Therefore  the  angle  DBE  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBE,  [Ax.  1. 
the  less  to  the  greater ; which  is  impossible.  [Axiom  9. 

Wherefore  two  straight  lines  cannot  have  a common 
segment. 

PROPOSITION  12.  PROBLEM. 

To  draw  a straight  line  perpendicular  to  a given 
straight  line  of  an  unlimited  length , from  a given  point 
without  it. 


Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  which  may  be  pro- 
duced to  any  length  both  ways,  and  let  C be  the  given  point 
without  it : it  is  required  to  draw  from  the  point  G a 
straight  line  perpendicular  to  AB. 


Take  any  point  D on 
the  other  side  of  AB,  and 
from  the  centre  C,  at  the 
distance  CD,  describe  the 
circle  EOF,  meeting  AB  at 
F and  G.  [Postulate  3. 

Bisect  FG  at  IT,  [I.  10. 
and  join  CH. 

The  straight  line  CH  drawn  from  the  given  point  C 
shall  be  perpendicular  to  the  given  straight  line  AB. 

Join  CF,  CG. 

Because  FIT  is  equal  to  HG , [Construction. 

and  HC  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  FHC,  GHC; 
the  two  sides  FIT,  HC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  GH,  HC, 
each  to  each  ; 


and  the  base  CF  is  equal  to  the  base  CG ; [Definition  15. 
therefore  the  angle  CHF  is  equal  to  the  angle  CHG  ; [I.  8. 
and  they  are  adjacent  angles. 

But  when  a straight  line,  standing  on  another  straight  line, 
makes  the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  one  another,  each  of  the 
angles  is  called  a right  angle,  and  the  straight  line  which 
stands  on  the  other  is  called  a perpendicular  to  it.  [Def.  10. 

Wherefore  a perpendicular  CH  has  been  drawn  to 
the  given  straight  line  AB  from  the  given  point  G with- 
out it.  Q.E.F. 


2 


18 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  13.  THEOREM. 

The  angles  which  one  straight  line  makes  with  another 
straight  line  on  one  side  of  it,  either  are  two  right  angles, 
or  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  make  with  the  straight  line 
CD,  on  one  side  of  it,  the  angles  CBA,  ABD : these  either 
are  two  right  angles,  or  are  together  equal  to  two  right 
angles. 


For  if  the  angle  CBA  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABD,  each 
of  them  is  a right  angle.  [ Definition  10. 

But  if  not,  from  the  point  B draw  BE  at  right  angles  to 
CD;  [I.  11. 

therefore  the  angles  CBE,  EBD  are  two  right  angles. [Def.10. 
Now  the  angle  CBE  is  equal  to  the  two  angles  CBA,  ABE ; 
to  each  of  these  equals  add  the  angle  EBD ; 
therefore  the  angles  CBE,  EBD  are  equal  to  the  three 
angles  CBA,  ABE,  EBD.  [Axiom,  2. 

Again,  the  angle  DBA  is  equal  to  the  two  angles  DBE, 
EBA  ; 

to  each  of  these  equals  add  the  angle  ABC ; 
therefore  the  angles  DBA,  ABC  are  equal  to  the  three 
angles  DBE,  EBA,  ABC.  [ Axiom  2. 

But  the  angles  CBE,  EBD  have  been  shewn  to  be  equal 
to  the  same  three  angles. 

Therefore  the  angles  CBE,  EBD  are  equal  to  the  angles 
DBA,  ABC.  [Axiom  1. 

But  CBE,  EBD  are  two  right  angles ; 
therefore  DBA,  ABC  are  together  equal  to  two  right 


Wherefore,  the  angles  &c.  Q.E.D. 


BOOK  I.  14,  15. 


19 


PROPOSITION  14.  THEOREM. 

If, \ at  a point  in  a straight  line , two  other  straight  lines , 
on  the  opposite  sides  of  it,  make  the  adjacent  angles  toge- 
ther equal  to  two  right  angles,  these  two  straight  lines 
shall  be  in  one  and  the  same  straight  line. 

At  the  point  B in  the  straight  line  AB,  let  the  two 
straight  lines  BO,  BD,  on  the  opposite  sides  of  AB,  make 
the  adjacent  angles  ABO,  ABD  together  equal  to  two 
right  angles:  BD  shall  be  in  the  same  straight  line  with  OB* 

For  if  BD  be  not  in 
the  same  straight  line  with 
OB,  let  BE  be  in  the  same 
straight  line  with  it. 

Then  because  the  straight 
line  AB  makes  with  the 
straight  line  CBE,  on  one 
side  of  it,  the  angles  ABO,  O 
ABE,  these  angles  are  to- 
gether equal  to  two  right  angles.  [I.  13. 

But  the  angles  ABO,  ABD  are  also  together  equal  to  two 
right  angles.  [Hypothesis. 

Therefore  the  angles  A BO,  ABE  are  equal  to  the  angles 
ABO,  ABD. 

From  each  of  these  equals  take  away  the  common  angle 
ABO,  and  the  remaining  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  remain- 
ing angle  ABD,  [Axiom  3. 

the  less  to  the  greater ; which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  BE  is  not  in  the  same  straight  line  with  OB. 

And  in  the  same  manner  it  may  be  shewn  that  no  other 
can  be  in  the  same  straight  line  with  it  but  BD ; 
therefore  BD  is  in  the  same  straight  line  with  OB. 

Wherefore,  if  ala  point  &c.  q.e.d. 


PROPOSITION  15.  THEOREM. 

If  two l straight  lines  cut  one  another,  the  vertical,  or 
opposite,  angles  shall  be  equal , 


20 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


Let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD  cut  one  another  at 
the  point.®;  the  angle  A EC  shall  be  equal  to  the  angle 
DEB , and  the  angle  CEB 
to  the  angle  AED. 

Because  the  straight  line 
A E makes  with  the  straight 
line  CD  the  angles  CEA, 

AED, these  angles  are  toge- 
ther equal  to  two  right  angles.  [I.  13. 

Again,  because  the  straight  line  DE  makes  with  the  straight 
line  AB  the  angles  AED , DEB,  these  also  are  together 
equal  to  two  right  angles.  [1. 13. 

But  the  angles  CEA , AED  have  been  shewn  to  be  toge- 
ther equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Therefore  the  angles  CEA,  AED  are  equal  to  the  angles 
AED,  DEB. 

From  each  of  these  equals  take  away  the  common  angle 
AED,  and  the  remaining  angle  CEA  is  equal  to  the  re- 
maining angle  DEB.  [Axiom  3. 

In  the  same  manner  it  may  be  shewn  that  the  angle 
CEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  AED. 

Wherefore,  if  two  straight  lines  &c.  q.e.d. 

Corollary  1.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  two  straight 
lines  cut  one  another,  the  angles  which  they  make  at  the 
point  where  they  cut,  are  together  equal  to  four  right  angles. 

Corollary  2.  And  consequently,  that  all  the  angles  made 
by  any  number  of  straight  lines  meeting  at  one  point,  are 
together  equal  to  four  right  angles. 

PROPOSITION  16.  THEOREM. 

If  one  side  of  a triangle  be  produced , the  exterior  angle 
shall  be  greater  than  either  of  the  interior  opposite  angles. 

Let  ABC  be  a triangle,  and  let  one  side  BC  be  pro- 
duced to  D : the  exterior  angle  A CD  shall  be  greater  than 
either  of  the  interior  opposite  angles  CBA,  BAC. 

Bisect  A C at  E,  [I.  10. 

join  BE  and  produce  it  to  F,  making  EF  equal  to  EB,  [I.  3. 
and  join  FC. 

Because  AE  is  equal  to  EC,  and  BE  to  EF ; [ Constr . 

the  two  sides  AE,  EB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CE,  EF 
each  to  each ; 


:B00k*I.  16,17.  2# 

and  the  angle  ABB  is  equal  to' the  angle  GEF, 
because  they  are  opposite  ver- 
tical angles ; [L  15, 

therefore  the  triangle  AEB 
is  equal  to  the  triangle  GEF. , 
and  the  remaining  angles  to 
the  remaining  angles,  each  to 
each,  to  which  the  equal  sides; 
are  opposite ; [I.  4. 

therefore  the  angle  BAE  is 
equal  to  the  angle  EGF. 

But  the  angle  ECD  is  greater 
than  the  angle  EGF.  [Axiom  9, 

Therefore  the  angle  AGD  is  greater  than  the  angle  BAE. 

■ Th  the  same  manner  if  BO  be  bisected,  and  the  side  AG 
be  produced,  to  G,  it  may  be  shewn  that  the  angle  BCG, 
thatis  the  angle  A CD,  is  greater  than  the  angle  A BG.  |I.  15. 
Wherefore,  if om'-side.  %c.  - - h, 

PROPOSITION  17.  THEOREM. 

Any  two  angles  of  a triangle  are  together  less  than  two 
right  angles.  . , 

Let  ABO  be  a triangle  : any  two  of  its  angles  are 
together  less  than  two  right  angles, 

Produce  BG  to  2). 

, Then  because  A CD  is  the  exte- 
rior angle  of  the  irimgle  ABC,  it 
is  greater  than  the  interior  oppo- 
site angle  ABC [1.  16. 

To  each  of  these  add  the  angled  <72? 

Therefore  the  angles  AGD,  ACB 
are  greater  than  the  angles'  ABO,  ACB. 

But  the  angles  AGD,  AG B are  together  equal  to  two  right 
angles.  [I.  13. 

Therefore  the  angles  ABC,  ACB  are  together  less  than 
two  right  angles. 

In  the  same  manner  it  may  be  shewn  that  the;  angles 
BAG,  ACB,  as  also  the  angles  GAB,  ABC \ are  together 
less  than  two  right  angles. 

Wherefore,  any  two  angles  &e.  Q.E.P. 


22 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 

PROPOSITION  18*  THEOREM. 

The  greater  tide  of  every  triangle  has  the  greater 
angle  opposite  to  it. 

Let  ABC  be  a triangle,  of  which  the  side  ACis  greater 
than  the  side  AJB : the  angle  ABC  is  also  greater  than  the 
angle  ACB. 

Because  AC  is  greater  than 
AB,  make  AD  equal  to  AB,  [1. 3* 
and  join  BD. 

Then,  because  A DB  is  the  ex- 
terior angle  of  the  triangle  BDGt 
it  is  greater  than  the  interior  op- 
posite angle  DCB.  [1. 16. 

But  the  angle  ADB  is-  equal  to  the  angle  ABDr  [I.  5. 
because  the  side  AD  is  equal  to  the  side  AB.  f C&nstr. 

Therefore  the  angle  ABD  is  also  greater  than  the  angle 
ACB. 

Much  more  then  is  the  angl &ABC  greater  than  the  angle 
ACB.  \Axkm 

Wherefore,  the  greater  side  &c*  q.e.ix 

PROPOSITION  Ift.  THEOREM. 

The  greater  angle  of  every  triangle  is  subtended  by  the 
greater  side , or  has  the  greater  side  opposite  to  it. 

Let  ABC  be  a triangle,  of  which  the  angle  ABC  is 
greater  than  the  angle  ACB  : the  side  AC  is  also  greater 
than  the  side  AB. 

For  if  not,  AC  must  be  either 
equal  to  AB  or  less  than  AB. 

But  ACis  not  equal  to  ABr 
for  then  the  angle  ABC  would 
be  equal  to  the  angle  A CB;  [1.5. 
but  it  is  not;  IHgpothesis. 

therefore  ACis  not  equal  to  AB. 

Neither  is  A C less  than  AB, 
for  then  the  angle  ABC  would  be  less  than  the  angle 
ACB;  [1.18. 

but  it  is  not  5 [ Hypothesis . 


23* 


BOOK  I.  19,  20,  21. 


therefore  AC  is  not  less  than  AB„ 

And  it  has  been  shewn  that  ACia-  not  equal  to  AB. 
Therefore  AC  is  greater  than  AB. 

Wherefore,  the  greater  angle  &e.  q.e.o. 


PROPOSITION  20.  THEOREM . 


Any  two  sides  of  a triangle  are  together  greater  than 
the  third  side. 

Let  ABC  be  a triangle : any  two  sides  of  it  are  together 
greater  than  the  third  side ; 
namely,  BA.  AG  greater  than 
BG ; and  AB,  BC  greater  than 
AG;  and  BC,  GA  greater  than 
AB 

Produce  BA  to  D, 
making  AD  equal  to  AG, 
and  join  DC. 

Then,  because  AD  is  equal  to  AC,  [Construction . 

the  angle  ADC  is  equal  to  the  angle  A CD.  [I.  5. 

But  the  angle  BCD  is  greater  than  the  angle  ACD.  [Ax.  9i 
Therefore  the  angle  BCD  is  greater  than  the  angle  BDG. 
And  because  the  angle  BCD  of  the  triangle  BCD  is 
greater  than  its  angle  BDG,  and  that  the  greater  angle  is 
subtended  by  the  greater  side ; [1. 19>. 

therefore  the  side  BD  is  greater  than  the  side  BG. 

But  BD  is  equal  to  BA  and  AG. 

Therefore  BA,  AC  are  greater  than  BC. 

In  the  same  manner  it  may  be  shewn  that  AB,  BC  jut© 
greater  than  AG,  and  BC,  CA  greater  than  AB. 

Wherefore,  any  two  sides  &c.  q.ej>. 


PROPOSITION  21.  THEOREM. 

If  from  the  ends  of  the  side  of  a triangle  there  he  drawn 
two  straight  lines  to  a point  within  the  triangle,  these 
shall  he  less  than  the  other  two  sides  of  the  triangle , hM 
shall  contain  a greater  angle. 


24 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


Let  ABC  be  a triangle,  and  from  the  points  B,  C, 
the  ends  of  the  side  BC1 
Jet  the  two  straight  lines 
BD,  CD  be  drawn  to  the 
point  D within  the  triangle : 

BD,  DC  shall  be  less 
than  the  other  two  sides 
BA,  AC  of  the  triangle, 
but  shall  contain  an  angle 
BDC  greater  than  the 
angle  BAG. 

Produce  BD  to  meet  A C at  E. 

" Because  two  sides  of  a triangle  are  greater  than  the 
third  side,  the  two  sides  BA,,AE  of  the  triangle  ABE  are 
greater  than  the  side  BE.  [I.  20, 

To  each  of  these  add  EG. 


Therefore  BA,  AC  are  greater  than  BE,  EG. 

Again ; the  two  sides  CE,  ED  of  the  triangle  CED  are 
greater  than  the  third  side  CD.  [I.  20. 

:To  each  of  these  add  DB. 

. Therefor e CE,  .EB  are  greater  than  CD,  DB. 

But  it  has  been  shewn  that  BA,  AC  are  greater  than 
BE,  EC; 

much  more  then  are  BA,  AC  greater  than  BD,  DC. 

Again,  because  the  exterior  angle  of  any  triangle  is 
greater  than:  the  interior  opposite  angle,  the  exterior 
angle  BDC  of  the  triangle  CDE  is  greater  than  the  angle 
CED.  11.16. 

Por,  the  same  reason,  the  exterior  angle  CEB  of  the  tri- 
angle ABE  is'greater  than  the  angle  BA.E. 

But  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  angle  BDC is  greater  than 
the  angle  CEB ; 

much  more  then  is  the  angle  BDC  greater  than  the  angle 
BAG. 

Wherefore,  if  from  the  ends  &c,  q.e.p.  \f 


BOOK  L 22. 


25 


PROPOSITION  22.  PROBLEM. 


To  make  a triangle  of  which  the  sides  shall  be  equal  to 
three  given  straight  lines,  but  any  two  whatever  qf  these 
must  be  greater  them  the  third. 

Let  A,  B,  C be  the  three  given  straight  lines,  of  which 
any  two  whatever  are  greater  than  the  third;  namely, 
A and  B greater  than  G ; A and  G greater  than  B ; and 
B and  G greater  than  A : it  is  required  to  make  a triangle 
of  which  the  sides  shall  be  equal  to  A,  B,  G,  each  to  each. 


Take  a straight  line 
DE  terminated  at  the 
point  D,  but  unlimited 
towards  E,  and  make 
BE  equal  to  A,  FG 
equal  to  B,  and  GH 
equal  to  G.  [I.  3. 

From  the  centre  F, 
at  the  distance  FI), 
describe  the  circle 
DKL.  [Post.  3. 


rom  the  centre  G,  at  the  distance  GH,  describe  the  circle 
ILK , cutting  the  former  circle  at  K. 
oin  KF,  KG.  The  triangle  KFG  shall  have  its  sides 
jual  to  the  three  straight  lines  A,  B,  G. 

Because  the  point  F is  the  centre  of  the  circle  DKL , 
FD  is  equal  to  FK.  [ Definition  15. 

But  FD  is  equal  to  A.  [ Construction . 

Therefore  FK  is  equal  to  A.  [Axiom  1. 

Again,  because  the  point  G is  the  centre  of  the  circle  HLK \ 
GH  i s equal  to  GK.  [Definition  15. 

But  GH  is  equal  to  G.  [Construction. 

Therefore  GK  is  equal  to  G.  [Axiom  I. 

And  FG  is  equal  to  B.  [Construction. 

Therefore  the  three  straight  lines  KF  FG,  GK  are  equal 
to  the  three  A,  B,  G. 

Wherefore  the  triangle  KFG  has  its  three  sides 
KF,  FG,  GK  equal  to  the.  three  given  straight  lines 
A,  B,  G.  Q.E.F. 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  23.  PROBLEM. 

At  a given  point  in  a given  straight  line , to  make  & 
rectilineal  angle  equal  to  a given  rectilineal  angle. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  and  A the  given 
point  in  it,  and  DCE  the  given  rectilineal  angle : it  is 
required  to  make  at  the  given  point  A,  in  the  given  straight 
line  AB,  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  angle 
DCE. 

In  CD,  CE  take  any 
points  D,  E,  and  join  DE. 

Make  the  triangle  A FG  the 
sides  of  which  shall  be  equal 
to  the  three  straight  lines 

CD,  DE,  EC ; so  that  AF 
shall  be  equal  to  CD,  AG  to 

CE,  and  FG  to  DE.  [I.  22. 

The  angle  FAG  shall  be 
equal  to  the  angle  DCE. 

Because  FA,  AG  are  equal  to  DC,  CE,  each  to  each, 
and  the  base  FG  equal  to  the  base  DE ; [Construction. 
therefore  the  angle  FAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCE.  [I.  8. 

Wherefore  at  the  given  point  A in  the  given  straight 
line  AB,  the  angle  FAG  has  been  made  equal  to  the  given 
rectilineal  angle  DCE.  q.e.f. 


PROPOSITION  24.  THEOREM. 

If  two  triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one  equal  to  tico 
sides  of  the  other,  each  to  each,  but  the  angle  contained  by 
the  two  sides  of  one  of  them  greater  than  the  angle  con- 
tained by  the  two  sides  eqtial  to  them,  of  the  other,  the  base 
of  that  which  has  the  greater  angle  shall  be  greater  than 
the  base  of  the  other ^ 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles,  which  have  the  two 
sides  AB,  AG,  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  DF,  each  to 
each,  namely,  AB  to  DE,  and  AC  to  DF,  but  the  angle 
BAC  greater  than  the  angle  EDF:  the  base  BC  shall  be 


BOOK  /.  24,  25. 


27 


greater  than  the  base 
EF. 

Of  the  two  sides 
DE,  DF,  let  DE  be 
the  side  which  is  not 
greater  than  the  other. 
At  the  point  D in 
the  straight  line  DE, 
make  the  angle  EDG 
equal  to  the  angle 
BAG,  [I.  23. 


and  join  EG,  GF. 

Because  AB  is  equal  to  DE,  [Hypothesis. 

and  AC  to  DG  ; [Construction. 

the  two  sides  BA,  AG  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED,  DG, 
each  to  each  ; 

and  the  angle  BAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDG ; [Constr. 

therefore  the  base  BG  is  equal  to  the  base  EG.  [I.  4. 

And  because  DG  is  equal  to  DF,  [Construction. 

the  angle  DG F is  equal  to  the  angle  DFG.  [I.  5. 

But  the  angle  DGF  is  greater  than  the  angle  EGF.  [Ax.  9. 
Therefore  the  angle  DFG  is  greater  than  the  angle  EGF. 
Much  more  then  is  the  angle  EFG  greater  than  the  angle 
EGF.  [Axiom  9. 

And  because  the  angle  EFG  of  the  triangle  EFG  is 
greater  than  its  angle  EGF,  and  that  the  greater  angle  is 
subtended  by  the  greater  side,  [I.  19. 

therefore  the  side  EG  is  greater  than  the  side  EF. 

But  EG  was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  BG ; 
therefore  BG  is  greater  than  EF. 

Wherefore,  if  two  triangles  &c.  q.e.d. 


PROPOSITION  25.  THEOREM. 

If  two  triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one  equal  to  two 
sides  of  the  other,  each  to  each,  but  the  base  of  the  one 


28 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


greater  than  the  base  of  the  other,  the  angle  contained  by 
the  sides  of  that  which  has  the  greater  base,  shall  be 
greater  than  the  angle  contained  by  the  sides  equal  to 
them,  of  the  other. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles,  which  have  the  two 
sides  AB,  AC  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  DF,  each  to 
each,  namely,  AB  to  DE,  and  AC  to  DF,  but  the  base 
BG  greater  than  the  base  EF:  the  angle  BAG  shall 
be  greater  than  the  angle 
EDF. 

For  if  not,  the  angle 
BA  C must  be  either  equal 
to  the  angle  EDF  or  less 
than  the  angle  EDF. 

But  the  angle  BAG  is  not 
equal  to  the  angle  EDF, 
for  then  the  base  BG 
would  be  equal  to  the  base  EF;  [I.  4. 

but  it  is  not ; [Hypothesis. 

therefore  the  angle  BAG  is  not  equal  to  the  angle  EDF. 
Neither  is  the  angle  BA  C less  than  the  angle  EDF , 
for  then  the  base  BC  would  be  less  than  the  base  EF ; [1. 24. 
but  it  is  not ; [Hypothesis. 

therefore  the  angle  BAG  is  not  less  than  the  angle  EDF. 
And  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  angle  BAG  is  not  equal 
to  the  angle  EDF. 

Therefore  the  angle  BA  G is  greater  than  the  angle  EDF. 

Wherefore,  if  two  triangles  &c.  q.e.d. 


PROPOSITION  26.  THEOREM. 

If  two  triangles  have  tioo  angles  of  the  one  equal  to  two 
angles  of  the  other,  each  to  each,  and  one  side  equal  to 
one  side,  namely , either  the  sides  adjacent  to  the  equal 
angles,  or  sides  which  are  opposite  to  equal  angles  in  each , 
then  shall  the  other  sides  be  equal,  each  to  each,  and  also 
the  third  angle  of  the  one  equal  to  the  third  angle  of  the 
other. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles,  which  have  the 
angles  ABC,  BGA  equal  to  the  angles  DEF,  EFD,  each 


BOOK  I.  26. 


29 


to  each,  namely,  ABC  to  DBF,  and  BGA  to  EFD  ; and 
let  them  have  also  one  side  equal  to  one  side  ; and  first  let 
those  sides  be  equal  which  are  adjacent  to  the  equal  angles 
in  the  two  triangles,  namely,  BC  to  EF:  the  other  sides 
shall  be  equal,  each  to  each,  namely,  AB  to  DE,  and 
A C to  DF,  and  the  third 
angle  BAG  equal  to  the 
third  angle  EDF. 

For  if  AB  be  not 
equal  to  DE,  one  of  them 
must  be  greater  than  the 
other.  Let  AB  be  the 
greater,  and  make  BG 
equal  to  DE,  [I.  3. 

and  join  GC. 

Then  because  GB  is  equal  to  DE,  [ Construction, . 

and  BC  to  EF ; [. Hypothesis, . 

the  two  sides  GB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  EF, 
each  to  each ; 

and  the  angle  GBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF ; [Hypothesis.. 

therefore  the  triangle  GBC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
and  the  other  angles  to  the  other  angles,  each  to  each,  to 
which  the  equal  sides  are  opposite ; [I.  4. 

therefore  the  angle  GCB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFE. 

But  the  angle  DFE  is  equal  to  the  angle  A CB,  [ Hypothesis . 
Therefore  the  angle  GCB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACB,  [Ax.  1. 
the  less  to  the  greater ; which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  unequal  to  DE, 
that  is,  it  is  equal  to  it ; 

and  BC  is  equal  to  EF ; [Hypothesis. 

therefore  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
DE,  EF,  each  to  each  ; 

and  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF;  [Hypothesis, 
therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  DF,  and  the 
third  angle  BAG  to  the  third  angle  EDF.  [1. 4. 


80 


EUCLID S ELEMENTS. 


Next,  let  sides  which  are  opposite  to  equal  angles  in 
each  triangle  be  equal  to  one  another,  namely,  AB  to 
DE : likewise  in  this  case  the  other  sides  shall  be  equal, 
each  to  each,  namely,  BC  to  EF,  and  AC  to  DF,  and 
also  the  third  angle  BAG  equal  to  the  third  angle  EDF. 


For  if  BC  be  not 
equal  to  EF,  one  of  them 
must  be  greater  than 
the  other. 

Let  BC  be  the  greater, 
and  make  BH  equal  to 
EF,  [I.  3. 

and  join  AH. 


Then  because  BH  is  equal  to  EF,  [ Construction . 

and  AB  to  DE ; [Hypothesis. 

the  two  sides  AB,  BH  axe  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  EF, 
each  to  each ; 

and  the  angle  A BIT  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF ; [Hypothesis. 
therefore  the  triangle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
and  the  other  angles  to  the  other  angles,  each  to  each,  to 
which  the  equal  sides  are  opposite  ; [I.  4. 

therefore  the  angle  BHA  is  equal  to  the  angle  EFD. 

But  the  angle  EFD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCA.  [ Hypothesis . 

Therefore  the  angle  BHA  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCA ; [4a:.  1. 

that  is,  the  exterior  angle  BHA  of  the  triangle  AHC  is 

equal  to  its  interior  opposite  angle  BCA  ; 

which  is  impossible.  [I.  16. 

Therefore  BC  is  not  unequal  to  EF, 

that  is,  it  is  equal  to  it ; 

and  AB  is  equal  to  DE ; [Hypothesis. 

therefore  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
DE,  EF,  each  to  each  ; 


and  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF  ; [Hypothesis. 
therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  DF,  and  the 
third  angle  BAG  to  the  third  angle  EDF.  [I.  4. 

Wherefore,  if  two  triangles  &c.  Q.E.D. 


BOOK  I.  27,  28. 


31 


PROPOSITION  27.  THEOREM. 


If  a straight  line  falling  on  two  other  straight  lines , 
make  the  alternate  angles  equal  to  one  another , the  two 
straight  lines  shall  be  parallel  to  one  another. 

Let  the  straight  line  EF,  which  falls  on  the  two  straight 
lines  AB,  CD,  make  the  alternate  angles  AEF,  EFB 
equal  to  one  another : AB  shall  be  parallel  to  CD. 

For  if  not,  AB  and  CD,  being  produced,  will  meet 
either  towards  B,  D or  towards  A,  C.  Let  them  be  pro- 
duced and  meet  towards  B,  D at  the  point  G. 


Therefore  GEF  is  a triangle,  and  its  exterior  angle  AEF 
is  greater  than  the  interior  opposite  angle  EFG ; [I.  16, 

But  the  angle  AEF  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EFG  ; [Hyp. 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  AB  and  CD  being  produced,  do  not  meet  to- 
wards B,  D. 

In  the  same  manner,  it  may  be  shewn  that  they  do  not 
meet  towards  A,  C. 

But  those  straight  lines  which  being  produced  ever  so  far 
both  ways  do  not  meet,  are  parallel.  [Definition  35. 

Therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 


If  a straight  line  falling  on  two  other  straight  lines , 
make  the  exterior  angle  equal  to  the  interior  and,  opposite 
angle  on  the  same  side  of  the  line , or  make  the  interior 
angles  on  the  same  side  together  equal  to  two  right  angles , 
the  two  straight  lines  shall  be  parallel  to  one  another. 


PROPOSITION  28.  THEOREM. 


82 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


Lefc  the  straight  line  EF,  which  fails  on  the  two 
straight  lines  AB,  CD , make  the  exterior  angle  EGB 
equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle  GHD  on  the  same 
side,  or  make  the  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  BGH\ 
GHD  together  equal  to  two  right  angles  : AB  shall  be 
parallel  to  CD. 

Because  the  angle  EGB  is 
equal  to  the  angle  GHD , {Hyp. 
and  the  angle  EGB  is  also  equal 
to  the  angle  AGHr  [1. 15. 
therefore  the  angle  AGH  is 
equal  to  the  angle  GHD  ; [Ax.l. 
and  they  are  alternate  angles  ; 
therefore  AB  is  parallel  to 
CD. 

Again  ; because  the  angles  BGH,  GHD  are  together 
equal  to  two  right  angles,  [Hypothesis. 

and  the  angles  A GH,  BGH  are  also  together  equal  to  two 
right  angles,  • [1. 13. 

therefore  the  angles  AGH.  BGH  are  equal  to  the  angles 
BGH,  GHD . 

Take  away  the  common  angle  BGH ; therefore  the  remaining 
angle  AGH  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  GHD ; [Axiom  3. 
and  they  are  alternate  angles ; 

therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD.  [I.  27. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.jv 


PROPOSITION  29.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  fall  on  two  parallel  straight  lines , 
it  makes  the  alternate  angles  equal  to  one  another , and 
the  exterior  angle  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle 
on  the  same  side ; and  also  the  two  interior  angles  on 
the  same  side  together  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Let  the  straight  line  EF  fall  on  the  two  parallel 
straight  lines  AB,  CD  : the  alternate  angles  AGH,  GHD 
shall  be  equal  to  one  another,  and  the  exterior  angle 
EGB  shall  be  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle 


BOOK  I.  29. 


33 


on  the  same  side,  GHD,  and  the  two  interior  angles  on 
the  same  side,  BGH,  GHD,  shall  be  together  equal  to  two 


right  angles. 

For  if  the  angle  AGH  be 
not  equal  to  the  angle  GHD, 
one  of  them  must  be  greater 

than  the  other ; let  the  angle 
A GH  be  the  greater. 

Then  the  angle  A GH  is  greater 
than  the  angle  GHD  ; 
to  each  of  them  add  the* angle 
BGH ; 

A 

C 

HV  D 

therefore  the  angles  AGH , BGH  are  greater  than  the 
angles  BGH , GHD. 

But  the  angles  AGH ‘ BGH  are  together  equal  to  two 
right  angles  ; [1.13. 

therefore  the  angles  BGH,  GHD  are  together  less  than 
two  right  angles. 

But  if  a straight  line  meet  two  straight  lines,  so  as  to 
make  the  two  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  of  it.  taken 
together,  less  than  two  right  angles,  these  straight  lines 
being  continually  produced,  shall  at  length  meet  on  that 
side  on  which  are  the  angles  which  are  less  than  two 
right  angles.  [ Axiom  12. 

Therefore  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  if  continually  pro- 
duced, will  meet 

But  they  never  meet,  since  they  are  parallel  by  hypothesis. 
Therefore  the  angle  AGH  is  not  unequal  to  the  angle 
GHD  ; that  is,  it  is  equal  to  it. 

But  the  angle  AGH  is  equal  to  the  angle  EGB.  [I.  15. 
Therefore  the  angle  EGB  is  equal  to  the  angle  GHD.  [Ax.  1. 

Add  to  each  of  these  the  angle  BGH. 

Therefore  the  angles  EGB,  BGH  are  equal  to  the  angles 
BGH,  GHD.  [Axiom  2. 

But  the  angles  EGB , BGH  are  together  equal  to  two 
right  angles.  [I.  13. 

Therefore  the  angles  BGH,  GTTD  are  together  equal  to 
two  right  angles.  [Axiom  1. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  ^.n.n. 


34 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  30.  THEOREM. 

Straight  lines  which  are  parallel  to  the  same  straight 
line  are  parallel  to  each  other. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  each  of  them  parallel  to  EF:  AB 
shall  be  parallel  to  CD. 

Let  the  straight  line  GHK 
cut  A B,  EF,  CD. 

Then,  because  GHK  cuts 
the  parallel  straight  lines  AB, 

EF.  the  angle  AGH  is  equal 
to  the  angle  GHF.  [I.  29. 

Again,  because  GK  cuts 
the  parallel  straight  lines  EF. 

CD,  the  angle  GHF  is  equal 
to  the  angle  GKD.  [I.  29. 

And  it  was  shewn  that  the 
angle  A GK  is  equal  to  the  angle  GHF. 

Therefore  the  angle  A GK  is  equal  to  the  angle  GKD ; [Ax.  1. 
and  they  are  alternate  angles ; 

therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD.  [I.  27. 

Wherefore,  straight  lines  &c.  q.e.b. 

PROPOSITION  31.  PROBLEM. 

To  draw  a straight  line  through  a given  point  parallel 
to  a given  straight  line. 

Let  A be  the  given  point,  and  BC  the  given  straight 
line  : it  is  required  to  draw  a straight  line  through  the 
point  A parallel  to  the  straight  line  BC. 

In  BC  take  any  point 
D,  and  join  AD  ; at  the 
point  A in  the  straight 
line  AD,  make  the  angle 
DAE  equal  to  the  angle 
ADC-,  [1.23. 

and  produce  the  straight  line  EA  to  F. 

EF  shall  be  parallel  to  BC. 


BOOK  I.  31,  32. 


35 


Because  the  straight  line  AD,  which  meets  the  two 
straight  lines  BO,  EF,  makes  the  alternate  angles  EAD , 
ADO  equal  to  one  another,  [Construction. 

EF  is  parallel  to  BO.  [I.  27. 

Wherefore  the  straight  line  EAF  is  drawn  through  the 
given  point  A,  parallel  to  the  given  straight  line  BO.  q.e.f. 


PROPOSITION  32.  THEOREM. 

If  a side  of  any  triangle  he  produced,  the  exterior 
angle  is  equal  to  the  two  interior  and  opposite  angles; 
and  the  three ■ interior  angles  of  every  triangle  are  toge- 
ther equal  to  two  right  angles. 


Let  ABC  be  a triangle,  and  let  one  of  its  sides  BO 
be  produced  to  D : the  exterior  angle  A CD  shall  be  equal 
to  the  two  interior  and  opposite  angles  CAB,  ABC \ and 
the  three  interior  angles  of  the  triangle,  namely,  ABC, 
BCA,  CAB  shall  be  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Through  the  point  C draw  A 

CE  parallel  to  AB.  [I.  31. 

Then,  because  AB  is  par- 
allel to  CE,  and  AG  falls  on 
them,  the  alternate  angles 
BAG,  ACE  are  equal. 


Again,  because  AB  is  parallel  to  CE,  and  BD  falls  on 
them,  the  exterior  angle  ECD  is  equal  to  the  interior  and 
opposite  angle  ABC.  [I.  29. 

But  the  angle  ACE  was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  the  angle 
BAC; 


therefore  the  whole  exterior  angle  ACD  is  equal  to  the 
two  interior  and  opposite  angles  CAB,  ABC.  [Axiom  2. 

To  each  of  these  equals  add  the  angle  ACB  ; 
therefore  the  angles  ACD,  ACB  are  equal  to  the  three 
angles  CBA,  BAC,  ACB.  [Axiom  2. 

But  the  angles  ACD,  ACB  are  together  equal  to  two  right 
angles ; [1. 13. 

therefore  also  the  angles  CBA,  BAC,  ACB  are  together 
equal  to  two  right  angles.  [Aociom  1. 

Wherefore,  if  a side  of  any  triangle  &c.  q.e.d. 


36 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


Corollary  1.  All  the  interior  angles  of  any  recti- 
lineal figure,  together  with  four  right  angles,  are  equal  to 
twice  as  many  right  angles  as  the  figure  has  sides. 

For  any  rectilineal  figure  ABODE  can  be  divided  into 
as  many  triangles  as  the  figure  has  sides,  by  drawing 
straight'"  lines  from  a point  F within  the  figure  to  each  of. 
its  angles. 

And  by  the  preceding  proposition, 
all  the  angles  of  these  triangles  are 
equal  to  twice  as  many  right  angles 
as  there  are  triangles,  that  is,  as  the 
figure  has  sides. 

A lid  the  same  angles  are  equal  to  the 
interior  angles  of  the  figure,  together 
with,  the  angles  at  the  point  F,  which 
is  the  common  vertex  of  the  triangles, 
that  is,  together  with  four  right  angles.  [I.  15.  Corollary  2. 
Therefore  all  the  interior  angles  of  the  figure,  together  with 
four  right  angles,  are  equal  to  twice  as  many  right  angles 
as  the  figure  has  sides. 


Corollary  2.  All  the  exterior  angles  of  any  recti- 
lineal figure  are  together  equal  to  four  right  angles. 

Because  every  interior  angle 
ABC,  with  its  adjacent  exterior 
angle  ABD,  is  equal  to  two 
right  angles  ; [I.  13. 

therefore  all  the  interior  angles 
of  the  figure,  together  with  all 
its  exterior  angles,  are  equal  to 
twice  as  mam  right  angles  -a.s 
the  figure  has  sides. 

But,  by  the  foregoing  Corollary  all  the  interior  angles  of  the 
figure,  together  with  four  right  angles,  are  equal  to  twice 
as  many  right  angles  as  the  figure  has  sides. 

Therefore  all  the  interior  angles  of  the  figure,  together  with 
all  its  exterior  angles,  are  equal  to  all  the  interior  angles  of 
the  figure,  together  with  four  right:  angles. 

Therefore  all  the  exterior  angles  are  equal  to  four  right 
angles. 


37 


BOOK  l 33,  34. 

PROPOSITION ' 33.  THEOREM. 

The  straight  lines  which  join  the  extremities  of  two 
equal  and  'parallel  straight  lines  towards  the  same  parts , 
are  also  themselves  equal  and  parallel. 

Let  AB  and  CD  be  equal  and  parallel  straight  lines, 
and  let  them  be  joined  towards  the  same  parts  by  the 
straight  lines  AC  and  BD : AC  and  BD  shall  be  equal 
and  parallel. 

Join  BC. 

Then  because  AB  is  par- 
allel to  CD,  [Hypothesis. 

and  BC  meets  them, 
the  alternate  angles  ABC 
BCD  are  equal.  [I.  29. 

And  because  AB  is  equal  to  CD,  [Hypothesis. 

and  BC  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ABC,  DCB ; 
the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to- the  two  sides  DC,  CB, 
each  to  each ; 

and  the  angle  ABC  !was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  the  angle 
BCD  ; 

therefore  the  base  A C is  equal  to  the  base . BD,  and  the 
triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  BCD , and  the  other  angles 
to  the  other  angles,  eaeh  to  each,  to  which  the  equal  sides 
are  opposite  ; [I.  4. 

therefore  the  angle.  A CB  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBD. 

And  because  the  straight  line  BC  meets  the  two  straight 
lines  AC,  BD,  and  makes  the  alternate  angles  ACB,  CBD 
equal  to  one  another,  AC  is  parallel  to  BD*  [I.  27 . 

And  it  was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  it. 

Wherefore,  the  straight  lines  &e.  q.e.b. 

PROPOSITION  34.  THEOREM. 

The  opposite  sides  and  angles  of  d parallelogram  are 
equal  to  one  another,  and  the  diameter  bisects  the  par- 
allelogram, that  is,  divides  it  into  two  equal  parts. 

Note.  A parallelogram  is  a four-sided  figure  of  which  the 
opposite  sides  are  parallel;  and  a diameter  is  the  straight  line 
Joining  two  of  its  opposite  angles. 


38 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


Let  ACDB  be  a parallelogram,  of  which  BC  is  a 
diameter ; the  opposite  sides  and  angles  of  the  figure  shall 
be  equal  to  one  another,  and  the  diameter  BC  shall  bi- 
sect it. 

Because  AB  is  parallel 
to  CD,  and  BC  meets  them, 
the  alternate  angles  ABC, 

BCD  are  equal  to  one  an- 
other. [I*  29. 

And  because  AC  is  parallel 
to  BD,  and  BC  meets  them, 
the  alternate  angles  ACB,  CED  are  equal  to  on© 
another.  [1. 29. 

Therefore  the  two  triangles  ABC,  BCD  have  two  angles 
ABC,  BCA  in  the  one,  equal  to  two  angles  DCB,  CBD  in 
the  other,  each  to  each,  and  one  side  BC  is  common  to  th© 
two  triangles,  which  is  adjacent  to  their  equal  angles ; 
therefore  their  other  sides  are  equal,  each  to  each,  and 
the  third  angle  of  the  one  to  the  third  angle  of  the  other, 
namely,  the  side  AB  equal  to  the  side  CD,  and  the  side 
A C equal  to  the  side  BD,  and  the  angle  BA  G equal  to  th© 
angle  CDB.  [1. 26L 

And  because  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD , 
and  the  angle  CBD  to  the  angle  ACB, 
the  whole  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  wholeangle  A CD.  [Ax.  2. 
And  the  angle  BAG  has  been  shewn  to  be  equal  to  the 
angle  CDB. 

Therefore  the  opposite  sides  and  angles  of  a parallelogram 
are  equal  to  one  another. 

Also  the  diameter  bisects  the  parallelogram. 

For  AB  being  equal  to  CD,  and  BC  common, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DC,  CB 

each  to  each ; 

and  the  angle  ABC  has  been  shewn  to  be  equal  to  th© 
angle  BCD ; 

therefore  the  triangle^  B Cis  equal  to  the  triangle  BCD,  [1. 4. 
and  the  diameter  BC  divides  the  parallelogram  ACDB 
into  two  equal  parts. 

Wherefore,  the  opposite  sides  Ac.  q,e,b. 


BOOK  L 35. 


39 


PROPOSITION  35.  THEOREM. 

Parallelograms  on  the  same  base , and  between  the  sam & 
parallels , are  equal  to  one  another. 

Let  the  parallelograms  A BCD,  EBCF  he  on  the  same 
base  BO,  and  between  the-same parallels  AF,  BC : the  paral- 
lelogram ABCD  shall  be  equal  to  the  parallelogram  EBCF. 

If  the  sides  AD,  DF  of 
the  parallelograms  ABCD, 

DBGFy  opposite  to  the  base 
BC,  be  terminated  at  the  same 
point  D,  it  is  plain  that  each  of 
the  parallelograms  is  double  of 
the  triangle  BDC ; [I.  34. 

and  they  are  therefore  equal  to  one  another.  [Axiom  6. 

But  if  the  sides  AD,  EF opposite  to  the  base  BG 
of  the  parallelo- 
grams ABCD, 

EBCF  be  not 
terminated  at 
the  same  point, 
then,  because 
ABCD  is  a par- 
allelogram AD  is  equal  to  BG  ; [I.  34. 

for  the  same  reason  EF  is  equal  to  BC', 
therefore  AD  is  equal  to  EF;  [Axiom  J. 

therefore  the  whole,  or  the  remainder,  AE  is  equal  to  the 
whole,  or  the  remainder,  DF.  [. Axioms  2,  3* 

And  AB  is  equal  to  DG ; [I.  34. 

therefore  the  two  sides  EA,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
FD,  DC  each  to  each  ; 

and  the  exterior  angle  FDC  is  equal  to  the  interior  and 
opposite  angle  EAB  ; [I.  29. 

therefore  the  triangle  EAB  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
FDC.  [I.  4. 

Take  the  triangle  FDC  from  the  trapezium  ABCF, 
and  from  the  same  trapezium  take  the  triangle  EAB , 
and  the  remainders  are  equal ; [Axiom  3. 

that  is,  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  equal  to  the  parallelo- 
gram EBCF. 

Wherefore, parallelograms  on  the  same  base  &c.  Q.E.& 


40- 


EU GLIDE  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  36.  THEOREM. 

Parallelograms  on  equal  bases,  and  between  the  same 
parallels , are  equal  to  one  another. 

Let  A BCD,  EFGH  be  parallelograms  on  equal  bases 
BO,  EG,  and  between  the  same^  parallels  All,  BG:  the 
parallelogram  ABGD  shall  be  equal  to  the  parallelogram 
EFGH. 

J oin  BE,  G3. 

Then,  because  BO 
Is  equal  to  EG,  [Hyp. 
and  EG  to  EH,  [1. 34. 

BG  is  equal  to 
ELI;  [ Axiom  1. 
and  they  are  parallel 
and  joined  towards  the  same  parts  by  the  straight  lines 
BE,’ GH. 

But  straight  lines  which  join  the  extremities  of  equal  and 
parallel  straight  lines  towards  the  same  parts  are  them- 
selves equal  and  parallel.  [I.  33. 

Therefore  BE,  CII  are  both  equal  and  paralleL 
Therefore  EBCH is  a parallelogram.  [Definition. 

And  it  is  equal  to  ABGD,  because  they  are  on  the  same 
base  BC ' and  between  the  same  parallels  BC,AH.  [I.  35. 

For  the  same  reason  the  parallelogram  EFGH  is  equal 
to  the  same  EBCH. 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  ABGD  is  equal  to  the  par- 
allelogram EFGH.  [Axiom  1. 

Wherefore,  parallelograms  &c.  q.e.s. 

PROPOSITION  37.  THEOREM . 

Triangles  on  the  same  base}  and  between  the  same  par- 
allels, are  equal. 

Let  the  triangles  ABC, 

DBG  be  on  the  same  base 
BG,  and  between  the  same 
parallels  AD,  BG : the  tri- 
angle ABC  shall  be  equal 
to  the  triangle  DBG. 

Produce  AD  both  ways 
£>o  the  points  E,  E \ [Post.  2. 


BOOK  1.  37,  38. 


41 


through  B draw  BE  parallel  to  CA,  and  through  C draw 
CF  parallel  to  BE.  [1.31. 

Then  each  of  the  figures  EBGA,  DBGF  is  a parallelo- 
gram ; [Definition. 

and  EBGA  is  equal  to  DBGF , because  they  are  on  the  same 
base  BC,  and  between  the  same,  parallels  BG,  EF.  [I.  35. 
And  the  triangle  AB G is  half  of  the  parallelogram  EBGA , 
because  the  diameter  A B bisects  the  parallelogram ; [f.  34. 
and  the  triangle  DBG  is  half  of  the  parallelogram  DBGF , 
because  the  diameter  DG  bisects  the  parallelogram.  [I.  34. 
But  the  halves  of  equal  things  are  equal.  [Axiom  7. 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABG  is  equal  to  the  triaugle  DBG. 

Wherefore,  triangles  &c.  q.e.d. 

PROPOSITION  38.  THEOREM. 

Triangles  on  equal  bases , and  between  the  same  par- 
allels, are  equal  to  one  another. 

Let  the  triangles  ABC.  DEF  be  on  equal  bases  BG, 
EF.  an  . between  the  same  parallels  B F,  AD  : the  triangle 
ABG  shall  be  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF. 

1’ reduce  vf  ZIboth 
wavs  to  the  points 
G,AI-, 

through  B draw  EG 
parallel  to  GA,  and 
through  F draw  FH 
parallel  to  ED.  [1. 31. 

Then  each  of  the 
figures  GBGA,  DEFTI  is  a parallelogram.  [ Definition . 

And  they  are  equal  to  one  another  because  they  are  on 
eoual  bases  BG,  EF,  and  between  the  same  parallels 
BE,  GH.  LL  36. 

And  the  triangle  ABG  is  half  of  the  parallelogram  GBGA , 
because  the  diameter  AB  bisects  the  parallelogram ; [I.  34. 
and  the  triangle  DEF  is  half  of  the  parallelogram  DEFH, 
because  the  diameter  DF  bisects  the  parallelogram. 

But  the  halves  of  equal  things  are  equal.  [Axiom  7. 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABG  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF. 

Wherefore,  triangles  &c.  Q.e.d. 


"42 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  39.  THEOREM. 

Equal  triangles  on  them  same  base , and  on  the  same 
side  of  it,  are  between  the  same  ‘parallels. 

Let  the  equal  triangles  ABC,  DBG  be  on  the  same 
base  BC,  and  on  the  same  side  of  it : they  shall  be  be- 
tween the  same  parallels. 

Join  AD. 

AD  shall  be  parallel  to  BC. 

For  if  it  is  not,  through  A draw 
AE  parallel  to  BC,  meeting  BD 
at  E.  [I.  31. 

and  join  EC. 

Then  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  EBC, 
because  they  are  on  the  same  base  BC,  and  between  the 
same  parallels  BC,  AE.  [I.  37. 

But  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DBG.  [Hyp. 
Therefore  also  the  triangle  DBC  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
EBC,  [Axiom  1. 

the  greater  to  the  less ; which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  AE  is  not  parallel  to  BC. 

In  the  same  manner  it  can  be  shewn,  that  no  other 
straight  line  through  A but  AD  is  parallel  to  BC ; 
therefore  AD  is  parallel  to  BC. 

Wherefore,  equal  triangles  &e.  q.e.d. 

PROPOSITION  40.  THEOREM. 

Equal  triangles,  on  equal  bases,  in  the  same  straight  line, 
and  on  the  same  side  of  it,  are  between  the  same  parallels. 

Let  the  equal  triangles  ABC,  DEF  be  on  equal  bases 
BC,  EF,  in  the  same  straight  line  BF,  and  on  the  same 
side  of  it : they  shall  be  between  the  same  parallels. 

Join  AD.  D 

A D shall  be  parallel  to  BF.  /V  ~-g  X. 

For  if  it  is  not,  through  A / \ XX 

draw  AG  parallel  to  BF,  / \ xx 

meeting  ED  at  6?  [1. 31.  / \ 

and  join  GF.  B G E f 


BOOK  I.  40,  41. 


43 


Then  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  GEF, 
because  they  are  on  equal  bases  BG , EF \ and  between 
the  same  parallels.  [I.  38. 

But  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF.  [Hyp. 
Therefore  also  the  triangle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
GEF,  [Axiom  1. 

the  greater  to  the  less ; which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  AG  is  not  parallel  to  BF. 

In  the  same  manner  it  can  be  shewn  that  no  other 
straight  line  through  A but  AD  is  parallel  to  BF ; 
therefore  AD  is  parallel  to  BF. 

Wherefore,  equal  triangles  &c.  q.e.d. 


PROPOSITION  41.  THEOREM. 

If  a parallelogram  and  a triangle  be  on  the  same  base 
and  between  the  same  parallels , the  parallelogram  shall  be 
double  of  the  triangle. 

Let  the  parallelogram  A BCD  and  the  triangle  EBC  be 
on  the  same  base  BC,  and  between  the  same  parallels 
BG,  AE : the  parallelogram  ABCD  shall  be  double  of  the 
triangle  EBC. 

Join  AC. 

Then  the  triangle  ABC 
is  equal  to  the  triangle  EBC, 
because  they  are  on  the  same 
base  BC,  and  between  the  same 
parallels  BC,  AE.  [1.37. 

But  the  parallelogram  ABCD 
is  double  of  the  triangle  ABC, 
because  the  diameter  A C bisects  the  parallelogram.  [I.  34. 
Therefore  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  also  double  of  the 
triangle  EBC. 

Wherefore,  if  a parallelogram  &c.  q.e.d. 


44 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  42.  PROBLEM. 

To  describe  a parallelogram  that  shall  be  equal  to  a 
given  triangle , and  have  one  of  its  angles  equal  to  a given 
rectilineal  angle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  triangle,  and  D the  given  recti- 
lineal angle : it  is  required  to  describe  a parallelogram  that 
shall  be  equal  to  the  given  triangle  ABC,  and  have  one  of 
its  angles  equal  to  D. 

Bisect  BC  at  E : [1. 10. 
join  AE,  and  at  the  point 
E,  in  the  straight  line  EC, 
make  the  angle  CEE equal 
to  D;  [1.23. 

through  A draw  AFG 
parallel  to  EC,  and  through 
C draw  CG  parallel  to 
EF.  [I.  31. 

Therefore  FECG  is  a parallelogram.  [ Definition . 

And,  because  BE  is  equal  to  EC,  [Construction. 

the  triangle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  AEC,  because 
they  are  on  equal  bases  BE,  EC,  and  between  the  same 
parallels  BC,  AG.  [I.  38. 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  double  of  the  triangle  AEG. 

But  the  parallelogram  FECG  is  also  double  of  the  triangle 
AEC,  because  they  are  on  the  same  base  EC,  and  between 
the  same  parallels  EG.  AG.  [I.  41. 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  FECG  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
ABC  ; [ Axiom  6. 

and  it  has  one  of  its  angles  CEF  equal  to  the  given  angle 
D.  [ Construction . 

"Wherefore  a parallelogram  FECG  has  been  described 
equal  to  the  given  triangle  ABC , and  having  one  of  its 
angles  CEF  equal  to  the  given  angle  D,  q.e.f. 


BOOK  I.  4S,  44. 


45 


PROPOSITION  43.  THEOREM. 

The  complements  of  the  parallelograms  which  are  about 
the ' diameter  of  any  parallelogram , are  equal  to  one 
another. 

Let  ABOD  be  a parallelogram,  of  which  the  diameter 
is  AG;  and  EH , GF  parallelograms  about  AG,  that  is, 
through  which  AC  passes  ; and  BK,  KD  the  other  paral- 
lelograms which  make  up  the  whole  figure  A BCD,  and 
which  are  therefore  called  the  complements : the  comple- 
ment BK  shall  be  equal  to  the  complement  KD. 

Because  ABCD  is  a 

parallelogram,  and  AC  its 
diameter,  the  triangle  ABC 
is  equal  to  the  triangle 
ADC.  EL  34. 

Again,  because  AEKH  is 

a parallelogram,  and  AK 
its  diameter,  the  triangle 
AEK  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
AHK.  [I.  34. 

For  the  same  reason  the  triangle  KGC  is  equal  to  the 
triangle  KFC. 

Therefore,  because  the  triangle  AEK  is  equal  to  the  tri- 
angle AHK , and  the  triangle  KGC  to  the  triangle  KFC ; 
the  triangle  AEK  together  with  the  triangle  KGC  is  equal 
to  the  triangle  A HK  together  with  the  triangle  KFC.  [Ax.  2. 
But  the  whole  triangle  ABC  was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  the 
whole  triangle  ADC. 

Therefore  the  remainder,  the  complement  BK,  is  equal  to 
the  remainder,  the  complement  KD,  [ A xiom  3. 

Wherefore,  the  complements  &c.  q.e.r. 


PROPOSITION  44.  PROBLEM. 

To  a given  straight  line  to  apply  a parallelogram , 
which  shall  be  equal  to  a given  triangle,  and  have  one 
of  its  angles  equal  to  a given  rectilineal  angle. 


46 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  and  C the  given 
triangle,  and  D the  given  rectilineal  angle : it  is  required 
to  apply  to  the  straight  line  AB  a parallelogram  equal  to 
the  triangle  C,  and  having  an  angle  equal  to  D. 


Make  the  parallelogram  BEFG  equal  to  the  triangle 
C,  and  having  the  angle  EBG  equal  to  the  angle  D,  so 
that  BE  may  be  in  the  same  straight  line  with  AB ; [1. 42. 
produce  FG  to  H\ 

through  A draw  AH  parallel  to  BG  or  EF,  [I.  31. 

and  join  HB. 

Then,  because  the  straight  line  HF  falls  on  the  parallels 
AH , EF,  the  angles  AHF,  HFE  are  together  equal  to 
two  right  angles.  [I.  29. 

Therefore  the  angles  BIIF \ LIFE  are  together  less  than 
two  right  angles. 

But  straight  lines  which  with  another  straight  line  make  the 
interior  angles  on  the  same  side  together  lass  than  two  right 
angles  will  meet  on  that  side,  if  produced  far  enough.  [Ax.  12. 
Therefore  HB  and  FE  will  meet  if  produced  ; 

' let  them  meet  at  K. 

Through  K draw  KL  parallel  to  EA  or  FH ; [I.  31. 

and  produce  HA,  GB  to  the  points  L,  M. 

Then  HLKF  is  a parallelogram,  of  which  the  diameter 
is  HK ; and  AG,  ME  are  parallelograms  about  II K\  and 
LB,  BF  are  the  complements. 

Therefore  LB  is  equal  to  BF.  [I.  43. 

But  BF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  C.  [Construction. 

Therefore  LB  is  equal  to  the  triangle  C.  [Axiom  1. 


BOOK  I.  44,  45. 


47 


jUnd  because  the  angle  £57?  is  equal  to  the  angle  A BM,  {1.15. 
and  likewise  to  the  angle  D ; [ Construction . 

the  angle  ABM  is  equal  to  the  angle  D.  [Axiom  1. 

Wherefore  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  'parallelo- 
gram LB  is  applied , equal  to  the  triangle  <7,  and  having 
the  angle  ABM  equal  to  the  angle  D.  q.e.f. 


PROPOSITION  45.  PROBLEM . 

To  describe  a parallelogram  equal  to  a given  rectilineal 
jxgure,  and  having  an  angle  equal  to  a given  rectilineal 
angle . 

Let  A BCD  be  the  given  rectilineal  figure,  and  E the 
given  rectilineal  angle:  it  is  required  to  describe  a par- 
allelogram equal  to  ABCD 9 and  having  an  angle  equal  to  E. 


Join  DB,  and  describe  the  parallelogram  FH  equal  to 
the  triangle  ADB , and  having  the  angle  FKR  equal  to  the 
angle  E ; [I.  42. 

and  to  the  straight  line  GR  apply  the  parallelogram  GM 
equal  to  the  triangle  DBG and  having  the  angle  GHM 
equal  to  the  angle  E.  [I.  44. 

The  figure  FKML  shall  be  the  parallelogram  required. 

Because  the  angle  E is  equal  to  each  of  the  angles  FKR, 
GHM,  { Construction . 

the  angle  FKR  is  equal  to  the  angle  GHM.  [Axiom  1. 
Add  to  each  of  these  equals  the  angle  KRG; 
therefore  the  angles  FKR. , KRG  are  equal  to  the  angles 
KRG,  GHM.  [Axiom  2. 


But  FKR,  KRG  aretogetfaerequaltotworightangles;[I.29. 
therefore  RRG,GHM are  together  equalise  two  right  angles. 


48 


And  because  at  the  point  H in  the  straight  line  GH,  the 
two  straight  lines  KH,  HM,  on  the  opposite  sides  of  it, 
make  the  adjacent  angles  together  equal  to  two  right  angles, 
KH  is  in  the  same  straight  line  with  HM.  [I.  14. 

And  because  the  straight  line  HG  meets  the  parallels 
KMt  FG,  the  alternate  angles  MHG , 776?  Fare  equal.  [1.29. 
Add  to  each  of  these  equals  the  angle  HGL  ; 
therefore  the  angles  MHG , HGL.  are  equal  to  the  angles 
HGFy  HGL.  [Axiom  2. 

But  MHG , HGL  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [1.29. 
therefore  II GF,  HGL  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
Therefore  FG  is  in  the  same  straight  line  with  GL.  [I.  1 4. 

And  because  AFis  parallel  to  HG,  and  HG  to  ML,[Constr. 
KF  is  parallel  to  ML ; , [I.  30. 

and  KM,  FL  are  parallels  ; [Construction. 

therefore  KFLM  is  a parallelogram.  £ Definition . 

And  because  the  triangle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  parallelo- 
gram II F,  [Construction. 

and  the  triangle  DBG  to  the  parallelogram  GM ; [Constr. 
the  whole  rectilineal  figure  ABGD  is  equal  to  the  whole 
parallelogram  KFLM.  [Axiom  2. 

Wherefore,  the  parallelogram  KFLM  hast  been  de- 
scribed equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  ABGD,  and 
having  the  angle  FKM  equal  to  the  given  angle  E.  q.e.f. 

Corollary.  From  this  it  is  manifest,' how  to  a given 
straight  line,  to  apply  a parallelogram,  which  shall  have  an 
angle  equal  to  a given  rectilineal  angle,  and  shall  be  equal 
to  a given  rectilineal  figure ; namely,  by  applying  to  the 
given  straight  line  a parallelogram  equal  to  the  first  tri- 
angle ABD,  and  having  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  angle  ; 
and  m on.  [I.  44. 


BOOK  I.  46. 


49 


\J 


PROPOSITION  46.  PROBLEM. 

To  describe  a square  on  ‘a  given  straight  line . 


Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line:  it  is  required  to 
describe  a square  on  AB. 

From  the  point  A draw  AG 
at  right  angles  to  AB\  [I.  11. 
and  make  AD  equal  to  AB  ; [1. 3. 
through  D draw  DE  parallel  to 
A B ; and  through  B draw  BE 
parallel  to  AD.  [I.  31. 

A DEB  shall  be  a square. 

For  ADEB  is  by  construction 
a parallelogram  ; 

therefore  AB  is  equal  to  DE , 
rind  AD  to  BE.  [I.  34. 

Bug  AB  is  equal  to  AD. 

Therefore  the  four  straight  lines  BA , AD,  DE,  EB  are 
equal  to  one  another,  and  the  parallelogram  ADEB  is 
equilateral.  [Axiom  1. 

Likewise  all  its  angles  are  right  angles. 

For  since  the  straight  line  AD  meets  the  parallels  AB , 
DE,  the  angles  BAD,  ADE  are  together  equal  to  two 
right  angles  ; [T.  29. 

but  BAD  is  a right  angle  ; [Construction. 

therefore  also  ADE  is  a right  angle.  [Axiom  3. 

But  the  opposite  angles  of  parallelograms  are  equal.  [I.  34. 
Therefore  each  of  the  opposite  angles  ABE,  BED  is  a 

right  angle.  [Axiom  L 

Therefore  the  figure  ADEB  is  rectangular; 
and  it  has  been  shewn  to  be  equilateral. 

Therefore  it  is  a square.  [Definition  30. 

And  it  is  described  on  the  given  straight  line  AB.  q.e.f. 

Corollary.  From  the  demonstration  it  is  manifest  that 
every  parallelogram  which  has  one  right  angle  has  all  its 
angles  right  angles. 


[Construction. 


4 


50  EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 

PROPOSITION  47.  THEOREM. 

In  any  right-angled  triangle , the  square  which  is  de- 
scribed on  the  side  subtending  the  right  angle  is  equal  to 
the  squares  described  on  the  sides  which  contain  the  right 
angle. 

Let  ABC  be  a right-angled  triangle,  haying  the  right 
angle  BAG : the  square  described  on  the  side  BG  shall  be 
equal  to  the  squares  described  on  the  sides  BA,  AC. 

On  BG  describe 
the  square  BDEC, 
and  on  BA,  AC  de- 
scribe the  squares 
GB,  HC ; [1.46. 

through  A draw  AL 
parallel  to  BD  or 
CE ; [I-  31. 

and  join  AD,  FC. 

Then,  because  the 
angle  BAG  is  a right 
angle,  [ Hypothesis . 

and  that  the  angle 
BAG  is  also  a right 
angle,  [. Definition  30. 
the  two  straight  lines  AC,  AG,  on  the  opposite  sides  of 
AB,  make  with  it  at  the  point  A the  adjacent  angles  equal 
to  two  right  angles  ; 

therefore  GA  is  in  the  same  straight  line  with  AG.  [I.  14. 
For  the  same  reason,  AB  and  All  are  in  the  same  straight 
line. 

Now  the  angle  DBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  FBA,  for  each 
of  them  is  a right  angle.  [Axiom  11. 

Add  to  each  the  angle  ABC. 

Therefore  the  whole  angle  DBA  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle 
FBC.  [Axiom  2. 

And  because  the  two  sides  AB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  FB,  BC,  each  to  each  ; [ Definition  30. 

and  the  angle  DBA  is  equal  to  the  angle  FBC ; 
therefore  the  triangle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
f&O,  Cl.  4. 


BOOK  I.  47,  4S. 


51 


7 Now  the  parallelogram  BL  is  double  of  the  triangle 
ABD,  because  they  are  on  the  same  base  BD,  and  between 
the  same  parallels  BD , AL.  [I.  41. 

And  the  square  GB  is  double  of  the  triangle  FBC,  because 
t they  are  on  the  same  base  FB,  and  between  the  same 
parallels  FB,  GO.  [I.  41. 

But  the  doubles  of  equals  are  equal  to  one  another.  [Ax.  6. 
Therefore  the  parallelogram  BL  is  equal  to  the  square  GB. 

In  the  same  manner,  by  joining  AE,  BK,  it  can  be 
shewn,  that  the  parallelogram  CL  is  equal  to  the  square  OH. 
Therefore  the  whole  square  BDEG  is  equal  to  the  two 
squares  GB,  HO.  [ Axiom  2. 

And  the  square  B DEC  is  described  on  BC,  and  the  squares 
GB,  HC  on  BA,  AC. 

Therefore  the  square  described  on  the  side  BC  is  equal  to 
the  squares  described  on  the  sides  BA,  AG. 

Wherefore,  in  any  right-angled  triangle  &c.  Q.e.d. 

PROPOSITION  48.  THEOREM. 

If  the  square  described  on  one  of  the  sides  of  a tri- 
angle be  equal  to  the  squares  described  on  the  other  two 
sides  of  it,  the  angle  contained  by  these  two  sides  is  a 
right  angle. 

Let  the  square  described  on  BC,  one  of  the  sides  of 
the  triangle  ABC,  be  equal  to  the  squares  described  on 
the  other  sides  BA,  AC:  the  .angle  BAG  shall  be  a right 
angle. 

From  the  point  A draw  AD  at 
right  angles  to  AC ; [1. 11. 

and  make  AD  equal  to  BA;  [I.  3. 
and  join  DC. 

Then  because  DA  is  equal  to 
BA,  the  square  on  DA  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  BA. 

To  each  of  these  add  the  square 
on  AC. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  DA,  AC  are  equal  to  the  squares 
on  BA,  AC.  \ Axiom  i, 

4—2 


52 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


But  because  the  angle  DAC'is  a right  angle,  [Construction. 
the  square? on  DCis  equal  to  the  squares  on  DA,  AC.  [I.  47. 
And,  by  hypothesis, the  square  on  BC is  equal  to  the  squares 
on  BA,  AC. 

Therefore  the  square  on  Z>6Yis  equal  to  thesquare  on  BC-[Ax.\. 
Therefore  also  the  side  DC  is  equal  to  the  side  BC. 

And  because  the  side  DA  is  equal 
to  the  side  AB  ; [Constr. 

and  th9  side  AC  is  common  to  the 
two  triangles  DAC,  BAG ; 
the  two  sides  DA,  AG  are  equal  to 
the  two  sides  BA,  AG,  each  to  each  ; 
and  the  base  DC  has  been  shewn  to 
be  equal  to  the  base  BC; 
therefore  the  angle  DAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAG.  [I.  8. 
But  DAC  is  a right  angle  ; [Construction. 

therefore  also  BA  C is  a right  angle.  [Axiom  1, 

Wherefore,  if  the  square  &e.  q.e.d. 


BOOK  IT. 


DEFINITIONS. 

1.  Every  right-angled  parallelogram,  or  rectangle,  is 
said  to  be  contained  by  any  two  of  the  straight  lines  which 
contain  one  of  the  right  angles. 

2.  In  every  parallelogram,  any  of  the  parallelograms 
about  a diameter,  together  with  the  two  complements,  is 
called  a Gnomon. 


BOOK  II  L 


53 


Thus  the  parallelogram  JIG, 
together  with  the  complements 
AF,  FG,  is  the  gnomon,  which  is 
more  briefly  expressed  by  the  let- 
ters AGK,  or  FUG,  which  are  at 
the  opposite  angles  of  the  parallelo- 
grams which  make  the  gnomon, 


B G C 


PROPOSITION  1.  THEOREM . 

If  there  be  two  straight  lines , one  of  which  is  divided 
into  any  number  of  parts,  the  rectangle  contained  by  Lice 
two  straight  lines  is  equal  to  the  rectangles  contained  by 
the  undivided  line,  and  the  several  parts  of  the  divided  line. 


Let  A and  BG  be  two  straight  lines ; and  let  BG  be 
divided  into  any  number  of  parts  at  the  points  D,  E : the 
rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  A,  BG,  shall  be 
equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  A,  BD , together  with 
that  contained  by  A,  BE,  and  that  contained  by  A,  EG. 

From  the  point  B draw  BF 
at  right  angles  to  BG ; [1. 11. 

and  make  BG  equal  to  A ; [I.  3. 
through  G draw  GH  parallel 
to  BG ; and  through  D,  E,  G 
draw  DK , EL,  GH,  parallel 
to  BG.  [I.  31. 

Then  the  rectangle  BH 
is  equal  to  the  rectangles 
BK  DL,  EH. 


B I 

5 I 

! C 

- 

I 

X 

C L II 

A 

But  BH  is  contained  by  A,  BG,  for  it  is  contained  by 
GB,  BG,  and  GB  is  equal  to  A.  [Construction. 

And  BK  is  contained  by  A,  BD,  for  it  is  contained  by 
GB,  BD,  and  GB  is  equal  to  A ; 

and  DL  is  contained  by  A,  DE,  because  DK  is  equal  to 
BG,  which  is  equal  to  A ; [I.  34. 

and  in  like  manner  EH  is  contained  by  A,  EG. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  A,  BG  is  equal  to  the 
rectangl  es  contained  by  A , BD,  and  by  A , DE,  and  by  A,  EG. 
Wherefore,  if  there  be  two  straight  lines  &e.  q.ej.d. 


54 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS, 


PROPOSITION  2.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  divided  into  any  two  parts , the 
rectangles  contained  by  the  whole  and  each  of  the  parts , 
are  together  equal  to  the  square  on  the  whole  line. 


Let  the  straight  line  AB  he  divided  into  any  two  parts 
at  the  point  C : the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC,  toge- 
ther with  the  rectangle  AB,  AG,  shall  be  equal  to  the 
square  on  AB. 

[Note.  To  avoid  repeating  the  word 
contained  too  frequently,  the  rectangle 
contained  by  two  straight  lines  AB,  AO 
is  sometimes  simply  called  the  rectangle 
AB,  AC.] 

On  AB  describe  the  square 
ADEB ; [I.  46. 

and  through  C draw  CF  parallel 
to  AD  or  BE.  [1.31. 

Then  AE  is  equal  to  the  rectangles  AF,  CE. 

But  AE  is  the  square  on  AB. 

And  AF  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  BA,  AC,  for  it  is 
contained  by  DA,  A C,  of  which  DA  is  equal  to  BA  ; 
and  CE  is  contained  by  AB,  BC,  for  BE  is  equal  to  AB. 


Therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  A C,  together  with  the  rect- 
angle AB,  BC,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 


PROPOSITION  3.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  divided  into  any  tico  parts,  the 
rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  and  one  of  the  parts,  is 
equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  two  parts,  together 
with  the  square  on  the  aforesaid  part. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  divided  into  any  two  parts 
at  the  point  C:  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  shall  be  equal  to 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  together  with  the  square  on  BC. 


BOOK  II.  3,  4 


55 


On  BC  describe  the  square  CDEB ; [I.  46. 

produce  ED  to  F,  and  through  A A C B 

draw  A F parallel  to  CD  or  BE.  [I. 31. 

Then  the  rectangle  AE  is  equal 
to  the  rectangles  AD,  GE. 

But  AE  is  the  rectangle  contained 
by  AB,  BG,  for  it  is  contained 

by  AB,  BE,  of  which  BE  is  equal  I 1 — ; 

to  BG;  F D E 

and  AD  is  contained  by  AG,  GB,  for  CD  is  equal  to  GB ; 
and  GE  is  the  square  on  BG. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BG  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
AG,  GB,  together  with  the  square  on  BG. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 


PROPOSITION  4.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  divided  into  any  two  parts , the 
square  on  the  whole  line  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  the  two 
parts , together  with  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 
two  parts. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  divided  into  any  two  parts 
at  the  point  G : the  square  on  AB  shall  be  equal  to  the 
squares  on  AG,  GB,  together  with  twice  the  rectangle  con- 
tained by  AG,  GB. 

On  AB  describe  the  square 
A DEB  ; [I.  46. 

join  BD ; through  G draw  CGF 
parallel  to  AD  or  BE,  and  through  G 
draw  HK parallel  to  AB  or  DE.  [1. 31. 

Then,  because  GF  is  parallel 
to  AD,  and  BD  falls  on  them, 
the  exterior  angle  GGB  is  equal 
to  the  interior  and  opposite  an- 
gle ADB ; [I.  29. 

but  the  angle  ADB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABD,  [I.  5. 
because  BA  is  equal  to  AD,  being  sides  of  a square  ; 
therefore  the  angle  GGB  is  equal  to  the  angle  GBG ; [Ax.  1. 
and  therefore  the  side  CG  is  equal  to  the  side  GB.  [I.  6. 
But  GB  is  also  equal  to  GK,  and  GG  to  BK ; [I.  34. 

therefore  the  figure  GGKB  is  equilateral. 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


It  is  likewise  rectangular.  For  since  CG  is  parallel  to 
JBK,  and  CB  meets  them,  the  angles  GCB  are  toge- 
ther equal  to  two  right  angles.  [I.  29. 

But  KBC  is  a right  angle.  [I.  Definition  30 

Therefore  GCB  is  a right  angle.  [ Axiom  3. 

And  therefore  also  the  angles  CGK , GKB  opposite  to 
these  are  right  angles. 

Therefore  GGKB  is  rectangular; 
and  it  has  been  shewn  to  be  equi- 
lateral ; therefore  it  is  a square,  and 
it  is  on  the  side  CB . 

For  the  same  reason  HF  is  also  a 
square,  and  it  is  on  the  side  HG, 
which  is  equal  to  AC.  [I.  34. 

Therefore  IIF,  CK  are  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB. 

And  because  the  complement  A G is  equal  to  the  com- 
plement GE ; [I.  43. 

and  that  AG  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  AC,  CB,  for 
CG  is  equal  to  CB  ; 

therefore  GE  is  also  equal  to  the  rectangle  AC,  CB.  [Ax.  1.  - 
Therefore  A G,  GE  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  A G,  CB. 
And  HF,  CK  are  the  squares  on  A C,  CB. 

Therefore  the  four  figures  HF,  CK,  AG,  GE  are  equal  to 
the  squares  on  AC,  CB,  together  with  twice  the  rectangle 
AC,  CB. 

But  HF,  CK,  AG,  GE  make  up  the  whole  figure  ADEB, 
which  is  the  square  on  AB. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
AC,  CB,  together  with  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 
Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 

Corollary.  From  the  demonstration  it  is  manifest, 
that  parallellograms  about  the  diameter  of  a square  are 
likewise  squares. 

.PROPOSITION  5.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  divided  into  two  equal  parts  and 
also  into  two  unequal  parts,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 


[I.  34.  and  Amom  1. 


BOOK  II.  5. 


57 


unequal  parts,  together  with  the  square  cm  the  line  between 
the  points  of  section,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  half  the  line. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  divided  into  two  equal 
parts  at  the  point  C,  and  into  two  unequal  parts  at  the 
point  D : the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  together  with  the  square 
on  CD,  shall  be  equal  to  the  square  on  CB. 


On  CB  describe  the 
square  CEFB ; [I.  46. 

join  BE-,  through  D draw 
DHG  parallel  to  CE  or  BF ; 
through  Hdruw  KLM paral- 
lel to  CB  or  EF ; and  through 
A draw  AK  parallel  to  CL 
or  BM.  [I.  31. 

Then  the  complement  GH  i 
HF; 


! L 

h/. 

K 

/ 

E G F 


equal  to  the  complement 
[I.  43. 


to  each  of  these  add  DM ; therefore  the  whole  CM  is  equal 
to  the  whole  DF.  [. Axiom,  2. 


But  CM  is  equal  to  AL,  [I.  36. 

because  AC  is  equal  to  CB.  [. Hypothesis . 

Therefore  also  AL  is  equal  to  DF.  [Axiom  1 . 

To  each  of  these  add  CH ; therefore  the  whole  AH  is  equal 
to  DF  and  CH.  [Axiom  2. 

But  AH  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DB,  for  DH  is 
equal  to  DB ; [IT.  4,  Corollary. 

and  DF  together  with  CH  is  the  gnomon  CMC  ; 
therefore  the  gnomon  CM  G is  equal  to  the  rectangle  A D,DB. 
To  each  of  these  add  LG,  which  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
CD.  [II.  4,  Corollary,  and  I.  34. 

Therefore  the  gnomon  CMG,  together  with  LG,  is  equal  to 
the  rectangle  AD,DB,  together  with  the  square  on  CD.  [Ax.  2. 
But  the  gnomon  CMG  and  LG  make  up  the  whole  figure 
CEFB,  which  is  the  square  on  CB. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  together  with  the  square 
on  CD,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CB. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 

Prom  this  proposition  it  is  manifest  that  the  difference  of 
the  squares  on  two  unequal  straight  lines  AC,  CD,  is  equal 
to  the  rectangle  contained  by  their  sum  and  difference. 


58 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  6.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  bisected , and  'produced  to  any 
point , the  r dangle  contained  by  the  whole  line  thus  pro- 
duced, and  the  part  of  it  produced,  together  with  the 
square  on  h > If  the  line  bisected,  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
the  straight  line  which  is  made  up  of  the  half  and  the 
part  produced. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  bisected  at  the  point  C, 
and  produced  to  the  point  D : the  rectangle  AD,  DB, 
together  with  the  square  on  CB,  shall  be  equal  to  the 
square  on  CD. 

On  CD  describe  the 
square  CEFD  ; [I.  46. 

join  DE ; through  B draw 
BHG  parallel  to  CE  or 
DF ; through  II  draw 
KLM  parallel  to  AD  or 
EF ; and  through  A draw 
AK  parallel  to  CL  or  DM. 

Then,  because  AC  is  eqi 
the  rectangle  AL  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  CII ; [I.  36. 

but  CH  is  equal  to  HF\  [I.  43. 

therefore  also  AL  is  equal  to  HF.  [ Axiom  1. 

To  each  of  these  add  CM ; 

therefore  the  whole  AM  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  CM G.  [Ax.  2. 
But  AM  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DB , 
for  DM  is  equal  to  DB.  [II.  4,  Corollary. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  equal  to  the  gnomon 
CMG.  [Axiom  1. 

To  each  of  these  add  LG,  which  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
CB.  [II.  4,  Corollary,  and  I.  34. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  together  with  the  square 
on  CB,  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  CMG  and  the  figure  LG. 
But  the  gnomon  CMG  and  LG  make  up  the  whole  figure 
CEFD,  which  is  the  square  on  CD. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  together  with  the  square 
on  CB,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CD. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 


to  CB,  [Hypothesis. 


BOOK  II.  7. 


59 


PROPOSITION  7.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  divided  into  any  two  parts,  the 
Squares  on  the  whole  line,  and  on  one  of  the  parts,  are 
equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  bontained  by  the  whole  and 
that  part,  together  with  the  square  on  the  other  part. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  divided  into  any  two 
parts  at  the  point  C : the  squares  on  AB,  BC  shall  be 
equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BGa  together  with  the 
square  on  AG. 

On  AB  describe  the  square 
ADEB,  and  construct  the  figure 
as  in  the  preceding  propositions. 

Then  AG  is  equal  to  GE ; [1. 43. 
to  each  of  these  add  GK ; 
therefore  the  whole  AK  is  equal  to 
the  whole  GE ; 

therefore  AK,  GE  are  double  of 
AK. 

But  AK,  GE  are  the  gnomon  AKF,  together  with  the 
square  GK ; 

therefore  the  gnomon  AKF,  together  with  the  square  GK, 
is  double  of  AK. 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BG  is  double  of  AK, 
for  BK  is  equal  to  BG.  [II.  4,  Corollary. 

Therefore  the  gnomon  AKF,  together  with  the  square  GK, 
is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BG. 

To  each  of  these  equals  add  HF,  which  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  AG.  [II.  4,  Corollary,  and  I.  34. 

Therefore  the  gnomon  AKF,  together  with  the  squares 
GK,  HF,  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BG,  together 
with  the  square  on  AG. 

But  the  gnomon  AKF  together  with  the  squares  GK,  HF, 
make  up  the  whole  figure  ADEB  and  GK,  which  are  the 
squares  on  AB  and  BG. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BG,  are  equal  to  twice  the 
rectangle  AB,  BG,  together  with  the  square  on  AG. 
Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 


60 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  8.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  divided  into  any  two  parts,  four 
times  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  line  and  one  of 
the  parts , together  with  the  square  on  the  other  part , is 
equal  to  the  square  on  the  straight  line  which  is  made  up 
of  the  whole  and  that  part. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  divided  into  any  two  parts 
at  the  point  C : four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  together 
with  the  square  on  AC,  shall  be  equal  to  the  square  on  the 
straight  line  made  up  of  AB  and  BC  together. 

Produce  AB  to  D,  so  a „ 

that  BD  may  be  equal 
to  CB  -,  [Post.  2.  and  I.  3.  ^ 

on  AD  describe  the  square  ^ 

AEFD  ; 

and  construct  two  figures 
such  as  in  the  preceding 
propositions. 

Then,  because  CB  is  equal  g jj — p 

to  BD , [Construction. 

and  that  CB  is  equal  to  GK,  and  BD  to  KN,  [I.  34. 
therefore  GK  is  equal  to  ICN.  [Axiom  1. 

For  the  same  reason  PR  is  equal  to  RO. 

And  because  CB  is  equal  to  BD,  and  GK  to  KN,  the  rect- 
angle CK  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BN,  and  the  rectangle 
GR  to  the  rectangle  RN.  [I.  36. 

But  CK  is  equal  to  RN,  because  they  are  the  complements 
of  the  parallelogram  CO ; [I.  43. 

therefore  also  BN  is  equal  to  GR.  [Axiom  1. 

Therefore  the  four  rectangles  BN,  CK,  GR,  RN  are  equal 
to  one  another,  and  so  the  four  are  quadruple  of  one  of 
them  CK. 


G 

K 

/ 

P 

/it 

\ ■ 

Again,  because  CB  is  equal  to  BD, 
and  that  BD  is  equal  to  BA', 
that  is  to  CG, 

and  that  CB  is  equal  to  GK, 


[Construction. 
[II.  4,  Corollary. 

[I.  34. 
[I.  34. 


BOOK  II.  8. 


61 


that  is  to  GP ; 

therefore  GG  is  equal  to  GP. 


[II.  4,  Corollary. 
[Axiom  1. 


And  because  C&»  is  equal  to  GP,  and  PR  to  RO,  the 
rectangle  AG  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  MP,  and  the  rect- 
angle PL  to  the  rectangle  RF.  [I.  36. 

But  MP  is  equal  to  PL,  because  they  are  the  complements 


Therefore  the  four  rectangles  A G,  MP,  PIj,  RF  are  equal 
to  one  another,  and  so  the  four  are  quadruple  of  one  of 
them  AG. 

And  it  was  shewn  that  the  four  CK,  BN,  GR  and  RN 
are  quadruple  of  CK ; therefore  the  eight  rectangles 
which  make  up  the  gnomon  AOH  are  quadruple  of  AK. 

And  because  AK  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC, 
for  BK  is  equal  to  BC ; 

therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  quadruple 
of  AK. 

But  the  gnomon  AOH  was  shewn  to  be  quadruple 
of  AK 

Therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the 
gnomon  AOH.  [Axiom  1. 

To  each  of  these  add  XH,  which  is  equal  to  the  square  on 


Therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  together  with 
the  square  on  AC,  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  AOH  and  the 
square  XII. 

But  the  gnomon  A OH  and  the  square  XH  make  up  the 
figure  AEFD,  which  is  the  square  on  AD. 

Therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  together  with 
the  square  on  AC,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AD,  that  is  to 
the  square  on  the  line  made  of  AB  and  BC  together. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.ej>. 


of  the  parallelogram  ML  ; 
therefore  also  AG  is  equal  to  RF. 


AC. 


[II.  4,  Corollary,  and  I.  34. 


62 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  9.  THEOREM . 

If  a straight  line  be  divided  into  two  equal,  and  also 
into  two  unequal  parts , the  squares  on,  the  two  unequal 
parts  are  together  double  of  the  square  on  half  the  line 
and  of  the  square  on  the  line  between  the  points  of  section . 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  divided  into  two  equal 
parts  at  the  point  C,  and  into  two  unequal  parts  at  the 
point  D : the  squares  on  AD,  DB  shall  be  together  double 
of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD L 
From  the  point  C draw 
CE  at  right  angles  to  AB,  [1. 11. 
and  make  it  equal  to  AG  or 
CB,  [I.  3. 

and  join  EA,  EB  ; through 
D draw  DF  parallel  to  CE,  and 
through  F draw  FG  parallel 
to  BA  ; (L  31. 

and  join  AF. 

Then,  because  AC  is  equal  to  CE,  £ Construction. 

the  angle  EAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  AEG.  [I.  5. 

And  because  the  angle  ACE  is  a right  angle,  [ Construction . 

the  two  other  angles  AEG,  EA  C are  together  equal  to  one 
right  angle ; £1.  32. 

and  they  are  equal  to  one  another ; 
therefore  each  of  them  is  half  a right  angle. 

For  the  same  reason  each  of  the  angles  CEB,  EBC  is  half 
a right  angle. 

Therefore  the  whole  angle  AEB  is  a right  angle. 

And  because  the  angle  GEF  is  half  a right  angle,  and 
the  angle  EGF  a right  angle,  for  it  is  equal  to  the  interior 
and  opposite  angle  ECB ; [I.  29. 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  EFG  is  half  a right  angle. 

Therefore  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  EFG,  and 
the  side  EG  is  equal  to  the  side  GF.  [I.  6. 

Again,  because  the  angle  at  B is  half  a right  angle,  and  the 


BOOR  II,  $.  63 

©Engle  FDB  a right  angle,  for  it  is  equal  to  the  interior  and 
■opposite  angle  ECB  ; [L  29. 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  BFD  is  half  a right  angle, 
therefore  the  angle  at  B is  equal  to  the  angle  BFD ; 
and  the  side  DF  is  equal  to  the  side  DB.  [L  6. 

And  because  AC  is  equal  to  CE,  { Construction . 

the  square  on  AC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CE ; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CE  are  double  of  the  square 
•on  ACL 

Hut  the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CE , 
because  the  angle  ACE  is  a right  angle ; [I.  47. 

therefore  the  square  on  AE  is  double  of  the  square  on  AC. 
Again,  because  EG  is  equal  to  GF,  [Construction. 

the  square  on  EG  is  equal  to  the  square  on  GF ; 
therefore  the  squares  on  EG , GF  are  double  of  the  square 
on  GF. 

But  the  square  on  EF  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  EG,  GF, 
because  the  angle  EGF  is  a right  angle  ; [I.  47, 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  double  of  the  square  on  GF, 
And  GF  is  equal  to  CD  ; [I.  34. 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  double  of  the  square  on  CD. 
But  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  square  on  AE  is  also 
double  of  the  square  on  A C. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AE,  EF  are  double  of  tho 
squares  on  A C,  CD. 

But  the  square  on  AF  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AE, 
EF,  because  the  angle  AEF  is  a right  angle.  [I.  47. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AF  is  double  of  the  squares  on 
AC,  CD. 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DF  are  equal  to  the  square  on 
AF,  because  the  angle  ADF  is  a right  angle.  [I.  47. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DF  are  double  of  the 
squares  on  AC,  CD. 

And  DF  is  equal  to  DB  \ 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  double  of  the 
squares  on  AC,  CD. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c,  q.e.d. 


64 


EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  10.  THEOREM. 

If  a straight  line  be  bisected , and  produced  to  any 
pointy  the  square  on  the  whole  line  thus  produced , and 
the  square  on  the  part  of  it  produced,  are  together  double 
of  the  square  on  half  the  line  bisected  and  of  the  square 
on  the  line  made  up  of  the  half  and  the  part  produced. 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  bisected  at  C,  and  pro- 
duced to  D : the  squares  on  AD,  DB  shall  be  together 
double  of  the  squares  on  A CT  CD. 

From  the  point  C draw CE  at  light  angles  to  AB,  [I.  11, 
and  make  it  equal  to  AC 
or  CB\  [I.  3. 

o.nd}o\nAE,EB',  through 
E draw  EF  parallel  to 
AB,  and  through  D draw 
DF  parallel  to  CE.  [1. 31. 

Then  because  the  straight 
line  .S/’meets  the  parallels 
EC,  FD,  the  angles  CEF,  EFD  are  together  equal  to  two 
right  angles;  [1.29. 

and  therefore  the  angles  BEF,  EFD  are  together  less 
than  two  right  angles. 

Therefore  the  straight  lines  EB,  FD  will  meet,  if  produced, 
towards  B,  D.  [Axiom  12. 

Let  them  meet  at  G,  and  join  AG. 

Then  because  AC  is  equal  to  CE,  [ Construction . 

the  angle  CEA  is  equal  to  the  angle  EA  C ; [I.  5. 

and  the  angle  ACE  is  a right  angle  ; [Construction. 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  CEA,  EAG  is  half  a right 
angle.  [I.  32. 

For  the  same  reason  each  of  the  angles  CEB , EBG  is  half 
a right  angle. 

Therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  a right  angle. 

And  because  the  angle  EBG  is  half  a right  angle, 
the  angle  DBG  is  also  half  a right  angle,  for  they  are  verti- 
cally opposite;  [1.15. 

but  the  angle  BDG  is  a right  angle,  because  it  is  equal  to 
the  alternate  angle  DCE  ; [f.  29. 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  DGBishali  aright  angle,  [1.32. 


BOOK  II.  10. 


65 


a,r,d  is  therefore  equal  to  the  angle  DBG ; 

therefore  also  the  side  BD  is  equal  to  the  side  DG.  [I.  6. 

Again,  because  the  angle  EGF  is  half  a right  angle, 

and  the  angle  at  F a right  angle,  for  it  is  equal  to  the 

opposite  angle  BCD  ; [I.  34. 

therefore  thereniaining  angle  i^A^ishalf  aright  angle,  [1.32. 

and  is  therefore  equal  to  the  angle  EGF ; 

therefore  also  the  side  GF  is  equal  to  the  side  FE.  [I.  6. 

And  because  EG  is  equal  to  CA,  the  square  on  EC  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  CA  ; 

therefore  the  squares  on  EC,  CA  are  double  of  the  square 
on  CA. 

But  the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  EC,  CA  .[1.47. 
Therefore  the  square  on  A E is  double  of  the  square  on  AC. 
Again,  because  GF  is  equal  to  FE,  the  square  on  GF  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  FE ; 

therefore  the  squares  on  GF,  FE  are  double  of  the  square 
on  FE. 

But  the  square  on  EG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  GF,  FE.[IA7. 
Therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  double  of  the  square  on  FE. 
And  FE  is  equal  to  CD  ; [I.  34. 

therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  double  of  the  square  on  CD. 
But  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  square  on  AE  is  double 
of  the  square  on  AC. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AE,  EG  are  double  of  the 
squares  on  A C,  CD. 

But  the  square  on  AG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AE, 
EG.  [I.  47. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AG  is  double  of  the  squares  on 
AC,  CD. 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DG  are  equal  to  the  square  on 
AG.  [I.  47. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DG  are  double  of  the 

squares  on  A C,  CD. 

And  DG  is  equal  to  DB  ; 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  double  of  the  squares 
on  AC,  CD. 

Wherefore,  if  a straight  line  &c.  q.e.d. 


5 


66  EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 

PROPOSITION  11.  PROBLEM. 

To  divide  a given  straight  line  into  two  parts,  so  that 
the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  and  one  of  the  parts 
may  be  equal  to  the  square  on  the  other  part. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line : it  is  required  to 
divide  it  into  two  parts,  so  that  the  rectangle  contained  by 
the  whole  and  one  of  the  parts  may  be  equal  to  the  square 
on  the  other  part. 

On  AB  describe  the  square 
ABDC ; [I.  46, 

bisect  AC  at  E ; [1. 10. 

join  BE ; produce  CA  to  F,  and 
make  EF  equal  to  EB  ; [I.  3. 

and  on  AF  describe  the  square 
AFGH.  [I.  46. 

AB  shall  be  divided  at  II  so 

that  the  rectangle  AB,  BH  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  AH. 

Produce  GII  to  K. 

Then,  because  the  straight  line 
AC  is  bisected  at  E,  and  pro- 
duced to  F,  the  rectangle  CF,  FA , together  with  the 
square  on  AE,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EF.  [II.  6. 
But  EF  is  equal  to  EB.  [ Construction . 

Therefore  the  rectangle  CF,  FA,  together  with  the  square 
on  AE,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EB. 

But  the  square  on  EB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AE,  AB, 
because  the  angle  EAB  is  a right  angle.  [I.  47. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  CF,  FA,  together  with  the  square 
on  AE,  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AE,  AB. 

Take  away  the  square  on  AE,  which  is  common  to  both ; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  rectangle  CF,  FA,  is  equal  to 

the  square  on  AB.  [Axiom  3. 

But  the  figure  FK  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  CF,  FA., 

for  FG  is  equal  to  FA  ; 

and  AD  is  the  square  on  AB  ; 

therefore  T^iT  is  equal  to  AD. 

Take  away  the  common  part  AK,  and  the  remainder  FH 
is  equal  to  the  remainder  HD.  [Axiom  3. 


67 


BOOK  II.  11,  12. 

But  HD  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BII \ for  AB  is 
equal  to  BD ; 

and  FH  is  the  square  on  AH ; 

therefore  the  rectangle  A B,BHis  equal  to  the  squareon  AH. 

Wherefore  the  straight  line  AB  is  divided  at  H,  so  that 
the  rectangle  AB,  BH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AH.  q.e.f. 

PROPOSITION  12.  THEOREM. 

In  obtuse-angled  triangles , if  a perpendicular  be  drawn 
from  either  of  the  acute  angles  to  the  opposite  side  'pro- 
duced’,  the  square  on  the  side  subtending  the  obtuse  angle  is 
greater  than  the  squares  on  the  sides  containing  the  obtuse 
angle , by  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  side  on 
which , when  produced , the  perpendicular  falls,  and  the 
straight  line  intercepted  without  the  triangle,  between  the 
perpendicular  and  the  obtuse  angle. 

Let  ABC  be  an  obtuse-angled  triangle,  having  the 
obtuse  angle  AGB,  and  from  the  point  A let  AD  be  drawn 
perpendicular  to  BO  produced  : the  square  on  AB  shall  ho 
greater  than  the  squares  on  AC,  OB,  by  twice  the  rectangle 
BO,  CD. 

Because  the  straight  line 
BD  is  divided  into  two  parts 
at  the  point  G,  the  square  on 
BD  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
BO,  CD,  and  twice  the  rectangle 
BO,  CD.  [II.  4. 

To  each  of  these  equals  add  the  B C £> 

square  on  DA. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  BD,  DA  are  equal  to  the  squares  on 
BC,  CD,  DA,  and  twice  the  rectangle  BC,  CD.  [Aociom  2. 
But  the  square  on  BA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BD,  DA, 
because  the  angle  at  D is  a right  angle ; [I.  47. 

andthe  square  on  CA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CD, DA.  [1. 47. 
Therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on 
BC,  CA,  and  twice  the  rectangle  BC,  CD  ; 
that  is,  the  square  on  BA  is  greater  than  the  squares  on 
BC,  CA  by  twice  the  rectangle  BC,  CD. 

Wherefore,  in  obtuse-angled  triangles  &c.  q.e.d. 

5—2 


68 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


PROPOSITION  13.  THEOREM. 

In  every  triangle,  the  square  on  the  side  subtending 
an  acute  angle , is  less  than  the  squares  on  the  sides  con- 
taining that  angle , by  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by 
either  of  these  sides,  and  the  straight  line  intercepted 
between  the  perpendicular  let  fall  on  it  from  the  opposite 
angle,  and  the  acute  angle. 

Let  ABC  be  any  triangle,  and  the  angle  at  B an  acute 
angle;  and  on  BC  one  of  the  sides  containing  it,  let  fall 
the  perpendicular  AD  from  the  opposite  angle : the  square 
on  AC,  opposite  to  the  angle  B,  shall  be  less  than  the 
squares  on  CB,  BA,  by  twice  the  rectangle  CB , BD. 

First,  let  AD  fall  within  the 
triangle  ABC. 

Then,  because  the  straight  line 
CB  is  divided  into  two  parts 
at  the  point  D,  the  squares  on 
CB,  BD  are  equal  to  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  CB,  BD 
and  the  square  on  CD.  [II.  7. 

To  each  of  these  equals  add  the 
square  on  DA. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  CB,  BD,  DA  are  equal  to  twice 
the  rectangle  CB,  BD  and  the  squares  on  CD,  DA.  [Ax.  2. 
But  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BD,  DA, 
because  the  angle  BDA  is  a right  angle  ; [I.  47. 

and  the  square  on  A C is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CD, DA.  [1.47. 
Therefore  the  squares  on  CB,  BA  are  equal  to  the  square 
on  AC  and  twice  the  rectangle  CB,  BD  ; 
that  is,  the  square  on  AC  alone  is  less  than  the  squares  on 
CB,  BA  by  twice  the  rectangle  CB,  BD. 

A 

Secondly,  let  AD  fall  without 
the  triangle  ABC. 

Then  because  the  angle  at  D is 
a right  angle,  [Construction. 

the  angle  A CB  is  greater  than 
a right  angle ; [I.  16. 


B 


C 


D 


BOOK  IL  13,  14, 


69 


and  therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares 
on  AG,  GB,  and  twice  the  rectangle  BG,  CD.  [II.  12. 
To  each  of  these  equals  add  the  square  on  BG. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BG  are  equal  to  the  square 
on  AG,  and  twice  the  square  on  BG,  and  twice  the  rect- 
angle BG,  CD.  [Axiom  2. 

But  because  BD  is  divided  into  two  parts  at  G,  the  rect- 
angle DB,  BG  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BG,  CD  and  the 
square  on  BG ; [II.  3. 

and  the  doubles  of  these  are  equal, 

that  is,  twice  the  rectangle  DB,  BG  is  equal  to  twice  the 
rectangle  BG,  CD  and  twice  the  square  on  BG. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BGsre  equal  to  the  square 
on  AG,  and  twice  the  rectangle  DB,  BG~, 
that  is,  the  square  on  A G alone  is  less  than  the  squares  on 
AB,  BG  by  twice  the  rectangle  DB,  BG. 

Lastly,  let  the  side  A C/  be  perpendicular 
to  BG. 1 

Then  BG  is  the  straight  line  between  the 
perpendicular  and  the  acute  angle  at  B ; 

and  it  is  manifest,  that  the  squares  on 
AB,  BG  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 
and  twice  the  square  on  BG.  [I.  47  and  Ax.  2. 

Wherefore,  in  every  triangle  he.  q.e.b. 

PROPOSITION  14.  PROBLEM. 


To  describe  a square  that  shall  be  equal  to  a given  recti- 
lineal figure. 


Let  A be  the  given  rectilineal  figure  : it  is  required  to 
describe  a square  that  shall  be  equal  to  A, 


Describe  the  rect- 
angular parallelogram  a 

BODE  equal  totherec-  A 

tilineal  figure  A.  [1. 45.  / 

Then  if  the  sides  of  it,  / 
BE,  ED  are  equal  to  / A 
one  another,  it  is  a \ 
square,  and  what  was  \/ 
required  is  now  done. 


70 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


But  if  tliey  are  not  equal,,  produce  one  of  them  BE  to  Fy 
make  EF  equal 
to  ED,  [I.  3> 
and  bisect  BF 
at  G ; [I.  10L. 

from  the  centre 
G,  at  the  distance 
GB,  or  GF,  de- 
scribe  the  semi- 
circle  MHF,  and 
produce DE  to  II.. 

The  square  described  on  Ell  shall  be  equal  to  the  givers 
rectilineal  figure  A. 

Join  GH.  Then,  because  the  straight  line  BF  is  divided 
into  two  equal  parts  at  the  point  G,  and  into  two  unequal 
parts  at  the  point  Ey  the  rectangle  BE,  EF,  together  with 
the  square  on  GE,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  GF  [II.  5„ 
But  GF  is  equal  to  GH. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  BE,  EF,  together  with  the  square 
on  GEy  is  equal  to  the  square  on  GH. 

But  the  square  on  GH\&  equal  to  the  squares  on*  GE,  EH . 
therefore  tlie  rectangle  BEy  EF,  together  with  the  square 
on  GE,  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  GE,  EH. 

Take  away  the  square  on  GE,  which  is  common  to  both  ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  BE,  EF  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
EH.  {Axiom  3. 


But  the  rectangle  contained  by  BE,  EF  is  the  parallelo- 
gram BD, 

because  EF  is  equal  to  ED.  [Construction, 

Therefore  BD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EH. 

But  BD  is  equal  to  the  rectilineal  figure  A.  [Construction. 
Therefore  the  square  on  EH  is  equal  to  the  rectilineal 
figure  A. 

Wherefore  a square  has  been  made  equal  to  the  given 
rectilineal  figure  A,  namely , the  square  described  on 
EH.  . Q.K.E, 


NOTES  ON  EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS. 


NOTES  ON  EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS. 


The  article  Eucleides  in  Dr  Smith’s  Dictionary  of  Greek  and 
Roman  Biography  was  written  by  Professor  De  Morgan  ; it 
contains  an  account  of  the  works  of  Euclid,  and  of  the  various 
editions  of  them  which  have  been  published.  To  that  article  we 
refer  the  student  who  desires  full  information  on  these  subjects. 
Perhaps  the  only  work  of  importance  relating  to  Euclid  which 
has  been  published  since  the  date  of  that  article  is  a work  on  the 
Porisms  of  Euclid  by  Chasles  ; Paris,  i860. 

Euclid  appears  to  have  lived  in  the  time  of  the  first  Ptolemy, 
B.c.  323 — 283,  and  to  have  been  the  founder  of  the  Alexandrian 
mathematical  school.  The  work  on  Geometry  known  as  The 
Elements  of  Euclid  consists  of  thirteen  books;  two  other 'books 
have  sometimes  been  added,  of  which  it  is  supposed  that  Hypsicles 
was  the  author.  Besides  the  Elements,  Euclid  was  the  author  of 
other  works,  some  of  which  have  been  preserved  and  some  lost. 

We  will  now  mention  the  three  editions  which  are  the  most 
valuable  for  those  who  wish  to  read  the  Elements  of  Euclid  in  the 
original  Greek. 

(r)  The  Oxford  edition  in  folio,  published  in  1703  by  David 
Gregory,  under  the  title  E vnXeldov  rci  au£bpeva.  “As  an  edition 
of  the  whole  of  Euclid’s  works,  this  stands  alone,  there  being  no 
other  in  Greek.”  De  Morgan. 

(2)  Euclidis  Elementorum  Libri  sex  priores...edidit  Joannes 
Gulielmus  Camerer.  This  edition  was  published  at  Berlin  in  two 
volumes  octavo,  the  first  volume  in  1824  and  the  second  in  1825. 
It  contains  the  first  six  books  of  the  Elements  in  Greek  with  a 
Latin  Translation,  and  very  good  notes  which  form  a mathema- 
tical commentary  on  the  subject. 

(3)  Euclidis  Elementa  ex  optimis  libris  in  usum  tironum 
Greece  edita  ah  Ernesto  Ferdinando  August.  This  edition  was 
published  at  Berlin  in  two  volumes  octavo,  the  first  volume  in 
1826  and  the  second  in  1829.  It  contains  the  thirteen  books  of 
the  Elements  in  Greek,  with  a collection  of  various  reading. 


NOTES  ON  EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS.  251 


A third  volume,  which  was  to  have  contained  the  remaining 
works  of  Euclid,  never  appeared.  “ To  the  scholar  who  wants 
one  edition  of  the  Elements  we  should  decidedly  recommend  this, 
as  bringing  together  all  that  has  been  done  for  the  text  of 
Euclid’s  greatest  work.  ” De  Morgan. 

An  edition  of  the  whole  of  Euclid’s  works  in  the  original  has 
long  been  promised  by  Teubner  the  well-known  German  publisher, 
as  one  of  his  series  of  compact  editions  of  Greek  and  Latin 
authors ; but  we  believe  there  is  no  hope  of  its  early  appearance. 

Robert  Simson’s  edition  of  the  Elements  of  Euclid,  which 
we  have  in  substance  adopted  in  the  present  work,  differs  con- 
siderably from  the  original.  The  English  reader  may  ascertain 
the  contents  of  the  original  by  consulting  the  work  entitled  The 
Elements  of  Euclid  with  dissertations... by  James  Williamson. 
This  work  consists  of  two  volumes  quarto ; the  first  volume  was 
published  at  Oxford  in  1781,  and  the  second  at  London  in  1788. 
Williamson  gives  a close  translation  of  the  thirteen  books  of  the 
Elements  into  English,  and  he  indicates  by  the  use  of  Italics  the 
words  which  are  not  in  the  original  but  which  are  required  by 
our  language. 

Among  the  numerous  works  which  contain  notes  on  the 
Elements  of  Euclid  we  will  mention  four  by  which  we  have  been 
aided  in  drawing  up  the  selection  given  in  this  volume. 

An  Examination  of  the  first  six  Boohs  of  Euclid's  Elements  by 
William  Austin... Oxford,  1781. 

Euclid's  Elements  of  Plane  Geometry  with  copious  notes... by 
John  Walker.  London,  1827. 

The  first  six  boohs  of  the  Elements  of  Euclid  with  a Commen- 
tary...by  Dionysius  Lardner,  fourth  edition.  London,  1834. 

Short  supplementary  remarks  on  the  first  six  Boohs  of  Euclid's 
Elements,  by  Professor  De  Morgan,  in  the  Companion  to  the 
Almanac  for  1849. 

We  may  also  notice  the  following  works: 

Geometry,  Plane,  Solid,  and  Spherical, ...London  1830;  this 
forms  part  of  the  Library  of  Useful  Knowledge. 

Theoremes  et  Problemes  de  Geometrie  Elementaire  par  Eugene 
Catalan. ..Troisieme  edition.  Paris,  1858. 

Eor  the  History  of  Geometry  the  student  is  referred  to 
Montucla’s  Histoire  des  Mathematiques,  and  to  Chasles’s  Apergu, 
historique  sur  Vorigine  et  le  developpement  des  Methodes  en  G6o- 
metrie... 


252 


NOTES  ON 


THE  FIRST  BOOK. 

Definitions.  The  first  seven  definitions  have  given  rise  to  con- 
siderable discussion,  on  which  however  we  do  not  propose  to  enter. 
Such  a discussion  would  consist  mainly  of  two  subjects,  both  of 
which  are  unsuitable  to  an  elementary  work,  namely,  an  exami- 
nation of  the  origin  and  nature  of  some  of  our  elementary  ideas, 
and  a comparison  of  the  original  text  of  Euclid  with  the  substitu- 
tions  for  it  proposed  by  Simson  and  other  editors.  For  the  former 
subject  the  student  may  hereafter  consult  Wheweil’s  History  of 
Scientific  Ideas  and  Mill’s  Logic,  and  for  the  latter  the  notes  in 
Camerer’s  edition  of  the  Elements  of  Euclid. 

We  will  only  observe  that  the  ideas  which  correspond  to  the 
words  point,  line,  and  surface,  do  not  admit  of  such  definitions  as 
will  really  supply  the  ideas  to  a person  who  is  destitute  of  them. 
The  so-called  definitions  may  be  regarded  as  cautions  or  restric- 
tions. Thus  a point  is  not  to  be  supposed  to  have  any  size,  but 
only  position;  a line  is  not  to  be  supposed  to  have  any  breadth  or 
. thickness,  but  only  length ; a surface  is  not  to  be  supposed  to  have 
any  thickness,  but  only  length  and  breadth. 

The  eighth  definition  seems  intended  to  include  the  cases  in 
which  an  angle  is  formed  by  the  m.eeting  of  two  curved  lines,  or 
of  a straight  line  and  a curved  line ; this  definition  however  is  of 
no  importance,  as  the  only  angles  ever  considered  are  such  as  are 
formed  by  straight  lines.  The  definition  of  a plane  rectilineal 
angle  is  important ; the  beginner  must  carefully  observe  that  no 
change  is  made  in  an  angle  by  prolonging  the  lines  which  form 
it,  away  from  the  angular  point. 

Some  writers  object  to  such  definitions  as  those  of  an  equi- 
lateral triangle,  or  of  a square,  in  which  the  existence  of  the 
object  defined  is  assumed  when  it  ought  to  be  demonstrated. , They 
would  present  them  in  such  a form  as  the  following:  if  there  be 
a triangle  having  three  equal  sides,  let  it  be  called  an  equilateral 
triangle. 

Moreover,  some  of  the  definitions  are  introduced  prematurely. 
Thus,  for  example,  take  the  definitions  of  a right-angled  triangle 
and  an  obtuse-angled  triangle  ; it  is  not  shewn  until  I.  17,  that 
a triangle  cannot  have  both  a right  angle  and  an  obtuse  angle, 
and  so  cannot  be  at  the  same  time  right-angled  and  obtuse- 
angled.  And  before  Axiom  x 1 has  been  given,  it  is  conceivable 


EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS. 


253 


that  the  same  angle  may  be  greater  than  one  right  angle,  and 
less  than  another  right  angle,  that  is,  obtuse  and  acute  at  the 
same  time. 

The  definition  of  a square  assumes  more  than  is  necessary. 
For  if  a four-sided  figure  have  all  its  sides  equal  and  one  angle  a 
right  angle,  it  may  be  shewn  that  aZtets  angles  are  right  angles ; 
or  if  a four-sided  figure  have  all  its  angles  equal,  it  may  be  shewn 
that  they  are  all  right  angles. 

Postulates.  The  postulates  state  what  processes  we  assume 
that  we  can  effect,  namely,  that  we  can  draw  a straight  line 
between  two  given  points,  that  we  can  produce  a straight  line  to 
any  length,  and  that  we  can  describe  a circle  from  a given  centre 
with  a given  distance  as  radius.  It  is  sometime?  stated  that  the 
postulates  amount  to  requiring  the  use  of  a ruler  and  compasses. 
It  must  however  be  observed  that  the  ruler  is  not  supposed  to 
be  a graduated  ruler,  so  that  we  cannot  use  it  to  measure  off 
assigned  lengths.  And  we  do  not  require  the  compasses  for  any 
other  process  than  describing  a circle  from  a given  point  with  a 
given  distance  as  radius ; in  other  words,  the  compasses  may  be 
supposed  to  close  of  themselves,  as  soon  as  one  of  their  points  is 
removed  from  the  paper. 

Axioms.  The  axioms-  are  called  in  the  original  Common 
Notions.  It  is  supposed  by  some  writers  that  Euclid  intended 
his  postulates  to  include  all  demands  which  are  peculiarly  geo- 
metrical, and  his  common  notions  to  include  only  such  notions 
as  are  applicable  to  all  kinds  of  magnitude  as  well  as  to  space 
magnitudes.  Accordingly,  these  writers  remove  the  last  three 
axioms  from  their  place  and  put  them  among  the  postulates; 
and  this  transposition  is  supported  by  some  manuscripts  and 
some  versions  of  t'he  Elements. 

The  fourth  axiom  is  sometimes  referred  to  in  editions  of 
Euclid  when  in  reality  more  is  required  than  this  axiom  ex- 
presses. Euclid  says,  that  if  A and  B be  unequal,  and  C and  D 
equal,  the  sum  of  A and  C is  unequal  to  the  sum  of  B and  D. 
What  Euclid  often  requires  is  something  more,  namely,  that  if 
A be  greater  than  B,  and  C and  D be  equal,  the  sum  of  A and 
C is  greater  than  the  sum  of  B and  D.  Such  an  axiom  as  this  is 
required,  for  example,  in  I.  17.  A similar  remark  applies  to  the 
fifth  axiom. 

In  the  eighth  axiom  the  words  “that  is,  which  exactly  fill 
the  same  space,”  have  been  introduced  without  the  authority  of 


254 


NOTES  ON 


the  original  Greek.  They  are  objectionable,  because  lines  and 
angles  are  magnitudes  to  which  the  axiom  may  be  applied,  but 
they  cannot  be  said  to  fill  space. 

On  the  method  of  superposition  we  may  refer  to  papers  by 
Professor  Kelland  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of 
Edinburgh,  Yols.  xxi.  and  xxni. 

The  eleventh  axiom  is  not  required  before  I.  14,  and  the 
twelfth  axiom  is  not  required  before  I.  -29  ; we  shall  not  consider 
these  axioms  until  we  arrive  at  the  propositions  in  which  they  are 
respectively  required  for  the  first  time. 

The  first  book  is  chiefl)  devoted  to  the  properties  of  triangles 
and  parallelograms. 

We  may  observe  that  Euclid  himself  does  not  distinguish 
between  problems  and  theorems  except  by  using  at  the  end  of 
the  investigation  phrases  which  correspond  to  q.e.f.  and  Q.E.D. 
respectively. 

I.  2.  This  problem  admits  of  eight  cases  in  its  figure.  For 
it  will  be  found  that  the  given  point  may  be  joined  with  either 
end  of  the  given  straight  line,  then  the  equilateral  triangle  may 
be  described  on  either  side  of  the  straight  line  which  is  drawn, 
and  the  sides  of  the  equilateral  triangle  which  are  produced  may  be 
produced  through  either  extremity.  These  various  cases  may  be 
left  for  the  exercise  of  the  student,  as  they  present  no  difficulty. 

There  will  not  however  always  be  eight  different  straight  lines 
obtained  which  solve  the  problem.  For  example,  if  the  point  A 
falls  on  BC  produced,  some  of  the  solutions  obtained  coincide ; 
this  depends  on  the  fact  which  follows  from  I.  32,  that  the  angles 
of  all  equilateral  triangles  are  equal. 

I.  5.  “Join  FC.'”  Custom  seems  to  allow  this  singular  ex- 
pression as  an  abbreviation  for  “draw  the  straight  line  FC”  or 
for  “join  F to  C by  the  straight  line  FC.” 

In  comparing  the  triangles  BFC,  CGB,  the  words  “and  the 
base  BC  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  BFC,  COB  ” are  usually 
inserted,  with  the  authority  of  the  original.  As  however  these 
words  are  of  no  use,  and  tend  to  perplex  a beginner,  we  have 
followed  the  example  of  some  editors  and  omitted  them. 

A corollary  to  a proposition  is  an  inference  which  may  b® 
deduced  immediately  from  that  proposition.  Many  of  the  corol- 
laries in  the  Elements  are  not  in  the  original  text,  but  intro- 
duced by  the  editors. 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


255 


It  has  been  suggested  to  demonstrate  I.  5 by  superposition. 
Conceive  the  isosceles  triangle  ABO  to  be  taken  up,  and  then  re- 
placed so  that  AB  falls  on  the  old  position  of  AC,  and  AC  falls 
on  the  old  position  of  AB.  Thus,  in  the  manner  of  I.  4,  we  can 
shew  that  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACB. 

I.  6 is  the  converse  of  part  of  I.  5.  One  proposition  is  said  to 
be  the  converse  of  another  when  the  conclusion  of  each  is  the 
hypothesis  of  the  other.  Thus  in  I.  5 the  hypothesis  is  the 
equality  of  the  sides,  and  one  conclusion  is  the  equality  of  the 
angles;  in  I.  6 the  hypothesis  is  the  equality  of  the  angles 
and  the  conclusion  is  the  equality  of  the  sides.  When  there  is 
more  than  one  hypothesis  or  more  than  one  conclusion  to  a pro- 
position, we  can  form  more  than  one  converse  proposition.  For 
example,  as  another  converse  of  I.  5 we  have  the  following:  if 
the  angles  formed  by  the  base  of  a triangle  and  the  sides  pro- 
duced be  equal,  the  sides  of  the  triangle  are  equal;  this  pro- 
position is  true  and  will  serve  as  an  exercise  for  the  student. 

The  converse  of  a true  proposition  is  not  necessarily  true; 
the  student  however  will  see,  as  he  proceeds,  that  Euclid  shew3 
that  the  converses  of  many  geometrical  propositions  are  true. 

I.  6 is  an  example  of  the  indirect  mode  of  demonstration,  in 
which  a result  is  established  by  shewing  that  some  absurdity 
follows  from  supposing  the  required  result  to  be  untrue.  Hence 
this  mode  of  demonstration  is  called  the  reductio  ad  dbsurdum. 
Indirect  demonstrations  are  often  less  esteemed  than  direct  de- 
monstrations ; they  are  said  to  shew  that  a theorem  is  true  rather 
than  to  shew  why  it  is  true.  Euclid  uses  the  reductio  ad  abswr- 
dum  chiefly  when  he  is  demonstrating  the  converse  of  some 
former  theorem;  see  I.  14,  19,  25,40. 

Some  remarks  on  indirect  demonstration  by  Professor  Syl- 
vester, Professor  Be  Morgan,  and  Dr  Adamson  will  be  found  in 
the  volumes  of  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  1852  and  1853. 

I.  6 is  not  required  by  Euclid  before  he  reaches  II.  4 ; so  that 
I.  6 might  be  removed  from  its  present  place  and  demonstrated 
hereafter  in  other  ways  if  we  please.  For  example,  I.  6 might  be 
placed  after  I.  18  and  demonstrated  thus.  Let  the  angle  ABC  be 
equal  to  the  angle  ACB : then  the  side  AB  shall  be  equal  to  the 
side  A C.  For  if  not,  one  of  them  must  be  greater  than  the  other ; 
suppose  A B greater  than  A C.  Then  the  angle  A CB  is  greater 
than  the  angle  ABC , by  I.  18.  But  this  is  impossible,  because 


256 


NOTES  ON 


the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC by  hypothesis.  Oi 
I.  6 might  be  placed  after  I.  26  and  demonstrated  thus.  Bisect  the 
angle  BAG  by  a straight  line  meeting  the  base  at  T>.  Then  the 
triangles  ABB  and  A CD  are  equal  in  all  respects,  by  I.  26. 

I,  7 is  only  required  in  order  to  lead  to  I.  8.  The  two  might 
be  superseded  by  another  demonstration  of  I.  8,  which  has  been 
recommended  by  many  writers. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles,  having  the  sides  AB,  AC 
equal  to  the  sides  DE,  DF,  each  to  each,  and  the  base  BO 
equal  to  the  base  EF:  the  angle  BA  C shall  be  equal  to  the  angle 


For,  let  the  triangle  DEF  be  applied  to  the  triangle  ABC, 
so  that  the  bases  may  coincide,  the  equal  sides  be  conterminous, 
and  the  vertices  fall  on  opposite  sides  of  the  base.  Let  GBC 
represent  the  ttiangle  DEF  thus  applied,  so  that  O corresponds 
to  D.  Join  AG.  Since,  by  hypothesis,  BA  is  equal  to  BG,  the 
angle  BAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  BGA,  by  I.  5.  In  the  same 
manner  the  angle  CAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  CGA.  Therefore 
the  whole  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle  BGC,  that  is, 
to  the  angle  EDF. 

There  are  two  other  cases  ; for  the  straight  line  A G may  pass 
through  B or  C,  or  it  may  fall  outside  BC : these  cases  may  be 
treated  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  we  have  considered. 

I.  8.  It  may  be  observed  that  the  two  triangles  in  I.  8 are 
equal  in  all  respects ; Euclid  however  does  not  assert  more  than 
the  equality  of  the  angles  opposite  to  the  bases,  and  when  he 
requires  more  than  this  result  he  obtains  it  by  using  I.  4. 

I.  9.  Here  the  equilateral  triangle  DEF  is  to  be  described 
on  the  side  remote  from  A,  because  if  it  were  described  on  the 
same  side,  its  vertex,  F,  might  coincide  with  A,  and  then  the 
construction  would  fail. 


EDF. 


A 


D 


: 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS, 


257 


L II.  The  corollary  was  added  by  Simson.  It  is  liable  to 
Berious  objection.  For  we  do  not  know  how  the  perpendicular 
BE  is  to  be  drawn.  If  we  are  to  use  I.  n we  must  produce  AB, 
and  then  we  must  assume  that  there  is  only  one  way  of  pro- 
ducing AB,  for  otherwise  we  shall  not  know  that  there  i3  . 
only  one  perpendicular;  and  thus  we  assume  what  we  have  to 
demonstrate. 

Simson’s  corollary  might  come  after  I.  13  and  be  deman- 
strated  thus.  If  possible  let  the  two  straight  lines  ABC,  ABD 
have  the  segment  A B common  to  both.  From  the  point  B draw 
any  straight  line  BE.  Then  the  angles  ABE  and  EBC  are  equal 
to  two  right  angles,  by  I.  13,  and  the  angles  ABE  and  EBB  are 
also  equal  to  two  right  angles,  by  L 13.  Therefore  the  an- 
gles ABE  and  EBC  are  equal  to  the  angles  ABE  and  EBB. 
Therefore  tile' angle  EBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  EBB ; which  is 
absurd. 

But  if  the  question  whether  two  straight  lines  can  have  a com- 
mon segment  is  to  be  considered  at  all  in  the  Elements,  it  might 
occur  at  an  earlier  place  than  Simson  has  assigned  to  it.  For 
example,  in  the  figure  to  I.  5,  if  two  straight  lines  could  have  a 
common  segment  AB,  and  then  separate  at  B,  we  should  obtain 
two  different  angles  formed  on  the  other  side  of  EG  by  these 
produced  parts,  and  each  of  them  would  be  equal  to  the  angle 
BCG.  The  opinion  has  been  maintained  that  even  in  I.  i,  it  is 
tacitly  assumed  that  the  straight  lines  A C and  BC  cannot  have  a 
common  segment  at  C where  they  meet ; see  Camerer’s  Euclid, 
pages  30  and  36.. 

Simson  never  formally  refers  to  his  corollary  until  XI.  r. 
The  eorollary  should  be  omitted,  and  the  tenth  axiom  should 
be  extended  so  as  to  amount  to  the  following;  if  two  straight 
lines  coincide  in  two  points  they  must  coincide  both  beyond  and 
between  those  points. 

I.  12.  Here  the  straight  line  is  said  to  be  of  unlimited  length, 
in  order  that  we  may  ensure  that  it  shall  meet  the  circle. 

Euclid  distinguishes  between  the  terms  at  right  angles  and 
perpendicular.  He  uses  the  term  at  right  angles  when  the  straight 
line  is  drawn  from  a point  in  another,  as  in  I.  1 1 ; and  he  uses 
the  term  perpendicular  when  the  straight  line  is  drawn  from  a 
point  without  another,  as  in  I.  12.  This  distinction  however 
is  often  disregarded  by  modern  writers. 

I.  14.  Here  Euclid  first  requires  his  eleventh  axiom.  For 

17 


258 


NOTES  ON 


in  the  demonstration  we  have  the  angles  'ABO  and  A BE  equal  to 
two;  right  angles,  and  also  the  angles  ABC  and  ABB  equal  to 
two  right  angles ; and  then  the  former  two  right  angles  are  equal 
to  the  latter  two  right  angles  by  the  aid  of  the  eleventh 
axiom.  Many  modern  editions  of  Euclid  however  refer  only  to 
tlie  first  axiom,  as  if  - that  alone  were  sufficient;  a similar  remark 
applies  to  the  demonstrations  of  I.  15,  and  T.  24.  In  these  cases 
we  have  omitted  the  reference  purposely,  in  order  to  avoid  per- 
plexing a beginner ; but  when  his  attention  is  thus  drawn  to  the 
circumstance  he  will  see  that  the  first  and  eleventh  axioms  are 
both  used. 

We  may  observe  that  errors,  in  the  references  with  respect  to 
the  eleventh  axiom,  occur  in  other  places  in  many  modern  edi- 
tions of  Euclid.  Thus  for  example  in  III.  1 , at  the  step  “ there- 
fore the  angle  FDB  i3  equal  to  the  angle  GBB ,”  a reference  is 
given  to  the  first  axiom  instead  of  to  the  eleventh. 

There  seems  no  objection  on  Euclid’s  principles  to  the  fol- 
lowing demonstration  of  his  eleventh  axiom. 

Let  AB  be  at  right  angles  to  BAG  at  the  point  A,  and  EF 
at  rig^angles  to  HEG  at  the  point  E\  then  shall  the  angles  BA  Q 
and  F EG  be.  equal. 


B TT"  F 


Take  any  length  A C,  and  make  AB,  EH,  EG  all  equal  to  A O. 
Now  apply  HEG  to  BA  C,  so  that  H may  be  on  B,  and  1JG  on 
BO,  and  B and  F on  the  same  side  of  BG ; then  G will  coincide 
with  C,  and  E with  A.  Also  EF  shall  coincide  with  AB\  for  if 
not,  suppose,  if  possible,  that  it  takes  a different  position  as  A K. 
Then  the  angle  BAK  k equal  to  the  angle  HEF,  and  the  angle 
CAK  to  the  angle  GEF;  but  the  angles  HEF  and  QEF  are  equal, 
by  hypothesis;  therefore  the  angles  BAK  and  CAK  are  equal 
But  the  angles  BAB  and  CAB  are  also  equal,  by  hypothesis; 
and  the  angle  CAB  is  greater  than  the  angle  CAK ; there- 


259 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 

fore  tlie  angle  DAB  is  greater  than  the  angle  OAK.  Much 
more  then  is  the  angle  DAK  greater  than  the  angle  GAK.  But 
the  angle  DAK  was  shewn  to  be  equal  to  the  angle  GAK  \ 
which  is  absurd.  Therefore  EF  must  coincide  with  AB ; and 
therefore  the  angle  FEG  coincides  with  the  angle  BAG,  and  is 
equal  to  it. 

I.  1 8,  I.  19.  In  order  to  assist  the  student  in  remembering 
which  of  these  two  propositions  is  demonstrated  directly  and  which 
indirectly,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  order  is  similar  to  that 
in  I.  5 and  I.  6. 

I.  20.  “ Proclus,  in  his  commentary,  relates,  that  the  Epi- 

cureans derided  Prop.  20,  as  being  manifest  even  to  asses,  and 
needing  no  demonstration ; and  his  answer  is,  that  though  the 
truth  of  it  be  manifest  to  our  senses,  yet  it  is  science  which 
must  give  the  reason  why  two  sides  of  a triangle  are  greater 
than  the  third:  but  the  right  answer  to  this  objection  against 
this  and  the  21st,  and  some  other  plain  propositions,  is,  that  the 
number  of  axioms  ought  not  to  be  increased  without  neces- 
sity, as  it  must  be  if  these  propositions  be  not  demonstrated.” 
Simson . 

I.  21.  Here  it  must  be  carefully  observed  that  the  two 
straight  lines  are  to  be  drawn  from  the  ends  of  the  side  of  the 
triangle.  If  this  condition  be  omitted  the  two  straight  lines  will 
not  necessarily  be  less  than  two  sides  of  the  triangle. 

I.  22.  “Some  authors  blame  Euclid  because  he  does  not 
demonstrate  that  the  two  circles  made  use  of  in  the  construction 
of  this  problem  must  cut  one  another:  but  this  is  very  plain  from 
the  determination  he  has  given,  namely,  that  any  two  of  the 
straight  lines  DF,  FG,  GH,  must  be  greater  than  the  third. 
For  who  is  so  dull,  though  only  beginning  to  learn  the  Elements, 
as  not  to  perceive  that  the  circle  described  from  the  centre  F,  at 
the  distance  FD,  must  meet  FH  betwixt  F and  II,  because  FD 
is  less  than  FH ; and  that  for  the  like  reason,  the  circle  de- 
scribed from  the  centre  G,  at  the  distance  (37/... must  meet 
DG  betwixt  D and  G ; and  that  these  circles  must  meet  one 
another,  because  FD  and  GH  are  together  greater  than  FG  s” 
Simson. 

The  condition  that  B and  G are  greater  than  A,  ensures  that 
the  circle  described  from  the  centre  G shall  not  fall  entirely 
within  the  circle  described  from  the  centre  F ; the  condition  that 
A and  B are  greater  than  C,  ensures  that  the  circle  described 

17—2 


2 GO 


NOTES  ON 


from  the  centre  F shall  not  fall  entirely  within  the  circle  de* 
scribed  from  the  centre  0 ; the  condition  that  A and  C are 
greater  than  B,  ensures  that  one  of  these  circles  shall  not  fall 
entirely  without  the  other.  Hence  the  circles  must  meet.  It  in 
easy  to  see  this  as  Simson  says,  but  there  is  something  arbi- 
trary in  Euclid’s  selection  of  what  is  to  be  demonstrated  and  what 
is  to  be  seen,  and  Simson’s  language  suggests  that  he  was  really 
conscious  of  this. 

I.  24.  In  the  construction,  the  condition  that  DE  is  to  be 
the  side  which  is  not  greater  than  the  other,  was  added  by 
Simson ; unless  this  condition  be  added  there  will  be  three  cases 
to  consider,  for  F may  fall  on  EG,  or  above  EG,  or  below  EG.  It 
may  be  objected  that  even  if  Simson’s  condition  be  added,  it 
ought  to  be  shewn  that  F will  fall  below  EG.  Simson  accordingly 
says  “...it  is  very  easy  to  perceive,  that  DG  being  equal  to  DF, 
the  point  G is  in  the  circumference  of  a circle  described  from  the 
centre  D at  the  distance  DF,  and  must  be  in  that  part  of  it 
which  is  above  the  straight  line  EF,  because  DG  falls  above  DF, 
the  angle  EDG  being  greater  than  the  angle  EDFF  Or  we  may 
shew  it  in  the  following  manner.  Let  H denote  the  point  of 
intersection  of  DF  and  EG.  Then,  the  angle  DUG  is  greater 
than  the  angle  DEG,  by  I.  16 ; the  angle  DEG  is  not  less  than 
the  angle  DGE,  by  I.  19;  therefore  the  angle  DUG  is  greater 
than  the  angle  DGH.  Therefore  DH  is  less  than  DG,  by  I.  20. 
Therefore  DIi  is  less  than  DF. 

If  Simson’s  condition  be  omitted,  we  shall  have  two  other 
cases  to  consider  besides  that  in  Euclid.  If  F falls  on  EG,  it  is 
obvious  that  EF  is  less  than  EG.  If  F falls  above  EG,  the  sum 
of  DF  and  EF  is  less  than  the  sum  of  DG  and  EG,  by  I.  21 ; and 
therefore  EF  is  less  than  EG. 

I.  26.  It  will  appear  after  I.  32  that  two  triangles  which 
have  two  angles  of  .the  one  equal  to  two  angles  of  the  other,  eacl 
to  each,  have  also  their  third  angles  equal.  Hence  we  are  abh 
to  include  the  two  cases  of  I.  26  in  one  enunciation  thus  ; if  two 
triangles  have  all  the  angles  of  the  one  respectively  equal  to  all  the 
angles  of  the  other,  each  to  each,  and  have  also  a side  of  the  one, 
opposite  to  any  angle,  equal  to  the  side  opposite  to  the  equal  angle 
in  the  other,  the  triangles  shall  be  equal  in  all  respects. 

The  first  twenty-six  propositions  constitute  a distinct  section 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


261 


of  tlie  first  Book  of  the  Elements.  The  principal  results  are 
those  contained  in  Propositions  4,  8,  and  26;  in  each  of  these 
Propositions  it  is  shewn  that  two  triangles  which  agree  in  three 
respects  agree  entirely.  There  are  two  other  cases  which  will 
naturally  occur  to  a student  to  consider  besides  those  in  Euclid ; 
namely,  (1)  when  two  triangles  have  the  three  angles  of  the  one 
respectively  equal  to  the  three  angles  of  the  other,  (2)  when  two 
triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one  equal  to  two  sides  of  the  other, 
each  to  each,  and  an  angle  opposite  to  one  side  of  one  triangle 
equal  to  the  angle  opposite  to  the  equal  side  of  the  other  triangle. 
In  the  first  of  these  two  cases  the  student  will  easily  see,  after 
reading  I.  29,  that  the  two  triangles  are  not  necessarily  equal. 
In  the  second  case  also  the  triangles  are  not  necessarily  equal, 
as  may  be  shewn  by  an  example;  in  the  figure  of  I.  11,  suppose 
the  straight  line  FB  drawn;  then  in  the  twTo  triangles  FBE, 
FBI),  the  side  FB  and  the  angle  FBC  are  common,  and  the  side 
FE  is  equal  to  the  side  FD,  but  the  triangles  are  not  equal  in 
all  respects.  In  certain  cases,  however,  the  triangles  will  be 
equal  in  all  respects,  as  will  be  seen  from  a proposition  which 
we  shall  now  demonstrate. 

If  two  triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one  equal  to  ttvo  sides  of 
the  other,  each  to  each,  and  the  angles  opposite  to  a pair  of  equal 
suLs  equal;  then  if  the  angles  opposite  to  the  other  pair  of  equal 
sides  be  both  acute,  or  both  obtuse,  or  if  one  of  them  be  a rigid 
angle,  the  two  triangles  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

Let  ABC  and  DEF  be 
two  triangles ; let  A B be 
equal  to  DE,  and  BC  equal 
to  EF,  and  the  angle  A 
equal  to  the  angle  D. 

First,  suppose  the  angles 
C and  F acute  angles. 

If  the  angle  B be  equal  to  the  angle  E,  the  triangles  A BC, 
DEF  are  equal  in  all  respects,  by  I.  4.  If  the  angle  B be  not 
equal  to  the  angle  E,  one  of  them  must  be  greater  than  the 
other;  suppose  the  angle  B greater  than  the  angle  E,  and  make 
the  angle  ABG  equal  to  the  angle  E.  Then  the  triangles  ABO, 
DEF  are  equal  in  all  respects,  by  I.  26;  therefore  BG  is  equal 
to  EF,  and  the  angle  EGA  is  equal  to  the  angle  EFD.  Put  the 
angle  EFD  is  acute,  by  hypothesis;  therefore  the  angle  EGA  is 
acute.  Therefor^  the  angle  BGC  is  obtuse,  by  I.  13.  But  it  has 


2C2 


NOTES  OM 


been  shewn  that  BO  is  equal  to 
EF;  and  EF  is  equal  to  BO, 
by  hypothesis ; therefore  BO  is 
equal  to  BC.  Therefore  the  an- 
gle BGO  is  equal  to  the  angle 
BOG,  by  I.  5 ; and  the  angle 
BOG  is  acute,  by  hypothesis; 
therefore  the  angle  BGO  is  acute. 

But  BGO  was  shewn  to  be  ob- 
tuse; which  is  absurd.  Therefore  the  angles  A BC,  DEF  are 
not  unequal;  that  is,  they  are  equal.  Therefore  the  triangles 
A BC,  DEF  are  equal  in  all  respects,  by  I.  4. 

Next,  suppose  the  angles  at  C and  F obtuse  angles. 

The  demonstration  is  similar  to  the  above. 

Lastly,  suppose  one  of  the  angles  a right  angle,  namely,  the 
angle  0.  If  the  angle  B be  not  equal  to  the  angle  E,  make  the 


angle  ABG  equal  to  the  angle  E.  Then  it  may  be  shewn,  as 
before,  that  BG  is  equal  to  BO,  and  therefore  the  angle  BGO  is 
equal  to  the  angle  BCG,  that  is,  equal  to  a right  angle.  There- 
fore two  angles  of  the  triangle  BGO  are  equal  to  two  right 
angles  ; which  is  impossible,  by  I.  17.  Therefore  the  angles  ABC 
and  DEF  are  not  unequal ; that  is,  they  are  equal.  Therefore 
the  triangles  ABO,  DEF  are  equal  in  all  respects,  by  I.  4. 

If  the  angles  A and  D are  both  right  angles,  or  both  obtuse, 
the  angles  O and  F must  be  both  acute,  by  I.  17.  If  AB  is  les 
than  BO,  and  DE  less  than  EF,  the  angles  at  0 and  F must  bs 
both  acute,  by  I.  18  and  I.  17. 

The  propositions  from  I.  27  to  I.  34  inclusive  may  be  said 
to  constitute  the  second  section  of  the  first  Book  of  the  Elements. 
They  relate  to  the  theory  of  parallel  straight  lines.  In  I.  29  Euclid 
uses  for  the  first  time  his  twelfth  axiom.  The  theory  of  parallel 
straight  lines  has  always  beer,  considered  the  great  difficulty 
« elementary  geometry,  and  many  attempts  have  been  mads 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


2G3 


to  overcome  this  difficulty  in  a better  way  than  Euclid  has  done. 
We  shall'  not  give  an  account  of  these  attempts.  The  student  who 
wishes  to  examine  them  may  consult  Camerer’s  Euclid,  Ger- 
gonne’s  Annales  de  Mathematiques,  Volumes  xv  and  xvi,  the 
work  by  Colonel  Pemmet  Thompson  entitled  Geometry  without 
Axioms,  the  article  Parallels  in  the  English  Cyclopaedia,  a me- 
moir by  Professor  Baden  Powell  in  the  second  volume  of  the 
Memoirs  of  the  Ashmolean  Society,  an  article  by  M.  Bouniakofsky 
in  the  Bulletin  de  V Academic  Imperiale,  Volume  v,  St  P^ters- 
bourg,  1863,  articles  in  the  volumes  of  the  Philosophical 
Magazine  for  1856  and  1857,  and  a dissertation  entitled  Sur 

un  point  de  Vhistoire  de  la  Geometric  chez  les  Grecs par 

A.  J-  II-  Vincent.  Paris,  1857. 

Speaking  generally  it  may  be  said  that  the  methods  which 
t&ffier  substantially  from  Euclid’s  involve,  in  the  first  place  an 
axiom  as  difficult  as  his,  and  then  an  intricate  series  of  proposi- 
tions ; while  in  Euclid’s  method  after  the  axiom  is  once  admitted 
the  remaining  process  is  simple  and  clear. 

One  modification  of  Euclid’s  axiom  has  been  proposed,  which 
appears  to  diminish  the  difficulty  of  the  subject.  This  consists 
in  assuming  instead  of  Euclid’s  axiom  the  following ; two  inter- 
secting straight  lines  cannot  be  both  parallel  to  a third  straight  line. 
The  propositions  in  the  Elements  are  then  demonstrated  as  in 
Euclid  up  to  I.  28,  inclusive.  Then,  in  I.  29,  we  proceed  with 
Euclid  up  to  the  words,  “therefore  the  angles  BGH,  GHD  are 
less  than  two  right  angles,”  We  then  infer  that  BGH  anil  GHD 
must  meet:  because  if  a straight  line  be  drawn  through  G so  as  to 
make  the  interior  angles  together  equal  to  two  right  angles  this 
straight  line  will  be  parallel  to  CD,  by  I.  28 ; and,  by  our  axiom, 
there  cannot  be  two  parallels  to  CD,  both  passing  through  G. 

This  form  of  making  the  necessary  assumption  has  been 
recommended  by  various  eminent  mathematicians,  among  whom 
may  be  mentioned  Playfair  and  De  Morgan.  By  postponing 
the  consideration  of  the  axiom  until  it  is  wanted,  that  is,  until 
after  I.  28,  and  then  presenting  it  in  the  form  here  given,  the 
theory  of  parallel  straight  lines  appears  to  be  treated  in  the  easiest 
manner  that  has  hitherto  been  proposed. 

I.  30.  Here  we  may  in  the  same  way  shew  that  if  AB  and 
EF  are  each  of  them  parallel  to  CD,  they  are  parallel  to  each 
other.  It  has  been  said  that  the  case  considered  in  the  text  is 
so  obvious  as  to  need  no  demonstration;  for  if  AB  and  CD  can 


264  NOTES  ON 

never  meet  EF,  which  lies  between  them,  they  cannot  meet  OM 
another. 

I.  32.  The  corollaries  to  I.  32  were  added  by  Simson.  In 
the  second  corollary  it  ought  to  be  stated  what  is  meant  by  an 
exterior  angle  of  a rectilineal  figure.  At  each  angular  point  let 
one  of  the  sides  meeting  at  that  point  be  produced;  then  the 
exterior  angle  at  that  point  is  the  angle  contained  between  this 
produced  part  and  the  side  which  is  not  produced.  Either 
the  sides  may  be  produced,  for  the  two  angles  which  can  thus  wa 
obtained  are  equal,  by  I.  15. 

The  rectilineal  figures  to  which  Eu- 
clid confines  himself  are  those  in  which 
the  angles  all  face  inwards ; we  may 
here  however  notice  another  class  of 
figures;  In  the  accompanying  diagram 
the  angle  A FC  faces  outwards,  and  it  is 
an  angle  less  than  two  right  angles ; this 
angle  however  is  not  one  of  the  interior 
angles  of  the  figure  AEDCF.  We  may  consider  the  corr©. 
sponding  interior  angle  to  be  the  excess  of  four  right  angles 
above  the  angle  AFC;  such  an  angle,  greater  than  two  right 
angles,  is  called  a re-entrant  angle. 

The  first  of  the  corollaries  to  I.  32  is  true  for  a figure  which 
has  a re-entrant  angle  or  re-entrant  angles ; but  the  second 
is  not. 

I.  32.  If  two  triangles  have  two  angles  of  the  one  equal  to 
two  angles  of  the  other  each  to  each  they  shall  also  have  their 
third  angles  equal.  This  is  a very  important  result,  which  is 
often  required  in  the  Elements.  The  student  should  notice  hew 
this  result  is  established  on  Euclid’s  principles.  By  Axioms  t r 
and  2 one  pair  of  right  angles  is  equal  to  any  other  pair  of  right 
angles.  Then,  by  I.  32,  the  three  angles  of  one  triangle  -iro 
together  equal  to  the  three  angles  of  any  other  triangle.  Tlnn, 
by  Axiom  2,  the  sum  of  the  two  angles  of  one  triangle  is  equal  to 
the  sum  of  the  two  equal  angles  of  the  other ; and  then,  by  Axiom  3, 
the  third  angles  are  equal. 

After  I.  32  we  can  draw  a straight  line  at  right  angles  to 
a given  straight  lino  from  its  extremity,  without  producing  the 
given  straight  line. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line.  It  is  required  to  draff 
from  A a straight  line  at  right  angles  to  AB. 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS. 


265 


On  AB  describe  tbe  equilateral  triangle 
ABC.  Produce  BC  to  D,  so  that  CD  may  be 
equal  to  CB.  Join  AD.  Then  AD  shall  be  at 
right  angles  to  AB.  For,  the  angle  CAD  is 
equal  to  the  angle  CD  A,  and  the  angle  CAB 
is  equal  to  the  angle  CBA,  by  I.  5.  There- 
fore the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  two 
angles  ABD,  BDA,  by  Axiom  1.  Therefore 
the  angle  BAD  is  a right  angle,  by  I.  32. 

The  propositions  from  I.  35  to  I.  48  inclusive  may  be  said 
to  constitute  the  third  section  of  the  first  Book  of  the  Elements. 
They  relate  to  equality  of  area  in  figures  which  are  not  neces- 
sarily identical  in  form. 

I.  35.  Here  Simson  has  altered  the  demonstration  given  by 
Euclid,  because,  as  he  says,  there  would  be  three  cases  to  con- 
sider in  following  Euclid’s  method.  Simson  however  uses  the 
third  Axiom  in  a peculiar  manner,  when  he  first  takes  a triangle 
from  a trapezium,  and  then  another  triangle  from  the  same 
trapezium,  and  infers  that  the  remainders  are  equal.  If  the 
demonstration  is  to  be  conducted  strictly  after  Euclid’s  manner, 
three  cases  must  be  made,  by  dividing  the  latter  part  of  the 
demonstration  into  two.  In  the  left-hand  figure  we  may  suppose 
the  point  of  intersection  of  BE  and  DC  to  be  denoted  by  G. 
Then,  the  triangle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DCF ; take 
away  the  triangle  DGE  from  each;  then  the  figure  ABGD  is 
equal  to  the  figure  EGCF ; add  the  triangle  GBC  to  each;  then 
the  parallelogram  A BCD  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  EBCF. 
In  the  right-ha,nd  figure  we  have  the  triangle  AEB  equal  to  the 
triangle  DFC ; add  the  figure  BE  DC  to  each ; then  the  parallel- 
ogram A BCD  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  EB-CF. 

The  equality  of  the  parallelograms  in  I.  35  is  an  equality  of 
area,  and  not  an  identity  of  figure.  Legendre  proposed  to  use 
the  word  equivalent  to  express  the  equality  of  area,  and  to  restrict 
the  word  equal  to  the  case  in  which  magnitudes  admit  of  super- 
position and  coincidence.  This  distinction,  however,  has  not 
been  generally  adopted,  probably  because  there  are  few  cases  in 
which  any  ambiguity  can  arise;  in  such  cases  we  may  say  es- 
pecially, equal  in  area,  to  prevent  misconception. 

Cresswell,  in  his  Treatise  of  Geometry,  has  given  a dem'm- 
i’fcratioafl  of  I.  35  which  shews  that  the  parallelograms  m«v  ue 


266 


NOTES  ON 


divided  into  pairs  of  pieces  admitting  of  superposition  and  coin- 
cidence; see  also  Ills  Preface,  page  x. 

X.  38.  An  important  case  of  I.  38  is  that  in  which  the  tri- 
angles are  on  equal  bases  and  have  a common  vertex. 

I.  40.  We  may  demonstrate  I.  40  without  adopting  the  in 
direct  method.  Join  BD,  CD.  The  triangles  DBC  and  DEI 
are  equal,  by  I.  38;  the  triangles  ABC  and  DEF  are  equal,  by 
hypothesis;  therefore  the  triangles  DBC  and  ABC  are  equal,  by 
the  first  Axiom.  Therefore  AD  is  parallel  to  BC,  by  I.  39. 
Philosophical  Magazine,  October  1850. 

I.  44.  In  I.  ‘44,  Euclid  does  not  shew  that  AH  and  FQ 
will  meet.  “I  cannot  help  being  of  opinion  that  the  construc- 
tion would  have  been  more  in  Euclid’s  manner  if  he  had  made 
GH  equal  to  BA  and  then  joining  II A had  proved  that  HA  was 
parallel  to  GB  by  the  thirty-third  proposition.”  Williamson. 

I.  47.  Tradition  ascribed  the  discovery  of  I.  47  to  Pytha- 
goras. Many  demonstrations  have  been  given  of  this  cele- 
brated proposition ; the  following  is  one  of  the  most  interesting. 

Let  A BCD,  A EFG  be  any 
two  squares,  placed  so  that 
their  bases  may  join  and  form 
one  straight  line.  Take  GH 
and  EK  each  equal  to  AB,  and 
join  HO,  CK,  KF,  FH. 

Then  it  may  be  shewn  that 
the  triangle  HBC  is  equal  in 
all  respects  to  the  triangle  FEK, 
and  the  triangle  KDC  to  the 
triangle  FGH.  Therefore  the 
two  squares  are  together  equiva- 
lent to  the  figure  CKFH.  It 
may  then  be  shewn,  with  the  aid  of  I.  32,  that  the  figure  CKFH 
is  a square.  And  the  side  CH  is  the  hypotenuse  of  a right-angled 
triangle  of  which  the  sides  CB,  BH  are  equal  to  the  sides  of  the 
two  given  squares.  This  demonstration  requires  no  proposition 
of  Euclid  after  I.  32,  and  it  shews  how  two  given  squares  may 
be  cut  into  pieces  which  will  fit  together  so  as  to  form  a third 
square.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Mathematics,  Vol.  I. 

A large  number  of  demonstrations  of  this  proposition  are  c.  I- 
lected  in  a dissertation  by  Joh.  Jos.  Ign.  Hoffmann,  entitled  Dsp 
Pythagorische  Lehrsatz...,Zweyte...Ausgabe.  Mainz.  1821* 


mG LIUS  ELEMENTS. 


26f 


THE  SECOND  BOOK. 


The  second  book  is  devoted  to  the  investigation  of  relations 
between  the  rectangles  contained  by  straight  lines  divided  into 
segments  in  various  ■ways. 

When  a straight  line  is  divided  into  two  parts,  each  part  is 
called  a segment  fey  Euclid.  It  is  fi»»jnd  convenient  to  extend  the 
meaning  of  ^ie  word  segment,  and  to  lay  down  the  following  defi- 
nition. W^ien  a point  is  taken  in  a straight  line,  or  in  the 
straight  lir,e  produced,  the  distances  of  the  point  from  the  ends  of 
the  straig  % line  are  called  segments  of  the  straight  line.  When 
it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  them,  such  segments  are  called  in- 
ternal or  external,  according  as  the  point  is  in  the  straight  line, 
or  in  the  straight  line  produced. 

The  student  cannot  fail  to  notice  that  there  is  an  analogy 
between  the  first  ten  propositions  of  this  book  and  some  element- 
ary facts  in  Arithmetic  and  Algebra. 

Let  A BOD  represent  a rectangle  which  is  4 inches  loDg  and 

3 inches  broad.  Then,  by  draw- 
ing straight  lines  parallel  to 
the  sides,  the  figure  may  be 
divided  into  12  squares,  each 
square  being  described  on  a 
side  which  represents  an  inch 
in  length.  A square  described 
on  a side  measuring  an  inch  is 
called,  for  shortness,  a square 
mch.  Thus  if  a rectangle  is 

4 inches  long  and  3 inches 

broad  it  may  be  divided  into  12  square  inches;  this  is  expressed 
by  saying,  that  its  area  is  equal  to  12  square  inches,  or,  more 
briefly,  that  it  contains  12  square  inches.  And  a similar  result 
is  easily  seen  to  hold  in  all  similar  cases.  Suppose,  for  example, 
that  a rectangle  is  12  feet  long  and  7 feet  broad;  then  its 
area  is  equal  to  12  times  7 square  feet,  that  is  to  84  square  feet; 
this  may  be  expressed  briefly  in  common  language  thus;  if  a 
rectangle  measures  12  feet  by  7 it  contains  84  square  feet.  It 
must  be  carefully  observed  that  the  sides  of  the  rectangle  a 
supposed  to  be  measured  by  the  same  unit  of  length.  Thus  if  * 
rectangle  is  a yard  in  length,  and  a foot  and  a half  in  ' oread  U.,  *8 


B 


208 


NOTES  ON 


must  express  each  of  these  dimensions  in  terms  of  the  same  unit; 
we  may  say  that  the  rectangle  measures  36  inches  by  18  inches, 
and  contains  36  times  18  square  inches,  that  is,  648  square  inches. 

Thus  universally,  if  one  side  of  a rectangle  contain  a unit  of 
length  an  exact  number  of  times,  and  if  an  adjacent  side  of  the 
rectangle  also  contain  the  same  unit  of  length  an  exact  number  of 
times,  the  product  of  these  numbers  will  be  the  number  of  square 
units  contained  in  the  rectangle. 

Next  suppose  we  have  a square,  and  let  its  side  be  5 inches  in 
length.  Then,  by  our  rule,  the  area  of  the  square  is  5 times 
5 square  inches,  that  is  25  square  inches.  Now  the  number 
25  is  called  in  Arithmetic  the  square  of  the  number  5.  And 
universally,  if  a straight  line  contain  a unit  of  length  an  exact 
number  of  times,  the  area  of  the  square  described  on  the  straight 
line  is  denoted  by  the  square  of  the  number  which  denotes  the 
length  of  the  straight  line. 

Thus  we  see  that  there  is  in  general  a connexion  between  the 
product  of  two  numbers  and  the  rectangle  contained  by  two 
straight  lines,  and  in  particular  a connexion  between  the  square  of 
a number  and  the  square  on  a straight  line ; and  in  consequence 
of  this  connexion  the  first  ten  propositions  in  Euclid’s  Second 
Book  correspond  to  propositions  in  Arithmetic  and  Algebra. 

The  student  will  perceive  that  we  speak  of  the  square  de- 
scribed on  a straight  line,  when  we  refer  to  the  geometrical  figure, 
and  of  the  square  of  a number  when  we  refer  to  Arithmetic.  The 
editors  of  Euclid  generally  use  the  words  "square  described 
upon ” in  I.  47  and  I.  48,  and  afterwards  speak  of  the  square  of 
a straight  line.  Euclid  himself  retains  throughout  the  same  form 
of  expression,  and  we  have  imitated  him. 

Some  editors  of  Euclid  have  added  Arithmetical  or  Alge- 
braical demonstrations  of  the  propositions  in  the  second  book, 
founded  on  the  connexion  we  have  explained.  W e have  thought 
it  unnecessary  to  do  this,  because  the  student  who  is  acquainted 
with  the  elements  of  Arithmetic  and  Algebra  will  find  no  diffi- 
culty in  supplying  such  demonstrations  himself,  so  far  as  they 
are  usually  given.  We  say  so  far  as  they  a/re  usually  given, 
because  these  demonstrations  usually  imply  that  the  sides  of 
rectangles  can  always  be  expressed  exactly  in  terms  of  some  unit 
©f  length ; whereas  the  student  will  find  hereafter  that  this  is  not 
the  case,  owing  to  the  existence  of  what  are  technically 
MWoeMi&tsurable  magnitudes.  We  do  not  enter  on  tbi«  subject, 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS.  2C9 

as  it  would  lead  us  too  far  from  Euclid’s  Elements  of  Geometry , 
with  which  we  are  here  occupied. 

The  first  ten  propositions  in  the  second  book  of  Euclid  may 
be  arranged  and  enunciated  in  various  ways ; we  will  briefly 
indicate  this,  but  we  do  not  consider  it  of  any  importance  to  dis- 
tract the  attention  of  a beginner  with  these  diversities. 

II.  2 and  II.  3 are  particular  cases  of  II.  x. 

II.  4 is  very  important;  the  following  particular  case  of  it 
should  be  noticed ; the  square  described  on  a straight  line  made  up 
of  two  equal  straight  limes  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square  described 
on  one  of  the  two  equal  straight  lines. 

II.  5 and  II.  6 may  be  included  in  one  enunciation  thus ; the 
rectangle  under  the  sum  and  difference  of  two  straight  lines  is  equal 
to  the  difference  of  the  squares  described  on  those  straight  lines; 
or  thus,  the  rectangle  contained  by  two  straight  lines  together  with 
the  square  described  on  half  their  difference , is  equal  to  the  square 
described  on  half  their  sum. 

II.  7 may  be  enunciated  thus;  the  square  described  on  a 
straight  line  which  is  the  difference  of  two  other  straight  lines  is  less 
thaAthe  sum  of  the  squares  described  on  those  straight  lines  by 
twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  those  straight  lines.  Then  from  this 
and  II.  4,  and  the  second  Axiom,  we  infer  that  the  square  described 
on  the  sum  of  two  straight  lines,  and  the  square  described  on 
their  difference,  are  together  double  of  the  sum  of  the  squares 
described  on  the  straight  lines ; and  this  enunciation  includes  both 
II.  9 and  II.  io,  so  that  the  demonstrations  given  of  these  pro- 
positions by  Euclid  might  be  superseded. 

II.  8 coincides  with  the  second  form  of  enunciation  which  we 
have  given  to  II.  5 and  II.  6,  bearing  in  mind  the  particular  case 
of  II.  4 which  we  have  noticed. 

II.  1 r.  When  the  student  is  acquainted  with  the  elements  of 
Algebra  he  should  notice  that  II.  11  gives  a geometrical  con- 
struction for  the  solution  of  a particular  quadratic  equation. 

II.  12,  II.  13.  These  are  interesting  in  connexion  with  I.  47 ; 
and,  as  the  student  may  see  hereafter,  they  are  of  great  import- 
ance in  Trigonometry ; they  are  however  not  required  in  any  of 
the  parts  of  Euclid’s  Elements  which  are  usually  read.  The 
converse  of  I.  47  is  proved  in  I.  48 ; and  we  can  easily  shew  that 
converses  of  II.  12  and  II.  13  are  true. 

Take  the  following,  which  is  the  converse  of  II.  12;  if  the 
square  described  on  one  side  of  a triangle  be  greater  than  the  sum 


270  NOTES  ON 

of  the  squares  described  on  the  other  two  sides , the  angle  opposite 
to  the  first  side  is  obtuse. 

For  the  angle  cannot  oe  a right  angle,  since  the  square  de- 
scribed on  the  first  side  would  then  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the 
squares  described  on  the  other  two  sides,  by  I.  47 ; and  the  angle 
cannot  be  acute,  since  the  square  described  on  the  first  side 
would  then  be  less  than  the  sum  of  the  squares  described  on  the* 
other  two  sides,  by  II.  13 ; therefore  the  angle  must  be  obtuse. 

Similarly  we  may  demonstrate  the  following,  which  is  the  con- 
verse of  II.  13;  if  the  square  described  on  one  side  of  a triangle 
be  less  than  the  sum  of  the  squares  described  on  the  other  two  sides, 
the  angle  opposite  to  the  first  side  is  acute. 

II.  13.  Euclid  enunciates  II.  13  thus;  in  acute-angled  tri- 
angles, &c. ; and  he  gives  only  the  first  case  in  the  demonstration. 
But,  as  Simson  observes,  the  proposition  holds  for  any  triangle ; 
and  accordingly  Simson  supplies  the  second  and  third  cases.  It 
has,  however,  been  often  noticed  that  the  same  demonstration  is 
applicable  to  the  first  and  second  cases ; and  it  would  ,be  a great 
improvement  as  to  brevity  and  clearness  to  ta,ke  these  two  cases 
together.  Then  the  whole  demonstration  will  be  as  follows. 

Let  ABC  be  any  triangle,  and  the  angle  at  B one  of  -its 
acute  angles;  and,  if  A C be  not  perpendicular  to  BC,  let  fall  on 
BC,  produced  if  necessary,  the  perpendicular  AD  from  the 
opposite  angle:  the  square  on  AQ  opposite  to  the  angle  B,  shall 
be  less  than  the  squares  on  CB,  BA,  by  twice  the  rectangle 
CB,  BD. 


First,  suppose  A C not  perpendicular  to  BC. 

The  squares  on  CB,  BD  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
CB, . BD,  together  with  the  square  on  CD.  [[J.  7. 

To  each  of  these  equals  add  the  square  on  DA. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  CB,  BD,  DA  are  equal  to  twit.*  the 
rectangle  CB,  BD,  together  with  the  squares  on  CD,  DA. 

But  the  square  cn  A B is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BDt  /JA, 


EUCLID'S  ELEMENTS.  271 

and  the  square  on  AC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CD,  DA, 
because  the  angle  BDA  is  a right  angle.  [I.  47. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  CB,  BA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  .4  C, 
together  with  twice  the  rectangle  CB,  BD ; 

that  is,  the  square  on  A C alone  is  less  than  the  squares  on 
CB,  BA,  by  twice  the  rectangle  CB,  BD. 

Next,  suppose  AC  perpendicular  to  BO. 

Then  BC  is  the  straight  line  intercepted  be- 
tween the  perpendicular  and  the  acute  angle 
at  B. 

And  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB.  [I.  47. 

Therefore  the  square  on  4C  is  less  than  the 
squares  on  AB,  BC,  by  twice  the  square  on  BC. 

II.  14.  This  is  not  required  in  any  of  the  parts  of  Euclid’a 
Elements  which  are  usually  read;  it  is  included  in  YI.  2a. 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


I.  1 to  15. 

1.  On  a given  straight  line  describe  an  isosceles  tri- 
angle having  each  of  the  sides  equal  to  a given  Straight 
linfe. 

2.  In  the  figure  of  I.  2 if  the  diameter  of  the  smaller 
circle  is  the  radius  of  the  larger,  shew  where  the  given 
point  and  the  vertex  of  the  constructed  triangle  will  be 
situated. 

3.  If  two  straight  lines  bisect  each  other  at  right  an- 
gles, any  point  in  either  of  them  is  equidistant  from  the 
extremities  of  the  other. 

4.  If  the  angles  ABG  and  AGB  at  the  base  of  an 
isosceles  triangle  be  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  BD, 
CD,  shew  that  DBG  will  be  an  isosceles  triangle. 

5.  BAG  is  a triangle  having  the  angle  B double  of  the 
angle  A.  If  BD  bisects  the  angle  B and  meet3  AG  at  D, 
shew  that  BD  is  equal  to  AD. 

6.  In  t|ie  figure  of  I.  5 if  FG  and  BG  meet  at  H 
shew  that  ///and  GH are  equal. 

7.  In  the  figure  of  I.  5 if  FG  and  BG  meet  at  H, 
shew  that  A. II  bisects  the  angle  BAG. 

8.  The  sides  AB,  AD  of  a quadrilateral  A BCD  are 
equal,  and  the  diagonal  A G bisects  the  angle  BAD  -,  shew 
that  the  sides  GB  and  CD  are  equal,  and  that  the  diagonal 
.ri  £7  bisects  the  angle  BCD. 

9.  AGB , ADB  are  two  triangles  on  the  same  side  of 
AB,  such  that  AG  is  equal  to  BD,  and  AD  is  equal  to 
BG,  and  AD  and  BG  intersect  at  0 : shew  that  the  tri- 
angle AOB  is  isosceles. 

10.  The  opposite  angles  of  a rhombus  are  equal. 

11.  A diagonal  of  a rhombus  bisects  each  of  the  angles 
through  which  it  passes. 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID . 


541 


12.  If  two  isosceles  triangles  are  on  the  same  base  the 
straight  line  joining  their  vertices,  or  that  straight  line 
produced,  will  bisect  the  base  at  right  angles. 

13.  Find  a point  in  a given  straight  line  such  that  its 
distances  from  two  given  points  may  be  equal. 

14.  Through  two  given  points  on  opposite  sides  of  a 
given  straight  line  draw  two  straight  lines  which  shall  meet 
in  that  given  straight  line,  and  include  an  angle  bisected 
by  that  given  straight  line. 

15.  A given  angle  BAC  is  bisected ; if  CA  is  produced 
to  G and  the  angle  BAG  bisected,  the  two  bisecting  lines 
are  at  right  angles. 

16.  If  four  straight  lines  meet  at  a point  so  that  the 
opposite  angles  are  equal,  these  straight  lines  are  two  and 
two  in  the  same  straight  line. 


I.  16  to  26. 

17.  ABC  is  a triangle  and  the  angle  A is  bisected  by 
a straight  line  which  meets  BC  at  D ; shew  that  BA  is 
greater  than  BD , and  CA  greater  than  CD. 

18.  In  the  figure  of  I.  17  shew  that  ABC  and  ACB 
are  together  less  than  two  right  angles,  by  joining  A to  any 
point  in  BC. 

19.  A BCD  is  a quadrilateral  of  which  AD  is  the 
longest  side  and  BC  the  shortest ; shew  that  the  angle 
ABC  is  greater  than  the  angle  ADC,  and  the  angle  BCD 
greater  than  the  angle  BAD . 

20.  If  a straight  line  be  drawn  through  A one  of  the 
angular  points  of  a square,  cutting  one  of  the  opposite  sides, 
and  meeting  the  other  produced  at  F \ shew  that  AF  is 
greater  than  the  diagonal  of  the  square. 

21.  The  perpendicular  is  the  shortest  straight  line 
that  can  be  drawn  from  a given  point  to  a given  straight 
line;  and  of  others,  that  which  is  nearer  to  the  perpen- 
dicular is  less  than  the  more  remote ; and  two,  and  only 
two,  equal  straight  lines  can  be  drawn  from  the  given  point 
to  the  given  straight  line,  one  on  each  side  of  the  perpen- 
dicular. 

22.  The  sum  of  the  distances  of  any  point  from  the 
three  angles  of  a triangle  is  greater  than  half  the  sum  of 
the  sides  of  the  triangle. 


342 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


23.  The  four  sides  of  any  quadrilateral  are  togethei 
greater  than  the  two  diagonals  together. 

24.  The  two  sides  of  a triangle  are  together  greater 
than  twice  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  vertex  to  the 
middle  point  of  the  base. 

25.  If  one  angle  of  a triangle  is  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  other  two,  the  triangle  can  be  divided  into  two  isosceles 
triangles. 

26.  If  the  angle  C of  a triangle  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  angles  A and  B,  the  side  AB  is  equal  to  twice  the 
straight  line  joining  C to  the  middle  point  of  AB. 

27.  Construct  a triangle,  having  given  the  base,  one  of 
the  angles  at  the  base,  and  the  sum  of  the  sides. 

28.  The  perpendiculars  let  fall  on  two  sides  of  a tri- 
angle from  any  point  in  the  straight  line  bisecting  the  angle 
between  them  are  equal  to  each  other. 

29.  In  a given  straight  line  find  a point  such  that  the 
perpendiculars  drawn  from  it  to  two  given  straight  lines 
shall  be  equal. 

30.  Through  a given  point  draw  a stoaight  line  such 
that  the  perpendiculars  on  it  from  two  given  points  may  be 
on  opposite  sides  of  it  and  equal  to  each  other. 

31.  A straight  line  bisects  the  angle  A of  a triangle 
ABC ; from  B a perpendicular  is  drawn  to  this  bisecting 
straight  line,  meeting  it  at  D,  and  BD  is  produced  to  meet 
AC  Or  AC  produced  at  E : shew  that  BD  is  equal  to  DE. 

32.  AB,  AC  are  any  two  straight  lines  meeting  at  A : 
through  any  point  P draw  a straight  line  meeting  them  at  E 
and  F,  such  that  AE  may  be  equal  to  AF. 

33.  Two  right-angled  triangles  have  their  hypotenuses 
equal,  and  a side  of  one  equal  to  a side  of  the  other : shew 
that  they  are  equal  in  all  respects. 


I.  27  to  31. 

34.  Any  straight  line  parallel  to  the  base  of  an  iso- 
sceles triangle  makes  equal  angles  with  the  sides. 

35.  If  two  straight  lines  A and  B are  respectively 
parallel  to  two  others  G and  D , shew  that  the  inclination  of 
A to  B is  equal  to  that  of  C to  D. 

36.  A straight  line  is  drawn  terminated  by  two  parallel 
straight  lines ; through  its  middle  point  any  straight  line  is 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


M3 


drawn  and  terminated  by  the  parallel  straight  lines.  Shew 
that  the  second  straight  line  is  bisected  at  the  middle  point 
if  the  first. 

37.  If  through  any  point  equidistant  from  two  parallel 
straight  lines,  two  straignt  lines  be  drawn  cutting  the  pa- 
rallel straight  lines,  they  will  intercept  equal  portions  of 
these  parallel  straight  lines. 

38.  If  the  straight  line  bisecting  the  exterior  angle  of 
a triangle  be  parallel  to  the  base,  shew  that  the  triangle  is 
isosceles. 

39.  Find  a point  B in  a given  straight  line  CD,  such 
that  if  AB  be  drawn  to  B from  a given  point  A,  the  angle 
ABC  will  be  equal  to  a given  angle. 

40.  If  a straight  lice  be  drawn  bisecting  one  of  the 
angles  of  a triangle  to  meet  the  opposite  side,  the  straight 
lines  drawn  from  the  point  of  section  parallel  to  the  other 
sides,  and  terminated  by  these  sides,  will  be  equal. 

41.  The  side  BC  of  a triangle  ABC  is  produced  to  a 
point  D;  the  angle  ACB  is  bisected  by  the  straight  line 
CE  which  meets  AB  at  E.  A straight  line  is  drawn 
through  E parallel  to  BC,  meeting  AC  at  F,  and  the 
straight  line  bisecting  the  exterior  angle  ACD  at  G.  Shew 
that  EF  is  equal  to  FG. 

42.  AB  is  the  hypotenuse  of  a right-angled  triangle 
ABC:  find  a point  D in  AB  such  that  DB  may  be  equal 
to  the  perpendicular  from  D on  AC. 

43.  ABC  is  an  isosceles  triangle : find  points  D,  E in 
the  equal  sides  AB,  AC  such  that  BD,  DE,  EC  may  all 
be  equal. 

44.  A straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  BC 
the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  ABC  cuts  the  side  AB  at 
D and  CA  produced  at  E:  shew  that  AED  is  an  isosceles 
triangle. 

I.  32. 

45.  From  the  extremities  of  the  base  of  an  isosceles 
triangle  straight  lines  are  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  sides ; 
shew  that  the  angles  made  by  them  with  the  base  are  each 
equal  to  half  the  vertical  angle. 

46.  On  the  sides  of  any  triangle  ABC  equilateral  tri- 
angles BCD,  CAE,  ABF  axe  described,  all  external:  shew 
that  the  straight  fines  AD,  BE,  CF  are  all  equal. 


344 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID . 

47.  What  is  the  magnitude  of  an  angle  of  a regular 
octagon? 

48.  Through  two  given  points  draw  two  straight  lines 
forming  with  a straight  line  given  in  position  an  equilateral 
triangle. 

49.  If  the  straight  lines  bisecting  the  angles  at  the 
base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  be  produced  to  meet,  they  will 
contain  an  angle  equal  to  an  exterior  angle  of  the  triangle. 

50.  A is  the  vertex  of  an  isosceles  triangle  ABC , and 
BA  is  produced  to  D,  so  that  AD  is  equal  to  BA ; and 
DC  is  drawn : shew  that  BCD  is  a right  angle. 

51.  ABC  is  a triangle,  and  the  exterior  angles  at  B 
and  C are  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  BD,  CD  respec- 
tively, meeting  at  D : shew  that  the  angle  BUG  together 
with  half  the  angle  BAC  make  up  a right  angle. 

52.  Shew  that  any  angle  of  a triangle  is  obtuse,  right, 
or  acute,  according  as  it  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less 
than  the  other  two  angles  of  the  triangle  taken  together. 

53.  Construct  an  isosceles  triangle  having  the  vertical 
angle  four  times  each  of  the  angles  at  the  base. 

54.  In  the  triangle  ABC  the  side  BC  is  bisected  at  E 
and  A B at  G ; AE  is  produced  to  F so  that  EF  is  equal 
to  AE,  and  CG  is  produced  to  If  so  that  GH  is  equal  to 
CG : shew  that  FB  and  HB  are  in  one  straight  line. 

55.  Construct  an  isosceles  triangle  which  shall  have 
one-third  of  each  angle  at  the  base  equal  to  half  the  vertical 
angle. 

56.  AB,  AC  are  two  straight  lines  given  in  position: 
it  is  required  to  find  in  them  two  points  P and  Q,  such 
that,  PQ  being  joined,  AP  and  PQ  may  together  be  equal 
to  a given  straight  line,  and  may  contain  an  angle  equal  to 
a given  angle. 

57.  Straight  lines  are  drawn  through  the  extremities  of 
the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle,  making  angles  with  it  on 
the  side  remote  from  the  vertex,  each  equal  to  one-third  of 
one  of  the  equal  angles  of  the  triangle  and  meeting  the 
sides  produced:  shew  that  three  of  the  triangles  thus 
formed  are  isosceles. 

58.  AEB,  CEP  are  two  straight  lines  intersecting  at 
E ; straight  linos  AC,  DB  are  drawn  forming  two  triangles 
AGE,  BED ; the  angles  AGE,  DBE  are  bisected  by  the 
Straight  lines  CF,  BF,  meeting  at  F.  Shew  that  the  angle 
CFB  is  equal  to  half  the  sum  of  the  angles  EAC,  EDB. 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


345 


59.  The  straight  line  joining  the  middle  point  of  the 
hypotenuse  of  a right-angled  triangle  to  the  right  angle  is 
equal  to  half  the  hypotenuse. 

60.  From  the  angle  A of  a triangle  ABC  a perpen- 
dicular is  drawn  to  the  opposite  side,  meeting  it,  produced 
if  necessary,  at  D ; from  the  angle  B a perpendicular  is 
drawn  to  the  opposite  side,  meeting  it,  produced  if  neces- 
sary, at  E : shew  that  the  straight  lines  which  join  D and 
E to  the  middle  point  of  AB  are  equal. 

61.  From  the  angles  at  the  base  of  a triangle  perpen- 
diculars are  drawn  to  the  opposite  sides,  produced  if  neces- 
sary : shew  that  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  inter- 
section will  be  bisected  by  a perpendicular  drawn  to  it  from 
the  middle  point  of  the  base. 

62.  In  the  figure  of  1. 1,  if  C and  H be  the  points  of 
intersection  of  the  circles,  and  AB  be  produced  to  meet 
one  of  the  circles  at  K,  shew  that  CHK  is  an  equilateral 
triangle. 

63.  The  straight  lines  bisecting  the  angles  at  the  base 
of  an  isosceles  triangle  meet  the  sides  at  D and  E:  shew 
that  DE  is  parallel  to  the  base. 

64.  AB,  AC  are  two  given  straight  lines,  and  P is  a 
given  point  in  the  former : it  is  required  to  draw  through 
P a straight  line  to  meet  AC  at  Q,  so  that  the  angle  APQ 
may  be  three  times  the  angle  A QP. 

65.  Construct  a right-angled  triangle,  having  given  the 
hypotenuse  and  the  sum  of  the  sides. 

66.  Construct  a right-angled  triangle,  having  given  the 
hypotenuse  and  the  difference  of  the  sides. 

67.  Construct  a right-angled  triangle,  having  given  the 
hypotenuse  and  the  perpendicular  from  the  right  angle 
on  it. 

68.  Construct  a right-angled  triangle,  having  given  the 
perimeter  and  an  angle. 

69.  Trisect  a right  angle. 

70.  Trisect  a given  finite  straight  line. 

71.  From  a given  point  it  is  required  to  draw  to  two 
parallel  straight  lines,  two  equal  straight  lines  at  right 
angles  to  each  other. 

72.  Describe  a triangle  of  given  perimeter,  having  its 
angles  equal  to  those  of  a given  triangle. 


346 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


I.  33,  34. 

73.  If  a quadrilateral  have  two  of  its  opposite  skWa 
parallel,  and  the  two  others  equal  but  not  parallel,  any  two 
of  its  opposite  angles  are  together  equal  to  two  right 
angles. 

74.  If  a straight  line  which  joins  the  extremities  of  two 
equal  straight  lines,  not  parallel,  make  the  angles  on  the 
same  side  of  it  equal  to  each  other,  the  straight  line  which 
joins  the  other  extremities  will  be  parallel  to  the  first. 

75.  No  two  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  extremities 
of  the  base  of  a triangle  to  the  opposite  sides  can  possibly 
bisect  each  other. 

76.  If  the  opposite  sides  of  a quadrilateral  are  equal  it 
is  a parallelogram! 

< 77.  If  the  opposite  angles  of  a quadrilateral  are  equal 
it  is  a parallelogram. 

78.  The  diagonals  of  a parallelogram  bisect  each  othea: 

79.  If  the  diagonals  of  a quadrilateral  bisect  each  otheL 
it  is  a parallelogram. 

80.  If  the  straight  line  joining  two  opposite  angles  ot 
a parallelogram  bisect  the  angles  the  four  sides  of  the  par 
rallelogram  are  equal. 

81.  Draw  a straight  line  through  a given  point  such 
that  the  part  of  it  intercepted  between  two  given  parallel 
straight  lines  may  be  of  given  length. 

82.  Straight  lines  bisecting  two  adjacent  angles  of  a 
parallelogram  intersect  at  right  angles. 

83.  Straight  lines  bisecting  two  opposite  angles  of  a 
parallelogram  are  either  parallel  or  coincident. 

84.  If  the  diagonals  of  a parallelogram  are  equal  all  its 
angles  are  equal. 

85.  Find  a point  such  that  the  perpendiculars  let  fell 
from  it  on  two  given  straight  lines  shall  be  respectively 
equal  to  two  given  straight  lines.  How  many  such  points 
are  there  ? 

86.  It  is  required  to  draw  a straight  line  which  shall 
be  equal  to  one  straight  line  and  parallel  to  another,  and  be 
terminated  by  two  given  straight  lines. 

87.  On  the  sides  AB,  BC,  and  CD  of  a parallelogram 
ABCD  three  equilateral  triangles  are  described,  that  on 
BC  towards  the  same  parts  as  the  parallelogram,  and  those 
on  ABt  CD  towards  the  opposite  parts:  shew  that  the 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


347 


distances  of  the  vertices  of  the  triangles  on  AB,  CD  from 
that  on  BC  are  respectively  equal  to  the  two  diagonals  of 
the  parallelogram. 

88.  If  the  angle  between  two  adjacent  sides  of  a paral- 
lelogram be  increased,  while  their  lengths  do  not  alter,  the 
diagonal  through  their  point  of  intersection  will  diminish. 

89.  A,  B,  C are  three  points  in  a straight  line,  such 
that  AB  is  equal  to  BC : shew  that  the  sum  of  the  perpen- 
diculars from  A and  C on  any.  straight  line  which  does  not 
pass  between  A and  C is  double  the  perpendicular  from  B 
on  the  same  straight  line. 

90.  If  straight  lines  be  drawn  from  the  angles  of  any 
parallelogram  perpendicular  to  any  straight  line  which  is 
outside  the  parallelogram,  the  sum  of  those  from  one  pair 
of  opposite  angles  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  those  from  the 
other  pair  of  opposite  angles. 

91.  If  a six-sided  plane  rectilineal  figure  have  its  op- 
posite sides  equal  and  parallel,  the  three  straight  lines  join- 
ing the  opposite  angles  will  meet  at  a point. . 

92.  AB,  AC  are  two  given  straight  lines;  through  a 
given  point  E between  them  it  is  required  to  draw  a straight 
line  GEH  such  that  the  intercepted  portion  GH  shall  be 
bisected  at  the  point  E. 

93.  Inscribe  a rhombus  within  a given  parallelogram, 
so  that  one  of  the  angular  points  of  the  rhombus  may  be  at 
a given  point  in  a side  of  the  parallelogram  . 

94.  ABCD  is  a parallelogram,  and  E,  F,  the  middle 
points  of  AD  and  BC  respectively;  shew  that  BE  and  DF 
will  trisect  the  diagr  \al  AC. 


I.  35  to  45. 

95.  ABCD  is  a quadrilateral  having  BC  parallel  to 
AD ; shew  that  its  area  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  parallelo- 
gram which  ca  i be  formed  by  drawing  through  the  middle 
point  of  DC  ? straight  line  parallel  to  AB. 

96.  ABUD  is  a quadrilateral  having  BC  parallel  to 
AD,  E is  the  middle  point  of  DC ; shew  that  the  triangle 
AEB  is  half  the  quadrilateral. 

_ 97.  Shew  that  any  straight  line  passing  through  the 
middle  point  of  the  diameter  of  a parallelogram  and  termi- 
nated V swo  opposite  sides,  bisects  the  parallelogram. 


348 


EXERCISER  jN  EUCLID. 


98.  Bisect  a parallel' /ram  by  a straight  lino  d tws 
through  a given  point  within  it. 

99.  Construct  a rho1  abus  equal  to  a given  parallelo- 
gram. 

100.  If  two  triangh  4 have  two  sides  of  the  one  equal 
to  two  sides  of  the  othe  , each  to  each,  and  the  sum  of  the 
two  angles  contained  bj  these  sides  equal  to  two  right  an- 
gles, the  triangles  are  e<  ual  in  area. 

101.  A straight  lino  is  drawn  bisecting  a parallelogram 
ABCD  and  meeting  AD  at  E and  BC  at  F : shew  that 
the  triangles  EBF  and  CED  are  equal. 

102.  Shew  that  the  four  triangles  into  which  a paral- 
lelogram is  divided  by  its  diagonals  are  equal  in  area. 

103.  Two  straight  lines  AB  and  CD  intersect  at  E, 
and  the  triangle  AEG  is  equal  to  the  triangle  BED : shew 
that  BC i3  parallel  to  AD. 

104.  ABCD  is  a parallelogram;  from  any  point.  P in 
the  diagonal  BD  the  straight  lines  PA , PC  are  drawn. 
Shew  that  the  triangles  PAB  and  PCB  are  equal. 

105.  If  a triangle  is  described  having  two  of  its  sides 
equal  to  the  diagonals  of  any  quadrilateral,  and  the  in- 
cluded angle  equal  to  either  of  the  angles  between  these 
diagonals,  then  the  area  of  the  triangle  is  equal  to  the  area 
of  the  quadrilateral. 

106.  The  straight  line  which  joins  the  middle  points  of 
two  sides  of  any  triangle  is  parallel  to  the  base. 

107.  Straight  lines  joining  the  middle  points  of  ad- 
jacent sides  of  a quadrilateral  form  a parallelogram. 

108.  D,  E are  the  middle  points  of  the  sides  AB,  AG 
of  a triangle,  and  CD,  BE  intersect  at  F : shew  that  the 
triangle  BFC  is  equal  to  the  quadrilateral  ADFE. 

109.  The  straight  line  which  bisects  two  sides  of  any 
triangle  is  half  the  base. 

1 10.  In  the  base  A C of  a triangle  take  any  point  D ; 
bisect  AD,  DC,  AB,  BC  at  the  points  E,  F,  G,  II  respec- 
tively : shew  that  EG  is  equal  and  parallel  to  FIT. 

111.  Given  the  middle  points  of  the  sides  of  a triangle, 
construct  the  triangle. 

112.  If  the  middle  points  of  any  two  sides  of  a triangle 
be  joined,  the  triangle  so  cut  off  is  one  quarter  of  the  whole. 

113.  The  sides  AB,  AC  of  a given  triangle  ABC  are 
bisected  at  the  points  E,  F;  a perpendicular  is  drawn  from 
A to  the  opposite  .side,  meeting  it  at  D.  Shew  that  the 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID.  349 

ingle  FDE  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAG.  Shew  also  that 
AFDE  is  half  the  triangle  ABC. 

114.  7 wo  triangles  of  equal  area  stand  on  the  same 
base  and  on  opposite  sides:  shew  that  the  straight  line 
joining  //ieir  vertices  is  bisected  by  the  base  or  the  base 
produce  i. 

} 15  Three  parallelograms  which  are  equal  in  all  re- 
spect? are  placed  with  their  equal  bases  in  the  same  straight 
ane  ?nd  contiguous;  the  extremities  of  the  base  of  the  first 
are  joined  with  the  extremities  of  the  side  opposite  to  the 
base  of  the  third,  towards  the  same  parts : shew  that  the 
portion  of  the  new  parallelogram  cut  off  by  the  second  is 
,7  © half  the  area  of  any  one  of  them. 

116.  ABCD  is  a parallelogram;  from  D draw  any 
traight  fine  DFG  meeting  BG  at  F and  AB  produced  at 
£;  draw  AF  and  CG:  shew  that  the  triangles  ABF, 
CFG  are  equal. 

117.  ABC  is  a given  triangle:  construct  a triangle  of 
equal  area,  having  for  its  base  a given  straight  line  AD, 
coinciding  in  position  with  A B. 

118.  ABC  is  a given  triangle:  construct  a triangle  of 
equal  area,  having  its  vertex  at  a given  point  in  BG  and  its 
base  in  the  same  sti-aight  line  as  AB. 

119.  ABCD  is  a given  quadrilateral:  construct  ano- 
ther quadrilateral  of  equal  area  having  AB  for  one  side, 
and  for  another  a straight  line  drawn  through  a given  point 
in  CD  parallel  to  AB. 

120.  ABCD  is  a quadrilateral:  construct  a triangle 
whose  base  shall  be  in  the  same  straight  line  asAB,  vertex 
at  a given  point  P in  CD,  and  area  equal  to  that  of  the 
given  quadrilateral. 

121.  ABC  is  a given  triangle:  construct  a triangle  of 
equal  area,  having  its  base  in  the  same  straight  line  as  A B, 
and  its  vertex  in  a given  straight  line  parallel  to  AB. 

122.  Bisect  a given  triangle  by  a straight  line  drawn 
through  a given  point  in  a side. 

123.  Bisect  a given  quadrilateral  by  a straight  line 
drawn  through  a given  angular  point. 

124.  If  through  the  point  0 within  a parallelogram 
ABCD  two  straight  lines  are  drawn  parallel  to  the  sides, 
and  the  parallelograms  OB  and  OD  are  equal,  the  point  O 
is  in  the  diagonal  AG. 


330 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


I.  46  to  48. 

125.  On  the  sides  AC,  BC  of  a triangle  ABC,  squares 
ACDE,  BCFH  are  described:  shew  that  the  straight 
lines  AF  and  BD  are  equal. 

126.  The  square  on  the  side  subtending  an  acute  an- 
gle of  a triangle  is  less  than  the  squares  on  the  sides 
containing  the  acute  angle. 

127.  The  square  on  the  side  subtending  an  obtuse  an- 
gle of  a triangle  is  greater  than  the  squares  on  the  sides 
containing  the  obtuse  angle. 

128.  If  the  square  on  one  side  of  a triangle  be  less 
than  the  squares  on  the  other  two  sides,  the  angle  contained 
by  these  sides  is  an  acute  angle ; if  greater,  an  obtuse 
angle. 

129.  A straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  the  hypotenuse 
of  a right-angled  triangle,  and  each  of  the  acute  angles  is 
joined  with  the  points  where  this  straight  line  intersects 
the  sides  respectively  opposite  to  them:  shew  that  the 
squares  on  the  joining  straight  lines  are  together  equal  to 
the  square  on  the  hypotenuse  Mid  the  square  on  the  straight 
line  drawn  parallel  to  it. 

130.  If  any  point  P be  joined  to  A,  B,  C,  D,  the  an- 
gular points  of  a rectangle,  the  squares  on  PA  and  PC  are 
together  equal  to  the  squares  on  PB  and  PD. 

131.  In  a right-angled  triangle  if  the  square  on  one  of 
the  sides  containing  the  right  angle  be  three  times  the 
square  on  the  other,  and  from  the  right  angle  two  straight 
lines  be  drawn,  one  to  bisect  the  opposite  side,  and  the 
other  perpendicular  to  that  side,  these  straight  lines  divide 
the  right  angle  into  three  equal  parts. 

132.  If  ABC  be  a triangle  whose  angle  A is  a right 
angle,  and  BE,  CF  be  drawn  bisecting  the  opposite  sides 
respectively,  shew  that  four  times  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  BE  and  CF  is  equal  to  five  times  the  square  on  BC. 

133.  On  the  hypotenuse  BC,  and  the  sides  CA,  AB  of 
a right-angled  triangle  ABC,  squares  BDEC,  AF,  and 
AG  are  described:  shew  that  the  squares  on  DG  and  EF 
are  together  equal  to  five  times  the  square  on  BC. 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID. 


351 


II.  l to  11. 

134.  A straight  line  is  divided  into  two  parts;  shew 
that  if  twice  the  rectangle  of  the  parts  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  squares  described  on  the  parts,  the  straight  line  is 
bisected. 

135.  Divide  a given  straight  line  into  two  parts  such 
that  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  shall  be  the  greatest 
possible. 

136.  Construct  a rectangle  equal  to  the  difference  of 
two  given  squares. 

137.  Divide  a given  straight  line  into  two  parts  such 
that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the  two  parts  may  be  the 
least  possible. 

138.  Shew  that  the  square  on  the  sum  of  two  straight 
lines  together  with  the  square  on  their  difference  is  double 
the  squares  on  the  two  straight  lines. 

1 39.  Divide  a given  straight  line  into  two  parts  such 
that  the  sum  of  their  squares  shall  be  equal  to  a given 
square. 

140.  Divide  a given  straight  line  into  two  parts  such 
that  the  square  on  one  of  them  may  be  double  the  square 
on  the  other. 

141.  In  the  figure  of  II.  11  if  CH  be  produced  to  meet 
BF  at  L,  shew  that  CL  is  at  right  angles  to  BF. 

142.  In  the  figure  of  II.  11  if  BE  and  CH  meet  at  O, 
shew  that  AO  is  at  right  angles  to  CH. 

143.  Shew  that  in  a straight  line  divided  as  in  II.  11 
the  I'ectangle  contained  by  the  sum  and  difference  of  the 
parts  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  parts. 

II.  12  to  14. 

144.  The  square  on  the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  is 
equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  either  side  and 
by  the  straight  line  intercepted  between  the  perpendicular 
let  fall  on  it  from  the  opposite  angle  and  the  extremity  of 
the  base. 

145.  In  any  triangle  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the 
sides  is  equal  to  twice  the  square  on  half  the  base  together 
with  twice  the  square  on  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the 
vertex  to  the  middle  point  of  the  base. 


352 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID . 


146.  ABC  is  a triangle  having  the  sides  AB  and  AG 
equal;  if  AB  is  produced  beyond  the  base  to  D so  that 
BD  is  equal  to  AB,  shew  that  the  square  on  CD  is  equal 
to  the  square  on  AB,  together  with  twice  the  square 
on  BC. 

147.  The  sum  of  the  squares  on  the  sides  of  a paral- 
lelogram is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the 
diagonals. 

148.  The  base  of  a triangle  is  given  and  is  bisected  by 
the  centre  of  a given  circle : if  the  vertex  be  at  any  point 
of  the  circumference,  shew  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
the  two  sides  of  the  triangle  is  invariable. 

149.  In  any  quadrilateral  the  squares  on  the  diagonals 
are  together  equal  to  twice  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the 
straight  lines  joining  the  middle  points  of  opposite  sides. 

150.  If  a circle  be  described  round  the  point  of  inter- 
section of  the  diameters  of  a parallelogram  as  a centre, 
shew  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the  straight  lines 
drawn  from  any  point  in  its  circumference  to  the  four  an- 
gular points  of  the  parallelogram  is  constant. 

151.  The  squares  on  the  sides  of  a quadrilateral  are 
together  greater  than  the  squares  on  its  diagonals  by  four 
times  the  square  on  the  straight  line  joining  the  middle 
points  of  its  diagonals. 

152.  In  AB  the  diameter  of  a circle  take  two  points  C 
and  D equally  distant  from  the  centre,  and  from  any  point 
E in  the  circumference  draw  EC,  ED  : shew  that  the 
squares  on  EC  and  ED  are  together  equal  to  the  squares 
on  AC  and  AD. 

153.  In  BC  the  base  of  a triangle  take  D such  that 
the  squares  on  AB  and  BD  are  together  equal  to  the 
squares  on  AC  and  CD,  then  the  middle  point  of  AD  will 
be  equally  distant  from  B and  C. 

154.  The  square  on  any  straight  line  drawn  from  the 
vertex  of  an  isosceles  triangle  to  the  base  is  less  than  the 
square  on  a side  of  the  triangle  by  the  rectangle  contained 
by  the  segments  of  the  base. 

155.  A square  BDEC  is  described  on  the  hypotenuse 
BC  of  a right-angled  triangle  ABC : shew  that  the  squares 
on  DA  and  AC  are  together  equal  to  the  squares  on  EA 
and  AB. 

156.  ABC  is  a triangle  in  which  C is  a right  angle, 
and  DE  is  drawn  from  a point  D in  AC  perpendicular  to 


EXERCISES  IN  EUCLID.  353 

AB\  shew  that  the  rectangle  AB,  AE  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  AC,  AD. 

157.  If  a straight  line  be  drawn  through  one  of  the 
angles  of  an  equilateral  triangle  to  meet  the  opposite  side 
produced,  so  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole 
straight  line  thus  produced  and  the  part  of  it  produced  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  triangle,  shew  that 
the  square  on  the  straight  line  so  drawn  will  be  double  the 
square  on  a side  of  the  triangle. 

158.  In  a triangle  whose  vertical  angle  is  a right  angle 
a straight  line  is  drawn  from  the  vertex  perpendicular 
to  the  base : shew  that  the  square  on  this  perpendicular  is 
equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the 
base. 

159.  In  a triangle  whose  vertical  angle  is  a right  angle 
a straight  line  is  drawn  from  the  vertex  perpendicular  to 
the  base : shew  that  the  square  on  either  of  the  sides  adja- 
cent to  the  right  angle  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained 
by  the  base  and  the  segment  of  it  adjacent  to  that  side. 

160.  In  a triangle  ABC  the  angles  B and  C are  acute : 
if  E and  F be  the  points  where  perpendiculars  from  the 
opposite  angles  meet  the  sides  AC,  AB,  shew  that  the 
square  on  BC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AB,  BE,  together 
with  the  rectangle  AC,  CE. 

161.  Divide  a given  straight  line  into  two  parts  so  that 
the  rectangle  contained  by  them  may  be  equal  to  the  square 
described  on  a given  straight  line  which  as  less  than  half 
the  straight  line  to  be  divided. 

III.  1 to  15. 

162.  Describe  a circle  with  a given  centre  cutting  a 
given  circle  at  the  extremities  of  a diameter. 

163.  Shew  that  the  straight  lines  drawn  at  right  angles 
to  the  sides  of  a quadrilateral  inscribed  in  a circle  from 
their  middle  points  intersect  at  a fixed  point. 

164.  If  two  circles  cut  each  other,  any  two  parallel 
straight  lines  drawn  through  the  points  of  section  to  cut 
the  circles  are  equal. 

165.  Two  circles  whose  centres  are  A and  B intersect 
at  G ; through  C two  chords  DCE  and  FCG  are  draw* 
equally  inclined  to  AB  and  terminated  by  the  circles: 
shew  that  DE  and  FG  arc  equal. 

i 3 


' 


