9 


t 


r 


» 


•  •  *  ; 


i 


✓  i 


r 


i 


'ii 


V. 


s 


*•* 


4 


•  4^ 


X 


r 

r 


ANDREA  PALLADIO'S 

Fir  ft  Book  of 

^kchituc  rum: , 

W/zAy/Z/j/  Plates  myt/Z/t/  Z2p7Z£() 

y^UT/ls  J//7/’j  £  7^fcl/ta?Yl?/Z/ZY77Y, 

Printed  in  ATLX'J  XCE  AnnoDonj 

MDLXX . 


LONDON. 

I  /or  anj/  ^Zcr/o  /y 

j  }fC  Oiveoi'  a£  ///rwieov  /uxic 
fZ/eori/i/eZ/Sar,  Jc«Z.  {//Locates 


Andrea 


FOUR  BOOKS 


{/oTitainzny  a  2/yOoZ/ie/m  on  Mo  Tive  Orders 
Ay  mFjZ7/<r,//ary  O/jermZamA  A://Z/v/y  Z&a/t . //u2j  £ 


BUILDING. 


a/.Jc 


aj  a /jo 


TheDifferent  Conftructions  0/ "Public  a/m/Yvvw&e- 
Houfes.High-ways.Bridg'es.Market'Places.Xyftes. 
3)  Temples,  /?/.  m£//r  Plans,  Sections,^ Elevations. 

/Me  /IVtc/r  //mfai/imy 

(a/e^u/cy  R  evil  &  /?/??/  RedeHneated 


BY 


EdwTHoPPUS  Surveyor  /o ?y //t^ioto/wti  o^z/rJ/tai/ca?  //fjoraac* 
/ (S//i/ye///j/ <//?/.  aJ/atyr  '/arte/?/  a/Z/i/aartry  / teeej 


a/m 


6e//ee/e?/ j/rom  //ie  //ar/j  t^Jm/yo ^o/iea  /fe/erj 

LONDON 

2H5 yor&Z/71/^/  S/za/mw 

//?e  comer  o/tA/yya-Z/ea//  fear/  r/ear?A//er-./t//tef  /AV/ottr/i. 

z?/?/itKu/e  //?£  tie/?/  C/ut/re/t  //?  //?c<  f/ra/te/. 


MDCCXXXVI 

a.  O'  _  _  _ 

Thrice flr < /?zza///z7/zz7'  ?/i  tZ/iee/j  jCJ/Z.O.  Zc  t/ze  Xaryx  fa/ier.  2:  2:0 . 


W-  J- 


i 


< 


? 


V 


% 


■t) 


"l 


K  «L 


'4 


If 


■' .  .. 


j  ,  »  r  v  '  .  •  ; '-r  -  . 

'  '  '  ?  ;  ■  r  •  ; f  If » i  l  s‘,’  :<  1 


;  *?:.r  *  ;  J 


,  ■> 


V  V  ; 

v  •>\\n\ 


S  ' 


■  ■  ■  . .  ■ 


m u:;  )l 


r  1  ■.VO’i  ! .  ;  ’>j  J  \v‘*V'.  •  \v  ^ 


•  '  ■  - ‘A  V , 


'  \!  '■>  sy  • ,  it  /,.*  > 


\  .  \  x  '  '  •  .  V 

\\  V  \  -v  v  *  x  \ 


x  \\\  \  '  .  \  • 


v'\  .\\V  \  r  y.Y\\ 


.  ,  .  \ 


x.  ■ .  \  '  -  ■ : 

•  o  •" x  N  '<  v  .v\  •  v  •  ;vv 


* 


1 


and  CORK  &rc.&c. 


V 


' 


4  / 


THE 


.'13E' 


T  O  T  H  E 


REA  D  E  R. 


S  my  Genius  prompted  me  to  pry  into 
the  Beauties  of  Architecture,  fo  I  fol¬ 
lowed,  from  my  Youth ,  the  Dilates  of 
Nature,  and  made  that  Science  my 
favourite  Study  ;  and  having  always 
entertained  the  Opinion  that  the  an¬ 
ti  ent  Romans  had  by  far  excelled  all 
thofe  who  came  after  them,  not  only  in  various  Arts, 
but  particularly  in  Building,  I  took  Vitruvius  for  my  Guide 
and  Infrubior,  he  being  the  only  antient  f Nr  Iter  whoje 
f Forks  have  been  preferved  upon  this  ufeful  Subject.  I 
afterwards  fought  out  for  aU  fuch  Ruins  of  antient  Edi¬ 
fices}  as  have  ref  fed  the  fNafle  of  Time,  and  the  wild 
Havoc k  of  Barbarians  •  and  having  pound  them  much  more 
amufing  and  worthy  my  Attention  than  I  at  frfl  imagi¬ 
ned,  I  began  to  meafure  their  various  Members  with 

A  the 


II 


The  Author  to  the  Reader; 

the  utmofi  Accuracy  and  Application.  And  difcerning 
afterwards  that  even  their  mofi  minute  Parts  were  per- 
formed  with  all  the  Regularity  imaginable,  and  in  a 
mofi  beautiful  Proportion,  the  Inclination  I  had  to  pur - 
fue  my  Enquiries  was  Jo  much  increafed  thereby,  that 
I  travelled  divers  Times  to  various  Parts  of  Italy,  and 
other  foreign  Parts,  on  purpofe  to  find,  by  the  Re¬ 
mains  of  Jome  antient  EreBions,  what  the  Mole  mud 

*  £**»  ZZ. 

When  I  perceiv'd  how  much  the  common  Method  of 
Building  vary'd  from  the  Remarks  I  had  made  upon 
the  abovementioned  Struftures,  and  what  I  had  read  in 
Leo  Alberti,  Vitruvius,  and  fome  other  excellent  Writers 
fmce  his  Time,  as  well  as  thofe  I  myfelf  have  lately 
praBifed,  with  the  Applaufe  and  Approbation  of  fuch 
as  were  pleafed  to  employ  me,  /  thought  it  an  Undertaking 
fuitable  to  the  Nature  of  Man,  who  is  not  born  merely 
for  himjelf  but  likewife  for  that  of  his  Fellow-Creatures 
to  publijh  the  Defigns  of  thoje  Statures,  in  the  ColleBion 
of  which  I  have  employed  fo  many  Tears,  and  expq/ed 
myfelf  to  fuch  various  Dangers  •  and  to  fet  down  as 
conpendioufly  as  poffble  what  ever  I  thought  mofi  worthy 
of  Obfervation ;  as  alfo  thofe  Precepts  which  I  my¬ 
felf  have  always  follow'd,  and  fiill  do  in  all  my 
EreBions.  And  herein  my  principal  Aim  was  that  all 
my  Readers  might  be  fully  inftruBed  how  to  make  ufe 
of  fuch  Things  as  fhould  be  juftly  laid  down  in  them 
and  frppty,  as  Occafion  required,  whatever  fhould  be  ei¬ 
ther  deficient  or  wholly  omitted.  Thus  Men  by  degrees 
will  learn  to  lay  afide  the  extravagant  Abules,  the 
barbarous  Inventions,  and  needlefs  Expence,  and  what 
is  of  greater  Importance,  to  prevent  the  various  and 
frequent  Rum  to  which  many  Fabricks  have  been  ex- 

pos'd. 


Ill 


The  Author  to  the  Reader. 

pos'd.  And  what  indue  d  me  the  more  to  this  Un¬ 
dertaking ,  was,  the  great  dumber  of  Perfons  who  at 
this  lime  apply  themjelves  to  the  Study  of  this  Science  ‘ 
many  oj  whom  have  been  mentioned  with  Honour  in 

the  Works  of  Georgio  Vafari  Aretino,  that  excellent 
Painter  as  well  as  Architedl:  ;  whence  we  may  juftly 
hope,  that  the  Art  of  Building  will  Joon  be  jo  far  im¬ 
prov'd  as  may  be  of  general  Advantage,  and  alfo  in 
Time  be  carried  to  that  Pitch  of  Perfection,  which 
in  all  Arts  is  principally  fought  after.  We  feem  to 
have  made  confderable  Advances  towards  it  in  this 
Part  of  Italy,  fnce  not  only  in  Venice,  ( where  all 

the  liberal  Arts  fourijh,  and  which  City  is  the  only 
Exemplar,  as  it  were ,  now  exifing  of  the  Roman 
Grandeur  and  Magnifcence ,J  fome  Fabricks  are  now 
Built  in  a  good  Tafte,  from  the  Time  that  James  San- 
fovino,  a  celebrated  Architect  and  Carver ,  frft  introdu¬ 
ced  the  beautiful  Manner ,  as  is  manifef  from  the  Palace 
nella  nuova  Procuratia,  ( not  to  mention  feveral  other  of 
his  jufly  admir'd  Performances,)  which  is  perhaps  the 
mvfl  coflly  and  magnificent  Edifce  that  has  ever  been 
eroded  by  any  oj  the  Moderns  *  but  alfo  in  feveral  other 
Cities  of  lefs  Note,  and  particularly  in  that  of  Vi¬ 
cenza,  which ,  though  not  very  extenfve ,  is  notwith - 

funding  fujfciently  rich ,  and  full  of  Inhabitants  of  the 
brightef  Capacities .  Here  it  was  that  ffrf  had  an 
Opportunity  to  put  in  PraBice  what  I  now  publijh  to 
the  World  for  general  Advantage.  In  this  Place  are  a 
great  Number  of  beautiful  Edifices,  as  well  as  Gentle¬ 
men,  Admirers  of  this  Art ;  who,  for  their  high  Birth 
and  extraordinary  Talents,  may  jufly  be  ranked  among 
the  mof  Illuflrious  ;  fuch  as  John  George  Triffino,  the 
Glory  of  our  Age  ;  the  Counts  Mark  Anthony,  and 

Adrian 


IV 


The  Author  to  the  Reader. 

Adrian  de  Thieni,  Brothers ,  Sig,  Antenore  Pagello, 

and  jeveral  others ,  who  have  acquired  immortal  Fame , 
by  the  beautiful  and  magnificent  Fabricks  which  they 
have  left  behind  them .  There  are  now  living  in  the 
fame  City  Fabio  Monza,  a  Gentleman  of  univerfal  Know¬ 
ledge  •  Elio  de  Belli,  Son  of  Valerio,  celebrated  for 
Painting  in *  *  Brooch,  and  cutting  of  Chryftal  •  Anthony 
Francis  Oliviera,  who ,  befdes  his  Profciency  in  Jeveral 
other  Sciences ,  is  an  excellent  Architect  and  a  Poet  *  his 
Poem  entitled  Alemana,  written  in  Heroick  Verfe ,  and 
his  Houfe  at  Bofchi  di  Nanto,  in  the  Territory  of 
Vicenza,  are  Proofs  of  his  Ffualif cations  in  both  ;  and 
laftly ,  to  name  no  morey  Valerio  Barbarano,  a  curious  ’ 
Enquirer  into  the  feveral  Branches  of  Architecture. 

But  to  return  to  my  Subjefcl  *  as  I  fully  intend  to 
communicate  to  the  Publick  the  Fruits  oj  my  Study  and 
Labours ,  in  which  I  have  been  employed  from  my  Touth 
upwards ,  in  fearching  out ,  and  meajuring  with  the  ut- 
mofl  Exablnefsy  all  fuch  antient  Fabricks  as  came  to  my 
Knowledge ,  and  being  defrous  upon  this  Occafon  to  write 
a,  Concife  Treatife  of  Architecture,  in  as  dfinfl  and 
methodical  a  Manner  as  poffibley  1  think  it  proper  to 
begin  with  Private  Houfes,  it  being  reafonable  to  fup- 
pofe  that  thefe  frfl  gave  Rife  to  more  fpacious  and 
ornamental  Buildings .  Befdes  it  is  very  probable  that 
Men  lived  at  frft  feperate ,  and  after  a  folitary  Man¬ 
ner  •  but  foon  finding  themfelves  at  a  great  Lofs  for 
want  of  proper  Afffance ,  in  order  to  obtain  true  Hap - 
pinefs  ( if  fuch  a  thing  is  to  be  obtain  d  in  this  fVorld ) 

'  ,  ■■■  ’  1  1  -  . . . 

*  Defigns  wherein  one  Colour  only  is  employed,  and  the  Lights  and  Shades 
difpofed  on  a  Gold  or  Azure  Ground,  and  .is generally  an  Imitation,  of  Bajfo  Relievo.  . 


V 


The  Author  to  the  Reader. 


they  naturally  fought  after ,  and  loved  the  Society  of 
other  Men :  Thus ,  from  a  few  fcatterd  Houfes,  Vil¬ 
lages*  were  made ,  and  Villages,  in  Procefs  of  Time ,  be¬ 
came  Cities  ;  and  in  thefe  they  ere  bled  Squares  and  Pub- 

lick  Structures.  And  fnce ,  of  all  the  various  Branches 
of  Architecture,  none  is  more  ufeful ,  or  more  univerfally 
prablifed ,  than  this ,  I  fhall  frfl  treat  oj  Private  Hou¬ 
les,  and  afterwards  of  Publick  Buildings.  I  fhall  like- 
wife  curforily  touch  upon  Streets,  Bridges,  Squares,  Pri- 
lons,  Bafilica’s  or  Courts  of  Juftice,  Xifti  and  Pa- 

laeftra’s,  or  Publick  Places  for  the  Performance  of  bodily 
Exercifes  *  on  Temples,  Theatres,  and  Amphitheatres, 
Arches,  Baths,  AqueduCts  ;  and ,  in  fhort ,  on  the  Me¬ 
thod  of  fortifying  Cities  and  Sea-Ports.  In  dif- 

courfng  on  all  thefe ,  I  fhall  Jludy  Brevity ,  and  fhall 
only  give  fuch  Infrublions  as  fhall  appear  to  me  rnojl 
neceffary ,  and  employ  thofe  Terms  of  Art  only  as  are 
now  in  Prabtice  among  the  moft  able  Architects.  And 
as  I  nyfelf  have  little  to  boafi  of  but  the  extraordinary 
Diligence  and  Pains  I  have  befowed ,  and  the  Affeblion 
and  flrong  Inclination  with  which  I  have  purfued  both 
the  Theory  and  PraCtice  of  what  I  now  make  publick. , 
if  my  Labours  have  not  been  in  vain ,  I  defre  not 
only  to  be  thankful  to  the  Almighty  for  his  Goodnefs 
to  me ,  but  gratefully  to  acknowledge ,  at  the  fame  Time , 
my  Obligations  to  thofe  whoy  by  their  beautiful  Inven¬ 
tions  and  Experiments ,  have  left  us  the  Rules  of  this 
Art  5  fnce  they  have  thereby  opened  a  more  eafy ,  as  well 
as  expeditious ,  iVay  to  the  making  of  new  Difcoveries , 
and  that  by  their  AJfflance  we  have  attained  to  the 
Knowledge  of  many  Things  which  perhaps  had  otherwife 
been  for  ever  concealed. 


\ 


> 


B 


This 


( 

vi  The  Author  to  the  Reader. 


This  jfirjl  Part  I  Jhall  divide  into  two  Books .  In  the 
JjrJl  I  (hall  difcourfe  on  the  feveral  Materials  which  are 
requijite ,  and  when  provided ,  how  and  in  what  Manner 
they  are  to  he  made  ufe  of  from  the  Foundation  to  the  Roof ; 
for  all  which  I fhall  lay  down  general  Precepts ,  which  will 
ferve  both  for  publick  and  private  Ere&ions.  In  the 
fecond  I  Jhall  treat  of  the  Qualities  of  Buildings,  fuitahle 
to  the  various  Stations  and  Conditions  of  Men  *  and  in 
the  firft  Place  of  thofe  of  Cities,  and  afterwards  of  fuch 
Situations  as  are  proper  and  convenient  for  thofe  of  Villa’s 
or  Gentlemen’s  Country-Seats,  and  the  Manner  in  which 
they  are  to  he  difpos' d.  And  as  we  have  hut  very  few 
ancient  Originals  of  this  Nature  to  copy  after ,  I  fhall  in - 
fert  the  Plans  and  Uprights  of  feveral  Noblemen  s  Houfes 
ere  hied  hy  me  in  ferveral  Places ,  together  with  the  Defigns 
of  thofe  of  the  Antients,  and  of  the  principle  Parts  in 
them ,  after  Vitruvius’/  Manner ,  and  after  which  they  them - 
felves  built  them. 


/3i/  J/ruyo  •  '/ohm 


Of  the  fever al  'Particulars  which  are  to  he  obferved , 
and  the  Preparations  to  he  made ,  before  a 

Builder  begins  to  work 


VERY  Builder,  before  he  begins  to  work, 
ought  carefully  to  examine  all  the  Parts  of 
the  Plan,  and  Uprights  of  the  whole  Struc¬ 
ture.  Vitruvius  tells  us,  that  in  every  Fa- 
brick  three  Things  are  requilite,  viz.  Conve¬ 
nience,  Strength,  and  Beauty  ;  for,  without  them,  no  Buil¬ 
ding  can  merit  our  Efteem  and  Approbation. 

Firjl ,  That  Edifice  which  is  defective  in  Strength, 
though  made  never  fo  commodious,  or  which  is  never 
fo  ftrong  and  commodious,  if  it  wants  Beauty,  cannot 
juftly  be  called  perfedb  It  will  be  commodious  if  every 
Member  or  Part  of  it  ftands  in  its  proper  Place,  a  due 
Regard  being  had  to  Dignity  and  Ufe ;  as  for  Example, 
when  the  Galleries,  Halls,  Chambers,  Cellars,  and  Gar- 
rets,  are  artfully  difpofed. 

Secondly ,  A  juft  Regard  will  be  had  to  Strength ,  when 
the  Walls  fhall  be  all  carried  up  dire&ly  regular,  thicker 
below  than  above,  and  their  Foundations  firm  and 
lolid.  Exa&  Care  muft  likewife  be  taken  to  fix  the 
upper  Columns  dire&ly  perpendicular  over  thofe  below, 
and  to  make  all  the  Openings,  as  Doors  and  Windows, 

exactly 


8 


P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

exa&ly  over  one  another  •  fo  that  the  Solid  may  be  diredlly 
over  the  Solid,  and  the  Void  over  the  Void. 

Thirdly,  The  Beauty  will  arife  from  the  Harmony  and 
Correfpondence  between  the  Whole  and  its  various  Parts, 
and  of  the  various  Parts  between  themfelves;  for  then 
the  Building  will  appear  one  complete  and  perfect  Body, 
in  which  one  Member  anfwers  to  another,  and  all  toge¬ 
ther  to  the  Whole ;  fo  that  it  may  feem  ablolutely  necef- 
lary  to  its  Exigence. 

After  a  due  Examination  of  all  thefe  Particulars,  upon 
the  Model  or  Draught,  an  exadt  Computation  muft  be 
made  of  the  whole  Charge,  and  a  timely  Provifion  made 
of  the  relpedtive  Materials  which  are  requilite,  in  order 
that  the  Building  may  be  carried  on  with  Vigour:  For  if 
Materials  are  got  in  due  Time,  the  Building  will  delerve 
Commendation,  and  his  Care  will  likewife  be  of  the  ut- 
moft  Service  to  the  whole  Strudlure  ;  and  if  the  Walls 
are  worked  up  equally,  they  will  fettle  in  the  like  Pro¬ 
portion  *  and  this  will  prevent  thofe  Crannies,  in  a  great 
Meafure,  which  are  found  in  Buildings  that  were  built 
only  by  Fits  and  Starts. 

In  the  next  Place,  when  you  have  made  choice  of  the  moft 
able  Artifts,  in  order  that  the  Work  may  be  well  purfu’d  un¬ 
der  their  Diredtion,  you  mud:  then  get  a  fufficient  Quantity 
of  Timber,  Stones,  Sand,  Lime,  and  Metals  ;  on  all  which 
it  may  not  be  improper  to  make  fome  curfory  Remarks. 

Firjl ,  For  the  Framing  of  the  Floors  of  Halls  and  Cham¬ 
bers,  fo  many  Joifts  muft  be  prepar’d,  that  the  whole 
Frame  being  laid,  the  Space  between  the  Joifts  may  be  the 
Breadth  of  one  Joift  and  an  half ;  then  as  to  Stones,  the 
Jaumbs  of  the  Doors  and  Windows  muft  be  no  larger  than 
a  Fifth,  and  no  lefs  than  a  fixth  Part  of  the  Vacuity  or 
Opening.  If  the  Building  is  to  be  ornamented  with  Co¬ 
lumns  or  Pilafters,  the  Bafes,  Capitals,  and  Architraves 
may  be  of  Stone,  and  the  other  Parts  may  conlift  of  Brick. 
With  regard  to  the  Walls,  Care  muft  be  taken  that  as  they 
rife  they  may  diminilh  proportionably  in  Thicknefs  •  which 
Remarks  will  be  of  lingular  Service,  as  they  will  enable 


ARCHITECTURE.  9 

you  to  make  an  exacft  Eftimate  of  the  Quantity  of  Mate¬ 
rials  to  be  provided.  But  as  I  lhall  treat  of  thefe  feveral 
Particulars  more  at  large  under  their  refpecftive  Heads, 
thefe  general  Hints,  which  I  have  here  given,  will  be  fiifF- 
cient  for  the  prefent,  and  ferve,  as  it  were,  for  a  kind  of 
Sketch  of  the  whole  Building. 

But  as  an  equal  Regard  is  to  be  had  to  the  Quality  and 
Goodnefs  of  the  Materials,  as  to  the  Quantity,  the  Ex¬ 
perience  of  fuch  as  have  built  before  us  will  be  of  great 
Service  upon  this  Tcpick.  And  though  Vitruvius ,  Albertiy 
and  fome  other  judicious  Writers,  have  laid  down  very  ufeful 
Rules  for  the  Choice  of  Materials,  I  fhall  take  Notice  how¬ 
ever  of  fuch  as  are  moft  eftential,  that  nothing  may  be 
deficient  in  the  following  Treatife. 


chap.  ii. 


Concerning  Timber. 


VITRUVIUS  tells  us,  in  the  Ninth  Chapter  of  his  Se- 
cond  Book,  that  Timber  ought  to  be  felled  in  Au~ 
tumn ,  and  during  all  the  iVinter  Seafon  *  for  then  the 
Trees  have  a  Strength  and  Vigour  conveyed  to  them  from 
the  Roots,  which,  in  Spring  and  Summer ,  was  difperfed 
among  the  Leaves  and  Fruits  •  they  mud  likewife  be  fel¬ 
led  in  the  Moon’s  Decreafe,  for  then  a  certain  Moifture, 
which  is  very  apt  to  engender  Worms,  and  rot  Timber,  is 
fpent  and  dried  up.  Timber  ought  at  firft  to  be  cut  no 
further  than  the  Pith,  when  it  mutt  be  left  till  it  be  per¬ 
fectly  dry  *  for  then  the  Moifture  will  all  fweat  away 
which  engenders  Putrefaction.  When  it  is  cut  down,  it 
mutt  be  ftor’d  up  in  fome  Place  where  it  may  not  be 
expofed  to  the  Heats  of  the  Sun,  or  to  the  Injuries  of  the 
Weather  *  particularly  fuch  Trees  as  rife  out  of  the  Ground 
without  being  planted  •  and  it  mutt  be  dawb’d  over  with 
Cow-Dung,  to  prevent  its  fplitting.  It  mutt  never  be 
drawn  in  the  Morning  whilft  the  Dew  falls,  but  in  the  Af- 

C  ternoon ; 


IO 


PALLADIO' s 


ternoon  *  neither  muft  it  be  work’d  if  ’tis  very  wet  or  very 
dry ;  for  in  one  Cafe  it  will  be  liable  to  rot,  and,  in  the 
other,  will  make  but  very  awkward  Work  ;  neither  will  it 
be  dry  enough  to  be  wrought  into  Planks,  Doors,  and 
Windows,  in  lefs  than  three  Years.  Such  Perfons  as  pro- 
pofe  to  build,  ought  to  advife  with  fuch  as  are  well  skilled 
in  Timber,  and  enquire  into  the  Nature  thereof,  and 
what  kiod  of  it  is  fit  for  fuch  and  fuch  particular  Ufes. 
Vitruvius ,  in  the  Chapter  above  cited,  lays  down  very  ufeful 
Inftru&ions  upon  this  Head,  not  to  mention  feveral  others 
who  have  written  very  largely  on  the  fame  Subje£L 


CHAP.  III. 

Concerning  Stones. 

WITH  refpe&  to  Stones,  fome  are  natural,  and 
others  artificial  •  the  former  are  dug  out  of  the 
Quarry,  and  are  ufed  either  in  making  Lime,  or  in  railing 
Walls  •  we  fhall  take  Notice  of  the  former  hereafter.  Thofe 
Stones  which  are  moft  proper  for  Walls,  are  either  very 
hard,  as  Marble  and  Live  Stone,  or  foft,  as  Free  Stone. 
The  former  muft  be  wrought  as  foon  as  they  are  dug  up, 
which  are  then  more  malleable,  and  done  with  lefs  Trouble  • 
for  all  Stones  grow  harder  by  being  expos’d  to  the  open 
Air.  But  for  thofe  of  a  foft  Nature,  particularly  if  their 
Qualities  are  unknown  ;  as  when  Stones  are  raifed  out  of  a 
Quarry  which  was  never  opened,  they  fhould  be  dug  in 
Summer,  and  be  fhelter’d  from  the  Weather,  whereby  they 
will  harden  by  degrees,  and  afterwards  be  able  to  ftand  the 
Shock  of  the  moft  violent  Tempefts.  Another  Reafon  for 
keeping  them  fo  long  is,  that  you  may  collet  fuch  as  you 
find  damaged,  and  difpofe  them  in  the  Foundations,  and 
employ  thofe  which  are  not  fo  in  fuch  Parts  of  the  Building 
as  are  in  View  ;  for  thefe  will  laft  a  long  Time. 


Artificial 


II 


ARCHITECTURE, 

Artificial  Stones  are  generally  called,  from  their  Form, 
Quadrelli,  or  Bricks ,  and  are  made  of  a  chalky,  whitifh, 
and  foft  Earth,  which  muft  be  clear’d  from  Clay  and  Sand. 
The  Earth  muft  be  open’d  in  Autumn ,  and  be  temper’d  in 
the  iVinter,  and  be  made  into  Bricks  the  Summer  following. 
But  if  Neceflity  obliges  you  to  mould  them  in  JVtnter ,  you 
muft  cover  them  with  dry  Sand,  and  with  Straw,  if  you 
mould  them  in  Summer.  When  they  are  made,  they  muft 
be  fet  to  dry  a  confiderable  Time  :  A  fhady  Place  is  there¬ 
fore  beft  ;  for  then  the  Outfide  and  Inlide  will  be  equally 
dried,  and  this  will  require  full  two  Years.  According  to 
the  Quality  of  the  Building,  and  the  Ufes  to  which  they 
are  to  be  employ’d,  they  are  to  be  made  larger  or  fmaller ; 
and  this  was  the  Pra&ice  of  the  Antients.  Thofe  which 
are  thicker  than  ordinary  fhould  have  Holes  bored  in  them 
in  feveral  Places  ;  for  then  they  will  both  burn  and  dry  the 
better. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Concerning  Sand. 


There  are  three  Sorts  of  Sand,  viz.  Pit-Sand , 
River-Sand ,  and  Sea-Sand .  The  firft  is  the  beft, 
and  is  either  of  a  Black,  White,  Red,  or  Afh-Colour  • 
which  laft  is  a  fort  of  Earth  burnt  by  Fire,  encloled  in  the 
Cavities  of  Mountains,  and  is  found  in  Tufcany .  In  Terra 
di  Lavoro ,  in  the  Territories  of  Baia  and  Cuma,  there  is 
likewife  a  kind  of  Sand  which  Vitruvius  calls  Pozzolana , 
which  being  thrown  into  Water,  cements  immediately, 
and  makes  excellent  Mortar.  Among  the  various  kinds  of 
Pit-Sand,  the  White  is  found  by  Experience  to  be  the 
worft  5  and  of  River-Sand  the  beft  is  that  which  is  found 
in  rapid  Streams,  and  under  Water-falls,  becaufe  it  is 
moft  purged.  Sea-Sand  is  the  worft  ;  but  if  us’d,  it  muft 
be  that  which  is  of  a  blackifh  Colour,  and  fhines  like  Glafs  ; 

but 


12  VALLA  D  I  O' s 

but  that  vvhofe  Particles  are  biggeft,  and  lies  neareft  the 
Shore,  is  better  than  any  other  Sort.  Pit-Sand,  as  it  is 
of  a  fatter  Subftance  than  the  reft,  makes  a  more  tenacious 
Cement,  and,  tho’  it  is  apt  to  crack,  is  frequently  made  ule 
of  in  building  long  Vaults,  or  railing  Walls.  River-Sand 
is  proper  enough  for  rough-cafting  of  Walls.  Sea-Sand, 
being  loon  wet  and  loon  dry,  and  of  a  faline  Quality,  which 
loon  melts  away,  is  very  improper  to  fuftain  any  conlidera- 
ble  Weight.  That  Sand  is  beft  in  its  Nature,  which,  when 
bruifed  between  the  Fingers,  makes  a  crackling  Noife,  or  if, 
when  laid  upon  any  white  Subftance,  neither  fouls  nor  ftains. 
That  Sand,  on  the  other  Hand,  which,  mixed  with  Water, 
makes  it  thick  and  muddy,  or  that  which  has  been  a  long 
Time  expofed  to  the  Weather,  is  very  bad,  becaufe  it  will 
retain  a  conliderable  Quantity  of  Earth  and  rotten  Moifture, 
which  is  very  apt  to  bring  forth  Shrubs  and  other  fpon- 
taneous  Plants,  which  are  of  great  Prejudice  to  a  Build¬ 
ing. 


CHAR  V. 

/ 

Concerning  Lime,  and  the  Method  of  working  it. 

STONES,  of  which  we  make  Lime,  are  either  dug 
out  of  Hills,  or  extracted  from  Rivers.  Thofe 
Stones  of  the  Hills  which  are  dry,  free  from  Wet,  brittle, 
and  which  have  no  Mixture  of  any  Subftance  in  them,  are 
good,  and  which,  being  wafted  away  in  the  Fire,  leflen  the 
Bulk  of  the  Stone  ;  the  beft  Lime  is  made  of  the  hardeft, 
founded:,  and  whiteft  Stone,  and  which  remains  a  third 
Part  lighter  than  the  Stones  of  which  it  was  made,  after  it 
is  burnt.  There  are  likewife  others  of  a  fpongy  Nature, 
which  make  very  good  Lime  for  rough-cafting  of  Walls. 
Certain  fcaly  Stones  are  alfo  dug  out  of  the  Hills  of 
Padua ,  which  make  a  kind  of  Lime  that  is  of  very 

great 


ARCHITECTURE.  13 

great  Service  to  fuch  Buildings  as  are  expofed  to  the 
Weather,  or  in  the  Water  ;  for  it  foon  grows  hard, 
and  is  very  ftrong  and  durable.  Such  Stones  as  are 
collected  up  and  down,  and  have  been  expofed  a  long 
Time  to  the  Injuries  of  the  Weather  are  not  fo  proper 
to  make  Lime  with  as  thofe  which  are  newly  dug  out 
of  the  Quarry.  Such  likewife  as  are  taken  from  a  dry  Pit 
are  not  fo  good  as  thofe  from  a  moift  and  fhady  one  ; 
and  the  Brown  are  to  be  rejected  before  the  White. 
Such  Pebbles  as  are  found  in  Rivers  and  rapid  Streams 
are  excellent  for  Lime,  and  make  very  white,  neat, 
and  fmooth  Work  ;  on  which  Account  it  is  principally 
ufed  in  the  rough-cafting  of  Walls.  All  Stones,  whe¬ 
ther  thofe  taken  from  the  Hills  or  from  the  Rivers, 
burn  fafter  or  flower,  in  Proportion  to  the  Fire  which 
is  given  them,  but  for  the  Generality  they  are  burnt 
in  threefcore  Hours.  After  they  are  burnt  and  converted 
into  Lime,  in  order  to  flack  it,  you  muft  wet  it,  but 
not  pour  the  Water  on  all  at  once,  but  by  flow 
Degrees,  to  prevent  its  burning  before  it  be  duly 
tempered.  Afterwards  you  muft  lay  it  in  a  moift  and 
fhady  Place,  and  take  care  not  to  mix  any  thing  with 
it,  but  to  cover  it  lightly  .with  Sand  *  and  the  more  it  is 
bruifed  and  mixed  with  Sand,  the  better  it  will  cement, 
except  that  which  is  made  of  a  fcaly  Stone  like  that  of 
Padua ,  becaufe  it  muft  be  worked  as  foon  as  ever  it  is 
kiln’d,  to  prevent  its  burning  and  confuming  away,  for  then 
its  cementing  Quality  is  loft,  and  is  good  for  nothing. 

If  you  make  your  Mortar  with  Pit-Sand,  you  muft  take 
three  Parts  of  it,  and  mix  it  with  one  of  Lime  •  but  if  you 
make  ufe  of  River  or  Sea-Sand,  your  Proportion  muft  be 
two  Parts  of  Sand  only,  and  one  of  Lime. 

r 


D 


CHAP, 


CHAP.  VI. 

Concerning  Metals. 


IRON,  Lead,  and  Copper  are  the  Metals  employ’d  in 
Building.  Of  the  firft  are  made  Cramps,  Nails, 
Hinges,  Bolts,  Gates,  Bars,  and  fuch-like  Works.  ’Tis 
never  found  perfectly  pure  *  but  when  the  Oar  is  dug  up,  it 
muft  be  rarified  by  Fire,  when  it  lignifies,  fo  that  it  may 
be  eafily  cleanfed  from  its  Foulnefs  before  it  cools  :  After 
it  is  purified  and  cool,  it  fhines,  and  is  foft  and  mallea¬ 
ble.  It  is  difficult  however  to  melt  it  a  fecond  Time,  un- 
lefs  you  throw  it  into  a  very  hot  Furnace  made  for  that 
Purpofe  ;  and  it  muft  be  beat  whilft  it  is  red-hot  ;  for 
otherwife  it  will  confume  and  wafte  away.  One  diftin- 
guiffiing  Mark  of  the  Goodnefs  of  Iron  is,  when  its  Veins 
are  found  to  run  ftrait  and  unbroken,  after  ’tis  worked  into 
Bars,  and  when  the  two  Extremes  of  the  Bars  are  clean 
and  without  Foulnefs  ‘  for  thefe  Veins  are  an  Indication 
that  the  Iron  is  free  from  Knots  and  Flaws  ;  and  by  the 
Extremes  we  may  judge  of  the  Goodnefs  of  the  Middle  : 
If  its  Sides  are  found  to  be  ftrait,  after  it  is  wrought  into 
Iquare  Plates,  or  into  any  other  Form  whatever,  we  may 
pronounce  it  equally  good  in  all  its  Parts,  as  it  has  endured 
the  Hammer  in  equal  Proportion. 

Lead  is  made  ufe  of  in  covering  magnificent  Palaces, 
Churches,  Towers,  and  other  publick  Builings  •  as  alfo  for 
Pip  es  and  Gutters  to  convey  Water  *  it  is  alfo  us’d  in 
fattening  all  kinds  of  Iron-work  in  Stone.  There  are  three 
kinds  of  Lead,  viz.  White,  Black,  and  of  a  Colour  between 
both,  generally  call’d  Afh-Colour.  The  Black,  though  fo 
call’d,  is  not  in  reality  of  that  Colour,  but  has  only  a  few 
black  Spots  in  it  •  for  which  Reafon  the  Antients,  by  way 
of  Diftin£tion,  and  properly  enough,  gave  it  the  Name  of 
Black.  The  White  is  more  perfect,  and  more  valuable, 

than 


ARCHITECTURE,  1$ 

than  the  Black,  and  the  Afh-Colour  likewife,  though  not 
io  good  as  the  White.  Lead  is  either  dug  up  in  great 
natural  Lumps,  or  in  letter  Pieces,  which  fhine  with 
a  blackifh  Hue,  or  is  found  in  very  thin  Leaves,  which 
cleave  to  Stones,  Marbles,  and  Flints.  Every  kind  ol 
Lead  is  melted  with  Eafe,  becaufe  the  Heat  ol  the  Fire 
lisnifies  it  before  it  is  red-hot  :  but  if  it  be  thrown  in- 
to  an  exceffive  hot  Furnace,  it  lofes  its  Subftance,  one 
Part  of  it  turning  to  Litharge,  and  the  other  to  Drofs. 
Of  thefe  Three  forts  of  Lead  the  Black  is  foft,  and 
therefore  eafily  beat,  and  is  heavy  too  •  the  White  is 
both  harder  and  lighter  *  the  Afh-Colour  is  much  hard¬ 
er  than  the  White,  and  is  of  a  middle  Weight  between 
both. 

Copper  is  fometimes  made  ufe  of  in  covering  publick 
Edifices,  and  the  Antients  ufed  to  make  a  kind  of  Cramps 
or  Hooks  with  it,  which  being  fixed  in  the  Stones,  binds 
them  faft,  fe  that  they  never  loofen  :  By  means  of  thefe 
Cramps,  a  Building,  which  mutt:  neceflarily  confitt:  of  a 
great  Number  of  Stones,  is  fe  joined  and  fixed  together, 
that  it  appears  to  be  but  one  entire  Piece,  and  there¬ 
fore  is  much  ftronger,  and  more  lafting.  Thefe  Cramps 
or  Hooks  are  now  made  of  Iron  ’  but  the  Antients  chofe 
rather  to  make  them  for  the  moft  part  of  Copper,  becaufe* 
as  that  Metal  is  not  apt  to  ruflr,  it  is  therefore  more  dura- 
rable.  This  Metal  likewife  was  us’d  in  making  Let¬ 
ters  for  Infcriptions  that  were  placed  in  the  Freezes  of 
Buildings  ;  and  Hiftorians  attfure  us,  that  the  hundred 
Gates  of  Babylon ,  fo  much  taken  Notice  of,  were  all  Cop¬ 
per  ;  as  alfo  the  two  Pillars  of  Hercules ,  which  were  eight 
Cubits  high,  in  the  Ifland  of  Gades .  That  Copper  is 
look’d  upon  as  the  bett:  which,  when  drawn  out  of  the  Mine, 
and  purified  by  Fire,  is  of  a  reddilh  Colour,  but  femewhat 
inclining  to  a  Yellow,  and  full  of  little  Holes  or  Pores  * 
for  this  is  an  Indication  that  it  is  thoroughly  purified,  and 
has  left  no  Drofs  behind  it.  Copper  may  be  heated  like 
Iron,  and  lignified,  and  therefore  capable  of  being  catt: ; 
but  if  it  be  thrown  into  too  hot  a  Furnace,  it  fubmits  to 

the 


16  VALLADIQ's 


the  Force  of  the  Fire,  and  is  utterly  confumed  in  it.  This 
Metal,  though  hard,  may  yet  be  render’d  fo  foft  and  pliant 
as  to  be  wrought  into  very  thin  Leaves.  The  beft  Way 
for  the  Prefervation  of  it  is  to  lay  it  in  Tar  •  and  tho’  it 
does  not  ruft  like  Iron,  it  neverthelefs  contracts  a  Ruft 
peculiar  to  itfelf,  which  is  called  Verdigreafe,  elpecially  if 
any  thing  that  is  either  fharp  or  moift  happens  to  touch 
it.  This  Metal,  when  mixed  with  Tin,  Lead,  or  Latten, 
which  laft  is  another  Sort  of  Copper,  but  colour’d  with 
Lapis  Calaminaris ,  makes  a  Metal  called  Brafs,  which  is 
often  made  ufe  of  by  Architedts  in  making  of  Bafes,  Co¬ 
lumns,  Capitals,  Statues,  and  fuch-like  Decorations. 
There  are,  in  the  Church  of  San  Giovanni  Lateranno  in 
Rome ,  four  Brafs  Columns,  one  of  which  only  has  its  Capi¬ 
tal  :  Thefe  were  made  by  Order  of  the  Emperor  Augujlus, 
of  the  Metal  that  was  found  in  the  Prows  of  thofe  Ships  he 
took  from  Mark  Anthony  in  Epirus.  There  are  four  antient 
Gates  of  this  Metal  ftill  to  be  feen  at  Rome ,  viz.  that  of 
the  Rotunda ,  formerly  called  the  Pantheon  ;  that  of  St. 
Adrian ,  heretofore  the  Temple  of  Saturn  ;  that  of  S.  Cof- 
mo  and  S.  Damian,  once  the  Temple  of  Cajlor  and 
Pollux ,  or  perhaps  that  of  Romulus  and  Remus  •  and  that 
of  S.  Agnes  without  the  Gate  Viminalis ,  now  called  St.  Ag¬ 
nes  Ju  la  Numentana.  But  the  moft  beautiful  is  that  of 
Santa  Maria  Rotunda ,  wherein  the  Antients  imitated  by 
Art  that  Species  of  the  Corinthian  Metal  wherein  the  Co¬ 
lour  of  Gold  was  mol!  prevailing  :  For  we  read  that  when 
Corinth  was  burnt  and  deftroyed,  all  the  Go-Id,  Silver, 
and  Copper  that  were  in  the  City  being  melted  down,  and 
mixed  together  in  various  Lumps,  Chance  temper’d  all 
thofe  Metals  different  Ways,  and  coinpofed  thefe  three  forts 
of  Copper,  which  were  afterwards  called  Corinthian .  That 
in  which  Silver  prevailed,  retained  its  Whitenefs  •  where 
Gold,  it  had  a  yellow  Caft  ‘  and  the  third  was  that  in  which 
all  the  three  Metals  were  pretty  equally  mixed  •  and  Work¬ 
men  have  fince  attempted  to  imitate  varioufly  all  thefe 
three  Metals. 


Having 


ARCHITECTURE,  17 

Having  thus  taken  Notice  of  fuch  Particulars  as  are  firft 
to  be  confider’d,  and  the  various  Materials  that  are  to  be 
provided  before  vve  begin  to  build,  I  fhall,  in  the  next 
Place,  treat  of  the  Foundations,  lince  thefe  mull:  firft  be  laid 
before  the  Building  can  begin. 


CHAR  VII. 

Of  the  §lualitj  of  the  Ground  in  which  the  Founda 

tions  are  to  he  laid . 


THE  Foundation,  /.  e.  that  Part  which  is  under 
Ground,  and  fuftains  the  whole  Edifice,  is  properly- 
called  its  Bafis.  Of  all  the  Errors  in  Building,  thofe  are 
the  moft  fatal  that  are  committed  in  the  Foundation,  becaufe 
they  at  once  endanger  the  whole  Strudfure,  nor  can  they 
be  redlified  but  with  the  utmoft  Difficulty  *  the  Architedf 
therefore  muft  take  great  care  to  make  choice  of  a  good 
Foundation,  fince,  in  fome  Places,  ’tis  naturally  ftrong  and 
folid,  and  in  others  Art  muft  be  us’d  to  make  it  fo.  A  na¬ 
tural  Foundation  is  when  the  Soil  is  rockey,  or  confifts  of 
a  foft  fandy  Stone  or  Gravel,  which  is  a  lort  of  Earth  in¬ 
clining  to  be  rockey  *  for,  without  digging,  or  any  other 
Afliftance  from  Art,  thefe  Foundations  are  ftrong  of  them- 
felves,  and  capable  of  fuftaining  the  moft  cumbrous  Struc¬ 
ture,  either  on  Land  or  Water.  But  when  a  Foundation 
is  not  natural,  Art  muft  be  exerted  *  and  here  the  Place  for 
building  on  is  either  a  folid  Earth  or  Clay,  a  fandy,  foft  and 
damp  Ground,  or  a  marfhy  Land.  If  the  Earth  be  folid 
and  fubftantial,  the  Foundation  may  be  made  of  fuch  a 
Depth  as,  to  an  artful  Architedf,  may  appear  neceffary  for 
the  Bulk  of  the  Building,  and  the  Strength  of  the  Soil * 
and  if  there  are  to  be  no  Cellars,  nor  other  Offices,  under 
Ground,  it  will  be  fufficient  to  dig  a  fixth  Part  of  the 
Height  of  the  Building.  The  Firmnefs  and  Solidity  of  the 

E  Earth 


iB  P  A  L  L  A  DlO's 

Earth  may,  with  Eafe,  be  known  by  digging  of  Wells, 
Cifterns,  and  the  like ;  and  alfo  by  the  Herbs  that  grow 
upon  it,  if  they  are  fuch  as  fpring  up  only  in  a  firm  and 
folid  Soil.  Another  Indication  of  the  Strength  and  Solidity 
of  the  Earth  is,  when  any  thing  pondrous  is  thrown  upon 
it,  it  neither  (hakes  nor  refounds,  which  may  eafily  be 
obferved  by  the  Affiftance  of  a  Drum,  if  when  ’tis  fet  upon 
the  Ground,  and  gently  touch’d,  it  does  not  refound,  nor 
fhake  the  Water  in  a  Vefiel  that  (lands  hard  by  it.  The 
Firmnefs  and  Strength  of  the  Ground  may  likewife  be 
known  by  the  Solidity  of  the  Earth  in  the  Places  adjacent. 
But  if  it  be  a  fandy  or  gravelly  Spot,  particular  Care  is  to 
be  taken,  whether  it  be  on  Land  or  in  the  Water  •  for  if 
it  be  on  Land,  the  Ojbfervation  of  what  has  been  already 
mention’d  concerning  firm  Ground  will  be  fufficient.  If  we 
build  in  the  Water,  the  Sand  and  Gravel  will  be  of  no 
manner  of  Service,  for  the  Water,  by  reafon  of  its  conti¬ 
nual  Current  and  Flood,  is  ever  varying  its  Bed ;  we  mud: 
therefore  dig  till  we  find  a  firm  and  folid  Bottom  ;  or  if  this 

O  ' 

cannot  with  Eafe  be  affe&ed,  we  muft  then  dig  a  little  into 
the  Sand  and  the  Gravel,  and  drive  in  Piles  of  Oak,  till 
their  Ends  reach  the  good  Ground,  and  on  thele  we  may 
build.  But  if  we  are  obliged  to  build  upon  molly  and  loole 
Earth,  we  muft  then  dig  till  we  find  folid  Ground,  and  that 
in  Proportion  to  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Walls,  and  the  Bulk 
of  the  Stru&ure.  This  firm  and  folid  Earth,  fit  to  fupport 
a  Building,  is  of  various  kinds ;  for,  as  Alberti  juftly  ob- 
ierves,  in  fome  Places  it  is  fo  hard  that  Iron  can  hardly 
penetrate  it,  and  fometimes  harder  than  Iron  itfelf  *  in  fome 
Places  it  is  of  a  blackifh,  and  in  others  of  a  whitilh  Caft, 
(which  is  deem’d  the  weakeft ;)  in  fome  it  is  like  Chalk, 
and  in  others  foft  and  fandy.  Of  thefe  various  kinds,  that 
is  the  beft  which  is  cut  with  moft  Toil  and  Difficulty,  or 
when  wet,  does  not  diffolve  away  in  Mud  and  Dirt.  An 
old  Foundation  muft  never  be  built  upon  before  we  know 
its  Depth,  and  are  well  allur’d  that:  it  is  able  to  fuftain  the 
Fabrick.  But  if  the  Earth  you  build  upon  be  very  (oft,  as 


in 


ARCHITECTURE. 


l9 


in  marlhy  Grounds,  you  mud  {Lengthen  it  with  Piles, 
whofe  Length  mud  be  the  eighth  Part  of  the  Height  of  the 
Walls,  and  their  Diameter  the  twelfth  Part  of  their 
Length.  T’hele  Piles  mud  be  drove  in  fo  contiguous  to 
one  another,  that  no  others  can  be  fet  between  them  ;  and 
particular  Care  mud  be  taken  to  ram  them  in  with  gentle 
Blows  often  repeated,  rather  than  with  Violence  *  for  the 
Earth  will  confolidate  better  the  one  Way  than  the  other. 
Piles  mud  be  drove  not  only  under  the  Walls,  but  alfo  un¬ 
der  the  Inner  or  Partition  Walls  :  For  if  the  Foundations  of 
the  Inner  Walls  are  weaker  than  thole  of  the  Outer  Walls, 
when  you  come  to  lay  the  Girders  and  Joifts,  you  will  find 
experimentally,  that  the  Inward  Walls  will  fink,  while  thofe 
on  the  Outfide  will  ftand  firm,  becaufe  they  were  raifed  on 
Piles  y  then  all  the  Walls  will  crack,  and  deftroy  the  whole 
Strudture  ;  befides,  thefe  Crevafles  ftrike  the  Eye  very  difi. 
agreeably.  As  therefore  the  Expence  for  Piles  will  be  of 
lels  Importance  than  the  endangering  of  the  whole  Fabrick, 
you  mud  not  be  too  faving,  but  diftribute  them  according 
to  the  Proportion  of  the  Walls,  and  take  care  that  thole 
within  are  placed  fomewhat  thinner  than  thofe  on  the  Out¬ 
fide  of  the  Building. 


20  « 


PALLADIO’ s 


Of  Foundations. 

CHAP.  VIII. 

THE  Foundation  muft  be  as  thick  again  as  the  Wall 
intended  to  be  railed  upon  it ;  and  here  you  muft 
take  particular  Notice  of  the  Quality  or  Goodnefs  of  the 
Ground,  and  the  Weight  of  the  Building  •  as  alfo  to  make 
the  Foundation  wider  in  foft  and  loofe  Ground,  and  on 
which  a  very  fpacious  Fabrick  is  to  be  eredfed.  The  Plan 
of  the  Trench  muft  be  exa&ly  level,  that  the  Weight  may 
prefs  equally  in  all  Parts,  and  not  lean  more  to  one  Side 
than  the  other,  which  occafjons  the  cracking  and  dividing 
of  the  Walls.  The  Antients  therefore  ufed  to  pave  the 
Plan  with  Tivertine,  but  we  lay  Planks  or  Beams  when  we 
build.  The  Foundations  muft  always  Hope,  that  is  to  lay, 
they  muft  diminifh  in  Proportion  as  they  rife,  yet  fo  as 
that  there  may  be  as  much  left  on  one  Side  as  the  other, 
and  fo  as  the  Middle  Wall  above  may  be  dire&ly  perpen¬ 
dicular  over  the  Middle  of  that  below,  which  muft  be  alfo 
particularly  regarded  in  the  diminifhing  of  Walls  above 
Ground  ;  for  this  will  make  the  Fabrick  much  ftronger  than 
if  the  Diminutions  were  made  any  other  Way.  Sometimes, 
in  order  to  prevent  a  too  large  Expence,  and  particularly  in 
marfhy  Grounds,  where  we  are  forc’d  to  make  ufe  of  Piles, 
the  Foundations  muft  be  arched,  and  on  this  the  Edifice 
muft  be  raifed.  In  large  Buildings  it  is  very  proper  to 
make  Vents,  or  Holes,  through  the  Body  of  the  Walls,  from 
the  very  Foundations  to  the  Roof,  in  order  to  let  out  the 
Winds  and  Vapours,  which  are  very  prejudicial  to  the  Fabrick, 
diminifh  the  Expence,  and  will  likewife  be  found  extreme¬ 
ly  convenient,  in  cafe  winding  Stairs  are  to  be  made  from 
the  Bottom  to  the  Top. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


21 


CHAP.  IX. 

Concerning  the  various  Kinds  of  Walls. 

THE  Foundations  being  thus  laid,  we  are  next  to 
difcourfe  of  the  Walls  that  are  to  be  ereded  above 
Ground.  The  Antients  made  fix  kinds  of  Walls:  The  firft 
were  called  Reticolata  or  Net-JVork  ;  the  fecond  were  com- 
pofed  of  Quadrels  or  Bricks  ;  the  third  of  Cement,  confift- 
ing  of  Flints  or  Pebbles  ;  the  fourth  of  irregular  and  various 
Stones,  and  called  Rufiick  ;  the  fifth  of  Free-Stone  ;  and 
the  fixth,  or  laft,  of  Riempiuta  or  Cojfer-ffork.  The  Mo¬ 
derns  do  not  pra&ife  the  Checquer  or  Net- Work  ;  but,  as 
Vitruvius  fays  it  was  very  cuftomary  in  his  Time,  I  thought 
proper  to  infert  a  Defign  thereof.  They  generally  made 
the  Angles  or  Corners  of  the  Building  of  Bricks,  and  laid, 
between  every  two  Feet  and  a  half,  three  Courfes  of 
Bricks,  which  ferved  as  a  kind  of  Band  to  the  whole 
Work. 

2.  Brick-Walls  which  furround  Cities,  or  which  are  in¬ 
tended  for  any  great  Building,  ought  to  be  faced  on  both 
Sides  with  Brick,  and  the  Middle  fhould  be  filled  with 
Cement,  rammed  dole  together  with  Brickbats  •  and  to 
every  three  Feet  in  Height  there  ought  to  be  three  Courfes 
of  Bricks,  of  a  larger  Size  than  the  others,  to  bind  the 
whole  Breadth  of  the  Wall.  The  firft  Courfe  muft  be  laid 
fo  that  the  leifer  Side  of  the  Brick  may  be  outward  *  the 
fecond  length-ways,  that  is  to  fay,  with  its  largeft  Side  on 
the  Outfide  *  and  the  third  as  the  firft.  The  Walls  of 
the  Rotunda  at  Rome,  thofe  of  Dioclejian  s  Baths,  and 
of  the  other  antient  Buildings  there,  are  all  after  this  Man¬ 
ner. 


F 


3.  Cement- 


22 


P  J  L  L  J  D  I  O’s 

3.  Cement-Walls  muft  be  made  fo  as  there  may  be  three 
Courfes  of  Brick,  and  difpofed  as  above,  to  every  two  Feet 
at  the  leaft.  The  Walls  of  Turin  in  Piedmont  which  are 
made  of  large  River  Pebbles  fplit  in  two,  and  fet  in  the 
Wall  with  the  fplit  Side  outwards,  which  makes  very  neat 
Work,  and  ftrikes  the  Eye  very  agreeably,  is  of  this 
kind.  The  Walls  of  the  Amphitheatre  of  Verona  are  alio 
made  of  Cement,  and  have  three  Courfes  of  Brick  to  every 
three  Feet,  as  in  feveral  other  antient  Edifices,  which  I  have 
illuftrated  in  my  Book  of  Antiquities . 

4.  The  Walls  made  of  irregular  Stones  were  called  Ruff 
tick  *  and  in  the  erecting  of  thefe  they  ufed  a  Leaden  Rule, 
which  being  bent  according  to  the  Place  where  the  Stone 
was  to  be  fet,  demonftrated  how  it  was  to  be  fquared  ;  fo 
that  when  it  was  once  cut,  they  immediately  fixed  it 
in  its  Place.  The  Walls  of  Prenejie  are  of  this  kind, 
and  the  Antients  ufed  to  pave  their  Streets  after  the  fame 
Manner. 

5.  At  Rome  there  are  now  ftanding  Walls  of  Free  Stone, 
where  the  Piazza  and  Temple  of  Auguflus  were  formerly 
to  be  feen  *  and  here  feme  Courfes  of  larger  Stones  inclofed 
the  lefler. 

6.  Walls,  called  Riempiuta  or  Coffer- [Pork,  were  made 
by  the  Antients  by  taking  Planks  laid  Edge-way,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Walls,  filling  the  Void  with 
Cement  and  all  ferts  of  Stones  mingled  together,  and  con¬ 
tinued  after  this  Manner  from  Courfe  to  Courfe.  There 
are  Walls  now  at  Sirmion ,  upon  the  Lake  di  Garday  built 
after  this  kind. 

7.  The  antient  Walls  of  Naples  may  likewife  be  laid 
to  be  of  this  fert  *  for  they  have  two  Walls  of  Free-Stone 
four  Feet  thick,  and  fix  Feet  afunder  from  one  another. 
1  hefe  Walls  are  bound  together  with  Croffing  Rows,  or 
others  that  run  crofs  them  •  and  the  Coffers  that  are  be¬ 
tween 


ARCHITECTURE.  23 

tween  thefe  Crofling  Rows  and  outward  Walls,  are  fix 
Feet  fquare,  and  are  filled  with  Stones  and  Gravel. 

In  fhort,  thefe  are  the  various  Sorts  of  Walls  which  the 
Antients  made  ;  Footfteps  whereof  are  ftill  remaining  to 
this  Day,  whereby  we  find  that  all  kinds  of  Walls  muft 
have  fome  bounding  Courfes,  as  fo  many  Sinews,  to  fallen 
all  the  other  Parts  together  :  And  this  muft  be  particularly 
obferved  in  Brick  Walls,  that  if  the  Middle  of  the  Wall, 
through  Length  of  Time,  Ihould  happen  to  fink,  the  reft 
may  not  be  fubje£l  to  Ruin,  as  we  fee  in  many  Walls,  par¬ 
ticularly  on  that  Side  that  looks  towards  the  North. 


H 


P  A  L  L  A  D  1  O’s 


CHAP.  X. 

The  Antient  Method  of  erecting  Stone 

Buildings. 


SINCE  it  often  happens  that  a  Building  is  to  be 
eredted  entirely,  or  a  confiderable  Part  of  it  at  leaft, 
of  Marble,  or  other  large  Stones,  it  may  not  be  amifs  to 
relate  in  this  Place  fome  Obfervations  of  the  Antients  on 
this  Head,  lince  we  find  they  were  fo  very  curious  and  ex- 
adt  in  joining  the  Stones  together,  that  ’tis  difficult  to  difi- 
cern  the  Joints  in  a  great  many  Places  ;  which  I  think  of 
very  great  Importance,  as  it  contributes  to  the  Beauty,  as 
well  as  Strength  and  Solidity  of  the  Building.  And  as  far 
as  I  could  perceive,  they  fquared  and  wrought  thofe  Sides 
of  the  Stones  firft  which  were  to  be  laid  one  above  another, 
leaving  the  other  Sides  rough,  after  which  they  were  made 
ufe  of  in  the  Building  •  fo  that  the  Angles  or  Edges  of  the 
Stones  not  being  fo  fharp,  they  could  move  them  up  and 
down  better  till  they  joined  well,  and  were  in  no  Danger 
of  breaking,  than  if  all  the  Sides  had  been  fquared  ;  for  the 
Angles  being  then  too  thin,  are  apter  to  break.  In  this 
manner  they  made  all  their  Stone  Buildings  rough,  and  Rus¬ 
tic  k ,  as  it  were  ;  and  when  thefe  were  completed,  they 
continued  to  polifh  thofe  Sides  of  the  Stones  that  were  ex- 
pofed  to  View.  It  mud  be  acknowledged,  that  as  the 
Rofes  between  the  Modilions,  or  other  Decorations  of  the 
Cornice  could  not  be  commodioufly  worked  after  the  Stones 
were  fixed,  they  made  them  while  they  lay  on  the  Ground. 
This  is  evident  by  many  antient  Buildings,  in  which  feveral 
Stones  are  found  that  were  left  unwrought  and  unpolilhed. 
The  Arch  near  the  old  Caftle  in  Verona ,  and  all  the  other 
Arches  and  antient  Edifices  in  that  Place,  were  made  after 
the  fame  Manner  :  This  we  eafily  difcover  by  the  Marks 

of 


I 


ARCHITECTURE,  2$ 

of  the  Tools,  which  {hew  in  what  Manner  the  Stones  were 
wrought.  The  Columns  of  Trajan  and  Antoninus  at  Rome 
were  thus  wrought  *  for  it  would  have  been  impofiible  other- 
wife  to  have  fix’d  the  Stones,  fo  as  that  the  joints  {hould  meet 
fo  clofe  together  crofs  the  Heads,  and  other  Parts  of  the 
Figures.  The  fame  may  be  faid  of  thofe  Triumphal 
Arches  that  are  found  there  ;  for  when  they  had  any  very 
large  Edifice  to  erecft,  as  the  Amphitheatre  of  Verona ,  that 
of  Pola ,  and  the  like,  to  fave  Time  and  Charge,  they  only 
wrought  the  Impofts  of  the  Arches,  the  Capitals  and  Cor¬ 
nices,  leaving  the  reft  Ruftick,  regarding  only  the  Beauty 
of  the  whole  Fabrick.  But  in  Temples,  and  other  magni¬ 
ficent  Edifices  that  require  great  Delicacy,  they  {par’d  no 
Labour  in  working  them,  but  glazed  and  polifhed  them, 
even  to  the  very  Flutes  of  the  Columns,  with  the  utmoft 
Accuracy  and  Application.  In  iny  Opinion,  therefore, 
Brick  Walls  {hould  never  be  made  Ruftick,  much  lefs  the 
Mantle-Trees  of  Chimnies,  which  ought  to  be  very  neat 
and  curious ;  for  befides  its  Mifapplication  in  that  Place,  it 
would  follow,  that  a  Work  which  fhould  naturally  be  one 
entire  Piece,  would  appear  to  be  divided  into  various  Parts. 
But  it  may  be  made  either  Ruftick  or  in  an  elegant  Tafte, 
according  to  the  Largenefs  and  Quality  of  the  Stru&ure  ; 
for  what  the  Antients  judicioufly  pra£Hfed,  being,  as  it 
were,  forced  to  it  by  the  Greatnefs  of  their  Fabricks,  muft 
not  be  copy’d  by  us  in  Edifices  wherein  Neatnels  is  princi¬ 
pally  required. 


G 


CHAP. 


2  6 


P  A  L  L  A  D  IQ's 


CHAP.  XL 


Concerning  the  Diminution  of  Walls, 
and  their  various  Parts . 


WALLS,  as  they  advance,  muft  diminifh  propor¬ 
tionally  in  their  Thicknefs,  and  fuch  as  appear 
above  Ground  muft  be  half  as  thick  as  thofe  in  the  Foun¬ 
dations  ;  thole  of  the  fecond  Story  muft  be  half  a  Brick 
thinner  than  thofe  of  the  firft,  and  in  like  manner  to  the 
Top  of  the  Fabrick  :  Due  Care  however  muft  be  taken  not 
to  make  the  upper  Part  too  weak.  The  Middle  of  the 
Walls  above  muft  be  exadfly  perpendicular  over  the  Middle 
of  thofe  below,  which  will  give  the  whole  Wall  a  Pyrami- 
dical  Form.  Moreover,  when  you  are  forc’d  to  make  the 
Superficies  of  the  upper  Wall  exa&ly  over  that  beneath,  it 
muft  be  done  inwardly  ;  for  the  Floors,  the  Beams,  the 
Vaults,  and  other  Supports  of  the  Edifice,  will  keep  the 
Walls  from  falling  inward.  The  Set-off,  or  difcharged 
Parts  on  the  Outfide,  muft  be  cover’d  with  a  Fafcia  and  a 
Cornice,  which  furrounding  the  whole  Fabrick,  will  bind  as 
well  as  beautify  it.  As  the  Angles  of  an  Edifice  are  com¬ 
mon  to  two  Sides  or  Faces,  to  keep  them  upright  and  faft 
together,  you  muft  take  care  to  make  them  very  ftrong  and 
fubftantial,  and  to  hold  them  with  long  and  hard  Stones, 
as  it  were  with  Arms.  The  Windows  therefore,  and  other 
Openings,  ought  to  be  as  far  diftant  from  the  Angles  as  pof- 
fible  ;  or  at  leaft  fo  much  Space  ought  to  be  left  as  is  the 
Breadth  of  the  faid  Opening.  Having  thus  treated  of  plain 
Walls,  we  fhall  next  confider  their  Decorations,  among 
which,  none  are  more  confiderable  than  Columns,  when 
they  are  artfully  placed,  and  in  a  juft  Proportion  to  the 
wholfe  Building. 


CHAP. 


2  7 


ARCHITECTURE. 


CHAP.  XII. 

Concerning  the  Five  Orders  of  Archi¬ 
tecture  made  ufe  the  Antients . 

TH  E  Antients  made  ufe  of  five  various  Kinds  or  Or¬ 
ders  of  Architecture,  viz.  The  Tufcan,  Dorick,  Ionick , 
Corinthian ,  and  Compojite  ‘  which  muft  be  fo  difpofed  that 
the  ftrongeft  and  moft  fubftantial  may  be  always  undermoft  ; 
for  then  it  will  be  the  better  capable  of  fuftaining  the  whole 
Weight,  and  the  Building  will  ftand  on  a  firmer  Founda¬ 
tion  •  the  Dorick  therefore  muft  always  be  under  the  Ionick, 
the  Ionick  under  the  Corinthian ,  and  the  Corinthian  under 
the  Compojite.  As  the  Tufcan  is  a  very  plain  and  fimple 
Order,  it  is  for  that  Reaforx  very  feldom  ufed  above  Ground, 
except  in  thofe  Fabricks  where  one  Order  only  is  employed  ; 
fuch  as  rural  Structures,  or  very  large  Fabricks,  as  Amphi¬ 
theatres,  &c.  in  which,  as  feveral  Orders  are  employed? 
this  may  be  under  the  Ionick ,  in  the  room  of  the  Dorick . 
And  if  the  ArchiteCf  thinks  proper  to  leave  out  one  of 
thefe,  as  for  Example,  to  fet  the  Corinthian  direCtly  over 
the  Dorick ,  he  may  do  fo,  provided  he  takes  care  that  the 
ftrongeft  and  moft  fubftantial  Part  be  undermoft,  for  the 
Reafons  above-mentioned.  I  fhall  fet  down  the  Meafures 
of  each  of  thefe  Orders  diftinCtly,  according  to  the  Remarks 
which  I  myfelf  have  made  on  antient  Fabricks,  and  not  fo 
much  purfuant  to  the  Rules  prefcrib’d  by  Vitruvius  ;  but  I 
fhall  firft  mention  thofe  Particulars  which  relate  to  all  of 
them  in  general. 


— 7 


,y 


CHAP. 


I 


28 


-PALLADIO' s 


CHAP.  XIII. 


Concerning  the  Swelling  and  Diminution  of  Co¬ 
lumns  ;  as  alfo  concerning  the  Intercolumniations 
and  Vilajlers. 

TH  E  Columns  in  each  of  the  five  Orders  before  men¬ 
tion’d  are  to  be  made  fo  as  that  the  Diameter  of  the 
upper  Part  of  the  Column  may  be  lefs  than  at  the  Bale,  and 
have  a  little  Swelling  in  the  Middle.  In  the  Diminution 
of  thefe,  due  Care  muft  be  taken,  that  the  longer  the  Co¬ 
lumns  are,  the  lefs  they  muft  diminifh,  becaufe  the  Height, 
by  reafon  of  the  Diftance,  has  the  Effe6f  of  Diminution. 
For  which  Reafon,  if  the  Column  be  fifteen  Feet  high,  the 
Diameter  at  the  Bottom  muft  be  divided  into  fix  Parts  and 
a  half,  and  five  and  a  half  muft  be  the  Thicknefs  at  Top  * 
if  from  fifteen  to  twenty  Feet,  the  Diameter  at  the  Bottom 
muft  be  divided  into  feven  Parts,  and  fix  and  a  half  will  be 
the  Diameter  at  Top.  The  fame  Obfervation  muft  be  made 
in  thofe  that  are  from  twenty  to  thirty  Feet  high,  where 
the  Diameter  at  the  Bottom  muft  be  divided  into  eight 
Parts,  feven  of  which  will  be  the  Diameter  at  Top  •  and 
thus  fuch  Columns  as  are  of  a  greater  Height  will  diminifh 
in  the  Manner  above-mention’d,  as  Vitruvius  informs  us  in 
the  fecond  Chapter  of  his  third  Book.  But  with  refpedl  to 
the  Swelling  in  the  Middle,  he  has  only  promis’d  to  dire6f 
us  how  it  is  to  be  made  ;  for  which  Reafon  the  Opinions  of 
Writers  upon  that  Head  are  widely  diftant,  and  we  are  left 
in  the  dark  as  to  that  Particular.  My  Method  in  making 
the  Profil  of  the  above-mentioned  Swelling  is  this  •  I  divide 
the  Fuft  of  the  Column  into  three  equal  Parts,  and  leave  the 
lower  Part  exa£tly  perpendicular  *  to  the  Extremity  whereof, 
I  apply  a  thin  Rule  of  the  exacft  Length,  or  fornetimes  a 
little  longer  than  the  Column,  and  bend  that  Part  of  the 

Rule 


ARCHITECTURE.  29 

Rale  which  comes  forward,  till  the  End  thereof  touches  the 
Point  of  Diminution,  of  the  upper  Part  of  the  Column  un¬ 
der  the  Collarino  5  then  I  mark  as  that  Curve  directs  •  thus 
I  have  the  Column  fwelling  a  little  in  the  Middle,  and  pro- 
jedling  forward,  which  ftrikes  the  Eye  very  agreeably. 
And  tho’  I  could  not  find  out  a  more  compendious  and  more 
ready  Method  than  this,  yet  what  gave  me  a  better  Opi¬ 
nion  of  it  was,  Signior  Pietro  Cattaneos  approving  thereof, 
and  inferting  it  in  his  Treatife  of  Architecture,  a  Work  which 
is  juftly  admired,  and  which  greatly  illuftrates  our  Profefi* 
fion. 


A  B.  The  third  Part  of  the  Column,  which  is  exattly 
perpendicular . 

B  C.  The  two  Thirds  that  diminifh. 

C.  The  Point  of  the  Diminution  under  the  Collarino. 


The  Diftances  between  the  Columns,  or  the  Intercolum- 
niations,  may  be  of  one  Diameter  and  a  half  of  the  Column, 
the  Diameter  being  always  taken  at  the  lowed:  Part  of  the 
Column  ;  or  of  two  Diameters,  of  two  and  a  Quarter,  of 
three,  and  fometimes  more  ;  but  the  Antients  never  ex* 
ceeded  three,  except  in  the  Tufcan  Order,  where  the  Archi¬ 
traves  being  of  Timber,  they  made  the  Intercolumniations 
very  large  5  but  then  they  never  made  them  lefs  than  a 
Diameter  and  a  half,  which  Diftance  or  Space  they  parti¬ 
cularly  obferved,  when  the  Columns  were  very  lofty.  But 
they  principally  approved  of  thole  Intercolumniations  which 
were  of  two  Diameters  and  a  Quarter,  and  efteem’d  them 
as  mod:  elegant  and  beautiful.  Great  Care  mud:  be  taken 
to  keep  a  due  Proportion  and  Harmony  between  the  Inter¬ 
columniations  or  Diftances  and  the  Columns,  becaufe  if  fmall 
Columns  are  made  with  large  Intercolumniations,  it  will 
very  much  diminilb  the  Beauty  of  the  former  ;  for  the  too 
great  Quantity  of  Air  in  the  void  Spacesj  will  leden  their 
Thicknefs  very  much  :  And,  on  the  contrary,  if  we  make 
large  Columns,  and  little  Intercolumniations,  the  too  fmall 

H  Vacuity 


30  PALLADIO’ s 

Vacuity  will  make  them  appear  heavy,  thick,  and  dif- 
agreeable;  If  the  Diftances  therefore  be  more  than  three 
Diameters*  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Column  muft  be  a  feventh 
Part  of  its  Height,  as  I  fhall  obferve  hereafter  in  the  Tujcan 
Order.  But  if  the  Diftances  are  three  Diameters,  then  the 
Length  of  the  Columns  muft  be  feven  Diameters  and  a  half, 
or  eight,  as  they  are  in  the  Dorick  Order  •  if  two  and  a 
Quarter,  the  Columns  muft  be  nine  Diameters  in  Length, 
as  in  the  Ionic k  •  ift  no  more  than  two,  the  Columns 
muft  be  nine  Diameters  and  a  half  in  Length,  as  in 
the  Corinthian  ;  and  if  one  Diameter  and  a  half  only, 
the  Length  of  the  Columns  muft  then  be  ten,  as  in  the 
CompoJjte.  I  have  been  thus  curious  in  making  my  Remarks 
upon  thefe  feveral  Orders,  that  they  may  ferve  for  Examples 
for  that  Variety  of  Intercolumniations  which  Vitruvius 
makes  mention  of  in  the  above-cited  Chapter.  In  the  Front 
of  any  Edifice  the  Columns  muft  be  even  with  refpecft  to 
their  Number,  that  there  may  be  an  Opening  in  the  Mid¬ 
dle,  which  fhould  be  larger  than  the  other  Intercolumnia¬ 
tions,  for  the  better  Reception  of  the  Doors  and  Entries  ; 
and  thus  much  for  fingle  Pillars  or  Collonades.  But  if  Gal¬ 
leries  are  to  be  made  with  Pilafters,  they  muft  be  difpofed 
fo  as  that  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Pilafters  or  Piers  be  not  lefs 
than  one  Third  of  the  Void  from  Pier  to  Pier,  and  to  thofe 
in  the  Angles  two  Thirds  *  which  will  make  the  Angles  of 
the  Building  more  folid  and  fubftantial.  And  when  thefe 
Piers  are  to  fupport  a  cumbrous  Load,  as  in  large  Structures, 
then  they  muft  have  half  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Vacancy,  like 
thofe  of  the  Theatre  of  Vicenza ,  and  of  the  Amphitheatre 
of  Capua ;  or  otherwife  two  Thirds,  like  thofe  of  the 
Theatre  of  Marcellus  in  Rome ,  and  that  of  Oguhius ,  which 
is  now  in  the  Pofteflion  of  Signior  Ludovico  de  Gahrielli ,  a 
Gentleman  of  that  City.  The  Antients  indeed  would  fome- 
times  make  them  as  thick  as  the  whole  Vacancy,  as  in  that 
Part  of  the  Theatre  of  Verona  which  is  not  upon  the  Hill. 
But  in  private  Edifices  they  muft  be  as  thick  at  leaft  as  the 
third  Part  of  the  Opening,  but  not  thicker  than  two  Thirds, 

and 


ARCHITECTURE,  31 

and  ought  to  be  fquare  ;  but  to  fave  Charges,  and  make  it 
more  commodious,  and  the  PafTage  more  open,  they  need 
not  be  fo  thick  in  Flank  as  in  Front  ;  and  for  its  Embel- 
lifhment,  Half-Columns  or  Pilafters  may  be  placed  in  the 
Middle,  to  fupport  the  Cornices  over  the  Arches  of  the 
Gallery,  whofe  Thicknefs  muft  be  in  Proportion  to  their 
Height,  according  to  each  Order,  as  I  fhall  demonftrate  in 
the  following  Chapters  and  Defigns  :  For  the  underftanding 
of  which,  and  to  prevent  Tautologies,  the  Reader  is  to  take 
Notice,  that  in  the  Divifion  and  Menfuration  of  the  above- 
mention’d  Orders,  I  have  not  us’d  any  fix’d  and  determinate 
Meafure  peculiar  to  any  Place,  as  a  Cubit,  a  Foot,  or  a 
Span,  the  various  Meafures  being  as  various  as  the  Coun¬ 
tries  ;  but,  in  Imitation  of  Vitruvius ,  who  divides  the  Do- 
rick  Order  with  a  Meafure  taken  from  the  Diameter  of  the 
Column,  common  to  all,  and  which  he  calls  a  Module ,  I 
fhall  like  wife  ufe  the  fame  Meafure  in  all  the  Orders.  This 
Module  is  the  Diameter  of  the  Column  at  Bottom,  and  is 
divided  into  fixty  Minutes,  except  in  the  Dorick ,  in  which 
the  Module  is  half  the  Diameter  of  the  Column^  and  is  di¬ 
vided  into  thirty  Minutes,  this  being  more  commodious  in 
the  Divifions  of  that  Order.  One  may  therefore  divide  the 
Module  into  more  or  lefs  Parts,  according  to  the  Quality  of 
the  Edifice,  and  ufe  the  Defigns  of  the  Proportions  and  Pro¬ 
fils  fuitable  to  each  Order, 


CHAP. 


32 


VALLA  DIO' s 


CHAP.  XIV. 

Concerning  the  Tuscan  Order. 

TH  E  Tufcan  Order  is  indeed  in  Effed)-,  as  well  as  in 
the  Opinion  of  Vitruvius ,  the  plaineft  and  mold  Am¬ 
ple  of  all  the  Orders,  as  it  retains  more  of  the  old  Simplicity, 
and  is  free  from  all  thofe  Decorations  which  give  fo  great  a 
Grace  and  Beauty  to  the  others.  It  was  firft  invented  in 
Tujctwyy  a  confiderable  Part  of  Italy ,  and  from  thence  it 
takes  its  Name.  The  Column,  together  with  its  Bafe  and 
Capital,  muft  be  feven  Modules  in  Length,  and  its  Dimi¬ 
nution  a  fourth  Part  of  its  Bignefs.  If  a  Work  is  to  be 
compos’d  of  this  plain  Order,  the  Intercoluminations  may 
be  very  wide,  becaufe  the  Architraves  are  made  of  Timber, 
which  will  be  very  commodious,  therefore,  for  Country 
Buildings,  on  account  of  the  ealy  Paflage  for  Carts,  and 
other  Country  Conveniencies  ;  befides,  it  will  not  be  near 
fo  expenfive. 

But  if  there  are  to  be  Gates,  or  Galleries  with  Arches, 
then  they  muft  ufe  the  Meafures  which  I  have  marked  in 
the  Delign  ;  wherein  we  lee  the  Stones  dilpoled  and  joined 
together  fo  as  I  thought  beft,  when  the  whole  Building  is 
to  be  of  Stone.  I  have  already  oblerved  the  fame  in  the 
Deligns  of  the  four  other  Orders,  and  have  borrowed  this 
Manner  of  difpoling  and  joining  the  Stones,  from  divers  an- 
tient  Arches,  as  will  be  feen  in  my  Treatije  of  Arches,  in 
the  Deligns  of  which  I  have  employed  the  utmoft  Care  and 
Application. 

A.  The  Architrave  of  Timber. 

B.  The  Joifs  which  f fifty  the  Place  of  the  Guttle. 


The 


/ 


/ 


ARCHITECTURE. 


33 


The  Pedeftals  which  are  under  the  Columns  of  this  Or¬ 
der  muft  be  very  plain  and  limple,  and  the  Height  of  a 
Module.  That  of  the  Bafe  of  the  Column  muft  be  half  its 
Diameter.  This  Height  muft  be  divided  into  two  propor¬ 
tional  Parts,  one  whereof  is  to  go  to  the  Plinth,  which  is 
round,  and  the  other  is  fubdivided  into  four  Parts,  one 
whereof  is  appropriated  to  the  Liftella  or  Fillet ,  which  is 
fometimes  made  a  little  lefs.  In  this  Order  only  the  Lif- 
tella  makes  a  Part  of  the  Bafe,  but  ’tis  a  Part  of  the  Column 
in  all  the  others ;  the  other  three  Parts  are  appropriated  to 
the  Torus.  This  Bafe  ought  always  to  project  a  fixth  Part 
of  the  Diameter  of  the  Column.  The  Height  of  the  Capi¬ 
tal  is  half  the  Diameter  of  the  lower  Part  of  the  Column, 
and  is  divided  into  three  proportional  Parts  ;  the  firft  is 
apply’d  to  the  Abacus ,  which,  from  its  Form,  is  generally 
called  Dado ,  or  a  Dye  ;  the  fecond  to  the  Ovolo,  and  the 
third  is  fubdivided  into  feven  Parts.  The  Liftella  under 
the  Ovolo  is  one  of  thefe,  and  the  other  fix  are  for  the  Col - 
lartno  or  Neck  of  the  Column.  The  Aftragal  is  twice  the 
Height  of  that  of  the  Liftella  under  the  Ovolo  *  and  its  Cen¬ 
ter  is  made  on  the  Line,  which  falls  perpendicular  from 
the  Liftella  •  the  Proje&ure  of  the  Cincture ,  which  is  as 
thick  as  the  Liftella,  falls  dire&ly  upon  it.  The  Projec- 
ture  of  this  Capital  correfponds  with  the  Shaft  of  the  Co¬ 
lumn  below.  Its  Architrave  is  compos’d  of  Timber,  the 
Height  whereof  muft  be  equal  to  its  Breadth,  and  its 
Breadth  muft  never  be  greater  than  the  Shaft  of  the  Column 
at  Top  :  The  joifts  which  are  inftead  of  the  Guttle,  or  Drip , 
projedl  a  fourth  Part  of  the  Length  of  the  Column.  I  Ihall 
here  give  you  the  Menfurations  of  the  Tufcan  Order,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Vitruvius . 


o 


A.  Abacus. 

B.  Ovolo. 

C.  Collarino. 

D.  Aftragal. 

E.  The  Shaft  of  the  Column 

at  Top. 


F.  The  Shaft  of  the  Column 

below. 

G.  Cinbture. 

H.  Torus. 

I.  Orlu. 

K.  Pedeftal 

I  The 


-7  /  ' 

. 


34  VALLA  DJO's 

The  Profils  on  the  Side  of  the  Plan  of  the  Bafe  and  Ca¬ 
pital,  are  the  Impofts  of  the  Arches. 

But  if  the  Architraves  are  compofed  of  Stone,  you  muft 
obferve  what  I  have  already  mentioned,  with  refpedt  to  the 
Intercolumniations.  There  are  Bill  fome  antient  Buildings, 
which,  as  they  retain  in  part  the  fame  Menfurations,  may 
properly  enough  be  (aid  to  have  been  of  this  Order  ;  fuch 
as  the  Arena  of  Verona ,  the  Arena  and  Theatre  of  Pola> 
&c.  from  which  I  have  taken  the  Profils  of  the  Bale,  Capi¬ 
tal,  Architrave,  Freeze,  and  Cornice,  as  you  may  fee  in 
the  laft  Plate  of  this  Chapter  ;  as  alfo  thofe  of  the  Impofts 
of  the  Arches. 

The  leveral  Defigns  of  all  thele  Buildings  fhall  be  inferted 
in  my  Book  of  Antiquities . 


A.  Cima  reSta. 

B.  Corona. 

C.  Gut  to?  &  Cima  recta. 

D.  Cavetto. 

E.  Freeze . 

F.  Architrave. 

G.  CymatiumJ 

H.  Abacus ,  /  of  the  Capital. 

I.  Cima  retfa.  ] 


K.  Collarino. 

L.  Aflragal. 

M.  Shaft  of  the  Column  under 
the  Capital. 

N.  Shaft  of  the  Column  at 

Bottom. 

O.  Liflella  of  the  Column. 
\TOrlo,  }°ftheBofc. 


On  the  Right  Hand  of  the  Profil  of  the  Architrave,  mark¬ 
ed  F.  the  Reader  will  find  the  Profil  of  another,  performed 
with  greater  Care  and  Exa&neis. 


ARCHITECTURE.  3$ 


CHAP.  XV. 

Concerning  the  Do  r  i c k.  Order. 

TH  E  Dorick  Order  is  indebted  to  the  Dorians,  (a 
Grecian  People  who  inhabit  Ajia J  both  for  its  Name 
and  its  Original.  If  thefe  Columns  are  infular  without 
Pires,  they  muft  be  eight  Diameters  in  Length,  or  feven 
and  a  half  at  leaf!:.  The  Intercolumniations  are  a  little  lefs 
than  three  Diameters  of  the  Column,  which  Manner  Vitru¬ 
vius  calls  Diaftylos.  But  if  they  are  joined  to  Pires,  their 
Height  muft  be  feventeen  Modules  and  a  third,  including 
the  Bafe  and  Capital  *  and,  as  I  obferved  before  in  the 
thirteenth  Chapter,  you  muft  take  Notice,  that  in  this  Or¬ 
der  the  Module  is  but  half  the  Diameter  of  the  Column, 
divided  into  thirty  Minutes,  and  that,  in  all  the  other,  it  is 
the  whole  Diameter  divided  into  fixty. 

The  Antients  did  not  make,  as  I  can  find,  any  Pedeftal 
to  this  Order,  in  which  the  Moderns  have^iot  thought  pro¬ 
per  to  copy  after  them.  When  a  Pedeftal  therefore  is  to 
be  joined  to  them,  the  Dado,  or  Dye,  muft  be  lquare,  from 
whence  the  Meafure  of  its  Decorations  muft  be  taken  ;  for 
it  muft  firft  be  divided  into  three  proportional  Parts,  two 
whereof  muft  be  for  the  Bafe  with  its  Plinth,  and  the  third 
for  the  Cymatium,  whereto  the  Plinth  of  the  Bafe  of  the 
Column  muft  be  joined.  There  are  fome  of  thefe  Pedeftals 
likewife  to  be  found  in  the  Corinthian  Order,  as  in  the 
Arch  in  Verona,  called  the  Arch  de  Leoni.  I  have  given 
you  feveral  forts  of  Profils,  which  may  be  fitted  to  the  Pe¬ 
deftals  of  this  Order,  all  beautiful,  taken  from  the  Anti- 
ents,  and  meafured  with  the  utmoft  Accuracy.  There  is 
no  peculiar  Bafe  to  this  Order  ;  for  which  Reafon  thefe 
Columns  are  found  without  Bafes  in  feveral  Buildings,  as 

the 


36  PALLADIO’ s 

the  Theatre  of  Marcellus  in  Rome ,  the  Temple  de  la  Pi  eta, 
adjacent  to  it,  the  Theatre  of  Vicenza ,  &x.  But  fbme- 
tirnes  the  Attick  Bafe  is  joined  to  it,  which  is  very  orna¬ 
mental.  I  fhall  now  give  you  the  exa£t  Meafures  thereof: 
Its  Height  muft  be  half  the  Diameter  of  the  Column,  and 
is  divided  into  three  proportional  Parts  •  one  goes  to  the 
Plinth,  the  other  two  are  fubdivided  into  four  proportional 
Parts,  one  of  which  is  for  the  upper  Torus  *  the  other  three 
are  again  fubdivided  into  two  proportional  Parts  *  one 
whereof  is  the  lower  Torus ,  and  the  other  the  Cavetto  with 
its  Lijlellas  ;  thefe  have  alfo  their  particular  Meafures,  and 
muft  be  divided  into  fix  Parts  ;  the  firft  is  for  the  upper 
Liftella ,  the  fecond  for  the  lower,  and  the  four  others  for 
the  Cavetto.  The  whole  Projedlure  is  the  fixth  Part  of 
the  Diameter  of  the  Column  ;  the  Cintinre  is  half  the  upper 
Torus.  In  cafe  it  is  divided  from  the  Bafe,  the  Projedlure 
thereof  muft  be  a  third  of  that  of  the  Bafe  ;  but  in  cafe  the 
Bale,  and  part  of  the  Column,  make  one  perfedt  Piece, 
the  Cinffiure  muft  then  be  made  final  1,  according  to  the 
third  Defign  of  this  Order,  wherein  I  have  likewile  drawn 
two  different  forts  of  Impofts  of  Arches. 


A.  Fuji  of  the  Column. 

B.  Liftella. 

C.  Upper  Torus. 

D.  Cavetto ,  with  its  Liftella. 

E.  Lower  Torus. 


F.  Plinth. 

G.  Cymatium ,  } 

H.  Dado,  or  Dyeyftf  *  6 

I.  Bafe ,  S  deJlaL 

K.  Impofs  of  Alrches. 


The  Capital  muft  be  half  the  Diameter  of  the  Column, 
and  be  divided  into  three  Parts  *  the  firft  is  divided  into 
five  Parts,  of  which  three  are  for  the  Abacus,  and  the  other 
two  for  the  Cymatium,  which  being  fubdivided  into 
three  Parts,  the  firft  goes  to  the  Liftella,  and  the  two 
laft  to  the  Cymatium.  The  fecond  principal  Part  is 
fubdivided  into  three  proportional  Parts  •  one  is  for  the 
Annulets,  or  Squares,  which  are  all  proportional  *  the 
other  two  are  for  the  Ovolo,  the  Projedfure  whereof 


is 


ARCHITECTURE, 


37 

is  two  Thirds  of  its  Height ;  the  third  principal  Part  is  for 
the  Collarino.  The  entire  Projedture  is  the  fifth  Part  of  the 
Diameter  of  the  Column.  The  Height  of  the  yjlragal 
is  proportional  to  the  three  Liflellas ,  and  projedts  to  the 
lower  Part  of  the  Shaft  of  the  Column.  The  CinBure  is 
half  the  Height  of  the  Ajlragal ,  and  its  Projedlure  is  diredt 
with  its  Center.  The  Architrave,  whofe  Height  muft  be 
half  the  Diameter  of  the  Column,  and  is  divided  into  feven 
Parts,  is  rais’d  upon  the  Capital ;  one  is  for  the  Tenia ,  or 
Fillet,  whofe  Projedture  is  proportional  to  its  Height. 
The  whole  is  afterwards  divided  into  fix  Parts  •  one  is  for 
the  Gutttf ,  of  which  there  muft  be  fix,  and  the  Lijlella  un¬ 
der  the  Tenia,  which  is  a  third  Part  of  the  Gutta ?.  The 
Remainder  from  the  Tenia  downwards  is  fubdivided  into 
feven  Parts  *  three  of  them  are  for  the  firft  Fajcia ,  and  the 
other  four  for  the  fecond.  The  Freeze  is  a  Module  and  a 
half  high  ;  the  Breadth  of  the  Triglyph  is  a  Module,  and 
'  its  Capital  the  fixth  Part.  The  Triglyph  is  divided  into 
fix  Parts  ;  two  whereof  are  for  the  two  Channels  in  the 
Middle,  one  for  the  two  half  Channels  at  the  Ends,  and 
three  for  the  Spaces  between  the  faid  Channels.  The  Me¬ 
tope ,  that  is,  the  Space  between  the  Triglyphs ,  muft  be  a 
perfedt  Square.  The  Cornice  ought  to  be  a  Module  and  a 
fixth  in  Height,  and  is  divided  into  five  Parts  and  a  half; 
two  whereof  are  for  the  Cavetto  and  Ovolo.  The  Cavetto 
is  lefs  then  the  Ovolo ,  exadtly  as  much  as  its  Lijlella  is  • 
the  other  three  and  a  half  are  for  the  Corona ,  and  both  the 
Cimas ,  the  ReBa,  and  the  Reverfa .  The  Projedture  of 

the  Corona  ought  to  be  two  Thirds  of  a  Module  ;  and  in 

the  Face  thereof  which  looks  downward,  and  projects  along 
the  Trigliphs,  fix  Qutta  in  Length,  and  three  in  Breadth, 
with  their  Lijlellas ,  and  fome  Rofes  over  the  Metope.  The 
Gutta  are  round,  in  the  Form  of  Bells,  and  anfwer  to  thofe 
under  the  Tenia.  The  Body  of  the  Cymatinm  muft  be  one 
eighth  larger  than  the  Corona ,  and  is  divided  into  eight 

Parts  ;  two  of  which  are  for  the  Plinth,  and  fix  for  the  Cy- 

matium ,  the  Projedture  whereof  is  feven  and  an  half :  So 

K  that 


y£v  •  /  o 

s  .  .  <*C 

// .  *  /  ^ 


38  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

that  the  Altitude  of  the  Architrave,  the  Freeze  and  Cor¬ 
nice,  are  a  fourth  Part  of  the  Height  of  the  Column.  Thus 
Vitruvius  meafures  the  Cornice  *  but  herein  I  have  de¬ 
viated  from  him,  by  making  an  Alteration  in  fome  of 
its  Members,  and  making  like  wife  the  whole  fome  what 
larger. 


Parts  of  the  Capital. 


A.  Cima  reffia. 

B.  Cima  reverfa. 

C.  Corona. 

D.  Ovolo. 

E.  Cavetto. 

F.  Capital  of  the  Triglyph. 

G.  Triglyph. 

H.  Metope. 

I.  Tenia ,  or  Fillet. 

K.  Gutta. 

L.  Firjl  Fajcia. 

M.  Second  Fajcia. 

N.  Cymatium. 


O.  abacus. 

P.  Ovolo. 

Q.  Lijlellas ,  or  little  Mould¬ 

ings. 

R.  Collar ino. 

S.  Ajlragal. 

T.  Cinffture. 

U.  Fuji  of  the  Column . 

X.  Plan  of  the  Capital  *  and 

the  Module  divided  in¬ 
to  thirty  Parts  or  Mi¬ 
nutes. 

Y.  Soffit  of  the  Cornice. 


CHAP.  XVI. 

Concerning  the  Ionick  Order. 


THE  Ionick  Order  owes  its  Original  to  Ionia ,  an 
Afatick  Province  ;  and  Hiftory  acquaints  us  that 
the  famous  Temple  of  Diana  at  Ephejus  was  compos’d  of 
this  Order.  The  Column,  with  its  Capital  and  Bafe,  muft 
be  nine  Modules  high  ;  a  Module  is  the  Diameter  of  the 
Column  below,  as  has  already  been  obferved.  The  Archi¬ 
trave,  Freeze,  and  Cornice,  are  a  fifth  Part  of  the  Height 
of  the  Column  ;  the  Intercolumniations  in  the  Defign  of 
fingle  Columns,  are  two  Diameters  and  a  Quarter,  which 

are 


ARCHITECTURE.  39 

are  the  moft  commodious,  and  ftrike  the  Eye  moft  agreea¬ 
bly,  and  which  Vitruvius  calls  Euflylos.  In  the  Defign 
of  the  Arch.es,  the  Piers  are  a  third  Part  of  the  empty 
Space,  and  the  Arches  have  two  Diameters  in  Height. 

If  the  Ionick  Columns  are  to  have  Pedeftals,  as  in  the 
Deligns  of  the  Arches,  their  Height  muft  be  equal  to 
half  the  Breadth  of  the  Opening  of  the  Arch,  and  divided 
into  feven  Parts  and  a  half  *  two  of  them  are  for  the  Bale, 
one  for  the  Cy mat  turn ,  and  the  other  four  and  a  half  for  the 
Dado •  The  Bafe  of  the  Ionick  Order  muft  be  half  a  Module 
thick,  and  is  divided  into  three  Parts,  one  is  for  the  Plinth, 
the  Projedfure  whereof  is  the  fourth,  and  an  eighth  Part  of 
the  Module  ;  the  other  two  are  divided  into  feven  Parts, 
three  whereof  are  given  to  the  Torus ,  the  other  four  are 
fubdivided  into  two  Parts  ;  the  upper  Cavctto  is  made  of 
the  one,  and  the  Lower,  which  ought  to  have  the  greateft 
Proje&ure,  of  the  other.  The  Ajiragals  muft  be  the 
eighth  of  the  Cavetto  ;  the  CinBurc  of  the  Column  is  the 
third  Part  of  the  Torus  of  the  Bale  •  but  in  cale  the  Bafe  is 
joined  to  the  Column,  the  CinBure ,  as  I  obferved  before  in 
the  Dorick  Order,  muft  be  fmaller.  The  Projedfure  of  the 
CinBure  is  half  of  that  above-mentioned.  Thefe  are  Vitru~ 
vius's  various  Mealures  of  the  Ionick  Bafe. 

But  as  the  Attick  Bafe  is  often  placed  under  this  Order 
in  feveral  antient  Buildings,  which  Pra&ice  I  mqch  approve 
of,  I  have  therefore  drawn  the  faid  Bafe  over  the  Pedeftal, 
with  a  lmall  Torus  under  the  CinBure ,  but  have  not  omitted 
at  the  fame  Time  Vitruvius’s  Deligns.  The  Deligns  marked 
L,  are  two  leveral  Profils  for  making  the  Impofts  of  the 
Arches,  and  the  Meafures  are  let  down  in  Numbers  on  each 
of  them,  denoting  the  Minutes  of  the  Module,  as  I  have 
oblerved  in  all  my  other  Deligns.  Thefe  Impofts  are  half 
as  high  again  as  the  Thicknels  of  the  Pilafter  which  fup- 
ports  the  Arch. 


A.  Shaft 


\ 


4° 


PALLADIO' s 


/ 


A.  Shaft  of  the  Column .• 

B.  Aftragal  with  its  CinBure, 

which  are  Members  o  f  the 
Column. 

C.  Upper  Torus. 

D.  Cavetto. 

E.  Lower  Torus . 

F.  Plinth  joined  to  the  Cyma- 

tium  of  the  Pedejtal . 


of  the  Pede - 
ftal. 


G.  Cymatium  in 

two  diffe¬ 
rent  Forms. 

H.  Dado. 

I.  Bafe  in  two 

different 
Forms. 

jt 

K.  Plinth  of  the  Bafe. 

L.  Impofs  of  the  Arches. 


To  make  the  Capital,  the  Diameter  at  the  Bafe  of  the 
Column  is  divided  into  eighteen  Parts,  and  nineteen  of  fuch 
Parts  make  the  Length  and  Breadth  of  the  Abacus  ;  one 
half  whereof  is  the  Height  of  the  Capital  with  its  Volutes, 
whence  its  Height  will  be  nine  Parts  and  a  half-  one  and  a 
half  whereof  is  for  the  Abacus  with  its  Cymatium ,  and  the 
other  eight  for  the  Volute,  which  is  made  after  this  Man¬ 
ner  :  One  of  the  nineteen  Parts  is  taken  from  the  End  of  the 
Cymatium  inward,  and  from  the  Point  made,  a  Plum-Line 
is  let  down  to  divide  the  Volute  in  the  Middle,  which  is 
call’d  Catheto.  Where  the  Point  falls  upon  this  Line, 
which  feparates  the  four  Parts  and  a  half  above,  from  the 
three  and  a  half  below,  the  Center  of  the  Eye  of  the  Volute 
is  made,  whole  Diameter  is  one  of  the  eight  Parts  •  and 
from  the  aforefaid  Point  is  drawn  a  Line,  which,  as  it  cuts 
the  Catheto  at  Right-Angles,  divides  the  Volute  into  four 
Parts.  Then  a  Square  is  made  in  the  Eye  of  the  Volute, 
about  the  fame  Bignefs  as  the  Semi-Diameter  of  the  fame 
Eye ;  and  Diagonal  Lines  being  drawn,  the  Points  are 
marked  upon  them,  where  the  fixed  Foot  of  the  Compafs 
muft  fiand,  to  make  the  Volute  ;  which  Points  or  Centers 
are  thirteen  in  Number,  the  Eye  inclufive  ;  and  how  thefe 
are  to  be  performed,  plainly  appears  by  the  Numbers 
marked  in  the  Defign.  The  Ajlragal  of  the  Column  is  in  a 
direct  Line  with  the  Eye  of  the  Volute.  The  Thicknefs 
of  the  Volutes  in  the  Middle  muft:  be  in  proportion  to 

the 


ARCHITECTURE.  41 

the  Proje&ure  of  the  Ovolo^  which  muft  project  beyond  the 
Abacus ,  juft  as  much  as  is  the  Eye  of  the  Volute.  The 
Channel  of  the  Volute  is  even  with  the  Shaft  of  the  Co¬ 
lumn.  The  Aftragal  of  the  Column  goes  under  the  Volute, 
and  is  always  feen>  as  appears  by  the  Plan  *  and  it  is  natu¬ 
ral  indeed  that  the  Volute,  which  is  fuppofed  to  be  a  thin, 
weak  Member,  fhould  give  way  to  a  ftronger,  fuch  as  the 
Aftragal,  from  which  it  muft  be  equally  diftant.  We 
ufually  make  Capitals  in  the  Angles  of  Colonnades  or  Por¬ 
ticos  of  the  Ionick  Order,  with  Volutes  not  only  in  the 
Front,  but  alfo  in  that  Part  which  would  have  been  the 
Flank,  in  cafe  the  Capital  was  to  be  made  as  generally  it  is  $ 
by  which  means  they  have  the  Front  on  two  Sides,  and 
are  called  Angular  Capitals.  In  my  Book  of  Temples, 
which  is  the  Fourth  of  this  Work,  I  fhall  fhew  how  thefe 
are  made. 


A.  Abacus. 

B.  Channel  or  Hollow  of  the 

Volute . 

C.  Ovolo. 


D.  Aftragal  under  the  Ovolo 

E.  Cintfure. 

F.  Shaft  of  the  Column. 

G.  The  Line  called  Catheto . 


In  the  Plan  of  the  Capital,  the  faid  Members  are  marked 
with  the  fame  Letters. 


S.  Eye  of  the  Volute  on  a  large  Scale. 


Members  of  the  Bafe  according  to  Vitruvius. 


K.  Fuji  of  the  Column. 

L.  Cinblure. 

M.  Torus. 

N.  Firft  Cavetto. 


O.  Aftragal. 

P.  Second  Cavetto. 

Q.  Plinth. 

R.  Projeblure . 


The  Architrave,  Freeze,  and  Cornice,  as  I  hav£  hinted 
before,  muft  be  a  fifth  Part  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Column, 
and  is  divided  into  twelve  Parts  ;  three  of  which  are  for  the 
firft  Fafcia  and  its  Aftragal,  four  for  the  fecond,  and  five 

L  for 


■>  .4 


/ 


42  PAL  L  A  D  JO’S 

for  the  third.  The  Comice  is  divided  into  feven  Parts  and 
•three  fourths  ;  -two  are  for  the  Cavetto  and  Ovolo  •  two  for 
-the  Modilion,  and  three  and  three  fourths  for  the  Corona 
.and  the  Cymatium^  the  Proje&ure  or  putting  out  of  the 
whole  Cornice  is  in  proportion  to  its  Altitude.  I  have  de- 
Jigrred  the  Front,  'Flank,  and  Plan  of  the  Capital,  together 
'with  tthe  Architrave,  Freeze,  and  Cornice,  with  their  pro¬ 
sper  Decollations. 


A.  Oirrn  re&M.  r 

G'tma  reverfa. 

\Q.  'Corona.  i 

D.  Gymatium  of  the  Modi-i 


G.  Cuvette, 

H.  Freeze. 

I.  Cymatium  of  }the  Archi¬ 

trave. 


lions. 

IL  Modilions. 
F.  Ovolo. 


■  ^K.  Firft  Fafcia. 

'  L.  •; Second  Fafcia . 

M.  Third  Fafcia. 


t  Members  of  the  Capital. 

N.  Abacus.  I  Qj  Aftragal  of  the  Column . 

O.  Hollow  of  the  'Volute.  IR.  jF ujl  of  the  Column. 

P.  Ovolo.  !j 


The  Plan  marked  S,  wherein  we  fee  the  Rofes  reprefents 
the  Soffit  of  the  Cornice  between  each  Modilion. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


CHAP.  XVII. 

Concerning  ^Corinthian  Order. 


THE  Corinthian  Order  was  invented  in  Corinth ,  a  fa* 
mous  City  of  Peleponnefus ,  and  is  more  elegant,  and 
ftrikes  the  Eye  more  agreeably  than  any  other  before  men¬ 
tioned.  The  Columns  thereof  are  like  thofe  of  the  Ionicky 
and  are  nine  Modules  and  a  halfin  Height,  including  both 
their  Bale  and  Capital.  In  cafe  they  are  to  be  fluted,  then 
they  muft  be  made  with  twenty  four  Flutes  or  Hollows, 
whofe  Dqpth  is  in  proportion  to  half  their  Breadth,  The 
Plans  or  Intervals  between  two  Flutes  .  mull;  be  one  third 
Part  of  the  Breadth  of  thofe  Flutes.  The  Architrave, 
Freeze,  and  Cornice,  are  a  fifth  Part  of  the  Height  of  the 
Column.  In  the  Defign  of  a  Colonnade,  the  Intercolumni- 
ations  are  two  Diameters,  as  in  the  Portico  of  Santa  Maria 
\ "Rotunda  in  Rome.  Vitruvius  calls  this  Manner  of  diftancing 
the  Columns  Syjiilos.  And  in  that  of  the  Arches,  the  Pires 
are  two  fifth  Parts  of  the  Opening  of  the  Arch,  whofe 
Opening  is  two  Squares  and  a  half  in  Height,  including  the 
Thicknefs-  of  the  faid  Arch. 

In  this  Order  the  Altidude  of  the  Pedeftal  muft  be  one 
fourth  Part  of  the  Height  of  the  Column,  and  is  divided  intp 
eight  Parts  ;  one  is  for  the  Cymatiumi  two  for  the  Bafe ,  and 
the  other  five  for  the  Dado.  When  the  Bafe  is  divided  into 
three  Parts,  two  of  them  go  to  the  Plinth,  and  one  to  the 
Mouldings.  The  Attick  Bafe  is  fet  under  this  Column,  but 
varies  from  that  which  is  plac’d  under  the  Dorick  Order, 
the  Proje&ure  therof  being  one  fifth  Part  of  the  Diameter  of 
the  Column.  Some  other  trivial  Alterations  may  be  made, 
as  may  be  feen  in  the  Defigns,  in  which  the  Impofts  of  the 
Arches  are  likewife  profil’d,  whole  Altitude  is  half  as  much 
again  as  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Alett  or  Tire  which ,  fup- 
ports  the  Arch. 


A.  Shaft 


44 


TALLADIO’ s 


A.  Shaft ,  J 

B.  Cinffiure  ana>  of  the  Co- 

A iftragaly  j  lumn. 

C.  Upper  Torus. 

D.  Cavetto  with  its  Afragals. 

E.  Lower  Torus. 

F.  Plinth  of  the  Bafe  joined 


to  the  Cymatium  of  the 
Pedefal. 

G.  Cymatium ,  1 

H.  Dado ,  I  of  the  Pe- 

I.  Cornice  of  the  r  deflal. 

Bafe,  J 

K.  Plinth  of  the  Bafe. 


The  Impofs  of  the  Arches  is  by  the  Side  of  the  Column. 


The  Height  of  the  Corinthian  Capital  is  the  Diameter 
of  the  Column  below,  and  a  fixth,  which  is  allowed  to  the 
Abacus',  the  Relidue  is  divided  into  three  proportional 
Parts  5  the  firft  is  for  the  firft  Row  of  Leaves,  the  fecond 
for  the  Middle  Row,  and  the  third  is  fubdivided  into  two 
Parts  j  the  Caulicoli ,  or  Stalks,  together  with  their  Leaves, 
which  are,  as  it  were,  fupported  by  them,  and  out  of  which 
they  grow,  are  made  of  that  Part  which  is  neareft  the  Aba¬ 
cus  ;  the  Stalk  therefore,  or  Fuft  from  whence  they  lpring, 
fhould  be  thick,  and  gradually  decreafe  in  their  Foldings^ 
like  Plants,  which  are  thicker  at  the  Bottom  than  at  the 
Ends  of  their  Branches.  The  Campana ,  or  Bell,  which  is 
the  Stalk  of  the  Column  under  the  Leaves,  muft  be  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  Bottom  of  the  Flutes  of  the  Columns. 
You  muft  make  a  perfect  Square,  the  Side  whereof  is  a 
Module  and  a  half,  in  order  to  give  the  Abacus  a  proper 
Proje&ure  ;  and  Diagonal  Lines  being  drawn  in  the  faid 
Square,  the  Point  of  their  InterfedHon  will  be  in  the  Cen¬ 
ter  ‘y  the  fixed  Foot  of  the  Compafs  muft  be  placed  here, 
and  a  Module  marked  towards  each  Angle  ;  and  Lines  are 
drawn  that  cut  the  faid  Diagonals  at  Right  Angles,  where 
thefe  Points  meet,  and  fo  as  to  touch  the  Sides  of  the 
Square,  and  thefe  fhall  be  the  Limits  of  the  Proje&ure, 
whofe  Length  gives  the  Breadth  of  the  Horns  of  the  Aba¬ 
cus.  To  make  its  Curvature  or  Diminution,  you  muft 
draw  a  circular  Line  from  one  Horn  to  the  other,  and  in 
marking  the  Point  *  whereby  an  Equilateral  Triangle  is 

made, 


ARCHITECTURE. 


45 


made,  the  Bale  whereof  is  the  Diminution.  Afterwards  a 
Right  Line  is  drawn  from  the  Ends  of  the  before-mentioned 
Horns  to  the  End  of  the  Aftragal  of  the  Column,  which 
muft  be  made  fo  as  to  be  touched  by  the  Tips  or  Ends  of 
the  Leaves,  ot  elfe  come  a  little  forwarder,  and  this  will 
be  their  Projedfure.  The  Rofe  muft  be  a  fourth  Part  as 
broad  as  the  Diameter  of  the  Column  at  the  Foot.  The 
Architrave,  Freeze,  and  Cornice,  as  I  have  before  hinted, 
are  a  fifth  Part  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Column,  and  the 
whole  is  divided  into  twelve  Parts,  as  in  the  Ionick ,  but 
varies  from  it  in  this,  viz.  that  the  Cornice  of  the  Corin¬ 
thian  is  divided  into  eight  Parts  and  a  half  *  the  firft  is 
given  to  the  Cima  Reverfa ,  the  fecond  to  the  Denticles, 
the  third  to  the  Ovcrlo ,  and  the  fourth  and  fifth  to  the  Mo- 
dilion,  and  the  other  three  and  a  half  to  the  Corona  and  the 
Cymatium .  The  Projedfure  of  the  Cornice  is  in  proportion 
to  its  Height.  The  Pannels  of  the  Rofes  between  the  Mo- 
dilions  muft  be  fquare,  and  the  Modilions  half  as  broad  as 
the  Plan  of  the  laid  Rofes.  The  Members  of  this  Order 
are  not  marked  by  Letters,  as  thofe  which  go  before,  be- 
caufe  thefe  may  be  eafily  known  by  them. 


CHAP.  XVIII. 


Concerning  the  Composite  Order. 

TH  E  Com^ofite  Order,  which  is  likewife  named  Ro¬ 
man,  becaule  the  antient  Romans  invented  it,  is  fo 
called  on  account  of  its  partaking  of  two  of  the  preceding 
Orders.  The  moft  regular  and  ornamental  is  that  which  is 
a  Compound  of  the  Ionick  and  Corinthian.  It  is  made  more 
(lender  and  difengaged  than  the  latter,  and  (the  Capital  only 
excepted)  may  refemble  it  in  all  its  Parts.  The  Columns 
muft  be  ten  Modules  long.  In  the  Defigns  of  Colonnades, 
the  Intercolumniation,  which  Vitruvius  calls  Tycnojiyle,  is 
one  Diameter  and  a  half ;  and  in  thofe  of  the  Arches  the 
Pires  are  half  the  Void  of  the  Arch,  and  the  Altitude 

M  of 


f)  <9 


O 


« ?  s 


46  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O's 

of  the  Arches  under  the  Key-ftone  is  two  Squares  and 


a  half. 

And  this  Order,  as  I  before  obferved,  muft  be  more 
(lender  and  difengaged  than  the  Corinthian  •  its  Pedeftal  is 
one  third  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Column,  and  muft  be  di¬ 
vided  into  eight  Parts  and  a  half.  The  Cymatium  of  that 
Bafe  is  made  of  the  firft,  and  five  and  a  half  remain  for  the 
Dado.  The  Bafe  of  the  Pedeftal  is  fubdivided  into  three 
Parts  •  two  are  allowed  for  the  Plinth,  and  one  for  the  To¬ 
rus  s  with  its  Cymatium. 

The  Bafe  of  this  Column  may  be  Attick ,  as  in  the  Co¬ 
rinthian,  and  alio  be  a  Compound  of  the  Attick  and  Ionick , 
as  by  the  Defigns  more  fully  appears. 

The  Profils  of  the  Impofts  of  the  Arches  are  by  the  Side 
of  the  Plan  of  the  Pedeftal,  and  its  Altitude  is  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Membretto. 

The  Compojite  Capital  has  the  lame  Meafures  as  the  Corin¬ 
thian ,  but  varies  from  it  in  the  Volute,  the  Ovolo ,  and 
Ajlragal  cut  into  Beads,  which  Members  are  borrowed  from 
the  Ionick  *  the  Method  of  making  which  is  as  follows  : 
From  the  Abacus  downward  the  Capital  is  divided  into  three 
Parts,  as  in  the  Corinthian  •  the  firft  is  allowed  to  the  firft 
Row  of  Leaves,  the  fecond  to  the  Middle  Row,  and  the 
third  to  the  Volute,  which  is  made  the  fame  Way,  and  with 
the  fame  Points  as  the  Ionick ,  and  takes  up  fo  much  of  the 
Abacus  that  it  ieems  to  go  out  of  the  Ovolo ,  near  the  Flower 
which  is  placed  in  the  Middle  of  the  Curvature  of  the  Aba¬ 
cus ,  and  is  as  thick  in  Front  as  the  Breadth  of  its  Horns,  or 
a  little  more.  The  Thicknefs  of  the  Ovolo  is  three  fifths  of 
the  Abacus ;  its  lower  Part  begins  parrellel  to  the  Eye  of 
the  Volute  ;  its  Projedfure  is  three  fourths  of  its  Altitude, 
and  with  its  Projedfure  is  perpendicular  to  the  Curvature 
of  the  Abacus ,  or  a  little  more  outwards.  The  Ajlragal  is 
one  third  Part  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Ovolo ,  and  its  Projec- 
ture  a  little  more  than  half  its  Thicknefs,  and  winds  about 
the  Capital  under  the  Volute,  and  is  always  vifible.  The 
Gradetto  or  Lijlclla  which  is  under  the  Ajlragal,  and  forms 


the 


ARCHITECTURE. 


47 


the  Plinth  of  the  Campana ,  or  Bell  of  the  Capital,  is  half 
the  Ajlragal.  The  Body  of  the  Campana  muft  be  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  Bottom  of  the  Flutes  of  the  Column.  Having 
feen  one  of  this  Sort  in  Rome ,  and  thinking  it  exceeding 
beautiful,  and  executed  with  more  than  ordinary  Judgment 
and  Ex^&nefs,  I  borrowed  all  the  Meafures  above-men¬ 
tioned  from  it.  There  are  Capitals  likewife  which  are  made 
in  a  different  Mode,  and  may  with  Propriety  be  called  Com - 
pojite  *  but  I  fhall  take  Notice  of  thefe  hereafter,  and  infert 
the  Defigns  of  them  in  my  Book  of  Antiquities.  The  Ar-» 
chitrave,  Freeze,  and  Cornice,  are  together  a  fifth  of  the 
Altitude  of  the  Column  ;  and  by  the  Obferfation  of  what 
was  before-mentioned,  with  refpe£t  to  the  other  Orders, 
and  the  Numbers  marked  in  the  Defign,  you  may  ealily 
know  both  their  Proportions  and  Divifions. 


!§8 


CHAP.  XIX. 

Concerning  Pedestals. 

IH  A  V  E  taken  Notice  all  along  of  whatever  I  thought 
effential,  with  refpe£t  to  plain  Walls  and  their  Decora¬ 
tions,  and  have  made  my  particular  Remarks  upon  the 
feveral  Pedeftals  that  may  be  given  to  each  Order.  But 
fince  the  Antients  had  no  regard  to  the  making  them  larger 
or  fmaller  in  the  different  Orders,  altho’  this  Member  gives 
iuch  a  Beauty  and  Grace  to  the  whole,  when  it  is  judici— 
oufly  made,  and  in  a  juft  Proportion  to  the  other  Parts, 
that  Architects  may  have  a  perfect  Idea  thereof,  and  ufe 
them  as  Occafion  offers,  I  think  it  proper  to  inform  them, 
that  the  Antients  made  them  fometimes  lquare,  that  is, 
their  Altitude  equal  to  their  Breadth,  as  in  the  Arch  de 
Leoni  in  Verona  ;  and  I  have  given  thefe  to  the  Dorick  Or¬ 
der,  becaufe  it  requires  Solidity  and  Subftance.  Their 
Proportions  were  fometimes  regulated  by  the  Meafure  of 
the  Openings  or  Voids,  as  in  the  Arch  of  Titus  at  Santa 

Maria 


48  PALLADIO’ s 

Marin  Nova  in  Rome ,  and  that  of  Trajan  over  the  Gate  of 
Ancona ,  where  the  Altitude  of  the  Pedeftal  is  half  of  the 
Void  of  the  Arch,  which  lort  of  Pedeftals  I  myfelf  have 
made  ufe  of  in  the  Ionick  Order.  Their  Meafures  like  wife 
were  fometimes  taken  from  the  Altitude  of  the  Column,  as 
is  vilible  in  the  City  of  Sum,  iituated  below  the  Mountains 
which  divide  Italy  from  France ,  in  an  Arch  eredled  in 
Commemoration  of  Auguftus  Cajar  •  in  the  Arch  of  Pola , 
a  City  of  Dalmatia ,  and  in  the  Amphitheatre  in  Rome ,  in 
the  Ionick  and  Corinthian  Order,  in  all  which  Buildings 
the  Pedeftal  is  one  fourth  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Column, 
as  I  obferved  %n  the  Corinthian  Order.  In  the  beautiful 
Arch  called  di  Caftel  Vecchio ,  at  Verona ,  the  Pedeftal  is  one 
third  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Column,  as  I  have  made  it  in 
the  Compojite.  All  thefe  different  Sorts  of  Pedeftals  are 
very  ornamental,  and  bear  the  moft  exa£t  Proportion  to  the 
other  Parts.  By  the  Word  Toggio ,  which  Vitruvius  takes 
Notice  of  in  his  fixth  Book,  where  he  talks  of  Theatres, 
he  means  Pedeftal,  which  he  makes  one  third  Part  of  the 
Height  of  the  Columns  made  to  beautify  the  Theatre.  But 
of  thefe  Pedeftals,  which  exceed  one  third  of  the  Columns, 
there  is  an  Inftance  in  the  Arch  of  Conjlantine  in  Rome ,  the 
Pedeftals  being  of  two  Parts  and  a  half  the  Altitude  of  the 
Column.  The  Antients  made  the  Bafe  of  almoft  all  their 
Pedeftals  twice  as  thick  as  the  Cymatium ,  which  I  fhall 
lhew  in  my  Book  of  Arches . 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


49 


CHAP.  XX. 

Concerning  the  Errors  and  Abuses  in 

Architecture. 


HAVING  thus  far  ihewn  the  various  Decorations  of 
Architedure,  viz.  of  the  five  Orders  thereof ;  laid 
down  the  Manner  of  making  them,  and  given  the  Profils  of 
their  feveral  Members,  as  the  Antients  ufed  to  make  them, 
I  think  it  necefiary,  in  this  Place,  to  take  notice  of  feveral 
Errors  which  were  firft  introduced  by  the  Barbarians,  and 
are  ftill  in  Pradice,  that  the  ftudious  Architect  may  avoid 
them  in  his  Works,  and  be  able  to  know  thefe  Abufes 
when  he  fees  them.  Architedure  therefore  being,  as  all 
other  Arts  are,  an  Imitation  of  Nature,  will  never  admit  of 
any  thing,  either  repugnant  to,  or  inconfiftent  with,  that 
Order  and  Harmony  which  Nature  obferves  in  all  her 
Works  ;  whence  the  antient  Architeds,  who  firft  began  to 
make  their  Edifices  of  Stone,  which,  ’till  then,  had  been 
made  of  Timber,  laid  it  down  for  an  infallible  Rule,  that 
Columns  ihould  be  thicker  at  the  Bottom  than  the  Top  •  in 
which  they  borrowed  an  Inftance  from  Trees,  which  are 
bigger  at  the  Trunk,  and  near  the  Roots,  than  at  the  Top. 
In  like  manner,  as  it  is  natural  for  thofe  Things  to  fink 
down,  on  which  any  great  Burden  is  laid,  they  put  Bales 
rn^der  their  Columns,  which,  with  their  Torus's  and  Covet - 
tos,  appear  to  be  the  Swellings  occasioned  by  the  Weight 
they  fuftain.  They  likewife  added  Trygliphs ,  Modilions, 
and  Dentels  to  the  Cornices,  to  reprefent  the  Extremities 
of  thofe  Joifts  that  fuftain  the  Cielings  and  Roofs.  If  we 
duly  examine,  we  Shall  find  that  the  lame  was  oblerved  in 
all  the  other  Parts  ;  upon  which  Account  one  cannot  but 
dillike  thofe  Forms  of  Building,  which  fwerving  from  thole 
Rules  that  Nature  herfelf  didates,  and  that  Simplicity 
which  is  confpicuous  in  all  her  Produdions,  form  to  them- 
felves  another  kind  of  Nature,  by  deviating  from  whatever 


P  A  L  LA  DIO7  s 


is  good,  juft  and  beautiful  in  Architecture  :  Wherefore  we 
muft  not,  inftead  of  Pilafters  or  Columns  which  are  to  fuf- 
tain  any  Weight,  place  Cartouches,  which  are  certain 
Scrolls  that  ftrike  the  Eyes  of  Judges  very  difagreeably  ; 
and  are  fo  far  from  being  in  the  leaft  fatisfa&ory  or  plea- 
fant  to  thofe  who  are  not,  that  they  give  them  only  an  im¬ 
perfect  Idea  of  Architecture,  and  only  put  the  Builder  to 
an  unneceflary  Expence  :  For  which  Reafon  none  of  thefe 
Cartouches  fhould  come  out  of  the  Cornice  ;  for  it  being 
neceflary  that  each  Part  thereof  fhould  be  made  to  fome 
End,  and  demonftrate,  as  it  were,  what  it  would  be  if  the 
whole  Building  had  been  compofed  of  Timber  •  and,  as  it 
is  alfo  natural  that  a  great  Burden  Ihould  be  fupported  by 
lomething  folid  and  fubftantial  enough  to  fuftain  it,  thefe 
Cartouches  would  doubtlefs  be  altogether  fuperfluous,  fince 
neither  Joifts,  nor  any  Timber  whatever,  can  perform  the 
Effect  the  Cartouches  reprefent  *  and  as  they  are  fuppofed 
to  be  (lender  and  weak,  I  cannot  imagine  how  they  can  be 
put  under  any  thing  grofs  and  weighty,  with  the  leaft 
Shew  of  Reafon.  But  the  greateft  Abufe  of  all  is,  in  my 
Opinion,  the  making  of  Frontifpieces  of  Gates,  Windows, 
and  Galleries,  divided  and  open  in  the  Middle,  fince  thefe 
Frontifpieces  were  firft  made  to  defend  thefe  Parts  of  the 
Edifice  from  Rain,  &c.  Neceflity  having  intruded  the 
antient  Architeds  to  cover  them,  and  to  give  them  the 
Shape  of  a  Roof.  Nothing  can  therefore  be  more  ridiculous 
than  to  open  that  Part  which  was  invented  for  no  other  Pur- 
pofe  than  to  lhelter  the  Inhabitants,  and  fuch  as  go  into  it, 
from  Rain,  Snow,  Hail,  and  other  Injuries  of  the  Weather. 
And  though  Variety  and  Novelty  naturally  pleafe  all  Man¬ 
kind,  yet  they  are  not  to  be  introduced  in  dired  Oppofition 
to  the  Rules  of  Art,  and  the  Didates  of  Reafon  ;  and  it 
muft  be  acknowledg’d,  that  the  Antients  never  departed 
from  any  general  and  necelfary  Precepts  of  Art  in  their  va¬ 
rious  Inventions,  as  I  fhall  fhew  in  my  Book  of  ^ dr/tiquities . 
As  for  the  Procedures  of  the  Cornice  and  other  Decorations, 
it  is  no  fmall  Error  to  make  them  very  large  •  becaufe 
when  they  exceed  reafonable  and  due  Proportion,  elpecially 

if 


ARCHITECTURE.  $t 

if  they  are  in  a  clofe  Place,  they  make  it  ftill  cloler,  and 
more  difagreeable  to  the  Eye,  and  frighten  thofe  who  ftand 
under  them,  who  imagine  they  are  every  Moment  going  to 
fall  upon  their  Heads.  We  ought  to  be  equally  careful  to 
make  the  Cornices  in  a  due  Proportion  to  the  Columns  *  for 
if  great  Cornices  are  put  over  little  Columns,  or  little  Cor¬ 
nices  upon  great  Columns,  the  whole  muft  needs  be  dila- 
greeable  to  the  Eye.  Moreover,  the  fuppofing  of  the  Co¬ 
lumns  to  be  compofed  of  various  Pieces,  and  jointed  toge¬ 
ther  by  certain  Annulets  and  Garlands  round  them,  which 
appears  to  keep  them  dole  together,  ought  fo  much  the 
more  to  be  avoided,  becaufe  the  more  folid  and  whole  the 
Columns  feem  to  the  Eye,  the  better  they  anfwer  the  End 
for  which  they  were  rais’d,  which  is  to  make  the  whole 
Building  more  ftrong  and  fecure.  There  are  feveral  other 
Abufes  of  the  like  Nature  which  might  here  be  taken  notice 
of ;  as  of  fome  Members  in  the  Cornice  which  are  made 
unequal  to  the  reft  ;  but  thefe  Things  are  eafily  difcern’d 
by  what  I  before  oblerved  and  here  mentioned.  In  the 
next  Place  I  lhall  take  the  Difpofal  of  the  particular  and 
moft  material  Parts  of  an  Edifice  into  my  Confederation. 


m 


CHAP.  XXI. 

Concerning  Galleries,  Entries,  Halls, 
R  o  oms,  and  the  Manner  how  to  contrive  them. 

Galleries  were  ufually  made  in  the  Fore  or 
Back  Front  of  an  Edifice,  and  are  alio  placed  in  the 
Middle  of  it  if  there  is  to  be  but  one  *  if  two,  in  the  Wings. 
Thefe  Galleries  are  commodious  upon  divers  Accounts  •  for 
Walking,  Eating,  &c.  and  are  either  large  or  final  1,  as 
Conveniency  and  Quality  of  the  Building  may  require  •  but 
they  fhould  never  be  above  twenty  Feet  broad,  or  lefs  than 
ten.  Belides,  every  Houfe  that  is  artfully  built,  fhould 
have  fome  certain  Places  in  the  Middle,  and  the  principal 

Parts 

— & 


52  VALLADIO’s 

Parts  of  it,  with  which  all  the  others  have  a  Communication. 
Thefe  in  the  lower  Part  of  the  Houfe  are  generally  called 
Entries,  and  Halls  in  the  upper,  and  are  like  fo  many  pub- 
lick  Places.  In  thefe  Entries  Perfons  wait  till  the  Matter 
of  the  Houfe  appears,  to  tranfaCt  Bufinefs  with,  or  pay 
their  Compliments  to  them,  and,  after  the  Galleries,  are 
the  firft  Places  that  prefent  themfelves  to  fuch  as  enter  into* 
the  Houfe.  Halls  are  proper  for  the  Solemnization  of  Wed¬ 
dings,  Balls,  Banquets,  Plays,  and  fuch  other  innocent 
Amufements  *  for  which  Reafon  they  mutt  be  made  much 
larger  than  any  of  the  other  Apartments,  and  be  fo  contrived, 
that  a  numerous  Company  may,  without  Inconvenience,  be 
entertained  in  them,  and  be  Spectators  of  all  that  paftes. 
The  Length  of  Halls  fhould  never  exceed  twice  their 
Breadth  ;  but  the  nearer  they  are  to  a  Square,  the  more 
uniform  and  commodious  they  will  be. 

The  Rooms  mutt  be  diftributed  equally  on  each  Side  of 
the  Entry  and  the  Hall ;  and  Care  mutt  be  taken  that  thofe 
on  the  Right  Hand  anfwer  to,  and  be  of  equal  Largenefs 
with  thofe  on  the  Left,  whereby  there  will  be  a  juft  Har¬ 
mony  and  Proportion  in  the  feveral  Parts  of  the  Edifice,  and 
the  Walls  will  be  in  equal  Proportion  prefied  by  the  Roof: 
For  if  the  Apartments  are  bigger  on  one  Side  of  the  Edifice 
than  on  the  other,  in  the  former  Cafe  they  will  refift  the 
Weight  with  Eafe,  becaufe  of  the  Solidity  and  Thicknefs  of 
the  Walls  •  but  in  the  latter  they  will  be  too  weak,  which 
will  create  great  Inconveniencies,  and  at  laft  deftroy  the 
whole  Strudure.  In  the  defigning  of  Rooms  there  are 
{even  beautiful  Proportions  j  for  either  they  are  made  round 
or  fquare,  but  the  former  is  now  negleCted  and  laid  afide  ; 
or  their  Length  is  the  Diagonal  of  their  Square  ;  or  of  one 
Square  and  a  third  5  or  a  Square  and  a  half  •  or  a  Square 
and  two  tjfirds  ;  or  laftly,  of  two  Squares. 


CHAP. 


/ 


ARCHITECTURE, 


53 


CHAP.  XXII. 

Concerning  Floors  or  Pavement  s3  and 

ClELINGS. 

A  V I N  G  thus  (hewn  you  the  Form  and  Conftrudlion 
of  Galleries,  Halls  and  Rooms,  I  fhall  next  proceed 
to  their  Floors  and  Cielino;s  :  Floors  are  made  either  of 
Terazzo  or  Mortar ,  as  at  Venice,  or  of  Bricks,  or  of  natural 
Stones.  Thofe  made  of  Mortar  are  extraordinary  good, 
which  is  compofed  of  Brickbats,  fine  Sand,  Lime  made  of 
River-Pebbles,  or  of  Paduan  Stone,  the  whole  well  min¬ 
gled  together.  Thele  Floors  muft  be  made  either  in  the 
Spring  or  in  the  Summer ,  becaufe  it  is  neceftary  that  they 
fhould  be  very  dry.  Brick  Pavements  are  very  ornamental, 
and  ftrike  the  Eye  agreeably,  as  well  on  account  of  the 
Variety  of  Colours,  which  they  borrow  from  the  various 
Sorts  of  Earth  of  which  they  are  compofed,  as  from  the 
various  Forms  which  may  be  given  them.  The  Floors  of 
Chambers  are  but  feldom  made  of  natural  Stones,  fince  they 
are  too  cold  in  Winter  ;  but  they  are  agreeable  enough  in 
Galleries  and  Apartments  for  publick  Entertainments.  It 
muft  here  be  obferved  that  fuch  Chambers  as  are  upon  the 
fame  Story  muft  have  their  Pavement  level,  and  fo  as  that 
the  Threfholds  of  the  Doors  may  be  no  higher  than  the  reft 
of  the  Plan  of  the  Rooms  ;  and  if  any  little  Room  or  Clofet 
fhould  not  arife  to  that  Height,  the  Remainder  muft  be 
fupplied  with  a  Mezonin  or  falfe  Cieling.  There  are  alfo 
divers  Methods  of  making  Cielings,  for  fome  People  are 
very  defirous  to  have  them  of  beautiful  and  well-wrought 
Joifts  ;  in  which  Cafe  particular  Care  muft  be  taken  that  the 
Diftance  between  the  Joifts  be  once  the  Thicknefs  and  a 
half  of  the  faid  Joifts  •  for  that  Diftribution  will  make  the 
Cieling  very  agreeable,  and  fo  much  of  the  Wall  will  be 
left  between  the  Ends  of  the  Joifts  as  will  fuffice  to  fupport 

O  the 


$4  VALLADIO' s 

the  Weight  over  it ;  but  in  cafe  they  are  made  at  a  greater 
Diftance,  they  will  look  very  unhandfome  •  and  if  at  a  lefler, 
they  will  divide,  as  it  were,  the  upper  Wall  from  the  low¬ 
er  *  and  if  the  Joifts  fhould  prove  rotten,  or  by  any  Cafu- 
alty  be  fet  on  Fire,  the  upper  Wall  muft  fall  of  courfe. 
Others  are  fond  of  Compartments  made  of  Stucco-fAork ,  or 
of  Timber  ;  thefe  they  fill  with  Pidlures,  fb  that  they  may 
be.  varioully  decorated,  and  therefore  no  fixed  and  pofitive 
Precepts  can  be  prefcribed  upon  this  Topick. 


CHAP.  XXIII. 


Concerning  the  Altitude  of  Rooms. 

O  O  M  S  are  built  either  with  an  arched  or  a  flat 
Cieling  ;  if  with  the  latter,  the  Altitude  from  the 
Floor  to  the  joifts  muft  be  in  equal  Proportion  to  their 
Breadth,  and  the  Rooms  over  them  muft  be  a  fixth  Part 
lower  than  thofe  beneath.  If  with  the  former,  as  they 
ufually  are  in  the  firft  Story,  for  this  gives  them  a  Grace 
and  Beauty,  and  renders  them  lefs  liable  to  Fire,  their  Al¬ 
titude  in  fquare  Rooms  is  a  third  Part  more  than  the  Breadth 
of  the  Room.  But  in  thofe  where  the  Length  exceeds  the 
Breadth,  an  Altitude  muft  be  fought  equal  to  their  Length 
and  Breadth,  which  is  found  with  Eafe,  by  joining  the  two 
Lines  of  the  Length  and  Breadth,  and  dividing  the  whole 
into  two  equal  Parts,  one  of  which  will  be  the  exad):  Altitude 
of  the  Arch  ;  as  for  Inftance  :  Let  B  C  be  the  Place  to  be 
arched  *  add  the  Breadth  f. 

A  C  to  the  Length  A  B,  ^ 
and  we  have  the  Line 
E  B  •  which  being  divi¬ 
ded  into  two  equal  Parts 
in  the  Point  F,  gives  FB 
the  Altitude  fought  for. 

Or  if  the  Chamber  to  be  arched  be  twelve  Feet  in  Length, 
and  fix  in  Breadth,  add  the  two  Numbers  together,  and  the 

Sum 


Sum  is  eighteen,  which  divided  by  two,  gives  nine  ;  and 
this  is  the  Altitude  of  the  Arch  required. 

In  Plate  XXV.  Prob.  I.  another  Altitude  equal  to  the 
Length  and  Breadth  of  a  Room  is  thus  found  :  B  C  being 
the  Room  to  be  arched,  you  muft  join  the  Length  to  the 
Breadth,  and  it  gives  the  Line  B  F  *  this  you  muft  after¬ 
wards  divide  into  two  equal  Parts  at  the  Point  £,  which 
making  a  Center,  you  muft  defcribe  thereon  the  Semicircle 
BGFj  then  continuing  the  Line  A  C,  till  it  touches  the 
Circumference  of  the  Point  G,  AC  will  be  the  Altitude  of 
the  Arch  B  C.  The  Method  of  finding  it  in  Numbers  is 
thus  ;  The  Length  and  Breadth  of  the  Room  being  given, 
a  Number  muft  be  found  that  bears  the  fame  Proportion  to 
the  Breadth  as  the  Length  does  to  it,  which  is  performed 
by  multiplying  the  lefter  Extreme  by  the  greater,  and  the 
fquare  Root  of  the  Produ6):  will  be  the  Height.  As  for  In- 
ftance  ;  fuppole  the  Place  to  be  arched  be  nine  Feet  long, 
and  four  Feet  broad,  the  Altitude  of  the  Arch  will  be  fix 
Feet  *  and  the  fame  Proportion  that  nine  has  to  fix,  fix  has 
to  four  *  that  is,  the  Sefquialtera  Proportion  :  But  you  muft 
oblerve  that  you  cannot  always  find  this  Altitude  by  Num¬ 
bers. 

In  Plate  XXV.  Prob.  II.  another  Altitude  may  alfo  be 
taken,  which,  though  it  be  lefs,  will  ftill  be  in  proportion 
to  the  Room,  and  is  done  in  this  Manner  :  Having  drawn 
the  Lines  AB ,  A  C,  C  D,  and  B  D ,  which  reprefent  the 
Length  and  Breadth  of  the  Room,  and  found  the  Altitude 
thereof  according  to  the  firft  Way,  which  will  be  C  £,  join 
it  to  A  C  j  then  draw  the  Line  E  D  F,  and  prolonging 
A  By  till  it  touches  E  D  F  in  the  Point  F,  the  Line  B  F 
will  be  the  Altitude  of  the  Arch,  But  to  find  it  in  Num¬ 
bers,  the  Rule  is  as  follows :  Having  by  the  Length  and 
Breadth  of  the  Chamber  found  its  Altitude,  according  to 
the  firft  Rule,  which  in  the  foregoing  Inftance  was  nine, 
firft  add  the  Length,  Breadth,  and  Altitude  together,  as  in 
the  Figure  ;  then  multiplying  the  nine  by  twelve,  and  af¬ 
terwards  by  fix,  fet  the  Product  made  by  twelve  under 
twelve,  and  the  Produdi:  made  by  fix  under  fix  ;  when  this 


$6  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

is  performed,  multiply  fix  by  twelve,  and  fet  the  Product 
thereof,  which  is  feventy-two,  under  nine  *  laftly,  having 
found  a  Number  that,  multiplied  by  nine,  produces  feventy- 
two,  which  in  this  Inftance  would  be  eight,  I  fay  that  eight 
Feet  is  the  Altitude  of  the  Arch.  Thefe  feveral  Altitudes 
have  this  Relation  between  themfelves,  viz.  that  the  firft  ex¬ 
ceeds  the  fecond  in  the  fame  Ratio  or  Proportion  as  the 
fecond  exceeds  the  third.  Each  of  thefe  Altitudes  may  then 
be  us’d,  according  to  the  Conveniency  which  they  give  for 
Contrivance  •  that  various  Rooms  of  feveral  Dimenfions  may 
be  fo  made  as  to  have  all  their  Arches  of  an  equal  Altitude, 
and  be  at  the  fame  Time  exa&ly  proportionate.  By  this 
means  the  Chamber  will  look  agreeable,  and  be  very  con¬ 
venient  for  the  Floor  above,  which  will  be  upon  a  Level. 
There  are  other  Proportions  for  the  Altitude  of  Arches, 
which  do  not  come  under  any  particular  Precepts,  and  are 
therefore  left  to  the  Architect  to  ufe  them  as  Neceflity 
requires. 

CHAP.  XXIV. 

Concerning  the  various  Sorts  of  A  r  c  i  1 1:  s. 

IN  Plate  XXV.  Prob.  III.  there  are  fix  kinds  of  Arches, 
viz.  Crofted,  Fafciated,  Flat,  (for  fo  thofe  Arches 
which  are  only  the  Segment  of  a  Circle,  and  lefs  than  a 
Semi-circle  are  called,)  Circular,  Grinded,  and  Shell-like  * 
all  which  are  in  Altitude  one  third  of  the  Breadth  of  the 
Room.  The  four  firft  were  made  ufe  of  by  the  Antients, 
but  the  two  laft  are  the  Invention  of  the  Moderns.  We 
make  round  Arches  in  fquare  Chambers,  and  the  Method 
of  railing  them  is  this :  In  the  Angles  of  the  Room  we 
leave  certain  Mutules,  or  Modilions,  which  fuftain  the 
Semi-circle  of  the  Arch,  which  is  fiat  in  the  Middle,  but 
more  circular  the  nearer  it  approaches  the  Angles.  We 
have  an  Inftance  of  one  of  this  Sort  in  the  Baths  of  Titus  in 
Rome ,  one  Part  whereof,  at  the  Time  I  view’d  it,  was 
moulder’d  away.  I  have  here  given  the  Defigns  of  all  thefe 
feveral  Manners  of  arching,  appropriated  to  the  different 
Figures  of  the  Rooms.  CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


57 


CHAP.  XXV. 

Concerning  the  Dimentions ,  or  Proportions  of 
G  axes,  Doors,  and  Windows. 

NO  fettled  and  determinate  Directions  can  poffibly  be 
given  for  the  Altitude  and  Breadth  of  the  Gates  of 
ipacious  Edifices,  nor  for  the  Doors  and  Windows  of  Rooms ,* 
the  Reafon  of  which  is  this  .*  When  an  Architect  makes  any 
Gates,  he  is  forced  to  adapt  them  to  the  Largenefs  of 
the  Fabrick  *  to  the  Dignity  of  the  Perfon  who  employs 
him  *  and  the  Conveniency  of  whatever  is  to  go  backwards 
and  forwards,  either  to  or  from  the  fame.  The  Method 
which  I  like  beft  is  this  ;  divide  the  Space  from  the  Ground, 
to  the  Superficies  of  the  Joifts,  into  three  Parts  and  a  half, 
according  to  Vitruvius  in  Book  IV.  Chap.  VI.  two  whereof 
allow  to  the  Altitude  of  the  Void  or  Opening,  and  one  to 
the  Breadth,  lefs  the  twelfth  of  the  Altitude.  It  was  a  Cufi- 
tom  amonsft  the  Antients,  to  make  their  Gates  wider  at  the 
Bottom  than  at  Top,  like  thofe,  for  Inftance,  in  the  Tem¬ 
ple  at  Tivoli ;  and  Vitruvius  has  laid  down  the  lame  Precept 
in  all  Probability  for  this  Reafon,  becaufe  it  would  give  a 
greater  Solidity.  The  Gates  and  principal  Doors  muft  be 
order’d  in  fuch  a  Pofition,  that  an  eafy  Accefs  from  all  Parts 
of  the  Houfe  may  be  had  to  them.  The  Doors  of  Rooms 
muff  not  exceed  three  Feet  wide,  and  fix  and  a  half  high  ; 
nor  be  lefs  than  two  Feet  wide,  and  five  Feet  high.  The 
Openings  for  Windows  mufi:  be  always  made  in  fuch  a 
Proportion,  as  that  the  Room  may  not  glare  with  two  much 
Light,  nor  be  too  dark  and  gloomy  •  and  likewife  the 
Windows  themfelves  mufi:  never  be  made  too  dole,  nor  too 
far  diftant  one  from  the  other.  In  this  cafe  therefore  a  par¬ 
ticular  Obfervation  mufi:  be  made  of  the  Dimenfions  of  the 
Chamber,  fince  it  is  but  natural,  that  a  fpacious  Room 
fhould  require  much  more  Light  than  a  fmall  one ;  and  in 

P  cafe 


58  V  A  L  LA  D  10' s 

cafe  the  Windows  are  made  either  lefs  in  Number,  or  fmal- 
ler  than  is  neceflary,  the  Chambers  will  be  dark  ;  as  on  the 
other  Hand,  if  they  are  too  fpacious,  or  too  numerous,  they 
will  be  very  incommodious,  on  Account  of  the  too  great 
Quantity  of  Air  which  they  let  in  ;  for  that  will  make  them 
either  too  hot  in  Summer ,  or  too  cold  in  IVtnter^  unlefs 
they  face  that  Side  of  the  Heavens  which  is  foft  and  tempe¬ 
rate.  The  Breadth  of  the  Windows  therefore  muft  not  be 
above  a  fourth  Part  of  that  of  the  Room,  nor  be  under  a 
fifth  Part  ;  they  muft  have  two  Squares  in  Height,  and  a 
fixth  Part  of  their  Breadth  •  and  as  in  a  Houfe,  altho’  it  con- 
fifts  of  various  Apartments  (feme  large,  feme  fmall,  and  others 
neither  one  nor  the  other)  we  are  notwithftanding  obliged 
to  make  the  feverai  Windows  in  the  feme  Story  equal.  In 
the  Menfuration  of  the  feid  Windows,  I  am  govern’d  by  the 
Dimenfions  of  fuch  Rooms,  as  their  Length  is  two  thirds 
more  than  their  Breadth  •  that  is,  if  the  Breadth  be  eigh¬ 
teen  Feet,  the  Length  muft  be  thirty,  and  the  Breadth  is 
divided  into  four  Parts  and  a  half,  one  of  which  is  allowed  to 
the  Opening  of  the  Window,  and  two  to  the  Height,  with 
a  fixth  Part  of  the  Breadth,  obfervingthe  feme  Proportion  in 
all  thofe  of  other  Rooms.  The  Windows  of  the  fecond  Story 
muft  be  a  fixth  Part  lefs  than  the  Length  of  the  Opening  of 
thofe  of  the  firft  ;  and  in  cafe  there  be  more  Stories,  they 
muft  leflen  in  the  feme  Proportion.  The  Windows  on  the 
Right  Hand  muft  correfpond  with  thofe  on  the  Left,  and 
thofe  above  be  dire&ly  perpendicular  over  thofe  below  ; 
fe  likewife  the  Doors  muft  be  exa&ly  over  each  other,  that 
the  Void  may  be  over  the  Void,  and  the  Solid  over  the  So¬ 
lid  ;  and  laftly,  they  muft  all  be  upon  the  feme  Level,  where¬ 
by  we  may  fee  quite  through  the  Houfe  at  once,  which  is 
very  graceful,  and  very  cool  in  Summer ,  befides  feverai  o- 
ther  Conveniencies,  which  would  be  needlefs  to  mention.  It 
is  cuftomary,  on  Account  of  Strength,  and  in  order  that  the 
Lintels  or  Architraves  of  the  Doors  and  Windows  may  not 
be  prefled  by  too  cumbrous  a  Weight,  to  raife  certain 
Arches,  commonly  called  Flat  Arches,  which  contribute 
very  much  to  the  Duration  of  the  Building.  The  Win¬ 
dows, 


ARCHITECTURE.  59 

dows,  as  I  have  already  obferved,  muft  be  as  diftant  from 
the  Angles,  or  Corners  of  the  Fabrick,  as  poffibly  they  can  j 
for  fince  that  Part  was  made  to  fallen  and  bind  all  the  reft 
of  the  Edifice  together,  it  muft  not  be  open  and  weak. 
The  Pilafters,  or  Jambs  of  the  Doors  and  Windows,  are  to 
be  no  thicker  than  a  fifth  Part  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Open¬ 
ing,  nor  lefs  than  a  fixth.  I  come  now  in  the  next  Place 
to  treat  of  their  proper  Decorations. 


CHAR  XXVI. 


Concerning  the  Decorations  of  Doors  and 

Windows. 


TH  E  Reader  may  eafily  know  how  to  adorn  and 
beautify  the  Gates  of  an  Edifice,  from  the  Rules 
laid  down  by  Vitruvius  in  the  fixth  Chapter  of  his  fourth 
Book  ;  from  the  Uluftrations  and  Defigns  which  the  Reve¬ 
rend  Barbaro  has  given  to  explain  that  Chapter  ;  and  from 
the  Obfervations  which  I  have  already  made,  and  the  De¬ 
figns  I  have  given  upon  all  the  five  Orders  *  but  to  wave 
thefe  Matters,  I  fhall  only  prelent  the  Reader  with  lome 
Profils  of  the  Decorations  of  the  Doors  and  Windows  of 
Rooms,  as  they  may  be  varied  ;  and  (hew  how  to  delign 
each  Member  with  Beauty,  and  to  give  it  its  proper  Pro- 
jedlure.  The  Decorations  of  Doors  and  Windows  are  the 
Architrave,  the  Freeze,  and  Cornice.  The  Architrave  turns 
about  the  Door,  and  muft  be  as  thick  as  the  jambs  or  Pi-» 
lafters,  which  muft  not  be  lels,  as  I  have  before  oblerved, 
than  a  fixth  Part  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Opening,  nor  more 
than  a  fifth  ;  and  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Freeze  and  Cornice 
are  taken  from  the  lame  Opening.  Of  the  two  Inventions 
which  follow,  the  firft,  or  uppermoft,  has  thele  Dimen- 
fions.  The  Architrave  is  divided  into  four  Parts,  three  of 
which  are  for  the  Altitude  of  the  Freeze,  and  five  for 
that  of  the  Cornice.  The  Architrave  is  again  divided  into 

ten 


6o 


P  A  L  L  A  D  I  Q’s 

ten  Parts  ;  three  whereof  go  to  the  firft  Fafcia,  four  to 
the  fecond,  and  the  other  three  are  fubdivided  into 
five  Parts  ;  two  whereof  are  for  the  Regolo  or  Orlo,  and 
the  other  three  for  the  Cima  Reverfa ,  which  is  alfo  cal¬ 
led  Cymatium  \  its  Proje&ure  is  equal  to  its  Altitude. 
The  Fillet  proje&s  lefs  than  half  its  Thicknefs.  To  de- 
fign  the  Cymatium ,  you  muft  draw  a  right  Line  from 
below  the  Fillet,  to  the  upper  Part  of  the  fecond 
Fafcia  ;  this  Line  you  muft  divide  into  two  equal 
Parts,  each  whereof  is  made  the  Bafe  of  an  Ijoceles 
Triangle ,  or  which  has  two  Sides  equal  ;  then  place  the 
fixed  Foot  of  your  Compals  in  the  Angle  over-againft 
the  Bafe,  and  draw  the  Curve  Lines,  which  gives  the  Cy¬ 
matium. 

The  Freeze  is  three  fourths  of  the  Architrave,  and  is 
formed  by  the  Segment  of  a  Circle  lefs  than  a  Semi- 
Circle,  and  with  its  Convexity  or  Swelling  is  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  Cymatium  of  the  Architrave.  The  five 
Parts  which  are  given  to  the  Cornice,  are  thus  diftribu- 
ted  to  its  Members  •  one  is  for  the  Cavetto  with  its 
Lijlella ,  which  is  the  fifth  Part  of  the  Cavetto ,  the  Pro- 
jedlure  whereof  is  two  thirds  of  its  Altitude }  and  an 
Ijoceles  Triangle ,  whofe  Angle  G  is  the  Center,  is  drawn 
to  defign  it,  fo  that  the  Cavetto  will  be  the  Bafe  of 
the  Triangle.  Another  of  the  faid  five  Parts  is  allowed 
to  the  Ovolo ,  the  Projetfure  whereof  is  two  thirds  of  its 
Altitude,  and  is  formed  by  drawing  an  Ifoceles  Tri angle , 
the  Point  H  being  its  Center.  The  other  three  are  fub¬ 
divided  into  feventeen  Parts  *  eight  whereof  are  allowed  to 
the  Corona  with  its  Liflellas ,  of  which  that  above  takes 
one  of  the  faid  eight  Parts,  and  that  below,  which 
makes  the  Hollow  of  the  Corona ,  has  but  a  fixth  Part 
of  the  Ovolo.  The  other  nine  are  given  to  the  Cima 
Re Ila  and  its  Fillet ,  which  is  one  third  of  the  laid  Ci¬ 
ma.  To  form  it  with  Grace  and  Exadlnefs,  the  rio-ht 
Line  A  B  is  drawn,  which  is  divided  into  two  equal 
Parts  in  the  Point  C  ;  one  whereof  is  fubdivided  into  feven 
Parts,  fix  of  which  being  taken  in  the  Point  D,  we  after¬ 
wards- 


6 1 


ARCHITECTURE. 


wards  defcribe  the  two  Triangles  A  E  C  and  C  B  F: 

7 

then  having  fet  the  fixed  Foot  of  the  Com  pals  in  the  Points 
E  and  F,  we  defcribe  the  Segments  of  Circles  A  C  and 
C  B ,  and  they  form  the  laid  Ctma  Bella. 

The  Architrave  of  the  fecond  Invention  is  likewife 
divided  into  four  Parts,  three  whereof  are  for  the  Altitude 
of  the  Freeze,  and  five  for  that  of  the  Cornice.  The  Ar¬ 
chitrave  is  again  divided  into  three  Parts,  two  whereof 
being  fubdivided  into  feven,  three  go  to  the  firft  Fafcia , 
and  four  to  the  fecond.  The  third  Part  is  fubdivided 
into  nine  Parts  ;  two  are  allowed  to  the  Ajlragal ,  and 
the  other  feven  being  again  fubdivided  into  five,  three  are 
given  to  the  Cymatium  or  Ogeei  and  two  to  the  Fillet. 
The  Altitude  of  the  Cornice  is  divided  into  five  Parts  and 
three  fourths,  one  whereof  being  fubdivided  into  fix,  five 
are  for  the  Bed-moulding  over  the  Freeze,  and  the  other 
for  the  Lifella.  The  Projedture  of  the  Bed-moulding  is 
equal  to  its  Altitude,  as  is  that  of  the  Lijiella.  One  is  for 
the  Ovolo ,  whofe  Projedfure  is  three  fourths  of  its  Alti¬ 
tude.  The  Gradettoo r  Fillet  over  the  Ovolo  is  the  fixth  Part 
of  the  Ovolo ,  and  projects  juft  as  much.  The  other  three 
Parts  are  fubdivided  into  feventeen  ;  eight  are  allowed  to 
the  Corona ,  whole  Projedfure  is  one  third  more  than  its  Alti¬ 
tude,  the  other  nine  being  fubdivided  into  four  ;  three  are 
for  the  Cymatium ,  and  one  for  the  Fillet :  The  three  others 
are  fubdivided  into  five  Parts  and  a  half  }  of  one  of  which 
the  Gradetto  or  Fillet  is  made,  and  of  the  other  four  and  a 
half  the  Cymatium  over  the  Corona .  The  Projedfure  of 
this  Cornice  is  equal  to  its  Altitude* 


Members  of  the  Cornice  of  the  jirft  Invention * 


I.  Cavetto . 

K.  Ovolo. 

L.  Corona . 


N.  Cymatium 

O.  Fillet . 


Members 


6  2 


PALLADIO’ $ 


Members  of  tlx  Architrave. 


P.  Ogee  or  Cima  Rcverfat. 

Q.  Firf  Fafcia. 

V.  Second  Fafcia . 

R.  Or  to  or  Fillet . 


S.  Convexity  or  Swelling  of 

the  Freeze. 

T.  Tart  of  the  Freeze  that 

goes  into  the  iFall. 


The  Members  of  the  feeond  Invention  may  be  eafily 
known  by  thofe  which  are  here  fet  down. 

In  the  two  following  Inventions,  the  Architrave  of  the 
firft  marked  F  is  likewife  divided  into  four  Parts,  three 
whereof*  and  a  fourth,  go  to  the  Altitude  of  the  Freeze, 
and  five  to  that  of  the  Cornice.  The  Architrave  is  again  di¬ 
vided  into  eight  Parts  *  five  of  which  are  allowed  to  the 
Fafciar  and  three  to  the  Cymatium}  which  is  again  fubdi- 
vided  into  eight  Parts  ^  three  whereof  are  for  the  Ogee , 
three  for  the  Cavetto ,  and  two  for  the  Fillet .  The  Alti¬ 
tude  of  the  Cornice  is  divided  into  fix  Parts  •  two  whereof 
are  for  the  Cima  Re  Fla  and  its  Fillet ,  and  one  for  the  Ogee. 
This  Cima  is  again  fubdivided  into  nine  Parts,  eight  where¬ 
of  are  allowed  to  the  Corona  and  its  Gradetti  or  Li  fel¬ 
las.  The  Afragal  over  the  Freeze  has  but  a  third  of  one 
of  the  faid  fix  Parts,  and  that  which  is  left  between  the  Co¬ 
rona  and  the  Afragal  is  for  the  Codetta. 

In  the  other  Invention  the  Architrave  marked  H  is  di¬ 
vided  into  four  Parts  •  three  and  a  half  whereof  are  allow¬ 
ed  to  the  Altitude  of  the  Freeze,  and  five  for  that  of  the 
Cornice.  The  Architrave  is  divided  into  eight  Parts,  of 
which  five  are  for  the  Fajcia ,  and  three  for  the  Cymatium . 
The  Cymatium  is  divided  into  leven  Parts  ;  one  whereof  is 
given  to  the  Afragal ,  and  the  reft  are  again  fubdivided  in¬ 
to  eight  Parts  ;  three  whereof  are  for  the  Cima  Reverja , 
three  for  the  Cavetto ,  and  two  for  the  Fillet.  The  Alti¬ 
tude  of  the  Cornice  is  divided  into  fix  Parts  and  three  fourths; 
three  are  allowed  to  the  Ogee ,  the  Dentile ,  and  the  Ovolo. 
The  Ogee  proje&s  juft  as  much  as  its  Thicknefs  ;  the  D en¬ 
tile  have  two  thirds  of  its  Altitude,  and  the  Ovolo  three 

fourths  ; 


ARCHITECTURE.  63 

fourths  ;  of  the  three  fourths,  the  Ogee  between  the  Cyma - 
ttum  and  the  Corona  is  form’d,  and  the  other  three  Parts  are 
fubdivided  into  feventeen  ;  nine  are  allowed  to  the  Cyma- 
tmm-  and  the  Fillet ,  and  eight  to  the  Corona .  The  Projec- 
ture  of  this  Cornice,,  as  thofe  above,  is  equal  to  its  Thick¬ 
ness. 


CHAP.  XXVII. 

Concerning  Chimnies. 


TH  E  Antients,  in  order  to  heat  their  Apartments, 
built  the  Chimnies  in  the  Middle  with  Columns  or 
Condoles  to  uphold  the  Architraves,  over  which  they  fixed 
the  Pyramidal  Funnel,  through  which  the  Smoke  was  con¬ 
veyed.  A  Chimney  of  this  kind  was  to  be  leen  at  Balat 
near  Nero's  Fijfo-Pand,  and  another  not  far  diftant  from  Cl - 
vita  Fee  eh  la.  But  in  cafe  there  were  to  be  no  Chimnies, 
they  then  made  certain  Tubes  or  Pipes  in  the  Thicknefs  of 
the  Wall,  through  which  the  Heat  of  the  Fires  which  were 
made  under  thofe  Chambers,  afcended,  and  iffued  out  thro’ 
certain  Vents  or  Mouths,  at  the  Top  of  the  laid  Tubes  or 
Funnels.  The  Trent  's  (a  Vicentine  Family)  cooled  the  Apart¬ 
ments  of  their  Villa  at  Coftoza  much  after  the  lame  Manner, 
during  the  Summer  Sealon :  For  there  are  in  the  Hills  where¬ 
on  that  Villa  is  erefied,  feveral  deep  Caverns,  called  Cova - 
ll  by  the  Inhabitants,  which  were  formerly  (Quarries*  Vi¬ 
truvius,  I  prefume,  means  thefe  Caverns  in  his  Second  Book, 
where  difcourfing  of  Stones,  he  tells  us,  that  there  is  a  kind 
of  Stone  dug  in  Marca  Trevlgiana ,  which  may  be  lawed 
like  Timber.  In  thefe  Caverns  are  generated  certain  very 
refrefhing  Winds,  which  are  conveyed  to  thofe  Gentlemen’s 
Houfes  through  certain  fiibterraneous  Paffages  called  Venti - 
dotti ,  or  Wind-Pipes  ;  and  by  Funnels  like  thofe  above- 
mentioned,  thefe  cool  Winds  are  let  into  every  Room 
of  the  Houfe  :  Thefe  Paflages  are  opened  and  fhut  when¬ 
ever  thefe  Gentlemen  pleafe,  and  take  more  or  lefs  Air,  ac¬ 
cording 


6. f  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O'  s 

cording  to  the  Seafons.  And  notwithftanding  this  Place  is 
very  remarkable,  on  account  of  this  lingular  Conveniency, 
yet  what  makes  it  ftill  more  fo,  and  worth  our  Obfervation, 
is  another  Place  called  il  Career e  de  Venti,  that  is  to  fay, 
the  Prijon  of  the  iVtnds ,  which  is  a  fubterraneous  Chamber 
contrived  by  the  juftly  admired  Sig.  Francefco  Trento ,  and 
by  him  called  E  O  L  I O  (or  the  Palace  of  JEolus)  where 
feveral  of  thefe  Ventidotti  or  Wind-pipes  difeharge  them- 
felves  *  and  to  adorn  it,  and  make  it  anfwer  to  its  Title, 
he  has  taken  abundance  of  Pains,  and  been  at  a  vaft  Ex¬ 
pence.  But  to  return  to  the  Chimnies,  the  Moderns  make 
them  in  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Walls,  and  raife  their  Funnels 
above  the  Roof,  to  carry  off  the  Smoke  quite  away  into  the 
Air.  But  the  Tubes  muft  never  be  made  too  wide  or  too 
narrow  ;  for  in  the  former  Cafe  the  Wind  having;  too  much 
Room,  will  drive  the  Smoke  downward,  and  not  let  it  afeend, 
or  go  freely  out  ;  and  in  the  latter  Cafe,  the  Smoke,  for 
want  of  a  free  Vent,  will  fly  back  again  :  In  the  Chimnies 
of  Rooms  therefore,  the  Funnels  muft  not  be  narrower  than 
half  a  Foot,  nor  wider  than  nine  Inches,  nor  above  two 
Feet  and  a  half  in  Length.  The  Mouth  of  the  Pyramid 
where  it  joins  to  the  Funnel  muft  be  made  fomewhat  nar¬ 
rower,  that  the  Smoke  driving  downward,  it  may  keep  it 
from  going  into  the  Room.  Some  make  the  Funnels  crook¬ 
ed,  that  by  their  Winding,  and  the  Strength  of  the  Fire 
which  forces  it  upward,  they  may  prevent  the  Smoke  from 
flying  back  into  the  Room.  The  Funnels,  or  Opening  at 
Top,  through  which  the  Smoke  fhould  be  conveyed,  ought 
to  be  wide,  and  fet  at  a  Diftance  from  any  Subftance  that  is 
apt  to  take  Fire.  The  Mantle-Tree,  over  which  the  Py¬ 
ramid  of  the  Chimney  is  placed,  muft  be  curioufly  wrought, 
and  not  the  leaft  Ruflick  ;  this  being,  for  the  Realons  alrea¬ 
dy  mentioned,  proper  only  for  fpacious  Buildings. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE,  6$ 


CHAP.  XXVIII. 


Concerning  Stair -Cases,  and  the  various  Me¬ 
thods  of  eretting  them ;  and  alfo  concerningthe 
Number  and  Dimenjions  of  the  Stairs  or 
Steps. 


AL  L  the  Care  imaginable  muft  be  taken  in  placing 
your  Stair-Cafes,  becaufe  ’tis  very  difficult  to  find  a 
convenient  Place  for  them,  which  at  the  fame  Time  will 
no  ways  damage  the  reft  of  the  Fabrick.  A  proper  Situa¬ 
tion  therefore  muft  be  affign’d  them,  that  they  may  not  in¬ 
terfere  with  any  other  Parts  of  the  Houfe,  nor  receive  any 
Inconveniency  from  them.  Stair-Cafes  muft  have  three 
Openings  ;  the  firft  of  which  is  the  Door  by  which  we  go 
up  to  them,  which  the  lefs  is  concealed  from  fuch  as  enter 
the  Houfe,  the  more  ornamental  it  will  appear  ;  and  in  my 
Opinion  it  ffiould  be  placed  in  fuch  a  Manner,  that  before 
we  come  at  it  we  may  have  a  Sight  of  the  beft  Part  of  the 
Houfe  ;  for  then  the  Edifice,  though  little  in  reality,  will 
appear  large  ;  for  which  Reafon  it  muft  be  obvious,  and 
eafy  to  be  found.  The  fecond  Opening  is  the  Windows, 
requifite  to  light  the  Stair-Cafe  ;  thefe  muft  be  fituate  in 
the  Middle,  and  be  made  high,  by  which  means  they  will 
diffufe  the  Light  in  equal  Proportion.  The  third  Opening 
is  the  Landing-place,  through  which  we  enter  into  the 
Rooms  of  the  firft  Story,  and  muft  lead  into  the  moft  hand- 
fome,  fpacious,  and  beft-furnifhed  Rooms  of  the  Houfe. 
Stair-Cafes  are  not  compleat  unlefs  they  be  light,  large,  and 
eafy  to  afcend,  and  invite  People  as  it  were  to  go  up  them. 
In  order  to  make  them  lightfome,  they  muft  receive  a  ftrong 
Light,  which,  as  I  have  already  obferved,  muft  be  equally 
diftufed  upon  all  Parts  of  them.  They  will  be  fpacious 
enough,  in  cafe  they  be  not  made  too  narrow  in  proportion 
to  the  Bignefs  and  Quality  of  the  Building  ;  but  they  muft 

R  never 


66  PALLADIO's 

never  be  narrower  than  four  Feet,  that  when  two  Perfons 
meet  they  may  have  Room  enough  to  pals.  They  will  be 
Commodious  with  refpe6t  to  the  whole  Fabrick,  if  Arches 
large  enough  to  hold  Goods,  &fe.  are  made  under  the 
Steps  j  and  if  they  are  made  wide,  and  of  an  ealy  Afcent, 
it  will  be  more  commodious  to  thofe  who  go  up  and  down  5 
their  Thread  therefore  muft  be  double  their  Height.  The 
Steps  muft  be  no  more  than  fix  Inches  fteep,  and  if  they 
fhould  be  lefs,  efpecially  if  the  Stair-Cafes  are  long,  and 
have  no  Landing-places,  it  will  make  them  Rill  more  con¬ 
venient  and  lefs  tirefome,  by  not  obliging  People  to  lift 
their  Feet  fo  high :  but  then  they  muft  be  four  Inches  fteep 
at  leaft.  The  Breadth  of  the  Steps  muft  not  be  more  than 
one  Foot  and  a  half,  nor  lefs  than  a  Foot.  The  Antients 
in  the  Steps  of  their  Stair-Cafes  took  particular  Care  to 
make  their  Number  odd,  that  when  they  begun  to  go  up 
with  the  Right  Foot,  the  fame  might  be  uppermoft  when 
they  came  to  the  Top,  which  they  imagined  was  a  propiti¬ 
ous  Omen,  and  a  Teftimony  of  more  religious  Awe  and  Re¬ 
verence  when  they  entered  their  Temples.  Eleven  or  thir¬ 
teen  Steps,  however,  at  moft  will  be  enough  for  a  Flight ; 
and  in  cafe  when  we  are  got  fo  high,  we  muft  ftill  go  far¬ 
ther,  than  a  Landing-Place  ought  to  be  made,  that  fuch 
Perfons  as  may  be  ever  weary  or  tired,  may  reft  themfelves  ; 
and  that  when  any  thing  happens  to  fall  from  above,  it  may 
thereby  be  flopped,  and  prevented  from  rolling  any  lower. 
Stair-Cafes  are  fometimes  made  ftrait,  and  fometimes 
winding.  The  former  may  be  divided  into  Pafiages,  or  elfe 
made  fquare,  which  turn  in  four.  For  the  making  of  thefe, 
the  whole  Space  muft  be  divided  into  four  Parts  *  two 
whereof  muft  be  allowed  to  the  Steps,  and  the  other  two  to 
the  Void  in  the  Middle,  whence  the  Stair-Cafe,  in  cafe  it 
were  left  open,  would  receive  the  Light.  They  may  be 
made  with  the  Wall  inward,  and  then  the  Wall  itfelf  is 
enclofed  in  the  two  Parts  which  are  allowed  to  the  Steps, 
but  there  is  no  abfolute  Occafion  for  this.  S.  Lewis  Cor - 
?mroy  a  Nobleman  of  an  extraordinary  Genius,  as  is  evident 

from 


ARCHITECTURE.  67 

from  the  artful  Defigns  which  he  drew  of  a  fine  Gallery, 
and  a  magnificent  Palace  which  he  built  at  Tadua  for  his 
own  Residence,  was  the  Inventer  of  thefe  two  kinds  of 
Stair-Cafes.  Whinding-Stairs,  which  fome  call  Cockle - 
Stairs ,  are  made  fometimes  Circular,  fometimes  Eliptical, 
and  lometimes  with  a  Column  or  Newel  in  the  Middle,  or 
open,  particularly  if  there  be  but  little  Room,  becaufe  they 
take  up  lefs  Com  pals  than  the  ftrait  *  but  they  are  not 
quite  fo  commodious  to  afcend.  Such  as  are  open  in  the 
Middle  are  found  to  be  ornamental  and  pleafant,  not  only 
becaufe  they  receive  the  Light  from  above,  but  becaufe 
any  one  that  is  at  the  Top  may  fee  and  be  feen  by  all  fuch 
as  go  up  and  down  them. 

When  a  Stair-Cafe  winds  round  a  Column,  it  is  made  in 
the  Manner  following  :  The  Diameter  being  divided  into 
three  Parts,  two  are  for  the  Steps,  and  one  for  the  Column, 
as  in  the  Defign  marked  A ;  or  the  Diameter  fhall  be  di¬ 
vided  into  feven  Parts,  three  of  which  mud  be  allowed  to 
the  Column  in  the  Middle,  and  the  four  others  to  the  Steps, 
which  has  been  accurately  obferved  in  the  Stair-Cafe  of  the 
Pillar  of  Trajan  :  And  in  cafe  the  Stair  Cafes  be  made  Cir¬ 
cular,  as  in  the  Defign  By  they  will  appear  very  ornamen¬ 
tal,  and  be  longer  than  if  they  had  been  made  ftrait.  But 
in  open  Stair-Cafes,  the  Diameter  is  divided  into  four  Parts, 
two  of  which  are  given  to  the  Steps,  and  two  to  the  Void 
in  the  Middle. 

Belides  the  various  kinds  of  Stair-Cafes  generally  made, 
the  celebrated  Mark  Anthony  Barharo ,  a  Gentleman  of 
Venice ,  hath  invented  another  kind  of  winding  Stair-Cafe, 
which  is  very  well  adapted  to  fuch  Places  as  are  narrow* 
This  has  no  Column  in  the  Middle,  and  the  Stairs  being 
circular,  become  long  by  that  Means. 

Its  Divifion  is  the  fame  with  that  before  mentioned. 

Eliptical  and  Circular  Stair  Cafes  are  divided  after  one 
and  the  fame  Manner,  and  are  very  handfome  and  agreeable, 
all  the  Windows  and  Doors  being  at  the  Head,  and  in  the 
Middle  of  the  Elipfis  ;  and  thefe  likewife  are  very  commo¬ 
dious. 


6 8  PALLADIO' s 

dious.  I  have  made  one  of  this  kind  myfelf,  which  is  open 
in  the  Middle,  in  the  Convent  della  Car  it  a ,  in  Venice,  which 
was  very  much  approved  of. 


A. 

B. 


C. 

D. 

E. 


F. 

G. 

H. 


/Finding  Stair-Cafe ,  with  a  Newel  in  the  Middle. 

- — — - with  a  Newel  and  Circular  Steps . 

— - open  in  the  Middle. 

- open  in  the  Middle ,  and  with 

Circular  Steps. 

Eliptical  Stair-Cafe ,  with  a  Newel  in  the  Middle. 

_ without  a  Newel. 

Strait  Stair-Cafe ,  with  the  IV all  on  infide. 
_ without  a  JVall. 


Another  handfome  fort  of  / Finding  Stair-Cafe ,  was  made 
by  the  Direction  of  the  puiflant  Monarch,  Frances  the  Firf , 
King  of  Fance  at  Chamhor ,  in  a  Palace  ere&ed  in  a  Wood, 
which  Stair-Cafe  is  made  in  the  following  Manner.  There 
are  four  Stair-Cafes ,  with  an  Entrance  to  each  of  them, 
which  go  up  one  over  the  other,  fo  as,  that  being  made  in 
the  middle  of  the  Fabrick,  they  may  ferve  for  four  diftin6t 
Apartments  *  the  Inhabitants  of  one  Stair-Cafe ,  being  under 
no  Obligation  to  go  down  thofe  of  the  other  •  and  as  they 
are  open  in  the  Middle,  they  all  fee  one  another  afcend  and 
defcend,  without  incommoding  one  another.  As  this  In¬ 
vention  is  noyal  and  ornamental,  I  have  inferted  a  Defgn  of 
it,  and  marked  the  Stair-Cafes  with  Letters  in  the  Flan  and 
Prof  l,  to  fhew  the  Reader  where  each  of  them  begins,  and 
how  they  afcend. 

There  are  alfo  in  the  Porticos  of  Pompey  at  Rome ,  in  the 
Way  that  leads  to  the  Jews  Quarter,  three  / Finding  Stair- 
Cafes  of  a  very  pretty  and  artfull  Invention  ;  for  being  pla¬ 
ced  in  the  Middle  of  the  Building ,  whence  they  could  re¬ 
ceive  no  Light  but  from  above,  they  were  fet  upon  Co- 
lumns  ;  to  the  End  that  the  Light  might  be  equally  diffufed. 
In  Imitation  whereof  Bramante ,  a  celebrated  Architect  in  his 
Time,  made  one  in  the  Belvidera ,  but  without  Steps,  and 
compofed  it  of  the  four  Orders  following,  that  is,  the  Do , 

rick 


; 


ARCHITECTURE.  69 

rick ,  Ionick,  Corinthian ,  and  Compojite.  This  kind  of  Stair- 
Cafe  is  made  by  dividing  the  whole  Space  into  four  Parts  * 
two  of  which  are  given  to  the  Void  in  the  Middle,  and  one 
to  each  Side  of  the  Steps  and  Columns. 

Several  other  Sorts  of  Stair-Cafes  are  to  be  feen  in  antient 
Fabricks,  as  Triangular,  of  which  fort  are  thofe  whereby 
we  afcend  the  Cupola  of  Santa  Maria  Rotunda ,  which  are 
open  in  the  Middle,  and  admit  the  Light  from  above. 
Thofe  of  the  Church  of  Santo  A pojlolo,  near  Monte  Cavalloy 
are  alio  very  pompous  and  magnificent.  Thefe  double 
Stair-Cafes  have  been  imitated  by  divers  Archite&s  ;  they  „ 
led  to  a  Temple  which  (food  on  the  Top  of  the  Mountain, 
as  in  my  Book,  of  Temples  is  fully  fhewn  *  and  this  is  the 
laft  Defign  of  this  fort  of  Stair-Cafes. 


CHAP.  XXIX. 

Concerning  Roofs. 


WHEN  we  have  carried  the  Walls  as  high  as  we  are 
determined  they  ihall  go,  when  we  have  made  the 
Vaults,  laid  the  Joifts  of  the  Floors,  brought  up  the  Stair- 
Cafes,  and,  in  fhort,  done  every  Thing  which  we  have  al¬ 
ready  taken  Notice  of,  in  the  next  Place  we  muft  raife  the 
Roof,  which,  as  it  embraces  all  the  Parts  of  the  Fabrick, 
and  prefles  the  Walls  thereof  equally  with  its  Weight,  is 
by  that  Means  a  kind  of  Bandage  to  the  whole,  and  ferves 
not  only  to  Ihelter  fuch  as  live  in  the  Houfe  from  Rain, 
Snow,  the  Sun  s  burning  Rays,  and  the  Vapours  which  arife 
in  the  Night,  but  is  alfo  of  great  Service  to  the  whole 
Edifice,  as  it  carries  off  the  Rain  from  the  Walls,  which  y 
altho’  it  be  imagined  of  but  imall  Detriment  to  the  Fabrick, 
will,  notwithftanding,  in  Procels  of  Time,  be  found  to  be 
very  prejudicial  to  it.  Vitruvius  tells  us,  that  when  the 

S  World 


7o  VALLAD10' s 

I 

World  was  young,  Men  made  the  Roofs  of  their  Houfes 
flat,  but  afterwards  finding  that  this  did  not  prote£f  and 
defend  them  from  the  Injuries  of  the  Weather,  Neceflity  com¬ 
pelled  them  to  raife  them  in  the  Middle,  and  make  them 
flope.  Thefe  Roofs  muff  be  made  more  or  lefs  fhelving, 
according;  as  the  Climate  is  either  hot  or  cold  :  For  which 
Reafon,  in  Germany ,  where  the  Snow  falls  in  great  Quan¬ 
tities,  the  Roofs  are  made  very  fharp,  and  are  covered  with 
Shingles,  or  little  thin  Pieces  of  Wood,  or  elfe  with  very 
thin  Tiles  *  for  otherwife  the  Weight  of  the  Snow  would 
crufh  them.  But  thofe  who  live  in  gentle  and  moderate 
Climates,  lhould  raife  their  Roofs  with  Grace  and  Polite- 
nefi,  and  to  fuch  an  Altitude  as  that  the  Rain  may  eafily 
roll  off.  The  Breadth  of  the  Place  to  be  rooffed  therefore 
mufi:  be  divided  into  nine  Parts,  two  whereof  fhall  be  the 
Pitch  ;  for  if  it  were  made  of  one  fourth  of  the  Breadth,  the 
Roof  would  be  too  fharp,  fo  that  the  Tiles  would  fcarce 
cleave  ;  and  if  they  were  made  but  of  a  fifth  Part,  the 
Roof  would  be  too  flat,  whereby  the  fuper-incumbent 
Weight  of  the  Tiles,  Shingles,  and  Snows,  would  prefs  too 
much  upon  it.  Gutters  are  ufually  made  all  round  the 
Houle,  into  which  the  Water  that  falls  from  the  Tiles  is 
conveyed  away  by  Spouts  at  a  confiderable  Diftance  from 
the  Walls.  The  Gutters  mufi:  have  a  Foot  and  a  half  of 
Wall  over  them,  which  will  not  only  keep  them  in  much 
ftronger,  but  likewife  preferve  the  Timber  in  the  Roof  from 
any  Damage  which  the  Rains  might  otherwife  occafion. 
There  are  divers  Methods  of  framing  the  Timber  in  the 
Roof ;  but  when  the  Middle  Walls  uphold  the  Joifts,  they 
are  raifed  with  Eafe  ;  which  Method  I  very  much  approve 
of,  becaufe  the  exterior  Walls  are  very  little  prefled  there¬ 
by,  and  becaufe  the  Roof  wTould  be  in  no  manner  of  Dan¬ 
ger,  altho’  the  End  of  fome  of  the  Idifts  lhould  happen  to 
decay 


> 


FINIS. 


THE 

SECOND  BOOK 

O  F 

PA  L  L  A  D  1  Os 

K 

ARCHITECTURE. 

In  which  are  contained. 


The  De  signs  of  feveral  Houfes  ere&ed  by 
himfelf  either  in  Town  or  Country. 


WITH 


# 


Divers  other  Defigns  of  the  Manner  of  Building  formerly 
pra&ifed  amongft  the  Greeks  and  Romans . 


Tranllated  from  the  Italian;  and  the  Designs  carefully 
copied  by  B.  C  o  L  E,  Engraver, 


LONDON: 

Printed  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  M.DCC.XXXVL 


1 


■ 


•\* 

A 


•  > 


<r  i 

■ 


4  f  O 


<  / 


t 

h  j 


*■ 


»  r 


f  _  s  ,  .  .■• 


•  *  V  }  k 


.  /i,  J.  .  ■>  *  -  t, 


i.  I  :  >  .J.  d:4  / 

;  H  ■  . 


I,  T  I  .1f/£ 


■  . 


I 


>  \  \  'ATI-  •  '  r’oft  /  >' 

r  I  ?)  " 


• : 


• . . 


•  i 


o  ,  i 


SECOND  BOOK. 

CHAP.  I. 

Concerning  the  Beauty ,  Conformahlenefs,  Symme¬ 
try,  and  "Proportion  'which  ought  to  he  obferved 
in  all  private  Edifices. 

HAVE  already  treated  of  all  fuch  Things  as  I 
thought  moft  requifite  to  be  pra£Hfed  in  the 
Ere&ion  of  publick  and  private  Edifices,  in  or¬ 
der  to  make  them  ornamental,  commodious, 
and  lafting,  I  have  alio  laid  iomething  relating 
to  the  Conveniencies  of  private  Gentlemen’s  Seats  $  of  which 
I  intend  to  fpeak  more  fully,  and  at  large,  in  this  Second  Book* 
And  forafmuch  as  we  generally  call  a  Houfe  commodious 
when  it  is  adapted  and  made  fuitable  to  the  Dignity  of  its 
Mafter,  and  not  only  all  the  Parts  are  proportioned  to  the 
Whole,  but  each  Part  has  an  exa£t  Symmetry  with  one  ano¬ 
ther  ;  an  Architect  muft  principally  obferve  therefore,  what 

T  Vitruvius 


74  PALLADIO’ s 

Vitruvius  has  recommended  to  him  in  his  Firft  and  Sixth  Book, 
viz,  that  when  he  builds  for  a  Perfon  of  Diftindtion,  and 
particularly  for  one  who  is  in  publick  Employ,  he  muft  build 
his  Palace  with  Portico’s,  Galleries,  and  fpacious  magnifi¬ 
cent  Halls  richly  adorned  ;  thatfuch  as  attend  about  Bufinefs, 
or  to  pay  their  Compliments  to  the  Owner  may  be  commo- 
dioufly  received,  and  be  pleafed  and  amufed  whilft  they 
wait  for  him.  But  when  he  builds  for  one  of  a  meaner  Sta¬ 
tion,  a  Medium  muft  be  obferved,  as  well  in  the  Extent 
and  Form  of  the  Edifice  as  in  the  Decorations  and  Expence. 
The  Houfes  of  fudges,  Counlellors,  &c,  muft  alfo  have 
commmodious  Places  to  walk  in,  and  where  their  Clients 
may  wait  without  being  reftlefs  and  impatient.  Mer¬ 
chants  Houfes  muft  have  Warehoufes,  and  other  Apart¬ 
ments  expofed  to  the  North,  wherein  their  Goods  and  other 
Commodities  may  be  commodioufly  kept  ;  and  thofe  Places 
muft  be  fo  ordered,  that  the  Mafters  may  have  no  Occafion 
to  apprehend  any  Danger  from  the  Idfults  of  Robbers.  Such 
a  Proportion  muft  alfo  be  obferved,  that  every  Member  of 
the  Edifice  may  agree  with  the  Whole  ;  fo  that  either  in 
great,  fmall,  or  moderate  Edifices,  the  Parts  may  be  dis¬ 
cerned  to  be  great,  fmall,  or  moderate,  fuitable  to  their 
various  Extents :  For,  doubtlefs,  it  would  be  no  fmall  Fault, 
and  a  Thing  very  difagreeable,  if  in  a  large  Building  all 
the  Halls  and  Rooms  were  fmall  ;  or  if  in  a  fmall  Edifice 
two  or  three  fpacious  Apartments  fhould  take  up  the  Whole. 
A  due  Regard  therefore  (as  I  faid  before)  muft  be  had  to 
the  Dignity  and  Diftindlion  of  the  Perlon  who  builds,  more 
than  to  his  Fortune,  and  his  Houfe  muft  be  made  fuitable 
to  his  Rank  and  Degree,  which  being  agreed  upon,  the 
Parts  of  the  Edifice  muft  be  fo  difpofed  that  they  all  may 
agree  with  the  Whole,  and  each  with  one  another,  with 
fuch  Decorations  as  are  fuitable  to  them :  But  it  very  often 
happens  that  the  Architect  is  under  an  Obligation  to  follow 
the  Fancy  of  the  Perfon  who  employs  him,  and  not  the  Dic¬ 
tates  of  his  own  Genius  or  Inclination. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


75 


CHAP.  II. 


Concerning  the  Compartition,  or  Diflrilution  of 
Chambers  and  other  apartments. 

T  I  ^  O  make  Buildings  commodious  for  Families,  (with- 
&  out  which  no  body  can  approve  of  them)  great 
Care  muft  be  taken  not  only  with  refpedt  to  the  principal 
Parts  of  them,  viz.  the  Entries,  Halls,  Courts,  great  Rooms, 
and  light  Stair-Cafes,  which  muft  be  made  fpacious  and  ea- 
fy  to  go  up  and  down,  but  alfo  that  the  meaneft  and  leaft 
graceful  of  them  may  be  fttuated  advantageoufly  to  ferve  the 
other  more  fpacious  aud  confiderable  Apartments  :  For  as 
we  fee  in  the  human  Body  fome  curious  and  beautiful  Mem¬ 
bers,  and  others  again  as  difagreeable  and  deformed,  which 
laft  however  are  very  advantageous  and  ferviceable  to  the 
firft,  and  without  which  they  could  not  fubfift  ;  fo  fome 
Parts  of  an  Edifice  muft  make  a  beautiful  and  pompous 
Appearance,  and  others  be  incurious  and  inelegant,  with¬ 
out  which  the  principal  ones  could  not  be  fo  conlpicuous  as 
they  ought,  but  would  rather  lofe  fome  Part  of  their  Gran¬ 
deur  and  Perfedtion.  But  as  our  all-wife  Creator  has  or¬ 
dered  and  difpofed  the  Members  of  the  human  Body  fo,  as  to 
make  the  moft  beautiful  of  them  to  be  the  moft  expofed  to 
View,  and  concealing  thofe  which  are  lefs  agreeable  ;  lo  we 
muft  order  and  difpofe  an  Edifice  in  fuch  a  Manner  as  that 
the  moft  noble  and  beautiful  Parts  of  it  be  the  moft  expofed  to 
all  Spedfators,  and  the  lefs  agreeable  thrown  into  By-places, 
and  removed  as  much  as  poffible  from  publick  View  ;  be- 
caufe  the  Refuge  of  the  Houfe,  and  whatever  may  pro¬ 
duce  any  ill  Effect  or  Incumbrance,  ought  to  be  carried 
thither.  And  for  this  Reafon  the  Cellars,  Wood-houfes, 
Pantries,  Kitchen,  Servant’s  Halls,  Landries,  Ovens,  and 
other  Offices,  which  are  for  ever  in  Ufe,  fihould,  in  my 
Opinion,  be  placed  in  the  lower  Part  of  the  Edifice,  and 

which, 


7  <5  PALLADIO’* 

which,  for  the  Generality,  fhould  be  ordered  a  little  under 
Ground.  There  are  two  Advantages  that  attend  this  Dif- 
tribution  :  the  firft  is,  that  the  Apartment  above  is  alto¬ 
gether  free  from  the  EmbarralTments  or  Incumbrances  be¬ 
fore-mentioned  ;  and  the  fecond,  which  is  of  equal  Impor¬ 
tance  with  the  former,  is,  that  the  faid  Apartment  is  there¬ 
by  much  more  wholfom,  the  Floor  thereof  being  free  from 
the  Moifture  of  the  Ground,  befides  that  its  being  high 
renders  it  more  beautiful,  and  contributes  towards  a  more 
agreeable  Profpedh  Care  muft  be  taken  in  the  next  Place, 
that  in  the  reft  of  the  Edifice  there  be  large,  moderate,  or 
middle-fiz’d,  and  fmall  Rooms,  and  that  they  be  all  con¬ 
tiguous  one  to  another,  for  the  better  Communication  be¬ 
tween  them.  Convenient  Partitions  muft  likewife  be  con¬ 
trived  for  Clofets,  Libraries,  PIorfe-Furniture,  and  other 
Things  which  are  in  daily  Ufe,  and  which  would  appear 
very  indecent  in  a  Bed-Chamber,  Dining-Room,  or  other 
Place  fet  apart  for  the  Reception  of  Strangers.  It  is  alfo 
requifite  that  the  Summer- Rooms  be  fpacious,  and  open  to 
the  North  ;  and  the  Winter  ones  fmall,  and  expofed  to  the 
South  and  Weft,  becaufe  in  Summer  the  Air  and  Shade  is 
very  agreeable,  and  in  Winter  the  Sun  ;  befides,  little 
Rooms  are  eafier  warmed  than  large  ones.  But  the  Rooms 
intended  for  Spring  and  Autumn  ought  to  look  towards 
the  Eaft ,  and  have  their  Profped):  towards  Greens  and  Gar¬ 
dens.  Studies  and  Clofets  fhould  likewife  have  the  fame 
Profpedt,  becaufe  the  Morning  is  the  beft  Time  for  Amufe- 
ment  in  fuch  Places.  All  the  Rooms  in  general,  either 
large,  moderate,  or  fmall,  ought  to  be  fo  difpofed  or  con¬ 
trived,  that  (as  I  have  already  obferved)  every  Part  of  the 
Edifice  may  anfwer  one  to  the  other,  and  the  whole  Con¬ 
texture  fhew  fuch  a  Convenience  and  Proportion  between 
all  its  Parts,  as  may  render  it  graceful  and  agreeable. 
But  becaufe  it  generally  happens  that  in  Cities  either 
the  Party-Walls,  the  Streets,  or  publick  Places  confine 
and  reftrain  an  Archite<ft  within  certain  Limits,  beyond 
which  he  has  no  Power  to  go  *  NecefTity  therefore 

obliges 


ARCHITECTURE.  77 

obliges  him  to  fait  himfelf  according  to  the  Situation  of  the 
Place  :  And  on  thole  Occafions,  one  may  receive  fome  Be¬ 
nefit,  I  humbly  conceive,  from  the  Plans  and  Elevations 
which  I  am  now  going  about  to  give  *  and  which  may  like- 
wife  ferve  as  Examples  for  the  Illufiration  of  what  I  have 
already  laid  in  my  Firffc  Book. 

*  This  Plate  reprefents  half  a  Vicentine  Foot,  half  a 
French  Foot,  and  half  an  Englijh  Foot. 

All  the  following  Draughts  have  been  made  and  meaiu- 
red  according  to  the  Vicentine  Foot,  which  is  here  divided 
into  twelve  Inches,  and  every  Inch  into  twelve  Parts,  as 
are  alfo  the  French  and  Englijh  Foot. 

N.  B.  That  the  French  Foot,  generally  called  Fie  deRoy , 
is  equal  to  eleven  Inches  of  the  Vicentine  Foot,  and  the 
Englijh  one  makes  only  ten  Inches  and  a  quarter  of  the  fame. 


CHAP.  III. 

Concerning  the  Erection  of  Houses  in 

T  O  W  N  s . 

I  Do  not  queftion,  but  fuch  as  ffiall  look  upon  the  Edi¬ 
fices  of  which  I  am  going  to  give  the  Draughts  in  this 
Book,  and  fuch  as  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  introduce  a 
new  Mode,  efpecially  into  the  Art  of  Artichedfure  (where¬ 
in  alrnofi:  every  one  thinks  himfelf  a  Matter)  will  allow  me 
to  be  very  happy,  that  I  have  met  with  fuch  Perions  as  were 
generous,  judicious,  and  ready,  and  willing  enough  to  heark¬ 
en  to  and  approve  my  Reafons  *  and  afterwards  to  relin- 
quiffi  that  old  Mode  of  Building,  which  is  neither  uniform 
nor  graceful :  And  indeed  I  delire  to  be  very  thankful  to 
Providence  for  all  his  Mercies,  and  peculiarly  for  giving 
me  an  Opportunity  of  putting  divers  Things  in  Prabfice, 
which  I  had  learnt  by  a  very  induftrious  Enquiry,  and  a  long 
and  laborious  Study.  And  notwithftanding  fome  of  thofe 
Buildings  have  remained  unfiniffied,  yet  it  is  very  eafy  to 

*  Plate  I. 


u 


form 


78  PAL  L  A  D  1  O’ s 

form  a  judgment  of  what  the  Whole  would  have  been,  by 
what  is  actually  compleated,  I  have  fet  down  the  Names 
of  the  Proprietors,  and  the  Places  where  the  Edifices  ftand, 
to  their  refpedfive  Draughts  ;  that  fuch  as  are  defirous,  may 
fee  how  they  have  fucceeded  in  the  Operation.  After  this 
it  is  very  proper,  in  my  Opinion,  to  acquaint  the  Reader, 
that  in  the  Order  of  my  Draughts  I  have  had  no  Regard  to 
the  Rank  or  Quality  of  the  Perfons,  every  one  of  them  be¬ 
ing  Noble  and  Illuftrious,  and  I  ranged  them  only  as  they 
came  firft  to  my  Remembrance. 

But  it  is  now  Time  to  proceed  to  our  Buildings,  the  firft 
whereof  is  at  *  Udena ,  the  Metropolis  of  Friuli.  It  was  e- 
redfed  from  the  Foundations  by  Signior  Floriano  ^ dntonini , 
a  Gentleman  of  the  fame  Town.  The  Ground-floor  Wall 
of  the  Fore-front  is  Ruftick  ;  and  the  Columns  of  the  Vefti- 
bule  and  Gallery  backwards  are  Ionick.  The  firfi:  Chambers 
are  arched  ;  and  the  Arches  of  the  largeft  are  made  after 
the  firfi:  Manner  I  fpoke  of,  relating  to  the  Arches  or  Vaults 
which  are  in  fuch  Places  as  are  longer  than  broad.  The 
Chambers  of  the  fecond  Story  are  ceiled,  and  are  fomewhat 
broader  than  the  lower  ones,  becaufe  of  the  Decreafe  of  the 
Walls  •  the  Altitude  of  the  Ceilings  being  proportionate  to 
their  Breadth.  There  are  other  Apartments  higher,  which 
may  ferve  as  Garrets.  The  Hall  is  fo  lofty  that  it  reaches 
to  the  very  Roof.  The  Kitchen  is  diftindl:  from  the  Body 
of  the  Houfe  •  but  it  is  very  convenient  notwithftanding. 
Near  the  great  Stairs  is  the  Neceflary  Houfe,  which  does 
not  give  any  Offence,  tho’  in  the  Body  of  the  Houfe,  being 
in  a  Place  where  the  Sun  never  enters,  and  having  Vents 
made  in  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Wall  from  the  Bottom  of  the 
Pit  to  the  very  Top  of  the  Houfe,  thro’  which  the  noifom 
Fumes  evaporate. 

At  Vicenza,  on  the  Place  commonly  called  the  JJle ,  Count 
Valerio  Chi  eric  at  0,  an  honourable  Knight  of  the  fame  Town, 
caufed  the  following  Defign  to  be  executed.  This 
Edifice  has  a  great  Portico  or  Gallery  in  the  lower  Part, 
which  takes  up  the  whole  Fore-front  of  it.  The  Bafe  of  the 

*  Plate  II.  t  Plate  III. 

firft 


ARCHITECTURE. 


firft  Order  is  five  Foot  above  the  Ground,  which  is  fo  ordered 
that  the  Cellars  may  be  underneath  it,  as  alfo  all  the  other 
Offices  deligned  for  the  Convenience  of  the  Houfe  ;  which 
had  they  been  quite  under  Ground,  had  not  fucceeded  fo  well, 
becaufe  of  the  adjacent  River,  and  that  thereby  the  upper 
Stories  fhould  be  more  airy,  and  have  a  more  agreeable  Pro- 
fpett.  The  Vaults  or  Arches  of  the  great  Rooms  are  raifed 
alter  our  firft:  Method,  or  firft  Rate  of  Arches  •  the  leffer 
are  arched  fhell-like,  and  are  as  high  as  thofe  of  the  largeft 
Sort:  The  Clofets  are  alfo  arched,  and  have  Mezzanino’s  or 
half  Stories  above  them.  Every  Arch  is  embellilhed  with 
Compartitions  of  Fret-work  accurately  wrought  by  Bartolo¬ 
meo  Ridolji ,  a  Sculptor  of  Verona ,  with  divers  valuable  Pieces 
of  Painting  done  by  Domenico  Rizzo ,  and  Battijla  Venetiano , 
two  celebrated  Artifts.  The  Hall  ftands  in  the  Middle  of 
the  Fore-front  above,  and  takes  up  the  Middle  of  the  Gal¬ 
lery  beneath.  Its  Altitude  reaches  to  the  Roof  of  the  Houfe  ; 
and  forafmuch  as  it  projedts  a  little  outwards,  its  Angles  are 
fupported  by  double  Pillars.  On  each  Side  of  this  Hall  are 
Galleries,  the  Cielings  of  which  are  embellilhed  with  Pic¬ 
tures  that  are  very  curious,  and  make  a  pompous  Shew.  The 
firft:  Order  of  the  Fore-front  is  Dorick ,  and  the  lecond  Ionick . 
The  following  Defign  *  reprefents  Part  of  the  Fore-front 
enlarged. 

The  next  Draughts  $  are  of  Count  Ijjeppo  de  Portis 
Houle,  a  noble  Family  in  the  fame  City.  This  Edifice 
fronts  two  large  Streets,  and  for  that  Realon  has  two  En¬ 
tries  or  Veftibules  with  four  Pillars  each,  which  bear  an 
Arch  to  fecure  the  pondrous  Weight  that’s  laid  upon  them. 
The  Rooms  of  the  firft:  Story  are  arched  ;  the  Altitude  of 
thole  on  the  Sides  of  the  Veftibule  are  according  to  our  le¬ 
cond  Mode  of  Arches.  The  Rooms  of  the  fecond  Order,  as 
well  as  thole  of  the  firft:  Story,  are  all  cieled  and  painted, 
and  adorned  with  very  rich  Fret-work,  made  by  thofe  cele¬ 
brated  Artifts  before-mentioned  ;  and  the  Pictures  are 


*  Plate  IV.  §  Plate  V. 


made 


So  PALLADIO’ s 

made  by  that  famous  Painter  Paul  Veroneje.  From  each 
of  thefe  Entries  there  is  a  Paffiage  which  leads  into  a  Court 
that  is  to  be  furrounded  with  a  Portico  ;  the  Pillars  whereof 
are  thirty  fix  Feet  and  a  half  high,  which  is  the  whole  of 
the  firft  and  fecond  Stories. 

Behind  are  Pilafters  that  are  one  Foot  and  nine  Inches 
Diameter,  and  they  projedf  outwards  two  thirds,  and  fup- 
port  the  Pavement  of  the  upper  Gallery.  By  this  Court  the 
whole  Houfe  is  divided  into  two  Parts.  The  Fore-part  is 
for  the  Matter  and  hisWomen,  and  the  Back-part  is  intended 
for  the  Accommodation  of  Strangers  •  that  the  one  and  the 
other  may  pafs  too  and  fro  without  any  EmbarralTment  *  a 
Circumftance  which  the  Antients,  and  more  efpecially  the 
Grecians,  had  a  peculiar  Regard  to.  Bettdes,  this  Divifion 
of  a  Houfe  may  be  alfo  very  commodious,  if  at  any  Time 
the  Children,  or  any  of  the  Family,  fhould,  through  Sick- 
nefs,  or  any  other  Emergency,  require  private  Apartments. 
I  placed  the  principal  Stair-cafes  under  the  Portico,  which 
is  diredily  oppofite  to  the  Middle  of  the  Court  ;  that  fuch 
as  go  up  and  down  muff  have  a  Profpedf  of  the  moft  grace¬ 
ful  Part  of  the  Houfe,  and  that  being  in  the  Middle,  they  may 
ferve  the  two  feparate  Parts  of  the  Building.  The  Cellars 
and  other  Offices  are  under  Ground.  The  Stables  diftindt 
from  the  Body  of  the  Houfe,  and  their  Entries  are  made  un¬ 
der  the  Stair-cafes. 

*  The  firft  of  the  two  large  Draughts  reprefents  a  Part 
of  the  Fore-front ;  and  the  fecond,  that  Side  that  fronts  the 
Court. 

§  The  following  Edifice  is  at  Verona ,  which  was  begun 
by  Count  Gianni  Battifta  della  Torre ,  a  Gentleman  of  that 
City,  whofe  Death  prevented  its  being  compleated,  tho’ 
it  was  very  far  advanced.  The  Entries  are  by  the  Sides  of  it, 
where  there  are  Paffiages  ten  Feet  broad,  which  lead  to  the 
Courts  fifty  Feet  long,  and  from  thence  to  an  open  Hall, 
embelliffied  with  four  Pillars,  which  ferve  alfo  to  fupport  and 
fecure  the  upper  Hall.  This  fame  Hall  leads  to  the  Stair- 


*  Plate  VI.  and  VII. 


§  Plate  VIII. 


cafe 


ARCHITECTURE.  81 

cafe,  which  is  of  an  eliptic  Form,  and  open  in  the  Middle. 
The  faid  Courts  are  invironed  with  Balluftrades,  that  are 
even  with  the  fecond  Floor.  The  other  private  Stairs  ferve 
for  a  greater  Conveniency  throughout  the  whole  Houfe. 
This  Compartition  fucceeds  very  well  in  its  Situation,  which 
is  long  and  narrow,  and  one  of  the  Wings  fronts  the  prin¬ 
cipal  Street  of  the  City. 

*  The  following  is  the  Draught  of  an  Edifice  at  Vicenza , 
which  belongs  to  Count  OBaviano  de  Thieni ,  and  was  be¬ 
gun  by  Count  Mare  Antonio.  This  Houle  being  lituated 
in  the  Middle  of  the  Town,  near  the  Market-place,  I 
thought  it  was  very  convenient  to  leave  Room  for  Shops  on 
that  Side  which  fronts  the  Market  ;  for  the  Architect 
fhould  always  have  an  Eye  to  the  Advantage  of  thole  who 
employ  him,  and  are  at  the  Expence  of  the  Edifice,  when 
the  Extent  of  the  Ground  will  commodioully  admit  of  it. 
Every  Shop  has  a  Half-ftory  over  it,  for  the  Ufe  of  the 
Shop-keeper,  and  the  Mailer’s  Apartments  are  over  them. 
This  Houfe  Hands  in  a  fort  of  an  Illand,  as  it  were,  being 
furrounded  by  four  Streets.  The  chief  Entry,  or  Mafter- 
Gate  (if  we  may  be  allowed  the  Exprelfion)  has  a  Gallery 
before  it,  and  fronts  the  chief  Street  of  the  Town.  The 
great  Hall  is  to  be  above  it,  and  will  project  as  far  out  as 
the  Piazza  underneath.  In  the  two  Wings  are  the  two 
Entries  with  Pillars  in  the  Middle,  which  ferve  not  only 
as  a  Decoration,  but  to  ftrengthen  the  upper  Part,  and 
render  its  Breadth  proportionable  to  its  Height.  By  thele 
Entries  we  pafs  to  a  Court  furrounded  with  a  Piazza,  of 
which  the  firft  Row  of  Pilafters  are  Ruftick,  and  the  fe¬ 
cond  of  the  Com  polite  Order*  The  Rooms  are  odfangulat 
at  the  four  Corners,  and  have  a  very  good  Effedf,  and  are 
both  beautiful  and  convenient.  The  Chambers  that  are 
now  compleated  have  been  embellilhed  with  curious  Stuc- 
catures  made  by  Alejfandro  Vi  t  tori  a ,  and  Bartolomeo  RidolJij 


82  PALLADIO’ S 

and  painted  by  slnjelmo  Canera  and  Bernardino  India , 
both  of  Verona ,  celebrated  Matters  in  their  Profeflion.  The 
Cellars  and  fuch  other  Places  of  the  like  Nature  are  under 
Ground,  becaufe  the  Edifice  is  fituated  in  the  higheft  Part 
of  the  Town,  where  there  is  no  great  Danger  of  Water. 

*  The  firft  of  the  two  large  Draughts  which  follow,  re- 
prefents  a  Part  of  the  Fore-front  of  the  Houfe,  the  fecond 
that  Side  which  fronts  the  Court. 

The  Counts  Valmarana ,  of  an  illuftrious  Family  of  that 
Place,  have  alfo  built  after  the  following  Defigns,  T  not 
only  for  their  own  Credit  and  Convenience,  but  alio  for 
the  Honour  and  Glory  of  their  Country.  They  have  omit¬ 
ted  nothing  which  might  be  defired  to  enrich  fuch  an  Edi¬ 
fice,  either  for  Stuccature  or  Painting.  There  is  a  Court 
in  the  Middle,  about  which  there  is  a  Corridor  with  Balluf- 
ters,  leading  from  the  Fore-part  to  that  which  is  behind  the 
Court,  which  divides  the  Houfe  into  two  Parts.  The 
Chambers  of  the  firft  Floor  are  arched,  and  the  upper  ones 
are  cieled,  of  which  the  Altitude  is  proportionable  to  their 
Breadth.  The  Garden  before  the  Stables  is  120  Feet  long 
by  60  Feet  wide.  This  Defcription  is  fufficient,  in  my  O- 
pinion,  for  what  relates  to  this  Houfe,  all  the  reft  being 
with  Eafe  difcerned  in  the  Plan  of  it,  where  I  have  let  down 
the  Meafure  and  Size  of  each  Part,  in  the  fame  Manner  as 
in  thofe  which  precede. 

§  The  following  Draught  is  one  half  of  the  Fore-front 
on  a  large  Scale. 

Amongft  feveral  worthy  Gentlemen  of  Vicenza ,  there  is 
Signior  Paolo  sirmericoy  who  was  Referendary  to  the  Popes 
Pius  the  Fourth  and  Fifth,  and  juftly  deferved  to  be  made 
a  Citizen  of  Rome  ;  and  fo  did  all  his  Family  for  his  fake. 
This  Gentleman,  after  having  travelled  a  long  Time  for  his 
Improvement,  determining  to  fettle  at  laft  in  his  own  Coun¬ 
try,  after  the  Deceafe  of  all  his  Relations,  chofe  to  refide 


*  Plate  X.  and  XI  f  Plate  XII.  §  Plate  XIII. 


at 


ARCHITECTURE.  83 

at  a  Country-houfe,  which  was  fituate  on  a  Hill,  within 
lefs  than  half  a  Mile  of  the  Town,  where  he  fince  has  eredl- 
ed  the  following  Edifice  *,  which  I  have  not  ranged  among 
the  Country-houfes,  as  it  is  adjacent  to  the  Town,  and,  in¬ 
deed,  properly  belongs  to  it.  Jts  Situation  is  as  advan¬ 
tageous  and  pleafant  as  can  be  defired,  being  fituated  on  a 
Hillock  of  a  very  gradual  Afcent  *  at  the  Foot  whereof  runs 
the  Bacchilione ,  a  navigable  River.  On  the  other  Side  it 
is  furrounded  by  feveral  Hills,  which  feem  to  form  a  great 
Theatre,  are  all  of  them  well  cultivated,  very  fertile,  and 
abounding  with  excellent  Fruits  and  Vineyards  ;  fo  that 
having  the  Advantage  of  agreeable  Profpedfs  on  all  Sides, 
fome  indeed  confined,  fome  more  remote,  and  fome  farther 
than  the  Eye  can  reach,  I  have  made  Portico’s  to  all  the 
Fore-fronts  ;  under  which,  and  alfo  the  Hall,  I  have  con¬ 
trived  Rooms  for  the  Service  and  Convenience  of  thole  of 
the  Family.  The  Hall,  which  is  circular,  and  placed  in 
the  Middle  of  the  Edifice,  receives  its  Light  from  the  Top. 
The  Clofets  have  Mezzanitio  s.  Above  the  great  Rooms 
furrounding  the  Hall  (the  Arches  of  which  are  according  to 
our  firfl:  Scheme)  there  is  a  Plat-form  to  walk  on  fifteen 
Feet  and  a  half  broad.  On  the  Pedeftals,  which  fupport 
the  Steps  of  the  four  Portico’s,  are  Images  made  by  Loren¬ 
zo  Vicentlno ,  an  excellent  Statuary. 

Signior  Guiogtio  Capra ,  an  eminent  Inhabitant  of  the  fame 
Town,  for  the  Glory  of  his  Country  more  than  his  own 
Convenience*  has  made  all  the  necelfary  Preparations,  and 
even  begun  to  build  the  following  Defign  f,  which  is  com- 
ffiodioully  fituated,  in  the  principal  Street  of  all  the  Town, 
This  Edifice  is  to  have  Courts,  Galleries,  Halls,  and  Apart¬ 
ments  of  all  forts,  fome  large,  fome  little,  and  others  mid- 
dle-fiz’d.  Its  Form  is  very  agreeable  and  artfully  diverfi- 
fled,  fo  that  it  will  be  pompous  and  magnificent,  luitable 
to  the  Dignity  and  Generoiity  of  its  Mafter. 


4  Place  XIV<  and  XV.  +  Plate  XVh 


C.  *4 


84  P  A  L  L  A  D  1  O’s 

C.  A  little  open  Court. 

D.  Another  little  Court. 

L.  The  great  Court. 

S.  A  Hall  (which  is  fupported  <with  Pillars  underneath  j 
but  as  it  has  none  above ,  it  appears  much  lighter. 

Count  Montano  Barbarano  having  a  commodious  Spot  of 
Ground  to  build  on  in  Htcenza,  I  gave  him,  at  his  Requeft, 
the  following  Defign  *,  which,  as  it  did  not  fuit  the  Place 
well  at  firft,  I  was  forced  to  make  fome  Alterations  in  it  ; 
but  that  Gentleman  having  fince  purchafed  the  Ground  that 
was  then  wanting,  the  firft  Defign  has  been  entirely  exe¬ 
cuted.  The  Stables  and  Servants  Rooms  on  the  one  Side, 
are  anfwerable  to  the  Women’s  Apartment,  to  the  Kitchen, 
and  other  Offices  for  their  particular  Purpofe  on  the  other 
Side,  as  in  the  Draught  very  plainly  appears.  This  Edi¬ 
fice  is  fo  forward,  that  they  are  now  railing  the  Fore-front, 
which  is  made  according  to  the  following  Defign  in  Great  T* 
I  could  not  furnifh  the  Printer  Time  enough  with  the  Plan 
of  the  laft  Draught,  according  to  which  it  was  at  laft  abfo- 
lutely  determined  to  build  it,  and  that  the  Foundations  of 
it  are  already  laid.  The  Entry  has  fome  Pillars,  which 
fupport  an  Arch  for  the  Reafons  already  given.  On  each 
Side  there  are  two  Apartments,  which  are  one  Square  and 
a  half  in  Length  •  at  the  End  whereof  are  two  fquare  ones, 
and  after  them  two  Clofets.  Over-againft  the  Entry  is  a 
Paflage  that  leads  to  a  Portico  towards  the  Court.  On  each 
Side  of  this  Paflage  is  a  Clofet  with  a  Mezzanino  above  it, 
to  which  they  go  by  the  principal  Stair-cafe.  Each  Arch  is 
twenty  one  Feet  and  a  half  high.  The  Hall  above,  and  all 
the  other  Chambers,  except  the  Clofets,  are  cieled,  which 
are  arched  as  high  as  the  Cielings  of  the  Chambers.  The 
Pillars  of  the  Fore-front  have  their  Pedeftals,  and  fupport  a 
Corridor,  to  which  they  enter  by  the  Soffit.  The  Front  is 
not  to  be  after  this  firft  Method,  as  I  before  obferved,  but  as 
it  is  in  the  next  Defign  $  drawn  upon  a  larger  Scale. 

•  Plate  XVII.  t  Plate  XVIII.  §  Ibid. 

CHAR 


ARCHITECTURE.  85 


m 


CHAP.  IV. 

Concerning  the  Tuscan  Atrium  or  Hall. 

HAVING  given  you  the  Deligns  of  fome  Edifices 
which  I  have  eredfed  in  Cities,  I  think  myfelf 
obliged  to  difcharge  my  Promiie,  and  de  fcribe  fome  of  the 
chief  Places  whereof  the  Buildings  of  the  Antients  were 
compofed.  I  fhall  begin  writh  the  Atrium,  or  grand  Hall, 
which  is  one  of  the  principal  Parts,  and  come  afterwards  to 
the  other  adjacent  Parts  of  the  laid  Edifices,  and,  laffly,  to 
their  common  Halls.  Vitruvius ,  in  his  Sixth  Book,  obferves, 
that  the  Antients  had  five  forts  of  thefe  Atriums,  viz.  the 
Tufcan ,  that  which  has  four  Pillars,  the  Corinthian ,  the 
Tejludinated ,  and  that  which  is  open,  of  which  I  intend  to 
take  Notice.  The  Defigns  *  which  follow  are  for  the  Tuf¬ 
can  Atrium.  The  Breadth  of  this  is  proportional  to  the  two 
Thirds  of  its  Length.  The  Breadth  of  the  Record-Room  is 
no  more  than  two  fifths  of  that  of  the  Atrium ,  which  is 
fquare.  From  this  they  pafs  into  the  Perifjlos ,  which  is  a 
Court  encompaffed  with  Columns,  a  Third  longer  than  its 
Breadth.  The  Breadth  of  the  Piazza  or  Portico  (that  is, 
the  Space  from  the  Walls  to  the  Columns)  anfwers  to  the 
Altitude  of  the  Pillars.  Over-againft  the  Wings  of  the 
Atrium  fome  little  Halls  might  be  contrived,  as  they  have 
a  Profpedf  over  the  Gardens  *  and  if  they  are  made  according 
to  the  Reprefentation  in  the  Draught,  their  Pillars  fhould 
be  Ionick ,  about  twenty  Feet  high,  and  then  the  Piazza’s 
would  be  as  broad  as  the  Diftance  between  each  Pillar* 
There  fhould  be  fome  other  Pillars  above  of  the  Corinthian 
Order,  lefs  by  a  fourth  than  thofe  below  *  between  which 
there  ought  to  be  Windows  to  give  Light,  in  Imitation  of 
the  Corinthian  Halls,  as  may  be  feen  hereafter  in  Plate  XXX. 
The  Opening  above  fhould  be  without  any  Cover,  and  en- 


*  Plate  XIX. 


compared 


86  PALLADIO’ s 

compared  with  a  Balluftrade.  More  or  lefs  Lodging  than  I 
have  here  drawn  may  be  made,  in  cafe  the  Ground  will  ad¬ 
mit  of  it,  and  it  will  be  more  commodious  for  the  Owner. 

The  following  Draught  %  upon  a  larger  Scale  reprefents 
this  Atrium. 


A.  Atrium. 

B.  Door  to  the  Record-Room. 

C.  Record-Room. 

D.  Portico  of  the  Periftylos. 

E.  Portico ,  or  Gallery  before  the  Atrium,  which  may  be  call¬ 

ed  the  Veftibule. 

F.  Freeze  and  Cornice  on  the  Bref  -Summer ,  fupporting  the 

Top  of  the  Atrium. 


CHAP.  V. 


Concerning  the  Atrium,  which  has  Four 

Pillars. 


TH  E  following  Delign  ■+•  reprefents  the  Atrium  which 
has  four  Pillars,  the  Length  whereof  being  divided 
into  five  equal  Parts,  the  Breadth  takes  up  three.  The 
Wings  (that  is,  the  Space  between  the  Wall  and  the  Pil¬ 
lars,  which  is  not  included  in  the  Breadth  of  the  Atrium) 
have  in  Breadth  a  fifth  Part  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Pillars. 
The  Pillars  are  Corinthian ,  and  their  Diameter  is  equal  to 
the  Breadth  of  one  half  of  the  Wings.  The  Opening  above 
is  one  third  Part  of  the  Breadth  of  the  faid  Atrium ,  and  the 
Breadth  of  the  Charter-Room  is  half  the  Breadth  of  the  fame 
Atriumy  and  has  the  fame  Length  :  From  which  Atrium 
you  may  pafs  through  the  Charter-Room  into  the  cPerifylos> 
which  is  a  Square  and  a  half  in  Length.  The  Pillars  of  the 
firfi:  Order  are  Dorick ,  and  the  Breadth  of  the  Portico  is 
proportional  to  the  Altitude  of  thofe  Pillars.  Thofe  of  the 


Place  XX.  f  Plate  XXI. 


fecond 


ARCHITECTURE.  87 

fecond  Order  are  Ionick ,  and  a  fourth  Part  lefs  than  the  fird, 
under  which  there  is  a  Pededal,  two  Feet  and  three  Quar¬ 
ters  high. 


A.  Atrium. 

B.  Door  to  the  Charter-room. 

C.  Charter-Room. 

X).  Portico  of  the  Peridylos. 

E.  Chambers  near  the  A- 

trium. 

F.  Portico  through  which 
one  enters  into  the  A- 

trium. 


c  H  A 


G.  IVings  of  the  Atrium. 

H.  Freeze  under  the  Cor¬ 
nice  of  the  Atrium. 

I.  Opening  on  the  Top  of 
the  Atrium,  with  a  Bal- 
lufrade  round  it. 

K.  Solid  above  the  Columns , 

L.  Scale  of  ten  Feet. 


p.  VI. 


Concerning  an  Atrium  that  is  made  after  the 
Corinthian  Fafhion. 


TH  E  Building  which  I  fhall  here  give  you  a  Defcrip- 
tion  of  *,  is  at  Venice ,  in  the  Convent  called  tfie 
Charity ,  which  belongs  to  the  regular  Cannons.  I  have 
endeavoured  to  make  this  Edifice  in  fome  meafure  like  thofe 
of  the  Antients,  and  for  that  Purpofe  I  have  eredfed  a  Co¬ 
rinthian  Atrium  in  it,  the  Length  whereof  is  the  Diagonal 
of  its  Square.  The  Wings  ( that  is ,  the  Spaces  between  the 
fFall  and  the  Pillars )  have  in  Breadth  two  Sevenths  of  the 
Length  of  the  Atrium,  that  is,  one  for  every  Wing.  The 
Pillars  are  Compojite ,  and  are  three  Feet  and  a  half  in  Dia¬ 
meter,  and  thirty  five  Feet  high.  The  Opening  in  the 
Middle  is  one  third  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Atrium ,  taken 
between  the  Pillars.  There  is  a  Terrafs  above  the  Atrium , 
which  is  level  to  the  third  Order  of  the  Convent,  where  the 
Cells  or  Apartments  of  the  Cannons  are.  The  Vedry  is,  on 
one  Side,  contiguous  to  the  Atrium ,  round  about  which 
there  is  a  Dorick  Cornice,  which  bears  up  an  arched  Ciel- 


*  Plate  XXII. 


mg. 


88 


V  A  L  L  A  D  10' s 

ing.  The  Pilla  rs  which  are  there,  fupport  that  Side  of 
the  Convent’s  Wall,  which,  in  the  upper  Part,  divides  the 
Aparments  or  Cells  from  the  Galleries.  The  Veftry  (hands 
in  the  Place  where  the  Antients  kept  the  Statues  of  their 
Anceftors,  and  which  was  known  by  the  Name  of  the 
Record-Room  *  tho’,  to  comply  with  the  Convenience  of 
the  Place,  I  have  made  the  Wings  of  the  Atrium  ferve  for 
that  purpofe,  over-againft  the  Veftry  in  the  Chapter-Hall 
anfwerable  to  one  another.  On  the  Side  contiguous  to  the 
Church,  there  is  an  Eltptical ,  or  oval  Stair-Cafe,  which  is 
open  in  the  Middle,  and  very  commodious  and  agreeable. 
From  the  Atrium  you  may  enter  into  the  Convent,  where 
there  are  three  Orders  of  Pillars  one  over  the  other.  The 
Firft  is  Dorick ,  and  its  Pillars  project  more  than  one  half 
from  the  Pilafters.  The  Second  is  Iomck)  and  the  Pillars 
are  one  fifth  Part  lefs  in  their  Altitude  than  the  former. 
The  Third  is  Corinthian ,  and  decreafes  likewife  a  fifth  in 
the  Altitude  of  the  Second.  In  this  laft  Range,  there  is  a 
contiguous  Wall  inftead  of  Pilafters  •  and  over  the  Center 
of  the  Arches  of  the  two  firft  Orders,  there  are  Windows 
which  give  Light  to  the  Entries  of  the  Cells,  whofe  arched 
Cielings  are  made  of  Cane,  to  difcharge  the  Walls.  Over- 
againft  the  Atrium  and  the  Convent,  beyond  the  Stair-Cale, 
is  the  Refecftory,  or  large  Dining-Room,  which  is  two 
Squares  in  Length,  and  raifed  to  the  third  Story  of  the 
Convent.  It  has  a  Gallery  on  each  Side,  and  under  it  a 
Cellar  made  in  the  Shape  of  a  Ciftern,  that  no  Water  may 
come  into  it.  At  one  End  are  the  Kitchen,  the  Ovens,  the 
Poultry- Yard,  the  Wood-houfe,  the  Laundry,  and  a  pretty 
fine  Garden  ;  at  the  other  End  are  other  Conveniencies. 
This  Building  has  forty  four  Rooms,  and  forty  fix  Cellars, 
including  the  Apartments  for  Strangers,  and  other  Places 
for  feveral  Ufes. 

The  firft  *  of  the  following  Draughts  is  a  Part  of  the 
Atrium  drawn  at  large,  and  the  fecond  -f  is  a  Part  of  the 
Cloifter. 


CHAP. 


Plate  XXIII.  t  Plate  XXIV. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


89 


CHAP.  VII. 

Concerning  the  T  f,  s  t  i  t  u  d  i  n  a  t  e  d  Atrium, 
and  the  private  Houfes  of  the  antient  Romans. 

BESIDES  the  different  Forms  of  Atriums  we  have 
before  fpoken  of,  there  was  one  very  much  in  ufe  a- 
mong  the  Antients  which  they  called  Tejiitudivated,  that  is, 
after  the  Form  of  a  Tortoife  •  and  as  what  Vitruvius  fays 
of  it  is  very  difficult  and  obfcure,  and  confequently  re¬ 
quires  a  particular  Obfervation,  I  fhall  therefore  inform 
you  with  what  I  think  on  that  Subjedf,  adding  alfo  the 
Situation  and  Difpofition  of  the  OEques ,  or  great  Halls  of 
the  Chanceries,  Refectories,  Baths,  &c.  fo  that  the  follow¬ 
ing  Cut  *  fhall  reprefent  all  the  Parts  of  a  private  Houfe, 
every  one  in  its  Place,  according  to  Vitruvius. 

The  Length  of  the  Atrium  is  equal  to  the  Diagonal  of 
its  Square,  and  has  its  full  Breadth  in  Height,  which  rea¬ 
ches  as  far  as  the  Summer  or  Architrave  of  the  Roof. 
The  Rooms  on  the  Sides  are  fix  Feet  lefs  in  Height,  and 
above  the  Walls  which  feparate  them  from  the  Atrium , 
there  are  Pilafters  which  bear  the  Roof  of  the  laid  Atri¬ 
um.  Between  thefe  Pilafters  there  are  fome  Apertures  or 
Windows  which  give  Light  to  the  faid  Atrium  ;  for  the 
Chambers  have  an  open  Plat-form  or  Terrafs  above  them. 
The  Record-Room  is  oppofite  to  the  Entry,  and  is  two 
Fifths  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Atrium .  This  Place  ferved, 
as  I  obferved  before,  to  put  in  the  Images,  or  Titles  of 
their  Anceftors.  A  little  further  one  finds  the  Periftylos , 
about  which  are  Piazza’s  that  are  the  Height  of  the  Co¬ 
lumns.  The  Chambers  are  of  the  fame  Breadth,  and  their 


Height 


*  PJarc  XXV. 


z 


9o  PA  L  L  A  D  I  0’ s 

Height  to  the  Imports  of  the  Arches  is  equal  to  their  Breadth, 
as  the  Arches  have  in  Height  the  r  third  Part  of  their  Dia¬ 
meter.  Vitruvius  has  defcribed  feveral  forts  of  OEques , 
which  were  great  Halls  or  Saltons,  for  Feafting  and  other 
Recreations,  and  wherein  alfo  the  Women  did  their  Work. 
Some  of  thefe  were  called  Tetrafyli ,  becaufe  they  had  in 
them  four  Pillars.  Others  were  called  Corinthian,  which 
were  furrounded  with  Semi-columns.  The  Egyptian  ones  had 
over  and  above  the  firft  Rows  of  Columns,  a  Wall,  which  enclo- 
fed  them  with  Half-columns  placed  diredfly  above  the  lower 
ones,  and  a  fourth  Part  lefs  :  Between  thefe  Pillars  were  the 
Windows  that  gave  Light  to  the  Hall.  The  Height  of  the 
Galleries  that  furrounded  it  did  not  exceed  the  Columns  of 
the  firft  Order  ;  and  above  all  there  was  a  Plat-form  with  a 
Corridor,  and  an  Elbow-rail  round  the  Whole.  I  fhall  give 
a  Defign  of  each  of  thefe  kinds  of  Halls  feparately.  The 
fquare  Halls  were  to  take  the  Cool  in  during  the  Summer 
and  had  commonly  the  Profpedf  of  Gardens,  or  other  Ver¬ 
dures.  They  had  alfo  another  kind  of  Halls  that  were  cal¬ 
led  Cizicenis,  and  which  were  alfo  defigned  for  the  above- 
faid  Ufes.  The  Chanceries  and  Libraries  were  generally  on 
the  Eajl  Side,  as  alfo  the  Triclinia  or  Eating-rooms.  There 
were  likewife  Bagnio’s  for  Men  and  Women,  which  I  have 
reprefented  in  the  further  Part  of  the  Houfe. 

A.  Atrium. 

B.  Record-room. 

C.  Periftylos. 

D.  Halls  after  the  Corin¬ 

thian  Manner. 

E.  A  Hall  with  four  Co¬ 

lumns. 

The  following  Defign  *  is  for  the  Atrium ,  from  a  larger 

Scale. 


F.  Baflica. 

G.  Apartments  for  the  Sum¬ 

mer. 

H.  Chambers. 

I.  Libraries. 


*  Plate  XXVI. 


A.  Atrium. 


ARCHITECTURE, 


5>i 


A.  Atrium. 

B.  Record-room . 

C.  Piazza  about  the  inner 

Court . 

D.  The  inner  Court. 

E.  Door-way  to  the  Record- 

room. 

F.  Part  of  the  Corinthian 

Hall. 

G.  Galleries  or  Piazza's. 


H.  Piazza  before  the  Atrium. 

I.  Chamber  about  the  Atrium. 


K. 


L. 


M. 


Summers  making  the 
Freeze  oj  the  Entabla¬ 
ture  within. 

IV in  daws  which  give  Light 
to  the  Atrium. 

The  Flat  above  the  FHalls 
of  the  Atrium. 


CHAP.  VIII. 


Concerning  the  i !  a  l  i.  s  with  Four  Columns. 


TH  E  Defign  *  following  is  of  that  fort  of  Hall  called 
Tetrafylos ,  becaufe  it  had  four  Columns.  It  was 
made  fquare,  and  the  Column  ferved  not  only  to  proportion 
the  Breadth  to  the  Height,  but  alfo  to  make  the  upper  Place 
ftill  the  firmer,  which  is  what  I  have  pradtifed  in  moft  of  my 
Edifices,  as  appears  both  in  the  Defigns  which  I  have  alrea¬ 
dy  given  and  thofe  that  are  to  follow. 


CHAP.  IX. 


Concerning  the  Corinthian  Halls. 

TH  E  Corinthian  Halls  were  of  two  kinds  :  The  firfr 
had  their  Columns  only  laid  on  the  Floor,  as  appears 
by  the  firft  Defign  T  ;  and  the  laid  were  laid  on  Pedeftals, 
as  in  the  fecond  §  :  But  the  Columns  in  both  were  near  the 
Wall,  and  the  Architrave,  Freeze,  and  Cornice  were  com- 
pofed  of  Stuc,  orelfe  Wood,  and  there  was  but  one  Row  of 
Pillars.  The  Cielings  were  either  Semi-circular,  or  fo  flat  as 


*  Plate  XXVII.  f  Plate  XXVIII. 


§  Plate  XXIX. 


to 


92  P  J  L  L  J  D  I  O’s 

to  have  in  Height  only  one  third  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Boom. 
They  were  for  the  mod:  part  advanced  with  Compartments 
made  with  Stuc  and  Painting.  The  Length  of  thefe  Halls 
would  be  of  a  beautiful  Proportion,  were  it  of  a  Square  and 
two  thirds  of  their  Breadth. 


CHAP.  X. 

Concerning  according  to  the  Egyptian 

Manner. 


THE  following  Defign  %  is  for  Halls  according  to  the 
Egyptian  Manner,  which  are  very  much  like  Bafrii- 
cas ,  or  Courts  of  juftice  (of  which  I  fhall  alfo  fpeak  when 
I  treat  of  publick  Edifices)  becaufe  thefe  kinds  of  Halls  had 
a  Portico,  in  which  the  Columns  were  diftantfrom  the  Wall 
juft  as  in  the  Bafilica s  *  and  upon  thefe  Pillars  were  placed 
the  Architrave ,  Freeze ,  and  Cornice  *  the  Space  or  Diftance 
between  the  Pillars  and  the  Wall  was  covered  with  a  Plat¬ 
form,  furrounded  by  a  Corridor  with  Rails  and  Bullufters. 
Above  the  faid  Pillars  there  was  a  continued  Wall  with 
half  Pillars  on  the  Infide  of  it,  one  fourth  Part  lefs  than  the 
lower  ones.  The  Windows  which  gave  Light  to  the 
Hall,  and  through  which,  when  laid  open,  fuch  as  were 
on  the  Plat-form  could  look  into  it,  were  placed  between 
the  faid  half  Pillars.  This  fort  of  Halls  muft  needs  have 
been  very  magnificent,  as  well  on  account  of  the  Decora¬ 
tions  of  its  Pillars,  as  its  Height ;  becaufe  th eSoffite  reached 
above  the  Cornice  of  the  fecond  Order,  and  one  may  judge 
how  commodious  they  were,  for  the  Reception  of  great 
Companies,  for  elegant  Entertainments,  and  for  all  manner 
of  Diverfions. 


4  Plate  XXX. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE.  93 


CHAP.  XL 


•  f 

Concerning  the  private  Buildings  of  the  Greeks. 

THE  Greeks  varied  from  the  Romans  in  their  Way  of 
Building  ;  for,  according  to  Vitruvius ,  they  made 
the  Entry  to  their  Houfes  very  narrow  *,  inftead  of  making 
Portico’s  or  Galleries  and  Halls,  placing  the  Stables  on  one 
Side,  and  the  Porter’s-lodges  on  the  other.  From  this  firft 
Entry  there  was  a  Paflage  into  a  Court,  which  had  Piazza’s 
on  three  Sides,  and  they  made  Anti,  or  Butments  of  Pila- 
fters  towards  that  of  the  South ,  which  fupported  the  Joifts 
of  the  Cieling  more  inwards :  For  leaving  fome  Space  be¬ 
tween  the  one  and  the  other,  they  had  very  large  Places, 
which  were  appropriated  for  the  Miftrefs’s  Lodgings,  and 
thole  of  the  Men  and  Maid  Servants^  On  the  fame  Floor 
with  thefe  Anti  were  fome  Apartments  which  we  call  Anti¬ 
chambers,  Chambers,  and  Drawing-rooms,  one  behind  the 
other.  About  the  Piazza’s  were  proper  Places  for  Eating, 
Sleeping,  and  the  like  Family  Occafions.  Another  Building^ 
greater  and  better  adorned,  with  larger  Courts,  was  joined 
to  this,  wherein  they  made  four  Portico’s,  or  Piazza’s,  of  e- 
qual  Height,  in  cafe  they  did  not  make  one  of  a  larger  Size 

towards  the  South  :  and  then  the  Piazza  on  that  Side  was 

•  '  \  * 

called  Rhodian ,  in  all  probability  becaufe  the  R  hodians  firft 
pradliled  this  manner  of  Building.  In  thefe  Courts  there 
were  very  magnificent  Galleries  to  the  Front' :4  They  had 
their  own  Gates,  and  were  inhabited  only  by  Men.  On  the 
right  and  left  Side  of  this  Structure  they  made  others,  which 
had  their  own  particular  Gates,  with  all  the  Conveniencies 
neceflary  for  a  Habitation,  as  well  as  the  foregoing.  There 


*  Plate  XXXI. 


A  a 


/ 


94  VALLA  DiO's 

they  lodged  their  Strangers  ;  for  it  was  a  Cuftom  among 
them,  when  they  had  a  foreign  Gueft,  to  entertain  him 
the  firft  Day  at  their  own  Table  ;  but  afterwards  an  Apart¬ 
ment  in  this  fort  of  Houfe  was  affigned  him,  which  was  fur- 
nilhed  with  every  Thing  necefiary  for  his  Accommodation  : 
So  that  a  Stranger  was  by  that  Means  confin’d  to  no  Ceremony, 
and  had  the  fame  Liberty  as  if  he  had  been  all  the  while 
at  his  own  private  Habitation.  And  thus  I  have  fufficiently, 
I  prefume,  explained  the  antient  Greek  Manner  of  Building, 
as  well  as  that  we  pradtife  ourfelves  at  prefent  in  the  Towns. 


The  various  Parts  of  a  private  Houfe  ere&ed  after  the 

Grecian  Manner. 


A.  Paffage  at  the  Entry. 

B.  Stables . 

C.  Porter  s  Lodge. 

D.  Firjl  Court. 

E.  Lobby  thro ’  < which  People 

pajl  into  the  Rooms. 

F.  Places  where  the  JVbmen 

did  their  ifork. 

G.  Fir fl  great  Chamber ,  which 

may  be  called  an  Anti¬ 
chamber. 

H.  A  leffer  Room. 

I.  A  Clofet. 

K.  Great  Dining-room. 

L.  Common  Chambers. 

M.  Second  Court ,  larger  than 

the  frfi. 

N.  Piazza  larger  than  the 

three  others ,  the  Court 
whereof  is  called  Rhodian. 


O.  Paffage  leading  from  the 

little  Court  to  the  greater. 

P.  Three  Piazza  s,  the  Pillars 

whereof  are  jmall. 

CL  Cizicene  Refrattories ,  and 
Chanceries ,  or  Places  that 
were  generally  painted. 

R.  Hall. 

S.  Library. 

T.  Square  Hall  where  they 

ufed  to  eat. 

V.  Apartments  for  Strangers. 

X.  Small  Pa ff ages  which  fe- 
perated  the  Strangers  A- 
partments  from  thofe  of 
the  Mafer. 

Y.  Small  open  Courts. 

Z.  The  principal  Street. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


CHAR  XII. 

Concerning  the  mofi  commodious  Situations  for 

Country  Houses. 


AS  doubtlefs  ’tis  very  reputable  and  commodious  for  a 
Gentleman  to  have  a  Houfe  in  the  City,  where  his 
Affairs  fometimes  oblige  him  to  refide,  either  as  being  pof- 
feifed  of  fome  publick  Poft  in  the  Government,  or  for  the 
Management  of  his  own  private  Concerns  *  fo,  in  all  proba¬ 
bility,  he  may  receive  equal  Pleafure  and  Advantage  from  a 
Seat  in  the  Country,  where  he  paffes  the  Remainder  of  his 
Time  in  furveying  and  improving  his  own  PofTeffions,  in 
errcreafing  his  Subftance  by  Diligence  and  Husbandry  ; 
w  here,  by  Exercife  either  on  Foot,  or  on  Horfeback  (which 
are  only  proper  for  the  Country)  he  preferves  his  Body 
ftrong  and  healthy,  aud  where,  in  fhort,  the  Mind  being 
over-burthened  by  the  Fatigues  of  the  City,  will  be  Angu¬ 
larly  refrefhed  and  recreated  :  So  that  then  he  may  apply 
himfelf  fedately,  and  without  Interruption,  either  to  the 
Study  of  Books  or  the  Contemplation  of  Nature,  in  Imita¬ 
tion  of  fome  antient  Philofophers,  who,  on  the  like  Occa- 
fions,  frequently  retired  to  the  like  Places  •  where,  by  re¬ 
ceiving  the  ViAts  of  their  virtuous  Friends  and  Relations, 
and  poffelTmg  Pleafure-houfes,  Gardens,  Fountains,  and  fuch 
like  Objects  of  DiverAon,  but  more  particularly  their  own 
Virtue,  they  could  with  eafe  attain  that  higheft  Pitch  of  a 
happy  Life,  that  can  be  poffibly  enjoyed  here  upon  Earth. 
Now  having  already,  by  the  divine  Affiftance,  compleated 
all  I  had  to  fay  with  refpedt  to  Houfes  in  the  City,  ’tis  but 
rational  that  I  fhould  proceed  to  thofe  in  the  Country, 
where  private  Affairs  and  Family-buAnefs  are  principally 
tranfacfed.  But  before  I  come  to  give  the  DeAgns  and 
Draughts  of  them,  it  feems  very  requiAte  to  treat  a  little 
about  the  moft  proper  and  commodious  Situations  for  fuch 
Buildings,  and  the  Compartment  or  Diftribution  of  their 

Parts : 


/ 


96  PALLADIO ’s 

Parts  :  Becaufe,  not  being,  for  the  generality  (as  in  Towns)  at 
a  Lofs  for  want  of  Room,  nor  confined  by  our  Neighbours  to 
certain  determinate  Limits,  it  is  the  Duty  of  a  skilful  Ar¬ 
chitect  to  find  out,  with  the  utmoft  Diligence  and  Precau¬ 
tion,  the  moft  commodious  and  healthful  Places  ;  fince  Peo¬ 
ple  refide  in  the  Country  for  the  greateft  Part  of  the  Summer , 
during  which  Seafon,  oiir  Bodies  are  apt  to  grow  weak  and 
fickly,  by  reafon  of  the  Heats  even  in  the  moft  healthy  Re¬ 
gion.  For  which  Reafon,  in  the  firft  Place,  let  the  Seat 
determined  upon  be  the  moft  convenient  for  the  Proprie¬ 
tor’s  Eftate,  as  poflibly  it  can  be  ;  that  is  towards  the  Cen¬ 
ter  of  it  *  in  order  that,  with  but  a  moderate  Fatigue,  he 
may  himfelf  view  the  Whole  whenever  he  thinks  proper, 
and  make  Improvements  round  about  it  ;  as  alfo  that  the 
Tenants  and  Labourers  may  bring  the  Growth  of  it  to  his 
own  Houfe  with  the  greater  Facility.  If  the  Houfe  can  be 
built  near  a  River,  it  will  conduce  greatly  to  its  Beauty  and 
Convenience  •  becaufe  by  that  Means  not  only  the  Produces 
of  the  Land  can  be  the  more  eafily  conveyed  at  all  times 
by  Water  to  the  City,  and  that  the  Water  itfelf  will  ferve 
the  Purpofes  of  the  Houfe  and  Cattle  •  but  it  will  render  the 
Profpedf  much  more  agreeable,  mightily  refrefh  the  Air  in 
Summery  and,  with  great  Advantage,  as  well  as  Ornament, 
water  the  Fields,  Gardens,  and  Stalls,  which  are  the  very 
Life  and  Soul  of  a  Country  Seat.  But  in  cafe  the  Situation 
cannot  be  near  a  navigable  River,  yet  let  it  be  near  fome 
Brook,  or  other  running  Water,  and  as  diftant  as  convenient¬ 
ly  can  be  from  dead  or  ftagnant  Waters  ;  becaufe  thefe  im¬ 
pregnate  the  very  worft  of  Air,  which,  by  building  in  ele¬ 
vated  and  agreeable  Places,  may  with  eafe  be  avoided  :  I 
mean  where  the  Air,  being  free,  is  in  a  perpetual  Motion, 
and  the  Earth,  thro’  its  Declivity,  purged  from  all  damp 
and  noxious  Vapours  ;  where  the  Inhabitants  are  healthful, 
gay,  and  very  well  complexioned  *  and  where  there  is  no 
Difturbance  from  the  Noife  of  Gnats,  and  other  little  per¬ 
plexing  Animals,  which  breed  in  noifom  and  marfhy  Waters. 
Since  Water  however  is  abfolutely  requifite  for  the  Support 
of  Man,  and  fince  Waters  of  various  Qualities  produce  in 

us 


ARCHITECTURE, 


us  various  Effects  (fome  occafioning  the  Spleen,  others  the 
Gout,  fome  the  Stone,  and  others  innumerable  Diftempers) 
due  Care  ought  to  be  taken  that  the  Houfe  may  be  fituated 
near  fuch  Water  as  has  no  particular  or  offenlive  Tafte, 
and  no  particular  Tin&ure  :  But,  on  the  contrary,  that 
it  be  clear,  light,  and,  when  fpringled  on  white  Linnen, 
will  not  ftain,  all  thefe  being  evident  Tokens  of  its  Good- 
nefs.  Vitruvius  has  recommended  to  us  many  Ways  of 
trying  the  Goodnefs  of  the  Water  ;  and  that  Water  is  ac¬ 
counted  the  beft  which  makes  the  bed  Bread,  in  which 
Greens  arey  mod  expeditioufly  boiled,  and  which  leaves  no 
Sediment  in  the  Bottom  of  the  Vefifel.  It  is  an  excellent 
Sign  of  the  Goodnefs  of  Water,  if  neither  Mofs  nor  Rufhes 
grow  in  its  PafTage  *  and  if  its  Bed  be  clean  and  fine  with¬ 
out  Mud  or  Slime,  and  with  Sand  or  Gravel  at  the  Bottom. 
The  very  bruit  Beads,  that  generally  drink  of  fuch  Waters, 
will  give  evident  Tokens  of  their  Goodnefs,  if  they  are  Ac¬ 
tive,  Strong,  and  in  good  Cafe,  and  neither  Lean  nor  Fee¬ 
ble.  As  for  the  Wholfomnefs  of  the  Air,  a  Mark  of  it, 
befides  thofe  already  mentioned,  may  be  taken  from  old 
Buildings,  if  they  are  neither  decayed  nor  confumed  •  from 
the  Trees,  if  they  thrive,  look  beautiful,  are  ftrait,  and 
none  of  thofe  which  naturally  grow  in  fenny  Places  •  from 
the  Rocks  and  Stones  of  the  Place,  if  they  fhew  no  Indica¬ 
tions  of  Rottennefs  in  that  Part  which  is  above  the  Surface 
of  the  Earth  ;  nay,  from  the  Complexion  of  the  Inhabitants? 
if  it  be  natural,  and  fhews  a  vigorous  Conditution.  It  is 
not  advifeable  for  any  one  to  build  in  Vallies  which  are  en- 
clofed  by  Mountains  •  becaufe  Houfes  which  lie  concealed 
in  fuch  Places,  befides  the  Difadvantage  of  their  having  no 
didant  Profpe&s,  and  not  being  confpicuous  to  the  Eyes  of 
others  •  by  which  Means  they  lofe  all  their  Beauty  and 
Edeem  ;  they  are  likewife  in  all  Refpedfs  prejudicial  to 
Health,  becaufe  the  Earth  being  inpregnated  with  the 
Rains  which  fettle  there,  fend  forth  contagious  Vapours, 
and  affe£f  not  only  the  Bodies,  but  alfo  the  Minds  of  Men  ■ 
the  Spirits  being  thereby  weakened,  the  joints  enervated, 
the  Nerves  loofened,  and  the  Provifions  carried  into  fuch 

B  b  Maga* 


r 


pB  VALLADIO’ s 

Magazines  and  Graneries  as  are  corrupted  with  Moifture. 
If,  on  the  other  Hand,  the  Sun  can  penetrate  into  thole 
Vallies,  the  Reflexion  of  its  Rays  will  create  exceflive 
Heats  •  or  if  not,  then  a  perpetual  Shade  will  render  the 
Inhabitants  dull  and  indolent,  and  fpoil  their  Complexion. 
When  the  Winds  blow  into  them  they  are  too  boifterous, 
on  account  of  the  narrow  Chops  through  which  they  muft 
pafs  *  and  when  the  Winds  ceafe  to  blow  there,  the  Air 
will  become  grofs  and  lickly  through  its  Stagnation.  For 
which  Reafon,  when  you  are  determined  to  build  upon  an 
Eminence,  chufe  fuch  a  Situation  as  faces  the  temperate 
Region  of  the  Air,  and  is  neither  always  overlhadowed  by 
higher  Hills,  nor  fcorched  up,  as  it  were,  with  two  Suns,  by 
the  Reflection  of  the  real  one  from  fome  adjacent  Rock  : 
For  in  either  of  thefe  Cafes,  it  becomes  an  incommodious 
Habitation.  To  conclude,  in  the  Choice  of  a  Situation  for 
the  erecting  of  a  Country-houfe,  all  thofe  Confiderations  are 
neceflary,  which  are  ufed  in  the  Choice  of  the  Situation  of 
a  City-houfe  :  For  as  the  City  is  but  one  great  Houle,  or 
Family  ;  fo  every  Family,  or  private  Houle,  is  a  little  City. 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Concerning  ^Compartments  of 
Country-Ho  uses. 


AFTER  you  have  found  and  determined  on  an  airy, 
delightful,  commmodious  and  healthful  Situation,  you 
muft  think  next  on  the  Compartment  of  the  Edifice,  or  the 
Diftribution  of  its  Parts,  and  to  make  it  both  neat  and  ad¬ 
vantageous.  Two  forts  ofHoufes  are  requifite  in  the  Country- 
one  for  the  Habitation  of  the  Mafter  and  his  Family  *  the 
other  for  the  Farmer,  who  improves  his  Lands,  and  gathers 
his  Rents,  as  well  as  for  lodging  his  Cattle  and  his  Fruits. 
It  will  be  neceflary  therefore  to  difpofe  the  Situation  of 

both 


ARCHITECTURE.  99 

both  the  Houfes  fo,  as  that  the  one  may  be  no  Inconveni¬ 
ence  to  the  other.  The  Matter’s  Building  mutt  be  adapted 
to  his  Quality,  and  proportioned  to  the  Number  of  his  Do- 
mefticks,  in  fuch  manner  as  the  City-houfes,  of  which  we 
have  before  treated.  There  mutt  be  proper  Sheds  made 
for  all  Things  which  belong  to  the  Country-Houfe,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  Produce  of  the  Ground  and  Number  of  the 
Cattle  ’  and  thefe  mutt  be  contiguous  to  the  principal  Houfe, 
that  the  Matter  may  with  eafe  go  every  where  fheltered, 
without  being  incommoded  in  the  purfuit  of  his  Bufinefs  by 
either  Snow  or  Rain,  or  the  intenfe  Heat  of  the  Sun .  This 
will  ferve  likewife  to  fhelter  the  Wood,  and  a  large  Varie¬ 
ty  of  other  Country  Provisions,  which  too  much  Moifture 
of  the  Air,  or  the  Heat,  will  damage  *  befides,  fuch  Piazza’s 
will  make  the  Houfe  look  much  more  fpacious  and  magnifi¬ 
cent.  Regard  mutt  likewife  be  had  to  the  Provifions,  with 
all  the  Country  Tools  and  Luggage,  and  fufhcicent  Room 
mutt  be  allowed  them.  The  Apartments  of  the  Steward, 
the  Farmer,  and  the  Labourers,  mutt  be  in  a  Place  commo¬ 
dious  for  them,  and  near  the  Gates,  for  the  greater  Security 
of  the  other  Places.  The  Stalls  and  Stables  appropriated 
to  the  labouring  Cattle,  fuch  as  Oxen  and  Horfes,  mutt  be 
diftant  from  the  main  Houfe,  becaufe  of  the  noifom  Smell 
of  their  Dung  •  but  they  mutt  however  be  in  a  warm  and 
airy  Situation.  All  breeding  Creatures,  fuch  as  Hogs,  Sheep, 
Pigeons,  &c.  require  diftant  Places,  and  fuch  as  are  proper 
to  their  Kind  *  and  in  this  Particular  we  mutt  be  directed 
by  the  different  Cuftoms  of  Countries.  The  Cellars  ought 
to  be  under  Ground,  very  clofe,  and  very  dry,  diftant  from 
all  Noife,  Moifture,  or  any  offenfive  Smell.  They  mutt: 
receive  their  Light  from  the  Eafl  to  the  North :  Becaufe 
the  Sun  coming  on  them  from  the  other  Sides,  would  heat, 
weaken  and  fpoil  the  Wine  or  other  Liquors.  They  fhould 
have  a  Declivity  in  the  Middle,  upon  a  cement  Pavement, 
or  elfe  made  with  fquare  Stones  fo  well  clofed  together, 
that,  fhould  the  Wine  happen  to  fpill,  it  may  be  taken  up 
again.  The  Veffels  in  which  the  Wine  is  working,  mutt 
be  under  Covert  near  the  Cellars  *  and  be  elevated  fo,  that 

the 


JO 


TA  L  L  A  D  I  O' s 

the  Props  may  be  fomewhat  higher  than  the  Bang-hole  of 
the  Pipes,  in  order  that  the  Wine  may  be  with  eale  carried 
thro’ leathern  or  wooden  Channels  into  the  faid  Pipes. 

The  Granaries  ought  to  receive  their  Light  from  the 
North,  becaufe  on  that  Side  they  won’t  be  expofed  to  the 
Heat,  but  be  rather  refrefhed  by  the  Wind  •  and  the  Corn 
will  thereby  be  better  preferved,  without  being  infeffed  by 
the  Mice,  and  fuch  other  Vermin  as  do  it  a  deal  of  Damage. 
Thefe  Granaries  muff  be  floor’d  with  excellent  Earth  *  but 
when  fuch  is  not  to  be  procured,  Deals  muft  be  made  ufe 
of,  becaufe  Lime  is^a  great  Enemy  to  Corn. 

The  other  Store-houfes,  for  the  fame  Reafon,  muff  have 
their  Lights  to  the  fame  Side.  The  Hay-lofts  may  receive 
their  Lights  from  the  South  or  JPejt  *  becaufe  when  it  is  thus 
well  dried  by  the  Sun,  there  will  be  no  Danger  of  its  cor¬ 
rupting  and  taking  fire.  The  Implements  belonging  to  A- 
griculture,  are  beff  under  Coverts  turned  to  the  South .  The 
Barns  where  the  Corn  is  threfhed  ought  to  be  expofed  to  the 
Sun,  to  be  fpacious,  on  a  firm  Ground,  and  a  little  elevated 
in  the  Middle  *  as  round  it,  or  at  leaff  on  one  Side  of  it, 
there  muff  be  a  Piazza,  for  the  immediate  Security  of  the 
Corn,  in  cafe  of  a  fudden  and  impetuous  Rain.  ’Tis  not 
proper  it  fhould  be  too  near  the  Maffer’s  Houfe,  becaufe  of 
its  Duff  ;  but  it  muff  not  however  be  fo  far  from  it,  as  to 
be  out  of  his  View. 

This  in  general  is  fufficient,  I  prefume,  relating  to  the 
Choice  of  the  Situation  and  Compartment  of  Villa’s  or  Coun- 
try-houfes  :  In  order  therefore  to  acquit  myfelf  of  my  Pro- 
mife,  I  fhall  hereto  annex  the  Draughts  of  feveral  Houfes, 
which,  according  to  feveral  Inventions,  I  have  eredfed  in 
the  Country. 


ARCHITECTURE, 


ior 


CHAP.  XIV. 


The  Draughts  of  divers  CountryHouses 
ere  fled  by  fome  noble  Venetians. 


TH  E  following  Houfe  *  is  fituate  at  Bagnolo,  within 
two  Miles  of  LonigOy  a  Caftle  in  the  Vicentine ,  and 
belongs  to  the  three  Brothers,  the  noble  Counts  Viffior, Mar¬ 
co,  and  Danial  Pijani.  On  both  Sides  of  the  Court  are  the 
Stables,  Cellars,  Granaries,  and  fuch  other  commodious 
Places  for  the  Service  of  the  Houfe.  The  Columns  of  the 
Portico’s  are  of  the  Dorick  Order.  The  Lord’s  Apartment 
is  in  the  Villa.  The  Floor  of  the  firft  Chamber  is  raifed 
feven  Feet  above  the  Ground,  under  which  is  the  Kitchen^ 
and  other  Places  which  belong  to  the  Servants.  The  Hall  is 
arched,  its  Altitude  being  equal  to  its  Breadth,  and  one  half 
more.  The  Arches  of  the  Galleries  have  alio  the  fame  Pro¬ 
portion.  The  Chambers  are  cieled,  and  as  high  as  they  are 
broad  *  the  largeft  are  a  Square  and  two  thirds  long  $  the 
others  are  but  a  Square  and  a  half.  There  was  not  fuch  par¬ 
ticular  Care  taken  in  placing  the  two  Back-ftairs,  for  the  Re¬ 
ception  of  a  clearer  Light  (as  we  have  directed  in  the  firft 
Book)  becaufe  thefe  Stairs  ferving  only  for  the  Offices  under¬ 
neath,  or  for  the  Granaries  and  other  like  Places  above,  the 
principal  Care  was  to  finifh  the  middle  Apartment  where  the 
Mafter,  as  well  as  Strangers,  lodged  ;  and  the  Stairs  which 
lead  to  this  Story  are  very  commodioufly  placed,  as  may  be 
feen  in  the  Draught.  Let  this  ferve  for  a  general  Advertife- 
ment  to  the  prudent  Reader,  with  Regard  to  all  the  other 
Houfes  which  have  but  one  Story  •  becaufe  in  thofe  which 
have  two  fine  ones,  and  beautifully  adorned,  I  have  taken 
Care  to  manage  it  fo,  that  the  Stair-cafes  are  very  lightlome 
and  in  convenient  Places  :  I  fay  two  Stories,  becaufe  as  nei¬ 
ther  what  is  under  Ground  for  Cellars  and  fuch  like  Ufes, 


*  Plate  XXXII. 


C  c 


nor 


102 


PALLADIO’ s 


nor  what  is  above  for  Granaries  and  Garrets,  ferve  not  to 
lodge  Gentlemen,  they  are  not  reckoned  among  the  princi¬ 
pal  Stories. 

The  Houle  following  *  belongs  to  the  illuBrious  Lord 
Francifco  Badoero  in  the  Polejlne ,  in  a  Place  called  la  Frata. 
’Tis  lituated  upon  an  Eminence,  at  the  Foot  whereof  palfes 
a  Branch  of  the  *Adige>  where  antienly  {food  the  Cattle  of 
Salinguera  de  Ejle ,  Brother-in-law  to  Ezzelino  Romano .  This 
whole  Fabrick  has  a  PedeBal  live  Feet  high  for  its  Balls;  at 
the  Level  whereof  is  the  Floor  of  the  Chambers,  which  are 
all  of  them  cieled  and  painted  in  Grotelque,  of  a  curious  In¬ 
vention,  by  Giallo  Florentino.  The  Granaries  are  above ;  the 
Kitchen,  Cellars,  and  other  Conveniencies  below.  The 
Columns  of  the  Galleries  in  the  Body  of  the  Houfe  are  Ionic k. 
The  Cornice  goes  round  the  whole  Houfe,  in  the  Form  of  a 
Crown.  The  Pediment  over  the  Portico  makes  a  pompous 
Shew,  railing  the  Middle  of  the  Houfe  higher  than  theWings. 
Afterwards,  as  you  go  downwards,  there  are  the  Farmer’s 
and  Steward’s  Apartments,  the  Stables,  and  other  Out-houfes 
proper  for  a  Country-houle. 

The  noble  Lord  Marco  Xeno  has  ere&ed  a  beautiful  Seat 
after  the  following  Invention  at  Cafalto ,  which  is  a  Place 
near  the  Caltle  of  la  Motta ,  in  the  Trivigian.  It  Bands  upon 
a  Bafement,  which  furrounds  the  whole  Edifice,  equal  with 
the  Floor  of  the  Rooms,  which  are  all  arched.  The  Altitude 
of  the  largelt  is  according  to  our  fecond  Manner.  The  Ar¬ 
ches  of  the  fquare  Rooms  are  grinded  in  the  Angles  about 
the  Windows :  Thofe  of  the  Clofets,  or  Rooms  near  the  Gal¬ 
leries,  as  well  as  thofe  of  the  Hall,  are  jafciated.  The  Hall 
and  Galleries  are  arched  of  an  equal  Altitude,  and  are  like- 
wife  both  of  them  higher  than  the  Rooms.  This  Edifice 
has  Gardens,  a  Court-yard,  a  Dove-houfe,  and  every  Thing 
that  is  requifite  and  convenient  for  a  Country  Seat. 

Near  to  Gambarare ,  on  the  Brenta ,  Bands  the  following 
Edifice  $,  which  belongs  to  thofe  illuBrious  Lords  Nicolo 
and  Luigi  de  Fofcari.  The  Houfe  is  elevated  eleven  Feet 


*  Plate  XXXIII. 


f  Plate  XXXIV.  §  Plate  XXXV. 


from 


ARCHITECTURE.  103 

from  the  Level  of  the  Ground,  and  below  are  the  Kitchens, 
Pantries,  and  the  like  Offices.  Every  Thing  is  arched  both 
above  and  below.  The  Arches  of  the  great  Chambers  are 
made  according  to  our  firft  Manner.  Thofe  of  the  Squares 
are  arched  round  like  a  Cupola.  On  the  Clofets  are 
Mezanlni.  The  Hall  is  arched  half  round  grinded  :  Its  Im- 
poft  is  as  high  from  the  Floor  as  the  Breadth  of  the  Hall, 
which  is  excellently  painted  by  Mefler  Battlfia  Venetiano. 
Mefler  Battijla  Franco,  one  of  the  beft  Modern  Artifts,  began 
likewife  to  paint  one  of  the  great  Chambers,  but  he  died  be¬ 
fore  he  could  accompliffi  it.  The  Portico  is  Ionic k.  The  Cor¬ 
nice  goes  round  the  whole  Houfe,  and  makes  a  Pediment  a- 
bove,  as  well  as  on  the  oppolite  Part  of  the  Portico.  Under 
the  Eves  of  the  Roof  there  is  another  Cornice,  which  paffies 
above  the  Pediments.  The  upper  Rooms  are  like  Mezani- 
nos ,  becaufe  they  are  but  eight  Feet  high. 

At  Majera,  near  the  Caftle  of  slfolo,  in  the  Trwlgtan ,  is 
the  following  #  Building,  which  is  the  Houfe  of  the  moft 
Reverend  Daniel  Barbaro,  Patriarch  ele6f  of  slqulkia,  and 
of  his  Brother  the  Lord  Marco  jdntonio  Barbaro .  That  Side 
of  the  Edifice  which  advances  a  little  outwards,  has  two  Sto¬ 
ries  of  Rooms.  The  Floor  of  the  upper  ones  is  level  with  a 
Court  that  lies  behind,  where  there  is  a  Fountain  wrought 
in  the  Mount  dire&ly  oppofite  to  the  Front  of  the  Houfe, 
with  an  infinite  Number  of  Decorations,  both  of  Stuc  and 
Painting.  This  Fountain  forms  a  little  Lake,  which  ferves 
as  a  Pond  ;  from  whence  the  Water,  as  it  overflows,  runs 
into  the  Kitchen,  and  afterwards  thro’  the  Gardens,  which 
are  on  the  Right  and  Left  of  the  high  Road  which  leads  by 
Degrees  to  the  Houfe  :  There  it  forms  two  little  Ponds, 
which  ferve  alfo  for  Watering-places  upon  the  Highway,  and 
running  ftill  further,  it  waters  the  Orchard,  which  is  very 
fpacious,  and  full  of  fine  Fruit-trees,  and  all  kind  of  Pulfe. 

The  Front  of  the  Mafter’s  Apartment  has  four  lonick 
Columns.  The  Capitals  of  thefe  on  the  Angles  fhew  a- 
like  on  both  Sides.  I  fhall  teach  the  Manner  of  making 


* 


Plate  XXXVI. 


thefe 


104  PA  L  L  A  D  I  O’  s 

thefe  Capitals  in  the  Book  of  Temples.  There  are  Galle¬ 
ries  on  both  Sides  of  the  Houfe,  at  the  End  of  which  are 
two  Dove-houfes ;  and  below  them  are  the  Prefles  for  the 
Vintage  [at  the  Place  marked  A  in  the  Plan )  with  the  Stable, 
and  other  Out-houfes  convenient  for  Husbandry. 

The  following  Houfe  *  Bands  near  the  Gate  of  Montag- 
nan  a ,  a  Caftle  in  the  Territory  of  Padua ,  and  was  in  Part 
ere&ed  by  the  Lord  Francijco  Tijdno ,  who  died  before  it  was 
finifhed.  The  great  Chambers  are  a  Square  and  three  quar¬ 
ters  long  ;  the  Arches  are  fchemed,  and  after  our  fecond 
Manner.  The  fecond-fize  Rooms  are  fquare,  and  their  Arches 
round,  or  in  the  Form  of  Ovens.  The  Clofets,  and  the  Paf- 
fage  between,  are  of  the  fame  Breadth :  Their  Arches  are  two 
Squares  high.  The  Entry  has  four  Columns,  lefs  than 
thofe  which  are  without  by  one  fifth  •  and  they  fupport  the 
Floor  of  the  Hall :  Befides  that  the  Altitude  of  the  Arch  is 
much  more  beautiful  and  fecure  with  them.  The  four  Ni¬ 
ches,  in  each  of  which  ftands  a  Statue,  reprefenting  one  of 
the  four  Seafons  of  the  Year,  done  by  Alejjandro  Vittoria ,  a 
celebrated  Sculptor.  The  firft  Order  of  Columns  is  Dorick , 
and  the  fecond  Ionic  k.  The  upper  Rooms  are  deled.  The 
Altitude  of  the  Hall  extends  as  far  as  the  Roof.  On  the 
Flanks  of  this  Houfe  there  are  two  Wings,  contiguous  to  the 
Building  by  two  Entries,  which  lead  into  the  Kitchen  and 
to  fome  other  Offices;  in  the  Middle  of  each  of  them  there 
are  two  arched  Gates  opening  into  the  Street. 

The  following  Draught  •f'  is  the  Edifice  of  the  moft 
illuftrious  Lord  George  Carnario  in  Piombino ,  a  Place 
of  Caflle  -  jranco.  The  firft  Order  of  the  Portico  is 
Ionick.  The  Stair-cafe  is  as  far  as  conveniently  may  be 
into  the  Houfe,  that  it  may  be  lefs  expofed  to  the  Wea¬ 
ther.  The  Wings  of  the  Hall,  in  which  are  the  Niches, 
have  the  third  Part  of  their  own  Length  in  Breadth  ;  and 
the  Pillars  range  exa&ly  with  the  laft  but  one  of  the  Por¬ 
tico’s,  and  are  as  diftant  from  each  other  as  they  are 
high.  The  great  Rooms  are  a  Square  and  three  quarters 


*  Plate  XXXVIP 


t  Plate  XXXVIII. 


ARCHITECTURE,  105 

long  ;  the  Altitude  of  the  Arches  is  after  our  firft  Method 
of  the  Altitude  of  Arches.  the  fecond-fize  Rooms  are 
fquare,  and  a  third  not  fb  broad  as  they  are  high.  The 
Arches  are  crofs-grinded.  Over  the  Clofets  are  Mezaninosi 
or  Half-ftories.  The  upper  Portico  is  of  the  Corinthian  Or¬ 
der  :  Its  Pillars  are  lefs  than  the  lower  ones  by  one  fifth; 
The  Chambers  are  cieled,  and  above  them  are  fome  Mezani~ 
nos.  The  Kitchen,  and  other  Offices  belonging  thereunto, 
are  on  one  Side  ;  and  on  the  other  are  proper  Places  for  the 
Servants. 

.  *  -  »  # 

The  following  Draught  *  is  the  Building  of  the  moft  il- 

luftrious  Knight  Leonardo  Mocenico,  in  a  Place  called  Mo¬ 
rocco,  on  the  Road  from  Venice  to  Trivigi.  The  Cellars 
are  even  with  the  Ground,  and  above  them  are  the  Grana¬ 
ries  on  the  one  Side,  and  the  Servants  Apartments  on  the 
other.  Over  thefe  are  the  Mafter’s  Rooms,  forming  four 
diftintft  Lodgings.  The  Arches  of  the  largeft  are  one  and 
twenty  Feet  high,  and  are  made  of  Canes,  that  they  may  be 
the  lighter.  Thofe  of  the  lefTer  ones  are  as  high  as  thofe 
of  the  biggeft ;  but  thofe  of  the  Clofets  are  crofted,  and 
only  feventeen  Feet  high.  The  Gallery  of  the  firft  Story  is 
Ionick .  There  are  four  Columns  in  the  lower  Hall,  which 
make  the  Height  and  Breadth  to  be  equal.  The  fecond 
Order  of  the  Portico  is  Corinthian ,  and  its  Poggio,  or  Pede- 
ftal,  is  two  Feet  and  three  Quarters  high.  The  Stair-Cafes 
are  in  the  Middle,  and  feparate  the  Hall  from  the  Vefti- 
bule*  Both  Stairs  are  oppofite  to  one  another,  in  order  that 
People  may  go  up  and  come  down  both  Ways,  which 
makes  them  very  handfome  and  commodious,  befides  that 
they  are  not  very  heavy.  On  the  Wings  of  this  Edifice  are 
the  Wine-preftes  [marked  on  the  Plan  A)  with  the  Sta¬ 
bles,  Galleries,  and  fueh  like  Conveniences  for  a  Country 
Family. 

At  Fanzolo  in  the  Trivigian ,  within  three  Miles  of  Caf- 
tel-franco ,  ftands  the  Houfe  of  the  moft  noble  Lord  Leo?t~ 
ardo  Emo ,  ere&ed  after  the  following  Draught  f*  The 


t  Plate  XL. 

D  d 


*  Plate  XXXIX. 


Cellars/ 


106  PA  L  LA  DIO’s 

Cellars,  Granaries,  Stables,  and  other  Places  for  a  Country 
Houfe,  are  on  each  Side  of  the  Mafter’s  Houfe  ;  at  each 
End  whereof  there  is  a  Dove-Houfe,  which,  befldes  being 
ornamental  to  the  Place,  is  profitable  to  the  Owner.  Peo¬ 
ple  may  go  all  about  this  Houfe  under  Shelter,  which,  as 
we  have  already  obferved,  is  one  of  the  greatefi:  Convenien- 
cies  that  can  be  defired  in  a  Country  Houfe.  On  the  Back 
of  this  Edifice  there  is  a  fquare  Garden,  containing  about 
fourfcore  Trivlgian  Acres  •  in  the  midfi:  whereof  runs  a  Ri¬ 
vulet,  which  renders  the  Situation  very  agreeable  and  plea- 
fant.  This  Houfe  is  embellifhed  with  feveral  Pieces  of 
Painting  performed  by  Battijta  Venetiano. 


CHAP.  XV. 

The  Draughts  of  feveral  Noblemen's  Seats  on  the 

Terra  Firma 

IN  a  Place  of  the  Vicentine,  called  Final,  is  the  following 
Edifice  belonging  to  the  Lord  Biagio  Sarraceno. 
The  Floor  of  the  Rooms  is  elevated  five  Feet  from  the 

i 

Ground.  The  great  Chambers  are  a  Square  and  five 
Eights  long,  their  Altitude  being  equal  to  their  Breadth, 
and  are  all  cieled.  This  Altitude  is  alfo  continued  in  the 
Hall.  The  Clofets  near  the  Galleries  are  arched :  The  Al¬ 
titude  of  the  Arches  is  in  Proportion  to  that  of  the  Rooms. 
The  Cellars  are  below,  and  the  Granaries  above,  being  of 
the  fame  Extent  with  the  whole  Building.  The  Kitchens 
are  without,  but  fo  near  that  they  are  commodious  enough : 
All  the  other  Places,  neceflary  to  a  Country  Houfe,  are  on 
the  two  Sides  of  the  Building. 


*  Plate  XLI. 


The 


) 


ARCHITECTURE.  107 

/ 

The  Draughts  that  follow  *  are  of  the  Building  which 
belongs  to  Signior  Girolamo  Rojrona ,  a  Vicentine  Gentleman, 
who  ereHed  it  at  one  of  his  Lordfhips  called  k  Ghizzole. 
This  Edifice  has  the  Convenience  before-mentioned,  viz* 
That  one  can  walk  every  where  under  Shelter.  The  Floor 
of  the  Mafter’s  Apartments  is  raifed  twelve  Feet  above  the 
Ground.  Under  thefe  are  all  the  Conveniencies  for  the  Do- 
mefticks.  There  are  other  Chambers  above,  which  may 
not  only  ferve  for  Granaries,  but  for  Lodgings,  it  Occation 
require.  The  principal  Stairs  are  in  the  Fore-front,  and 
anfwer  dire 6tly  to  the  Porticos  of  the  Court. 

At  Pogliana ,  a  Place  in  the  Vlcentlne,  hands  the  follow¬ 
ing  Houfe  $  which  belongs  to  the  Cavalier  Pogliana.  The 
Rooms  have  been  decorated  with  Paintings  and  very  fine 
Stuccatures  by  Mejjer  Bernardino  India  and  Mejjer  Vlnfelmo 
Canera ,  Painters  of  Verona ,  and  by  Mejjer  Bartholomeo  Ro - 
dolfi ,  Sculptor  of  the  fame  Place.  The  great  Rooms  are  a 
Square  and  two  Thirds  long,  and  arched.  Over  the  Clo- 
lets  are  Mezanlnos .  The  Altitude  of  the  Hall  is  one  half 
more  than  its  Breadth,  and  in  Proportion  to  the  Altitude  of 
the  Gallery.  The  Hall  is  arched  with  a  Fafcia ,  and  the 
Portico  with  an  Arch  which  is  crofs-grinded.  The  Grana¬ 
ries  are  above  all  thefe  Apartments,  as  the  Cellars  and 
Kitchen  are  below  them  ;  becaufe  the  Floor  of  the  firfi: 
Story  is  raifed  five  Feet  above  the  Ground.  The  lower 
Yard,  and  other  Offices  for  the  Ufe  of  a  Villa,  are  on  one 
Side  of  it,  and  a  Garden,  anfwering  to  the  Yard,  on  the 
other  Side.  Behind  the  Building  is  an  Orchard  and  a  Fiffi- 
pond  :  So  that  this  magnanimous  Gentleman  has  fpared  no¬ 
thing  which  he  thought  might  be  either  ornamental  or  con. 
venient,  in  order  to  make  it  as  pleafant  and  compleat  as 

At  Liziera ,  a  Place  near  Vicenza ,  Signior  Glo.  Francefco 
Valmarana ,  of  immortal  Memory,  ereHed  the  following 
Houfe  ||.  The  Galleries  or  Porticos  are  Ionick  •  the  Co¬ 
lumns  are  upon  a  fquare  Bafe,  which  furrounds  the  whole 


||  Plate  XLIV. 


*  Plate  XLII. 


§  Plate  XLIII. 


Houfe> 


io8  TALL  AD  IQ's 

Houfe.  To  the  Level  of  this  Bafe  is  the  Floor  of  the  Gal¬ 
lery  and  Rooms,  which  are  all  ceiled.  At  the  Angles  of 
this  Edifice  there  are  four  arched  Towers  ;  the  Hall  is  alfo 
arched  with  a  Fafcia .  There  are  two  Court-Yards,  the 
one  forwards  for  the  Matter’s  Ufe,  and  the  other  backwards 
for  the  Servants  to  threlh  the  Corn.  About  this  Court 
are  Sheds,  and  all  other  Places  requifite  for  a  Country 
Houfe. 

The  Counts  France fco  and  Ludovico  de  TriJJini,  Brothers, 
began  the  Building  of  the  following  *  Draught  at  Meledo ,  a 
Place  in  the  Vicentine,  Its  Situation  is  very  agreeable, 
being  on  a  Hill  that’s  walhed  by  a  Rivulet,  in  the  midft 
of  a  fpacious  Plain,  and  on  a  well-frequented  Road.  On 
the  Top  of  the  Hill  a  Hall  is  to  be  eredted  furrounded  with 
Rooms  *  but  raifed  fo  high  that  it  may  receive  its  Light 
above  them.  This  Hall  has  fome  half  Pillars,  which  fup- 
port  a  Corridor,  to  which  People  enter  by  the  upper  Cham¬ 
bers,  which  ferve  but  for  the  Mezaninos ,  being  no  more 
than  feven  Feet  high.  Under  the  Floor  of  the  firft  Cham¬ 
bers  are  the  Kitchens,  Pantries,  &c.  And  becaufe  every 
Front  of  the  Houfe  has  a  beautiful  Profpedf,  there  are  made 
four  Porticos  or  Galleries  to  them,  of  the  Corinthian  Or¬ 
der  *  above  the  Pediments  whereof  the  Cupolo  of  the  Hall 
is  feen.  The  Galleries  that  come  round  it  look  very  well. 
The  Hay-Lofts,  Cellars,  Stables,  Granaries,  the  Farmer’s 
Apartment,  and  other  Family  Conveniencies  are  lower. 
The  Columns  of  the  Porticos  are  of  the  Tufcan  Order  $  and 
at  the  Corners  of  the  Court  near  the  River  are  two  Pidgeon- 
houfes. 

This  Edifice  ■f*  is  at  Campiglia ,  a  Place  of  the  Vicentine 
and  belongs  to  Signior  Marjo  Repeta ,  who  compleated  it 
according  to  the  Defign  of  the  late  Signior  Francefco  his  il- 
luftrious  Father.  The  Pillars  of  the  Porticos  are  of  the  Do- 
rick  Order  5  the  Intercolumniation  is  four  Diameters  of  a 
Column.  In  the  two  farthermoft  Corners  of  the  Roof, 
where  the  Galleries  are  without  the  main  Body  of  the  Houfe, 


*  Plate  XLV. 


f  Plate  XLVI. 


are 


ARCHITECTURE.  109 

are  two  Dove-houfes  and  Galleries.  On  the  Side  towards 
the  Stables  are  feveral  Chambers,  every  one  devoted  to 
fome  peculiar  Virtue,  as  one  to  Juftice,  another  to  Chafti- 
ty,  and  fo  on,  with  Elogiums  and  Pi£tures  fuitable  to  the 
Subje£L  Part  of  thefe  were  executed  by  Battifta  Maganza , 
a  Vine  en  tine  Painter,  who  is  alfo  a  celebrated  Poet,  and 
who  has  done  all  this  with  defign,  that  as  the  Gentleman 
receives  his  Vifiters  with  abundance  of  Courteoufy  and  good 
Nature  5  fo  he  may  lodge  each  of  his  Guefts  in  the  Apart¬ 
ment  of  that  Virtue  to  which  he  thinks  them  moft  addicted. 
In  this  Edifice  one  may  go  every  where  under  Piazzas  :  And 
as  the  Farm-houfe  is  of  the  fame  Order  with  that  of  the 
Matter’s  itfelf,  all  that  this  laft  wants  in  Greatnefs  by  not 
being  more  coftly  than  th^  other,  is  futticiently  recom- 
penced  by  being  equal  both  in  Ornament  and  Proportion. 

The  following  Edifice  *  belongs  to  the  two  Brothers,  the 
Count.1?  Vdcmave).  onrl  Theodore  dc  Thicnt.  It  ftands  in  a  Place 
called  Cigogna ,  where  Count  Francis  their  Father  began  to 
ere&  it.  The  Hall  ftands  in  the  middle  of  the  Houf^,  and 
round  it  are  fome  lonick  Pillars,  which  fupport  a  Corridor 
which  is  even  with  the  Floor  of  the  upper  Rooms.  Tbe 
Arch  of  this  Hall  extends  to  the  Roof.  The  great  Rooms 
are  arched  with  a  Fafcia ,  the  fquare  ones  Oven-wife,  and 
are  fo  raifed,  that  they  form  four  little  Turrets  on  the  An¬ 
gles  of  the  Fabrick.  The  Clofets  have  Mezaninos  above 
them,  the  Doors  whereof  are  over-againft  the  middle  of  the 
Stairs,  which  have  no  Wall  in  their  Middle  :  And  as  the 
Hall  is  very  lightfome  by  receiving  its  Light  from  above? 
thefe  Mezaninos  are  light  enough  likewife  ;  and  the  more 
fo,  fince  they  receive  their  Light  from  the  Top  being  open 
in  the  Middle.  The  Cellars  and  Granaries  are  in  one  of  the 
covered  Sides,  or  Arches  of  the  Yard  ;  and  the  Stables  in 
the  other,  with  the  other  Places  proper  for  Country  Ufes. 
The  two  Galleries,  which  make,  as  it  were,  the  two  Arms 
of  the  main  Edifice,  ferve  to  unite  the  Farmer’s  Houfe  and 
the  Matter’s  together.  There  are  two  Yards  with  Porticos, 


E  e 

/ 


*  Plate  XLVII. 


the 


I  IO 


V  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

the  one  is  fet  apart  for  laying  up  the  Crop,  the  other  for 
lodging  the  Hufbandmen  and  their  Servants. 

The  following  Edifice  *  is  Count  Giacomo  Angaranos, 
who  ere&ed  it  in  his  Lordfhip  of  Angara  no,  a  Place  in  the 
Vicentine.  The  Cellars,  the  Granaries,  the  Wine-prefTes, 
the  Farmer’s  Houfe,  the  Stables,  and  the  Dove-houfe  are 
on  both  Sides  the  Court  ;  and  beyond,  on  one  Side,  there  is 
a  Court  or  Yard  for  the  Country  Ufes,  and  a  Garden  on  the 
other.  The  Matter’s  Houfe  is  in  the  Middle.  All  the  firtt 
Story  of  it  is  arched,  and  the  fecond  cieled.  the  Clofets 
have  Mezaninos  both  above  and  below.  The  Brent  a,  a  Ri¬ 
ver  which  abounds  with  very  fine  Fifh,  runs  near  this  Houfe. 
The  Place  is  celebrated  for  its  delicious  Wines  and  Fruits, 
but  more  efpecially  for  the  Hofpitality  and  Benevolence  of 
its  Lord  and  Matter. 

The  following  are  Draughts  $  of  Count  Ottavo  Thienis 
Seat,  in  a  Place  called  ^ uiuiu .  This  Kdifire  was  begun  by 
Count  Marc  Antonio ,  his  moft  illuftrious  and  moft  worthy 
Father,  and  by  Count  Adriano  his  Uncle.  This  Houfe  is 
finely  fituated,  having  the  Tejfina  on  one  Side,  and  a  confi- 
derable  Branch  of  the  fame  River  on  the  other.  There  is  a 
Gallery  before  the  Gate  thereof  of  the  Dorick  Order,  thro’ 
which  there  is  a  PafTage  into  another  •  and  from  that  into 
the  Court,  which  has  likewife  two  Galleries  in  its  Wings^ 
at  the  End  whereof  are  all  the  Rooms  and  Apartments  ; 
feme  of  which  have  been  painted  by  Giovanni  Indemio ,  a 
Vicentine ,  and  a  very  celebrated  Artift.  Over-againft  the 
Portico  of  the  Entry  there  is  another  Gallery  exa<Sly  like  it, 
which  brings  you  to  an  Atrium  with  four  Pillars,  and  ftrait 
forwards  to  a  Court,  the  Porticos  are  of  the  Dorick  Order. 
It  ferves  for  all  the  Neceflities  of  the  Villa.  There  is  no 
principal  Stair-cafe  that  has  any  Proportion  to  the  reft  of 
the  Houfe  ;  becaufe  the  upper  Part  of  this  Building  ferves 
only  for  Wardrobes,  Stores,  and  Apartments  for  the  Ser¬ 
vants. 

The  followinw  Houfe  ||,  belonging  to  Signior  Girolamo 
de  Godi ,  is  at  Lonedo ,  a  Place  in  the  Vicentine  :  It  is  fitua- 


*  Plate  XLVIII.  §  Plate  XLIX,  ||  Plate  L. 

ted 


1 1 1 


ARCHITECTURE, 


ted  on  a  little  Hill  which  has  a  very  fine  Profped):,  near  a 
River  that  fupplies  it  with  Fifh.  To  render  this  Situation 
proper  for  Country  Ufes,  they  have  made  Yards  and  Pafi- 
fag  es  which  are  fupported  by  Arches  ;  the  Expence  where¬ 
of  muft  needs  be  very  confiderable.  The  Apartment  for  the 
Mafter  and  the  Family  is  in  the  Middle  of  the  Building. 
The  Floor  of  the  Chambers,  which  are  cieled,  are  raifed 
thirteen  Feet  from  the  Level  of  the  Ground.  The  Grana¬ 
ries  are  above  *  and  the  Cellars,  Kitchens,  Places  to  make 
Wine,  and  other  neceflary  Conveniencies,  are  below,  under 
the  Railing  of  the  thirteen  Feet.  The  Hall  has  two  Rows 
of  Windows,  and  its  Height  is  the  very  Roof.  At  each 
Side  of  the  Houfe  there  are  great  Yards  with  Coverts,  ferving 
for  Country  Purpofes.  The  Houfe  is  painted  very  accu¬ 
rately  by  Mefler  Qualterio  Padoano ,  Mefler  Battifta  del 
Moro  of  Verona ,  and  Mefler  Battifta  Venetiano :  For  this 
Gentleman  being  ambitious  to  make  his  Houfe  as  complete 
as  poflible,  and  being  himlelf  an  excellent  Judge,  fpared  no 
Coft  to  procure  the  moft  celebrated  Workmen  and  Artifts  of 
our  Time. 

The  following  Houfe  #,  which  belongs  to  Count  Marc 
Antonio  Saregoi  is  at  Santa  Sophia ,  a  Place  within  five  Miles 
of  Verona *  Its  Situation  is  on  a  fine  Hill,  of  a  very  ealy 
Afcent,  between  two  Vallies,  from  whence  there  is  a  curi¬ 
ous  Profpe£t  of  a  great  Part  of  the  City*  There  are  feveral 
other  Hills  very  agreeable  to  the  Eye,  all  round  about 
which  abound  with  excellent  Waters,  by  which  Means  the 
Houfe  and  Garden  are  adorned  with  feveral  curious  Foun¬ 
tains.  This  Place  was  formerly  the  Delight  of  the  Lords 
de  la  Scala ,  on  Account  of  its  Agreeablenefs  ;  and  we  may 
alio  judge,  that  it  was  in  great  Efleem  in  the  Time  of  the 
antient  Romans ,  by  fome  old  Ruins  that  are  ftill  found 
there.  That  Part  of  this  Houfe,  which  ferves  for  the  Maf- 
ter’s  Apartment  and  his  Family,  has  a  Court  perfe&ly  fur- 
rounded  with  Porticos.  The  Pillars  are  of  the  Jonick  Order, 
and  but  courfly  wrought,  which  feem  to  become  a  Country 
Houfe ;  nice  and  finifhed  Works  not  bearing  fo  true  a  Re- 

*  Plate  LI. 

femblance 


1 12 


.  > 

VALLA  D  IO's 

femblance  as  plain  and  natural  ones.  Thele  Pillars  fupport 
the  Cornice,  which  forms  the  Gutters  that  receive  the  Rain 
falling  from  the  Top  of  the  Houfe  ;  and  behind  are  fome 
Pilafters  under  the  Porticos,  that  fupport  the  Floors  of  the 
fecond  Story.  In  this  fecond  Story  are  two  Halls  one  over- 
againft  another,  the  Largenefs  whereof  may  be  feen  in  the 
Draught  #  by  the  Lines  that  go  crofs  each  other,  and  are 
carried  on  from  the  further  Walls  to  the  Pillars.  Near  this 
Court  is  the  Farmer’s  Yard,  where  all  the  Coverts  requilite 
for  Country  Purpofes  are  on  both  Sides. 

The  following  $  is  the  Houle  belonging  to  Count  Anni- 
bal  SeregOy  in  a  Place  of  the  Collogneje  called  la  Miga.  The 
whole  Edifice  is  raifed  on  a  Pedeftal  or  Bafe,  four  Feet  and 
a  half  high  ;  and  the  Floor  of  the  firft  Chamber  is  level  to 
it ;  the  Cellars,  Kitchens,  and  other  Places  for  the  Apart¬ 
ments  or  other  Services  of  the  Family,  are  under  thole 
Chambers.  The  firft  Chambers  are  arched,  and  the  fecond 
cieled.  The  Farmer’s  Yard,  and  all  the  Country  Conve¬ 
niences  thereunto  belonging,  is  contiguous  to  the  Houle. 


*  Plate  Llv  §  Plate  LII, 


l 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


C  H  A  P.  XVI. 


Of  the  Count  r  y-Ho  uses  oft  he  Antients. 


Hitherto  I  have  given  you  the  Draughts  of  feveral 
Country  Seats  performed  by  my  own  Direction  :  I 
lhall  now  give  you  fome  others  *  after  the  Manner  of  the 
Antients,  according  to  Vitruvius  ;  for  in  thefe  all  the  Places 
belonging  to  the  Lodgings,  and  the  Conveniencies  of  the 
Country,  are  turned  to  the  Regions  of  the  Heaven  that  are 
moll  proper.  I  fhall  not  here  inlift  upon  what  Pliny  lays  on 
thisTopick  ;  my  Intention,  at  prefent,  being  only  to  explain 
what  Vitruvius  fays  of  it.  The  principal  Front  of  the  Build¬ 
ing  is  turned  to  the  South ,  and  has  a  Gallery,  from  which  there 
is  a  Palfage  into  the  Kitchen,  which  receives  it  Light  above 
the  Places  adjacent,  it  being  requilite  to  have  the  Chimney 
in  the  Middle.  The  Stalls  for  the  Oxen,  the  Manger 
whereof  muft  be  turned  to  the  Eaft,  are  on  the  Left-hand. 
The  Bagnios  muft  likewife  be  on  the  fame  Side,  and  at  e- 
qual  Diftance  from  the  Kitchen  as  from  the  Gallery,  on  Ac¬ 
count  of  the  Room  they  require.  The  Oil-prefles,  and 
other  Places  for  the  Oil,  which  anfwers  the  Places  of  the 
Bagnios,  and  are  turned  to  the  Eajl ,  South ,  and  Vhrefl,  are 
on  the  Right-hand.  The  Cellars  are  backwards,  far  from  all 
Noife,  and  open  to  the  North ,  that  it  may  not  be  expo  fed  to 
the  Sun.  The  Granaries  are  above,  and  receive  the  lame 
Light,  the  fame  Way  as  the  Cellars  do.  On  the  the  right 
and  left  Sides  of  the  Court  are  Stalls  for  the  Oxen,  Stables 
for  the  Horfes,  Conveniencies  for  Sheep  and  other  Animals  * 
Hay-lofts  and  Barns  to  put  the  Straw  in,  and  Bake-houfes  * 
all  which  muft  be  as  far  from  any  Fire  as  conveniently  may 
be.  The  Mafter’s  Apartment  is  backwards,  the  principal 
Front  whereof  is  oppolite  to  the  Farmer’s  Houle  *  lo  that 


*  Plate  LI II. 


Ff 


the 


PALLADIO’ s 


the  Halls  are  always  in  the  back  Part  of  the  Country  Build¬ 
ings.  All  the  fame  Things  were  obferved  in  thefe,  where¬ 
of  we  have  fpoken  above,  when  we  gave  the  Draughts  of 
the  private  Houfes  of  the  Antients,  for  which  Reafon  I  have 
had,  at  prefent,  no  Regard  but  to  what  purely  relates  to  the 
Country.  In  all  the  Houfes  which  I  have  built  in  the  Coun¬ 
try,  and  alfo  in  fome  of  thofe  which  I  have  made  in  Towns, 
I  have  always  placed  the  Pediments  before,  where  the  prin¬ 
cipal  Gates  are  ;  becaufe  they  make  the  principal  Entry  to 
the  Houfe  more  confpicuous,  and  contribute  very  much  to 
the  Magnificence  and  Grandeur  of  the  Building.  This  gives 
the  Fore-part  a  great  Advantage  over  the  others,  and  for 
that  Reafon  muft  be  made  higher  5  befides,  it  is  much  more 
proper  to  put  the  Arms  of  the  Owner  there,  which  are  ge¬ 
nerally  placed  in  the  Middle  of  them.  The  Antients  em¬ 
ployed  them  alfo  in  their  Works,  as  is  vifible  in  the  old  Re¬ 
mains  of  Temples  and  other  publick  Buildings  •  from 
which  it  is,  in  all  Probability,  as  in  the  Preface  to  my  Firft 
Book  I  have  before  obferved,  that  they  borrowed  the  Con¬ 
trivance  and  Proportions  of  private  Houfes.  Vitruvius 
teaches  us  how  to  make  them,  in  the  laid  Chapter  of  his 
Third  Book. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE.  115 


CHAP.  XVII. 


Of fome  Inventions  adapted  to  various 

Situations. 

WHEN  I  firft  began  to  write,  I  intended  to  fpeak 
only  of  fuch  Buildings  as  were  brought  to  Perfec¬ 
tion,  or  at  lead:  were  fo  far  advanced,  as  that  it  might  reafon- 
ably  be  expedled  they  would  foon  be  finifhed  :  But  having 
obferved,  that  it  is  frequently  requifite  to  confine  one’s  felf 
to  the  Situations,  and  that  fometimes  one  has  not  free  Room  to 
build,  I  have  thought  proper  to  add  to  thofe  Draughts,  which 
I  formerly  made,  fome  new  Inventions  of  my  own  (which 
were  requefted  of  me  by  feveral  Perfons  of  Diftin&ion,  not- 
withftanding  fome  Alterations  in  their  Affairs  have  hindered 
the  Execution)  becaufe  the  Irregularity  and  Difficulty  of 
their  Situation,  and  the  Method  I  have  obferved  to  difpofe 
the  Chambers  and  other  Places,  fo  as  to  be  correfpondenfc 
and  proportionable  to  each  other,  in  my  Opinion,  may  prove 
of  no  little  Ufe  and  Advantage. 

The  Situation  of  this  firft  Draught  %  is  in  the  Form  of  a 
Pyramid  :  The  Bafis  of  a  Pyramid  makes  the  principal  Front 
of  the  Houfe,  which  has  three  Orders  of  Pillars,  Dorick ,  Ionic  i 
and  Corinthian.  The  Vejlihule  is  fquare,  and  the  Arch 
thereof,  whofe  Height  and  Breadth  is  equal,  is  lupported  by 
four  Pillars.  On  each  Side  are  two  Chambers,  the  Length 
whereof  is  a  Square  and  two  thirds,  and  they  are  arched  af¬ 
ter  our  firft  Manner.  Each  of  them  has  a  Clofet,  and  a 
fmall  Stair-cafe  to  go  up  to  the  Mezaninos .  I  had  placed 
two  Chambers,  a  Square  and  a  half  long,  at  the  End  of  the 
Entry,  with  two  Clofets  contiguous  to  them  of  the  fame  Pro¬ 
portion,  which  would  alfo  have  had  their  Stairs  to  the 


*  Plate  LTV. 


Meza* 


i  i<S  PALLADIO’ s 

Mezaninos  :  And  moreover,  I  contrived  a  Hall,  a  Square  and 
two  thirds  long,  with  Pillars  equal  to  thole  of  the  Vejhbule. 
Next  to  this  there  had  been  a  Gallery,  on  both  Sides  where¬ 
of  I  would  have  placed  two  Out-flairs,  and  at  fome  Diftance 
a  Yard,  in  one  Side  of  which  fhould  be  the  Kitchen.  The 
Chambers  in  the  fecond  Story  were  to  be  twenty  Feet  high, 
and  thole  in  the  third  eighteen :  But  each  of  the  Halls  was  to 
be  as  high  as  the  Roof,  and  level  with  the  Chambers  of  the 
fecond  Story  ;  the  Halls  would  have  had  lome  Balconies,  or 
Corridors,  for  theAccommodation  of  Perfons  of  Diftindlion  at 
the  Time  of  Feftivals,  Banquetings,  or  fuch  like  publick 
Amufements. 

The  following  Draught  *  was  deligned  for  a  Situation  in 
Venice .  The  principal  Front  has  three  Orders  of  Pil¬ 
lars,  the  lonick,  the  Corinthian ,  and  the  Compojite.  The 
Vejlibule  projedfs  a  little  outwards,  and  is  adorned  with  four 
Pillars,  equal  to,  and  like  thofe  of  the  Front.  The  Cham¬ 
bers,  which  are  on  the  Wings,  are  arched  after  our  firft  Man¬ 
ner.  Belides  thefe,  there  are  other  fmaller  Chambers,  and 
Clofets  with  Stairs  to  go  up  to  the  Mezaninos.  At  the  End 
of  the  Entry  there  is  a  PalTage  into  a  fecond  Hall,  which  has 
a  little  Court  on  one  Side,  by  which  it  receives  its  Light, 
and  the  principal  Stair-cafe  of  an  Elliptical  Form  on  the  o- 
ther,  and  open  in  the  Middle,  with  Pillars  all  round,  that 
fupport  the  Steps.  At  lome  Dilfance  there  is  another  Paf- 
fage  for  an  Entrance  into  a  Gallery,  the  Pillars  whereof  are 
lonick ,  and  equal  to  thole  of  the  Vejlibule .  There  is  an  A- 
partment  like  thofe  at  the  Entry  on  each  Side  of  this  Gallery, 
but  that  Apartment  which  is  on  the  Left-hand  is  in  a  Place 
which  contradfs  it  a  little  more.  There  is  likewife  a  Court 
hard  by  adorned  quite  round  with  Pillars,  forming  a  Corridor, 
which  ferves  for  the  Apartment  of  the  Women,  in  which  they 
cook,  and  which,  for  that  Reafon,  ought  to  be  backwards.  The 
upper  Part  is  like  the  lower  one,  the  Hall  excepted,  which 
is  above  the  Entry,  has  no  Pillars,  and  is  raifed  to  the  Roof, 


having 


*  Plate  LV. 


ARCHITECTURE.  117 

having  a  Corridor  that  is  level  to  the  Chambers  in  the  third 
Story,  and  might  likewife  ferve  the  upper  Windows,  this 
Hall  having  two  Rows  of  them.  The  Floor  of  the  lefler 
Hall  will  be  of  the  lame  Height  with  the  Arches  of  the  fe- 
cond  Chambers,  thefe  being  twenty-three  Feet  high.  The 
Chambers  in  the  third  Story  are  cieled,  and  are  eighteen 
Feet  high.  All  the  Doors  and  Windows  would  be  dire<ftly 
perpendicular  over  one  another,  and  each  Wall  would  bear 
its  Proportion  of  the  Weight,  were  the  Delign  executed. 
The  Cellars,  Laundries,  and  other  Offices,  would  have  been 
under  Ground. 

I  made  the  following  Draught  *  fome  conliderable  Time 
lince,  at  the  Requeft  of  the  two  Brothers  Count  Francifco 
and  Count  Lodoico  de  TriJJini ,  for  a  Place  they  were  poflef- 
fed  of  in  the  City  of  Vicenza ;  according  to  which  the  Houle 
would  have  had  a  fquare  Vejlibule ,  divided  into  three  Spaces 
by  Rows  of  Corinthian  Pillars,  to  give  more  Strength  and 
Proportion  to  its  Arch.  On  the  Wings  would  have  been 
two  Apartments,  with  feven  Chambers  in  each,  and  three 
Mezaninos  ;  for  which  the  Stairs  would  have  ferved,  which 
are  next  the  Clofets.  The  Height  of  the  great  Rooms  was 
to  be  twenty  T^ven  Feet ;  and  the  Height  of  the  leffer,  and 
the  leaft  of  all,  but  eighteen.  Farther  in  there  was  a  Court, 
furrounded  with  Galleries  of  the  Ionic k.  Older.  The  Pillars 
of  the  firft  Floor  of  the  Fore-front  were  likewife  to  be  lonick . 
and  equal  to  thofe  of  the  Court  ;  thofe  of  the  fecond  Floor 
were  to  be  Corinthian .  The  Hall  would  have  been  entirely 
free,  of  the  fame  Size  with  the  Vejlibule ,  and  raifed  up  to 
the  Roof ;  and  there  would  have  been  a  Corridor  level  to 
the  Floor  of  its  Sojfita.  The  great  Rooms  would  have  been 
all  cieled,  but  the  lefler  and  fmalleft  arched.  The  Women’s 
Aparment,  the  Kitchen,  and  other  Offices  of  the  like  kind, 
were  to  be  on  one  Side  of  the  Court  ;  the  Cellars,  a  Place 
for  Firing,  and  the  reft  of  the  Implements  of  the  Houffiold 
under  Ground. 

The  following  Invention  ft*  was  for  Count  Giacomo  Anga - 
rano ,  who  had  likewife  a  Spot  of  Ground  in  the  fame  City. 

* 


Plate  LVI.  f  Plate  LVII. 


1 1 3  PJLLJDIO's 

The  Pillars  of  the  Front  are  of  the  Compoffie  Order.  The 
Rooms  on  the  Side  of  the  Entry  are  a  Square  and  two  thirds 
long.  There  is  a  Clofet,  with  a  Mezanino  above  it  to  dole 
them.  After  this,  there  is  a  Court  furrounded  with  Porti¬ 
co’s,  the  Pillars  whereof  are  thirty  Feet,  with  Pilafters  be¬ 
hind  them  (which  Vitruvius  calls  Parajlates )  to  fupport  the 
Floor  of  the  fecond  Gallery,  upon  which  there  is  ftill  ano¬ 
ther  open,  one,  level  with  the  higlieft  Floor  in  the  Houle, 
and  railed  all  round.  Farther  in,  is  another  Court,  furround¬ 
ed  likewife  with  Portico’s  ;  the  Pillars  of  the  firft  Order 
whereof  are  Dorick ,  and  of  the  fecond  Ionick.  The  Stairs 
are  in  the  Court,  and  there  are  Stables  over-againft  them, 
where  the  Kitchen  and  the  Servants  Lodgings  might  alfo  be 
placed.  As  to  the  upper  Part,  the  Hall  Ihould  have  been 
without  Pillars,  and  its  Cieling  mull:  have  reached  to  the 
Roof  of  the  Houle.  The  Rooms  would  have  been  all  of  an 
equal  Height  and  Breadth,  having  Clolets  and  Mezamnos 
like  the  lower  ones.  One  could  make  a  Corridor  upon  the 
Pillars  of  the  Fore-front  of  the  Houle,  which  might  be  ve¬ 
ry  commodious  on  feveral  Occalions. 

On  a  very  line  Situation,  called  Gli  Portoni  della  Bra,  in 
Verona,  Count  Gio.  Battijla  della  Torre  had  an  Inclination  to 
build  according  to  the  following  Draught  The  Houle 
was  to  be  improved  with  Gardens,  and  all  manner  of  Deco¬ 
rations  that  can  make  a  Place  agreeable  and  convenient.  The 
fir  ft  Rooms  were  to  be  arched,  and  there  would  have  been 
Mezamnos,  with  fmall  Stairs  to  go  up  to  them  above  all  the 
little  ones.  The  Rooms  in  the  fecond  Story  were  to  becieled. 
The  Height  of  the  Hall  was  to  extend  as  lar  as  the  Roof, 
and  there  would  have  been  a  Corridor  or  Balcony  level  with 
the  Floor  of  the  Soffit.  Its  Light  was  to  have  proceeded 
from  the  Gallery,  and  the  Windows  on  the  Wings. 

The  following  Draught  T  was  given  to  Signior  Gio.  Bat- 
tifia  Garzadore ,  a  Vicentine  Gentleman,  in  which  there  are 

two  Galleries,  the  one  before,  and  the  other  behind,  after 

\  . 


Plate  LVIII.  f  Plate  LIX. 


the 


ARCHITECTURE.  up 

the  Corinthian  Order.  Thefe  Galleries  have  their  Soffits,  and 
fo  likewife  has  the  lower  Hall,  which  is  in  the  inner  Part 
of  the  Houfe,  that  they  may  be  cool  there  in  Summer  ;  and 
it  has  farther  two  Rows  of  Windows.  Its  Soffit  is  fupported 
by  four  Pillars  that  fupport  the  Floor  of  another  fquare  Flail 
which  is  above  it,  but  has  no  Pillars.  It  is  almoft  as  high 
as  it  is  broad,  and  only  higher  as  the  Cornice  is  in  Thick- 
nels.  The  Arches  of  the  great  Chambers  are  raifed  accord- 
to  our  third  Manner,  and  thofe  of  the  Clofets  are  fixteen 
Feet.  The  upper  Chambers  are  cieled.  The  Pillars  of  the 
fecond  Galleries  are  Compofite ,  and  a  fifth  Part  lefs  than  the 
lower  ones.  Upon  thefe  Galleries  are  Frontons ,  which,  as 
I  have  already  faid,  give  a  great  Air  ^nd  Grandeur  to  a 
Building,  making  it  appear  higher  in  the  Middle  than  on 
the  Wings  •  and  beiides,  they  lerve  likewfe  to  contain  the 
Arms  of  the  Family. 

The  following  Draught  %  was  made  at  the  Requeft  of  the 
illuftrious  Signior  Leonardo  Mocenigo ,  for  a  Spot  of  Ground 
which  he  had  on  the  Brenta •  Four  Galleries,  containing  a 
Quarter  of  a  Circle  each,  like  the  Arms  of  the  Houfe,  feem 
to  accoft  and  embrace  thole  that  come  towards  it.  T  he 
Stables  are  on  the  Sides  of  thefe  Galleries,  in  the  Fore-part, 
which  looks  to  the  River  *  and  on  the  Back-part,  taking  up 
alio  the  Sides,  are  the  Kitchen,  and  the  Farmer’s,  and  the 
Husbandmen’s  Apartments.  The  Gallery,  which  is  in  the 
Middle  of  the  Fore-front,  is  after  the  Pycnoftyle  Method  ; 
that  is  to  fay,  the  Pillars  are  very  thick,  and  near  one  ano¬ 
ther  ;  \and  forafmuch  as  thefe  Pillars  are  forty  Feet  high,  they 
have  fome  Pilafters  behind  them,  which  are  two  Feet  broad, 
and  a  Foot  and  three  Inches  thick,  and  fupport  the  Floor  of 
the  upper  Gallery.  There  is  likewife  a  Court  furrounded 
with  Galleries  after  the  lonick  Order.  The  Portico’s  are  as 
broad  as  the  Pillars  are  high,  excepting  only  one  Diameter 
of  a  Pillar.  The  Galleries  and  the  Chambers  which  front 
the  Gardens  are  like  wile  of  the  lame  Breadth,  that  the  Walls, 
which  make  the  Separation  of  all  the  Apartments,  may  be 


dire&ly 


*  Plate  LX, 


120 


PALLADlO's 

diredfly  in  the  Middle,  to  fupport  the  Weight  of  the  Roof. 
The  firft  Chambers  would  be  very  commodious  Dining- 
Rooms,  in  cafe  there  fhould  happen  to  be  more  Company 
than  ufual  in  the  Houfe.  They  are  of  a  double  Proportion. 
The  Rooms  on  the  Angles  are  fquare,  and  are  arched  with 
a  Fajcia.  The  Impoft  is  as  high  as  the  Diameter  of  the 
Room,  and  the  Arches  are  a  third  Part  of  their  Breadth  in 
Height.  The  Hall  is  two  Squares  and  a  half  long  :  Pillars 
are  placed  in,  that  they  may  make  the  Length  and  Breadth 
equal  to  their  Height  $  and  thefe  Pillars  fhould  have  been 
only  in  the  lower  Hall,  that  the  upper  one  might  be  per- 
fedfly  free  and  agreeable.  The  Pillars  of  the  Galleries  a- 
bove  the  Court  are  Corinthian ,  and  a  tilth  lefs  than  the  lower 
ones.  The  upper  Chambers  are  as  high  as  they  are  broad. 
The  Stairs  are  at  the  End  of  the  Court,  and  each  goes  up  a 
contrary  Way  to  the  other. 

With  this  Draught  I  fhall  conclude  thefe  two  Books,  in 
which  I  have  ufed  my  utmoft  Endeavours  briefly  to  put  to¬ 
gether,  and  to  teach  in  the  cleared:  Manner,  as  well  by 
Words  as  by  Draughts,  all  fuch  Things  as  I  have  thought 
moft  requifite  and  important  in  the  Art  of  Building  well  - 
and  particularly  with  Regard  to  private  Houfes,  which  are 
and  beautiful  and  magnificent,  commodious  for  the  Owner, 
to  be  credible  for  the  Builder. 


R  E  M  ARK, 


ARCHITECTURE. 


121 


REMARK. 

I  Cannot  conceive  why  this  Plate*  was  not  inferted  by  Pal¬ 
ladio,  in  feme  Part  of  his  Book ,  among  other  Draughts 
of  private  Houfes ,  fnce  it  plainly  appears  that  it  came  from 
the  fame  Hand  with  all  the  ref ,  and  was  not ,  in  all  Probabili¬ 
ty ,  defgnedfor  any  other  Purpofe ,  unlefs ,  perhaps ,  Grvww 
had  fnifhed  it  time  enough  for  the  Printer ,  ^  have 

feen  above ,  Page  yp,  that  the  like  Accident  has  happened 
once  before .  JB«/,  however ,  ffc  Draught  merits  a  Place  here . 

that  it  maybe  known  for  a  pof  humous  Piece  of  this  our 
_ Author ,  /  foztf  particularized  by  a  different  Char abler,  and 
given  it  the  laf  Place,  to  avoid  breaking  in  upon  the  Order  of 
the  Booh  :  And  moreover  this  Plate,  with  two  others  of  the 
fame  Author  (which  are  the  Plan  and  Elevation  of  the  Do- 
rick  Temple,  and  which  I  referve  for  the  Conchfion  of  this 
l Cork )  were  found  among  the  ref,  which  were  fent  from  Ve¬ 
nice  to  Mr .  de  Chambray  at  Paris,  who  firfi  inferted  them  in 
his  French  Tranfation ,  from  whence  I  extracted  it. 


'  ' 


r 


■ 


; 


'  ■  .  •* 


" 


' 


■ 


■ 


. 


\\  *  v,\ 

■  .  -  :  \  ; 


: 


■  : 
I 


! 


I 


.-f” 


;  f_ 


r#'  \ 


v  '  •• 


. 


:  it 


THE 


THIRD  BOOK 

O  F 

P  A  L  L  A  D  I  0’s 

ARCHITECTURE. 


Treating  particularly  on 


HIGH-WAY'S, 

STREETS, 

BRIDGES, 

SQUARES, 

PALACES, 


BASILICAS,  or 
Courts  of  Judicature . 
X  I  S  T  E  S,  or  Places 
of  Exercifey  &c. 


Tranflated  from  the  ITALIA  iV, 

AND 

The  Defigns  carefully  copied  by  B.  Cole,  Engraver. 


LONDON: 

Printed  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  M.DCC.XXXVL 


i  b 


c 


s4/terr  at .  tom-f'rJ e(- rJtttuj €  Cti-a/i/ut . 


INTRODUCTION. 


WING  already  treated  as  fully  as  I  thought 
proper  of  Private  Edifices  (or  the 
Houfes,  and  other  Apartments,  which  belong 
to  particular  Perfons)  and  having  mentioned 
all  the  Directions  which  are  moll  necefifary,  and  ought  to 
be  obferved  about  the  fame ;  and  having  moreover  given  the 
Defigns  of  feveral  Edifices  which  I  have  built  myfelf,  whe¬ 
ther  within  or  without  the  City,  and  alfo  of  thofe  ereCted 
by  the  Ancients,  according  to  Vitruvius  ;  ’tis  highly  requi- 
fite  that,  turning  my  Treatife  to  more  excellent  and  magni¬ 
ficent  Buildings,  I  fhould  now  proceed  to  difcourfe  of  Pub- 
lick  Fabricks  ;  wherein  (becaufe  they  ccnfifl:  of  larger  Di~ 
menfions,  and  are  beautified  with  more  curious  Decorations 
than  Private  ones,  as  being  for  the  Service  and  Convenience 
of  every-body)  Princes  have  a  very  large  Field  to  demon- 
ffrate  to  the  World  the  Greatnefs  of  their  Souls  ;  and 

I  i  2  Architects 


126  The  Introduction. 

Architects  have  likewife  the  faireft  Opportunity  to  fhew 
their  own  Abilities  in  artful  and  excellent  Inventions.  For 
which  Reafon,  it  is  my  Defire,  as  well  in  this  Book,  wherein 
I  begin  my  Antiquities,  as  in  thofe  others,  which  (God 
willing)  are  to  follow,  that  by  fo  much  the  greater  Di¬ 
ligence  may  be  ufed  in  weighing  well,  and  reflecting 
on,  the  little  I  fhall  fay,  and  the  Deflgns  I  fhall  give; 
by  how  much  greater  Trouble,  and  more  tedious  Watchings, 
I  have  been  reducing  thofe  Fragments,  which  remain  of 
ancient  Buildings,  into  fuch  a  Form,  that,  I  hope,  the  Ad¬ 
mirers  of  Antiquity  may  reap  Pleafure  therefrom,  and  the 
Lovers  of  Architecture  receive  much  Advantage ;  efpecially, 
flnce  much  more  is  learnt,  in  a  fhort  Time,  from  good  Ex¬ 
amples,  or  Originals  by  Menfuration,  and  by  feeing  com¬ 
plete  Buildings,  with  all  their  Parts,  defcribed  on  a  fmall 
piece  of  Paper,  than  can  be  learnt  from  Words  in  a  long 
Time,  whereby  the  Reader  becomes  able,  in  Idea  only, 
and  with  great  Difficulty,  to  attain  to  a  Arm  and  certain 
Knowledge  of  what  he  reads,  and  to  reduce  it  afterwards 
into  Practice  with  great  Fatigue.  Every  Perfon,  who 
knows  any  thing,  may  very  plainly  perceive  how  excellent 
the  Manner  was  which  the  Ancients  ufed  in  their  Buildings; 
flnce,  after  fo  long  a  Space  of  Time,  after  fo  many  De- 
ftruCtions  and  Changes  of  Empires,  there  ftill  continue  in 
Italy ,  and  out  of  it,  the  Footfteps,  or  Ruins,  of  fo  great 
a  Number  of  their  magnificent  Edifices  ;  by  which  Means 
we  come  to  a  certain  Knowledge  of  the  Roman  Virtue  and 
Greatnefs,  which  otherwife,  in  all  Probability,  had  never 
been  believed.  In  this  Third  Book,  therefore,  I  fhall  obferve 
the  following  Method  in  ranging  the  Deflgns  which  will  be 
therein  contained.  Firft  I  fhall  give  thofe  of  Highways, 
Streets,  and  Bridges,  being  that  Branch  of  Architecture 
which  belongs  to  the  Ornament  of  Cities  and  Provinces, 
and  which  ferves  for  the  Convenience  of  all  People  in  ge¬ 
neral  :  For,  as  in  the  other  Edifices  ereCted  by  the  Ancients, 
it  may  with  Eafe  be  difcovered  that  they  fpared  no  Pains  or 
Expences  to  bring  them  to  that  Pitch  of  Perfection,  which 
is  allowed  them  even  by  our  Imperfection  ;  fo  they  took 

great 


The  Introduction.  127 

great  Care  in  the  Management  of  their  Ways,  finishing 
them  fo  as  that,  even  now,  their  Greatnefs  and  Magnani¬ 
mity  may  be  learnt  thereby ;  fince,  in  order  to  render 
them  more  convenient  and  fhort,  they  penetrated  Moun¬ 
tains,  drained  Fens,  and  ere&ed  Bridges,  by  which  Means 
they  made  thofe  Paflages  eafy  and  plain,  which  were  in¬ 
terrupted  by  uneven  Vallies,  or  rapid  Rivers.  In  the  next 
Place  I  fhall  treat  of  Forums ,  or  publick  Places  (according 
as  the  Greeks  and  Romans  made  them)  and  alfo  of  thofe 
Fabricks  which  ought  to  be  built  about  fuch  Squares : 
And  flnce  that  Place,  among  the  reft,  well  deferves  fome 
Confideration,  where  the  Judges  adminifter  Juftice,  which 
the  Ancients  called  a  Bajilica ,  I  fhall  give  the  particular 
Deflgns  thereof.  But  forafmuch  as  it  is  not  fufficient  that 
Countries  and  Cities  be  divided  ever  fo  well  into  their  feveral 
Diftri&s,  and  regulated  by  wholefome  Laws  ;  nor  that  we 
have  Magiftrates,  who,  as  Executors  of  the  Laws,  keep  the 
Citizens  in  Awe ;  if  Men  be  not  likewife  rendered  wife 
by  the  Afliftance  of  Learning,  and  ftrong  and  healthy  by 
the  Exercife  of  their  Bodies  (to  become  thereby  capable  both 
to  govern  others  and  themfelves,  and  to  make  good  Defence 
againft  fuch  as  would  opprefs  them)  this  is  the  principal 
Reafon  why  the  Inhabitants  of  any  Country,  being  at  firft 
divided  into  many  little  Cantons,  united  afterwards  and 
founded  Cities.  And  for  this  Reafon  alfo  (according  to  Vi¬ 
truvius)  the  ancient  Grecians  made  certain  Fabricks  in  their 
Cities,  which  they  called  Felefiras ,  and  Xyftes ,  to  which 
the  Philofophers  reforted  to  difpute  and  difcourfe  about 
the  Sciences,  and  the  Youth  exercifed  themfelves  every  Day : 
As  alfo  the  whole  People  flocked  thither  at  certain  Times, 
to  fee  the  Athletes  (or  Fencers  and  Wreftlers)  play  their 
Prizes.  I  fhall  therefore  conclude  this  third  Book  with  the 
Deflgns  of  thefe  Buildings,  which  fhall  be  followed  by  thofe 
of  Temples  for  the  Exercife  of  Religion,  without  which  no 
civil  Policy  can  poflibly  be  preferved. 


K  k 


THE 


■  r:';  ,  '  ■■■•  '  "• 

r 

:  -  ’■  W  '  '  : 

■  i  *  *  -  -  ’  *  "  y 


. 


5 


-  I 


■ 

;u :  t 


' 


.  :r 

•  t' 

)  ,  10;»/ 

. 

i  j  i". 

■  •  ,■ ; 

■  :  , 

• 

i  . 

: 

<vV f 

/ 

Lri  •' 

. 

1  ,*  : 

i 

<* 

• 

j 


' 


1 


)  ■'  ' 

. 


i 


/ 


.Jedur/i  <rf  f/w  ff&nt/cfcnfj' 
a  CeUvriy  .  ‘ 


Ire  A  . 


$ .  lH*  %/ctlfyv  . 


THE 


THIRD  BOOK. 


CHAP  I. 

Of  High-ways  and  Streets. 

H  E  High-ways  ought  to  be  ffiort,  commo¬ 
dious,  fafe,  pleafant,  and  beautiful.  They  will 
be  fhort  and  commodious,  if  made  in  a  diredt 
Line ;  and  fo  large,  that  neither  Carriages  nor 
Horfes  hinder  each  other  as  they  meet :  For  which  Rea- 
fon  there  was  a  Law  among  the  Ancients,  that  where  the 
Ways  were  drait,  they  fhould  be  eight  Foot  broad  at 
leaf!: ;  and  where  they  were  crooked  or  winding,  at  lead: 
bxteen.  The  Ways  will  be  further  commodious,  if  they 
are  made  every  where  equal ;  that  is,  that  there  are  no 
Places  in  them  but  where  Armies  may  eadly  march,  and 
that  there  is  no  Difficulty  of  Pafiage,  either  from  Waters 
or  Rivers  :  Whence  we  read,  that  the  Emperor  Trajan ,  ha¬ 
ving  a  particular  Regard  to  thefe  two  Circumdances  (which 


are 


130  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

are  abfolutely  requifite  in  all  Ways)  when  he  repaired  the 
famous  Appian  Way,  which  Time  had  in  many  Places  im¬ 
paired,  he  drained  Bogs,  levelled  Mountains,  and  filled  up 
Vallies ;  and,  as  he  made  Bridges  where  they  were  ne- 
ceflary,  he  rendered  Travelling  there  eafy  and  expeditious. 
The  Ways  will  be  fafe,  if  made  on  high  Places;  or  if 
there  be,  as  was  the  Manner  of  the  Ancients,  a  Ditch  and 
Banks  on  each  Side,  when  made  in  the  Plain ;  and  that 
there  be  no  Places  too  near,  where  Highway-men  or  Ene¬ 
mies  may  conveniently  conceal  themfelves :  lo  that  Stran¬ 
gers  and  Armies  may  preferve  themfelves  from  Surprize  in 
fuch  open  Ways,  and  readily  difcover  any  Ambufcades 
which  might  be  laid  for  them.  Such  Ways  then,  as  have 
the  three  Qualifications  aforefaid,  muft  of  Necefiity  be 
beautiful,  and  very  agreeable  to  Paffengers ;  for  in  the 
Country,  their  ftrait  Direction,  and  their  Conveniencies, 
befides  the  various  and  diftant  ProfpeCts  they  afford,  mufl 
very  much  leffen  the  Fatigue,  and  fill  the  Mind  with  Sa¬ 
tisfaction,  prefenting  always  new  Landfchapes  to  the  Eye. 
Nothing  can  be  a  more  agreeable  Sight  in  a  City,  than  a 
ftrait,  even,  and  large  Street,  which  has  magnificent  Houfes 
on  each  Side,  and  is  built  with  fuch  Ornaments  as  are 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  Books.  Now  as  the  Streets 
are  beautified  by  Buildings  in  Towns,  fo  are  the  Ways 
adorned  by  Trees  in  the  Country  ;  which  Trees,  if  planted 
on  both  Sides,  not  only  delight  our  Minds  by  their  Ver¬ 
dure,  but  highly  refrefh  us  with  their  Shade.  Of  fuch 
Kinds  of  Ways  out  of  the  City,  there  are  feveral  in  the 
Vicentine  :  And,  among  the  reft,  thofe  are  moft  celebrated 
which  are  at  Cicogna ,  the  Villa  of  Count  Edward  Thiene , 
and  at  Quinto,  the  Villa  of  Count  O&avio  of  the  fame 
Family,  and  which,  after  I  had  direded  them,  were  beau¬ 
tified  and  adorned  by  the  Diligence  and  Induftry  of  thofe 
curious  Gentlemen.  The  Ways  fo  made,  afford  number- 
lefs  Conveniencies,  becaufe,  being  ftrait,  and  fomewhat  more 
elevated  than  the  reft  of  the  Ground,  always  fpeaking  of 
thofe  in  the  Country,  the  Enemy  may  be  difcovered  at  a 
Diftance,  as  I  faid  before,  in  Time  of  War,  whereby  a 

General 


ARCHITECTURE.  131 

General  is  at  Liberty  to  take  fuch  Refolution  as  he  thinks 
beft :  Moreover,  at  other  Times,  great  Advantage  arifes 
from  their  Shortnefs  and  Eafinefs,  by  Reafon  of  the  Trade 
and  Commerce  that  is  carried  on  by  them :  But  fince  all 
Ways  are  either  within  or  without  the  City,  I  fhall  firft 
mention  the  particular  Qualifications  which  are  requifite  in 
thofe  within  the  City*  and  then  defcribe  how  thofe  fhould 
be  made  which  are  without.  Yet,  forafmuch  as  military 
Ways  are  one  Thing,  and  non- military  are  another,  the 
firft  being  fuch  as  pafs  through  the  Middle  of  the  City, 
lead  from  one  City  to  another,  and  ferve  for  the  common 
Ufe  of  all  Paflengers,  for  Carriages  to  drive,  or  Armies  to 
march ;  and  the  fecond  being  fuch  as  ififue  out  of  the  other* 
leading  from  one  military  Way  to  another,  or  are  made  for 
the  Service  and  Convenience  of  fome  particular  Villa  ;  I 
fhall  treat  of  the  military  Ways  only  in  the  following 
Chapters,  quite  omitting  the  non-military  ones,  becaufe 
thefe  fhould  be  regulated  by  thofe ;  and  becaufe  the  more 
like  they  are,  the  more  commendable  they  will  be. 


LI 


CHAR 


132 


PALLADIO' s 


CHAP.  II. 

Of  the  Dijlribution  of  the  IVays ?  or  Streets , 

within  the  City . 

IN  the  Diftribution  or  Compartment  of  the  Ways  in  a 
City,  or  a  Town,  particular  Care  mud  be  always  taken 
with  refpeft  to  the  Temperament  of  the  Air,  and  the  Cli¬ 
mate  of  the  Country  ;  becaufe  in  fuch  Places,  where  the 
Air  is  cold  or  temperate,  the  Streets  fhould  be  made  large 
and  noble,  fince  by  that  Means  the  City  will  become  more 
wholefome,  commodious,  and  beautiful  ;  for  the  freer  and 
led  piercing  the  Air  is,  the  lefs,  doubtlefs,  will  it  offend 
the  Head  ;  and  therefore,  if  a  Town  is  fituated  in  a  cold 
Place,  or  in  a  keen  Air,  and  the  Houfes  thereof  are  high, 
the  Streets  fhould  be  made  the  larger,  that  the  Sun  may 
vidt  them  in  every  Part.  As  for  what  relates  to  Conve¬ 
nience,  lince  there  is  more  Room  for  Men,  Cattle,  and 
Carriages  in  large  Streets  than  narrow  ones,  there  is  no 
Doubt  but  the  former  are  much  more  commodious  than  the 
latter :  And  it  being  likewife  evident,  that  broad  Streets 
are  more  lightfome,  and  that  one  Side  of  fuch  a  Street  is 
therefore  lefs  eclipfed  by  the  oppofite  Side,  the  Beauty  of 
Churches  and  Palaces  muft  needs  be  feen  to  greater  Ad¬ 
vantage  in  large  than  in  narrow  Streets,  whence  the  Mind 
is  more  agreeably  entertain’d,  and  the  City  more  adorn’d  : 
But  in  cafe  the  Town  is  iituated  in  a  hot  Climate,  the 
Streets  mud  be  made  narrow,  and  the  Houles  built  high  ; 
that  by  the  Shade  and  Narrownefs  of  the  Paffagc,  the  Heat 
of  the  Air  may  be  tempered,  and  by  Confequence  may 
become  more  healthy  :  As  this  is  well  known  by  the 
Indance  of  Rome ,  which,  according  to  Cornelius  Tacitus , 
grew  more  hot,  and  lefs  healthy,  after  Nero  had  en¬ 
larged  its  Streets,  in  order  to  make  it  more  beautiful. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


i33 

In  this  Cafe,  however,  the  Street  that  is  fulleft  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  Trades,  and  the  moft  frequented  by  Strangers,  ought 
to  be  made  large,  and  adorn’d  with  magnificent  and  pom¬ 
pous  Fabricks,  for  the  greater  Ornament  and  Convenience 
of  the  City ;  becaufe  fuch  Strangers  as  pafs  thro’  it,  will 
readily  conclude,  that  the  other  Streets  of  the  City  bear 
a  Proportion  to  the  Largenefs  and  Beauty  of  this.  The 
principal  Streets,  which  we  have  term’d  military ,  ought  to 
be  fo  comparted,  as  to  be  narrow,  and  to  lead  in  a  ftrait 
Line  from  the  Gates  to  the  principal  Place  Or  Square  of  the 
City  ;  and  likewife,  if  the  Situation  will  permit  it,  fometimes 
from  one  Gate  dire&ly  to  the  other  on  the  oppofite  Side;  and 
it  ought  to  be  remembered,  that  according  to  the  Compafs 
of  the  City,  there  fhould  be  made  one  or  more  fuch  Squares 
a  little  lefs  than  the  principal  one,  in  the  fame  Street,  and 
on  the  fame  Line,  or  in  any  other  fuch  Street,  and  leading 
from  which  of  the  Gates  you  pleafe.  The  other  Streets, 
at  leaf!:  the  moft  beautiful  of  them,  ought  not  only  to 
lead  to  the  chief  Square,  or  opeti  Place,  but  alfo  to  the 
moft  noted  Churches,  Palaces,  Porticos,  and  other  publick 
Edifices :  But  above  all,  particular  Care  muft  be  taken  in 
this  Diftribution  of  the  Streets,  that  (according  to  Vitruvius  s 
fixth  Chapter  of  his  firft  Book)  they  do  not  face  any  of  the 
principal  Winds  dire&ly,  left  they  fhould  blow  violently  into 
the  fame,  but  that  they  may  come  broken,  gentle,  purified? 
and  fpent ;  for  otherwife  you  will  fall  into  the  fame  In¬ 
convenience  with  thofe  of  old,  who  comparted  the  Streets 
of  Metelinum  ;  from  which  City  the  whole  Ifland  of  Lesbes 
has  taken  its  Name.  The  Ways,  or  Streets,  of  a  Town  ought 
always  to  be  pav’d  ;  and,  in  the  Confulfhip  of  Emilius , 
we  are  told,  they  begun  to  pave  the  Streets  of  Rome ,  fome 
whereof  are  feen  at  this  Day,  and  are  all  even,  confifting 
of  Stones  unequal  in  their  Size  and  Angles :  The  Perform¬ 
ance  of  which  Sort  of  Paving,  fhall  be  taken  Notice  of 
in  its  proper  Place.  But  if  you  would  have  the  Place 
for  the  Paffage  of  Men  divided  from  that  for  the  life  of 
Carriages  and  Beafts,  Porticos ,  in  my  Opinion,  fhould  be 

made 


PALLADIO' s 


i34 

made  on  each  Side  of  the  Street,-  under  the  Cover  where¬ 
of,  the  Citizens  may  tranfadf  their  Affairs,  without  being 
injured  by  the  Sun,  the  Rain,  or  the  Snow;  and  almoft 
all  the  Streets  of  Padua *  which  is  a  very  ancient  City, 
and  famous  for  its  Univerfity,  are  in  this  Manner.  Or 
if  there  be  no  Porticos ,  in  which  Cafe  the  Streets  will  be 
larger,  and  more  pleafant,  a  Border  ought  to  be  pav’d 
on  each  Side  with  broad  Stones,  or  fquare  Tiles,  which 
are  a  kind  of  Bricks  fomewhat  larger  than  Quadrels  \  be- 
caufe  in  walking  they  never  hurt  the  Feet:  So  that  the 
Middle  of  the  Street  will  be  left  for  Carriages  and  Beafts, 
and  may  be  paved  with  any  hard  Stone  whatfoever. 
There  ought  to  be  a  Kennel  in  the  Middle  of  the  Street, 
towards  which  each  Side  is  gently  to  dope,  that  the  Rain¬ 
water,  which  falls  off  the  Houfes,  may  run  all  into  one 
Channel,  and  have  a  free  and  eafy  Courfe ;  by  which 
Means  the  Streets  will  be  left  clean,  and  no  bad  Air  will 
be  produced ;  which  will  happen  when  fuch  Waters  are 
collected  into  one  Place,  and  ftagnate  there. 


\ 


1 


t 


I3y  '/niys  fiorzsj 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


*35 


CHAP.  III. 

Of  the  High-W'ays,  or  Roads  without  the  City . 

r  I  d H  E  Ways  without  the  City  muft  be  made  large, 
JL  convenient  bn  both  Sides,  and  be  planted  with 
Trees,  by  whofe  Shade  the  Pafiengers  will  be  fecured  from 
the  Heat  of  the  Sun  in  Summer,  and  their  Eyes  agreeably  v 
refrefh’d  by  their  Verdure.  The  Ancients  were  very  care- 
ful  and  laborious  about  fuch  Ways ;  and  created  Prefects, 
Overfeers,  or  Curators  thereof,  that  they  might  continue  in 
good  Repair.  They  made  feveral  of  thofe  Ways,  which, 
tho’  fpoilt  by  Time,  yet  Rill  preferve  in  fome  Places  the 
Memory  of  their  Beauty  and  Convenience :  But  the  Fla - 
minian  and  Appian  Ways  are  the  moft  famous.  The 
firft:  was  made  by  the  Conful  Flaminius ,  after  his  Con- 
queft  over  the  Ligurians  (or  Genoefe.)  It  took  its  Beginning 
from  the  Gate  Flamentana  (now  called  Porto  del  Fopolo) 
and  palling  thro’  Tufcany  and  Umbria ,  led  to  Ariminum ; 
from  whence  it  was  afterwards  continued  by  Marcus  Le- 
pidus  his  Collegue  to  Bononia  (now  Bologna)  and  winding 
round  the  Marfhes,  near  the  Foot  of  the  Alps ,  ended  at 
Aquileia .  The  Appian  Way  owed  its  Name  to  Appius  Clau¬ 
dius ,  who  made  it  with  great  Labour  and  Expence ;  whence, 
on  Account  of  its  wondrous  Magnificence  and  Art,  it  was 
called,  The  ^ueen  of  Roads.  This  Way  began  from  the  Co- 
li/eo  (or  Pompey\  Amphitheatre)  and  leading  thro’  the  Porta 
Capena  (a  Gate  of  Rome  fo  called)  it  extended  as  far  as 
Brundujtwn.  It  was  carried  no  farther  than  Capua  by  Ap¬ 
pius  ;  and  who  was  the  Author  of  it  beyond,  is  uncertain, 
tho’  by  fome  it  is  imagined  to  be  Cefar ,  becaufe  Plutarch 
lays,  that  the  Care  of  this  Way  was  committed  to  Cefar , 
and  he  laid  out  a  large  Sum  of  Money  upon  it.  It  was 
laft  of  all  repaired  by  the  Emperor  Trajan,  who,  as  I  before 
obferved,  by  draining  of  Marfhes,  levelling  of  Mountains, 
filling  up  of  Vallies,  and  making  Bridges  where  it  was 

M  m  requifite. 


136  PAL  LAD  10' s 

requiftte,  made  it  both  expeditious  and  agreeable  to  Paf- 
fengers.  The  Aurelian  Way  is  alfo  very  famous ;  fo  called 
from  Aurelius ,  a  Citizen  of  Rome,  who  made  it.  It  took 
its  Beginning  from  the  Aurelian  Gate,  now  called,  The 
Gate  of  St.  Pancrace  ;  and  extending  itfelf  along  the  ma¬ 
ritime  Places  of  Tufcany ,  ended  at  Pifa.  The  Numentan , 
the  Prenejlin ,  and  the  Lahican  Ways,  were  all  equally  ce¬ 
lebrated.  The  firft  began  from  the  Gate  Viminalis ,  now 
called,  The  Gate  of  St.  Agnes,  and  extended  to  the  City 
of  Numentum :  The  fecond  at  the  Gate  Efquilina ,  now 
Called  that  of  St.  Laurence  :  The  third  from  the  Gate  Ne- 
via  (which  is  now  the  Porta-maggiore)  and  both  led  to 
the  City  of  Preneflcf  now  called  Pelleflrino ,  and  to  the  ce¬ 
lebrated  City  of  Labicana.  There  were  feveral  other  Ways, 
fuch  as  the  Via  Salaria ,  the  Collatina ,  the  Latina ,  and 
others,  which  Authors  have  mentioned  and  made  famous, 
every  one  of  which  took  its  Name  either  from  the  Man 
who  made  if,  or  from  the  Gate  where  it  begun,  or  from 
the  Place  where  it  ended  :  But  the  P or tuenfian  Way,  which 
reached  from  Rome  to  Ofia ,  furpafled  them  all,  no  doubt, 
for  Beauty  and  Convenience ;  becaufe,  as  Alberti  affirms, 
it  was  divided  into  two  Ways,  between  each  of  which  there 
was  a  Courfe  of  Stones  a  Foot  higher  than  the  reft  of  the 
Way,  and  which  ferved  for  a  Divffion  ;  fo  that  People 
went  one  Way,  and  returned  the  other,  whereby  they 
avoided  all  Hindrance  or  Joftling  of  each  other ;  and  it 
was  indeed  a  very  commodious  Invention,  conftdering  the 
vaft  Concourfe  of  People  that  flock’d  then  to  Rome  from 
all  Parts  of  the  World.  The  Ancients  made  two  Kinds 
of  thofe  military  Roads  ;  that  is,  one  was  paved  with 
Stones,  and  the  other  covered  all  over  with  Gravel  and 
Sand.  The  Ways  of  the  former  kind  were  divided  into 
three  Spaces,  as  far  as  by  fome  Remains  of  them  we  have 
been  able  to  conjecture.  On  the  middlemofl,  which  was 
higher  than  the  other  two,  and  which  rofe  a  little  in  the 
Middle,  that  no  Water  might  reft  upon  it,  but  run  off 
immediately,  went  the  People  who  travelled  on  Foot.  It 
was  paved  with  irregular  Stones ;  that  is,  fuch  as  had  un¬ 
equal 


*37 


ARCHITECTURE. 

equal  Sides  and  Angles ;  in  which  Kind  of  Paving,  as  is 
elfewhere  obferved,  they  made  ufe  of  a  fquare  Rule  of  Lead, 
which  they  opened  and  fhut  according  to  the  Figure  of 
the  Stones ;  by  which  Means  they  joined  them  perfectly 
well  together,  and  with  great  Difpatch.  The  other  two 
Spaces  on  each  Side  of  this,  were  made  a  little  lower, 
and  covered  with  Sand  and  fine  Gravel,  being  appro¬ 
priated  for  the  Paffage  of  Horfes  and  other  Cattle.  Each 
of  thefe  Spaces  were  but  half  as  large  as  that  in  the  Middle, 
from  which  they  were  divided  by  a  Range  of  Stones 
pitch’d  Edge  -ways ;  and  there  were  other  Stones  fomewhat 
higher,  at  certain  Diftances,  on  which  they  got  up  when 
they  mounted  on  Horfeback,  the  Ancients  not  having  had 
the  Ufe  of  Stirrups.  Befides  the  Stones  for  this  Purpofe, 
there  were  others  a  confiderable  deal  higher,  fet  at  an 
equal  Diftahce,  on  which  were  engraved  the  Miles  of  the 
whole  journey.  Thefe  were  fet  up,  and  the  Ways  mea- 
fured,  by  Gneus  Gracchus.  The  military  Ways  after  the 
fecond  Manner;  that  is,  thofe  made  of  Sand  and  Gravel, 
were  raifed  by  the  Ancients  a  little  in  the  Middle ;  for 
which  Reafon,  no  Water  being  able  to  reft  upon  them, 
and  confifting  of  Matter  very  apt  to  become  dry  in  a 
fhort  Time,  they  were  always  even  and  fmooth,  without 
either  Duft  or  Dirt.  Of  this  Sort  there  is  one  to  be  leen 
in  Friuli ,  which  leads  into  Hungary ,  by  the  Inhabitants 
it  is  called  the  Poflhumous  Way.  There  is  another  of  them 
in  the  Country  of  Padua ,  which  beginning  from  the  faid 
City,  at  the  Place  called  Argere ,  paffes  thro’  the  midft 
of  Cicogita ,  the  Villa  of  the  two  Brothers,  the  Counts  Ed¬ 
ward  and  Theodore  de  Fhieni ,  and  leads  to  thofe  Alps  which 
divide  Italy  from  Germany.  The  following  Draught  *  is 
of  the  firft  Manner  of  Ways,  by  which  you  may  under¬ 
hand  how  the  Ojlian  Way  was  made  ;  but*  I  have  made  no 
Defign  of  the  fecond  Manner  of  Ways,  becaufe  it  is,  in 
itfelf,  very  eafy  ;  neither  is  there  any  Difficulty  to  make 
them  fwelling  towards  the  Middle,  in  order  to  make  the 
Waters  run  off. 


*  Plate  I. 


A.  The 


i3& 


PALLADIO' s 


A.  Tlhe  middle  Space  for  the  Pajfage  of  People  on  Foot . 

B.  7 he  Ways  on  each  Side  for  the  Pajfage  of  Carriages 

and  Cattle . 

C.  Ihe  Stones ,  3y  the  Help  of  which  People  got  on 

Horfeback. 

D.  *Ihe  military  Stones,  to  mark  the  Dijlances  to  and 

from  Rome. 

E.  A  SeSlion  of  the  three  Ways ,  Jhewing  their  different 

Levels. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Concerning  the  building  of  Bridges ,  and  the  befl 
Manner  of  their  Situation. 

TH  E  Convenience  of  Bridges  was  firft  contrived,  be- 
caufe  many  Rivers,  by  Reafon  of  their  Largenefs, 
Depth,  and  Rapidity,  are  not  fordable ;  on  which  Account, 
it  may  be  properly  enough  faid,  that  Bridges  are  a  prin¬ 
cipal  Part  of  the  Way,  and  a  Street,  or  Way  continued 
over  the  Water :  For  which  Reafon  Bridges  ought  to  have 
the  felf-fame  Qualifications,  that  we  judged  neceftary  in  all 
other  Buildings ;  which  are,  that  they  fhould  be  com¬ 
modious,  beautiful,  and  lafting.  They  will  be  commodi¬ 
ous,  when  they  are  not  raifed  above  the  Level  of  the  reft 
of  the  Way  ;  or,  if  they  are  raifed,  when  they  are  of  eafy 
Afcent  and  Defcent ;  and  likewife  when  fuch  a  Place  is 
chofen  for  Building  them,  as  fhall  be  moft  convenient  for 
the  whole  Province,  or  the  whole  City,  according  as  they 
are  built  within  or  without  the  Walls ;  and  for  that  Reafon 
that  Place  is  to  be  made  Choice  of,  to  which  there  is  a 
commodious  Pafiage  from  all  other  Parts ;  I  mean,  that  it 
be  towards  the  Middle  of  the  Province,  or  the  City  (as  Ni- 

cotrisy 


ARCHITECTURE.  i39 

cofr/Sj  Queen  of  Babylon ,  did  in  the  Bridge  which  fhe 
ere&ed  over  the  Euphrates)  and  not  in  a  Corner,  where 
it  can  be  only  advantageous  to  a  few.  Bridges  v^ill  be 
fine  and  lafting,  if  they  are  made  after  the  Manner,  and 
according  to  the  Proportions  which  fhall  be  particularly 
fpecified  in  this  Book  :  But  in  the  Choice  of  a  Situation 
for  ereding  them,  Care  mull  be  taken  to  fix  on  fuch 
a  Place,  as  fhall  give  good  Grounds  to  exped  that  the 
Bridge  may  be  perpetual,  and  where  it  may  be  ereded 
with  lefs  expence,  if  poflible,  than  any  where  elfe.  That 
Place  therefore  muft  be  chofen  where  the  River  is  moll 
fhallow,  and  where  its  Bed  or  Bottom  is  even  and  uniform, 
that  is,  either  of  Stone,  or  of  Gravel-flone  ;  becaufe  (as 
I  obferved  in  my  firft  Book,  where  I  treated  of  Places 
for  laying  Foundations)  Stone  and  Gravel  are  excellent 
Foundations  in  Waters.  Moreover,  Swallows  and  Whirl¬ 
pools,  and  that  Part  of  the  River’s  Bed  which  is  fandy,  or 
has  much  Clay  in  it,  muft  be  avoided ;  becaufe,  being 
conflantly  moved  by  the  Water-Floods,  they  frequently 
alter  the  Bed  ;  and  the  Foundations  being  thus  under¬ 
mined,  the  Work  muft  of  Neceflity  fall  to  Ruin.  But  in 
Cafe  the  Bed  of  the  River  be  altogether  of  Gravel  or 
Sand,  then  the  Foundations  muft  be  made  according  to 
the  Directions  I  fhall  lay  down  hereafter,  when  I  treat  - 
of  Stone-Bridges.  Due  Care  ought  likewife  to  be  taken 
in  the  Choice  of  a  Bridge’s  Situation,  that  it  be  in  that 
Part  of  a  River  where  its  Courfe  is  narroweft  ;  fince  the 
winding  and  uneven  Parts  of  the  Banks  are  liable  to 
be  wafhed  away  by  the  Waters,  whence  the  Bridge  would 
become  deftitute  of  Land-tyes,  in  fuch  a  Cafe,  and  remain 
an  Ifland  :  Moreover,  in  Time  of  Land-Floods,  the  Water 
draws  into  thofe  Turnings  and  Windings  all  the  Matter 
that  it  wafhes  from  the  Banks  and  the  Fields ;  which  be¬ 
ing  unable  to  move  direCtly  forwards,  and  refting  there,  it 
flops  other  Things,  and  turning  towards  the  Piles,  fills  up 
the  Arches,  by  which  Means  the  Work  fuffers  fo  very  much, 
that  it  falls  to  Ruin,  in  Time,  by  the  Weight  of  the 
Water.  Make  Choice  therefore  of  fuch  a  Place  for  ereding 
a  Bridge,  as  may  be  in  the  Middle  of  a  Province  or  City, 

N  n  and 


1 4o  PALL^D10\ 

and  by  Confequence  commodious  for  all  the  Inhabitants : 
As  alio  where  the  Current  of  the  River  is  dired,  and  its 
Bed  Ihallow,  even,  and  uniform.  But  fince  Bridges  are 
made  either  of  Timber  or  Stone,  I  fhall  treat  of  both  Me¬ 
thods;  and,  at  the  fame  Time,  give  you  the  Draughts 
of  feveral  Bridges,  both  ancient  and  modern. 


&QQ  ^OsgO09QQ9QQ9OQSOQ^QQQ9OQQQG9QQCOQSOQQO0 


CHAP.  V. 

Of  Wooden  Bridges ,  and  what  Obfervations  are 
to  be  made  in  the  EreSling  of  them . 

BRIDGES  are  built  of  Wood,  either  for  fome  one 
particular  Occafion,  as  for  all  fuch  Accidents  as 
ufually  happened  in  War  (of  which  Kind  the  moft  noted 
is  that  which  Cefar  ereded  over  the  Rhine)  or  that  they 
may  be  of  univerfal  Service.  Thus  we  are  informed  that 
Hercules ,  after  he  had  killed  Geryon ,  vidorioufly  drove 
his  Herd  thro’  Italy,  and  built  the  firft:  Bridge  that  ever 
was  upon  the  Tyber ,  in  that  Place  where  Rome  was  after¬ 
wards  founded ;  for  which  Reafon  it  was  called  the  Holy 
Bridge.  It  was  fituated  on  that  Part  of  the  River  where 
Ancus  Tdartius  had  afterwards  built  the  Sublician  Bridge , 
which  was  likewife  made  all  of  Timber,  and  the  feveral 
Pieces  of  it  were  fo  artificially  joined  together,  that  it 
could  be  taken  up,  and  carried  to  any  Place  where  Ne- 
cefiity  fhould  require  it  ;  neither  were  there  any  Nails 
or  Iron  in  it,  for  any  Ufe.  It  is  fiill  a  Secret  how  it  was 
contrived,  only  Authors  tell  us,  that  it  was  laid  over  large 
Pieces  of  Timber,  which  fupported  others,  and  from  thence 
was  called  Sublician ,  becaufe,  in  the  Volfcian  Language, 
fuch  Pieces  were  called  Sublices.  This  was  the  Bridge  that 
Horatius  Codes  defended  fo  advantageoufiy  for  his  Country, 

and 


ARCHITECTURE.  i4t 

and  fo  glorioufly  for  himfelf.  It  was  built  near  Ripa ,  where 
fome  Remains  of  it  are  to  be  feen  at  this  Day  in  the 
midft  of  the  River ;  for  it  was  afterwards  made  of  Stone 
by  Emilius  Lepidus ,  at  the  Time  when  he  was  Preetor , 
and  repaired  by  the  Emperors  Tiberius  and  Antoninus  Pius . 
Such  wooden  Bridges  ought  to  be  built  very  ftrong  and 
fubftantial,  and  of  large  Pieces  of  Timber  ftrongly  joined 
together,  fo  as  that  there  be  no  Danger  of  their  breaking, 
either  by  the  vaft  Number  of  Men  and  Beafts  that  pals 
over  them,  or  by  the  Weight  of  Carriages  and  Artillery  ; 
and  that  they  be  not  ruinated  by  Floods  or  Inundations. 
For  which  Reafon,  fuch  as  are  made  at  the  Gates  of 
Cities  (which  are  called  Draw-Bridges,  becaufe  they  can 
be  drawn  up  or  let  down)  are,  inftead  of  being  paved, 
generally  overlaid  with  Rods  and  Plates  of  Iron,  left  they 
fhould  be  broken,  or  worn,  by  the  Wheels  of  Carriages, 
or  the  Feet  of  Cattle.  The  Pieces  of  Timber  (as  well  fuch 
as  are  fixed  in  the  Water,  as  thofe  which  make  the 
Length  and  Breadth  of  the  Bridge)  ought  to  be  long 
and  thick,  in  Proportion  to  what  the  Depth,  the  Breadth, 
and  what  the  rapid  Current  of  the  River  fhall  require: 
But  fince  the  Particulars  are  innumerable,  no  certain  or  de¬ 
terminate  Rule  can  be  given  about  them  ;  and  therefore  I 
fhall  prefent  you  with  fome  Draughts,  and  particularize 
their  feveral  Proportions,  by  which  every  one,  as  he  has  an 
Opportunity,  or  as  his  Genius  is  happy,  may  take  his  Mea- 
fures,  and  perform  what  fhall  be  praife-worthy. 


CHAP. 


1^2 


PALLADIO' s 


CHAP.  VI. 


Concerning  the  Bridge  which  Caefar  ordered  to 
be  laid  over  the  Rhine. 


U  L  I  U  S  C  JE  S  A  R  having  determined  to  pals 
J  the  Rhine  (as  he  himfelf  informs  us  in  the  fourth 
Book  of  his  Commentaries)  that  the  Germans  might  be 
apprehenlive  of  the  Roman  Power ;  and  concluding  that 
it  would  neither  be  fafe  in  itfelf,  nor  a  Thing  becoming 
him,  or  the  People  of  Rome,  to  pafs  in  Boats,  he  forth¬ 
with  ordered  a  Bridge,  which  was  a  mod  curious  and 
difficult  Piece  of  Workmanfhip,  on  Account  of  the  Large- 
nefs,  Depth,  and  rapid  Stream  of  the  River.  But  after 
what  Manner  this  Bridge  was  contrived,  altho’  he  exprefly 
mentions  it,  is  yet  very  difficult  to  determine,  becaufe  we 
have  not  an  adequate  Idea  of  the  Force  of  fome  Terms  in 
his  Defcription ;  and  various  Draughts  have,  for  that  Rea- 
fon,  been  made  of  it  according  to  Mens  various  Concep¬ 
tions.  I  having  made  mention  of  it  likewife  a  little  higher, 
I  would  not  lofe  this  Opportunity  of  fetting  down  the  * 
Deflgn  which  I  formed  of  it  in  my  Youth,  when  I  fird 
read  thofe  Commentaries :  becaufe  it  agrees  very  much,  as 
I  take  it,  with  the  Words  of  Ccefar\  and  alfo  becaufe 
it  fucceeded  to  Admiration,  as  Experience  has  fhewn,  in 
a  Bridge  which  I  built  immediately  over  the  Bachiglione 
without  Vicenza.  I  do  not,  however,  intend  hereby  to  con¬ 
fute  the  Opinion  of  others,  who  were  all  of  them  very 
valuable  Perfons,  and  highly  praife-worthy,  for  leaving  the 
Defigns  of  this  Bridge  in  their  Books,  according  to  their 
Idea  of  it  ;  thus  by  their  Labour  and  Ingenuity  making 
it  very  eafy  to  our  Underftandings.  But  before  I  give  my 
Delign,  I  ffiall  quote  the  Words  of  Ccefar ,  which  are  as 


*  Plate  II. 


follows. 


ARCHITECTURE.  143 

follows.  Rationem  igitur  Pont  is  hanc  inflituit.  fligna  bind 
fequipedalia ,  paululum  ab  into  preeacuta ,  dimenfa  ad  alti- 
tudinem  fluminis ,  intervallo  pedum  duorum  inter  fe  jungebat. 
Hcec  cum  machinationibus  immifla  in  jiumen  defixerat,fleftu- 
cifque  adegerat ;  non  fublicce  modo  direSia  ad  perpendiculum , 
fed  prona  ac  fafigiata ,  ut  fecundum  naturam  fluminis  pro- 
cumberent.  His  item  contraria  duo ,  ad  eundeifi  modum 
junSla,  intervallo  pedum  quadragenum ,  ab  inferiore  parte 
contra  vim  atque  impetum  fluminis  converfa ,  flatuebat .  Hcec 
utraque ,  infuper  bipedalibus  immijfls ,  quantum  eorum  tigno- 
rum  junSlura  trabibus ,  diflab  at,  binis  utrinque  fibulis  ab  ex¬ 
trema  parte  diflinebantur  :  ^uibus  difclufis ,  atque  in  con- 
trariam  partem  revinSlis ,  tanta  erat  operis  firmitudo ,  #/- 
a?  rerum  natura ,  quo  major  vis  aquce  flefe  incita- 
vijfet ,  hoc  arSlius  illigata  tenerentur .  direSia  injeSla 

materia  contexebantur ,  longuriis  cratibufque  conflerne- 

bantur  ;  nihilfecius ,  fublicce ,  inferiorem  partem  flumi- 

nis  oblique  adjungebantur ,  ariete  fubjeSlce  cum 

omni  opere  conjunSlce ,  fluminis  exciperent  :  & 

fupra  pontem  mediocri  Jpacio ,  Ji  arborum  trunci  five  na¬ 

ves,  dejiciendi  operis  cdufa,  eflent  a  barbaris  mi  flee,  his  de- 
fenforibus  earum  rerum  vis  minueretur ,  neu  ponti  nocerent. 
The  true  Senfe  and  Meaning  whereof  is,  that  he  ordered 
a  Bridge  to  be  made  after  this  Manner.  He  joined  two 
Pieces  of  Timber  together,  each  a  Foot  and  a  half  thick, 
at  two  Foot  Diftance,  pretty  fharp  towards  the  lower 
End,  and  as  long  as  the  Depth  of  the  River  required. 
Having  ftuck  thefe  Pieces  in  the  Bottom  of  the  River,  by 
Engines,  he  directed  them  to  be  rammed  down,  not  per¬ 
pendicularly,  but  inclining  according  to  the  Courfe  of  the 
River.  Over-againft  thefe,  in  the  lower  Part  of  the  River, 
and  at  forty  Foot  Diftance,  he  fixed  two  others,  joined 
together  after  the  fame  Manner,  leaning  thefe  againft  the 
Stream,  and  Force  of  the  River.  They  laid  long  Summers 
two  Foot  thick  (according  to  their  Diftance  from  each 
other)  between  thefe  two  double  Piles,  which  being  held 
fall  by  two  Braces  at  each  End,  and  preffing  contrary  to 
each  other,  fuch  was  the  Strength  and  Nature  of  the 

O  o  Work, 


PALLADIO' s 


144 

Work,  that  as  the  Force  of  the  Water  was  the  greater, 
the  fader  was  all  linked  together.  Thefe  Summers  were 
joined  with  others  acrofs  them,  and  covered  with  long  Poles 
and  Hurdles.  Over  and  above  this,  there  were  feveral 
River-Piles,  or  Pods,  in  the  lower  Part  of  the  River,  which 
Hoping  againd  the  Bridge,  ferved  for  Buttrefles  againd  the 
Force  of  the  River.  Others  were  added  in  the  upper 
Part  of  the  River,  at  fome  fmall  Diftance  from  the  Bridge, 
that  in  Cafe  the  Trunks  of  great  Trees  or  Ships  fhould  be 
let  down  by  the  Barbarians  to  demolifh  the  Works,  the 
Violence  of  luch  Things  fhould  be  ledened  by  thefe  De¬ 
fences*  fo  that  the  Bridge  might  not  be  damaged.  Thus 
Cafar  defcribes  the  Bridge  which  he  laid  over  the  Rhine ; 
and  the  following  Draught  feems  to  me  very  conformable 
to  that  Defcription.  The  principal  Parts  of  it  are  marked 
by  Letters. 

A.  Ihe  two  Pieces  of  Timber  joined  together ,  each  one  Foot 

and  a  half  thick ,  pretty  Jharp  towards  the  lower  End, 
not  fixed  perpendicularly  in  the  River ,  but  inclining 
according  to  the  Stream ,  and  at  two  Foot  difiance 
from  each  other . 

B.  7 he  other  two  Pieces  of  "Timber  fixed  in  the  lower  Part 

of  the  River ,  over-againfi  the  Pieces  juft  mentioned , 
and  forty  Foot  difiant  from  them ,  but  inclining 
againft  the  Stream . 

C.  The  Figure  of  one  of  thofe  Pieces  by  itfelf. 

D.  The  Pieces  of  Timber ,  every  TV ay  two  Foot  thick ,  making 

the  Breadth  of  the  Bridge ,  which  was  forty  Foot. 

E.  One  of  thofe  Pieces  by  itfelf. 

F.  The  Braces ,  which  being  open ,  or  divided  one  from  the 

other,  and  bound  contrariwife  (that  is,  one  in  the 
inner ,  and  the  other  in  the  outer  Part ;  one  above, 
and  another  under  the  Pieces  two  Foot  thick,  which 
made  the  Breadth  of  the  Bridge)  did  fo  corroborate 
the  whole  Work,  that  the  greater  the  Violence  of 
the  Water,  or  the  more  pondrous  any  Load  was  upon 
the  Bridge,  the  more  it  united,  and  became  the  firmer . 


G.  Is 


ARCHITECTURE. 


*45 


G.  Is  one  of  the  Braces ,  or  Ties,  by  itfelf. 

H.  The  Pieces  of  Timber  which  were  laid  the  Length  of  the 

Bridge ,  and  were  covered  with  Poles  a?id  Hurdles . 

I.  The  Pofls  below  the  Bridge ,  which  inclining  againfl , 

and  joining  to  the  whole  TV irk,  reffled  the  Force 
of  the  Stream . 

K.  The  Pofls  above  the  Bridge  for  its  Defence ,  in  Cafe  the 

Enemy  -  fhould  let  down  the  River  Trees  or  V ejfels 
to  deftroy  it . 

L.  Two  of  thofe  Pieces  of  Timber ,  which  being  joined  toge¬ 

ther,  flood  in  the  River,  not  perpendicularly,  but 
inclining . 

M.  The  Head  of  the  Pieces  which  ?nade  the  Breadth  of 

the  Bridge. 


f8»  €£  &  €§  lb  $1  n>  €l  §&  «*$  §8*  «9£ §5*  $8*  €§  §&  *8§  $>  «&§  §gt 


CHAP.  VII. 


Concerning  the  Bridge  on  the  Cifmone. 

TH  E  Cifmone  is  a  River,  which  falling  from  the 
Mountains  that  divide  Italy  from  Germany,  enters 
into  the  Brenta  a  little  above  Bajfano  ;  and  forafmuch  as 
it  is  very  rapid,  and  the  Mountaneers  lend  down  great 
Quantities  of  Timber  by  it,  a  Refolution  was  taken  to  build 
a  Bridge  over  it:  Yet  without  fixing  any  Polls  in  the  Water, 
becaufe  they  were  fhaken  and  worn  by  the  Force  of  the 
Stream,  and  by  the  Stones  and  Trees  which  it  conftantly 
rouled  down  ;  whence  Count  Giacomo  Hngaranno,  who  is 
Lord  of  the  Bridge,  was  under  the  Neceffity  of  repairing  it 
every  Year.  *  The  Invention  of  this  Bridge  is  well  worth 
our  Obfervation,  in  my  Opinion,  becaufe  it  may  be  fervice- 
able  wherever  thofe  Difficulties  occur  ;  and  further,  becaufe 
Bridges  fo  built  are  fubftantial,  beautiful,  and  commodious: 
Subftantial,  becaufe  all  their  Parts  fupport  each  other  mu¬ 
tually  ;  beautiful,  becaufe  the  Carpenter’s  Work  is  very  or- 


*  Plate  nr. 


namental; 


146  PA  L  L  A  D  I  Os 

namental ;  and  commodious,  becaufe  they  are  plain,  and 
in  the  fame  Line  with  the  reft  of  the  Way.  The  River, 
over  which  this  Bridge  ftands,  is  a  hundred  Foot  broad. 
This  Breadth  is  divided  into  fix  equal  Parts,  and  at  the 
End  of  each  Part  (except  at  the  Banks,  which  are  ftrength- 
ned  with  two  folid  Butments  of  Stone)  are  placed  the 
Beams  which  conftitute  the  Bed  and  Breadth  of  the  Bridge  \ 
upon  which,  leaving  a  little  Space  at  their  Extremities,  other 
Beams  are  laid  longwife,  which  form  the  Sides  of  the  Bridge. 
Over  thefe,  direct  with  the  firft,  are  difpofed  the  Collonelli , 
or  little  Pillars  on  the  one  Side  and  the  other  ;  for  fo  we 
generally  call  fuch  Pieces,  as,  in  Works  of  that  Kind,  are 
fet  up  an  end.  Thefe  little  Pillars  are  faftened  to  the 
Beams  (which,  as  I  before-hinted,  make  the  Breadth  of 
the  Bridge)  with  Iron  Cramps,  contrived  to  pafs  thro’  a 
Hole  made  for  that  Purpofe  in  the  Heads  of  the  faid 
Beams,  in  that  Part  which  advances  beyond  thofe  Pieces 
which  conftitute  the  Sides.  Thefe  Cramps  being  in  the 
upper  Part  along  the  faid  ftrait  and  plain  Pillars  perforated 
in  divers  Places,  and  in  the  under  Part,  near  to  thofe  thick 
Beams  which  we  before  mentioned,  and  with  one  Hole 
moderately  big,  went  into  the  Pillars,  and  faftened  again 
below  with  little  Bars,  or  Pins  of  Iron,  made  for  that  Pur¬ 
pofe.  Hence  the  whole  Work  becomes,  as  it  were,  united, 
fo  that  the  Beams,  which  make  the  Breadth  of  the  Bridge, 
and  thofe  of  the  Sides,  are,  in  a  manner,  one  Piece  with 
the  Pillars ;  which  thus  come  to  fupport  the  Beams  which 
make  the  Breadth,  as  thefe  are  again  fupported  by  the  Arms 
which  extend  from  one  Pillar  to  another.  Thus  all  the 
Parts  mutually  fupport  each  other,  and  their  Nature  is  fuch, 
that  the  greater  Weight  there  is  on  the  Bridge,  fo  much 
the  fafter  do  they  clofe  together,  and  corroborate  the  Work. 
All  the  faid  Arms,  and  other  Pieces  of  Timber,  which 
make  up  the  Body  of  the  Bridge,  are  but  a  Foot  in  Breadth, 
and  three  Fourths  in  Thicknefs:  But  thofe  Pieces  which 
make  the  Bed  of  the  Bridge,  that  is  to  fay,  thofe  which 
are  laid  long-wife,  are  conftderably  fmaller. 


A.  The 


147 


ARCHITECTURE. 

A.  T he  Elevation  of  the  Flank  of  the  Bridge, 

B.  7he  folid  Stone-work  againft  each  Bank . 

C.  T he  Heads  of  the  Beams  which  go  acrofs ,  or  make  the 

Breadth  of  the  Bridge, 

D.  The  Beams  which  make  the  Sides. 

E.  The  Collonelli  or  Pillar sy  which  make  the  Rails  of  the 

Bridge . 

F.  The  Heads  of  the  Cramps ,  with  the  Pins  of  Iron. 

G.  The  Braces ,  which  hearing  contrary  to  each  other-, 

fupport  the  whole  TV ork. 

H.  The  hotto?n  of  the  River. 

I.  The  Plan  of  the  Bridge. 

K.  The  Beams  which  go  acrofs ,  and  advance  beyond  the 

Sides ,  near  which  are  the  Holes  for  the  Cramps. 

L.  The  fmall  Beams  which  cover  the  Bed  of  the  Bridge. 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Concerning  Three  other  Inventions ,  by  which 
wooden  Bridges  may  be  built  without  fixing 
any  Pofis  in  the  JVater . 

WOODEN  Bridges  may  be  made  without  any 
Pofls  in  the  Water,  like  that  on  the  Cifmoney  after 
three  other  Inventions,  of  which  I  would  not  omit  to  give 
the  Defigns,  becaufe  they  are  of  a  very  curious  Contri¬ 
vance  ;  and  the  more  fo,  becaufe  they  will  be  under- 
flood  with  Eafe  by  every  one  who  has  learnt  the  Terms 
made  ufe  of  in  the  Bridge  on  the  Cifmoney  fince  thefe 
Bridges  confifl  likewife  of  Beams  laid  a-crofs,  Pillars, 
Braces,  Cramps,  and  Beams  laid  longwife,  which  make 
the  Sides.  Now  Bridges,  according  to  the  firft  In¬ 
vention  *,  are  made  after  the  following  Manner : 


*  Plate  IV- 


Pp 


Having 


PA  L  L  A  D  /  O’s 


I4S 


Having  fortified  the  Banks  with  folid  Butments  as  far  as 
is  convenient,  at  a  fmall  Difiance  from  them,  one  of  the 
Beams  which  n^ake  the  Breadth  of  the  Bridge  muft  be  laid, 
and  then  the  Beams  which  make  the  Sides  muft  be  difpofed 
upon  it,  which,  with  one  of  their  Heads,  are  to  lie  upon 
the  Bank,  and  be  faftened  thereunto.  Then  upon  thefe, 
direct  with  the  Beam  laid  for  the  Breadth,  the  Collonelli , 
or  Pillars  muft  be  plac’d,  which  are  to  be  faften’d  into 
the  faid  Beams  with  Iron  Cramps,  and  fupported  by  the 
Braces  well  fix’d  in  the  Head^  of  the  Bridge ;  that  is  to 
fay,  In  the  Beams  which  make  the  Sides  upon  the  Bank. 
Afterwards  leaving  as  much  Space  as  fhall  be  left  by  the 
faid  Bea4n  foi;  the  Breadth,  to  the  Bank,  the  other  Beam 
muft  be  laid  fpr  the  Breadth,  which  fhall  be  in  like  man¬ 
ner  fa/hened  to  the  Beams,  which  are  to  be  laid  over  it 
lengthwife,  and  to  the  Pillars  likewife,  as  they  will  be  fup¬ 
ported  by  their  Braces.  And  thus  muft  it  be  done  from 
one  End  to  the  other,  or  as  far  as  it  will  be  requifite, 
always  obferving  in  fuch  Bridges,  that  in  the  Middle  of  the 
Breadth  there  be  a  Pillar,  the  Braces  whereof  fhall  meet 
over-againft  one  another,  and  in  the  upper  Part  other  Beams 
muft  be  put,  which  expending  from  one  Pillar  to  another, 
will  keep  them  united,  and  (together  with  the  Braces  plac’d 
in  the  Head  of  the  Bridge)  they  will  make  a  Part  or 
Portion  of  a  Circle  lefs  than  a  Semicircle.  Thus  making 
every  Brace  fupport  its  Pillar,  and  every  Pillar  the  crofs 
Beam,  and  thofe  that  make  the  Sides,  every  Part  fupports 
its  own  Weight.  Such  Bridges  are  large  at  their  Heads, 
and  grow  narrow  near  the  Middle  of  their  Length.  There 
is  none  o£>  this  .Kind  in  Italy  ;  but  Alexander  Picheroni  of 
Mirandola ,  in  Converfation,  told  me  that  he  faw  one  in 


Germany. 


\ 


A.  The  Upright  of  the  Flank  of  the  Bridge. 

B.  The  Heads  of  the  Beams ,  which  make  the  Breadth  of  it. 

C.  The  Beams  which  are  laid  longwije . 

D.  The  Pillars. 


E.  The 


ARCHITECTURE. 


49 


E.  The  Braces ,  which  being  fajlened  in  the  Beams  of  the 

Length ,  bear  up  the  Pillars. 

F.  The  Beams  which  bind  one  Pillar  to  the  other ,  reach¬ 

ing  between  them ,  and  making  a  Part  or  Portio?i 
of  a  Circle . 

G.  The  Butments  upon  each  Bank. 

H.  The  Heads  of  the  Iron  Pins . 

I.  The  Bottom  of  the  River. 

K.  The  Plan  of  the  Bridge. 

L.  The  firfl  Beams ,  which  are  fupported  by  the  Bank  at 

one  Head ,  and  by  the  firft  crofs  Beam  at  the  other. 

M.  T!oe  fecond  Beams,  which  are  fupported  by  the  firfi 

and  fecond  Beams  of  the  Breadth. 

N.  The  third  Beams ,  fupported  by  the  fecond  and  third 

Beams  of  the  Breadth. 

G.  Crofs  Beams ,  which  make  the  Bed  of  the  Bridge. 

P.  Lifter  thefe  follow  the  Beams  which  make  the  Breadth , 
fupported  ( as  I  faidj  by  the  Pillars  to  which  they 
are  made  fa /l,  and  the  Pillars  borne  up  by  their 
Braces: 

The  Invention  of  the  following  *  Bridge  has  the  upper 
Part,  which  bears  up  the  whole  Weight,  made  oF  a  Part 
or  Portion  of  a  Circle  lefs  than  a  Semicircle ;  and  has 
the  Braces  which  go  from  one  Pillar  to  another,  made 
after  fuch  a  manner,  that  they  crofift  each ‘  other  in  the 
midft  of  the  Space  between  the  Pillars.  Thev  Beams  which 
make  the  Ground  or  Bottom  of  the  Bridge,  are  made  fall 
by  Cramps  to  the  Pillars,  as  in  the  former  Invention.  For 
an  additional  Strength  two  Beams  may  be'  faftened  at  each 
End  of  the  Bridge,  which  being  fo  'faftened  in  the  Pilafters 
at  one  End  of  their  Heads,  incline  with  their  other  Head 
under  the  firft  Pillars,  becaufe  fuch  would  help  much  to 
jupport  the  Weight  of  the  Bridge. 

A.  The  Upright  of  the  Bridge  in  Flank. 

B.  The  Beams  which  ?nake  the  Sides  of  the  Bridge. 


*  Plate  V. 


C.  7 he 


i^o  PALLADIO' s 

C.  The  Heads  of  the  Beams  which  make  the  Breadth . 

D.  The  Heads  of  the  Iron  Pins. 

E.  The  Beams ,  which  placed  under  the  Bridge  at  each 

Head \  help  to  fupport  the  Weight. 

F.  The  Braces  which  ferve  as  Rails  to  the  Bridge . 

G.  The  Pillars. 

H.  The  Butments  againfi  each  Bank. 

I.  The  bott07n  of  the  River. 

K.  The  bed  of  the  Bridge. 

Bridges  of  this  *  laft  Invention,  may  be  built  with  a 
lefler  or  greater  Arch  than  what  is  laid  down  by  the 
Draught,  according  as  the  Quality  of  the  Situation,  and 
the  Greatnefs  of  the  River,  fhall  require.  The  Height  of 
the  Bridge,  wherein  are  the  Rails  or  Braces  which  go  from 
one  Pillar  to  another,  will  be  the  eleventh  Part  of  the 
Breadth  of  the  River.  All  the  Radii  or  Lines  of  the 
Pillars  muff  anfwer  to  the  Center,  which  will  make  the 
Work  very  fubftantial ;  and  the  Pillars  will  fupport  the 
Beams  laid  a-crofs  and  along  the  Bridge,  as  in  the  fore¬ 
going  ones.  The  Bridges  of  thefe  four  Sorts,  may  be  built 
as  long  as  Occafion  fhall  require,  but  all  their  Parts  muft 
be  made  greater  in  Proportion. 

A.  The  Upright  of  the  Bridge  in  Flank. 

B.  Its  bottom  or  bed. 

C.  The  Pillars. 

D.  The  Braces  which  bear  up  the  Pillars. 

E.  The  Heads  of  the  Beams ,  which  make  the  Breadth  of 

the  Bridge. 

F.  The  Heads  of  the  Iron  Pins. 

G.  The  Buttrejfes  againfi  each  Bank. 

H.  The  bottom  of  the  River . 


*  Plate  VI. 


CHAP. 


/ 


ARCHITECTURE. 


151 


CHAP.  IX. 

.  f-  —  ^  ■ « •  '■ ■  £  f  jn  ;  r  *  * 

Concerning  the  Bridge  of  Baflano. 

Nr  E  A  R  Bajfdno ,  a  Place  at  the  Foot  of  the  Alps, 
which  divide  Italy  from  Germany ,  I  have  ordered 
the  following  wooden  Bridge  *  over  the  Brent  a,  a  very  ra¬ 
pid  River,  which  empties  itfelf  into  the  Sea  near  Venice , 
and  which  the  Ancients  called  MedUacits ;  to  which  (accord¬ 
ing  to  Livy  in  his  firft  Decctd)  Cleonymus  the  Spartan 
came  with  a  Fleet  before  the  Trojan  War.  This  River, 
in  the  Place  where  the  Bridge  is  erected,  is  One  hundred 
and  eighty  Foot  broad.  This  Breadth  is  divided  into 
five  equal  Parts,  becaufe  the  two  Banks  being  fumciently 
fortified  with  Beams  of  Oak  and  Larix,  there  were  four 
Rows  of  Piles  fixed  in  the  River  thirty-four  Foot  and  a 
half  diftant  from  each  other.  Evfery  one  of  thefe  Rows 
confifted  of  eight  Piles  thirty  FoOt  long,  a  Foot  and  a  half 
thick  all  Ways,  and  two  Foot  diftant  from  each  other :  By 
which  means  the  whole  Length  of  the  Bridge  was  divided 
into  five  Spaces,  and  its  Breadth  Was  twenty -fix  Foot. 
Over  thefe  Rows  of  Piles  were  placed  Joyfts,  long  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  faid  Breadth  (thofe  Joyfts  fo  placed  are  com¬ 
monly  call’d  Crofs-pieces)  Which  being  faftened  into  the 
Piles  fixed  in  the  River,  keep  them  ail  joined  and  united 
together.  Over  thefe  Crofs-pieces,  direft  to  the  faid  Joyfts, 
eight  other  Joyfts  were  placed  ‘according  to  the  Length' 
of  the  Bridge,  and  extending  from  one  RoW  to  the  other  : 
And  becaufe  the  Diftance  between  ihefe  RoWs  is  very 
great,  whence  the  Joyfts  laid  loiigwife  ‘might  with  Diffi¬ 
culty  bear  any-  considerable  Weight  that  ffiould  pafs  over 
them ;  certain  Beams,  which  ferve  as  fiiouldeVing  Pieces 
to  bear  Part  of  the  Weight,  Were  placed  between  thefe  and 
the  Crofs-pieces.  There  were  other  Beams  befides, which  being 


*  Plate  VII. 


Q.q 


made 


15a  PA  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

made  fall  in  thofe  Piles  which  flood  in  the  River,  and 
inclining  one  towards  the  other,  were  joined  to  another 
Beam  placed  in  the  Middle  of  the  faid  Diftance,  under 
each  of  the  Beams  of  the  Length.  Thefe  inclining 
Beams  fo  difpofed,  reprefent  a  Part  or  Portion  of  a  Cir¬ 
cle,  riling  the  fourth  of  its  Diameter.  And  thus  the 
Work  llrikes  the  Eye  agreeably  as  to  its  Form,  and  is 
alfo  ftrong,  becaufe  the  Beams  which  make  the  Length 
of  the  Bridge  are  double  in  the  midft.  Other  Beams  are 
put  over  thefe  and  acrofs  them,  which  make  the  Bed  or 
Bottom  of  the  Bridge,  and  projed  their  Heads  a  little 
beyond  the  reft  of  the  Work,  in  Appearance  like  the 
Modilions  of  a  Cornice.  On  the  one  and  the  other 
Side-beams  of  the  Bridge,  the  Pillars  which  fupport  the 
Roof,  and  make  it  ferve  for  a  Gallery,  are  placed ;  all 
which  render  the  whole  Work  very  commodious  and  or¬ 
namental. 

A.  The  Upright  of  the  Flank  of  the  Bridge . 

B.  The  Rows  of  Piles  which  ftand  in  the  Water. 

C.  The  Heads  of  the  Crofs-pieces. 

D.  The  Beams  which  make  the  Length  of  the  Bridge , 

over  which  the  Heads  of  the  Joyfts  may  he  Jeen  that 
make  the  Ground  of  it. 

E.  The  Beams ,  which  inclining  towards  each  othery  unite 

themfelves  with  other  Beams  plac'd  in  the  Middle 
of  the  Diflance  between  the  Rows  of  Piles ,  by  which 
means  the  Beams  come  to  be  double  in  that  Place. 

F.  The  Pillars  which  fupport  the  Roof 

G.  The  Elevation  and  SeSlion  of  one  End  of  the  Bridge. 

H.  The  Plan  of  the  Rows  of  Pilesy  with  their  Spurs , 

preferving  the  faid  Piles  from  being  damaged  by 
the  Timber  that  floats  down  the  River. 

I.  The  Scale  of  flxty  Foot ,  whereby  the  whole  W irk  is 

meafured. 

K.  The  Surface  of  the  Water. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE, 


iS3 


CHAP.  X. 

Concerning  the  Bridges ,  and  what  ought  to  be 
obferved  in  the  Erection  of  them. 

MEN  made  wooden  Bridges  at  firft,  having  a  Re¬ 
gard  only  to  their  prefent  Occafions;  but  when 
they  began  to  entertain  Thoughts  of  immortalizing  their 
Names,  and  their  Minds  were  enlarged  by  Riches,  and 
furnifhed  with  Conveniences  for  more  important  Enter- 
prizes,  they  began  likewife  to  make  Stone  Bridges ;  which 
are  more  expenfive  and  lafting,  as  well  as  more  reputa¬ 
ble  for  the  Builders.  In  Bridges  of  this  Kind,  four  Things 
are  principally  to  be  confidered,  viz.  The  Heads,  which 
are  made  at  the  Banks  ;  the  Piles,  or  Pilafters,  which  are 
fix’d  in  the  River ;  the  Arches  which  thefe  Pilafters  fup- 
port ;  and  the  Pavement  which  is  made  over  the  Arches. 
The  Heads  of  thefe  Bridges  fhould  be  made  as  firm  and 
fubftantial  as  they  pofiibly  can  be ;  becaufe  they  not  only 
ferve  to  fupport  the  Weight  of  the  Arches,  as  the  other 
Pilafters  do,  but  they  likewife  keep  the  whole  Bridge  to¬ 
gether,  and  the  Arches  from  cracking  or  opening.  They 
are  made  therefore  where  the  Banks  are  of  Stone,  or  at 
leaft  of  folid  Earth  :  and  no  Banks  of  Earth  being  na¬ 
turally  folid  enough  for  this  Occalion,  Art  mult  be  ufed 
to  make  them  firm  and  ftrong,  and  other  Arches  or 
Buttrefles  muft  be  added ;  that  if  the  Water  fhould  happen 
to  deftroy  the  Bank,  yet  the  Way  to  the  Bridge  might 
ftill  be  preferved.  The  Pilafters,  which  are  to  be  made 
in  Proportion  to  the  Largenefs  of  the  River,  fhould  always 
be  even  in  regard  to  their  Number  ;  not  only  becaufe 
Nature,  we  fee,  has  produced  from  this  Number  all  fuch 
Things  as,  confifting  of  more  than  one  Part,  are  to  fupport 
any  Weight,  as  the  Feet  of  Men,  and  all  other  Ani¬ 
mals,  evidently  demonftrate  ;  but  likewife,  becaufe  fuch 
a  Compartment  ftrikes  the  Eye  more  agreeably,  and 

renders 


i54  PA  L  LA  D  1  '0\ 


renders  the  Work  more  fubftantial,  ftnce  the  Current  of  the 
River  in  the  Middle  (where  it  is  naturally  moft  rapid, 
as  it  is  mod:  diftant  from  the  Banks)  is  thus  free,  and 
does  not  prejudice  the  Pilafters  by  perpetually  fhaking 
them.  For  this  Reafon  the  Pilafters  ought  to  be  fo  com¬ 


parted,  as  to  fall  into  that  Part  of  the  River  where  the 
Courfe  is  leaft  rapid.  The  greateft  Stream  of  the  Water 
is  where  fuch  Things  meet  together  as  fwiift  upon  it, 
which  is  moft  eafily  tiifcerned  at  the  tiling  of  Floods.  The 
Foundations  of  Bridges  tiught  to  be  made  at  that  Time 
of  the  Year  when  the  Waters  are  loweft,  which  is  in  Au¬ 
tumn  :  And  in  Cafe  the  Bottom  of  the  River  be  of  Stone, 
or  Gravel-Stone,  or  any  foft  Stone  whatsoever,  which  (as  I 
obferved  in  the  firft  Book)  is  a  kind  of  Earth  that  is  partly 
Stone,  you  have  the  Foundations  already  made,  without 
any  Trouble  or  Fatigue  of  digging,  becaufe  thefe  are  na¬ 
turally  the  beft  Foundations.  But  in  cafe  the  Bottom  of 
the  River  be  of  Sand  or  Gravel,  you  moft  dig  therein 
till  you  come  to  folid  Ground;  or  if  that  fhbuld  prove 
too  laborious  or  impracticable,  you  muft  dig  moderately 
deep  in  the  Sand  or  Gravel,  and  then  you  muft  thruft  in 
oaken  Piles,  which  will  reach  the  folid  and  firm  Ground, 
with  the  Iron  by  which  their  Points  are  to  be  armed. 
To  lay  the  Foundation  of  the  Pilafters,  only  one  Part  of 
the  Bed  of  the  River  muft  be  enclofed  from  the  Water, 
and  then  to  build  there,  that,  the  other  Part  being  left 
open,  the  Water  may  have  its  free  Current ;  and  fo  to  go 
on  from  Part  to  Part.  The  Pilafters  muft  not  be  left 
in  Dimenfton,  than  the  ftxth  Part  of  the  Breadth  of  the 
Arch ;  nor,  generally  fpeaking,  larger  than  a  fourth.  They 
fhould  be  made  of  great  Stones,  which  are  to  be  joined 
together  with  Cramps  and  Bars  of  Iron,  faftned  with  Lead, 
that  they  may  be  all  of  one  Piece,  as  it  were,  by  fuch  Liga¬ 
ments.  The  Fronts  of  the  Pilafters,  or  that  Side  which  fa¬ 
ces  the  Stream,  are  ordinarily  made  angular  ;  that  is,  that 
t  hey  end  in  a  right  Angle ;  and  fometimes  they  are  made 
femicircular,  in  order  to  divide  or  break  the  Water,  and 
that  thofe  Things  which  are  impetuoufly  brought  down 

the 


I 


ARCHITECTURE. 


*55 

the  River,  when  they  ftrike  againft  them,  may  be  fhov’d 
from  the  Pilafters,  and  pafs  thro’  the  Middle  of  the  Arch. 
The  Arches  too  fhould  be  made  very  ftrong  and  fubftantial, 
and  with  great  Stones  well  united  together,  the  better  to 
refill:  the  conftant  Palling  of  Carriages,  or  any  other  Weight 
that  lhall  happen  to  come  over  them.  Thofe  Arches  are 
the  Pronged:  which  conlift  of  a  Semicircle,  becaufe  they 
entirely  reft  upon  the  Pilafters,  and  never  prefs  upon  each 
other  :  But  if  by  the  Nature  of  the  Situation,  and  the 
Difpolition  of  the  Pilaftersr  a  perfect  Semicircle  fhould  not 
be  commodious,  as  rendering  the  Afcent  and  Defcent  diffi¬ 
cult,  a  lelfer  Se&ion  mull:  then  be  made  ufe  of,  and  fuch 
Arches  mull:  be  made  as  rife  only  the  third  Part  of  their 
Diameter ;  and,  in  this  Cafe,  the  Foundations  mull:  be  made 
extreamly  ftrong  upon  the  Banks.  The  Pavement  of  thele 
Bridges  ought  to  be  made  exa&ly  like  thofe  of  Ways  and 
Streets,  whereof  we  have  already  treated.  And  thus,  having 
feen  what  is  to  be  conlidered  in  general  relating  to  building 
Stone  Bridges,  we  fhall,  in  the  next  Place,  proceed  to  par¬ 
ticular  Draughts  and  Deligns. 

CHAR  XL 

Concerning  fome  certain  celebrated  Bridges  erecied 
by  the  Ancients ,  with  the  Draughts  of  that 
of  Ariminum. 

ABUNDANCE  of  Bridges  were  eredled  by  the 
Ancients  in  feveral  Places ;  but  particularly  in  Italy , 
and  on  the  Eyber  ;  whereof  fome  are  at  this  Day  intire, 
and  others  have  fome  fmall  Remains  only  left,  to  preferve 
their  Memory.  Thofe  which  are  at  prefent  entire  on 
the  7 ’yber,  are  that  of  the  Caftle  of  St.  Angelo ,  called,  in 
former  Times,  the  Elian  Bridge ,  from  the  Emperor  Elius 
Adrianus ,  who  eredted  in  this  Place  his  own  Monument : 

R  r  The 


i56  P  A  L  L  A  D  1  O’ s 

The  Fabrician  Bridge ,  ere&ed  by  Fabricius ,  now  called 
the  Four-headed  Bridge ,  or  Ponto  quattro  capi ,  from  the 
four  Heads  of  "Janus,  or  of  four  Termini ,  which  are 
placed  oh  the  left  Hand  of  this  Bridge,  whereby  the 
Ifland  of  the  Tyber  is  joined  to  the  City :  The  Cejlia?i 
Bridge ,  now  called  St.  Bartholomew  s  Bridge,  which,  from 
the  other  Side  of  the  Illand,  pafles  to  Iranflevere ,  or  over 
Tyber :  The  Bridge  called  Senatorio  from  the  Senators,  and 
Palatino  from  the  adjacent  Hill,  made  of  ruftick  Work, 
and  now  called  St.  Marys  Bridge.  But  the  Bridges,  where¬ 
of  the  ancient  Remains  are  only  to  be  feen  in  the  Tyber , 
are  the  Sublician  Bridge ,  called  likewife  the  Lepidan  Bridge , 
from  Emilias  Lepidus ,  who  made  it  of  Stone,  tho’  it  was 
firft  made  of  Wood,  and  was  built  near  Ripa  :  The  Trium¬ 
phal  Bridge ,  whofe  Pilafters  are  dill  to  be  feen  over- 
againd  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Ghojl :  The  Janiculan 
Bridge ,  fo  named  from  its  being  adjacent  to  Mount  Ja- 
niculus ,  which,  becaufe  Pope  Sixtus  IV.  repaired  it,  is  now 
called  Ponte  Sijlo  :  And  the  Milvian  Bridge,  now  called 
Ponte  molle ,  in  the  Flaminian  Way,  not  two  Miles  diftant 
from  R.ome ,  and  retaining  the  Foundations  only  of  its  an¬ 
cient  Form.  It  is  reported  to  have  been  eredled  in  the 
Time  of  Sylla,  by  Marcus  Scaur  us  the  Cenfor.  There 
are  likewife  the  Remains  of  a  Bridge  to  be  feen,  ere&ed 
by  Auguflus ,  of  ruftick  Work,  upon  the  V era,  a  moft  rapid 
River  near  Narmi :  And  another  likewife  of  the  fame  Work 
upon  the  Metaurus,  at  Calgi  in  Umbria,  with  particular 
Counterworks  at  each  End  of  it  upon  the  Banks,  which 
make  it  exceeding  ftrong,  and  fupport  the  Road.  But 
among  all  the  celebrated  Bridges,  that  is  recorded  as  a 
Miracle,  which  Caligula  built  from  Puteoli  to  Bata ,  in 
the  midlf  of  the  Sea,  almoft  three  Miles  in  Length ;  and 
’tis  faid  that  he  expended  all  the  Revenues  of  the  Empire 
upon  it.  Extraordinary  great,  and  mod:  deferving  Admi¬ 
ration,  was  that  Bridge  built  over  the  Danube  in  Tran- 
Jilvania,  and  on  which  were  infcribed  thefe  Words ; 
Providentia  Augusti  vere  Pontificis  virtus  Romana 
quid  non  domet?  Sub/ugor  ecce  rapidus  Danubius.  This 

Bridge 


ARCHITECTURE.  157 

Bridge  was  afterwards  broke  down  and  demolifhed  by 
Adriaji ,  to  prevent  the  Barbarians  from  coming  over  it 
to  plunder  the  Roman  Provinces ;  and  its  Pilafters  are 
ftill  to  be  feen  in  the  Middle  of  the  River.  But  fince, 
of  all  the  Bridges  that  I  have  here  mentioned,  that  appears 
to  me  to  be  the  moil:  beautiful,  and  the  moft  worthy  of 
Obfervation  (not  only  for  the  Strength,  but  the  Com¬ 
partment  of  it)  which  was  ere&ed  at  Ariminum ,  a  City 
of  the  Flaminian  Tribe,  and,  I  believe,  by  Auguftus  Ccefar , 
I  have  given  the  following  *  Draughts  of  it.  It  is  di¬ 
vided  into  five  Arches,  the  three  middlemoft  whereof  are 
equal,  conftfting  of  25  Feet  in  Breadth  ;  and  the  two 
next  the  Banks  are  lefs,  conftfting  only  of  20  Feet.  All 
thefe  Arches  conftft  of  a  Semicircle,  and  the  Depth  of  their 
Archivolte  is  a  tenth  Part  of  the  Light  or  Void  of  the 
greater,  and  an  eighth  Part  of  a  Light  of  the  leffer  ones. 
The  Pilafters,  as  to  their  Thicknefs,  are  a  little  more  than 
the  Half  of  the  Light  of  the  greater  Arches.  The  Angle 
of  the  Spurs,  which  cut  the  Water,  is  a  right  Angle  : 
This,  as  I  obferve,  the  Ancients  follow’d  in  building  all 
their  Bridges,  as  being  ftronger  than  the  Acute  Angle,  and 
for  that  Reafon  the  Acute  Angle  is  lefs  expofed  to  be 
thrown  down  and  deftroyed  by  Trees,  or  any  other  Matter, 
that  rolls  down  with  the  Stream.  On  the  Sides  of  the  Bridge 
there  are  fome  Niches,  wherein  there  muft  formerly  have 
been  fome  Statues,  dire&ly  over  the  Pilafters.  There  is 
a  Cornice  over  thefe  Niches,  the  Length  of  the  whole 
Bridge,  which,  altho’  it  is  plain,  adds  neverthelefs  a  moft 
agreeable  Decoration  to  the  Work. 

A.  The  Cornice ,  which  is  over  the  Niches ,  the  whole  Length 

of  the  Bridge . 

B.  The  Surface  of  the  JVater . 

C.  "The  Bottom  of  the  River. 

D.  A  Scale  of  thirty  Feet ,  whereby  the  whole  Work  is 

meafured. 


*  Plate  VIII. 

CHAP, 


) 


158 


PALLADIO' s 


CHAP.  XII. 

Concerning  the  Bridge  of  Vicenza,  which  is  over 

the  Bacchiglione. 

TW  O  Rivers  run  thro’  Vicenza ,  one  whereof  is  called 
the  Bacchiglione ,  and  the  other  the  Rerone.  This 
laft  enters  into  the  farft  juft  without  the  City,  and  fo  lofes 
its  Name  immediately.  There  are  two  ancient  Bridges 
built  over  thefe  Rivers:  The  Pilafters  and  one  Arch  of 
that  which  is  over  the  Bacchiglione  are  ftill  entire,  and 
to  be  feen  near  the  Church  of  St.  Mary  of  the  Angels  : 
The  reft  is  all  modern  Work.  This  *  Bridge  is  divided 
into  three  Arches;  the  middlemoft  whereof  is  thirty  Feet 
broad,  the  other  two  are  twenty  two  Feet  and  a  half 
each ;  which  were  fo  ordered  and  difpofed,  that  the  River 
might  enjoy  its  Current  the  freer  in  the  Middle.  The 
Pilafters,  as  to  their  Thicknefs,  are  the  fifth  Part  of  the 
Light  of  the  lefler  Arches,  and  the  fixth  of  the  greater. 
The  Arches  rife  from  their  Impoft,  the  third  Part  of  the 
Diameter  of  the  Void  of  the  Arch.  Their  Archivolte  has 
in  Depth  the  ninth  Part  of  the  fmaller  Arches,  and  the 
twelfth  Part  of  that  in  the  Middle,  and  they  are  wrought 
after  the  manner  of  the  Architrave.  In  the  uppermoft 
Part  of  the  Pilafters,  under  the  Impoft  of  the  Arches, 
certain  Stones  projetft,  or  jut'  forth,  which,  in  the  Erection 
of  the  Bridge,  ferved  to  fupport  the  Beams,  over  which 
was  the  Centering  of  the  Arches :  And  thus  the  Danger 
of  any  Flood’s  taking  away  the  Pofts  (to  the  Deftruc- 
tion  of  the  Work)  which  muft  have  been  otherwife  fixed 
in  the  River  for  making  the  faid  Centering,  Was  afiuredly 
avoided. 


*  Plate  IX. 


A.  7 he 


ARCHITECTURE. 


*59 


A.  The  Parapet  of  the  Bridge. 

B.  The  Stones  which  projeSl  from  the  Top  of  the  Pilajlers , 

and  ferve  to  fupport  the  Centers  of  the  Arches. 

C.  The  Architrave  round  the  Arches . 

D.  The  Heads  of  the  Bridge. 

E.  The  Architrave  round  the  Arches  at  large . 

F.  Scale  of  thirty  Feet ,  whereby  this  IV irk  is  meafured. 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Concerning  a  Stone  Bridge  of  my  own  Invention. 

VE  RY  beautiful,  in  my  Opinion,  is  the  following 
Defign,  and  perfe&ly  well  fuited  to  the  Place  where 
it  was  to  be  ereded,  which  was  in  the  midft  of  one  of 
the  larged  and  mod  famous  Cities  of  Italy ,  the  Metropolis  of 
many  others,  arid  trading  alfnod  to  all  Parts  of  the  ha¬ 
bitable  World.  The  River  is  very  large,  and  the  Bridge  was 
to  have  been  ereded  on  the  very  Spot  where  the  Merchants 
met  to  tranfad  and  treat  of  their  Affairs :  For  which  Rea- 
fon,  not  only  to  preferve  the  Grandeur  and  Dignity  of  the 
faid  City,  but  very  condderably  to  advance  the  Revenues 
of  the  fame,  I  dedgned  the  Bridge  fo  broad  as  to  build 
three  Streets  upon  it ;  that  in  the  Middle,  fpacious  and 
beautiful,  and  the  other  two  on  the  Sides  fomewhat  lefs. 
On  both  Sides  of  each  of  thofe  Streets  I  contrived  Shops, 
whereof  thus  there  would  have  been  fix  Rows.  Moreover, 
there  were  Galleries  intended  to  be  made  at  each  Head 
of  the  Bridge,  and  in  the  Middle,  over  the  great  Arch, 
in  which  the  Merchants  were  to  keep  their  Exchange, 
which  would  have  been  no  lefs  ornamental  than  conve- 


*  Plate  X. 

S  f 


nientc 


PALLADIO' s 


1 60 

nient.  The  Accefs  to  the  Galleries  at  the  Heads  fhould 
have  been  by  fome  few  Steps,  and  even  with  thefe  would 
be  the  Ground,  or  Pavement  of  the  reft  of  the  Bridge.  It 
ought  not  to  be  thought  a  new  or  furpriftng  Thing,  that 
Galleries  fhould  be  made  over  Bridges, ftnce  the  Elian  Bridge 
at  Rome ,  of  which  we  have  made  mention  in  its  proper 
Place,  was  heretofore  all  covered  with  Galleries,  having 
Columns  of  Brafs,  with  Statues,  and  other  curious  Deco¬ 
rations  :  Befides,  upon  this  Occafton,  it  was  almoft  neceftary 
to  make  Galleries,  for  the  Reafons  already  mentioned. 
The  very  fame  Order,  and  the  fame  Rules,  are  obferved 
in  the  Proportions  of  the  Pilafters  and  the  Arches,  as  have 
been  obferved  in  the  other  Bridges  before-mentioned,  and 
every  one  may  readily  find  them  himfelf.' 

The  Parts  of  the  Plan. 

A.  1 he  beautiful  and fpacious  Street  made  in  the  midjl  of 

the  Breadth  of  the  Bridge. 

B.  The  lejfer  Streets  on  the  Sides. 

C.  The  Shops  on  the  Outfde  over  the  River. 

D.  The  Galleries  at  each  Head  of  the  Bridge. 

E.  The  Steps  which  lead  up  to  thofe  Galleries. 

F.  The  Galleries  in  the  middle ,  over  the  large  Arch  of  the 

Bridge. 

The  Parts  of  the  Elevation  anfwer  to  thofe  of  the  Plan, 
and  for  that  Reafon  are  eafily  underftood  without  •  any 
farther  Illu fixation. 

G.  The  Elevation  of  the  Shops  fronting  all  the  three 

Ways  A,  B,  B. 

W.The  Lines  of  the  Water s  Surface . 

I.  A  ProfpeB  of  the  Ways  leading  to  the  fmall  Stairs 

of  the  Bridge. 


CHAR 


I 


ARCHITECTURE.  161 


CHAP.  XIV. 

Concerning  another  Bridge  of  my  own  Invention. 

HAVING  been  follicited  by  fome  Gentlemen  to 
give  them  my  Opinion  about  a  Bridge  which  they 
had  Thoughts  of  building  with  Stone,  in  order  to  oblige 
them  I  made  the  following  Draught  *.  The  River,  where 
the  Bridge  was  to  be  erected,  is  one  hundred  and  eighty 
Feet  broad.  I  divided  this  whole  Breadth  into  three 
Arches,  made  that  in  the  Middle  fixty  Feet  broad,  and  the 
other  two,  forty-eight  each.  The  Pilafters  which  fupport 
the  Arches  were  twelve  Feet  thick,  and  by  that  means  were 
a  fifth  Part  of  the  middle  Arch,  and  a  fourth  of  the  lefier 
ones.  I  fomewhat  varied  from  the  common  Meafures  of 
Pilafters,  on  this  Occafion,  making  them  very  thick,  and 
to  project  very  far  from  the  Body  of  the  Bridge,  in  order 
that  they  might  refill  the  Violence  of  the  River,  which 
is  very  impetuous,  and  alfo  oppofe  the  Stones  and  Trees 
which  fall  down  with  the  Stream.  The  Arches  were 
to  have  been  a  Part  or  Portion  of  a  Circle  lefs  than  a 
Semicircle,  that  the  Alcent  and  Defcent  of  the  Bridge 
might  be  plain  and  eafy.  I  made  the  Archivolte  of  the 
Arches  a  feventeenth  Part  of  the  Void  of  the  middle  Arch, 
and  a  fourteenth  Part  of  the  other  two.  This  Bridge 
might  have  been  embellilhed  with  Niches  over  the  Pi¬ 
lafters,  and  with  Statues  ;  as  there  might  have  been  a 
Cornice  the  whole  Length  of  it  on  each  Side,  which  the 
Ancients,  ’tis  well  known,  fometimes  pra£tiied,  as  in  the 
Bridge  of  Ariminum  built  by  Augujlus  Ccejar ,  the  Draughts 
whereof  are  given  above. 


*  Plate  XI. 


A.  Tide 


1 62  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

• 

A.  The  Superficies  of  the  W ater. 

B.  The  Bottom  of  the  River. 

C.  The  Sto?jes  which  projeEl  for  the  Ufes  above-?nen~ 

tioned. 

D.  The  Scale  of  Forty  Feet ,  whereby  the  whole  Work  is 

meafured. 


CHAP.  XV. 


Concerning  the  Bridge  of  Vicenza,  which  is  over 

the  Rerone. 

TH  E  other  ancient  *  Bridge,  which,  as  I  have  be¬ 
fore  obferved,  is  in  Vicenza  over  the  Rerone ,  is  by 
the  common  People  called,  II ponte  belle  Beccarie>  or  the 
Butchers  Bridge ,  becaufe  it  is  adjacent  to  the  greateft 
Shambles  of  the  City.  This  Bridge  is  ftill  entire,  and 
varies  but  little  from  that  on  the  Bacchiglione ,  being  di¬ 
vided  into  three  Arches,  and  the  middlemoft  is  larger 
than  either  of  the  other  two.  All  thefe  Arches  are  a  Part  or 
Portion  of  a  Circle  lefs  than  a  Semicircle,  and  have  no 
Decorations  at  all.  The  lefier  ones  rife  above  their  Impofl 
the  third  of  their  Breadth,  and  that  which  is  in  the  Middle 
a  little  lefs.  The  Pilafters  are  the  fifth  Part  of  the  Dia¬ 
meter  of  the  lefier  Arches  in  Thicknefs,  and  have,  at  their 
Extremes,  under  the  Imports  of  the  Arches,  the  Stones 
which  projeft  for  the  Ufes  before-mentioned.  Both  the 
one  and  the  other  of  thefe  Bridges  are  compofed  of 
Cofoza  Stone,  which  is  a  foft  Stone,  and  is  fawed  like 
Wood.  There  are  four  in  Padua  of  the  fame  Propor¬ 
tions  with  thefe  two  at  Vicenza ,  three  of  which  have 
only  three  Arches  ;  and  they  are,  the  Bridge  of  Altina , 


*  Plate  XU. 


that 


ARCHITECTURE.  163 

that  of  St.  Laurence ,  and  that  called  Ponte-corvo ,  or  Raven- 
Bridge  :  The  fourth,  called  Ponte-molino ,  or  Mill-Bridge , 
has  five  Arches.  It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  in  all  thefe 
Bridges  the  greateft  Care  has  been  taken  to  join  the  Stones 
well,  which,  as  I  have  frequently  advifed,  is  indifpenfibly 
requifite  in  all  Erections. 

A.  The  Side  of  the  Bridge. 

B.  Stones  that  projeB  to  fupport  the  Centers  of  the 

Arches. 

C.  Pilajlers  or  Buttrejfes  at  each  Bank. 

D.  Scale  of  forty  Feet>  whereby  this  Bridge  was  mea - 

fared. 


CHAP.  XVI. 

Concerning  the  Principal  Squares ,  Markets y  and 
open  Places  of  a  Cityy  and  the  Structures  or 
Buildings  which  ought  to  be  made  about  them. 

E  S  I  D  E  S  the  Streets,  of  which  we  have  already 
treated,  it  is  likewife  neceffary  that  there  be  greater 
or  leffer  Squares,  or  open  Places,  diftributed  in  Cities  in 
Proportion  to  their  Extent,  where  People  may  meet  to¬ 
gether  to  tranfadt  and  treat  about  their  necefiary  Affairs  : 
But  as  fuch  Places  may  be  fet  apart  for  various  Pur- 
poies,  fo  a  proper  and  commodious  Situation  ought  to  bt 
afiigned  them.  Thefe  great  and  open  Places  in  a  City, 
befides  the  Conveniencies  of  walking,  difcourfing,  and 
ccntradting  Bargains,  are  very  ornamental  ;  as  when  there 
is  a  beautiful  and  fpacious  Place  at  the  Head  of  a 
Street,  from  whence  you  have  the  Profpedl:  of  fome  cu¬ 
rious  Edifice,  and  particularly  of  fome  Church.  As 

T  t  it 


1 64  P  A  L  L  A  D  1  O’s 

it  would  be  very  advantageous  to  have  feveral  of  thefe  open 
Places  in  divers  Parts  of  the  City,  fo  it  is  by  far  more 
requifite,  and  more  honourable  and  magnificent,  to  have 
one  principal  Square,  which  may  juftly  deferve  the  Title 
of  a  publick  Place.  Thefe  principal  Squares  ought  to  be 
proportioned  to  the  Number  of  the  People,  that  they  may 
not  be  too  fmall  for  their  various  Occafions,  nor  be  too 
great,  left  the  Place  may  feem  uninhabited.  In  Sea-port 
Towns,  or  Cities,  they  ought  to  be  made  as  near  the  Ha¬ 
ven  as  conveniently  can  be  ;  and  in  Inland  Cities,  about 
the  Middle,  that  the  Citizens  may,  with  Eafe  and  Con¬ 
venience,  refort  to  them  from  all  Parts.  They  ought  to 
be  defigned  according  to  the  Manner  of  the  Ancients. 
There  fhould  be  large  Porticos,  or  Piazzas,  round  thefe 
Squares,  in  Proportion  to  the  Height  of  their  Columns ; 
the  Ufe  whereof  is  to  fhelter  People  from  the  Rain,  Snow, 
and  all  other  Injuries  of  the  Weather :  But  all  fuch  Edi¬ 
fices  as  are  built  round  them,  ought  not  be  (in  the 
Opinion  of  Alberti)  higher  than  the  third  Part  of  the 
Breadth  of  the  Square,  nor  lower  than  the  fixth.  To  the 
Porticos,  or  Piazzas,  there  muft  be  an  Afcent  by  Steps, 
which  are  to  rife  the  fifth  Part  of  the  Height  of  the  Co¬ 
lumns.  Squares  receive  an  extraordinary  Beauty  by  having 
Arches  eredted  at  the  Entrance  into  them  ;  that  is,  at  the 
Head  of  thofe  Streets  which  go  out  of  them.  How  fuch 
Arches  fhould  be  eredted,  on  what  Account  the  Ancients 
made  them,  and  from  whence  they  were  called  Triumphal \ 
I  fhali  fhew  at  large  in  my  Book  of  Arches ,  where  the 
Draughts  of  many  of  them  will  be  met  with ;  and  whereby 
great  Light  will  be  imparted  to  fuch  as  would  at  this 
time,  or  hereafter,  build  fuch  Arches  in  Commemoration 
of  Princes,  Kings,  and  Emperors.  But  to  return  to  the 
principal  Squares :  To  thefe  the  Prince’s  Palace,  or  that  for 
the  Affembly  of  the  States,  according  as  the  Country  is 
either  a  Monarchy,  or  a  Republick,  ought  always  to  be 
joined.  The  Exchequer,  or  the  Publick  Treafury,  where 
the  Money  and  other  valuable  Effedts  of  the  Publick  are  de- 
pofited,  and  the  Prifbns,  ought  to  join  them  like  wife.  Thefe 

latter 


ARCHITECTURE.  165 

latter  were  heretofore  of  three  Sorts ;  one  for  thofe  who 
were  diffolute  and  debauched,  who  were  confined  there 
till  they  were  reformed,  and  which  are  now  appropriated 
or  afiigned  to  Fools  or  Mad-men :  Another  was  for  Debt- 
ors,  which  is  alfo  ufed  amongft  us ;  and  the  third  was  for 
Rebels,  and  other  abandoned  Perfons,  either  already  con¬ 
demned,  or  fhortly  to  be  fo.  Thefe  three  Sorts  are  fufficient, 
fince  all  the  Mifdemeanours  of  Mankind  proceed  either 
from  Debauchery,  Obftinacy,  or  Perverfenefs.  The  Exche¬ 
quer  and  the  Prifons  ought  to  be  fituated  in  the  moll 
fecure  Places,  furrounded  with  lofty  Walls,  and  guarded 
againft  the  Invafion  or  Treachery  of  the  fa&ious  Inhabitants. 
The  Prifons  particularly  ought  to  be  built  in  the  moft  healthy 
and  convenient  Places,  becaufe  they  are  appointed  for  the 
fafe  Cuftody,  and  not  for  the  Punifhment  or  Execution  of 
any  Kind  of  Delinquents :  For  which  Reafon  the  Walls  of 
them  fhould  be  made  in  the  Middle  with  great  Stones,  join¬ 
ed  together  with  Cramps  and  Faftenings  of  Iron  or  Copper, 
and  then  be  lined  on  both  Sides  with  Pricks ;  for  thereby 
the  Moifture  and  Damp  of  the  Stones  will  not  render 
the  Prifon  unhealthy,  neither  will  the  Walls  lofe  any  Part 
of  their  Strength.  Pafifages  ought  to  be  made  all  round  them, 
and  the  Keepers  Apartments  be  near  at  Hand  ;  that  if 
the  Prifoners  form  any  Stratagem  to  make  their  Efcape,  it 
may  be  quickly  difcovered.  The  Senate  and  Council-Houfe, 
where  Affairs  of  State  are  tranfadled,  as  well  as  the  Ex¬ 
chequer  and  the  Prifons,  fhould  join  the  great  Square. 
The  Senate-Houfe  ought  to  be  large  in  Proportion  to  the 
Dignity  and  Number  of  the  Inhabitants :  The  Height  muff 
exceed  the  Breadth  of  it  by  near  one  half,  in  cafe  it  be 
fquare ;  but  if  it  be  oblong,  it  muff  be  half  as  high  to  the 
Cieling,  as  the  Length  and  the  Breadth  put  together.  There 
ought  to  be  large  Cornices  made  in  the  Middle  of  the 
Height,  which  fhould  project  from  the  Walls,  in  order  that 
the  Voice  of  fuch  as  debate  may  not  be  loft  and  diffus’d 
in  the  Height  of  the  Room,  but  may  the  better  reach  the 
Ears  of  the  Auditors,  by  being  reflected  back.  On  that  Side 
of  the  Square  which  is  towards  the  warmeft  Region  of 

Heaven, 


166  PALLADIO'* 

Heaven,  fhould  be  made  the  Bafilica ,  or  the  Edifice  for 
the  Courts  of  Juftice,  to  which  a  great  Part  of  the  Peo¬ 
ple,  particularly  People  of  Bufmefs,  daily  refort :  But  I  fhall 
treat  of  the  Bafilica  s,  after  I  have  fhewn  how  the  Greeks 
and  the  Romans  made  their  Squares,  and  given  the  Draughts 
of  each  of  them. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

Concerning  the  Agora’s,  or  Squares  of  the 

Greeks. 

TH  E  Greeks  (as  Vitruvius  informs  us  in  the  firft 
Chapter  of  his  fifth  Book)  made  the  *  open  Places 
in  their  Cities  of  a  fquare  Form,  furrounding  them  with 
lpacious  and  double  Porticos,  and  thick  Columns,  viz, 
diftant  from  each  other  a  Diameter  and  a  half  of  a  Co¬ 
lumn,  or  at  moft  two  Diameters.  Thefe  Porticos  or 
Piazzas  were  as  broad  as  the  Columns  were  long ;  fo 
that  by  their  being  double,  the  Place  for  walking  was  as 
fpacious  as  twice  the  Length  of  a  Column,  which  made 
it  very  commodious.  Over  the  firfi;  Columns  (which  in 
my  Opinion,  mull  have  been  Corinthian ,  as  Regard  was 
had  to  the  Place  where  they  flood)  were  other  Columns, 
a  fourth  Part  lefs  than  the  firft.  Thefe  had  under  them 
a  Corridor  of  fuch  Height  as  was  moft  convenient,  be- 
caufe  thefe  upper  Porticos  were  appointed  like  wife  for 
walking  and  difeourfing,  and  for  Perfons  to  ftand  com- 
modioufiy  therein  to  be  Spectators  of  any  Shews  that 
might  be  exhibited  in  the  Square,  either  out  of  Pleafure 
or  Devotion.  All  thefe  Porticos  muft  of  Courfe  have 
been  embellifhed  with  Niches  and  Statues,  fince  the 


*  Plate  XIII. 


Greeks 


ARCHITECTURE.  167 

Greeks  us’d  to  be  highly  delighted  with  fuch  fort  of  Or¬ 
naments.  Near  to  thefe  Squares  were  the  Bafilica ,  the 
Senate-Houfe,  the  Prifons,  and  all  the  other  Places  above- 
mentioned,  tho’  Vitruvius ,  when  he  inftru&s  us  in  what 
Manner  they  ought  to  be  built,  does  not  nominate  that 
Place  for  them.  Moreover,  becaufe  (as  he  tells  us  in  the 
Vllth  Chapter  of  his  firft  Book)  the  Ancients  us’d  to  build 
the  Temples  devoted  to  Mercury  and  IJis ,  as  Gods  who 
prehded  over  Commerce  and  Merchandize ;  and  that  in 
Pola ,  a  City  of  Ifiria ,  there  are  two  Temples  to  be  feen 
upon  the  great  Square,  exactly  like  one  another  in  Form, 
Bulk,  and  Decorations :  I  have  inferted  them  on  each  Side 
of  the  Bafilica ,  in  the  following  Draught.  Here  the  Plan 
and  the  Elevation  follow ;  of  which,  together  with  all  their 
diftind  Members,  you’ll  have  a  more  diftintf:  Account  in 
my  Book  of  Temples. 

A.  The  Agora,  Square,  or  great  Place. 

B.  The  double  Porticos. 

C.  The  Bafilica,  where  the  Judges  had  their  Tribunals . 

D.  The  Temple  ofi  Ills. 

E.  The  Temple  of  Mercury. 

F.  The  Senate-Houfe. 

G.  A  Portico  and fimall  Court  before  the  Treafury. 

H.  A  Portico  and fimall  Court  before  the  Prifons. 

I.  The  Gate  of  the  Hall  leading  into  the  Senate-Houfe. 

K.  Pajfag  es  round  the  Senate-Houfe ,  fro?n  which  People 

pafs' d  to  the  Porticos  of  the  Square. 

L.  The  Turnings  or  Corners  of  the  Porticos  of  the  Square. 

}A.The  Turning  of  the  Porticos  on  the  Infde . 

N.  The  Plan  of  the  TV alls  of  the  little  Courts  of  the 

Temple. 

O.  Pajfag  es  round  the  Rxchequer  and  the  Senate-Houfe. 

The  Elevation  that  is  on  the  Back  of  the  Plan  *,  is  of 

one  Part  of  the  Square. 

(fiHalf  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Portico  towards  the 

Square . 


U  u 


*  Plate  XIV. 


CHAP 


i68 


PALLADIO' s 


\ 

CHAP.  XVIII.  < 

Concerning  the  Forums^  Squares ,  or  Publick 
Market-Places  of  the  Romans. 

THE  Roma?is,  and  the  other  Italians  (as  Vitruvius 
affures  us  in  the  Place  above  quoted)  deviating 
from  the  Cuftom  of  the  Greeks ,  made  their  *  Squares  fome- 
what  longer  than  they  were  broad  ;  fo  that  dividing  the 
Length  into  three  Parts,  two  made  the  Breadth  ;  becaufe 
the  Gladiators  exerting  their  Skill  publickly  in  thefe  Places, 
this  Form  was  more  commodious  for  their  purpofe  than  a 
perfed:  Square :  For  which  Reafon  likewife,  the  Inter- 
Columnation  of  the  Porticos  that  went  round  the  Square, 
was  made  of  two  Diameters  and  a  quarter  of  a  Column, 
or  even  of  two  Diameters,  that  the  Sight  of  the  People 
might  not  be  intercepted  by  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Columns. 
The  Porticos  were  as  broad  as  the  Columns  were  high, 
and  under  them  were  the  Bankers  and  Goldfmiths  Shops. 
The  upper  Columns  were  a  fourth  Part  lefs  than  the 
under  ones ;  becaufe,  as  I  have  informed  you  in  my  firft 
Book,  all  Pieces  below,  confidering  the  Weight  that  they 
bear,  fhould  be  Wronger  than  thofe  above.  In  the  Part 
fronting  the  warmed;  Region  of  Heaven,  were  the  Bafdica , 
which  I  have  mark’d  in  the  Draughts  of  thofe  Squares  in  the 
Length  of  two  Squares,  and  the  Porticos  round  the  Inlide 
are  a  third  Part  of  the  middle  Space  in  Breadth.  Their 
Columns  are  as  long  as  the  Porticos  are  large,  and  may 
be  made  of  what  Order  you  pleafe.  On  that  Side  which 
fronts  the  Norths  Hands  the  Senate-Houfe,  a  Square  and 
a  half  in  Length.  The  Height  of  it  is  half  its  Breadth 
and  Length  put  together.  This  Curia  or  Senate  Houle 
(as  I  obferved  above)  was  the  Place  where  the  Senate 
affembled  to  confult  about  State  Affairs. 


*  Phtc  XV. 


A.  Winding 


ARCHITECTURE.  169 

\  -  1 

A.  Winding  Stairs ,  open  in  the  Middle ,  and  leading  to 

the  upper  Parts . 

B.  H  Pajfage  leading  to  the  Porticos  of  the  Square. 

C.  Porticos ,  and  a  little  Court  on  one  Side  the  Bafilica. 

D.  E.  Places  for  the  Bankers ,  and  the  moft  reputable 

Tradefmen . 

F.  Places  for  the  Secretaries ,  where  the  Deliberations  and 

Refolutions  of  the  Senate  were  repofeted. 

G.  The  Prifons. 

H.  The  Turnings  or  Corners  of  the  Porticos  of  the  Square. 

I.  The  Entrance  into  the  Bafilica,  or  Courts  of  JuJlicey 

by  one  Side. 

K.  The  Turning  of  the  Porticos  of  the  little  Courts  on  one 

Side  of  the  Bafilica. 

The  Elevation  that  follows  §,  on  a  larger  Scale,  is  a 
Part  of  the  Porticos  of  the  Square. 

L.  Half  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Portico  towards  the 

Square. 

CHAP.  XIX. 

Concerning  the  ancient  Baiilicas,  or  Courts  of 


THESE  Places  *  were  heretofore  called  Bafilicasy 
where  the  Judges  attended  to  adminifler  Juffice 
under  Shelter,  and  where  fometimes  Affairs  of  the  laft 
Importance  were  tranfadled :  Whence  we  read,  that  the 
Tribunes  of  the  People  caus’d  a  Column,  that  interrupted 
their  Benches,  to  be  taken  away  from  the  Bafilica  Por¬ 
tia  which  was  at  Romey  near  the  Temple  of  Romulus 
and  Remus y  and  is  now  the  Church  of  St.  Cofmus  and 


§  Plate  XVI. 


*  Plate  XVII. 


DamianuSc 


170  PALLADIO' s 

Damianus.  Of  all  the  ancient  Bajilicas ,  that  was  the 
moft  famous,  and  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  Wonders  of 
the  City,  which  Paulus  Emilius  built  between  the  Tem¬ 
ples  of  Saturn  and  Faujiina  ;  and  upon  which  he  ex¬ 
pended  fifteen  hundred  Talents  beflowed  on  him  by  Ccefar^ 
whieh  amount,  according  to  the  neared:  Computation,  to 
nine  hundred  thoufand  Crowns.  Bajilicas  then  ought  to  be 
joined  to  the  Square,  as  I  have  obferved  in  thofe  already 
mentioned,  both  which  flood  in  the  Roman  Forum ,  and 
fac’d  the  warmed:  Region  of  Heaven,  in  order  that  the 
Men  of  Bufinefs,  and  fuch  as  were  at  Law,  might  meet  to¬ 
gether  in  the  Spring  time,  and  continue  there  without  any 
Inconvenience.  In  Breadth  they  ought  to  be  no  lefs  than 
a  third  Part  of  their  Length,  nor  more  than  the  half ;  I 
mean,  fuppofing  the  Situation  of  the  Place  will  permit  it, 
and  that  you  are  not  obliged  to  alter  the  Meafures  of  your 
Compartment.  There  is  not  the  lead:  Footfteps  remaining 
of  any  fuch  ancient  Edifice  ;  for  which  Reafon,  purfuing 
the  Directions  of  Vitruvius  about  them  in  the  Place  be¬ 
fore  mentioned,  I  have  made  the  following  Draughts  *, 
in  which  the  Bafilica  in  the  middle  Part  of  it,  that  is, 
within  the  Columns,  is  in  Length  two  Squares.  The  Porticos 
which  are  on  the  Sides,  and  at  the  End  of  the  Entrance, 
are  a  third  Part  of  the  middle  Space  in  Breadth.  The  Co¬ 
lumns  are  as  high  as  the  Porticos  are  large,  and  you 
may  make  them  of  what  Order  you  think  mod:  proper.  I 
have  made  no  Portico  in  the  End  oppofite  to  the  Entry, 
becaufe  it  would  be  better,  in  my  Opinion,  to  have  there 
a  great  Nich,  made  of  a  Part  or  Portion  of  a  Circle  lefi 
than  a  Semicircle,  where  might  Band  the  P rector  s  Tribu¬ 
nal,  or  that  of  the  Judges,  if  there  be  a  confiderable 
Number ;  as  there  fhould  be  an  Afcent  likewife  to  it  by 
Steps,  in  order  to  make  it  more  grand  and  majedic.  I  do 
not  deny,  however,  but  that  the  Porticos  might  reach 
quite  round,  as  I  have  made  them  in  the  Defigns  of  fuch 
Bajilicas  as  are  in  the  Draughts  of  the  Squares.  You  go 


*  Plate  XVIII. 


along 


ARCHITECTURE.  1 71 

along  the  Porticos  to  the  Stairs,  which  are  on  each  Side 
of  the  faid  Nich,  and  lead  you  to  the  upper  Porticos. 
The  Columns  of  thefe  upper  ones  are  a  fourth  Part  lefs 
than  thofe  below.  The  Corridor  which  is  between  the 
upper  and  the  lower  Columns,  ought  to  be  in  Height  a 
fourth  Part  lefs  than  the  Length  of  the  upper  Columns ; 
that  fuch  as  are  tranfa&ing  their  Affairs  in  the  upper 
Porticos,  may  not  be  feen  by  thofe  who  are  bufy  in  the 
Bafilica  below.  Vitruvius  made  a  Bajilica  at  Fanoj  with 
other  Compartments,  which,  according  to  the  Proportions 
which  he  gives  of  it  in  the  Place  above  quoted,  muff, 
doubtlefs,  have  been  a  Fabrick  of  extraordinary  Beauty  and 
Magnificence.  I  had  inferted  the  Draughts  of  it  here, 
but  fince  the  moft  Reverend  Barbara  has,  with  the  great- 
eft  Induftry  and  Exa&nefs,  done  it  in  his  Vitruvius ,  I 
thought  it  altogether  needlefs. 

A.  The  Entrance  into  the  Bafilica. 

B.  The  Nich  for  the  Tribunal  over  againft  the  Entry, 

C.  The  Porticos  round  the  Bafilica. 

D.  The  Stairs  which  lead  to  the  upper  Parts, 

E.  Necejfary  Houfes, 

Of  the  following  *  Defigns  at  large,  the  eighteenth 
Plate  reprefents  the  Infide  of  the  Colonade  towards  the 
Bafilica ,  and  the  nineteenth  fhews  half  of  the  Nich  for 
the  Tribunal  over-againft  the  Entrance  of  the  Bafilica, 


*  Plate  XVIII.  and  XIX. 


Xx 


CHAP, 


PA  LLAD10\ 


172 


CHAP.  XX. 

Concerning  the  Bafilica’s  of  our  own  Times,  or 
modern  Courts  of  Juflice . 


AS  the  Ancients  *  made  their  Bafilica  s  fo,  as  that  in 
the  Spring  and  Summer  People  might  meet  together 
there,  to  treat  of  and  tranfad  their  Affairs,  and  to  carry 
on  their  Law-Suits ;  fo,  in  our  1 'imes,  every  City,  as  well 
in  Italy  as  out  of  it,  built  certain  fpacious  Publick  Halls, 
which  may  be  properly  and  juflly  term’d  Bafilica' s ,  be- 
caufe  the  Refidence  of  the  Supreme  Magiflrates  is  near  to 
them,  whence  they  come  to  be  Part  thereof ;  and  the 
proper  etymological  Senfe  of  this  Word  Bafilica  is,  a  Royal 
Houfie ,  not  only  for  the  Reafon  now  given,  but  becaufe 
the  Judges  attend  there  to  adminifter  Juftice  to  the  Peo¬ 
ple.  The  Bafilica  s  cf  our  Times  differ  herein  from  the 
ancient  Bafilica' s,  that  the  latter  were  on  the  Ground,  or 
even  with  the  Surface  of  it,  whereas  the  former  are  built 
over  Arches,  in  which  Shops  are  placed  for  feveral  Arts, 
and  the  Reception  of  Merchants  Wares ;  the  Prifons  being 
likewife  there,  and  other  Places  for  the  Emolument  of  the 
Publick.  Moreover,  the  ancient  Bafilica  s  had  their  Porti¬ 
cos  on  the  Infide,  as  our  Draughts  fufficiently  demonffrate  ; 
and  the  modern  ones,  on  the  contrary,  have  either  no 
Porticos  at  all,  or  elfe  they  are  on  the  Outfide  towards 
the  Square,  or  open  Place.  Among  thefe  modern  Halls, 
there  is  a  very  remarkable  one  in  Padua  (a  City  valued 
for  its  Antiquity,  and  famous  all  over  the  whole  World 
for  its  Univerfity)  in  which  the  Gentlemen  affemble  daily, 
this  Place  ferving  them  for  a  covered  Square  to  walk  in. 
The  Citizens  of  B?'ejcia ,  who  are  magnificent  in  all  their 


*  Plate  xx. 


Under- 


ARCHITECTURE.  173 

Undertakings,  have  lately  ere&ed  one  of  thofe  Halls,  which 
is  juftly  admired  for  its  Grandeur  and  Decorations.  There 
is  another  of  them  in  Vicenza ,  of  which  only  I  have 
given  you  the  Draughts,  becaufe  the  Porticos  around  it 
are  of  my  own  Invention :  And,  I  don’t  queftion  but  that 
this  Fabrick  may  be  compared  to  the  ancient  Edifices, 
and  be  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  moft  noble  and  beau¬ 
tiful  Buildings  ere&ed  fince  the  Time  of  the  Ancients ; 
as  well  on  Account  of  its  Largenefs  and  Decorations,  as 
of  its  Matter,  which  is  all  hewn  Stone,  hard  to  the  laft 
Degree,  and  joined  and  bound  together  with  the  utmoft 
Care.  There  is  no  need  I  fhould  mention  particularly  the 
Proportions  of  every  Part  here,  fince  they  are  all  marked 
in  their  Places  on  the  Draughts. 

Part  of  the  Plan  *  and  of  the  Elevation  of  the  Bafilica 
at  large. 


CHAP.  XXI. 

Concerning  the  Paleftras  and  Xyfti,  or  Places  of 
Publick  Exercifey  amongji  the  Greeks. 

HAV I  N  G  treated  of  Ways,  Streets,  Bridges,  and 
Squares,  I  fhall  difcourfe  of  certain  Grecian  Edifi¬ 
ces,  to  which  Men  reforted  for  the  Exercife  of  their  Bo¬ 
dies  ;  and  ’tis  highly  probable,  that  when  the  Cities  of 
Greece  were  governed  after  a  Republican  Manner,  there 
was  one  of  thefe  Buildings  in  each  of  thofe  Cities  ;  where¬ 
in  the  Youth,  befides  learning  the  Sciences,  by  exercifing 


*  Plate  XXI. 


their 


PA  L  L  A  D  /  O’s 


1  74 

their  Bodies  in  a  military  Form  (  as,  in  knowing  their 
Ranks,  throwing  the  Bar  or  Javelin,  Wreftling,  handling 
their  Arms,  fwimming  with  Burdens  on  their  Backs,  and 
the  like )  became  accuftomed  to  the  Toils  and  Accidents 
of  War ;  by  means  whereof,  tho’  but  a  fmall  Body,  they 
could  afterwards,  with  their  Valour  and  Military  Difci- 
pline,  rout  numerous  Armies.  The  Romans ,  in  Imitation 
of  the  Greeks ,  had  their  Catnpus  Martins ,  or  Field  of 
Mars ,  wherein  their  Youth  exercifed  themfelves  in  the 
like  Military  Atchievements,  from  whence  proceeded  very 
wonderful  Effe&s,  and  many  a  glorious  Conqueft.  Ccefar , 
in  his  Commentaries ,  allures  us,  that  being  attack’d  on  a 
hidden  by  the  Nervii ,  and  perceiving  that  the  feventh 
and  twelfth  Legions  were  fo  crowded,  that  they  were  not 
able  to  fight,  he  commanded  them  to  fet  themfelves  in 
Array  at  a  greater  Diftance,  and  fo  as  that  the  one 
Ihould  flank  the  other,  that  by  that  Means  they  might 
have  Room  to  handle  their  Arms,  and  not  be  hemmed 
in  by  their  Enemies  ;  which  being  with  all  imaginable 
Dexterity  and  Speed  performed  by  the  Soldiers,  gained 
the  Vi&ory  for  their  General,  and  purchafed  for  them¬ 
felves  the  immortal  Reputation  of  being  valiant  and 
well-difciplined  Men,  fince,  in  the  Heat  of  the  Engage¬ 
ment,  when  every  thing  was  in  the  utmofl:  Danger  and 
Confufion,  they  executed  that  which  many,  in  our  Times, 
think  very  difficult  to  perform,  even  when  no  Enemy  is 
near,  and  when  there  is  Convenience  both  of  Time  and 
Place.  The  Greek  and  Roman  Hiftories  abound  with  fuch 
glorious  Atchievements,  whereof  the  principal  Caufe,  no 
doubt,  confifted  in  the  conftant  Exercife  of  their  Youth. 
From  thefe  Exercifes  thofe  Places  (which  the  Greeks  erect¬ 
ed,  according  to  Vitruvius s  Account  in  the  eleventh 
Chapter  of  his  fifth  Book)  were  called  Palejirce  and  Xyfti, 
and  they  were  thus  comparted.  Firft,  they  traced  or 
meafured  out  a  fquare  Piece  of  Ground,  of  the  Compafs 
of  two  Stades,  that  is,  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  Paces  ; 
and  on  three  Sides  thereof  they  made  Angle  Porticos, 
under  which  were  fine  fpacious  Rooms,  wherein  Philofo- 

phers 


ARCHITECTURE.  175 

phers  and  other  Men  of  Literature  argued,  and  difputed 
one  with  another.  On  the  fourth  Side,  which  looked  towards 
the  South,  the  Porticos  were  made  double,  that  the  Rain 
driven  by  the  Wind  in  the  Spring  might  not  beat  into 
the  inner  Parts,  and  that  the  Sun  in  the  Summer  might 
be  kept  at  further  Diftance.  In  the  Middle  of  this  Por¬ 
tico  was  a  fpacious  Hall,  a  Square  and  a  half  long,  where 
the  Boys  were  inftru&ed,  on  the  Right-ftde  whereof  was 
the  Place  where  the  Girls  were  alfo  educated  ;  and  be¬ 
hind  it  the  Place  where  the  Wreftlers  covered  themfelves 
with  Dull.  Further  on  was  the  Room  for  wafhing  in 
cold  Water,  which  is  now  called  a  Cold-Bath,  and  hap¬ 
pens  to  be  in  the  Turning  or  Corner  of  the  Portico. 
On  the  Left-fide  of  the  Hall  for  the  Youth,  was  the 
Place  where  the  Wreftlers  anointed  their  Bodies  to  make 
them  more  a<ftive  and  vigorous ;  adjoining  to  which  was 
a  cold  Room,  where  they  ftripp’d  themfelves  naked ;  and 
further  on,  a  moderate  warm  Room,  with  a  Fire  in  it, 
from  whence  they  entered  into  the  hot  Stove.  This  Room 
had  the  Laconicum ,  or  Sweating-Place,  on  the  one  Side 
of  it,  and  the  Room  for  bathing  in  cold  Water  on  the 
other :  For  thus  People  would  imitate  Nature,  which  gra¬ 
dually  proceeds  from  extreme  Cold  to  extreme  Heat;  and 
for  that  Reafon  they  would  not  go  at  once  from  the 
cold  Room  into  the  hot,  but  by  the  Medium  or  Inter¬ 
val  of  the  moderately  warm  one.  On  the  Out-fide  of 
all  thefe  Places  were  three  Porticos,  one  on  the  Side  of 
the  Entrance  (which  may  either  be  made  Eaft  or  Weft) 
and  the  other  two  were  on  the  Right  and  Left,  the  one  to¬ 
wards  the  North,  and  the  other  towards  the  South.  The 
Portico  towards  the  North  was  double,  and  as  large  as 
its  Columns  were  long  :  That  towards  the  South  was 
{ingle,  but  conftderably  broader  than  any  of  thofe  before 
mentioned,  and  was  fo  divided,  as  that  leaving  ten  Feet 
on  the  Side  of  the  Columns  and  of  the  Wall  (which 
Space  is  by  Vitruvius  called  the  Margin  or  Border)  they 
defcended  by  two  Steps,  fix  Feet  broad,  into  a  plain 
Place  about  twelve  Feet,  or  rather  more,  wherein  the 

Y  y  Wreftlers 


1 76  PALLADIO' s 

Wreftlers  and  others  might  exercife  their  Bodies  under 
Cover  in  the  Spring,  without  being  hindered  by  fuch  as 
were  Spectators  in  the  Porticos ;  who  likewife  faw  better, 
on  Account  of  the  Largenefs  of  the  Place  where  the 
Wreftlers  were.  The  Portico  was  properly  called  the  Xyjlus . 
The  Xyfti  were  fo  ordered,  that  between  the  Porticos 
there  fhould  be  Woods  and  Plantations,  and  the  Ways 
between  the  Trees  fhould  be  paved  with  Mofaick  Work. 
Near  the  Xyjlus  and  the  double  Portico  were  traced 
the  open  Places  for  walking,  which  they  called  Peridro7ni- 
des ,  wherein  the  Athletes  in  the  Spring  Time,  when  the 
Weather  was  fair,  might  exercife  themfelves.  The  Sta¬ 
dium  was  on  one  Side  of  this  Building,  and  was  a  very 
commodious  Place,  from  whence  the  People  might  fee 
the  Combatants  and  other  Performers.  From  thefe  Sorts  of 
Fabricks  the  Example  was  taken  by  the  Roman  Empe¬ 
rors,  who  built  the  Thermce ,  or  publick  Baths,  to  amufe 
and  divert  the  People ;  thefe  being  Places  to  which  Per- 
fons  reforted  for  their  Pleafure,  as  well  as  to  wafh  them¬ 
felves  clean,  and  which,  with  God’s  Adiftance,  I  propofe 
to  treat  of  in  the  following  Books. 

A.  'The  Place  where  the  Boys  were  inftruEled . 

B.  The  Place  were  the  Girls  were  inftruEled. 

C.  The  Place  where  the  TV reftlers  covered  themfelves  with 

Dujl. 

D.  The  Cold  Bath. 

* 

E.  The  Place  in  which  the  Wrejllers  anointed  themfelves . 

F.  The  Cold  Rootn. 

G.  The  moderately  warm  Room ,  from  which  they  went 

into  the  Stove . 

H.  The  Hot  Room . 

I.  The  Laconicum,  or  Sweating-Place . 

K.  The  TVartn  Bath . 

L.  The  Outer  Portico  before  the  Entrance. 

M.  The  Outer  Portico  towards  the  North. 


V 


N.  The 


ARCHITECTURE.  177 

N.  The  Outer  Portico  towards  the  Eafl ,  called  the  Xyftus, 

where  they  exercifed  in  the  Spring . 

O.  "The  TV oods  between  two  Porticos . 

P.  Open  Places  for  walkings  called  Peridromides. 

QJThe  Stadium,  where  the  Spectators  flood  to  fee  the 

Combatants . 


Sloe  other  Places  in  the  Draught  are  Exhedrse  and 

Schools . 

LL,  The  Eafl . 

OO.  The  South . 

PP.  The  TVeJl. 

TT.  The  North* 


' 


'  ■  ••  t\  •  .  •  vV  v, 


,v\  \  <  .  .  v 


.  .  .Vi, 

r. 

. 

' 


. 


I  <• '  J  . 


< 


..a 


THE 


FOURTH  BOOK 

O  F 

P  A  L  L  A  D  1  0’s 

ARCHITECTURE 

Treating  particularly  on 

The  Ancient  Roman  Temples, 

and  fome  Churches  which  are  now  to 
be  feen  in  Italy 9  and  divers  other  Parts  of 
Europe. 


T ranflated  from  the  ITALIAN \ 

AND 

The  Deftgns  carefully  copied  by  B.  Cole*  Engraver, 


LONDON: 

Printed  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  M.DCC.XXXVL 


/ 


/ 


D 


. . mm . in . . 


THE 


PREFACE. 


F  Art  and  Induftry  are  to  be  exerted  in  the 
Ere&ion  of  any  common  Fabricks,  in  order  that 
they  fhould  have  the  exa&eft  Symmetry  and 
Proportion  in  all  their  Parts,  they,  doubtlefs, 
ought  to  be  difplay’d  in  the  Contrivance  of  thofe  Edifices 
which  are  fet  apart  for  the  Service  of  God  our  great 
Creator,  and  bountiful  Benefa&or ;  and  we,  doubtlefs, 
ought  to  compleat  them  after  the  beft  Manner  we  are 
able,  as  a  grateful  Acknowledgment  of  all  thofe  manifold 
Favours  which  he  is  continually  pleafed  to  beftow  upon  us. 
For  if  Men,  in  the  Ere£tion  of  their  own  private  Habi¬ 
tations,  will  ufe  their  utmoft  Endeavours  to  find  out  the 
moft  skilful  and  celebrated  Archite&s,  with  other  able 
Workmen,  they  are,  moil  certainly,  under  greater  Obliga¬ 
tions  to  be  induftrious  and  careful  in  the  Ere&ion  of  their 
Churches  :  And,  if  in  the  former  their  chief  End  and 
principal  Concern  is  Convenience,  they  ought,  in  the  latter* 

Z  z  2  to 


* 


r 


18a  ,  The  PREFACE. 

to  have  a  Regard  to  the  Dignity  and  Grandeur  of  him 
who  is  to  be  invoked  and  worfhipped  therein ;  and  as 
he  is  the  chiefeft  Good  and  Perfe&ion  in  the  Abftract,  it  is 
highly  reafonable  that  all  things  devoted  to  his  Service 
ffiould  be  brought  to  the  greateft  Perfe&ion  human  Art  is 
capable  of.  And,  indeed,  when  we  reflect  on  this  beau¬ 
tiful  Fabrick  of  the  World,  with  how  many  wonderful 
Decorations  it  is  repleniffi’d  ;  when  we  conlider  how  the 
Heavens,  by  their  conftant  Revolutions,  change  the  Seafons 
according  to  the  Neceffities  of  Mankind,  and  preferve 
themfelves  by  the  exa&eft  Harmony,  and  due  Tempera¬ 
ment  of  their  Motion ;  we  cannot  doubt,  but  that  as  thefe 
little  Temples  which  we  ere&,  ought  to  bear  fome  Affinity 
to  that  immenfe  one  of  his  infinite  Goodnefs,  which  was 
perfectly  compleated  by  his  bare  Fiat ,  or  Almighty  Word  ; 
fo  we  are  in  Duty  bound  to  adorn  them  with  all  the 
Embelliffiments  we  poffibly  can,  and  to  build  them  in 
fuch  a  beautiful  Manner,  and  with  fuch  juft  Proportions, 
that  all  the  Parts  together  may  ftrike  the  Eyes  of  the 
Beholders  with  the  moft  pleafing  Harmony,  and  that  each 
of  them  diftin&ly  may  anfwer  with  Convenience  the  Ufe 
for  which  it  was  intended.  For  which  Reafon,  altho* 
they  are  worthy  of  Applaufe,  who,  being  animated  by 
the  beft  Spirit,  have  already  ere&ed  Churches  and  Temples 
in  Honour  of  the  Almighty,  and  are  ftill  perfuing  the 
like  glorious  Undertakings ;  neverthelefs,  they  do  not  feem 
to  be  free  from  all  Blame,  if  they  have  not  likewife  ufed 
their  utmoft  Endeavours  to  make  them  in  the  moft  beau¬ 
tiful  Form,  and  the  nobleft  Manner  they  could  poffibly 
devife.  Now,  fince  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans  were 
very  diligent,  and  very  ambitious  of  making  Temples  for 
their  Gods,  and  that  they  built  them  according  to  the 
exa&eft  Rules  of  Archite&ure,  in  order  that  they  might 
have  the  greateft  Decorations,  and  the  moft  beautiful 
Proportions,  that  were  agreeable  to  the  Deity  to  whom 
they  were  devoted :  I  fhall  therefore  ffiew  you,  in  this 
Book,  the  Form  and  Ornaments  of  feveral  ancient  Tem¬ 
ples,  the  Ruins  whereof  are  yet  to  be  feen,  and  I  have 

made 


The  PREFACE,  183 

made  the  Defigns  of  them,  that  every  one  may  be  rightly 
informed  in  what  Figure,  and  with  what  Decorations, 
Churches  ought  to  be  ereCted.  And  tho’  but  very  little 
of  fome  of  thefe  Temples  is  to  be  feen  above  Ground,  yet 
from  this  little,  and  from  the  due  Confideration  of  the 
Foundations,  which  could  likewife  be  feen,  I  have  made, 
by  Conjectures,  what  they  muft  have  been  when  they 
were  whole  and  perfeCt :  And,  in  this  Affair,  I  own  my 
felf  much  indebted  to  Vitruvius ,  becaufe,  as  what  I  faw 
was  conformable  to  what  he  taught,  it  was  no  difficult 
Task  for  me  to  come  to  the  Knowledge  both  of  their 
AfpeCts  and  Forms.  But  as  for  what  relates  to  the  Decora¬ 
tions,  that  is,  the  Bafes,  Columns,  Capitals,  Corniffies,  and 
the  like,  I  have  introduc’d  nothing  of  my  own;  but  I 
meafur’d  them  with  the  utmoft  Care  and  CorreCtnefs  I 
was  capable  of  from  feveral  Fragments  which  were  found 
in  the  very  Places  where  thofe  Temples  ftood.  Nor  do  I 
doubt,  but  that  fuch  as  fhall  perufe  this  Book,  and  care¬ 
fully  conlider  the  Defigns  of  it,  will  come  to  underftand 
many  Paffages  in  Vitruvius ,  which  were  reputed  extreamly 
dark  and  obfcure  ;  and  that  their  Judgments  will  be  di¬ 
rected  to  difcover  the  molt  beautiful  and  beft  proportion’d 
Forms  of  Temples,  and  to  draw  feveral  very  noble  In¬ 
ventions  from  them  ;  and  by  making  Ufe  of  them  in 
due  Time  and  Place,  they  may  fhew  in  their  Works, 
how  judicious  Architects  may  and  ought  to  vary,  without 
fwerving  from  the  Precepts  of  the  Art,  and  how  fuch 
Variations  are  frequently  very  commendable  and  very 
graceful.  But,  before  I  come  to  the  Deligns,  I  fhall 
briefly  lay  down,  according  to  my  ufual  Manner,  thole 
Rules  or  InftruCtions  which  are  to  be  obferved  in  the 
EreCtion  of  Temples,  I  my  felf  having  drawn  them  from 
Vitruvius ,  and  from  other  celebrated  Authors  that  have 
treated  on  fo  noble  an  Art. 


A  a  a 


THE 


..  V' 

■ 

.5.  , 


1 


■  . • 

’  . 


•  f  •  • 

- 

- 

•  c  •  . 

•  -  •  r  •  /  -  - 

- 

•  -  -  -•  ■*-  •  '  ■  / ' 


* 

•*-  - 

■ 

. 

r»:i 

•  •  •  ■  •  i:  V 


A  A  J 

*  )  .  * 

rt  fi<  >  f  . 

'  ".  , 


\ 


J 


V 


■  •'!(,  .  .  ' 

-  t  *il  ;> 

1 ;  r  •  ->  =  f 


* 


‘ 

' 


. 


* 


i 


THE 

FOURTH  BOOK. 

CHAP.  I. 

Of  the  Situation  to  be  chofen  for  the  Erection 

of  Temples. 

US  CANY  was  not  only  the  firft  Italian  Coun¬ 
try  that  received  Architecture  as  a  foreign 
Invention,  from  whence  the  Tufca7i  Order  had 
its  Dimenlions ;  but  with  refpeCt  to  the  Things 
relating  to  thole  Gods,  which  were  worlhipp’d  by  the 
greateft  Part  of  the  World  (groveling  in  the  Darknefs  of 
Efror  and  Superiftition)  fhe  was  the  Miftrefs  of  all  the 
"  \neighbo.vifing  Nations,  and  Ihew’d  them  what  kind  of 
Temples  they  ought  to  ereCt,  what  Places  were  molt  com- 
what  Ornaments  moll  fuitable  to  the  Quality 
.pf  the  jfeveral  Gods.  Altho’  in  many  Temples  ’tis  too 
eyideot  that  fucfh  Obfervatioos  have  not  always  been  duly 
xegard^dp  yet  I  jftialh  with  as  much  Brevity  as  pofiible, 

relate 


186  PA  L  LA  D  1  O’  s 

relate  what  Writers  have  left  recorded  of  them,  that  fuch 
as  take  Delight  in  ancient  Matters,  may  have  Satisfa&ion 
in  this  Particular,  and,  that  the  Minds  of  all  may  be 
excited  and  inflam’d  to  Diligence  and  Induftry  in  the 
building  of  Churches ;  for  ’tis  a  very  fcandalous  and  dis¬ 
honourable  Thing,  that  we  who  profefs  the  true  Religion, 
fhould  be  excelled  in  this  Refpeft  by  fuch  as  had  no 
Knowledge  of  the  Truth  at  all.  Now,  Since  the  Places 

o 

on  which  fuch  facred  Temples  ought  to  be  ere&ed,  are 
the  firfl:  Things  which  fhould  fall  under  our  Considera¬ 
tion,  I  Shall  treat  of  them  in  this  Chapter.  I  fay  then, 
that  the  ancient  Tufcans  diredted  Temples  to  be  built 
without  the  City,  to  V enus ,  Mars ,  and  V ulcan ,  as  being 
the  Powers  that  Stirred  up  Men’s  Minds  to  Lafcivioufnefs, 
Wars,  and  destructive  Fires  ;  and  within  the  City,  to  fuch 
as  preflded  over  Chaftity,  Peace,  and  all  the  ufeful  Arts. 
To  thofe  Deities  under  whofe  Guardianfhip  the  City  was 
entrufted,  particularly  to  Jupitery  Juno ,  and  Minerva 
(whom  they  look’d  upon  likewife  as  Protestors  cf  the 
City)  they  ereSted  Temples  in  the  hjgheft  Places,  in  the 
Middle  of  their  Towns,  and  in  their  Citadels.  To  Pallas , 
Mercury ,  and  IJis,  becaufe  they  were  the  Superintendants 
of  Artificers  and  Commerce,  they  built  Temples  frequently 
near  Squares,  and  Sometimes  in  them.  To  Apollo  and 
Bacchus  they  built  near  the  Theatre,  as  to  Hercules  near 
the  Circus  and  Amphitheatre.  To  JEfculaptus ,  Hygeia 
the  Goddefs  of  Health,  and  fuch  other  Gods  by  whole 
Influence  and  Power  they  thought  Men  cured  of  their 
Diftempers,  they  built  in  the  moll  healthful  Places,  and 
near  to  Salubrious  Waters;  that  by  coming  out  of  a  bad 
Air  into  a  good  one,  and  by  drinking  Such  Waters,  they 
might  the  Sooner  be  cur’d  ;  whence  allb  their  Zeal  for 
Religion  was  inflamed  the  more.  Thus  they  thought  it 
agreeable  to  all  the  other  Gods  to  find  out  Places  for 
erecting  their  Temples,  according  to  the  Properties  they 
afcribed  to  each  of  them,  and  to  their  particular  Manner 
of  Sacrificing.  But  we,  who  by  the  Ipecial  Grace  and 
Favour  of  God  are  delivered  from  this  Darknefs,  hav¬ 
ing 


I 


ARCHITECTURE.  tS? 

ing  forfaken  their  vain  and  falfe  Superftition,  fhould  chufe 
fuch  Places  for  the  Situation  of  our  Churches,  as  are  in 
the  mod:  noble  and  mod:  populous  Parts  of  the  City*  as 
didant  as  podible  from  unfeemly  or  fcandalous  Places,  and 
adjoining  to  beautiful  Squares,  or  other  open  Places, 
where  feveral  Streets  meet;  and  from  whence  every  Part  of 
the  Church  may  be  feen  to  the  bed:  Advantage,  at  once 
exciting  Devotion,  as  well  as  Admiration,  in  all  fuch  as  view 
and  condder  it.  It  there  be  any  Hills  in  the  City,  the 
mod;  elevated  Parts  thereof  ought  to  be  pitch’d  upon :  But¬ 
in  cafe  there  fhould  be  no  fuch  Eminences,  the  Floor  of  the 
Temple  mud:  be  elevated  above  the  Level  of  the  other 
Edifice,  as  much  as  pofiibly  can  be  ;  fo  that  the  Afcent 
will  confid:  of  divers  Steps,  which  fets  off  the  Majedy  of  a 
Church,  and  begets  greater  Devotion.  The  Fronts  of  the 
Temples  are  fo  to  be  difpofed,  as  to  look  over  the  moft 
beautiful  Part  of  the  City,  that  Religion  may  feem  to  be 
fet  as  the  Guardian  and  ProteCtrefs  of  the  Citizens.  But  if 
Temples  are  to  be  ereCted  out  of  the  City,  then  the  Fronts 
are  to  be  fo  plac’d  as  to  look  towards  the  High  Roads, 
or  Navigable  Rivers,  if  there  be  any  adjacent,  that  Paffen- 
gers  may  fee  them,  and  pay  Reverence  and  RefpeCt  before 
the  Fronts  of  the  Temples. 


CHAP.  II. 


Of  the  Form  in  which  Temples  fljould  be  Ere£ledy 
and  what  is  decent  to  be  obferved  about  them . 


TEMPLES  are  made  either  round,  quadrangular* 
fexangular,  octangular,  or  with  more  Angles  and 
Sides ;  all  which  fhould  conclude  in  the  Capacity  of  a 
Circle  :  they  are  fometimes  made  in  the  Form  of  a 
Crofs,  and  fometimes  in  other  Fafhions  and  Figures, 
according  to  the  various  Inventions  of  various  Men ;  but 

B  b  b  all 


188  PA  L  L  A  D  10' s 

all  commendable,  when  they  are  diftinguifh’d  with  beau¬ 
tiful  and  due  Proportions,  according  to  the  ftriCt  Rules  ol 
Architecture.  But  the  moft  agreeable,  and  moft  regular 
Forms,  from  which  all  the  others  receive  their  Meafures,  are 
the  round  and  the  quadrangular;  and  for  that  Reafon  Vitru¬ 
vius  fpeaks  of  thefe  two  only,  and  inftruCts  us  how  they  ought 
to  be  comparted,  as  fhall  be  feen  hereafter  when  we  come  to 
treat  of  the  Compartments  of  Temples.  In  fucli  as  are  not 
round  (be  they  of  four,  or  fix,  or  more  Angles  and  Sides) 
due  Care  muft  be  taken,  that  all  their  Angles  be  equal.  The 
Ancients,  as  we  have  fhewn  before,  had  not  only  a  particu¬ 
lar  Regard  to  the  Situation  for  the  building  of  their  Tem¬ 
ples,  and  to  what  might  be  moll  agreeable  to  each  of  their 
Deities,  but  likewife  to  their  Form.  For  which  Reafon,  as 
the  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  perpetually  whirling  their  Orbs 
about  the  World,  and  with  this  circular  Motion  produce  fuch 
Effeds  as  are  apparent  to  all  Mankind,  they  built  their 
Temples  round,  or  at  leaft  fo,  as  that  they  approached  to 
Roundnefs.  So  they  ereCted  the  Temples  of  V eft  a ,  by  them 
accounted  the  Goddefs  of  the  Earth,  which  Element  we 
are  fully  fatisfied  is  round.  To  Jupiter ,  as  being  the  Ruler 
of  the  Air  and  the  Sky,  they  made  Temples  which  were 
uncovered  in  the  Middle,  with  Porticos  round  them,  as 
fhall  be  defcribed  hereafter.  In  the  Difpofal  of  their  Deco¬ 
rations  likewife,  they  always  duly  confidered  what  God  it 
was  to  whom  they  were  building  ;  for  which  Reafon,  they 
made  the  Temples  of  Minerva ,  Mars ,  and  Hercules ,  of 
Dorick  Work  ;  becaufe  Edifices  without  Elegance  or  Soft- 
nefs  were  moft  fuitable,  in  their  Opinion,  to  fuch  Divi¬ 
nities  as  prefided  over  War.  But  they  maintained,  that  to 
V enus ,  Flora ,  the  Mufes ,  the  Nymphs ,  and  the  moft  delicate 
Goddefles,  fuch  Temples  ought  to  be  ereCted  as  beft  agreed 
with  the  gay,  tender,  and  virginal  Age ;  to  thefe  there¬ 
fore  they  confecrated  the  Corinthian  Order,  being  perfua- 
ded  that  the  fineft  Work,  and  the  moft  florid,  adorn’d 
with  Leaves  and  Volutas,  was  moft  fuitable  to  fuch  an  Age. 
On  the  other  Hand,  to  Juno ,  Diana ,  Bacchus ,  and  fuch 
other  Gods  and  Goddefles  (to  whom  neither  the  Gravity 

of 


ARCHITECTURE.  189 

of  the  former,  nor  the  Delicacy  of  the  latter  was  agree¬ 
able)  they  afcribed  the  Ionick  Order, which  retains  a  Medium 
between  the  Dorick  and  the  Corinthian.  Thus  we  find  that 
the  Ancients  were  truly  ingenious  in  preferving  a  Decorum 
in  their  Buildings,  in  which  confifls  the  Beauties  of  Archi¬ 
tecture.  We  therefore,  who  have  no  falfe  Gods,  in  order  to 
preferve  a  due  Decorum  about  the  Form  of  our  Churches, 
fhould  chufe  the  moil  perfect  ;  and  fince  the  round  Form 
alone,  among  all  Figures,  is  fimple,  uniform,  equal,  ftrong, 
and  moil  capacious,  we  fhould  make  our  Churches  round. 
Befides,  it  being  included  within  a  Circle,  wherein  neither 
End  nor  Beginning  can  be  found,  and  having  all  its  Parts 
alike,  and  each  of  them  partaking  of  the  Figure  of  the 
Whole;  and  lailly,  the  Extream  in  every  Part  being  equally 
diilant  from  the  Center,  it  is  the  moil  proper  Figure  to 
denote  the  Unity,  Effence,  Uniformity,  and  Juilice  of 
God.  Moreover,  it  mull  be  acknowledged,  that  Strength 
and  Durablenefs  are  more  requifite  in  Churches  than  any 
other  Fabricks  whatfoever ;  iince  they  are  confecrated  to 
the  immediate  Service  of  God  Almighty ;  and  the  moffc 
valuable,  famous,  and  authentick  Records  of  Towns, 
are  preferved  in  them  ;  wherefore  it  ought  to  be  con¬ 
cluded,  that  the  round  Figure,  in  which  there  is  no 
Corner  or  Angle,  is  abfolutely  the  moil  agreeable  for 
Churches,  which  ought  likewife  to  be  as  large  and  fpa- 
cious  as  conveniently  may  be,  that  a  Multitude  of  Peo¬ 
ple  may  conveniently  aihil  in  them  at  Divine  Service ; 
and  of  all  the  Figures  which  are  terminated  by  an  equal 
Circumference,  none  is  more  large  and  fpacious  than  the 
round.  I  do  not  deny  but  fuch  Churches  are  com¬ 
mendable  enough  as  are  made  in  the  Form  of  a  Crofs, 
and  in  that  Part  which  makes  the  Foot  of  the  Crofs, 
have  the  Entrance  over-againil  the  great  Altar  and  the 
Choir  ;  as  in  the  two  Iiles,  extending  like  Arms  on  each 
Side,  are  two  other  Entrances,  or  two  Altars ;  becauie 
being  eroded  in  the  Form  of  the  Crofs,  they  reprefent 
to  Paffengers  that  Wood  on  which  our  bleifed  Saviour 
was  Crucified.  I  my  felf  built  the  Church  of  St.  George 

the 


/ 


1 90  PJLLJD1  O’s 

the  Great  at  Venice ,  in  this  Form.  Churches  ought  to 
have  large  Porticos,  having  greater  Columns  than  are  re¬ 
quired  in  other  Buildings ;  and  doubtlefs  ’tis  very  reafon- 
able  they  fhould  be  large  and  magnificent,  and  built  with 
great  and  well-proportion’d  Parts ;  but  yet  not  exceeding 
that  Proportion  which  the  Extent  of  the  City  feems  to  re¬ 
quire  ;  becaufe  all  Pomp  and  Magnificence  are  necefiary  in 
the  Service  of  God,  for  which  they  are  fet  apart ;  their 
Orders  of  Columns  ought  to  be  as  beautiful  as  pofiible, 
and  each  Order  fhould  have  its  own  proper  and  convenient 
Decorations.  They  fhould  likewife  be  made  of  the  choiceft 
and  moft  valuable  Materials,  that  the  Divinity  may  be  honou¬ 
red  with  the  Form,  Decorations,  and  Materials,  as  much  as 
pofiible:  And  indeed,  were  it  pofiible,  we  ought  to  make 
them  fo  exquifitely  curious,  that  nothing  could  be  devifed 
more  beautiful;  and  the  Difpofal  of  them,  in  all  their  Parts, 
fhould  be  fo  artful,  that  fuch  as  enter  them  fhould  be  charm’d, 
and  ftand  aftonifh’d,  when  they  view  their  Elegance  and  Beau¬ 
ty.  White,  of  all  Colours,  is  the  moft  fuitable  to  Temples ; 
becaufe  the  Purity  of  it,  exprefs’d  in  the  Purity  of  Life, 
is  highly  acceptable  to  the  Almighty.  But  in  cafe  they 
mull  be  painted,  there  ought  to  be  no  Pictures  in  them  that 
may  in  the  lead:  tend  to  the  Alienation  of  Men’s  Minds 
from  the  Contemplation  of  divine  Things.  In  Temples, 
therefore,  we  muft  never  fwerve  from  Gravity,  or  from 
fuch  Things  as,  being  feen  by  us,  render  our  Minds  more 
fervent  in  the  Service  of  God,  and  difpofe  us  to  all  man¬ 
ner  of  good  Actions. 


CHAP. 


1 


ARCHITECTURE. 


191 


CHAP.  III. 

Concerning  the  ProfpeSis  of  Temples. 

BY  the  Profpe<ft  I  mean  the  firft  View,  or  Appear¬ 
ance  that  a  Temple  makes  to  fuch  as  come  near 
it.  Seven  are  the  moft  regular  Profpe&s  of  Temples, 
and  the  beft  underftood  ;  for  which  Reafon  it  feems  re* 
quifite,  in  my  Opinion,  to  infert  in  this  Place  as  much 
concerning  them,  as  Vitruvius  has  delivered  in  the  firft 
Chapter  of  his  firft  Book,  that  this  Part,  which,  thro*  the 
finall  Regard  Men  fhew  for  ancient  Remains,  is  by  many 
thought  difficult,  and  by  few  hitherto  rightly  underftood, 
may  become  eafy  and  intelligible  by  what  I  fhall  fay 
relating  thereto,  as  well  as  by  the  fubfequent  Draughts, 
which  will  lerve  for  Examples  of  what  that  great  Matter 
has  taught.  I  have  likewife  thought  convenient  to  pre- 
ferve  his  very  Names  and  Terms,  that  fuch  as  perufe  the 
Text  of  Vitruvius  himfelf  (which  I  would  advife  every 
one  to  do)  may  underftand  in  him  the  fame  Words,  and 
not  think  they  are  reading  different  Things,  To  come 
therefore  to  our  Subject;  Temples  are  made  either  with 
or  without  Porticos.  Such  as  are  made  without,  may  have 
three  Profpe&s ;  the  one  is  called  in  Antis ,  that  is,  a  Front 
in  Pilafters,  Antce  being  the  Name  of  the  Pilafters  which 
are  made  in  the  Angles  or  Corners  of  Edifices :  Of  the 
other  two,  the  one  is  called  Projlylos ,  viz.  a  Front  in  Co¬ 
lumns  ;  and  the  other,  Amfhiprojlylos,  That  called  in 
Antis  ought  to  have  two  Pilafters  in  the  Corners,  which 
fhould  turn  from  the  Sides  of  the  Temple ;  and  between 
thofe  Pilafters  in  the  Middle  of  the  Front,  there  muff:  ftand 
two  Columns,  which  muft  advance  forwards,  and  fupport 
the  Fronton  that  is  to  be  over  the  Entrance.  The  other 
Profpeet,  called  Projlylos ,  muft  have  yet  more  than  the 
former  Columns  in  the  Corners  over-againft  the  Pilafters ; 
and  two  other  Columns,  both  on  the  Right  and  on  the 

Ccc  Left? 


i9z  PJLLJD1  O’  s. 

Left,  in  the  Turning  of  the  Corners,  that  is,  one  on  each 
Side:  But  if  the  fame  Difpofition  of  Columns  be  preferved 
in  the  back  Part  of  the  Temple,  as  in  the  Front,  this  is 
the  Profpeft  which  is  called  A?nphiproJlylos ,  that  is,  both 
Fronts  in  Columns.  We  have  not  at  prefent  any  Remains 
left  of  the  two  firft  Sorts  of  ProfpeCts  of  Temples;  no 
Examples,  therefore,  of  fuch  will  be  introduced  here,  nei¬ 
ther  have  I  thought  it  requifite  to  make  Draughts  thereof, 
fince  the  Platforms  and  Elevations  of  each  of  them  are  in 
the  Vitruvius  which  is  published  with  the  Annotations  of 
the  mod;  Reverend  Barbaro.  But  where  Temples  are  made 
with  Porticos,  then  they  are  either  made  quite  round  the 
Temple,  or  the  Front  only.  Such  as  have  their  Porticos 
only  in  Front,  may  be  faid  to  have  the  ProfpeCt  Projiylos  : 
But  fuch  as  have  their  Porticos  round  them,  may  be  made 
with  four  Profpe&s,  fince  they  are  either  made  with  fix 
Columns  in  the  Fore-front,  and  fix  in  the  Back-front,  ha¬ 
ving  eleven  Columns  on  each  Side,  including  the  angular 
ones ;  and  then  this  ProfpeCt  is  called  Peripteros ,  that  is 
to  fay,  wing’d  round ;  and  if  fo,  the  Porticos  round  the 
Nave  muff  be  as  large  as  one  Intercolumnation.  If  there  be 
any  ancient  Temples  that  have  fix  Columns  in  the  Front, 
and  notwithftanding  have  no  Porticos  round  them,  then 
they  have  Semi-columns  in  the  Walls  of  the  Cell  on  the 
Outfide,  accompanying  thofe  of  the  Portico,  and  with  the 
very  fame  Decorations  as  at  Ni?nes  in  Provence  :  and  of 
this  Kind  may  be  faid  to  be  the  Temple  of  the  Ionick  Or¬ 
der  in  Rome ,  which,  at  prefent,  is  the  Church  of  St.  Mary 
the  /Egyptian^  which  thofe  Architects  did  on  purpofe  to 
make  the  Nave  larger,  and  to  fave  Expences,  the  fame 
round-wing’d  ProfpeCt  neverthelefs  remaining  to  every  one 
that  viewed  the  Temple  in  Flank.  If  Temples  be  made  with 
eight  Columns  in  the  Front,  and  fifteen  on  the  Sides  with 
the  angular  ones ;  thefe  come  to  have  the  Porticos  round 
them  double,  and  for  that  Reafon  their  ProfpeCt  is  call’d 
Dipteros ,  or  Double-wing’d.  Or  Temples  are  thus  made 
with  eight  Columns  in  the  Front,  and  fifteen  on  the  Sides ; 
but  the  Porticos  round  are  not  made  double,  one  Order 

of 


ARCHITECTURE. 


193 

of  Columns  being  left  out ;  by  which  Means  thefe  Porticos 
come  to  be  as  large  as  two  Intercolumnations,  and  the 
Thicknefs  of  a  Column ;  fo  that  the  ProfpeCt  of  them  is 
called  Pfeudodipteros ,  that  is  to  fay,  falfe  double- wing’d. 
Hermogenes ,  one  of  the  moft  ancient  Architects,  invented 
this  ProfpeCt,  who  thus  made  the  Porticos  round  the  Tem¬ 
ples  large,  and  commodious  likewife,  in  order  to  fave  both 
Labour  and  Expence,  and  take  nothing  away  from  the  Pro- 
fpeCl  notwithftanding.  Or,  to  conclude,  ’tis  fo  manag’d, 
that  in  the  one  and  the  other  Front  there  are  ten  Columns, 

*  and  the  Porticos  round  the  Temple  double,  juft  as  in  thofe 
the  ProfpeCt  whereof  is  Dipteros .  Thefe  Temples  had  other 
Porticos  within,  with  two  Orders  of  Columns  one  over  the 
other,  which  Columns  were  fmaller  than  thofe  without; 
the  Roof  reached  from  the  Columns  without  to  thofe  with¬ 
in,  and  all  the  Space  which  was  furrounded  by  the  inner 
Columns  was  open  ;  for  which  Reafon  the  ProfpeCt  of 
fuch  Temples  was  Hypethros ,  that  is,  uncover’d.  Thele 
Temples  were  confecrated  to  Jupiter ,  as  the  Sovereign 
Ruler  of  the  Sky  and  of  the  Air,  and  the  Altar  was 
eredted  in  the  Middle  of  the  Court.  Of  this  Kind,  I  am 
apt  to  think,  was  the  Temple,  fome  few  Remains  whereof 
are  to  be  feen  in  Rome  on  Monte  Cavallo ,  which  was 
dedicated  to  Jupiter  ^ ]uirinalis ,  and  ereCted  by  the  Empe¬ 
rors;  becaufe,  as  Vitruvius  tells  us  himfelf,  there  was  no 
fuch  Temple  there  in  his  Time. 


CHAP.  IV. 

*  «’ 

Concerning  Five  Sorts  of  'Temples . 

TH  E  Ancients  (as  has  been  before  obferved)  gene¬ 
rally  made  Porticos  to  their  Temples,  that  the 
People  might  have  a  commodious  Place  to  difcourfe  and 
walk  in  without  the  Nave,  in  which  the  Sacrifices  were 
offer’d,  as  well  as  to  beftow  the  greater  Grandeur  and 

Majefty 


i94  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

Majefty  on  thofe  Fabricks.  Now,  fince  the  Intervals  be¬ 
tween  one  Column  and  another  may  be  made  of  five 
different  Spaces,  Vitruvius  has,  according  thereto,  diftin- 
guilh’d  five  Kinds  or  Manners  of  Temples ;  the  Names 
whereof  are  Pycnojlylos ,  that  is,  thick  fet  with  Columns ; 
Syfiylos ,  having  Columns  at  a  greater  Diftance ;  Diajlylos , 
at  a  ftill  greater  Diftance  ;  Areoflylos ,  at  a  greater  Diftance 
than  is  proper  ;  and  Eufiylos ,  that  has  proper  and  con¬ 
venient  Intervals.  How  all  thefe  Intercolumnations  ftand, 
and  what  Proportion  each  of  them  ought  to  bear  with 
the  Length  of  the  Columns,  I  have  already  fhewn  in  the 
firft  Book,  and  given  you  the  Draughts  of  them ;  for  which 
Reafon  I  fhall  fay  nothing  further  concerning  them  here, 
but  that  the  firft  four  are  defective.  The  two  firft,  becaufe 
as  their  Intercolumnations  are  of  a  Diameter  and  half, 
or  two  Diameters  of  a  Column,  they  are  very  fmall 
and  ftrait ;  fo  that  two  Perfons  cannot  go  a-breaft  into 
the  Porticos,  but  will  be  obliged  to  walk  one  after  the 
other ;  neither  can  the  Doors,  or  their  Decorations,  be  feen 
at  any  Diftance :  and,  laftly,  the  Walk  round  the  Tem¬ 
ple  is  much  embarrafs’d  by  the  Narrownefs  of  the  Space. 
Thefe  two  Manners  however  are  tolerable,  when  the  Columns 
are  made  large,  as  may  be  obferved  in  almoft  all  the 
ancient  Temples.  The  third  Manner  is  defective,  becaule 
as  the  Intercolumnations  are  of  three  Diameters  of  a  Co¬ 
lumn,  they  are  too  ’large ;  whereby  the  Architraves,  thro’ 
the  Greatnefs  of  the  Space,  come  to  break :  but  this  Defed 
may  be  rectified  by  making  Arches  over  the  Architraves 
(in  the  Height  of  the  Frize)  which  will  bear  the  Weight, 
and  leave  the  Architraves  free.  The  fourth  Manner,  tho’ 
not  liable  to  the  Defed  we  have  been  fpeaking  of  (the 
Architraves  being  not  made  of  Stone  or  Marble,  but  Beams 
of  Timber  being  laid  over  the  Columns)  may,  notwith- 
ftanding,  be  deem’d  defedive,  fince  it  is  low,  wide,  and 
mean,  being  appropriated  to  the  Tufcan  Order.  From  what 
has  been  faid,  it  follows,  that  the  moft  elegant  and  beauti¬ 
ful  Manner  of  Temples  is  that  called  Eujlylos ,  the  Inter- 
columnations  whereof  confift  of  two  Diameters  of  a  Co¬ 
lumn, 


lumn,  and  a  fourth  Part ;  for  it  ferves  perfectly  well  for 
Ufe,  Ornament,  and  Strength.  I  have  call’d  the  Manners 
of  Temples,  and  their  Profpe&s,  by  the  fame  Names  all 
along  as  Vitruvius  does ;  not  only  for  the  Reafon  above-^ 
mention’d,  but  becaufe  fuch  Names  feem  to  be  already  ad¬ 
mitted  into  our  Language,  and  are  univerfally  underdood ; 
and  I  fhall  dill  continue  to  ufe  them,  in  thofe  Draughts  of 
Temples  which  are  to  follow,  for  the  very  fame  Reafon, 


CHAP.  V. 

Of  the  Compartment  of  'temples. 

ALT  HO’  in  all  Buildings  it  be  abfolutely  neceflary 
that  all  their  Parts  fhould  correfpond  together,  and 
have  fuch  a  Proportion,  that  there  be  none  of  them  by 
which  the  Whole  may  not  be  meafured,  and  likewife  every 
individual  Part ;  yet  this  fhould  be  obferved  with  the  ut- 
mod  Precaution  in  Temples,  they  being  confecrated  to  the 
fupreme  Being  ;  in  Honour  of  whom,  the  Work  ought  to 
be  mod  excellent  and  beautiful.  For  which  Reafon,  fince 
the  round  and  the  quadrangular  Forms  of  Temples  are  the 
mod  regular,  I  fhall  fhew  how  each  of  them  fhould  be  com¬ 
parted,  and  add  likewife  fome  certain  Things  with  Refped 
to  the  Temples  in  ufe  with  us  Chridians.  Round  Temples 
were  fometimes  made  open  formerly,  that  is,  without  a 
Cell ;  but  with  Columns  which  fupported  the  Cupola,  as 
thofe  that  were  confecrated  to  Ju?^o  Lacinia  \  in  the  Mid¬ 
dle  whereof  dood  the  Altar,  and  the  inextinguifhable,  or 
perpetual  Fire  upon  it.  This  was  the  Manner  in  which  fuch 
Temples  were  comparted.  The  Diameter  of  the  whole 
Space  which  the  Temple  was  to  take  up,  was  divided 
into  three  equal  Parts ;  one  was  given  to  the  Steps,  that 
is,  the  Afcent  of  the  Floor,  and  two  remain’d  for  the 

D  d  d  Temple 


196  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

Temple  itfelf  and  the  Columns,  which  are  plac’d  upon  Pe¬ 
deftals,  and,  with  their  Bafes  and  Capitals,  are  as  high  as 
the  Diameter  of  the  leall  Courfe  of  the  Steps,  and  a  tenth 
Part  as  thick  as  they  are  high.  The  Architrave,  the  Frize, 
and  the  other  Decorations  are  made  in  this,  and  in  all  other 
Kinds  of  Temples,  according  to  the  Directions  laid  down 
in  my  firft  Book.  But  fuch  Temples  as  are  made  clofe, 
that  is,  with  a  Nave,  are  either  wing’d  round,  or  made 
with  a  Portico  only  in  the  Front.  The  Compartment  of 
fuch  as  are  wing’d  round,  is  as  follows.  Firft,  two  Courfes 
of  Steps  are  made  quite  round,  and  the  Pedeftals  are  fet 
upon  them,  as  upon  thefe  the  Columns ;  the  Wings  are 
a  fifth  Part  of  the  Diameter  of  the  Temple,  taking  the 
Diameter  from  the  inner  Part  of  the  Pedeftals.  The  Co¬ 
lumns  are  as  long  as  the  Cell  is  large,  being  a  tenth 
Part  as  thick  as  they  are  long.  The  Cupola  is  to  be 
raifed  above  the  Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice  of  the 
Wings,  proportionate  to  the  Half  of  the  whole  Work.  Thus 
were  the  round  Temples  comparted  by  Vitruvius .  No  Pe¬ 
deftals,  however,  are  feen  in  the  antient  Temples,  but  the 
Columns  begin  from  the  Floor :  Which  I  cannot  but 
approve  of,  becaufe  the  Going  into  the  Temple  is  not  only 
obftruCled,  in  fome  Meafure,  by  thofe  Pedeftals ;  but  the 
Columns  which  begin  from  the  Floor,  render  the  Temple 
more  pompous  and  majeftick.  But  if  a  Portico  be  ereCted 
only  in  the  Front  of  round  Temples,  it  muft  be  made 
as  long  as  the  Nave  is  large,  or  an  eighth  Part  lefs :  It  may 
be  fhorter  yet,  but  muft  never  be  fhorter  than  three  Quar¬ 
ters  of  the  Breadth  of  the  Temple  ;  nor  muft  it  ever  be 
made  broader  than  the  third  Part  of  its  Length.  In  qua¬ 
drangular  Temples,  the  Porticos  in  the  Front  are  to  be 
made  as  long  as  the  Temple  is  broad :  And  if  the  Manner 
be  Eufylosy  which  is  the  moft  elegant  and  beautiful,  then 
they  muft  be  comparted  after  this  Manner :  If  the  ProfpeCl* 
be  of  four  Columns,  the  whole  Front  of  the  Temple  (omit¬ 
ting  the  Proje&ure  of  the  Bafes  of  the  Columns  in  the  Cor¬ 
ners)  muft  be  divided  into  eleven  Parts  and  a  Half,  one 
whereof  we  will  call  a  Module ,  that  is,  a  Meafure  whereby 

the 


ARCHITECTURE.  197 

the  other  Parts  are  to  be  meafured :  For  in  making  the 
Columns  one  Module  thick,  four  muft  be  given  to  them, 
three  to  the  middle  Intercolumnation,  and  four  and  a  Half 
to  the  other  two  ;  that  is,  two  and  a  Quarter  to  each.  But 
in  cafe  the  Front  have  fix  Columns,  then  it  muft  be  divi¬ 
ded  into  eighteen  Parts ;  if  eight,  into  twenty-four  and  a 
Half ;  and  if  ten,  into  one  and  thirty ;  giving  always  one 
of  thefe  Parts  to  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Columns,  three  to 
the  middle  Void,  and  two  and  a  Half  to  each  of  the  other. 
The  Height  of  the  Columns  muft  be  managed,  according 
as  they  are  either  Ionick  or  Corinthian.  As  to  the  Regulation 
of  the  Profpe&s  of  the  other  Manner  of  Temples  (that  is,  of 
the  Pycnoftylos ,  Syflylos ,  Diajiylos ,  and  Areojlylos)  you  will 
find  my  Dire&ions  therein  in  the  firft  Book,  under  the  Topic 
of  Intercolumnations.  The  Antitemple  was  beyond  the  Por¬ 
tico,  and  the  Nave  after  the  former.  The  Breadth  was  divided 
into  four  Parts,  and  the  Length  of  the  Temple  confifted  of 
eight  fuch  ;  five  whereof  were  given  to  the  Length  of  the 
Nave,  including  the  Wall  wherein  the  Door  is;  and  the  other 
three  remained  to  the  Antitemple,  which  has  two  Wings  of 
Wall  on  its  Sides,  continued  to  the  Walls  of  the  Cell.  At  the 
End  of  thefe  are  made  two  that  is,  two  Pilafters  as 

thick  as  the  Columns  of  the  Portico :  And  fince  between 
thefe  Wings  there  may  be  a  greater  or  lefs  Space,  if  the  larger 
be  twenty  Foot,  there  ought  to  be  two  Columns  put  between 
the  laid  Pilafters,  nay  more,  if  there  fhould  be  Occafion, 
directly  oppofite  to  the  Columns  of  the  Portico.  The  Ule 
of  them,  is  to  feparate  the  Antitemple  from  the  Portico : 
And  the  three  or  more  Voids  that  will  be  between  the  Pila¬ 
fters,  muft  be  clofed  with  Pannels  of  Wood  or  Marble ;  the 
neceflary  Openings  however  muft  be  left  for  entering  into 
the  Antitemple.  But  if  the  Breadth  exceed  forty  Foot,  there 
muft  be  other  Columns  placed  within,  over-againft  thofe 
between  the  Pilafters  ;  and  they  muft  be  made  as  high  as 
thofe  without,  tho’  not  quite  fo  thick:  For  the  open  Air 
will  take  away  from  the  Thicknefs  of  thofe  without,  and 
the  Inclofure  will  not  let  the  Smallnefs  of  thofe  within  be 
feen,  fo  that  they  will  appear  equal.  Now,  tho’  this  Com¬ 
partment 


198  P  A  L  L  A  D  1  O' s 

partmcnt  fucceeds  to  the  niceft  Point  in  Temples  of  four 
Columns,  yet  the  fame  Proportion  does  not  happen  in  other 
Profpedts  and  Manners ;  becaufe  the  Walls  of  the  Nave  will 
run  counter  to  the  Columns  on  the  Outfide,  and  be  in  a 
Line,  whence  the  Naves  of  thofe  Temples  will  be  fomewhat 
larger  than  we  have  faid.  Thus  the  Ancients  comparted 
their  Temples  (according  to  Vitruvius)  and  had  always  Por¬ 
ticos  to  them,  that  the  People  in  excefiive  Weather  might 
avoid  the  Sun,  Rain,  Hail,  and  Snow ;  and  likewife,  that 
on  folemn  and  feftival  Days  they  might  converfe  with 
one  another  there  till  the  Hour  of  Sacrifice  came  on.  But 
we,  not  regarding  whether  the  Porticos  furround  the  Tem¬ 
ple  or  not,  build  our  Churches  much  like  the  ancient  Ba- 
filicas ,  or  Courts  of  Juftice,  wherein  (as  we  have  already 
obferved)  the  Porticos  were  made  within  the  Building,  as 
we  do  now  in  our  Churches.  The  Reafon  whereof  is,  that 
the  firft  who  embraced  our  Religion,  being  enlighten’d  by 
the  Truth,  ufed  to  meet,  for  fear  of  the  Gentiles ,  in  the 
Bajilicas  of  private  Perfons ;  where  afterwards,  obferving 
that  this  Form  was  very  convenient,  becaufe  the  Altar 
could  be  plac’d  in  the  Room  of  the  Tribunal  to  great  Ad¬ 
vantage,  and  that  the  Choir  could  ftand  round  the  Altar 
in  good  Order,  while  the  remaining  Part  might  hold  the 
People,  they  have  not  thought  proper  to  alter  it  fince ;  and 
for  that  Reafon,  in  the  Compartment  of  the  Wings  or  Illes 
which  are  made  in  our  Churches,  Regard  muft  be  had  to 
what  I  have  faid  on  the  Subject  of  Bafelicas.  There  is  a 
Place  added  to  our  Churches,  which  is  feparated  from  the 
reft,  called  the  Sacrijiy  or  V eftry,  where  the  Veftments  be¬ 
longing  to  the  Priefts  are  depofited  ;  as  alfo  the  Veflels, 
the  facred  Books,  and  fuch  other  Things  as  are  made  ufe  of 
in  divine  Service,  the  Priefts  likewife  drefilng  themfelves 
there:  and  then  Towers  and  Steeples  are  raifed,  wherein 
Bells  are  hung  to  fummon  the  People  to  their  publick  De¬ 
votions  ;  but  fuch  Bells  are  not  made  ufe  of  for  thefe  Pur- 
pofes  by  any  People  but  Chriftians.  Near  the  Churches  are 
erected  the  Apartments  for  the  Priefts,  which  ought  to 
be  made  with  large  Cloifters,  and  beautiful  Gardens ; 

but 


ARCHITECTURE. 


1 99 

but  particularly  the  Habitations  for  the  facred  Virgins, 
or  Nuns,  ought  to  be  fafe  and  fecure,  high,  far  from  Noife 
and  the  View  of  People.  Thus  much  may  fuffice  with 
refped  to  the  Decorum,  the  ProfpecSts,  the  Manners,  and 
the  Compartments  of  Temples.  I  fhall  now  fet  down  the 
Draughts  and  Deligns  of  feveral  ancient  Temples,  and 
obferve  the  following  Method  in  the  doing  thereof :  Firft, 
I  fhall  give  the  Draughts  of  fuch  Temples  as  are  in  Rome ; 
next,  of  fuch  as  are  out  of  Rome ,  but  are  up  and  down 
in  Italy ;  and  laftly,  of  fuch  as  are  out  of  Italy.  But  the 
better  to  be  underftood,  and  not  to  be  too  tedious  (as  well 
as  not  to  burthen  the  Reader  by  minutely  expreiling  the 
Meafures  of  every  Part)  I  have  inferted  them  all,  with 
their  Numbers  and  References,  in  the  Draughts. 

N.  B.  This  *  reprefents  half  of  the  Vicentine  Foot  di¬ 
vided  into  fx  Niches ,  and  each  Nich  into  four  Minutes , 
or  Parts.  7 he  whole  Foot  contains  48  Minutes ,  which 
Meafure  is  made  ufe  of  by  Palladio  through  all  Parts  of 
the  fubfequent  Temples. 


nmmmkunuummmmmmmmm 

CHAP.  VI. 

Concerning  the  Draughts  of  feveral  antient  'Tem¬ 
ples  which  are  in  Rome ;  and  firft,  concern¬ 
ing  the  Temple  of  Peace. 


WE  fhall  begin  therefore  with  a  good  Omen,  from 
the  Draughts  of  the  Temple  formerly  confecrat- 
ed  to  Peace  §,  whole  Traces  or  Footfleps  are  feen  near 
the  Church  of  SanSla  Maria  Nova>  in  the  Sacred  Way  ; 
And  Hiftorians  tell  us,  that  it  is  in  the  felf-lame  Place 


*  Plate  I. 


§  Plate  II. 


E  e  e 


where 


200 


P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’ s 

where  the  Curia  of  Romulus  and  Hoftilius  was  at  firft,  and 
afterwards  the  Houle  of  Melius >  the  Bafilica  Portia ,  the 
Houfe  of  Cce/ar ,  with  its  Portico  ;  which  Augujlus  demo- 
lifhed,  appearing  a  Building,  in  his  Opinion,  too  great  and 
magnificent ;  but  he  ere&ed  another  there  which  he  call’d 
after  the  Name  of  his  Wife  Livia  Drufilla.  The  Emperor 
Claudius  begun  this  Temple,  and  Vefpafian  finifhed  it,  after 
he  return’d  vi&orious  from  "Judea ,  depofiting  all  the  Vcffefs 
and  other  Decorations  of  the  Temple  of  JeruJalem  therein, 
which  he  carry’d  in  Triumph.  This  Temple  was,  as  we  are 
informed,  the  greatcft,  the  mod  magnificent,  and  the  richefl 
of  the  whole  City :  And,  doubtlefs,  its  Remains,  even 
ruined  as  they  are,  reprefent  fo  much  Grandeur,  that  we 
may  eafily  form  an  Idea  of  what  it  was  when  whole  and 
intire.  There  was  a  Gallery  before  the  Entry,  which  had 
three  Voids  of  Brick-Work  ;  and  the  reft  was  a  continued 
Wall,  equal  to  the  Breadth  of  the  Front.  In  the  Pilafters 
of  the  Arches  of  the  Gallery  there  were  Columns  placed  on 
the  outfide  for  Ornament,  the  Order  whereof  followed  like- 
wife  in  the  continued  Wall.  Over  this  firft  Gallery  was  ano¬ 
ther  open  one,  with  its  Balluftrade  ;  and  dire&ly  over  each 
Column  was  a  Statue.  There  were  eight  Marble  Columns 
of  the  Corinthian  Order  within  the  Temple,  five  Feet  and 
four  Inches  thick  ;  with  the  Capitals  and  Bafes,  fifty  three 
Foot  long.  The  Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice,  were  ten 
Feet  and  a  half ;  and  fupported  the  Arching  of  the  middle 
Nave.  The  Bafe  of  thefe  Columns  was  higher  than  the 
Half  of  the  Diameter  of  the  Column,  and  had  its  Plinth 
thicker  than  the  third  part  of  its  Height:  Which  the  Build¬ 
ers,  in  all  Probability,  difpofed  after  that  Manner,  as  con¬ 
ceiving  that  the  Weight  to  be  laid  thereon,  might,  by 
that  Means,  be  better  regulated.  The  Projedture  thereof 
was  the  fixth  part  of  the  Diameter  of  the  Column.  The 
Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice,  were  curioufly  carved. 
The  Cymatium  of  the  Architrave  deferves  to  be  taken 
Notice  of,  for  its  different  Form  from  the  others,  and  the 
Beauty  of  its  Workmanfhip.  The  Cornice  has  Modi- 
lions  inftead  of  the  Corona.  The  Metopas  of  the  Rofes, 

which 


ARCHITECTURE. 


201 


which  are  between  the  Modilions,  are  fquare ;  and,  as  I 
have  obferved  in  all  the  antient  Edifices,  ought  always  to  be 
made  fo.  This  Temple  was  burnt,  as  Hiftorians  tell  us, 
in  the  Time  of  the  Emperor  Co?nmodusy  which  I  cannot 
believe  to  be  FaCt,  fince  no  Part  of  it  was  made  of  Tim¬ 
ber  ;  but  it  might  very  probably  be  deftroyed  by  an  Earth¬ 
quake,  or  fome  fuch  fatal  Accident ;  and  afterwards  re¬ 
paired,  when  Architecture  was  not  fo  well  underftood  as  in 
the  Time  of  Vefpafean.  I  am  the  rather  induced  to  give 
into  this  Opinion,  becaufe  I  find  that  the  Intaglias  are  not 
fo  well  done,  or  fo  carefully  labour’d,  as  thofe  of  the  Arch 
of  7 "itus,  and  other  Fabric ks,  that  were  ereCted  in  good 
Times.  The  Walls  of  this  Temple  were  adorned  with  Sta¬ 
tues  and  Pictures,  and  the  Arches  thereof  made  with  Com¬ 
partments  of  Stuc :  Every  Part  of  it,  in  fhort,  was  ex¬ 
tremely  beautiful. 


The  *  Elevation  of  the  out  fide  and  infide  of  the  Fronts 
and  of  the  infide  of  the  Flank  of  the  Temple . 

A  §  Profil  at  large  of  the  Corinthian  Cornice ,  and  other 
ornamental  Members  of  the  faid  Temple. 

A.  The  Bafe, ,  > 

B.  The  Capital ,  ]of  the  Columns  that  Jupport 

C.  The  Architrave ,  Frize, '  the  Nave  in  the  middle . 

and  Cornice ,  j 

D.  Compartments  of  Stuc  made  in  the  Arches . 

E.  A  Scale  of  four  Feet  divided  into  192  Parts ,  there¬ 

with  the  fame  has  been  meafured. 


*  Plate  III.  §  Plate  IV. 

.  1 


CHAP, 


202 


PALLADIO' s 


CHAP.  VII. 

Concerning  the  femple  of  Mars  the  Avenger. 

I  l 

NEAR  the  Torre  de  Conti  may  flill  be  feen  the 
Ruins  of  the  Temple  which  was  formerly  ereded 
by  Augujlus  to  Mars  the  Avenger  *,  purfuant  to  a  Vow 
which  he  made,  when  he  and  Mark  Antony ,  to  be  re¬ 
venged  for  the  treacherous  Murder  of  Julius  Ccefar ,  fought 
the  Battle  of  Pharfalia  againft  Brutus  and  Cajfius ,  and 
conquer’d  them.  By  the  Remains  of  it,  we  may  plainly 
difcern  that  this  was  a  moil  beautiful  and  ftupendous  Fa- 
brick  ;  and  much  the  more  marvellous  mull  it  have  been, 
by  the  Splendor  refleded  upon  it  from  the  Forum  juft 
before  it ;  into  which,  we  are  told,  that  thofe  who  return’d 
Vidors,  and  Triumphant  into  the  City,  carry ’d  the  Tro¬ 
phies  of  their  Enemies,  and  other  Signals  of  their  Vidory. 
We  are  likewife  inform’d,  that  Augujlus ,  in  the  fined  Part 
of  it,  plac’d  two  Pidures,  wherein  were  delineated  the 
Manner  of  an  Attack,  and  the  Procefiion  of  a  Triumph : 
As  alfo  two  other  Pidures,  drawn  by  Apelles ;  in  one  of 
which  were  Cajlor  and  Pollux ,  the  Goddefs  of  ViSlory ,  and 
Alexander  the  Great ;  in  the  other,  the  fame  Alexander , 
and  the  Reprefen tation  of  a  Battle.  There  were  two  Por¬ 
ticos  there,  in  which  the  faid  Augujlus  dedicated  the  Sta¬ 
tues  of  all  fuch  as  had  return’d  in  Triumph  to  Rome : 
But  at  prefent  there  are  not  the  lead:  Footfteps  of  this 
Forum  to  be  feen,  unlefs  thofe  Wings  of  Walls  which  are 
on  the  Sides  of  the  Temple  might  poflibly  be  part  of  it; 
which,  as  there  are  feveral  Places  for  Statues  that  are  there, 
is  no  Ways  improbable.  The  Profped  of  the  Temple  is 
wing’d  round,  which  we  have  before,  with  Vitruviusy 
call’d  Peripteros.  And  becaufe  the  Breadth  of  the  Nave 
is  above  twenty  Feet,  and  the  Columns  are  put  between 


*  Plate  V. 


the 


ARCHITECTURE.  203 

the  two  Antes  or  Pilafiers  of  the  Antitemple,  over-agamft 
thofe  of  the  Portico  (as  we  have  before  obferved  fhould 
be  done  in  the  like  Cafe)  .  the  Portico  is  not  continu’d 
quite  round  the  Temple.  Neither  is  the  faid  Rule  obferv’d 
on  the  Outfide,  in  the  Wings  of  the  Wall  which  joins  to 
the  one  and  the  other  Side  of  the  Nave,  altho’  all  Parts 
are  correfpondent  within  :  From  which  we  may  infer,  that 
the  publick  Street  was  both  behind  and  in  flank,  and  that 
Auguftus  chofe  rather  to  accommodate  himfelf  to  the  Si¬ 
tuation,  than  incommode  the  Neighbours,  or  take  the  Houfes 
from  the  rightful  Owners.  The  Manner  of  this  Temple  is 
Pycnofylos .  The  Porticos  are  large,  in  Proportion  to  the 
Intercolumnations.  Within  the  Nave  there  is  no  Trace  or 
Footftep  whatfoever  left,  no  Fragments  in  the  Wall,  where¬ 
by  we  might  with  Confidence  affirm,  that  it  had  Decorations 
and  Tabernacles  ;  yet  fince  in  all  Probability  there  were,  I 
have  made  fome  according  to  my  own  Imagination.  The 
Columns  of  the  Portico  are  of  the  Corinthian  Kind.  The 
Capitals  are  wrought  with  Olive  Leaves,  and  the  Abacus 
is  much  larger  than  what  is  generally  obfervM  in  others  of 
that  Order,  due  Regard  being  had  to  the  Dimenfion  of  the 
whole  Capital.  The  firft  Leaves,  you  may  fee,  fwell  a  little 
near  the  Place  where  they  fprout,  which  adds  a  peculiar 
Beauty  to  them.  Thefe  Porticos  have  moft  curious  Soffitas, 
or,  as  we  may  call  them,  Cielings ;  and  for  that  Rea- 
fon  I  have  given  their  Profil  and  Profpedt  in  Plans.  Round 
this  Temple  were  high  Walls  of  Peperino ,  which  were  ruftic 
Work  on  the  outfide,  and  within  there  were  divers  Taber¬ 
nacles,  and  commodious  Places  for  holding  Statues.  _ 

'The  Decorations  which  I  have  added  to  the  infides  of 
this  Temple ,  are  taken  from  fever al  ancient  Reliques  which 
I  found  in  a  neighbouring  Place . 

A  *  Prof  l  of  the  Flank  of  the  Portico  a?id  of  the  Nave . 

The  -f  Elevation  of  half  the  Front ,  with  part  of  the 
JValls  that  are  on  the  Side  of  the  Temple . 


The 


*  Plate  VI. 


f  Plate  VII. 


F  f  f 


204 


PJLLADIO's 


The  Elevation  *  of  part  of  the  infide  of  the  Portico , 
and  of  the  Nave ,  with  the  Decorations  which  I  have 
added  to  them.  • 

The  Decorations  -f*  of  the  Cornice  of  the  Portico. 

A.  The  Capital  of  the  Columns  of  the  Portico. 

B.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice. 

C.  The  Sofjita  of  the  Portico  ;  that  is ,  the  deling . 

D.  ^  Scale  of  four  Feet  divided  into  192  Parts ,  where¬ 

with  thefe  Decorations  have  been  meafured. 

Ihe  So  fit  a  J  of  the  Portico,  and  how  it  turns  in  the 
Antae,  or  Pilaflers  of  the  Antite?nple. 

E.  The  Sojfita  of  the  Architrave  between  the  Columns. 
Some  ||  particular  Decorations  of  the  faid  Temple. 

F.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns  of  the  Portico ,  which  is  con¬ 

tinued  likewife  in  the  Wall  round  the  Temple. 

G.  The  Cauriola ,  from  whence  the  Divifions  of  the  Squares 

begin ,  which  are  made  for  Shew  in  the  W all  under 
the  Porticos. 

H.  The  Plan  of  the  Columns  put  for  an  Ornament  of 

the  Tabernacles  in  the  Nave. 

I.  Their  Bafe. 

K.  The  Capital. 

L.  The  Scale  of  four  Feet  divided  in  192  Parts. 

M.  The  Cornice  which  is  feen  in  the  Wings  of  the  Wall \ 

and  makes  a  Square  from  the  Sides  of  the  Temple. 

N.  A  Plan  of  the  Diminution  of  the  Column  under  the 

Capital. 


CHAP.  VIII. 

Concerning  the  'Temple  of  Nerva  Trajan. 

00  *  v. 

NEAR  the  faid  Temple,  built  by  Auguflus ,  are 
the  Traces  or  Footfteps  of  the  Temple  of  Ner- 
Qa  §.  The  Profpedt  thereof  is  Projlylos ,  and  the  Man- 


*  Plate  VIII.  f  Plate  IX.  %  Plate  X.  ||  Plate  XI.  §  Plate  XII. 


ner 


ARCHITECTURE.  io| 

ner  Pycnoftylos.  The  Portico,  with  the  Nave,  is  little  lefi 
than  two  Squares  in  Length.  The  Floor  is  rais’d  from  the 
Ground  by  a  Bafement,  which  goes  round  the  whole  Edi¬ 
fice,  and  becomes  a  Butment  to  the  Steps  which  lead  to 
the  Portico.  At  each  End  of  thefe  Butments  flood  two 
Statues.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns  is  after  the  Attick  Man¬ 
ner,  different  in  this  from  what  Vitruvius  diredta,  and 
which  I  have  inferted  in  my  firft  Book ;  becaufe  there 
are  two  Aftragals  more  in  him,  one  under  the  Scotia,  and 
the  other  under  the  Cindture  of  the  Column.  The  Capitals 
are  wrought  with  Olive  Leaves,  and  difpos’d  Five  and  Five, 
like  the  Fingers  of  Men’s  Hands,  as  all  the  ancient  Ca¬ 
pitals  of  this  Kind  are  made,  as  I  have  before  obferved  ; 
which  have  a  better  Effedt,  and  are  more  agreeable  than 
thofe  where  the  Leaves  are  made  Four  and  Four.  In  the 
Architrave  there  are  more  beautiful  Intaglias  which  divide 
one  Fafcia  from  another ;  which  Intaglias  and  Divifions 
are  the  Sides  only  of  the  Temple,  becaufe  in  the  Front 
the  Architrave  and  Frize  were  made  even  with  one  ano¬ 
ther,  for  placing  an  Infcription  in  the  moft  commodious 
Manner,  whereof  the  few  Letters  following  may  ftill  be 
feen  ;  tho’  even  thefe  are  imperfedt,  and  defac’d  by  Time* 

.  a.  .  V  w  *  V  au  V  „  „ 

JMPERATOR  NERVA  CJESAR  AUG.  PONT. 
MAX.  TRIB.  POT.  II.  IMPERATOR  II. 
PRO  COS. 

v.  *•  ,‘\  *  W.-  -A.  X  .  *  ‘ 

The  Cornice  is  beautifully  wrought,  having  a  very  fine 
and  commodious  Projedture.  The  Architrave,  Frize,  and 
Cornice,  all  together,  are  a  fourth  part  of  the  Length  of 
the  Columns.  The  Walls  are  made  of  *  Peperino ,  and 
crufted  with  Marble.  In  the  Nave,  along  the  Walls,  I 
have  put  Tabernacles  with  Statues,  fince  by  the  Ruins  it 
appears,  that  there  were  fuch  originally.  There  was  a 
Square  before  this  Temple,  in  the  Center  whereof  was 
eredted  the  Statue  of  the  faid  Emperor  on  Horfeback. 


*  A  Stone  fo  called. 


And 


lo6  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

And  its  Decorations  were  fo  many,  and  To  admirable,  as 
Hiftorians  tell  us,  that  it  rais’d  the  Admiration  of  all  that 
view’d  them ;  imagining  them  to  be  Works  of  Giants,  ra¬ 
ther  than  of  Men.  When  the  Emperor  Coizflans  came  to 
Rome ,  the  rare  Stru&ure  of  this  Edifice,  at  firlf,  ftruck  his 
Eye  in  the  mod;  agreeable  Manner ;  and  then  turning  to 
his  Architect,  he  faid,  that  he  would  make  a  Horfe  like  that 
of  Nerva ,  at  Conflantinople ,  to  immortalize  his  own  Me¬ 
mory  :  Whereupon  Ormifidas  (for  that  was  the  Name  of 
his  Architect)  anfwer’d  him,  that  it  was  necellary  to  make 
fuch  a  Stable  for  him  firft,  pointing  to  this  Square.  The 
Columns  which  furround  it  have  no  Pedeftals,  but  fiand 
on  the  Ground ;  and  it  was  highly  requifite  that  the 
Temple  fhould  be  higher  than  the  other  Parts.  Thefe 
Columns  are  likewile  Corinthian ,  and  there  were  little 
Pilafters  upon  the  Cornice  diredlly  over  them.  Upon 
each  Pilafter  there  mull  have  been  a  Statue ;  nor  is  it 
any  Matter  of  Wonder,  that  I  place  fo  many  Statues  in 
thefe  Edifices:  fince,  we  are  told,  they  were  fo  nume¬ 
rous  in  Rome ,  that  they  feem’d  another  People. 

E.  The  Entry  of  the  Court  before  the  Temple . 

F.  The  Entry  by  the  Flank . 

G.  The  Portico . 

H.  The  Temple* 

I.  The  Sides  of  the  Court. 

K.  The  Doors  to  the  Front  of  the  Court  over-againjl  the 

Temple. 

L.  The  place  where  the  Statue  of  Trajan  flood. 

Elevation  *  of  half  of  the  Out-portico ,  and  of  the  Entry 

on  the  Side  of  it. 

Elevation  f  of  half  of  the  Infde  of  the  Temple ,  with 
the  Entry  on  the  Side  of  it. 

Elevation  J  of  the  Flank  of  the  Portico  ;  and  the  Dif- 
poftion  of  the  Columns  which  were  round  the  Court ,  is 
Jeen  through  the  Inter columnations. 


*  Plate  XIII.  f  Plate  XIV.  J  Plate  XV. 

Half 


ARCHITECTURE. 


207 


Half*  the  Front  of  the  Court ,  over-againfl  the  Temple . 
The  Decorations  -f*  of  the  Portico  of  the  Temple , 

A.  The  Bafement  of  the  whole  Edifice . 

B.  The  Bafe  of  the  Column . 

C.  The  Architrave. 

D.  The  Frize. 

E.  The  Cornice . 

F.  A  Scale  of  two  Feet  divided  into  96  Parts. 

G.  The  Soffita  of  the  Architrave  within  the  Columns. 

The  Decorations  ^  which  were  round  the  Court. 

H.  The  Architrave. 

I.  The  Frize ,  which  was  wrought  with  Figures  in  Bajfo~ 
relievo. 

K.  The  Cornice. 

L.  The  little  Pilaflers ,  upon  which  flood  the  Statues. 

M.  The  Decorations  of  the  Doors  which  were  in  the  Front 

of  the  Court  over-againft  the  Portico  of  the  Temple. 

N.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns . 

O.  A  Scale  of  three  Feet  divided  into  1 44  Parts. 


CHAP.  IX. 

Concerning  the  'Temple  of  Antoninus  and 

Fauftina. 


NEAR  to  the  Temple  of  Peace ,  which  we  have 
already  defcribed,  is  the  Temple  of  Antoninus 
and  Fauftina  **,  from  whence  Antonine ,  as  fome  imagine, 
was  rank’d  by  the  Antients  among#  the  Number  of  their 
Gods  ;  becaufe  he  had  Salian  and  Antoninian  Priefts 
beiides  his  Temple.  The  Front  of  this  Temple  is 
made  in  Columns,  and  the  Manner  of  it  is  Pycnoflylos. 
The  Floor  of  it  is  elevated  from  the  Ground  one  third 


**  Plate  XIX. 


*  Plate  XVI, 


f  Plate  XVII. 


X  Plate  XVIII. 

G  g  g 


Part 


208 


PALLADIOS 

Part  of  the  Height  of  the  Columns  of  the  Portico,  to 
which  you  go  up  by  Steps ;  and  to  thefe  a  kind  of  Pe- 
deftal  is  made  by  two  Bafements,  the  Mouldings  whereof 
are  continu’d  round  the  whole  Temple.  The  Bafe  of  thele 
Bafements  is  thicker  than  one  Half  of  the  Cymatium,  be¬ 
ing  alfo  made  more  plain  or  fimple :  And  fe>  the  Antients, 
as  I  have  already  obferved,  made  all  fuch  Bafements,  and 
likewife  the  Pedeftals  that  are  fet  under  the  Columns ;  and 
that  with  very  good  reafon,  fince  all  the  Parts  of  any  Edi¬ 
fice  whatever  ought  to  be  the  more  folid,  the  nearer  they 
are  to  the  Earth.  In  the  Extremities  of  thefe  Bafements, 
there  were  two  Statues  dire&ly  over  the  angular  Columns 
of  the  Portico ;  that  is,  one  at  each  End.  The  Bafe  of  the 
Columns  is  Attick \  the  Capital  is  wrought  with  Olive  Leaves; 
the  Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice,  have  a  quarter,  and  a 
third  of  the  faid  quarter  Part,  of  the  Height  of  the  Co¬ 
lumns.  In  the  Architrave  thefe  Words  are  ftill  vifible : 

/.V  \  «yV  -v  ,  .  t.  ; ..  -  * 

-  DIVO  ANTONINO ,  ET 
DIFjE  FAUSTINA  E  X  S.  C 

There  are  Gryphons  carv’d  in  the  Frize,  which  turn  their 
Faces  towards  each  other,  and  ftretch  out  a  Paw  towards 
a  Candleftick,  much  like  thofe  made  Ufe  of  in  Sacrifices. 
There  are  no  Dentils  cut  in  the  Cornice,  which  is  without 
Modilions ;  but  has  a  pretty  large  Ovolo  between  the  Den¬ 
til  and  Corona.  Tho’  we  cannot  now  difcern  whether  there 
were  any  Decorations  in  this  Temple  ;  yet  confidering  the 
Grandeur  and  Magnificence  of  thofe  Emperors,  I  cannot 
but  think  there  were  feme,  and  for  that  Reafon  I  have 
added  Statues.  It  had  a  Court  before  it,  made  of  Pepe - 
rino ;  in  the  Entry  whereof,  over-againft  the  Portico  of  the 
Temple,  were  extraordinary  fine  Arches  and  Columns,  and 
a  Variety  of  Decorations  all  round  it,  tho’  there  are  no 
Footfteps  thereof  to  be  feen  at  prefent;  nay,  I  faw  one 
Part  of  it  demolifh’d  my  felf,  which  had  flood  till  that 
Time.  There  were  two  other  open  Entrys,  that  is,  with¬ 
out  Arches  on  the  Sides  of  the  Temple.  In  the  midft  of 
r  the 


architecture.  309 

the  Court  was  an  Equeftrian  Statue  of  Antofiinus ,  made  of 
Brafs,  which  Bands  now  in  the  Square  of  the  Capitol 

•  **  •  /  ••  V  V 

A.  />/#££  where  the  Statue  of  Antonine  flood, 

B.  The  Portico  of  the  Temple * 

C.  The  Temple . 

D.  The  Entry  of  the  Court  over-againfl  the  Temple , 

E.  The  Entry  by  the  Portico  into  the  Court. 

The  Elevation  *  of  half  of  the  Front  of  the  Temple ,  and 
part  of  the  Wall  of  the  Court. 

Elevation  -f*  of  the  inflde  of  the  Temple ,  with  a  part 
of  the  Entablature  within  the  Portico,  and  a  part  of  the 
Court  Wall. 

_  .  ,  V  L  f  ?  I  ^  Tv 

The  Elevation  $  of  the  outfide  in  Flank ,  in  which,  and 
thro  the  hitercolumnations  of  the  Portico,  you  way  fee  the 
Order  of  the  Column's  and  other  Decorations  which  were 
round  the  Court. 

The  Elevation  ||  of  half  the  Entry,  inflde  of  the  Courts 
over-againfl  the  Front  of  the  Temple, 

The  Decorations  §  of  the  Portico  of  the  Temple , 

A.  The  Eafe  round  the  whole  Edifice . 

B.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns. 

C.  The  Capital. 

D.  The .  Architrave ,  whereon  the  Infcription  was  carvd, 

Z.  The  Prize. 

ctj/  '/r*  i-«Q  ■ 

r.  I  he  Lor  nice. 

G.  A  little  Cornice  made  in  the  Sides  of  the  Temple ,  on 

7  >  v,r  j\  i  j  :  :  .  ....  4 

the  out  ha  e. 

H.  A  Scale  of  four  Feet  divided  into  192  parts. 

X.  The  Dentil  of  the  Cornice  without  carving. 

>  ’  ••••  "i  IJ 


*  Plat?  XX.  f  Plate  XXI.  {  Plate  XXII.  ||  Plate  XXIII.  §  Plate  XXIV. 


Jin  <  t 


loi 


CHAP, 


210 


PALLAD  /  0’s 


CHAP.  X. 

Concerning  the  ^temples  of  the  Sun  and  Moon. 

r  \  A  ^  *  A  V»  \ 

IN  the  Gardens  of  SanSla  Maria  Nova ,  not  far  from 
the  Arch  of  Titus  y  there  are  two  Temples  *  which 
are  ere&ed  after  the  fame  Fadiion  or  Structure,  and  have 
the  very  fame  Decorations.  One  of  them,  by  its  Situation 
to  the  Eafty  is  fuppofed  to  have  been  the  Temple  of  the 
Sun ;  as  the  other  of  the  Moon ,  by  its  being  placed  towards 
the  Weft .  They  were  eredted  and  dedicated  by  Titus  Ta- 
cituSy  King  of  the  Romans  (thd  originally  King  of  the 
Sabines.)  They  come  very  near  the  circular  Form,  becaufe 
they  are  as  broad  as  they  are  long ;  having  Refpedt  to 
the  Courfe  of  thofe  Planets  round  the  Heavens,  The  Gal- 

-  *  '  *  -  ‘,'0  j;  ~UY  PV./I 

leries,  which  were  before  the  Entrance  to  thefe  Temples, 
are  entirely  demolifh’d ;  nor  are  there  any  other  Decorations 
of  them  to  be  feen,  but  what  are  in  the  Arches,  which 
have  Compartments  of  Stuc  very  curioufly  wrought,  and 
according  to  a  beautiful  Delign.  The  Walls  of  thefe  Tem¬ 
ples  are  vadly  thick :  And  between  the  one  and  the  other 
Temple,  on  the  Flank  of  the  great  Chapels  (which  are  over 
againd  the  Entry)  are  feen  the  Faces  or  Footfleps  of  fome 
Stairs,  which  mud:,  doubtlefs,  have  led  to  the  Roof.  I  have 
made  the  Fore-galleries,  and  the  Decorations  of  the  In- 
bde,  according  to  the  Idea  I  have  conceived  of  them,  by 
what  is  now  danding  above  Ground,  and  the  fmall  Matter 
that  could  be  difcern’d  of  the  Foundations,  where  the 
Plans  of  both  dand  join’d  together ;  as  like  wife  the 
Place  where  the  Stairs  were,  which  led,  as  I  before 
obferved,  to  the  Roof.  Near  thefe  Plans  are  the  Elevations 
both  of  the  indde  and  out. 


The 


*  Plate  XXV. 


ARCHITECTURE.  21 1 

[ The  DecoratioJis  *,  that  isj  thofe  of  the  Arches  within 
(the  others  being  demolifhed)  and  the  Elevation  of  the  in* 
Jide  in  Flank . 

A.  "The  Compartments  of  the  Chapels ,  over-agamft  the 

Doors ,  which  have  each  of  them  twelve  Squares. 

B.  The  Profil  and  Mouldings  of  thofe  Squares. 

C. The  Compartments  of  the  great  Nave ,  divided  into 

nine  Squares. 

D.  The  Profil  and  Mouldings  of  thofe  Squares . 


CHAP.  XL 

Concerning  the  'Temple  commonly  called  the 

Galluce. 


NEAR  the  Trophies  of  Marius  is  feen  the  fol¬ 
lowing  +  Fabrick,  of  a  circular  Figure,  which* 
in  Imitation  of  the  Pantheon ,  is  the  largeft  round  Edifice 
in  all  Rome.  The  Place  is  vulgarly  called  La  Galluce , 
which  gave  fome  People  an  Opportunity  of  faying,  that 
it  was  the  Bafilica  of  Caius  and  Lucius  \  which,  together 
with  a  noble  Portico,  Auguflus  caus’d  to  be  erected  in 
Commemoration  of  Caius  and  Lucius  his  Grand-children. 
But  this,  I  am  apt  to  believe,  is  not  Matter  of  Fadt ;  fince 
this  Fabrick  has  none  of  thofe  Parts  which  are  abfolutely 
neceflary  in  Bafilicas  (the  manner  of  making  which  I 
have  above  defcrib’d  in  the  third  Book,  when,  according 
to  the  Rules  laid  down  by  Vitruvius ,  I  divided  the  Parts 
of  a  Square)  and  for  that  Reafon  I  am  fully  perfuaded 
this  was  a  Temple.  It  is  all  Brick- work,  which  muft 
have  been  incrufted,  no  doubt,  with  Marble,  but  is  now 
all  taken  away.  The  middle  Nave,  which  is  perfectly 
Circular,  is  divided  into  ten  Parts,  and  in  each  of  them 


there 


*  Plate  XXVI. 


t  Plate  XXVII. 

Hhh 


21  2 


PJLLADIO's 

there  is  a  Chapel  inchas’d  in  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Wall, 
except  in  that  where  the  Entrance  is.  The  two  Naves  on 
the  Sides,  muft  have  been  curioully  embellilh’d,  becaufe 
they  contain  fuch  a  Number  of  Niches :  And,  in  all  Pro¬ 
bability,  there  were  Columns  and  other  Decorations  in 
them,  which,  attending  thofe  Niches,  muft  unavoidably 
produce  an  admirable  Effect.  They,  who  directed  the  Cha¬ 
pels  of  the  Emperor  and  the  King  of  France  in  St.  Pe¬ 
ters  (which  have  been  ftnce  demolifh’d)  took  their  Model 
from  this  Structure,  which,  as  all  its  Parts  fupport  one 
another,  is  prodigioully  ftrong ;  and,  tho’  fo  very  antient, 
is  ftill  ftanding. 

The  Line  A.  B.  dividing  the  Plan ,  Jhews  the  SeSlion  of 
the  Temple . 


CHAP.  XII. 

Concerning  the  Temple  of  Jupiter. 

UPON  the  Quirinal  Mount,  now  known  by  the 
Name  of  Monte  Cavallo ,  behind  the  Tenements  of 
the  Lords  Colonna ,  are  feen  the  Footfteps  of  the  following 
Fabrick  *,  which  is  commonly  called  the  F rontifpiece  of 
Nero .  Some  fay,  the  Tower  of  Meccenas  flood  here,  from 
which  Nero  faw  Rome  in  Flames,  to  his  great  Satisfaction 
and  Delight.  But  herein  they  are  moft  grofly  miftaken, 
becaufe  that  Tower  was  on  the  Efquiline  Mount,  not  far 
diftant  from  the  Baths  of  Dioclefian .  Others  have  ima¬ 
gin’d,  that  the  Cornelian  Family  dwelt  there.  I  am  of 
Opinion,  for  my  Part,  that  ’twas  a  Temple  dedicated  to 
Jupiter :  Becaufe  I  faw  feveral  People,  when  I  was  at 
Rome>  digging  in  the  Place  where  the  Body  of  the  Tem- 


*  Plate  XXVIII. 


pie 


ARCHITECTURE. 


213 

pie  flood,  where  fome  lonick  Capitals  were  found,  which 
ferv’d  for  the  inner  Part  of  the  Temple,  and  were  thole 
of  the  Angles  of  the  Galleries  ;  for  the  Middle  of  the  Tem¬ 
ple,  in  my  Opinion,  was  uncover’d.  The  Profpedt  of  this 
Temple  was  the  falfe- wing’d,  or,  as  Vitruvius  calls  it, 
Pfeudodipteros.  The  Manner  of  it  was  Pycnoflylos ,  or  of 
Columns  thick  fet.  The  Columns  of  the  Porticos  without 
were  Corinthian .  The  Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice,  were 
the  fourth  Part  of  the  Altitude  of  the  Columns.  The  Cy- 
matium  of  the  Architrave  was  of  a  very  fine  Invention. 
The  Frize  in  the  Sides  was  carv’d  with  Foliage  ;  but  in  the 
Front,  which  is  now  demolifh’d,  there  muff  have  been  an 
Infcription.  The  Modilions  of  the  Cornice  are  Square,  one 
whereof  comes  diredtly  over  the  middle  of  the  Column. 
The  Modilions  in  the  Cornice  of  the  Pediment  are  perpen¬ 
dicular  upon  the  Column,  and  ought  to  be  made  fo. 
Within  this  Temple  there  muff  have  been  Porticos,  in  fuch 
manner  as  I  have  drawn  them.  There  was  a  Court  round 
it,  adorn’d  with  Columns  and  Statues,  and  two  Horfes  be¬ 
fore  it,  which  are  now  in  the  Street ;  and  ’tis  from  hence 
that  this  Mount  has  taken  the  Name  of  Monte  Cavallo • 
One  of  them  was  made  by  Praxiteles ,  and  the  other  by 
Phidias.  There  were  very  commodious  Stairs  going  up  to 
the  Temple :  And  this  was  the  large!!  and  befl  decorated 
Temple,  according  to  my  Opinion,  in  all  Rome. 

The  Plan  comprehends  the  whole  Building,  with  the 
back  Part  where  the  Stairs  flood,  which,  as  they  went 
one  over  another,  led  to  the  Courts  on  the  Sides  of  the 
Temple.  The  Elevation  of  this  fort  of  Stairs,  with  their 
Plan  on  a  large  Scale,  I  have  inferted  in  my  firft  Book, 
where  I  treat  of  the  various  Ways  of  making  Stairs. 

A.  7 he  Pedeflal  where  the  Horfe  flood  which  was  made  by 

Phidias  ;  as  the  other  was  at  a  great  Diftance  from 
this ,  it  could  not  be  marked  in  the  Deflgn. 

B.  'The  Portico  of  the  Temple . 

C.  The  Body  of  the  Temple . 


D.  The 


214  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  0\ 

D.  The  Courts  on  either  Side  of  the  Temple . 

Half  the  *  Front  of  the  Portico  on  the  outfide ,  with 
Part  of  the  Decorations  of  the  Court. 

Half  t  the  infide  of  the  Temple ,  with  part  of  the  De¬ 
corations  of  the  Court . 

The  Flank  \  °f  the  Temple  on  the  out  fide. 

The  Flank  ||  of  the  infide ,  both  of  the  Portico  and  of  the 
Nave  of  the  Temple. 

The  Decorations  §  drawn  at  large . 

A.  The  Capital. 

B.  The  Architrave . 

C.  The  Frize. 

D.  The  Cornice. 

E.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns. 

F.  The  Bafe  of  the  Pilajlers  behind  the  Columns. 

G.  The  Acroteria,  or  fmall  Pedefials  having  Statues  upon 

them. 

H.  The  Cornice  round  the  Court. 

\  . 

I.  A  Four- foot  Scale  divided  into  192  Parts. 

N.  B.  The  Cornice  H  is  drawn  by  a  larger  Scale  than 
the  Scale  I,  becaufe  the  fmall  Members  thereof  could  not 
otherwife  be  diflinguifU d. 

CHAP.  XIII. 

Concerning  the  Temple  of  Fortuna  Virilis. 

TH  E  following  Church  §§,  now  that  of  St.  Mary 
the  ^Egyptian ,  is  feen  almoft  whole  and  perfect 
near  the  Senatorian  Bridge,  at  prefent  St.  Marys.  The 
antient  Name  of  it  is  not  certainly  known.  Some  fay, 
’twas  the  Temple  of  Manly  Fortune ,  whereof  this  Mira¬ 
cle  is  upon  Record,  that  being  in  a  Flame  with  every 

*  Plate  XXIX.  f  Plate  XXX.  %  Plate  XXXI.  II  Plate  XXXII. 

§  Plate  XXXIII.  §§  Plate  XXXIV. 

thing 


ARCHITECTURE.  215 

thing  in  it,  the  gilded  wooden  Statue,  which  was  ereded 
there  by  Servius  Tullius ,  was  the  only  valuable  Part  that 
was  not  damaged.  But  lince  the  Temples  dedicated  to 
Fortune  were  for  the  Generality  made  round,  others  have 
maintain’d,  that  it  was  not  a  Temple,  but  the  Bajilica  of 
Caius  Lucius ,  grounding  their  Notion  upon  certain  Letters 
which  were  found  there.  In  my  Opinion,  however,  this 
cannot  be  fo ;  both  becaufe  the  Strudure  is  fmall,  whereas 
the  Bafilicas  were  of  Neceffity  very  large,  on  Account  of 
the  vail  Number  of  Perfons  that  reforted  to  them  about 
their  Affairs ;  and  becaufe  the  Porticos  were  made  within 
the  Edifice  in  the  Bafilicas ;  whereas  in  this  there  is  not  the 
leafl  Sign  of  any  Portico  at  all ;  from  whence  I  am  fully 
perfuaded,  that  it  was  a  Temple.  The  Profped  thereof  is 
Profiylos ,  and  in  the  Walls  of  the  Nave  on  the  outfide 
there  are  half  Columns,  which  accompany  thofe  of  the  Por¬ 
tico,  and  have  the  very  fame  Decorations  :  So  that  to  fuch 
as  view  it  in  Flank,  it  prefents  the  Profped  Peripteros ,  or 
wing’d-round.  The  Intercolumnations  are  of  two  Diameters 
and  a  Quarter.  The  Manner  thereof  is  Syfiylos.  The  Floor 
of  the  Temple  is  rais’d  fix  Feet  and  a  Half  from  the 
Ground.  There  is  an  Afcent  by  Steps,  butted  by  the  Bafe- 
ment  that  fupports  the  whole  Structure.  The  Columns 
are  Ionick ,  and  the  Bafe  is  Attick  ;  tho’  one  would  ima¬ 
gine  it  fhould  have  been  Ionick  too,  as  the  Capital  is;  it 
is  not,  however,  found  in  any  Fabrick,  that  the  Antients 
made  ufe  of  the  Ionick  defcribed  by  Vitruvius .  The 
Columns  are  fluted,  and  have  four  and  twenty  Grooves. 
The  Volutes  of  the  Capitals  are  Elliptical,  and  the  Ca¬ 
pitals  in  the  Angles  of  the  Portico  and  the  Temple 
front  two  Ways,  which  I  do  not  recoiled  that  I  have 
feen  any  where  elfe :  And  fince  this  Invention  feems  to 
me  to  be  very  beautiful  and  graceful,  I  have  made  ufe 
of  it  in  feveral  Buildings.  The  Defign  will  dired  you 
how  to  do  it.  The  Decorations  of  the  Door  of  the 
Temple  are  very  curious,  and  have  an  excellent  Propor¬ 
tion.  This  whole  Temple  is  built  with  Peperino ,  cover’d 
with  Stuc. 


Iii 


A.  The 


zi6  PALLADI  <y s 

A.  The  Steps  to  the  'Temple. 

B.  The  Portico  of  the  Temple. 

C.  The  Temple. 

D.  The  Bafe  t 

E.  The  Dado  Kof  the  Bafement  of  the  whole  Edifice* 

F.  The  Cimaize  J 

G.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns  over  the  Bafement. 

H.  Part  of  the  Te?nple  Door  Jeen  in  Front. 

I.  Profil  of  the  fa7?ie  with  its  Scrowl. 

A  Plan  *  and  Elevation  of  the  Te?nple  in  Flank. 

A.  The  Steps  to  the  Temple. 

B.  The  Portico  of  the  Temple . 

C.  Part  of  the  Temple. 

Plan  -f  and  Elevation  of  the  Temple  in  Front. 

A.  The  Steps  of  the  Temple. 

B.  A  part  of  the  Portico. 

The  Decorations  J  of  the  Outfide  at  large . 

D.  Plan  of  the  Capital. 

E.  The  Capital  in  Front . ' 

F.  The  Architrave. 

G. The  Frize. 

H.  The  Cornice. 

I.  The  Decorations  of  the  Frize  at  large. 

K.  Plan  of  the  Capital  fee?i  by  the  Angle ,  whereby  the 

Manner  of  making  it  may  eafily  be  difcernd. 

L.  Half  of  the  Capital  feen  in  the  Flank. 

M.  A  Profil  of  the  faid  Capital  without  its  V olute. 

N.  B.  The  faid  Decorations  have  been  meafured  with 
the  Vicentine  Feet  divided  as  above-mention  d,  into  48 
Minutes. 


*  Plate  XXXV.  +  Plate  XXXVI.  t  Plate  XXXVII. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 

CHAP.  XIV. 


ai7 

Ail 


Concerning  the  'Temple  of  Vefta. 

TO  follow  the  Courfe  of  the  River  Tyber^  near 
this  laft  Temple  there  is  another  round  one, 
call’d  at  prefent  St.  Stephens  *,  Hiftorians  tell  us,  that 
it  was  built  by  Numa  Pompilius ,  and  dedicated  to  the 
Goddefs  V ejla.  He  would  have  it  circular,  like  the 

Globe  of  the  World,  whereby  Mankind  fubftfts,  and  where¬ 
of  the  faid  V ejla  was  the  Goddefs.  This  Temple  is  of  the 
Corinthian  Order.  The  Intercolumnations  have  a  Diameter 
and  a  Half.  The  Columns,  with  the  Bafes  and  Capitals, 
are  eleven  Teftas  in  length.  By  Tejla  is  underftgod,  as 
was  before  obferved,  the  Diameter  of  a  Column  towards 
the  Bafe  of  it.  The  Bafes  have  no  Plinth,  but  the  Steps, 
on  which  they  reft,  ferve  inftead  of  it :  And  this  was 
directed  by  the  Architect,  on  purpofe  that  the  Entrance 
into  the  Portico  might  be  the  eafter;  the  Manner  of  it 
being  Pycnojlylos ,  or  of  Columns  thick  fet.  The  Nave, 
taking  in  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Wall,  has  in  Diameter  as 
much  as  the  Columns  are  long.  The  Capitals  are  wrought 
with  Olive  Leaves.  The  Cornice  is  unfeen,  but  added  by 
me  in  the  Deftgn.  There  are  handfome  Compartments  under 
the  Soffita  of  the  Portico.  The  Door  and  Windows  have 
abundance  of  curious,  tho’  plain  Decorations..  Under  the 
Portico,  as  alfo  within  the  Temple,  are  the  Cymatiums 
which  fupport  the  Windows.  They  go  quite  round,  and 
appear  like  a  Bafement  whereon  the  Wall  is  laid,  and 
upon  which  the  Cupola  repofes.  This  Wall,  on  the  out- 
ftde,  that  is  to  fay,  under  the  Porticos,  is  diftinguiffi’d  by 
Squares  from  the  faid  Cornice  to  the  Soffita,  and  is  poliffi’d 
on  the  infide,  having  a  Cornice  like  that  of  the  Portico, 
which  fupports  the  Cupola. 


The 


*  Plate  XXXVIII. 


PALLADIOS 


218 

The  Elevation  *  both  of  the  infide  and  out. 

A.  The  Temple  Door  at  large. 

B.  Ihe  Window  of  the  fame. 

C.  A  Three-foot  Scale  divided  in  1 44  parts. 

The  particular  f  Members  at  large. 

A.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns. 

B.  The  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave. 

D.  The  Prize. 

E.  The  Cornice . 

F.  The  Sofjita  of  the  Portico. 

G.  The  littleCornice  of  the  outfide  going  round  the  Nave^upon 

which  the  fquare  Courfes  of  Stone  begin  to  be  feen. 

H.  The  Bafe  of  the  faid  Cornice ,  which  a?ifwers  to  the 

Bafe  of  the  Columns. 

I.  The  little  Cornice  within ,  whereon  the  Window- Jells 

reft. 

K.  A  Four-foot  Scale  divided  in  192  parts>  whereby 
the  faid  Members  have  been  meafured. 

CHAP.  XV. 

Concerning  the  Temple  of  Mars. 

IN  that  which  is  commonly  call’d  the  Priejl' s  Square , 
as  you  go  from  the  Rotunda  to  the  Pillar  of  Anto- 
nine ,  the  Remains  of  the  X  following  Temple  are  feen, 
which,  according  to  fome,  was  eredled  by  the  Emperor 
Antonine ,  and  dedicated  to  the  God  Mars.  The  Profpeft 
thereof  is  Peripteros ,  or  wing’d  round.  The  Manner  Pyc- 
nojlylos ,  or  of  Columns  thick  fet.  The  Intercolumnations 
have  a  Diameter  and  a  Half.  The  furrounding  Porticos 
are  fo  much  the  larger  by  one  Intercolumnation,  by  how 
much  the  more  the  Antes,  or  Pilafters  of  the  remainder 
of  the  Wall,  project  outwards.  The  Columns  are  of  the 

*  Plate  XXXIX.  +  Plate  XL.  J  Plate  XLI. 

Corinthian 


ARCHITECTURE. 


219 

Corinthian  Order.  The  Bafe  is  Attick ,  and  has  a  little 
Aftragal  under  the  Column’s  CinClure  ;  the  Liftel  whereof 
is  very  fmall,  and  appears  pretty  enough.  It  is  always 
made  as  fmall  when  it  is  join’d  with  an  Aftragal  over  the 
Torus  of  the  Bafe,  being  likewife  a  fort  of  Aftragal,  be- 
caufe  there  is  no  manner  of  Danger  on  Account  of  its 
breaking.  The  Capital  is  wrought  with  Olive-Leaves,  and 
well-deftgn’d.  The  Architrave,  inftead  of  the  Ogee,  has  a 
half  Ovolo,  and  over  it  is  a  Cavetto  ;  and  this  has  many 
curious  Intaglias,  quite  different  from  thofe  of  the  Tem¬ 
ple  of  Peace ,  and  that  which  we  before  obferv’d  was  on 
the  ^uirinal  Mount  dedicated  to  Jupiter.  The  Frize  pro¬ 
jects  one  eighth  part  of  its  Height,  and  fwells  in  the  Mid¬ 
dle.  The  Cornice  has  its  Modilion  Square,  and  over  it 
the  Corona  without  Dentil,  which,  as  Vitruvius  obferves, 
ought  to  be  done  every  time  Modilions  are  ufed ;  which 
Rule,  however,  is  pra&ifed  but  in  few  antient  Buildings. 
Over  the  Cornice  in  the  Sides  of  the  Temple  is  another 
little  Cornice,  the  naked  Part  whereof  falls  perpendicular 
upon  that  of  the  Modilions,  and  was  made  to  fet  the 
Statues  fo,  that  they  might  be  perfectly  feen,  and  that 
their  Feet  and  Legs  might  not  be  conceal’d  by  the  Pro¬ 
jection  of  the  Cornice.  In  the  inner  part  of  the  Portico 
is  an  Architrave,  of  the  fame  Height  as  that  without: 
But  it  has  three  Fafcias,  which  the  other  has  not.  The 
Members  which  divide  one  Fafcia  from  another,  are  wrought 
with  little  Intaglias  of  Leaves  and  little  Arches,  and  the 
lefter  Fafcia  with  Foliage.  Befides  this,  inftead  of  an  Ogee, 
this  Fafcia  has  a  Fufarole  with  a  Gula  carv’d  with  Leaves 
in  a  moft  beautiful  Manner.  The  Architrave  fupports  the 
Arches  of  the  Porticos.  The  Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice, 
are  one  fifth  Part  and  a  Half  of  the  Length  of  the  Co¬ 
lumns  :  And  tho’  they  fhould  be  lefs  than  the  fifth  Part, 
yet  they  anfwer  admirably,  and  are  very  beautiful.  The  out- 
fide  of  the  Walls  are  of  Peperino ,  and  within  the  Temple  are 
other  Brick-Walls,  the  better  to  fupport  the  Vault,  which 
was  made  with  moft  curious  Squares,  wrought  with  Stuc. 
Thefe  Walls  were  crufted  with  Marble.  Tfyere  were  alfb 

K  k  k  Niches 


220 


PALLADIOS 


Niches  and  Columns  all  round,  by  way  of  Ornament.  Al- 
moft  a  whole  Flank  of  this  Temple  is  yet  to  be  feen  •  but 
I  have  endeavour’d  to  reprefent  this  Fabrick  compleat,  al¬ 
ways  following  Vitruvius  s  Defcription  of  it. 

The  Elevation  *  of  the  Portico  i?i  Front. 

The  Elevation  -f  of  part  of  the  Temple ,  feen  •without  on 
one  fide. 

The  Elevation  J  of  another  part  of  the  Portico ,  and  of 
the  Temple  within. 

The  Decorations  ||  of  the  Columns  on  a  large  Scale . 

A.  The  Bafe. 

B.  The  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave. 

D.  The  Frize. 

E.  The  Cornice. 

F.  The  little  Cornice  of  the  Statues. 

G.  The  Soffita  of  the  Architrave  between  the  Columns. 

H . The  Architrave  of  the  inner  part  of  the  Porticos 

which  fupport  the  Arches  of  it. 

I.  A  Four-foot  Scale  divided  into  192  Parts . 

CHAP.  XVI. 

Concerning  the  Eaptijlery  of  Conftantine. 

TH  E  following  Draughts  are  of  Conftantine  s  §  Bap- 
tiftery,  which  is  at  St.Johns  in  the  Later  an.  This 
Temple,  in  my  Opinion,  is  a  modern  Work,  made  out  of 
the  Spoils  and  Ruins  of  antient  Fabricks.  But  as  the  De- 
fign  is  beautiful,  and  the  Decorations  very  well  carv’d 
with  divers  forts  of  Intaglias  (which  may  be  of  Service 
to  an  Architect  on  various  Occasions)  I  thought  my  felf 


*  Plate  XLII.  f  Plate  XLIII  %  Plate  XLIV.  [|  Plate  XLV. 

§  Plate  XLVI. 

oblig’d 


ARCHITECTURE. 


oblig’d,  as  it  were,  to  infert  it  among  the  antient  Works  * 
and  the  rather,  becaufe  it  is  accounted  a  very  good  Piece 
by  every  body.  The  Columns  are  of  Porphyry,  and  of  the 
Compojite  Order.  The  Bafe  is  a  Compound  of  the  Attick 
and  Ionick ;  the  two  Torus’s  being  Attick ,  and  the  two 
Scotias  Ionick :  But  inftead  of  two  Aftragals  which  are 
made  between  the  Scotias  in  the  Ionick ,  this  has  one  only, 
that  takes  up  the  the  Room  of  two.  All  thefe  Members 
are  beautifully  carv’d,  and  have  fine  Intaglias.  The  Bales 
of  the  Columns  in  the  Portico  are  embellifh’d  with  Leaves? 
running  up  along  the  Shaft  of  the  Column,  which  is  worth 
obferving ;  and  Ihews  the  Architect  to  be  a  Man  of  very 
folid  Judgment,  who  could  accommodate  Things  fo  well  • 
And  tho’  the  Shafts  of  the  Columns  were  not  fo  long  as 
they  fhould  be,  yet  by  this  Management  he  did  not  rob 
the  Work  in  the  leafi:  of  any  of  its  Beauty  or  Majelly,  I 
have  made  Ufe  myfelf  of  the  very  fame  Expedient  in  the 
Columns  which  I  have  put  for  Ornament  in  the  Door,  fince 
they  did  not  reach  fo  far  as  was  neceffary  ;  but  as  they  are 
of  fuch  fine  Marble,  they  ought  not  to  be  left  out  of  the 
Work.  The  Capitals  are  compounded  of  Ionick  and  Corin¬ 
thian ,  with  Acanthus  Leaves,  The  Manner  how  they  ought 
to  be  wrought,  is  laid  down  in  my  firft  Book.  The 
Architrave  is  very  well  carv’d,  its  Cymaize  having  a 
Fufarole  and  above  half  an  Ovolo,  inftead  of  a  Gula-inverla. 
TheFrize  is  plain.  The  Cornice  has  two  GuJa-re&as  one 
above  the  other,  which  is  a  Thing  that  very  feldom  happens: 
I  mean,  that  two  Members  of  the  very  fame  fort  fhould 
be  put  over  each  other,  without  fome  other  intermediate 
Member  befides  the  Liftel.  Over  thefe  Gula-redas,  or 
Cymatiums  is  a  Dentil,  and  then  the  Corona  with  its 
Ogee,  and  lafi:  of  all  a  Gula-re&a,  or  another  Cymaize  : 
So  that  the  Architect  in  this  Cornice  has,  by  making 
Dentils,  avoided  Modilions, 

The  particular  *  Members  at  large. 

*  Plate  X3L.VII. 


A.  The 


222 


P  A  L  L  A  D  /  O’s 


A . The  Safe. 

B.  The  Capital. 

C.  Tie  Architrave ,  Frize,  and  Cornice. 

D. Tbe  Scjfita  of  the  Architrave  between  each  Column . 

E.  Plan  of  the  Capital. 

F.  A  Three-foot  Scale  divided  into  144  Parts * 


CHAP.  XVIL 

Concerning  the  Temple  of  Bramante. 

>  *  c.  ^ j  or 

AFTER  the  Pomp  and  Grandeur  of  the  Roman 
Empire  began  to  decline,  by  the  perpetual  Irrup¬ 
tion  of  Barbarians,  Architecture  (the  fame  Fate 
then  likewife  attended  all  other  Arts  and  Sciences)  de¬ 
clining  from  its  Original  Beauty  and  Perfection,  grew 
every  Day  worfe  and  worfe ;  infomuch  that,  at  laft,  all 
Knowledge  of  beautiful  Proportions,  and  the  elegant 
Manner  of  Building  were  loft,  and  the  Art  came  to  fuch 
a  low  Ebb,  that  it  could  not  poftibly  be  lower.  But, 
as  all  human  Affairs  are  in  a  perpetual  Flux  and  Motion, 
and  as  it  fo  happens,  that  at  one  time  they  attain  the 
Achme  of  their  Perfection,  and  at  another  defcend  to 
their  utmoft  Imperfection :  So  Architecture,  in  the 
Days  of  our  Fore-fathers,  breaking  out  of  the  Darknefs 
wherein  it  had  lain  fo  long  in  Oblivion,  began  to  appear 
once  more  in  a  fair  and  advantageous  Light.  For  which 
Reafon,  under  the  Pontificate  of  Pope  Julius  II.  Bramante , 
who  was  a  moft  excellent  Artift,  and  a  curious  Obferver  of 
the  antient  Buildings,  made  very  beautiful  Edifices  in  Rome\ 
and  after  him  follow’d  Michael  Angelo  Buonarroti ,  Jacobo 
Sanfovino ,  Balthafar  da  Sienna,  Antonio  da  San  Gallo , 
Michael  de  San  Michele ,  SebaJUan  Serlio ,  George  V afari , 
Jacobo  Barozzio  da  Vignola ,  and  the  Cavalier  Lione ,  whole 
furprifing  Structures  may  be  feen  in  Rome ,  Florence ,  V enice , 

Milan, 


\ 

ARCHITECTURE.  223 

Milan ,  and  in  other  Cities  of  Italy :  Befides,  mod;  of  thefe 
Archite&s  were  likewife  excellent  Painters,  Sculptors,  and 
Penmen  ;  fome  of  whom  are  Alive  to  this  Day,  together 
with  feveral  others,  whom,  to  avoid  being  tedious,  I  fhall 
pafs  over  in  Silence.  But  to  return  to  our  Subject ;  fince  it 
is  certain,  that  Bramante  was  the  firft  who  brought  to 
light  the  true  and  beautiful  Architecture,  which 
lay  conceal’d  from  the  Time  of  the  Antients  to  his  own, 
I  thought  my  felf  indifpenfably  oblig’d  to  afford  Room 
to  his  Works  among  thofe  of  the  faid  Antients :  For  which 
Reafon  I  have  in  this  Book  fet  down  the  following  Tem¬ 
ple  *,  erected  by  him  upon  the  Janiculan  Mount ;  and 
call’d  San  Pietro  Montorio ,  not  only  from  this  Mount,  but 
alfo,  becaufe  it  is  faid  that  St.  Peter  was  crucified  there. 

Elevation  T  both  of  the  infide  and  outfde  of  the  Temple . 


/ 


CHAP.  XVIII. 

Concerning  the  Temple  of  Jupiter  Stator. 

BETWEEN  the  Capitol  and  Mount  Palatine ,  near 
the  Roman  Forufn>  are  three  $  Columns  of  the 
Corinthian  Order:  Which,  as  fome  fay,  were  Part  of  the 
Flank  of  the  Temple  of  Vulcan  ;  and,  according  to 
others,  of  the  Temple  of  Romulus.  There  are  fome  like¬ 
wife,  who  are  of  my  Opinion,  that  they  belong’d  to 
the  Temple  of  Jupiter  Stator  \  which  Temple  was  fo- 
lemnly  vow’d  to  be  ere&ed  by  Romulus ,  when  the  Sa¬ 
bines  having  furpriz’d  the  Capitol  and  Citadel  by  Trea¬ 
chery,  were  vi&orioufly  marching  to  Mount  Pala¬ 
tine^  where  he  kept  his  Court.  Others,  however,  are 
of  Opinion,  that  thefe  Columns,  together  with  thofe 


*  Plate  XLVIII. 


t  Plate  XLIX. 

Ll  1 


%  Plate  L. 


below 


PALLADIOS 


224 

below  the  Capitol \  were  part  of  the  Bridge  made  by  Cali¬ 
gula's  Directions,  for  palling  from  Mount  Palatine  to  the 
Capitol :  which  Notion  is  known  to  have  no  Shadow  of 
Truth,  fince  it  may  be  feen  by  the  Decorations,  that  thefe 
Columns  belong’d  to  two  different  Fabricks;  befides,  the 
Bridge  fo  order’d  to  be  made  by  Caligula ,  was  of  Tim¬ 
ber,  and  crofs’d  the  Roman  Forum.  But  to  return  to  our 
Subjed,  let  thefe  Columns  have  belong’d  to  what  Temple 
you  will,  I  never  faw  better  Work,  nor  more  curioufly 
wrought.  All  the  Members  are  moft  accurately  form’d,  and 
well  underftood.  The  ProfpeCt  of  this  Temple  was,  in  my 
Opinion,  Peripteros ,  or  wing’d-round  ;  and  the  Manner  of 
it  Pycnoftylos ,  or  of  Columns  thick  fet.  It  had  eight  Co¬ 
lumns  in  each  Front,  and  fifteen  in  each  Flank,  including 
•  thofe  of  the  Angles.  The  Bafes  are  compounded  of  Attick 
and  Ionick.  The  Capitals  are  worthy  of  particular  Notice, 
on  account  of  the  curious  Intaglias  on  the  Abacus.  The 
Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice,  have  a  fourth  Part  of  the 
Length  of  the  Columns.  The  Cornice  alone  wants  very 
little  of  the  Height  of  the  Architrave  and  Frize  together, 
which  is  what  I  never  law  in  any  other  Edifice. 

1 'he  Elevation  *  of  the  Front  of  the  Tetnple. 

The  particular  4  Members  at  large. 

A.  The  Bafe. 

B.  The  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice. 

D.  Part  of  the  So  fit  a  of  the  Architrave  between  the 

Columns. 

E.  A  Four-foot  Scale  divided  into  192  parts. 


*  Plate  LI.  t  Plate  UI. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


“5 


CHAP.  XIX. 

Concerning  the  ’Temple  of  Jupiter  the  Thunderer. 

AT  the  Foot  of  the  Capitol  are  fome  Traces  of  the 
following  *  Temple,  which  was  confecrated  to  Ju¬ 
piter  the  Thunderer,  and  eredled  by  Auguftus  for  his  De¬ 
liverance  from  an  eminent  Danger  in  the  Cantabrian  War ; 
when  in  an  Expedition  which  he  made  by  Night,  his 
Litter  was  pierced  through  with  an  Arrow ;  by  which 
Accident  a  Slave  that  was  juft  before  him  was  kill’d, 
and  he  preferved  unhurt.  But  I  very  much  Queftion  the 
Truth  of  it,  becaufe  the  remaining  Decorations  are  moft 
exquifttely  wrought  with  fine  Intaglias:  And,  ’tis  plain, 
that,  in  the  Days  of  Auguftus ,  all  Works  were  made  fo- 
lid  and  fubftantial  ;  as  appears  by  the  Portico  of  the 
Rotunda  to  the  Fantheon  (now  confecrated  to  the  Virgin 
Mary)  which  is  very  plain  and  fimple,  as  feveral  other 
Edifices  are,  which  were  feated  at  that  time.  Some  think, 
that  the  Columns  here  were  Part  of  Caligula  $  Bridge ;  but 
I  have  demonftrated  the  Falfity  of  that  in  the  laft  Chapter. 
The  Profpeft  of  this  Temple  is  Dipteros,  or  double- wing’d. 
It  muft  be  acknowledged,  that  in  that  Part  of  it  which  is 
towards  the  Capitol ,  there  was  no  Portico :  But,  as  far  as 
I  could  perceive  from  other  Fabricks  erected  near  Hills,  I 
am  of  Opinion,  that  it  was  built  on  that  Side,  after  the 
Manner  of  the  Plan;  which  is,  that  it  had  an  extreme 
thick  Wall,  inclofing  the  Nave  and  the  Porticos,  and,  after 
leaving  fome  Space  between,  then  another  Wall  with 
Stone  Land-tyes,  which  enter’d  into  the  Hill,  The  Rea- 
fon  why  the  Antients  in  fuch-  Cafes  made  the  firft  Wall 
fo  very  thick,  was,  that  no  Wet  might  penetrate  into 
the  inner  Part  of  the  Structure :  And  they  made  the 


*  Plate  LIII. 


other 


226 


PA  L  LA  D  I  O' s 


other  Wall  with  Stone  Land-tyes,  in  order  to  fuftain 
the  conftant  Weight  of  the  Hill ;  the  laid  void  Space 
being  alfo  left  between  both  the  faid  Walls,  that  the 
Waters  ilfuing  out  of  the  Hill,  and  meeting  there,  might 
have  their  free  Courfe  in  fuch  a  Manner,  as  to  do  no 
Damage  to  the  Edifice.  The  Manner  of  this  Temple 
was  Pycnofylos.  The  Architrave  and  Frize  were  equal 
in  the  Front,  to  receive  an  Infcription  ;  fome  Letters 
whereof  are  ftill  legible.  The  Ovolo  of  the  Cornice 
above  the  Frize  is  different  from  any  I  have  ever  yet  feen : 
And  as  there  are  two  Ovolos  in  the  Cornice,  this  Variety 
is  made  with  great  Judgment.  The  Modilions  of  this 
Cornice  are  fo  ordered,  that  there  comes  an  empty  Space, 
and  not  a  Modilion,  dire&ly  over  the  Center  of  the  Co¬ 
lumn,  as  it  occurs  alfo  in  fome  other  Cornices :  Altho’  a 
Modilion  fhould  come  juft  over  the  Middle  of  the  Column* 
according  to  the  regular  Way  of  Working. 

A.  The  Space  between  the  two  IV alls.  \ 

B.  The  Butments  againjl  the  Hill. 

C. The  Spaces  between  the  Butments. 

D.  A  Scale  of  50  Vicentine  Feet. 

The  particular  *  Members  of  the  Portico  at  large. 

A.  The  Bafe. 

B.  The  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave. 

D.  The  Frize. 

E.  The  Cornice. 

F.  The  Sojfta  of  the  Architrave  between  the  Columns. 

G.  A  Three-foot  Scale  divided  into  1 44  Parts. 

H.  A  large  Pannel  taking  up  the  whole  Architrave  and 

Frize  to  place  the  Infcription  upon. 


*  Plate  LIV. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


22,7 


CHAP.  XX. 


Concerning  the  Pantheon,  now  call'd  the  Rotunda. 

I 

F  all  the  Temples  now  to  be  feen  in  Rome ,  no 


one  is  more  celebrated  than  the  Pantheon ,  at  prefent 
call’d  the  *  Rotunda ;  nor  indeed,  that  is  more  perfect 
and  compleat,  fince  it  appears  almoft  in  its  original  State, 
with  refpeft  to  the  Edifice,  but  ftript  of  all  its  Statues  and 
other  Decorations.  Some  are  of  Opinion,  that  it  was 
ere&ed  by  Marcus  Agrippa ,  about  the  14th  Year  of  Chrijl : 
But  I  am  inclinable  to  believe,  that  the  Body  of  the  Tem¬ 
ple  was  built  in  the  time  of  the  Republic k,  and  that 
Agrippa  added  only  the  Portico  to  it,  which  may  be 
inferred  from  the  two  Frontons  in  the  Front  of  it.  This 
Temple  was  called  the  Pantheon ,  either  becaufe,  after 
Jupiter ,  it  was  dedicated  to  all  the  Gods ;  or,  as  others 
are  of  Opinion,  becaufe  it  is  circular,  or  bears  the  Figure 
of  the  World.  The  Height  of  it  from  the  Floor  to  the 
Opening  at  the  top  (from  whence  it  receives  all  its  Light) 
is  the  Diameter  of  its  Breadth  from  one  Wall  to  the 
other :  And  as  People  defcend  to  the  Floor,  fo  formerly 
they  afcended  to  it  by  fome  Steps.  Amongft  the  mod: 
celebrated  Things  which  we  read  were  in  this  Temple, 
were  the  Ivory  Statue  of  Mine?~va  made  by  Phidias ;  and 
that  of  V enus ,  which  had  the  one  halt  of  that  Pearl  for 
an  Ear-ring,  whereof  Cleopatra  diflolv’d  the  other  half,  and 
drank  it  at  Supper  to  exceed  the  Liberality  of  Anthony .  This 
half  only  of  that  Pearl  was  valued,  as  is  reported,  at  250 
Thoufand  Ducats  of  Gold.  This  whole  Temple,  both 
without  and  within,  was  of  the  Corinthian  Order.  The 
Bafes  are  compounded  of  Attick  and  Ionick  ;  and  the  Ca¬ 
pitals  are  carv’d  with  Olive  Leaves.  The  Architraves, 


*  Plate  LV. 


Frizes 


M  m  m 


PJLLADIO's 


228 

Frizes,  and  Cornices,  have  beautiful  Mouldings,  but  other- 
wife  very  little  Carving.  In  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Wall  there 
are  certain  void  Spaces  left  quite  round  the  Temple,  the 
better  to  preferve  it  againft  Earthquakes,  and  to  fave  Ex¬ 
pence  and  Materials.  This  Temple  has  a  moft  beautiful  Por¬ 
tico  in  Front,  on  the  Frize  whereof  is  this  Infcription, 

M.  AGrippa .  L.  F.  Cos.  III.  fecit. 

Under  it  (that  is,  in  the  Fafcias  of  the  Architrave)  is  the 
following  Infcription  in  fmaller  Letters,  which  fhews,  that 
the  Emperors  Septimius  Severus  and  Marcus  Aurelius  re¬ 
pair’d  this  Temple,  confum’d  with  Age : 

Imp.  Ccef.  Septimius.  Severus.  Pius.  P ertinax.Arabicus. 
Parthicus.  Pontif  Max.  Frib.  Pot.  XI.  Cos.  III.  P.  P.  Procos. 

Et.  Imp.  Ccef.  Marcus.  Aurelius.  Antonius. 

Pius.  Felix.  Aug.  Frib.  Pot.  V.  Cos.  Procos . 

Pantheum.  vetujlate.  (confumtum) 

Cum.  omni.  cultu.  reflituerunt. 

In  the  Thicknefs  of  the  Wall  within  the  Temple,  there 
are  feven  Chapels  with  Niches,  wherein  there  muft  have 
been  Statues  of  courfe ;  and  a  Tabernacle  between  one 
Chapel  and  another  ;  fo  that  there  are  in  all  eight  Ta¬ 
bernacles.  There  are  feveral  who  are  of  Opinion,  that  the 
Chapel  in  the  Middle  over-againft  the  Entrance  is  not 
antient,  becaufe  the  Arch  thereof  breaks  into  fome  of  the 
Columns  of  the  fecond  Order  ;  but  that  in  the  Times  of 
Chriftianity,  iince  Pope  Boniface ,  who  firft  confecrated  this 
Temple  to  our  divine  Service,  this  Chapel  is  added,  as  be¬ 
comes  Chriftian  Churches,  in  order  to  have  one  particular 
Altar  larger  than  all  the  reft.  However,  ftnce  I  perceive 
that  it  agrees  perfectly  well  with  the  reft  of  the  Work, 
and  that  it  has  all  its  Members  excellently  finifhed,  I  take 
it  for  granted,  that  it  was  made  at  the  fame  time  with 
the  reft  of  the  Temple.  This  Chapel  has  two  Columns, 
one  of  a  Side,  which  projed  out,  and  are  fluted,  the 

Space 


/ 


ARCHITECTURE.  229 

Space  between  one  Groove  and  another  being  cabled,  and 
accurately  finifhed. 

The  Stairs  mark’d  in  the  Plan  on  each  Side  the  En¬ 
trance  lead  over  the  Chapels  in  a  private  Pafiage,  which 
goes  quite  round  the  Temple,  and  whereby  one  goes  out 
to  the  Steps,  to  afcend  to  the  top  of  the  Building,  by 
other  Stairs  which  are  round  it.  That  Part  of  a  Build¬ 
ing  behind  the  Temple,  and  mark’d  M,  is  Part  of 
Agrippds  Baths. 

*  Half  of  the  Fore-front. 

•f  Half  of  the  Front  under  the  Portico. 

This  Temple,  as  appears  by  thefe  two  Draughts,  has 
two  Frontifpieces  ;  one  in  the  Portico,  and  another  on  the 
Temple  Wall.  Where  you  find  the  Letter  A,  there  are  fome 
particular  Stones  jutting  out  of  the  Wall,  the  Ufe  and  Ser¬ 
vice  whereof  I  cannot  account  for.  The  Joyfts  of  the 
Portico  are  all  made  of  Tables  of  Copper. 

$  The  Elevation  in  Flank  of  all  the  outfide . 

B.  The  fecond  Cornice ,  which  furrounds  the  whole  Temple . 

J|  The  Elevation  in  Flank  of  the  infide  of  the  Portico . 

§  7 he  Decorations  of  the  Portico  at  large . 

A.  The  Bafe. 

B.  "The  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice. 

D.  The  Moulding  of  the  Decorations  made  over  the  Co¬ 

lumns  and  the  Pilafers  on  the  infide  of  the  Portico. 

E.  The  Plan  of  the  Pilafiers  of  the  Portico ,  anfwering  to 

the  Colmnns. 

F.  The  turning  of  the  Caulicoles  of  the  Capitals. 

G.  I he  Sojfita  of  the  Architrave  between  the  Columns . 

H.  7 he  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice  of  the  Door. 

I.  The  Fefioons  which  adorn  the  fides  of  the  Door. 

**  Part  of  the  Elevation  of  the  infide  over-againft  the 
Entry,  where  you  may  fee  in  what  Order  the  Chapels 


*  Plate  LVI.  f  Plate  LVII.  %  Plate  LVIII.  ||  Plate  LIX. 

§  Plate  LX.  **  Plate  LXI. 


and 


a3o  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

and  Tabernacles  are  rang’d,  and  with  what  Decorations ; 
as  alfo  how  the  Squares  in  the  Vaults  are  comparted, 
which,  that  they  were  embellifh’d  with  Plates  of  Silver, 
is  very  probable,  by  certain  Traces  remaining  there :  For 
had  fuch  Decorations  been  of  Bronze,  they  would  not, 
doubtlefs,  have  been  taken  away,  no  more  than  thofe 
which,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  are  in  the  Portico. 

*  A  large  Deftgn  of  one  of  the  Tabernacles  in  Front, 
with  Part  of  the  Chapels  by  it. 

•f  The  Decorations  of  the  Columns  and  Pilafters  on  the 
inftde  of  the  Temple. 

A.  The  Bafe. 

B.  1  he  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave . 

D.  The  Frize. 

E.  The  Cornice. 

F.  The  turning  of  the  Caulicoles  of  the  Capitals . 

G.  The  fluting  of  the  Pilaflers. 

H . A  Three- foot  Scale  divided  into  144  Parts ,  where* 

with  the  faid  Decorations  have  been  meafured \ 

X  The  Decorations  of  the  Tabernacles  between  the 
Chapels,  and  wherein  may  be  obferv’d  the  profound 
Judgment  of  the  Architect,  who,  in  the  Architrave,  Frize, 
and  Cornice  of  thefe  Tabernacles,  has  made  only  a  large 
Ogee,  or  Gula-redta,  and  converted  the  remainder  of  the 
Members  into  a  Fafcia,  becaule  the  Pilafters  of  the  Cha¬ 
pels  were  not  fo  far  out  of  the  Wall,  as  to  be  able  to 
receive  the  whole  Projedture  of  this  Cornice. 

A.  The  Rmbafement . 

B.  The  Bafe. 

C.  The  Capital. 

D.  The  Architrave. 

E.  The  Frize. 

F.  The  Cornice. 

G.  A  Three-foot  Scale  divided  into  144  Parts . 


*  Plate  LX II. 


%  Plate  LXIV. 


t  Plate  LXIII. 


And 


ARCHITECTURE. 


231 


And  with  this  Temple  we  jhall  make  an  End  of  the 
Draughts  of  the  Temples  which  are  in  Rome. 


CHAP.  XXI. 

Concerning  the  Draughts  of  feveral  'Temples 
which  are  out  of  Rome,  or  in  other  Parts  of 
Italy  ;  and  fir  ft  ^  with  refpeSl  to  the  Temple 
of  Bacchus. 

WITHOUT  St.  Agnes  s  Gate,  as  it  is  now  call’d, 
but  diftinguifh’d  by  the  Antients  by  the  Name 
of  the  Viminal  Gate,  from  Mount  Viminalis  whereon  it 
ftands,  the  Temple  *  which  follows,  and  is  now  confe- 
crated  to  St.  Agnes>  may  be  feen  pretty  whole  and  en¬ 
tire.  It  was,  in  my  Opinion,  a  Burying-Place,  becaufe 
a  very  large  Coffin  of  Porphyry  was  found  in  it,  beautifully 
carv’d  with  Vines,  and  little  Children  gathering  the  Grapes. 
This  has  induc’d  fome  People  to  imagine,  that  it  was 
the  Temple  of  Bacchus.  And  fince  this  is  the  receiv’d 
Notion,  and  fince  it  now  ferves  for  a  Church,  I  have 
placed  it  among  the  Temples.  Before  the  Portico  of  it 
may  be  feen  the  Footfteps  of  a  Court,  which  was  of  an  Oval 
Form,  and  which  was  embelliffi’d,  as  I  imagine, withColumns; 
as  well  as  that  there  were  feveral  Niches,  wherein  flood  the 
Statues  in  the  Intercolumnation.  The  Gallery  of  this  Temple, 
by  what  is  now  vifible  of  it,  was  made  with  Pilafters,  and 
confided  of  three  Voids.  In  the  inner  Part  thereof,  the 
Columns  which  fupported  the  Cupola  were  rang’d  two  by 
two.  All  thefe  Columns  are  of  Granate,  and  the  Bafes, 
Capitals,  and  Cornices  of  Marble.  The  Bafes  are  after 
the  Attick  Manner,  the  Capitals  are  very  beautiful,  and 


*  Plate  LXV. 


Nnn 


of' 


2$z  P  A  L  L  A  D  1  O' s 

of  the  Compofite  Order,  having  fome  Foliage,  which  pro* 
ceeds  on  each  Side  from  the  Rofes,  and  adds  a  great 
Grace  to  the  Volutas.  The  Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cor¬ 
nice,  are  but  indifferently  wrought,  which  induce  me  to 
believe,  that  this  Temple  was  not  ere&ed  in  the  good 
Times,  but  rather  under  fome  of  the  late  Emperors.  It 
is  inrich’d  with  a  great  deal  of  Work,  and  with  various 
Compartments,  partly  of  fine  Stones,  and  partly  of  Mo- 
faick ,  as  well  in  the  Floor,  as  in  the  Walls  and  Arches. 

*  The  Elevation  of  the  outfide  of  the  Temple. 

T  Shews  how  the  Columns  are  difpofed ,  to  fupport  the 

i 

A  .The  Bafe. 

B.  The  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice . 

D.  The  fpringing  of  the  Arches. 

E.  A  Two-foot  Scale  divided  into  96  Parts ,  wherewith 

the  faid  Parts  are  meafured. 


CHAP.  XXII. 

Concerning  the  'Temple  whoje  Footjleps  are  feen 
near  St.  Sebaftian’i  Church  on  the  Appian  IF  ay. 

WITHOUT  St.  Sebaftians  Gate,  which  formerly 
was  called  the  Appian  Gate  (from  that  celebrated 
Way,  which  with  fuch  wondrous  Art,  and  at  fuch  a 
prodigious  Expence  was  made  by  Appius  Claudius)  are 
feen  the  Traces  of  the  following  Structure  near  to  the 
faid  Church  of  St.  Sebaflian .  It  is  very  probable  that  it 


*  Plate  LXVI.  f  Plate  LXVII.-  %  Plate  LXVIII. 


was 


ARCHITECTURE. 


*33 

was  wholly  built  of  Brick.  A  Part  of  the  Galleries  which 
furrounded  the  Court  is  yet  Handing.  The  Entrance  of 
the  faid  Court  had  double  Galleries ;  and  on  the  one  fide 
and  the  other  of  it,  there  were  Apartments,  or  Chambers, 
which  muft  have  been  for  the  Service  of  the  Priefls.  The 
Temple  was  in  the  Center  of  the  Court :  And  that  Part 
which  is  now  feen  ftanding  above  Ground,  and  whereon 
was  the  Floor  of  the  Temple,  is  moft  folid  Work,  having 
no  Light  but  from  the  Doors,  and  fix  little  Windows, 
which  are  in  the  Niches;  for  which  Reafbn  it  is  fome- 
what  dark  and  gloomy,  as  all  the  antient  Temples  for  the 
generality  are.  Before  the  Front  of  this  Temple,  directly 
over  the  Entrance  to  the  Court,  are  the  Foundations  of 
the  Portico ;  but  the  Columns  are  now  taken  away :  I 
have  reprefented  them,  however,  in  the  fame  Dimenfions 
and  Diftances  which  they  muft  have  had,  as  may  be 
known  by  the  faid  Foundations. 

A.  The  Plan  of  the  Temple  and  Portico  under  the 

Area . 

B.  The  Floor ,  or  Area  of  the  Temple  and  Portico  under 

the  faid  Area. 

C.  The  Angular  Pilaflers  of  the  Court  at  large. 

D.  The  other  Pilaflers  which  confiitute  the  Galleries 

round  the  Court . 


CHAP.  XXIII. 

Concerning  the  Temple  of  Vefta. 

AT  Tivoli ,  about  fixteen  Miles  from  Rome ,  upon 
the  Fall  of  the  River  Anien ,  now  call’d  Teverone , 
is  feen  the  following  circular  Temple  *,  which  the  In* 


*  Plate  LXIX. 


habitants 


a34  PALLADIOS 

habitants  of  thofe  Places  allure  us,  was  the  Habitation  of 
the  Tiburtin  Sybil \  But  there  is  no  manner  of  Foundation 
for  this  Opinion:  And  therefore,  for  the  Reafons  above, 
this  Temple,  as  I  take  it,  was  confecrated  to  Vejla .  It 
is  of  the  Corinthian  Order.  The  Intercolumnations  are  of 
two  Diameters.  The  Floor  is  rais’d  from  the  Ground,  one 
third  Part  of  the  Length  of  the  Columns.  The  Bafes 
have  no  Zocco,  in  order  that  the  Walk  under  the  Portico 
ftiould  be  more  fpacious  and  eafy.  The  Columns  are  juft 
as  long  as  the  Nave  is  large  ;  and  they  incline  in  fuch 
a  Manner  towards  the  Wall  of  the  Nave,  that  the  Naked 
at  the  top  of  the  Columns  falls  perpendicularly  upon  the 
Naked  of  the  Bottom  of  their  Shaft,  towards  the  inftde. 
The  Capitals  are  excellently  well  executed,  and  wrought 
with  Olive  Leaves ;  from  whence  it  may  be  concluded, 
that  this  Temple  was  eredted  in  good  Times.  The  Door 
and  the  Windows  are  narrower  at  the  Top  than  at  the 
Bottom,  according  to  Vitruvius  s  Directions  in  the  fixth 
Chapter  of  his  fourth  Book.  This  whole  Temple  is  of 
! Tiburtin  Stone,  cover’d  with  the  fineft  Stone,  which  makes 
it  feem  all  Marble. 

*  The  Elevation  of  the  outfide  and  infde  of  the  Temple . 

+  The  Members  of  the  Portico  and  Cornice  at  large . 

A.  The  Bafement  that  goes  round  all  the  Temple . 

B.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns . 

C.  The  Capital. 

D.  The  Architrave ,  Frizey  and  Cornice. 

E.  The  Soffita  of  the  Portico. 

F .  A  V ault  that  goes  round  the  Portico. 

G.  A  TJ^ree-foot  Scale  divided  into  1 44  Parts. 

H.  The  Decorations  of  Frize  round  the  Temple . 

X  The  Decorations  of  the  Door  and  Windows. 

A.  The  Decorations  of  the  Door. 

B.  The  Decorations  of  the  Windows  on  the  outfide. 

C.  The  Decorations  of  the  Windows  on  the  infide . 


*  Plate  LXX. 


t  Plate  LXXI. 


%  Plate  LXXII. 


D.  A 


*35 


ARCHITECTURE. 

D.  A  Two-foot  Scale  divided  into  96  Parts . 

The  Fafcias  of  the  Decorations  of  the  Door  and  the 
Windows  are  different  from  what  are  generally  made. 

The  Aftragals,  under  the  Cymatiums,  projed  beyond 
them,  which  is  what  I  have  not  feen  in  other  Deco¬ 
rations. 

CHAP.  XXIV. 

Concerning  the  'Temple  of  Caftor  and  Pollux, 

IN  a  very  beautiful  Part  of  the  City  of  Naples ,  be¬ 
low  the  Square  of  the  Palace  and  the  Vicar iay  is 
feen  the  Portico  of  a  Temple  *,  ereded  and  dedicated 
to  Caftor  and  Pollux  by  Tiberius  Julius  Tarfus ,  and  by 
PelagOy  Auguftuss  Free-Man,  as  appears  by  its  Infcription 
in  the  following  Greek  Charaders, 

TIBEPIOS  IOTAIOS  TAPSOS  AIOS  KOTPOIS  KAI  TH  I70AEI 
ton  naon  kai  ta  en  nag. 
nEAArnN  sebastot  AnEAET ©epos  kai  EniTPonos 

STNTEAE2A2  EK  TS2N  IATi2N  KA©IEPOSEN. 

That  is,  in  Latiny 

TIBERIUS  JULIUS  TARSUS  JOV1S  FIL1IS  ETURBI 
TEMPLUM  ET  $JJ  A  E  IN  TEMPLO . 
PELAGO  AUGUSTI  LIBERTUS  ET  PROCURATOR 
PERFIC1ENS  EX  PROPRIIS  DEDICAVIT. 

The  Signification  whereof  is,  that  Tiberius  Julius 
Tarfus  began  to  ered  this  Temple,  and  all  the  Things 
thereto  belonging,  in  Honour  to  the  Sons  of  Jupiter 
(viz.  Caftor  and  Pollux )  and  to  the  City :  And  that  the 


*  Plate  LXXIII. 


O  o  o 


before- 


PALLADIO'' s 


236 

before-mentioned  Pelago  compleated  it  at  his  own  Expence, 
and  confecrated  it.  This  Portico  is  of  the  Corinthian 
Order.  The  Intercolumnations  are  more  than  a  Diameter 
atid  a  Half,  but  not  quite  two  Diameters.  The  Bafes 
are  after  the  Attick  Manner.  The  Capitals  are  carved 
with  Olive  Leaves,  and  moft  accurately  wrought.  The 
Invention  of  the  Stalks  or  Caulicoles,  which  are  under  the 
Rofe,  and  which  are  knotted  together,  is  very  fine :  They 
iflue  cut  of  the  Foliage,  which,  in  the  upper  Part,  cover 
the  other  Stalks  that  fupport  the  Horns  of  the  Capital. 
From  this  Inflance,  therefore,  as  well  as  from  feveral  others 
interfperfed  throughout  this  Book,  it  is  manifeft  that  an 
Architect  may  deviate  fometimes  from  the  common  Me¬ 
thods  or  Ufage,  provided  his  Variation  be  agreeable  and. 
natural.  In  the  Fronton  is  a  Sacrifice  carved  in  BafTo- 
relieVo,  by  the  Hand  of  a  moft  excellent  Artift.  Some  are 
of  Opinion,  that  there  were  two  Temples  in  this  Place, 
the  one  Circular,  and  the  other  Square.  There  remains 
no  Foot-fteps  cf  the  former  one,  and  the  latter  one  is, 
in  my  Opinion,  Modern :  For  which  Reafon,  without 
meddling  with  the  Body  of  the  Temple,  I  have  oiily 
given  the  Upright  of  the  Front  of  the  Portico  in  the 
firft  Draught. 

*  Particular  Members  at  large . 

A.  The  Baje. 

B.  7 he  Capital . 

C.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice. 

D.  A  Four-foot  Scale  divided  mto  192  Parts. 


*  Plate  LXXIV. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


2-37 


CHAP.  XXV. 

Concerning  the  'Temple  below  Trevi. 

BETWEEN  Fuligno  and  Spoleti ,  below  Treviy  Hands 
the  little  Temple  *,  to  which  the  following  Draughts 
belong.  The  Bafement  which  fupports  it  is  eight  Feet 
and  a  half  high ;  to  which  Height  you  afcend  by  Steps, 
which  proceed  from  the  Sides  of  the  Portico,  and  end  in 
two  fmall  Porticos,  ilTuing  out  of  the  Remainder  of  the 
Temple.  The  Profpeft  of  it  is  Proflylosy  and  the  Columns 
are  fet  very  clofe.  The  Chapel,  which  is  over-againft 
the  Entrance  of  the  Nave,  is  finely  decorated,  and  the 
fluting  of  the  Columns  is  Spiral :  Thefe  Columns  are  of 
the  Corinthian  Order,  as  well  as  thofe  of  the  Porticos, 
and  delicately  wrought  with  a  beautiful  Variety  of  In- 
tagl  ias.  What  I  faid  in  the  firft  Book  therefore,  appears 
by  this  Temple,  as  well  as  all  the  others,  to  be  indifpu- 
tably  true,  viz.  that  the  Ancients,  in  fuch  fort  of  Structure, 
and  particularly  in  the  fmalleft,  were  very  curious  and 
exa£t  in  polifhing  every  Part,  and  fetting  them  off  with 
all  the  Embellifhments  imaginable,  provided  they  were  na¬ 
tural  and  graceful :  Whereas  in  the  large  Edifices,  fuch 
as  Amphitheatres,  and  the  like,  they  only  polifhed  fome 
particular  Parts,  leaving  the  remainder  rough,  to  fave  both 
the  Expence  and  Time  that  would  be  required  to  polifli  all, 
as  fhall  be  feen  in  my  Book  of  Amphitheatres ,  which  I  in¬ 
tend  to  publifh  in  a  very  fliort  Time. 

A. The  Plan  of  the  Body  of  the  Temple. 

B.  The  Plan  of  the  Portico . 

C.  The  Pla?t  under  the  R?nbafe?nent  of  the  Portico . 

D.  The  Bafe  of  the  Rmbafement. 

E.  The  Dado  of  the  Rmbafement . 


*  Plate  LXXV. 


F.  The 


238  PALLADIO' s 

F.  The  Cornice  of  the  faid  Emhafement. 

G.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns . 

H.  The  Bafe  of  the  Pilafers  and  Columns  of  the  little 

Porticos. 

I.  The  Capitals  of  the  fame . 

K.  The  Architrave ,  Frizey  and  Cornice . 

L.  The  Steps  which  lead  to  the  Temple . 

*  The  Elevation  of  Half  the  Front  on  the  outfde . 

■f  The  Elevation  of  the  inner  Half 
$  The  Elevation  of  the  Flank. 

||  The  Decorations  of  the  Temple  drawn  at  large . 

A.  The  Capital. 

B.  The  Architrave. 

C.  The  Frize. 

D.  The  Cornice. 

E.  A  Two-foot  Scale  divided  into  96  Parts . 


CHAP.  XXVI, 

Concerning  the  'Temple  of  Scifi. 

THE  following  Temple  §  is  fituate  in  the  Square 
of  Scifiy  a  City  of  XJmbriay  and  is  of  the  Corin¬ 
thian  Order.  The  Pedeftals  in  this  Temple,  which  are 
placed  under  the  Columns  of  the  Portico,  are  worthy  of 
Obfervation  ;  becaufe,  as  I  faid  before,  in  all  other  an¬ 
cient  Temples,  where  the  Columns  of  the  Porticos  reach 
the  Ground,  I  never  law  one  that  had  Pedeftals.  Be¬ 
tween  one  Pedeftal  and  the  other  are  the  Steps  which  go 
up  from  the  Square  to  the  Portico.  The  Pedeftals  are  as 
high  as  the  middle  Intercolumnation  is  large,  which  is 
two  Inches  larger  than  the  reft.  The  Manner  of  this 
Temple  is,  as  Vitruvius  calls  it,  Syfiylos ,  that  is,  of  two 

*  Plate  LXXVI.  f  Plate  LXXVII.  %  Plate  LXXVIII.-  ||  Plate  LXXIX. 

§  Plate  LXXX. 

Diameters. 


ARCHITECTURE.  239 

Diameters.  The  Architrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice  together, 
are  one  fifth  Part  of  the  Height  of  the  Columns,  and 
fomething  more.  The  Cornice  of  the  Front,  inftead  of 
the  Modilions,  has  feveral  Leaves,  and  in  the  remain¬ 
ing  Part  is  altogether  like  that  direCtly  over  the  Co¬ 
lumns.  The  Nave  of  the  Temple  is  one  fourth  longer  than 
it  is  large. 


*  The  Elevation  of  the  Front  of  the  Temple . 

If  The  Decorations  at  large . 

A.  The  Fedeflal. 

B.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns . 

C.  The  Capital. 

D.  The  Architrave . 

£.  The  Frize . 

F.  The  Cornice . 

G.  The  Foliage  carved  in  the  Cornice  of  the  Pediment^ 

infiead  of  Modilions .  \ 

H.  The  Acroterias . 

L  A  Two-font.  Beale  divided  into  96  Parts. 


CHAP.  XXVII. 

Concerning  the  Draughts  of  feveral  Temples  which 
are  out  of  Italy  $  and,  in  the  firjl  Place ,  con - 
cerning  the  two  Temples  of  Pola. 

IN  Pola%  a  City  of  IJlria ,  befides  a  Theatre,  an  Am¬ 
phitheatre,  and  a  Triumphal  Arch  (which  are  very 
beautiful  Structures,  and  of  each  of  which  I  fhall  treat, 
and  give  their  Draughts  in  their  proper  Place)  there  are 
on  the  fame  Side  of  the  Square  two  Temples  §  of  equal 
Dimenfions,  having  the  fame  Decorations,  and  being 


*  Plate  LXXXI.  fl  Plate  LXXXII.  §  Plate  LXXXIII. 


P  p  p  diftant 


24o  P  A  L  L  A  D  I  O’s 

diftant  from  each  other  58  Feet,  four  Inches.  Their 
Draughts  follow  this  Account.  The  Profpeft  of  them 
is  Projlylos ,  and  the  Manner  of  them  is  what  Vitruvius 
calls,  as  I  have  above  obferved,  Syflylos ,  which  has  the 
Intercolumnations  of  two  Diameters,  only  that  the  mid¬ 
dle  Intercolumnation  has  two  Diameters  and  a  Quarter. 
Round  thefe  Temples  there  goes  a  Bafement,  on  the 
Top  whereof  they  have  their  Area  or  Floor,  to  which 
the  Afcent  is  by  Steps,  as  has  been  feen  in  feveral  other 
Tempi  es,  placed  in  the  Front.  The  Bales  of  the  Columns 
are  after  the  Attick  Manner,  and  their  Plinth  is  as 
thick  as  the  Remainder  of  the  Bafe.  The  Capitals  are 
wrought  very  neatly  with  Olive  Leaves.  The  Stalks  are 
covered  with  Foliage  of  Oak  Leaves,  which  Variation 
is  feldom  feen  in  others,  and  merits  Obfervation.  The 
Architrave  like  wife  is  different  from  the  mod  Part  of 
others,  becaufe  its  firft  Fafcia  is  large,  the  fecond  lefs, 
and  the  third  under  the  Cymatium  dill  lels  :  Befides, 
thefe  Fafcias  Ihoot  out  in  the  lower  Part,  which  was  done 
with  Delign,  that  the  Architrave  might  project  the  lefs, 
and  fo  not  conceal  the  Infcription  on  the  Frize  of  the 
Front,  which  is  as  follows  : 

ROMAE  ET  AU GUSTO  CAESARIS  1NVL 
F .  PAT  PATRIAE . 

The  Foliage  of  the  faid  Frize  furround  the  other  Parts 
of  the  Temple.  The  Cornice  has  but  a  few  Members, 
and  is  wrought  with  the  ufual  Intaglias.  The  Decora¬ 
tions  of  the  Door  are  lod ;  but  I  have  made  them  juft 
as  I  imagine  they  ought  to  have  been.  The  Nave  is  a 
fourth  Part  longer  than  it  is  large.  The  whole  Temple, 
taking  in  the  Portico,  is  longer  by  two  Squares  than  it  is 
large. 

A.  The  Steps  leading  to  the  Temple . 

B.  Ihe  Portico . 

C.  Ihe  Body  of  the  Temple. 

*  The  Elevation  of  a  Part  of  the  Temple  in  Flank * 


*  Plate  LXXXIV. 


A.  The 


ARCHITECTURE. 


241 


A.  'The.  Decorations  of  a  Door  of  my  own  Invention . 

B.  The  Prof  l  of  the  Bell  of  the  Capital . 

C.  A  three  Foot  Scale  divided  into  144  Parts . 

*  The  Elevation  of  the  Front  of  the  faid  Temple . 

A.  The  Steps  leading  to  the  Temple . 

B.  A  Part  of  the  Portico. 

J  The  Decorations  at  large. 

A.  The  Pedeftaly  or  the  Embafement  of  the  Temple . 

B.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns . 

C.  The  Capital. 

D.  The  Architrave . 

E.  The  Frize. 

F.  The  Cornice. 

G.  A  Part  of  the  Plan  of  the  Capital. 


N.  B.  The  Scale  whereby  the  faid  Decorations  have  been 
meafured,  is  in  Plate  84,  Letter  C. 


CHAP.  XXVIII. 

Concerning  the  two  'Temples  of  Nimes  $  and 
firft ,  with  refpeci  to  that  calf  d  la  Maifon 
Quarre,  or  the  Square  Houfe . 

IN  Nimes ,  a  City  of  Languedoc ,  the  Native  Country 
of  the  Emperor  Antoninus  Pius ,  the  two  following 
Temples  are  feen,  among  many  other  magnificent  and 
curious  Remains  of  Antiquity.  §  This,  whereof  I  am 
firft  going  to  difcourfe,  is  call'd  by  the  Inhabitants  of 
the  Place  la  Maifon  Quarre^  or  the  Square  Houfe,  be- 
caufe  it  is  built  in  a  quadrangular  Form  ;  and  they  in¬ 
form  us,  that  it  was  a  Baflica ,  or  Court  of  Juftice  (of 
which  Baftlicas ,  their  Ufe  and  Manner  of  Ere&ion,  I 


*  Plate  LXXXV.  x  Plate  LXXXVI.  §  Plate  LXXXVII. 


have 


PALLADIO's 


242 

have  already  treated  at  large  in  the  third  Book,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  Rules  laid  down  by  Vitruvius)  but  as  their 
Form  was  loft,  I  am  apt  to  think  this  lower  Building  to 
have  been  a  Temple.  The  Prolpedt  and  Manner  of  it, 
is  manifeft  enough  from  what  has  been  already  faid  of 
fo  many  other  Temples.  Its  Floor  is  elevated  from  the 
Ground  ten  Feet  five  Inches.  For  a  Bafement  all  round 
it  there  is  a  Pedeftal,  upon  the  Cymatium  whereof  are 
two  Steps,  which  fupport  the  Bafe  of  the  Pillars.  And 
Vitruvius ,  in  all  Probability,  meant  fuch  Steps,  when, 
at  the  Clofe  of  the  third  Chapter  of  his  third  Book,  he 
fays,  That  in  making  a  continual  Embafement  round  a 
Temple ,  the  Scamilli  (which  probably  may  be  thefe  Steps, 
or  elfe  Zoccos)  under  the  Bafes  of  the  Columns  ought  to 
be  made  unequal,  falling  direElly  plum  over  the  Naked 
of  the  Pedeflal ,  which  is  under  the  Columns ,  and  being 
equal  under  the  Bafe  of  the  Column  and  above  the  Cy¬ 
matium  of  the  Pedeflal .  This  Paffage  has  incited  the 

Attention  of  feveral  Architects.  The  Bafe  of  this  Bafe¬ 
ment  has  but  few  Members,  and  is  thicker  (as  I 
have  elfewhere  directed  Ihould  be  done  in  Pedeftals ) 
than  the  Cymatium.  The  Bale  of  the  Columns  is 
Attick ,  but  has  likewife  fome  Aftragals,  from  whence 
it  may  be  properly  call’d  Cotnpofite ,  and  agreeable  to 
the  Corinthian  Order.  The  Capitals  are  wrought  with 
Olive  Leaves,  and  have  the  Abacus  carv’d.  The  Rofe 
placed  in  the  midft  of  the  Fore-part  of  the  Capital 
takes  up  the  Height  of  the  Abacus  and  the  Fillet  of 
the  Bell ;  which,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  is  follow’d 
in  all  the  antient  Capitals  of  this  Sort.  The  Architrave, 
Frize,  and  Cornice,  are  one  fourth  Part  of  the  Length 
of  the  Columns,  and  all  the  Parts  of  them  are  very 
eimoufiy  carv’d.  ,  The  Modilifins  are  different  from  all 
1  have  ever  feen,  and  this  Difference  of  theirs  from  the 
common  Sort  is  very  ornamental  :  And  as  the  Capitals 
are  wrought  with  Olive  Leaves,  thefe  are  carv’d  with 
Oak  Leaves.  Over  the  Gula-redta,  inftead  of  a  Filet, 
is  carv’d  an  Ovolo,  which  is  feen  but  in  a  few  Cor¬ 


nices. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


243 


nices.  The  Fronton  is  exa&ly  finifh’d  according  to  Vi¬ 
truvius*  DireCHons,  in  the  Place  above-quoted.  Becaufe 
of  nine  Parts  of  the  Length  of  the  Cornice,  one  is  put  in 
the  Height  of  the  Fronton  under  its  Cornice.  The  Jambs 
or  Pilafters  of  the  Doors  are  thick  in  Front,  one  fixth  Part 
of  the  Largenefs  of  the  Light,  or  void  Space.  This  Door 
has  feveral  curious  Decorations,  and  is  perfectly  well  carv’d. 
Over  its  Cornice,  and  even  with  its  Jambs,  are  two  Pieces 
of  Stone  wrought  like  Architraves,  and  projecting  out  of 
the  fa  id  Cornice.  In  each  of  them  is  a  large  fquare  Hole, 
about  ten  Inches  and  a  Half  every  Way,  thro’  which  they 
let  down,  as  I  imagine,  fome  certain  long  Pieces  that  reach 
to  the  Ground,  in  order  to  fupport  an  additional  Door,  to  be 
taken  up  or  down  as  Occafion  may  require,  and  made  after 
the  Manner  of  a  Lattice,  that  the  People  who  Hand  with¬ 
out  might  fee  was  done  in  the  Temple,  without  being  any 
Hindrance  or  Interruption  to  the  Priefts. 


A.  The  Steps  which  lead  to  the  Temple . 

B.  The  Portico  of  the  Temple. 

C.  A  Plan  of  the  two  bor'd  Stones ,  which  projeSl  over  the 
Cornice  of  the  Door. 

D.  The  Holes  of  ten  Inches  and  a  Half  Square  in  the  mid - 
die  of  the  faid  Stones. 

E.  The  Door  of  the  Temple. 

F.  The  Body  of  the  Temple. 

*  The  Elevation  of  the  Front  of  the  Temple . 

T  The  Elevation  of  the  Flank. 

+  Part  of  the  Members  at  large. 

A.  The  Bafe  1  via/ 

_  „  .  >of  the  reaetal. 

B.  The  (Jy/natium  j  J  J 

C.  The  Bafe  of  the  Coluimis. 

D.  Half  of  the  Capital. 

F.  The  Architrave. 

F.  The  Frize  and  the  Foliage  carved  in  it. 

G.  The  Cornice. 


f  Plate  LXXXIX. 

Q.q  q 


*  Plate  LXXXVIII. 


+  Plate  XC. 

H.  The 


PALLADIO' s 


244 

H.  The  Decorations  of  the  Door. 

I.  The  Scrowls  of  the  Door  in  Front. 

K.  The  Profit  of  the  faid  Scrowl. 

L.  The  Stone  over  the  Cornice . 

M.  A  three-foot  Scale  divided  into  144  Parts. 

CHAP.  XXIX. 

Concerning  the  other  'Temple  of  Nimes. 

TH  E  following  Draughts  appertain  to  the  other 
*  Temple  of  Nimes,  which,  as  the  Inhabitants  of 
that  City  report,  was  formerly  the  Temple  of  Vejla  ;  but, 
in  my  Opinion,  that  cannot  be,  not  only  becaufe  the 
Temples  of  Vefia  were  made  circular,  after  the  Form  of 
the  Earth,  whereof  fhe  was  reputed  to  be  the  Goddefs  ; 
but  becaufe  the  Paflages  on  three  Sides  of  this  Temple 
were  inclofed  with  Walls,  wherein  were  the  Doors  to  the 
Sides  of  the  Cell,  and  the  Door  of  the  Nave  it  felf  in  the 
Front,  fo  that  it  could  receive  no  manner  of  Light  from 
any  Quarter.  Now,  as  no  Reafon  can  be  aftigned  why 
dark  and  gloomy  Temples  fhould  be  confecrated  to  V efta> 
this  Temple  was  dedicated,  in  my  Opinion,  to  fome  of  the 
infernal  Deities.  In  the  inner  Part  there  are  lome  Taber¬ 
nacles,  wherein  there  muft  have  been  Statues.  The  inftde 
of  the  Temple,  over-againft  the  Door,  is  divided  into 
three  Parts.  The  Area,  or  Floor  of  the  middle  Part,  is  even 
with  the  reft  of  the  Temple  :  The  other  two  Parts  have 
their  Floors  raifed  to  the  Height  of  the  Pedeftals,  and  you 
go  up  to  them  by  two  Pair  of  Stairs,  beginning  in  the  Paf¬ 
fages,  which,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  come  round  this 
Temple.  The  Pedeftals  are  fomewhat  higher  than  the 
third  Part  of  the  Length  of  the  Columns.  The  Bafes  of 

/ 


*  Plate  XCI. 


the 


ARCHITECTURE.  245 

the  Columns  are  compounded  of  the  Attick  and  lonick , 
and  have  a  delicate  Profil.  The  Capitals  likewife  are  Corn- 
polite,  very  accurately  wrought  and  polifhed.  The  Ar¬ 
chitrave,  Frize,  and  Cornice  have  no  Intaglias ;  and  the 
Decorations  of  the  Tabernacles,  which  are  round  the 
Nave,  are  very  plain  and  limple.  Behind  the  Columns 
which  are  over-againfh  the  Entry,  and  form,  according  to 
our  Manner  of  fpeaking,  the  great  Chapel,  there  were  fquare 
Pilafters,  which  have  Compolite  Capitals  alike,  but  diffe¬ 
rent  from  thofe  of  the  Columns,  nay,  different  among 
themfelves  ;  becaufe  the  Capitals  of  the  Pilafters  next  the 
Columns  have  different  Intaglias  from  the  other  two  :  But 
all  of  them  have  fo  agreeable  and  beautiful  a  Form,  and 
are  of  fuch  an  extraordinary  Invention,  that  I  do  not  re¬ 
member  I  have  feen  any  Capitals  of  that  Kind  better 
or  more  judicioully  compafs’d.  Thefe  Pilafters  fupport  the 
Architraves  of  the  Chapels  on  the  Sides,  whereto  you  go 
up,  as  I  faid  before*  by  the  Stairs  of  the  Paffages  ;  and  are 
therefore  larger  this  Way  than  the  Columns  are  thick, 
which  is  worth  the  Reader’s  Obfervation.  The  Columns 
which  are  round  the  Nave,  bear  up  certain  Arches  made  of 
fquare  Stones :  And  the  Stones  which  make  the  greater 
Vault  of  the  Temple,  are  placed  from  one  of  thefe  Arches 
to  the  other.  This  entire  Fabrick  is  made  of  fquare  Stones, 
and  cover’d  with  flat  ones,  fo  difpos’d,  that  the  End  of  one 
comes  over  the  Beginning  of  the  other,  fo  that  no  Wet 
can  poffibly  penetrate  through  them.  I  have  been  more 
curious  and  exadt  about  thefe  two  Temples,  becaufe  they 
feemed  to  me  to  be  Stru&ures  which  deferved  the  utmofl 
Confideration  ;  and  by  which  it  may  be  known,  that  it  was 
the  peculiar  Property,  as  it  were,  of  that  Age,  to  underhand 
the  true  Way  of  Building  every  where. 

*  Half  what  appears  of  the  injide  over-againjl  the  Door . 

•f  The  Elevation  of  Part  of  the  Flank  infede. 


*  Plate  XCII. 


+  Plate  XCIII. 


*  The 


246  PALLADIO' s 

*  The  Decorations  of  the  Tabernacles ,  Columns  and  Sof- 
ftas .  The  following  Tetters  refer  to  them  all. 

A.  The  Pedcftal. 

B.  The  Bafe  of  the  Column  and  Pilajlers. 

C.  Plan  of  the  Capital. 

D.  The  Capital  of  the  Columns. 

E.  The  Prof  l  of  the  Capital  without  the  Volutas. 

F.  The  Architrave ,  Frize  and  Cornice  over  the  Columns . 

G.  The  Capital  of  the  Pilafters  behind  the  middle  Columns. 

H.  The  Capital  of  the  other  Pilaflers. 

I.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  fmall  Cornice  over  the 
Pilaflers  behind  the  middle  Columns. 

K.  The  Decorations  of  the  Tabernacle  between  the  Columns 
round  the  Temple. 

L.  The  Decorations  of  the  Tabernacle  of  the  great  Chapel 
in  the  middle  of  the  Temple. 

M.  N,  O.  The  Co?npartments  of  the  Soffit  a  of  the  Jaid 

N.  B.  The  Compartments  above-mention’d  have  been 
defign’d  by  a  fmaller  Scale. 

P.  A  Three  foot  Scale  divided  into  1 44  Parts. 

/  ' 

CHAP.  XXX. 

Concerning  the  two  other  Temples  in  Rome ;  and 
firjl  with  refpecl  to  the  Temple  of  Concord. 

BESIDES  the  Temples  above  delineated,  when  I 
difcourfed  of  fuch  as  are  in  Rome ,  at  the  Foot  of  the 
Capitol ,  not  far  from  the  Arch  of  Septimius  (where  the 
Roman  Forum  began)  may  be  feen  the  Columns  of  the 


*  Plate  xciv. 


Portico 


ARCHITECTURE.  247 

Portico  of  the  following  *  Temple  ;  which,  purfuant  to  a 
Vow,  was  ereCted  by  Furius  Caniillus,  and,  according  to 
fome,  confecrated  to  Concord.  The  publick  Affairs  were 
frequently  here  debated  ;  and  we  may  reafonably  conclude, 
that  this  Temple  was  devoted  to  that  Service,  fince  the 
Priefts  would  not  permit  the  Senate  to  convene  about  State 
Affairs,  except  only  in  the  confecrated  Temples,  and  fuch 
only  were  confecrated  as  were  ereCted  according  to  the 
Directions  of  the  Augurs ;  for  which  Reafon,  and  on  Ac¬ 
count  of  their  debating  in  fuch  Places  on  the  neceffary  Oc- 
cafions  of  the  Government,  the  Temples  fo  made  were 
likewife  called  Curice.  Among  many  Statues  with  which 
this  Temple  was  embellifhed,  fome  Hiftorians  make  men¬ 
tion  of  that  of  Latona ,  holding  Apollo  and  Diana  her 
Children  in  her  Arms ;  as  alio  the  Statue  of  AEfculapius ,  and 
his  Daughter  Hygeia ,  or  Health  ;  thofe  of  Mars ,  Miner- 
va,  Ceres ,  Mercury ,  and  that  of  ViElory ,  which  was  in  the 
Fronton  of  the  Portico,  and  which  was  Thunder-ftruck  in 
the  Confulfhip  of  Marcus  Marcellus ,  and  Marcus  Vale¬ 
rius.  By  what  may  be  collected  from  the  Infcription 
which  ftill  remains  on  the  Frize,  this  Temple  was  deftroy’d 
by  Fire,  and  afterwards  re-edified  by  the  Direction  of  the 
Senate  and  People  of  Rome ;  from  whence  I  am  inclinable 
to  believe,  that  it  is  not  fo  beautiful  and  compleat  as  the  firft. 
The  Words  are  thefe, 

S.  P.  ^  R . 

INCENDIO  CONSUMPTUM 
R  Esriruir. 

That  is,  “  The  Senate  and  People  of  Rome  rebuilt  this 
“  Temple  confum’d  by  Fire.”  The  Intercolunmations  are 
fome  what  lefs  than  two  Diameters.  The  Bafes  of  the 
Columns  are  compounded  of  Attick  and  Ionick.  They  are 
different  in  fome  Meafure  from  fuch  as  are  generally  made, 
but  very  curioufiy  finifh’d.  The  Capitals  may  be  faid 


*  Plate  XCV. 

R  r  r  likewife 


I 


PALLADIO’ s 


248 

like  wife  to  be  compounded  of  Dorick  and  Ionick ,  and  are 
perfectly  well  wrought.  The  Architrave  and  Frize  in  the 
Front  on  the  outlide  are  even  with  each  other,  and  there  is 
no  Diftindtion  between  them,  that  an  Infcription  might  be 
put  there  :  But  on  the  inhde,  that  is,  under  the  Portico 
they  are  divided,  and  have,  as  may  be  feen  in  their  Draughts, 
their  feveral  Intaglias.  The  Cornice  is  plain,  that  is,  with¬ 
out  lntaglias.  No  Veftiges  of  the  old  Walls  of  the  Nave 
are  vifible,  but  the  prefent  Walls  have  been  made  lince, 
and  not  extremely  well :  But  we  know,  however,  how  they 
ought  to  have  been  eredted. 

A.  The  Steps  'which  lead  to  the  Temple. 

B.  The  Portico . 

C.  She  Body  of  the  Temple. 

*  The  Elevation  of  the  Front  of  the  Temple . 

•f  The  feveral  Members  at  large. 

A.  The  Bafement  going  round  the  Temple. 

B.  The  Bafe  of  the  Columns . 

C.  The  Front 

D.  Half  the  Plan 

E.  The  Prof  l  without  the  V olutas 

F.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice. 

G.  The  Architrave  and  Cornice  within  the  Portico. 

H.  A  Three-foot  Scale  divided  into  144  Parts. 


*  Plate  XCVI.  +  Plate  XCVII. 


CHAP. 


ARCHITECTURE. 


249 


CHAP.  XXXI. 

Concerning  the  Temple  of  Neptune. 

OVER  againft  the  Temple  of  Mars  the  Avenger , 
the  Draughts  whereof  we  have  given  you  above,  in 
the  Place  call’d  in  Pantano ,  behind  Marforio ,  flood  for¬ 
merly  the  following  *  Temple,  the  Foundations  whereof 
were  difcover’d  as  fome  Workmen  were  digging  in  order 
to  build  a  Houfe  ;  and  there  was  a  great  flore  of  Marble 
Stones  found  likewife,  all  admirably  well  wrought.  By 
whom  it  was  built,  or  to  what  God  confecrated,  we  cannot 
determine  ;  but  lince  there  are  Dolphins  carv’d  in  the  Frag¬ 
ments  of  the  Cymatium  of  its  Cornice  ;  and  fince  in  fome 
Places  between  the  Dolphins  there  are  Tridents,  I  prefume 
it  was  confecrated  to  Neptune .  Its  Profpedt  was  Peripteros , 
or  wing’d-round  :  Its  Manner  Pycnoftylos ,  or  thick  fet  with 
Columns.  The  Intercolumnations  thereof  were  the  eleventh 
Part  of  the  Diameter  of  the  Columns,  wanting  a  Diameter 
and  a  Half ;  which  I  think  worthy  of  Obfervation,  fince 
I  never  faw  in  any  other  antient  Fabrick  fuch  fmall  Inter¬ 
columnations.  Tho’  no  Part  of  this  Temple  is  now  Hand¬ 
ing,  yet  from  the  Ruins  of  it,  which  are  many,  it  was  pof- 
fible  to  come  at  the  Knowledge  of  the  whole  ;  that  is,  the 
Plan,  the  Elevation,  and  the  particular  Members,  which 
are  all  artfully  wrought. 

•f  7 he  Elevation  of  Half  the  Front ,  without  the  PorticOi 

A.  The  Door  of  the  Temple. 

B.  The  Architrave  round  the  Door . 

C.  The  Frize. 

D.  The  Cornice. 

E.  A  Six-foot  Scale  divided  into  288  Parts. 


*  Plate  XCVIII. 


f  Plate  XCIX. 


*  The 


250  P  A  L  L  A  D  /  O’ s.  Sec. 

*  The  Elevation  of  Half  the  Front  under  the  Portico , 
that  is ,  the  firfl  Columns  being  remov d. 

F.  The  Prof  l  of  the  Pilafers  round  the  Nave  of  the 
Temple ,  over-againfl  the  Columns  of  the  Porticos. 

G.  The  Coriola  of  the  Wall  of  the  Nave  on  the  outfide , 

whereon  begins  the  Divifon  of  the  ruflick  Mafonry  of  the 
Wall.  '  ^ 

H.  The  Prof  l  of  the  rufiick  Mafonry  of  the  W all. 

I.  A  Six-foot  Scale  divided  into  288  Parts . 

•f  Phe  particular  Members  at  large. 

A.  The  Safe. 

B.  The  Capital. 

C.  The  Architrave ,  Frize ,  and  Cornice. 

X  The  Compartments ,  and  the  Intaglias  of  the  Sojfitas  of 
the  Porticos  round  the  Nave. 

E.  The  Prof  l  of  the  Sojftas . 

F.  A  Three-foot  Scale  divided  into  1 44  Parts. 

G.  The  Sojfta  of  the  Architrave  between  one  Capital  and 
another. 


*  Plate  C.  t  Plate  Cl.  %  Plate  CII. 

'  \ 


REMARKS. 


REMARKS. 

fjERE  are  the  two  Prints  *  I  mentioned  at  the  End  of 
•L  J-  the  fecond  Book ,  which  were  probably  mifay'd  during 
the  Hurry  of  fo  laborious  an  Edition  made  by  Palladio  of  his 
orks.  Perhaps ,  as  Mr.  de  Cambray  thmks ,  they  were  not 
drawn  till  afterwards ,  inte?iding  them  for  a  fecond  Edition , 
which ,  in  all  probability ,  he  would  have  embellifoed  with 
many  more  of  the  like  Nature  ;  as  may  be  colleSled  from  what 
he  f aid  above  in  the  25th  Chapter ,  wherein  he  promifes  in  a 
Jhort  time  to  publi fh  his  Draughts  of  the  Amphitheatres  ;  be- 
fides  what  he  had  already  promifed  in  the  19th  Chapter  of 
the  firfl  Book  with  refpeSl  to  the  Triumphal  Arches  :  But  as 
that  Part  of  his  W orks  has  not  appeared  in  Pub  lick,  we  may 
reafonably  conclude  that  he  did  not  live  long  enough  to  acco?n- 
plifh  his  Defegn.  This  Temple  is  of  the  Doric k  Order ,  and 
tho ,  to  all  outward  Appearance ,  very  plain  and  fmple ,  it  was 
notwit hflanding  plac'd  by  Ant.  Labaco  a?nong  the  antient 
Fabricks .  Palladio  mentions  it  likewije  in  the  15  th  Chapter 
of  his  firft  Book ,  where  he  dijlinguifhes  it  by  the  Natne  of  the 
Temple  of  Piety.  It  feems  likewife  that  Vitruvius  has  had  the 
fame  in  View  in  the  third  Chapter  of  his  fourth  Book ,  where 
he  fpeaks  of  the  Inconveniencies  which  attend  the  angular 
T ry gliphes,  found  in  the  Entablature  of  this  Te?nple.  It  is  an 
authentick  Precedent ,  however ,  for  the  Opinion  of  Juch  as 
maintain  it  to  be  an  Error  to  add  a  Bafe  to  the  Dorick  Co¬ 
lumns ,  fince  the  Antients  never  did  ;  and  to  be  a  peculiar 
Propriety  of  that  Order.  The  A?itiquity  of  this  Structure, 
and  the  Occafon  of  its  being  built ,  fill  render  it  more  valu¬ 
able.  It  is  the  receiv'd  Opinion ,  that  it  fands  071  the  very 
Spot  of  Ground  where  that  memorable  Deed  of  the  young  TV 0- 
mai7  happened \  who  knowing  her  Father  to  be  fentenced  to  be 
flarv  d  to  Death  in  that  Prifon ,  ca7?ie  every  Day  privately 
to  give  him  Suck.  The  Story  is  univerfally  known.  Pliny 
and  Valcr.  Maximus  relate  it,  and  fay,  it  happen d  under  the 
Cojifulate  of  L.  Quindtius  and  M.  Acilius,  in  the  Tear  of  Rome 
603,  and  about  148  Tears  before  the  Birth  of  Jefus  ChrifL 


*  Plate  Clir.  and  CIV. 


srr 


A  TABLE 


■ 


' 

■ 

' 

; 

■  \\  ■  \  !  ■  '  '  "  V-  ■■  -  ' 

, 

'  -  ^  ''V 

■  ■  -  .  '  '  *  • 

.  '•  >■ 

. 


•  .  i  !  •  4}  JiO 


•  • 

. 

1 

1 

V- •  '  < . , 


. 


* 


A 

TABLE 

Of  the  moft  remarkable  Things  contain’d  in 

this  Work. 


N.  B.  *That  I  denotes  the  firjl  and  fecond  Books ,  II  the 
third  and  fourth  Books ;  the  Cyphers  denote  the  Number 
of  the  Page  quoted. 


A. 

ypGRIPPA  built  no  more  of  the  Pantheon ,  than  the  Portico ,  II, 

yH  Page  227. 

Alejandro  Vittoria ,  a  Carver  or  Sculptor,  I,  81. 

Antients ,  they  were  very  exadl  and  curious  in  putting  together,  and 
fitting  the  Stones  of  their  Buildings,  and  had  a  particular  Method 
in  ere&ing  them,  I,  24.  Made  no  Pedeftals  to  the  Columns  of  the 
Dorick  Order,  I,  35.  Nor  often  any  Bafis  proper  to  that  Order, 
Ibid.  II,  253.  Made  their  Gates  fometimes  wider  at  the  Bottom  than 
at  the  Top,  I,  57.  II,  234.  How  they  made  their  Chimneys,  I,  63. 
Ufed  to  make  the  Steps  of  their  Stair-Cafes  of  an  odd  Number,  and 
why,  I,  66.  Built  Porticos  and  Piazzas  round  their  Markets  or  pub- 
lick  Places,  II,  168.  Their  Manner  in  Building  of  Temples,  II,  187, 
201.  They  took  a  particular  Care  to  perfedt  and  finifh  fmall  Build¬ 
ings,  but  in  the  large  ones  contented  themfelves  to  finifh  here  and 
there  a  Piece,  II.  237. 

Anjelmo  Canera  of  Verona ,  a  Painter,  I,  82,  107. 

Apelles  a  moft  antient  Painter,  Augujlus  caufed  two  of  his  Pictures  to 
be  placed  in  the  moft  remarkable  Place  of  the  Temple  dedicated  to 
Mars  the  Avenger ,  II,  202. 

Architects  alive  under  the  Papacy  of  Julius  the  Second,  II,  222.  Are 
to  follow  Nature,  I,  49.  May  fometimes  deviate  from  the  common 
Way,  II,  236. 

Atrium,  or  Entry  of  the  Pufcans ,  I,  85.  That  with  four  Pillars,  ibid. 
86.  The  Corinthian ,  ibid.  87.  The  Teftudinated,  or  Tortoife-like 
Entry,  ibid.  89. 

Augujlus  the  Emperor  eredted  a  Temple  to  Mars  the  Avenger ,  II,  202 

B.  Bap- 


A  TABLE,  ©V . 


B. 

Baptijlery ,  or  BaptiJ'mal  Font  of  Conjiantine  the  Great ,  II,  220. 

Bartolomeo  Ridolji ,  a  Carver  of  Verona ,  I,  79,  107. 

Baths ,  cold  and  warm,  in  the  Falejlrce  of  the  Greeks ,  or  Places  of  pub- 
lick  Exercifes,  II,  175. 

Battijla  Franco ,  a  great  Draughcs-Man.  I,  103. 

Bat  ti ft  a  Maganza ,  a  Vicentine  Painter,  ibid.  109. 

Battijla  del  Moro ,  a  Veroneze  Painter,  ibid.  hi. 

Battijla  Venetiano,  a  Painter,  ibid.  103,  106,  in. 

Bafilicce,  or  Courts  of  Juftice  of  the  Antients,  their  Ufe  and  Construction, 
II,  169.  A  Draught  of  the  Bafilica  at  Vicenza ,  ibid.  173.  An  an- 
tient  one  at  Nimes  in  Languedoc ,  ibid.  24 1. 

Barnardino  India ,  a  VeroneJ'e ,  and  a  Painter,  I,  82,  107. 

Bramante y  an  excellent  Architect,  and  the  Restorer  of  Architecture, 
II,  222,  223. 

Bra/s ,  and  Corinthian  Brafs,  their  Composition  and  Ufes,  I,  16.  Which 
way  belt  preferved,  ibid. 

Bridges ,  what  ought  to  be  confider’d  in  their  ConftruCtion,  II,  138,  139. 
The  Sublician  Bridge  at  Rome ,  ibid.  140.  Julius  Cajdrs  Bridge  over 
the  Rhine ,  ibid.  142,  143,  144.  Of  the  Bridge  on  the  Cijmone ,  ibid. 
145,  146.  Three  different  Methods  of  conftruing  Wooden  Bridges,  ib. 
147  to  150.  Wooden  Bridge  near  Bajjano ,  built  by  Palladio ,  ifo/. 
15 1,  152.  Of  Stone  Bridges,  ibtd.  153  to  155.  Some  of  the  moft 
reputed  Bridges  among  the  Antients,  ibid.  155  to  157.  Several  other 
Bridges  defcribedj  fome  of  our  Author’s  Invention  at  Vicenza  and 
other  Places  in  Italy,  ibid.  158  to  162. 

C. 

Capitals  of  the  Ionick  Order,  in  the  Angles  of  a  Temple,  feen  in  Front 
and  in  Flank,  II.  216. 

Cartoufes ,  or  Scrowls,  a  modern  Ornament  in  Architecture,  and  an  Eye- 
fore  to  Artifts,  I,  50. 

Chalk ,  or  Lime,  the  manner  of  killing  it,  I,  12. 

Chambers  or  Rooms ,  their  Dimensions,  and  feven  different  Manners  to 
make  them  proportionate,  I,  51,  52.  Of  their  Height,  ibid.  54. 
Of  the  Compartition  or  Distribution  of  Chambers,  ibid.  Chambers 
of  the  fame  Story  muft  have  the  fame  Dimenfions,  ibid. 

Chimneys ,  and  their  ConftruCtion,  I,  63. 

Churches ,  that  of  St.  George  at  Venice ,  built  by  Palladio,  II,  189.  Chri¬ 
stian  Churches  very  like  the  Bajilicce  of  the  Antients,  and  why,  II, 
198.  A  Defcription  of  them,  ibid. 

Cielings  of  Rooms,  and  their  different  Manner,  I,  53. 

Claudius  the  Emperor  began  the  Temple  of  Peace,  II,  200. 

Columns,  of  their  Swelling  and  Diminution,  I,  28.  Thofe  of  the  Dorick 
Order,  as  in  the  Temple  of  Piety,  have  no  Bafis  or  PedeStal,  ib.  35, 
36.  II,  253.  The  jointed  Columns  made  of  feveral  Pieces,  blamed 
by  Palladio,  I,  51.  Columns  yet  to  be  feen  at  the  Foot  of  the 
Capitol  in  the  Forum  Romanum,  very  beautiful,  II,  225.  Four  Brafs 
Columns  at  Rome  in  the  Church  of  S.  Giovanni  Later ano,  I,  16. 
Columns  of  a  lefs  Height  than  the  Portico,  II,  238. 

Compartments  of  Streets  in  a  City,  II,  132. 

Confideration  which  one  ought  to  have  before  he  begins  to  build,  I,  7. 

Covah,  great  Caves  near  Vicenza ,  formerly  Quarries,  out  of  which  Gentle¬ 
men  derive  very  cold  Winds  to  cool  their  Houfes  in  hot  Weather,  I,  63. 

Convent 


A  TABLE,  gfr. 

Convent  of  Charity  at  Venice  defcrib’d,  I,  87,  88. 

Corinthian  Brafs ;  See  BraJ's . 

Courts  of  Judicature;  See  Bafilica.  / 

Covering  of  Buildings,  I,  69. 

D. 

Diminution  of  Columns;  See  Columns. 

Dining-Rooms ;  See  Parlours  or  Halls. 

Dominico  Rizzo ,  a  Painter,  I,  79. 

Doors>  their  Proportions  and  Ornaments,  I,  57  to  62. 

E. 

E//0  </<?/  Belli,  Son  of  Valerio ,  famous  for  painting  in  Brooch  and  cutting 
of  Cryftal,  I,  the  Author  to  the  Reader. 

Errors  or  Abufes  in  Architecture,  common  to  moft  modern  Builders*  I,  49. 

F. 

Flaminius  caufed  that  High-way  to  be  made,  which  bore  his  Name,  II,  135. 

Floors  of  Rooms,  and  the  different  Way  of  Flooring,  I,  53. 

Form  of  Temples,  what  is  becoming  to  be  obferv’d  about  them,  II,  187 
to  190. 

Foot  of  Vicenza ,  is  the  Meafure  of  Palladio ,  I,  77. 

Foundations ,  what  Rules  to  be  obfervcd  to  lay  a  good  Foundation,  I,  17 
to  19. 

Frontijpieces ,  or  Roofs  over  Doors  ought  not  to  be  divided,  and  why,  I,  50, 

G. 

Gates,  very  antient  ones  of  Brafs  to  be  feen  at  Rome  to  this  Day,  1, 16. 

Giallo  Florentino ,  a  Painter,  I,  102. 

Giovanni  Indemio ,  a  Painter  at  Vicenza ,  ibid.  1 10. 

Ground,  which  fitteft  to  build  upon,  ibid.  17  to  19. 

Gualterio ,  a  Painter  of  Padua,  ibid.  111. 

H. 

Halls ,  Dining-Rooms,  or  Parlours:  Thofe  with  four  Columns,  I,  91. 
The  Corinthian ,  and  thofe  after  the  /Egyptian  Manner,  ibid.  91,  92. 

High-ways ,  or  publick  Roads  without  the  Cities,  what  Method  to  make 
them  commodious  and  ufeful,  II,  135.  The  Conveniency  and  particu¬ 
lar  Make  of  the  High- way  to  OJlia ,  ibid.  136. 

Horfes  on  Monte  Cavallo ,  one  made  by  Praxiteles ,  and  the  other  by 
Phidias ,  II,  213. 

Houfes  for  the  City,  and  the  different  Method  in  building  them,  I,  77  to 
84.  Houfe  of  Count  Gianni  Battifla  della  Torre  at  Verona ,  ibid.  80.  Of 
Count  Ifppo  de  Port  at  Vicenza ,  ibid.  79.  Of  Signor  E lor i ana  An- 
tonini  at  Udene,  ibid.  78.  Of  Signor  Giuglio  Capra  of  Vicenza,  ibid. 
83.  Of  Count  Montano  Barbarano  of  Vicenza ,  ibid.  84.  Of  Count 
Odraviano  de  Thieni  at  Vicenza,  ibid.  8 1.  Of  Signor  Paolo  Armerico  of 
Vicenza,  ibid.  82.  Of  Count  Valerio  Chiericato  of  Vicenza,  ibid.  78. 
Of  the  Counts  Valmarana  of  Vicenza,  ibid.  82. 

Houfes  for  the  Country,  their  Situation,  ibid.  95  to  98.  Their  Compart¬ 
ment,  ibid.  98  to  100.  How  the  Antients  built  them,  ibid.  1 1 3 ,  1  14. 

Houfes  built  in  the  Country,  by  noble  Venetians ;  that  at  Mazer  a  in  the 
Trivigian ,  of  Daniel  Barbaro,  and  Antonio  Barbaro ,  I,  103.  Of 
Nicolo  and  Luigi  de  Fofcari  on  the  Brent  a,  ibid.  102.  Of  Francifco 

T  t  t  Badoero 


A  TABLE,  &c. 

Badoero  in  the  Polefine,  ibid.  Of  Francifco  Pifano  in  the  Paduan , 
ibid.  1 04.  Of  Georgio  Cornaro  in  Piombino ,  ibid.  Of  Leonardo  Emo , 
ibid.  105.  Of  Leonardo  Mocenigo  at  Marocco ,  ibid.  Of  Marco  Zeno 
at  Cafalto  in  the  Frivigian ,  102.  Of  the  Counts  Marco,  Victor, 

and  Daniel  Pifani  at  Bagno lo  in  the  Vicentin,  ibid.  10 1. 

Houfes  built  in  the  Terra  Ferma,  of  the  State  of  Venice  for  the  Country- 
Houfes  of  Count  Annibal  Sarego  at  La  Miga,  I,  112.  Of  Biagio  Sa- 
raceno  in  the  Vicentin ,  ibid.  106.  Of  the  Counts  Francifco  and  Lu¬ 
dovico  Frijjini  at  Meledo,  ibid.  108.  Of  Count  Giacomo  Angarano  in 
the  Vicentin,  ibid.  110.  Of  Gio  Francifco  Valmanara  at  Liziera,  ibid. 

10 7.  Of  Girolamo  de  Godi  in  the  Vicentin ,  ibid.  1 10.  Of  Girolamo 
Ragona  at  Ghizzole ,  ibid.  107.  Of  Marjo  Repet  a  at  Campiglia ,  ibid. 

108.  Of  Count  Marc  Antonio  Sarego  near  Verona,  ibid.  111.  Of 
the  Counts  Edward  and  Fheodoro  de  Thieni  at  Ciccgna ,  ibid.  log.  Of 
Count  Ottavo  Fhieni  at  Quint  0,  ibid.  no.  Of  the  Knight  Pogliana 
at  Pogliana  in  the  Vicentin,  ibid.  107. 

FLouJe  (or  rather  a  Temple)  at  Nimes  in  Languedoc,  call’d  the  Square - 
Houfe ,  II,  241. 

I. 

Inter-Columns,  and  their  Proportion  with  Columns,  I,  29. 

John  George  Friffino,  a  Gentleman  of  Vicenza,  very  well  skill’d  in  Archi¬ 
tecture,  I,  Preface  to  the  Reader. 

’Joints  of  Stones,  See  Antients. 

Joyjls,  the  Diftance  which  ought  to  be  betwixt  them,  I,  53. 

Iron,  its  Ufes,  Marks  of  Goodnefs,  I,  14. 

Ifs,  Patronefs  of  Trade  and  Mechanick  Arts,  II,  167. 

Julius  Cafar  built  a  Bridge  over  the  Rhine,  its  Structure,  II,  142  to  145. 

L. 

Laconic,  the  Sweating  Room  in  th zPaleJlra  of  the  Antient  Greeks,  II,  175. 
Lead,  its  Difference  and  Ufe,  I,  14,  i£. 

Lime ,  and  how  to  work  it,  ibid.  12,  13. 

Lorenzo  Vicentino ,  a  Statuary  and  Sculptor,  I,  83. 

M. 

Mercury,  the  God  of  Trade,  II,  167. 

Metals  ufed  in  Building,  I,  14. 

Method,  or  Manner  of  the  Antient  Greeks  in  their  Buildings,  II,  225,  226. 
Metopas,  its  Meafure,  I,  37.  Ought  always  to  be  Square,  ibid.  As  ought 
to  be  the  Rofes,  or  Cajfes  de  Rofes  betwixt  the  Modilions,  II,  200.  201. 
Module,  which  Palladio  ufes,  defcrib’d,  I,  3 1. 

Mortar,  or  Plafter  for  Flooring,  I,  53. 

O. 

Orders  of  Architecture,  their  Number,  I,  27.  The  Fufc an  Order  de¬ 
fcrib’d,  ibid.  32  to  34.  The  Doric k  Order,  ibid.  35  to  38.  The  An¬ 
tients  put  no  Pedeftals  under  their  Dorick  Columns;  neither  has  this 
Order  any  Balls  peculiar  to  itfelf:  There  are  many  Antient  Dorick 
Columns  extant  without  any  Bafis,  ibid.  35.  The  Ionic k  Order,  ibid. 
38.  Its  Meafures,  ibid.  39  to  42.  The  Corinthian  Order,  ibid.  43  to 
45.  Ufed  in  the  Temples  of  Venus  and  Flora,  and  why?  II,  188. 
The  Compofite  Order,  I,  45  to  47. 


P.  Palejlrce , 


A  TABLE,  &c. 

p. 

Palefirce ,  or  Xyfii  of  the  Greeks ,  Places  for  their  publick  Exercifes,  II,  173.- 

Palladio ,  our  Author,  promifes  a  Book  of  Antiquities,  I,  51.  Another 
about  Triumphal  Arches,  II,  164.  He  was  the  Architect  that  built 
St.  George's  Church  at  Venice ,  II,  189.  Promifes  a  particular  Book 
about  Amphitheatres,  ibid.  237. 

Pantheon ,  now  call’d  la  Rotunda ,  ibid.  227  to  230.  See  Agrippa, 

Pavement  of  the  Antients ;  See  High-ways . 

Pavements  of  the  Streets  in  Cities,  ibid.  132  to  134. 

Paolo  Veronefe ,  a  famous  Painter,  I,  80. 

Pedefials ,  and  their  different  Proportions,  ibid.  47. 

Places ,  Squares,  or  Markets  in  a  City  j  how  to  make  them  handfomej 
II,  163.  The  Greek  Manner,  ibid.  166,  167.  The  Roman  Manner, 
ibid.  168,  169. 

Plinth ,  half  the  Height  of  the  Bafis  of  the  Column,  ibid.  240. 

Porticos ,  or  Piazzas,  about  publick  Places,  ibid.  163  to  166.  In  the 
Palefirce  of  the  Greeks ,  ibid.  175,  176.  About  or  before  the  Tem¬ 
ples,  ibid.  192,  193. 

Prifons  employ’d  to  three  different  Ufes  by  the  Antients,  ibid.  165.  What 
ought  to  be  confider’d  in  the  Building  of  them,  ibid. 

Procuracy,  a  Palace  at  Venice  of  the  Invention  of  Sanfovino ,  I,  Preface 
to  the  Reader. 

Profpefts  of  the  Temples  of  the  Antients  various,  II,  191,  192. 

R. 

Roofs ,  I,  69. 

Rooms  5  See  Chambers, 

S. 

Salinguerra  de  Efie,  Brother-in-Law  to  Ezzelino  Romano ,  had  a  Caftle 
at  la  Fratra  in  the  P olefine,  I,  102. 

Sand,  the  different  Sorts  made  Ufe  of  in  Building,  I,  1 1. 

Sanfovino,  a  famous  Sculptor  and  Architect,  I,  Preface  to  the  Reader. 

Scamilli,  what  Vitruvius  meant  by  them,  in  the  Opinion  of  Palladio,  II,  242. 

Scrolls’,  See  CartouJ'es. 

Situation ,  which  belt  for  Temples  or  Churches,  II,  185.  Which  belt 
for  Country-Houfes,  I,  95. 

St  air  cafes,  different  Manner  of  building  them,  I,  65  to  69.  The  well  con¬ 
triv’d  Stair-Cafe  of  the  Caftle  of  Chambor  near  Blois  in  France ,  ib.  68* 

Stones,  which  fit  for  Building,  and  their  Differences,  I,  10,  11.  High 
Stones  on  the  Roman  Highways,  marking  the  Number  of  Miles,  and 
dire&ing  the  Roads,  II,  137. 

Stoves,  or  hot  Baths  in  the  Greek  Palefirce ,  II,  175,  176. 

Streets,  and  their  Compartments  in  Cities,  II,  132  to  134. 

Swellings  of  the  Columns,  I,  28. 

T. 

Temples,  what  the  Antients  obferv’d  concerning  their  Situatipn  or  Stand¬ 
ing,  II,  185  to  187.  Their  Form,  ibid.  187  to  190.  Their  various 
Profpe&s,  ibid.  19 1  to  193.  How  many  forts  of  them,  ibid.  193  to  195. 

Temple  below  Trevi,  betwixt  Fulgino  and  Spoleto,  very  antient,  II,  237, 

238.  That  of  Scifi,  ibid.  238,  239.  That  of  Pola  in  Ifiria,  ibid. 

239.  That  of  Nimes  in  Languedoc ,  ibid .  241  to  248. 

Temples 


A  TABLE,  @>r. 

‘ Temples  dedicated  to  Antoninus  and  Faufina ,  ibid.  207  to  209.  To 
Bacchus ,  ibid.  231.  To  Cajlor  and  Pollux  at  Naples,  ibid.  235.  To 
Concord ,  ibid.  246.  To  Manly  Fortune,  ibid.  214.  The  Temple  call’d 
de  Gallitce,  ibid.  211.  That  of  Jupiter  on  Monte  Cavallo,  ibid.  212, 
213.  That  of  Jupiter  Stator,  ibid.  224,  225.  That  of 
Avenger ,  ibid.  202  to  204.  That  of  Neptune ,  ibid.  251,  252.  That 
of  Nerva  Trajanus ,  ibid.  204  to  207.  That  of  Peace,  which  our 
Author  doth  not  believe  to  have  been  burnt,  and  why,  ibid.  199  to 
201.  That  of  Piety,  ibid.  251.  in  the  Remark.  That  of  the  Sun 
and  Moon,  ibid.  210.  That  of  Vejla  at  Tivoli,  call’d  by  fome  the 
Temple  of  the  Sybils,  ibid.  233.  Another  of  Vefa  at  Nimes,  ib.  244. 

Temple  built  by  Bramante ,  called  San  Pietro  Montorio  at  Rome,  ib.  222,  223. 

Trajan  repair’d  the  famous  Appian  Way,  ibid.  129,  130.  Built  a 

Bridge  in  Tranfdvania  over  the  Danube,  ibid.  156. 

Triglyphs,  their  Meafure,  I,  37. 

Timber,  which  beft  for  Carpenters,  ibid.  9,  10. 

Tujcany  was  the  hrft  Country  in  Italy  that  encourag’d  Architecture, 
11,  185. 

V. 

Vefpafian,  finifh’d  the  Temple  of  Peace  at  Rome,  II,  200. 

Vitruvius  chofen  by  Palladio  for  his  Mailer  and  his  Guide,  I,  To  the 
Reader. 

Voluta ,  and  its  Proportions,  I,  40,  41.  In  lonick  Capitals  of  an  Oval 
Figure,  II,  215. 

W. 

Waters,  how  to  dillinguilh  their  Goodnefs,  I,  97. 

Walls,  different  Manner  of  Building  them,  ibid.  21  to  23.  Of  their 
Parts  and  Diminution,  ibid.  26. 

Windows,  their  Meafure,  Proportion,  and  Ornaments,  ibid,  57  to  62. 

X. 

Xyfii  of  the  Antient  Greeks ,  what  they  were,  II,  173: 


FINIS. 


/IN  D  R  E  A  PALLADIO  (one  of  the  moil 
Learned  Architects  that  Italy  has  produc’d  fince  the 
polite  Arts  begun  to  revive  there)  was  born  in  Vicenza , 
a  Town  belonging  to  the  Republick  of  V mice.  His  Parents 
were  of  mean  Extraction,  but  in  Confideration  of  his  great 
Abilities,  and  as  a  Reward  for  the  Honour  he  did  his  Na¬ 
tive  City,  he  was  made  free  of  the  fame,  and  receiv’d 
into  the  Body  of  the  Nobility.  He  had  for  his  Matter  the 
Celebrated  Giovanni  Giorgio  Triffino^  under  whom  he  not 
only  learnt  the  moft  curious  Parts  of  Civil  and  Military 
ArchiteBure ,  but  likewife  adorn’d  his  Mind  with  all  Sorts 
of  Erudition.  He  made  it  his  chief  Study  to  fearch  into 
the  (lately  Monuments  of  old  Rome ,  which  he  examin’d 
with  unparallel’d  Diligence  and  Attention.  His  Pofthu- 
mous  Work  of  the  Roman  Antiquities ,  tho’  imperfeCt,  does 
yet  fufficiently  fhew  how  much  he  made  himfelf  Malfer  of 
the  Nobleft  Ideas  of  the  Antients :  for  walking  through 
the  Rubbifh  and  other  Remains  of  thefe,  he  difcover’d  the 
true  Rules  of  an  Art,  which,  till  his  Time,  were  un¬ 
known,  even  to  Michael- Angelo  and  Brunellefchi  his  Con¬ 
temporaries.  The  ExaCtnefs  of  his  Defigns  can’t  -  be  too 
much  commended  :  ’Tis  pity  that  the  Authors,  who  have 
made  mention  of  him,  are  Blent  on  the  Particulars  of  his 
Life.  They  have  taken  great  Pains  in  giving  us  a  long 
Lift  of  the  fine  Buildings  wherewith  he  adorn’d  his  Coun¬ 
try,  but  to  little  purpofe ;  fince  we  have  them  drawn 
and  explain’d  by  himfelf,  in  the  fecond  and  third  Books 
of  his  ArchiteBure.  He  flourifh’d  in  the  15th  Century, 

and  dy’d  in  the  Year  1580. 

/TIA- 


U  u  u 


BOOKS 


'  :  - ll  - 


' 


'  -  * 

- 

•  • 


BOOKS  printed  for  John  Wilcox  at  Virgil^ 
Head,  oppofite  to  the  New  Church  in  the  Strand. 


A  General  Dictionary,  Hiftorical 
and  Critical,  in  which  a  New 
and  Accurate  Tranflation  of  that  of 
the  Celebrated  Mr.  Bayle ,  with  the 
Corrections  and  Obfervations  printed 
in  the  late  Edition  at  Paris,  will  be 
included;  and  interfperfed  with  fe- 
veral  thoufand  Lives  never  before 
publifhed.  The  whole  containing 
the  Pliftory  of  the  mod  illuftrious 
Perfons  of  all  Ages  and  Nations, 
particularly  thofe  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland ,  diftinguilhed  by  their 
Rank,  Actions,  Learning,  and  other 
Accomplishments :  Compiled  and 
Tranflated  by  feveral  Hands.  The 
whole  will  be  nine  Volumes  in  folio, 
i /.  ys.  per  Vol.  in  Sheets. 

The  Naval  Hiftnry  of  England 
in  all  its  Branches,  from  the  Conqueft 
in  1066,  to  1734.  Collected  from 
the  moft  approved  Hiftorians,  Eng¬ 
lish  and  Foreign,  authentick  Records 
and  Manufcripts,  fcarce  TraCts, 
original  Journals,  &c.  By  ‘Thomas 
Lediard ,  Gent.  2  vol.  fol.  1/.  ior. 

The  Life  of  John,  Duke  of 
Marlborough,  &c.  Containing  his 
Pedigree,  and  fome  Account  of  his 
private  TranfaCtions,  but  more  parti¬ 
cularly  an  exaCt  Relation  of  all  h  isglo- 
rious  Actions  in  War,  Sieges,  Battles, 
Victories,  &c.  under  his  foie  Com¬ 
mand,  or  in  Conjunction  with  feve¬ 
ral  Kings,  Princes,  Emperors,  and 
the  moft  famous  Generals  of  his 
Age,  and  their  Characters  given 
of  him ;  alfo  an  Account  of  all 
his  Treaties  and  Negociations.  Com¬ 
piled  with  the  utmoft  Impartiality, 
from  perfonal  Knowledge,  original 
Papers  and  Letters;  likevvife  com¬ 
pared  with  every  Hiftorian  of  his 
Time,  both  Englifh  and  Foreign, 
and  digefted  in  exaCt  and  regular 
Order ;  illuftrated  with  Maps,  Plans 
of  Battles,  Sieges  and  Medals.  3 
vol.  8vo.  i8r. 


A  Survey  of  Dorfetlhire,  con¬ 
taining  the  Antiquities  and  Natural 
Hiftory,  with  the  Arms  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  Families,  and  a  new  Mapp 
of  the  County.  By  the  Rev.  Mr.  Co¬ 
ker,  fol.  12  s. 

The  Koran,  commonly  called  the 
Alcoran  of  Mahomed.  Tranflated 
immediately  from  the  Arabick,with 
a  large  preliminary  Difcourfe  and 
Commentary,  with  a  new  Mapp  of 
Arabia,  and  a  View  of  the  Temple 
of  Mecca.  By  G.  Sale,  Gent.  4m.  i8r. 

Two  Chronological  Diflertations 
on  the  Birth  and  Death  of  Chrift. 
By  Nic.  Man,  Efq;  8vo.  3*.  6 d. 

Hiftorical  Account  of  Taxes  un¬ 
der  all  Denominations  foever,  from 
the  Conqueft,  to  the  Death  of  K. 
George  the  firft  ;  collected  from  the 
beft  Hiftorians,  ancient  and  modern, 
likewife  from  many  valuable  Ma¬ 
nufcripts  in  the  Cotton  and  other 
Libraries,  and  feveral  Offices  in  this 
Kingdom;  intermix’d  with  manyRe- 
markable  Occurrences  never  before 
printed.  By  Capt.  J.  Stevens,  8vo.  $s. 

The  Modern  Navigator’s  Corn- 
pleat  Tutor;  or.  Navigation  in  its 
Theory  and  PraCtice,  Utility  and 
Curiofity.  By  Jo/iah  Kelly ,  2  vol. 
8  vo.  ys. 

The  Builder’s  Sure  Guide;  or. 
Principles  of  Architecture  made 
eafy,  with  eighty  Copper-plates.  By 
B.  Langley,  4to.  12 s. 

Magnum  in  parvo ;  or,  the  Mar¬ 
row  of  Architecture:  Being  anew 
Method  of  drawing  the  Five  Or¬ 
ders  of  Columns  in  Architecture. 
By,  IV.  Halfpenny,  4 s. 

The  Builder’s  Cheft-Book ;  or,  a 
compleat  Key  to  the  five  Orders  of 
Columns  of  Architecture.  By  B. 
Langley,  2 s.  6 d. 

A  New  Treatifeof  the  Conftruc- 
tion  and  Ufe  of  the  SeCtor.  By  S.  Cun-, 
revifed  by  Ed.  Stone,  3*.  bd. 

Syftem 


BOOKS  printed  for  J.  Wilcox. 


Syftem  of  the  Planets,  demon- 
ftrated  by  Inftruments.  By  Charles 
Leadbettcr ,  T eacher  of  the  Mathe- 
maticks,  4to.  $s. 

A  Compleat  Syftem  of  Aftro- 
nomy,  2  vol.  8vo.  12J. 

Aitronomy  of  the  Satellites,  8vo. 

2S. 

Treatife  of  Eclipfes  for  35  Years, 
with  the  Tranftt  of  Venus  and  Mer¬ 
cury  over  the  Sun  for  79  Years,  and 
the  Conjunction  of  Jupiter  and  Sa¬ 
turn  for  120  Years,  8vo.  2 s. 

A  Demonftration  of  the  Equation 
of  Time,  with  new  Aftronomical 
Tables,  from  Dr.  Hally ,  &c.  8vo. 
6s. 

A  Defcription  of  Gunter's  Qua¬ 
drant,  the  two  Foot  Rule,  Ring 
Dial,  &c.  a  very  ufeful  Book,  is. 
Thefe  fix  by  Mr.  Leadbetter. 

The  Bifhop  of  Cambray's  Tales 
and  Fables,  French  and  Englijh ,  for 
the  Ufe  of  Schools,  3J. 

Holders  Treatife  of  Harmony, 
with  Keller's  Rules  to  play  and  tunc 
the  Harpfichord,  3*.  6 d. 

Le  Fraud's  Parallel  of  the  diffe¬ 
rent  manner  of  extrading  the  Stone 
out  of  the  Bladder,  with  Cuts. 

Boerhaave's  Treatife  of  the  Force 
and  Energy  of  Medicines,  4 s. 

A  Natural  and  Medicinal  Account 
of  Worms,  bred  in  the  Bodies  of 
Men  and  other  Animals  j  taken  from 
the  Authorities  and  Obfervations  of 
all  Authors  who  have  treated  there¬ 
of,  from  Hippocrates  to  this  Time, 
with  proper  Remedies  to  deftroy 
them:  Very  ufeful  for  Families,  and 
illuftrated  with  copper  Cuts.  By 
M.  Le  Clerc.  8vo.  41. 

The  young  Analyft’s  Exercife  ; 
being  a  Collection  of  an  hundred 
Algebraical  Problems,  exhibiting  all 
that  is  Curious  in  Simple  and  Qua- 


dratick  AdfeCted  Equations,  calcu¬ 
lated  for  young  Beginners.  By  Sam: 
Afiby,  Teacher  of  the  Mathema- 
ticks,  i2mo.  2 s. 

An  Hiftorical  Account  of  London 
Bridge,  with  a  Propofition  for  a  new 
Stone  Bridge  at  Wejimtnjler  ;  alfb  an 
Account  of  fome  remarkable  Stone 
Bridges  Abroad,  and  what  the  befi: 
Authors  have  faid  and  directed  con¬ 
cerning  the  Methods  of  Building 
them  ;  with  feveral  Plans  engrav’d 
on  Copper.  By  Nicholas  Haw kj moor t 
Efq-,4to.  3*. 

Hiftory  of  Poland  under  Auguflus 
II.  2  vol.  8s. 

The  Amorous  Adventures  and  In¬ 
trigues  of  Frederick  Augujlus  II. 
late  King  of  Poland:  Containing 
many  TranfaCtions  of  his  Life  not 
mentioned  in  any  other  Hiftory, 
with  diverting  Remarks  on  the  La¬ 
dies  of  feveral  Countries  thro’  which 
he  travelled,  8vo.  2 s.  6 d. 

Oeuvres  d ’Horace  par  Dacier, 
with  Bent  ley' SyCunningham's ,  and  Sa¬ 
na  don's  Notes  and  Emendations,  Lat. 
and  Fren.  4  vol.  in  4to.  1/.  8s. 

■ - The  fame  Book  in  10  vol. 

in  i2mo.  1  /.  3J. 

Le  Comedies  de  Terence,  Lat.  & 
Fren.  avec  les  Remarques  de  Mad. 
Dacier.  Augmentee  des  Differentes 
Let^ons  de  M.  Bentlei,  de  Donat,  de 
Fearn,  &  d’autres,  avec  fig.  3  vol. 

1 2  mo.  gs. 

Avantures  de  Telemaque  Fils 
d’Ulyfie,  par  1’Archevelque  de  Cam- 
bray,  with  Cuts.  i2mo.  3 s. 

Fables  Choifies,  miles  en  Vers  par 
M.  de  la  Fontaine.  i2mo.  2 s. 

Contes  de  la  Fontaine,  i2mo  2 s. 

The  Common  Prayer  in  Italian , 
alfo  in  French  with  all  forts  of 
School  Books  in  Latin,  French ,  6sc. 
very  cheap. 


A .  AA////Ayj  myiyAy  of'&rtcAj .  B  afAAlncAj  /Am/  A/mcA  ?/  n^/ur/e 

A/;YfA/ .  C .AAAm  /lY/cm/rAX)  .  AA/yy^yJ  o/YAj/'/ycAj  /A/yyyy/y/Ay  /y 
<?/' /Ate  AAAyiAA.  E .  A/A/yAyAAy  y>/  /Ay  AIWA ///yyyAy  AAttzyyz^ 


E  .  AbiYr^YJ  yyYAAAyAyAj  //m/  A////yA  /Ay  AAAAA  SA /A7iy  tnmr ^Y/r/  /f'j/  AAAyiAA 
yhyiyAy  ojA  AAm&n/,  Ar/mee^  /A&jetr&niA  AAu/'Jyj,  Sc  /Ay  yyzy/yz  u/rcA  A3 r/ r A.  i . 


/m 


Ji. 


foieJUi/p 


P .  77 zz/7 ^/zzco/ Ti'/WJ/ozio .  Q .  fro/?  7nno//iy  frzim&t  o/'J/orz& .  R .  fr/j?rd 
////a/  nfrA  JfoneJ  <fc  7/o^A. 


jB  .  COe  J&dfi 


VT 


^.(frfro/v  Tuo/ eo/f&may .N .  frnmo?7//ar£ o///iey  7l?a/7,  O  .  //act  qfj/io 
Wo/7  /As  /7/oozfr  7cc?ty  SoAo/z  oou/y . 


VTT 


) 


.V/vJ/vr;/ 


45 


^Uc 


C,  B7u  Taint  of1  t/ie  unde r  t/ie  tirf/arinc  . 


\7tnuc/v 


^tU>.  l\~4ti/,72. 


^'tto 


4 

l  4:  K 


.. 


*:  _ 


rx;  r 

i  i  . ... 


.  ; 


j 


n  v 


T 


. r 


! 


* 

»  • 


li 


f  ?  ! 


y 


'  i  ' .  1 


-  •• 


MS,  SIT  '  *. 


,  -  .  .  1... 


. 


iBSiBaM 


r.i.iitB 


X*-39 


VI 


M  ■  t>/.'  J’n/  '//  . 


■\ 


I  - 


"  ,\  \  '  v,  •  .V  v  v '  ■  ' 


— 


I 


% 


/ 


I 


[  I 


/ 


! 


-/ 


i  i 


...i. _ 


J3 . 


B.Cot 5?  ^  • 


4i 


XIV 


4 


4 


\ 


# 


J> .  C&lt  ■ 


\ 


ul- 


/ 


M 


srs. 


^44 


b 

ID 


Q\ 

<71 


A 


KJ 


Kj 


*5 


If 


J"i 


( 

- B - 

‘) 

( _ 

C 

- r 

J 

D 

c 

J-i - 

E 

*5 


ti 

-$-r 

Tlf 

4/ 

:-*. 


•M* 


*«s 

"W 


ZU 

ih 


'&£. f 

L 


l-W+fH-H-44- 


...'!■ 


5J 

m 


+ - 1 


24 


^.Cs# 

C« 


**v> 


. -2/-^ 


/ 


^u. 


w>\f 


H 

■<1- 

/ 

*<s 

« 

<*  ■  -  - T* 

n- 

<X 

ISXI 


Tag .  .fj 


ML 


LML 


nn 


^^7  2  # 


-^<?  Z  £ 


.3 ,  TateJat/p  ■ 


TOOL 


•  . 


' 


V 


/ 


./ 


i 

; 


t  i 


■ 


i 


•  ,y 


X 


^Uc .  t . 2-4 


’V 


3.  CoJc  )aUp  ■ 


A?  4-f 


B  CcrU  Se 


/ 


/ 


« 


1 


•i  r--;*' 


.  i 


x 


♦ 


\ 


* 


•  ■»  •  *  . . . 


* 


XXVIII 


1 


\ 


/ 


/ 


/ 


t 

/ 

/ 


/ 


XXX 


llwfB 


iHH 


- 


XXXI 


Fag:  fry 


YT*****+&++* 


j 

1 

gg] 

F  CoU,  yfcuif) 


( 


S' 


CZui/wiey  fiece  U' w/rfi  i&  ^rqfiZe  ,  i /limney I*e^&atJlu:/im/nul . 


^i7 


i 


i 

\ 


I 


•  MKYSX 


- 


■  :'V''  . V  ;  >  .  ; X; 

■ ! 


t: 


1 


'  f 


\ 


\ 


• 


~ 

'  ; 


r 


Thi  Jesond  Baok 


/"  i  Jiopp  cor  D  eiuv 


B  .dU.iJhU/r 


*sj5f; 


. 


» 


»;  —  ■  -  -  r—V-  V 


.  .  .  . 


' 


-  -  -  -  "  ■  w,« 


\  ; 


r-n 


> 


.vopuur;, 


ijini  aii  f<l  S'Ti  .f-J!  Earn  y.  mgijj  ar.tr  am m  aing-'J!  Effi  kiq  ssjf  Km  earn  i  js  i:  »ni  snr  5® 


ft?™? 


I 


V 


A  <*> 


'/enooi&fv 


mm* . .  J'e^t 

jo  So 


F.  deUfV. 


S  ■  Cy/r  Jf/t/.p . 


tiooojf  8L^</  //-? 


p 

0-2 


VJI 


£ -.ttppziJ  dc/M. 


•  Av 


V 


< 


■ 


•••«**  *  (•  - 


w  •  f"  t  l-> 

'.'■fey 


*-  : : 

.  ■  v. 


t  •  1  , v 


n* 


el 


•  ‘  ^  vr  : 


l  • 

■ 


1- 


,  i. 


vi1.  S'  >v. 


;n  . 


.» •••  ■ ' 


: .if  ■  ki 


.  ...  '  -  '  ! 

l  •  ,  .?t  i  ...  ! 


■■■'  ■  *  4  : 

.a. 


t , 


‘  ■>  4 


I 


IX 


S.  Jca/jV 


T&mZtarv 


'  //  s; 


-B  ■  fjjte  jc 


S'- 


<1 


\  ■  Y 

■  iJ 


•  > 

i  • 


:  ,f 

i 


i  <i: 


i 


I 

: 


/.  2  ''  sn 


S  • 


i 

! 


/5* ,  m:  . 


i 


XET. 


.  -n-Offiruj  de/i/v. 


£  ■  Midp  ■ 


I'e-mlian, 


F&ed. 


A,. 


3. 


-E  ■  -Hap  p  uj  d  c/ , 


-B .  Ccrie 


JctUp  ■ 


•I-  ■ 


XVTt 


,  ’i. 


;r -i.  !>«■•'•  i  ’  •»  •  •:». 


-  -r  '•<{•  *rr  ^  --jr'  • 

‘ 


. 

8 


■ 

. 


V 

J 


- 


«*?'.  f :  ;V. 

.  •  -  V  -•  !" 

-  ;f 

: 


'  I ' 


\  I 


i  •. 


xrrn 


Jl .  Ctt/t  JcuJp  ■ 


22  •  de/trt . 


if 


XIX 


-EJJoppus .  D  dm 


zi/ 


,v-y  ?%»*  • 


'-r  ' 


-  •  '  ■  *  ■ 


*  • 

r-  ■ 

.  :  t  '  »:l  ■  «  :*•  f . 

‘  •  tjf  *! '  -  <•.■>»•  v  i#  -  P*  * 


».** 

■ 


HWS||| 


.  .  ?•»  -  •'*.■  *«!•:.  ;■  i  5ft  . 

tpiH  j'  -  ••'•  • 


*  •  ■  -  i 

•  •  }  :\t%  'i  ■  1 

••  i ; C  r"‘r 


.  r  ,  $ .  . ; 

I.?  (i,  .;S$v«  .  6-  -  f.  .  I 


4  ia  i; 

1  I  ’  8  •!  J 


-  ^V"V 

i»  • 

i  X* 

J  r-v 


r;rr--  r---  _ -%  V  — u; 


'  '  5  - 

'  . ;  v.--  .r- .*  r_ 

'  T  Ssiki.,  .  r'.i 


"iT  *«»«■« 

ft-'.  ’ 


?<  •> 

i  * 


.  1 


•  -  ... 

V  ~ 


a  I  •; 

>  :I  I 


ii 


3  M  O  ?;  .  «  «.'  _  .  ^  A'  i 

<«  ■ 


.  ;•  u 

i.  » . 

n 


<y 


r 


?*■> 


h 


t- 


Ki 


.«• . 

St; 

6  if 


i,U 


c  . 


:  "  •  ••--  ■ 
1  J 


.v-i: 
f  » 


5 

1 

:'f 

3 


i. 

< 

r 


w 


K 

t. 


u  i.  t 


•3,-si*  i.  .  .  .*-i'  _  -  ♦ e  fl-j 


•  —  ■« 

.. 


't 


ji — 


3 


j  c*  -  t_  X — . 


t  )  *! 


V  U  >  g 


;.r  : 


r 


* 


•  ■  »#  <  i* 


r!  "  "  h  i  f  ■.  ;  f  =  j 

...  .  .,  ■  .  ....  ..... 


y  t 


;,t  K  *.<*•£*, 


\  u  '•  v  ■ 


21  Colt.^aUp. 


XX 


'  -  ‘ 


— • — — 


* 


— — 


J3 .  d> 'U.  l  fatty 


— , — 


/em6bn 


*Iji=b 

iri 

B  is  «j 

pr^f 

= 

. -’ll 

t . iyi| 

■ 

!  if  |  j 

I 

1 

I 

V 


^  Jfopfus  DtJjsi 


1  '<:■  inn  i  ■  ■  tiii'H Jill 

■ 

Mi  fiTitri  i  t  rr  mrTrTrrffTT 

‘i  nim  milillii  i  tin  1 1 1 1 1 1 1  ii'n  ii ! 

i|j|  1&M 

i  '  - 

'  ;r  - 

1 

] 

I 

SIMS 

% 


-  / r:y  ' •  * i:. 4  -/ . J/  JLv.v: :  v:  .w.v; nrf.r  \  .v:  v.;; >J-J.  f.  xv.:  ■  /  '  V-F. ” *-> 


m, .  x 


r  f  *•;  f  .  t  T*  -  "V 


"t:  h 
=  . 


.  :  r--S}\  1  '  ';i  ;- 

lU-  .  *  •  .-V,; 


~i.-v  •  -. 


f>  *1  k  -  -  -at***-., 

j:*ca  i;ti.ir..l^  :.~i^.±.  i  i  .r~.  ; :  ■ .  i*<  -  • ' 

•  -•  ;  •  •  _ 

r  r-rr.-  y_ ..  ':  —•  •  ••»  m-  ••  •  V.  •>  ' 

-  j^^^^^^^n-nnnTtninTT-fir-frripn-  *•*  &  ' 

•-•■.  •.!■}■*«  *i  >•  "•  ’  **  If”  ‘ 


> 

4b| f4 ,  i- » <i.t  ‘  . :  <• 

r&?‘  '  t  y  ■  •  ■•■■■  I 

i-  - 

i  ! 

mMmrn 


o-  '4"; 

'  • v  *  ’ .  ;  •■ 


••*?•-«•  ^r  ^jf  .v;^  ,  .  :  ?  ;a*  ■v/SVI  ^-  ^i)c  n*«  .  y  • 

-• 

i  '  ■ 

{,'•?•  ,  L,  .  \  ;■  ;*  ‘  -  t‘'My  '  *St>  ,'.■  .• 

'  i' 

•  :  ; 

■•  -*•■  -•••-  •  ■  l!}  v-'  •  -  . V  '!•  "***•*  * 


I 


•  t 


V 


4  «•••> 

i*lp  ;V; 


i  t’.'.  ■■  •  .  r‘  ; 


t‘T. 


, " ; :  i  -f 


-  - 

.  -•>  • .  *.*ii%  *£§  f  ,:  *  j 

1$  *  t  ■  '  *  ■.'*“*  i 


)k 


' '  M ; 


n 


■’■  t  A> 


■•••?.  rti K-i- 
\  '  t 


. '.  ifg- 


in 


kvf 


£* 


&-■  • .  *' 


i* 


.*t 


XXV 


til 


■?  v 

•  - 

!•  •’ 


^  ' .  > 

. 

...  ■  ■  .Ti  ,  .■ 


-  ,  ‘  7 

- 


•  i  :  ■  ' 


'  . 

■  ^  IK- 


fc'i »» 


t  .  ■ 


r 

s 


j 

< 


’ 


« 


i 


_Z7  Hoppus  Ddw 


B,  IbU.j'aUp  , 


E  Ffcppus  DcOn  —  £  ■  Cole-Jculp. 


I 

) 

i 


j 


I 


.  AN 


-E  Hop/iut  D  dint 


2?  Colt  SoUp 


V 


B.Hoppu/.Deim . 


J3-  CoU'Jcul/i 


XXXI 


6-  2 


xxxn 


J?.  JTj/i/uts  . 


.3.  iy/s  /Itifyi  , 


t 


s’ 2  xxxm 


E.  uj  J)e/ ( n  . 


.  SI*/*  <Au/f  • 


XXXIV 


— '  •  c  ^SCU/Tl  , 


-5.  Grfe  Jcu^l . 


A .  iTojifuu  7)d{sn 


CM* 


xxx  vm 


6-2 


J2  •  7/ 0/ i fiuj  , 


J? .  i 


r 

_ _ XXXIX 


7B.  &&  . 


i 


‘\l'{ 


miv 

*  f  v* 


*»?£ 


j 

-«s. 


% 


1.5  L 


«23^*SC>*~  it..  . 


•  *y'»  )-»w  -*  - 

■  i. .  ~»-  V  ijuAs  '  ‘ 

1.*  '  -.v  Lr, 


«r> 

ffi  1  Si  £ 


■SSi^fB 


. 

»  i  t  1  1 

v  i)  -•  ? :  j_  ™  *  f  ■ 


*m<  .>  Ms  >■. ■  Ji  'ftf&Jfc  ■'■*-, 

. it *L  . .  4fc 

:  .1-  a  ■ :  iF  i  - 


If 

ir— '• :- 


t 


-ia 


}■ 

1 . .  . 


. :  s  ■ 


S' 


L 


,;  J 


Tf 


V 


'■ 


;■  ru-!1;  jv  *.  k>  •.  r  r 

1  i\  «  i  :  1  ■ 

*  *  *  A 


*  *1  •  f 


fej 

fi .« 


V 


f  -  ,  w** ' 

<•  -— - *----'  W4l~ 


.  V  **  -- *  •  .  -x-4^.  «.  .J  I  .. 

1 '  -  •  ~r4**.-» 


V» 


*i\  -  >  .  ili«rL 


— 


>9 .  t/v4^ , 


I 


/•: 


xlh 


.  •  JELyifiuJ  J)e/ni 


J9.  {Zrfe  Jcu/pi. 


/ 


* 


XL1V 


) 


XLV 


*  i 


XXVI 


Ffoppus  Delm 


S  Co  Or 


XLMI 


J3.  Cc-ie  •  /* cu/'r 


% 


/ 


XLV1U 


p 


\ 


m  eif^p  wi 
I*  tS  ® 
^  © 

&  f^l 

D"  | 

1  \ 

i  o| 

&  ^  A_ 

I 


/l  .  ZfiTft/uu  jOe/cn  . 


Orie  Scu/y  z  . 


s/f  2 


L 


> 


fi  ■  //j/i/ius  _2?etin 


/S .  Cc-£e  S  . 


« 


.1  k 


I 


v 


•  ' 


X  '  :n* 


'■m 


"  *.  "•  a---  .if 


m 


■ 


'  -  ■  - 


V  J 


ribs. 


•  h  «L 


'!•  i'v/.Vv 


-8.tilc.Jhdp 


1 

1 

[ 

, 

\ -e-st  .  iKjRjhi. . 


*©  J<rn 


£  .JZlyyius  JJc/itL . 


&r/<*  S'cu,  tfi . 


IV 


c  *- 


i.,  * 
1 


■  ;  '  '■  ;  5 

^  •  •  ••  ^  ~ 

' 

.  4 !  »  >.  *.  •  •  "«  ;  '•  *  ; 

■ 

:  .  -  .J  rr.-.r: 

•  -  »  r  •-  J.  IVi-l  •  r  i  » A  .  -  il  •.  i  ' 

* '  •  ,  -  - 

,  lj  ’  :  ■  -ii  H- 


■  1  u 


??■ 


->  J. 


;rB-  -- 

. 

v 


,  4  - 

-  i  -  l  ■ 

t. 

&:$•  <iW. 


i£S' 


LVH 


••••*  *  *1 


:  t:-  *. 


-V 


\ 


>  rlW  '  »V.  •  >; 


1 


4 


I 


4 


% 


f  p  —  «^al  •  r  .  ^  * 


i 


1 


J/J 


-7,.  tfefi/nu  £)e/m 


73  fr/e  •f’ctiZ/r 


}/. 


iff 

•  u  •  * 


V:.  j:.'  .  r  "  -i 

•  ;  »  '  - 

- 

.  a#'-  -t.  »«.' ■ .  * »  *  -<-*-»  • 

•  *  :  aa  ” *  y  .  -w  •  V*  f  •  •  t  - 


.  :  ^  2*  /•  • 


rip1' 

h 


r  -5  ••  .  - 

U  i'-'T  ; 


'-•111-'  ?■ 


;  >>  - . 


,  v  ?  r 


hi  : 


■ri 


•wu* 


in 


vm 


i  iv  . 


r 


„  «- 
* 


A, 


. 

.  VA  - 

;i  _ 


-  W  A-  *■ 


w-  • 

i  .«<)  *Ut 


»«J 


-  ■ -  ■ 

■  i  1  *  ,  A- 


*  X 

'■  %  •:<?.;  i  i 

4-  :v  i;  i 

•  •  : 

;  ;  A'  •-!  > 

,4!--  >* 


■ 

'•f. 


.  :  ;'!  i*rf 

■i'r  v  »«  .  ,  j f • 

- 

•  -  {  a  jj 


\  ‘  4 


'/  f  i!  • '  ( 

' 


4  -  *  • 


>  s. 

« 


A 


) 


t 


T'enetwn  feet 


S  -io 


■DirmnuinnirDmumuiiiiiiimuu 


5o 


r 


a 


i  mtmrn 


.... 


•.  . 

*'<»►./  •  *  - 


■  *  ’  :  -  -  .  ■  r  " 

'  '  <v-  *  .’*1  *  •  •" 

. .  •  ■ 

t  v  '  '  ««****  Mr  r^vv.'C  ; 

■  •  '  ‘  -  i 


t  *•  1 

■  • 


a 


J 


t 


\ 


UMod-ffJd*  £ -Mod  i  $  Mod  k  JO  M~od 


XTV 


9 

S  CoU  djujf) 


5  ModuU 


*-  •  •  ! 


F: 

.•  -•  - 


i  . 


■ .  t  > 


■  i*  ■  :,••■  •;  ;  £  •.  ■ 


•:  ‘ 


I  .  r  ’  i. 


'i.  si- 


: 


Ifl 


ir 


:  /:  , 

V 


?:  r 

■ 

!  i  l . 


V'-'L.u'M? 


*  i ; 


! 


w  i 


w 

.  ir 


{■•• 


i 


\r. 


•  i! 

*  iifi 


9 


,  m 


■  •  •  ^ 


*  •  ’  C’t..  ~ c-*  “•  *•  •  ■ 


’  ‘f:  *  '#$$$  '  S$V  j;I 

J  .  .r.  •  .  ":i  ’•  '  |  - 


■  -  ■ . . 


■  ■  » 


-«  i  ;t4  •  Jfrtt  ;  * 

' 


■  r  </ 


•  •  *; 


■  <  » 


ft! 


\aV 


tV 


-as* 


■  5,  '  -3  " .  : 

-  *  r-.  1 

'  '  i/M'i’i*!*.  l|ji :  f ;  r  .  ,  ? 

,'.t  .  ‘  u  ...  :_v  .*<  &*  V  feE  :':[ 

*  ' .  ~  :  /fT.tfi  ‘  -  i 


:C-.r 

t-  ^Ai 


rT 

.  ■  : 


fe4 


*  •  fr  . 


i*  fit 

t  x  • 


m 


13,; 


1 


"  .'  i,  r 

Sr  '  «  *!*' 


.  v;  •»  : 


:/■'  i*  . 


'“"4 


.  Jt  . 


I*’2*; 


*  -.'i-.ri: 


•  l  •  '  '  '  ’>  .  . 


iss,  rrt  jmf*  T.psr/' 


" 


f-A 


..  1 


■ . i  k*.  ••  .  t,.  u 


■  \  . 

k/ 


3  -ft  _ 

• 


a 


,  < 


<f 


-V  '  ,,  V  ‘  -  p  — / 

;  »>  P  i  ] 

■  '  "•  •(  l  :  '  '3 


1.3 


>/ 


! 


1 


1. 


f  j  Ki  \iM  ■  IM 

-  i-;  f  *  ‘k,  *  •  •  ’ '  ••  -rrr  •  i  — ! 

i.  •  *.  rkL.-'?  ,tU  .r  ILl.:*..  ) 


-■ 


!  - 


if  .  r  VX '  v;r\Pii:-P 


.  .fe  - 

F  -  ■'■ 
p  i-'-  i 

;v>.L 


r< 


Ti 


•? 


p  • 


•r  i 


: '  i 


t'tA 

fi 


i  >• 


j-:  —i> 


•Mr-.*- 
.  ....  ~v 


S' » 


.  OftM 


n.^^  v.W  V\  | 


/ 


xvn 


■AaaMa 


jB 


JJo/jpus£)flcn  ■ 


A 


J1  > 


7 


I 


*~1 

» 

:  I 


!•; 


v 


t  .•  *  - 


j 

l 


r 


£  Jfoppus  De/ui 


JB  CoU  JTm^> 


’■jfipw* 


XIX 


-E2  Hop  pus  De/in 


J9 


XX 


\ 


£  JIaf/j  us  DzCsz 


CB  Cote  Sutef) 


1 XX 


f  r  • 

p 


:K 


.•  {■■%■;  m  , 

■  4 


i+ 

IV- 


■ 

. 

'  ■  ■  •  ■  ■  -■  ■  •,  •  -•  ■  .  • 

. 

.  ..  ;  .  "--'"'I  "'•  *?  -  t  •  •’  ■  V 

'  ‘  .  •*  ,  r  -  it,  .  i  '  .  »  7  \  •  .  '  .  ,  ..*ji  . 


Httfci? 


hi  •  " 
\  • ..  1 


x : 


•,tr 


■,  _  T“  * '  r  1  JKfc  J  t  ••*;  .  -  si  '  .  ;  . 


:  .  .  ,  *  : 


r» ^  •  ‘if;  : 

i  •  £>.  ■  •  •  -  -  -  .‘ij 

•  ■  .--ll'.  tJS 


v  15 'h  ' 

=  •  .  .v,  . (:•»•■  '  1*; 

ii  ■  v  ■  X? 

/  •  'S'  £-*»*  »' 

- 

i  <  -i'  t  *  ■ 


X 

l 


;  ■  :r-  ...  ; 
.-  -r  .  ■  ■  '  ■ 

.  .  ......  ‘  - 

jSf  .  "S'}  ",  - 


■*  -  r  • 

I,  :  I 

1  ii 


'•I  ' 

•}< 

j- 

.i. 


•  l/i  . 

■  ’  i. 


' 


I 


xxrr 


tJu  i '  •  h 


4- 


I 


Jcale  of  Sanction  S/cct~ 


J 

2 

-f 

dddcct 

,  ;  . . .  . . a. . . 

. IlMllF  -— rr1— 

.  ,  , 

* 

3 

1* 

2l7 

■24  parti 

divided  into  2/  par  to 

J 


joo  J-'oot 


U .  £oU .  s^Cutf 


) 


6  2  Foot  6  Inches 


■ 


«■  '  -c 


' 


I  : 


t  .  “i  4jt 

}  •  =>  I 

•  Mi 

■ 


' 

'  ■  Ji 

■ 

'  £■  .  '  ,  uu.. 


I, 


*•  ^T: 


\ 


'  f *-f  j 


K 
9 4 


M 


•  * 


T  ?! 


■  i 


,  1 


1  •  -  f  ■ 


••  • 

»  - 1  •  •  *  .  •'■wB? 


l 

»•? 


1* 


-£-  Hop  pus  De/vi 


£  uu  osiup 


jsifwj-  gi oo j  or 


B.  tifa  jadp. 


-i—i  -i  tS/J/JUJ,  JSctf/7  0 


J?  foie  jlul/} 


<?1  Foot  t  inches 


1 

' 

I 


■  vi.  . 


1 


IX 


5 


) 


I 


'  ( 


Jl-  JJc/ip us  Deh/r. 


S  Cole  JitUp 


J 


1  ■'  < 


*  is 


*  -  • 


M 


- 


v-\ 


>r.-Tfr.-w»'v<r<Wry*  -  .f  ...  ,  .  ., 

r  ^ 


TT  - 

I*  n 


4  ♦'  «"»*  • 


•  -  *  •  -  -f»  ‘  — \  ?  --  •>  r  f  *r  r  t  - 

’  '-r  -  - >' - ? •  ,  -  ■  .r.: 

. 


"  -  .  is  ■■ 


. 


7  •  •• 


i~  . :  i 

V  .  \  ^ 


••■• f  •  7 

\  T5.1'  '  ••'■>•>  , 

, .  •■' 

<*&■}:  ' 

:.u 


•  ;  %  !• .  - 


ly 

- 


•***,  -T'i- " 


1 


. 

- 


» 


s 


K  Uoapus.  De/in  . 


* 


XV . 


V  * 


•  -  i.  v  •  • 


y:.rfw£». 

.  -  ■  .  -=■  •  ■  v  .■  -  **- 


V; 


w  W  . 

* 


- 


*  j.f  &; 

•  .  .  V 


■ 


;  ' 


:  •  •  r  ■ 


.  f,  ■ 

■ 


. 

' 

. 

-*  ■£*  ' 

*;•  '  <  ...  ,  ? 

y 

1 

.  -  *,  ^  i  >< 

•• 

. 

.-  ■ 

.  *» 

y ' 

- 

- 

'  >  •'! 

-*  • 

*(•'4 

V/  •  $r 

< 

,  ►,<  ‘  %  4 

-r*.  •+■*  *  •«  -»• 


■ 

V  . 

.  -  •••:-  '  ■ 

•  ; 

. 

* 

... 

'  -  - 


,  T  '  -  .1 


r  ,  -'vt.  • 

••  z: 


•  -  •  ff  4  •'  *7^  r*T 

S-fchfr 


•  r-'l.-J'.  *i 


.  A  .5  ' 


fl 

35S  slfi'l' 

-  - 


XVI 


JB  CoU  Jlu/f) 


) 


:  ♦**» 


J/  7* oct-  J  J/ukcs  .  .  • .  . 

. Tile . r .  . f7  '^si  3X 


x\u . 


XVTH. 


JL.Hcp/nu.-Dcdn  . 


< 


f*- 


V 


XX  JL 


-  * 


XXTV 


0.4- 


•2  Feet  o- 1 


_p . 

;  i 


J.O 

1 

V 

* 

w 

mi 

./>.  Scujjfl  . 


XXVI  . 


WTO.lfTO 


iMWttyB 


'mMMMaMl! 


■rib 


jff  WWW.itfwrm  h% 


ftVifwwrrf, 


Uif  vir  nr^t  I't  Krm  ¥: 


x$cvn 


S  Cote  JciUp 


) 


' 


•  ' 

I 

I 

'  . 


yxvm 


%  * 


s'r  -f 


0-  + 


C.;.. 


L. 


HI  IJoppus  De/in 


rxx 


-  -  ■<  ...  . , 


■  vkj. 


A ' 


;  Ha 


t':’  -  J.t.’U.  .  '  ■ 

«.  i  -M t  -u;  .. 

;  :  i  J  ■  :■ 

• : .  ,  '  •  y  <■;  w.  •'* 

■  ■  * 

syi 


*  VI 


-  ;  i? 


"  i  ! 


- 


'  ;  •  -■ 


£ 


%'rli 

!i 


^  V 


■  f; 


•  ;• 


Jr’"  ' 

: 

•f.,‘  ; 

'  vrr.  ><•  .  . 


SL"--frr»,j  -•  %»  »  -T  /  . 


•vW«* 


.u;rr 

•  *>-,:>  •  •  •  •  .  I  r 

& 


"  •  -  .'■■*  •  •  *>•  '•  ,  tt  t  '  I 

‘  ' 


ii  &? 

f  ?  r‘ 

‘  *Lf 


iff  • 


# 


!}V  «*!<»••  •  ;'T-'  -  IV:  i!.-  .'y^aji.  -  i 

.Jr  f  '  •  ij;  -  -  -’r  •  •  •  f 

-  -  -  ■  r  t  t-  lii.'  .  !  -  .  -  — t.  —J,-.  -i-  •«  -  -  -V  .  —  ,  .  .  .  .  •  -  •  ■  -  , 


* —  j.~  ..... :  i  - . 
“  •■?  ?v*r  r  -  ■ 


‘  L* 


\ 


•  1  !  1  I 

I  I  !  1 


I'll* 


* 

:  \ 


XXXI 


C HjQpus.HeluT. 


_B .Colt .  fcuJfi 


. . . . j . IT- 


^  . 


X  / 


r 


• 

.■ 

.  *  -  : 


>5' ■ ,  ,M  ,1 


r 

. 


■  i  ^ .  i 


/  - 


* 


.  r  . 

X!'  ■ 


t .  .  ■  •. 


• 


.  J3  f 4.  ; 


,'r-,  .  -  v;  .  -  4<  I 


>• 


i 


•  •  *  • 


- - 


1  ;  .= 

\ 


.  .  hi 

■  ■■’rr 


xxxir 


E  Hcppuf-DtEn, 


/ 


If-. 


4  ™ 


!l  />;X 


mrw  -r 


.  -  rifiETn 


..ilUi 

U  ||| 


*r : 


?<■  : 

-•  r  -I  :  *-  . 


* 


■  * 


111*  ; 

•It: 


■-  ; 

i 


' 


V  *  l!  C .  i  •  /  J*  .  l!* 

r  '= ;  j. ,  * .  $  -  »• 


•  ‘H  q 


*r 


- 


•  ■:  f*r~*5'*  <■■ 


V  ■  - 


Mh  ■  : 

U>: 

3-  -  j  ■'••*■ . 


t 


•~i 


»  t  Hr-.**  .  . 


-Kii  ' :  T 

W&C 

4i 


\  .h  .  .  ‘ 


I  V*.  » 


lift 


if. 


•■■»/•=:  -  ' 
t»~  *>  6 


'  •*: 


*tt?  = 


Kvr**’^5'* 


i  ' 


— * — 


7Z  TH*  lir  1  *  *'A 


XXXKL. 


'-E,  Jirapjnu  JXelms. 


Ji.  C&1&  cfc  'p 


■  ... 

- 


V 


hi  < 


-ZD  JIoppuj'  UeJn 


S  CfU  Ji> u/p 


I 


' 


\ 


I 


A 


- 


I 


I 


XXXIX 


jijuiimiiiijiinmjjUiiiM 


i 

I 

i 


i 


E.  Hopu/j  ])elm 


E.  Cote  Sculp.* 


\ 


f ' 


% 


«  • 


XL  . 


r 


/ 


% 


XL.  I 


-E  HoppUS  JJciitX 


S  Cole  SUtXp 


XLn 


E>  Hip p  us  D  elm 


CoU  /culp 


.  .  ... 


J 


f 

.  -■** 


V 


XL  Ill- 


J£,  Hoppus  Selin  . 


I 

II 


S  Cote  Sculp 


1? Y  HulT .  -—t-fo-ojr  ?tj 


xliv  . 


F  HoppusFelCn 


■F  Cole  Sculp 


*  -JL  i  *S 


✓ 


1  j  . '  '  , 

i 

I 

t  .  - 

i  r 

-  - 


l 


i 


XLV. 


) 


.rV  •  i  - 


.'V.V  v 


K,  Hcnpus.  Delia 


iS.  iole.jZuJf 


•  • 

. 


f  ■/**.’  ... 


4v 


■ 


; 

■  •>  <  ’  ' 


.  -  ■  H^Ti' < 

;J  V?  vK-t 


. 


. 

-II 


. 


:  .  ,  •-  ■  ; 

: 


.=  f 


r 


$:  -  ■ 


i 


i 


i . 


« 


\ 


2)ck*t . 


r 


v 


Ir 


J 


I 


‘  L  1 


* 


i 


4 


f  f 


5 


V 


’ 


I 


l 


0 


0 


P  u'k  .jcu/f 


- U  -  r, 


E .  Mojifuuf  -De/irv 


J  Ebzrg-  S  Jn<A.  G&.  iir/e.  Scu/fi . 


V\>7\*  J3*  3°  )7\  M-v'd  Wji 


-2T.  J)eun  . 


LIV 


Deiuv 


XV 


loojlt  f'tf  n  . Ittf'#..?. 


S3  Foot 


*is 


- 


T- 


Lvnr 


-  zz 


I . 

fi 

*: .  ?  ’  Lax. 


B.Co-b  SciUp 


2? .TlefifutJ  delcn, : 


% 


:  : 


, 


?“s 


m  ■  i  - 


'.r 


- 


v 


■:  -  .'  ••  !^r-  ■■ 

i 

*  ••■•  i.-w 


>'  Wi',  ;  J 


! 

•  .  -  '  j  *-'*#}  ^  ■■ '  r-hs 

'  ;  ;- 


«« 


...  .  M  • 


i 


‘ 


1  . 

— '  r  ;m  . 

***'•'*  -  ..»»  , 

✓ 

;  s 

, 

';*■  ' 

' 

' 

•  * 

>.  •  »  7 

•  ■  ...  ...  , 

1 

*  •  ;  •  -  '  • 

• 

. 

• 

>'  •  .  .  .  - 


■ 


. 

.• "  urir, 

... 


!  ' 


'  X 


*: 


ij;  • 


|. 


<• 


J  t 


:  ' 

■  v  '  i 


. 


.  £<r/e ,  * 


IZI  Fact 


LXI 


JEJ  Foppus  Detia 


F  Cole  Sculp 


!/,  I 


I 

i 


> 

I- 


f 

i  • 


-l 


WwM» 


K  3  Fapt  -t  *" 


E us  Z)e/<n 


S3 ’.  Ms.  S 'c*t//L 


■r.,  Tii.-inmiMii  immugmimiyimmr  r  •«  ij..',  ....  ~n.ii.il  . . .  . . . . . . . . nw-nm 

3#fwt-  g  /ncA  . -  - . ■*■  —  — s>  jy.  ./!*•-■'- . ji  Jrtrt-SIn  . 


‘.ii/r 


y. ; , : 


Ts 


.  ■»  *  sj;  ; 


i  ;  • 


-  f ... 


■ 

1 


■ 

'■k 


£ 


asiti 


t 


v  V 


& 

f 


■  ’■ 


I 

'  Tu 

•f 


if' 

f 


rj; 

:‘r*L 


tQXUXX'J 


■BDDODODDDL 


l  JFatrir  v  Jrtc  A  2 


'V'v* 

NC>" 

^  . 

"-N-- 

V 

-  -  :  - 
-V.friM 


.  J3  .JTiyi/ittJ  .72  e/irz  . 


73 .  S?7e  Sett  /ft . 


r 


(• 


v  ", 


t 


' 


5^.  Scujfo  ■ 


I 


XXV 


£.JC?/i/uuf  J)elui  _  S5\  CyUjcu//v* 


) 


.  .  ^ 


LXV1 


-E  Hcppus  D  tin 


_  I 

-B  Cole  ~  Culp 


2  £  Coot  6 


ixvn 


9-  €r 


LXVffl 


( 

1 

1 

1 

.'o  ! 

'  V  : 

l 

, 

1 

1 

'VJ.  Cafe  S cu^z 


. 


ftfV/ 


~ — - 


:  .ii.  >• -; 
- 


r&'  x 


■.£  "I" 

\  $ 


,'V 


n  4 , 
<*•- v 


£}.\ 

U_..: 

.J 


':  •  •  sr 

*  mib 


tv 


•  r  * 

'  -  ?  '.-  ■ 

*  -"'  :'y 


2r  -^a  f- 


\  - 
i*  •  >■ '  xff  - 
It***-  %S 


■  •:•  x.  **  - 


.•••:■ 

'  Vxt  .  •'  ,*  > 

'.  x  .-*•• 


' 


-  V 


> 


ft 

%  -A 

tjf 

.  a  .  >;$*. 


lxix. 


H  Hcppus  Delin 


2?  Cole  Jculp 


/V' 


IX  K 


Hop p  LLi'  D  Hn 


* 


LXXI 


/ 


V 


Aw 


lxx m 


JEl  Jfojopus  Delia 


IB  ■  Ccie.Jhilfj 


3Z- 


E Hop  pus  Delia 


e 


JB  Cole  Jculp 


yovj  r 


I 


■ 


. 


JXXV 


*  .  '*< 


i 


i 


/  • 


t 


* 


. 


. 


\ 


V 


I 


I  XXVII 


LXXV1 


B  tbU  f/culf} 


E  JHo/jfus  Jj  elui 


2i.  Co  .  SSu/p 


I.  XX  LX  . 


' 


-  -J  *.  .  . 

u 


i  -  ,  , 


;  ;;vi 


•  r  - 

-  i;  v.'i 

j  -  - 

•' ,  - - rr:"'r*-' 

1  mV1  )A  •  *  . 


K  fc.:; 

!;-v 

A  L--:: 


■  ) 
i 


i  , 


I 


h 


1  o  1 

.  ••  "-V  \  •  N  ‘  y  v  V  ^ 

j  -it  |  ’  ;  '  •  J  ’  •  s 

;  '-i  ■* —  rrv  —  -  in-  v-_  •_* ... —  f.i 


<•  * 


:T 


•  -i  :  i  •  ->■ 

y.'-i-' 

L  --  ■/  ‘ 


I  /' 

\  V , 

t  y- 


-V 


rj 


-  :  I 


1 


j-l  Li  :  Ua  ■  ;• 
tn  vi  . 


-_SN 


"'v  i  ■  J 

■V  ■  V.  \\  ...  >  '  >  V-, 

■  t  f‘  *  ■ 

...  ■  ■  ,«  -  •. 

: 

■  »  ,  \  *  i  i  'ff  *  '' 


;  p:/; 
/v/l' v 


b  Iff  / 

■Y  *  7  ' 


"r 


*■ 


•;  *> 


LXXXJ 


c  + 


-EJJoppus  Delia 


£  CbU  Sculp 


% 


J  F00t$  +  X— : 


I 


:J2  Colt  Jiii/p 


V 


I 


/  wi 


I 


.  i 


f 


I 


s 


i 


r  •  *  •  •  *  «r-'  «  - 


* 


Foots  jo  Inch/)'  lii/dl?  /Foot  11 _ 11 


IXXXVI 


LXXXIV 


"W 


LXXXV 


J  Foot  1-1 


j 

- k, 

I 

1 

! 

N, 

J 

>> 

B 

- 

•- 

- H 

7~7 


F  Hc/yut  Xftlin 


% 

A 

-f  Hoppus  Delta 


Lxxxy m 


‘  /•- 


Ho, 


o^pur 


Dstin 


JR  &L *  tj'tulp 


JO  Moduls 


jo  -  5  .!  /O  McduU  s  )  2-Mbduls  t 


6  Foot  /o  S/i : 


□□□□□□□ 

□□□□□□□ 


m 


“*  *<y. 


* 


. 


i 


?' . 


i 


r 


«  «  ■  •  7 


-  ‘ 

■  '  Frnflj 

4# 


I 


•v 


. 


''y'fo  ‘ 


:  - 


\ 


‘ 


-ZT  Hoppus  TUlin 


■B  Celt  Jcidp 


/•?  -Hop pus  .  Dchsi  . 


I 


I 


J 


i 


XC  V. 


J- 


£  floppus  DUln 


r  *  'F 

■  J  jpT  »■  %  ^ 

\ 

■  ! 

Foot 

#  ■  • 

11  z 

1  s> 

B 

*  1 

?  .  £ 

fs 

*1 

<yi 

■'  c/o 


Scu/p 


* 


V  . 


/  -  XX?  VT. 


-EJJofjiUS  Dt  tin 


J3  .  &U  JhUp 


XC  VTTI 


ft 


f-j 


g  E.  HoppuS  Dt/in 


J9  fbU  Jcu/p 


E  H/r/ru*  Dtlin 


— 

II  ;  :  ■  •  '  1 

1!:  iffHMr 

m 

P 

Sill 

iji  |  "I’"1':'1 

is 
Sit -SI 

■ 

«  3  -Jill. 

IS. 

■It..  1  If;! 

Ir  *'J 

l|i;|  liiS;! 

!;H 

f-r'4 

1 

23 

IrV: 

i  -  ! 

T'i  ■ 

■ 

H ' 

r 

jj 

IP 

1 

Ljj 

r*N 

I 

it 

f  ft 

fr1- 

1 

E 

B 

I 

* 

|cp^ 

is ::  ji  ‘ 

in  ! 

83c.  .  i- 

1*  11 

11 

• 

■ 

it  fill 

rij 

Bn 

:P| 

J.i 

- 

1 

1 

n 

Jfei&J 

4-f 

in 

fB 

-V  .  I*  -  . 

. .  . 


cm. 


r- 


■  -  ■ 


i.  r  *  f 


( 


.*  - 


.  l 


i 


Mtn 


crv 


•  ■ 

/> 


The  end  of  v" Fourth  Boole. 

r. 


,/iulfi 


JEL  Ho/j/dus  ET)e//  n 


:'i  <* 

-  & 


f. 


Aw  . 


