t' 


• - 'S^.-'  ->i#^  w* 

pii.  •."-■.■•■ 


'■  .'  ' ■i 


L ■* 


5* 

ai 

' ”»  -Jf  l ‘ ■ • 'l*-''  ■ f ^ '•  ' / r ’ 

I*#:,:..:  r'  -v.^i*.  -■  -/  ■■  , « 


'1  ♦■’j 


!4 

-S.V*  VV-  ‘ 


t ■ -■>.-, 


- 

*:->  - 


■•  ,1 


■ f ■'. 

■ i"  ;'  ' '■ 

>-v  <!'-»^-  ^ • 

K- ' .■>--•■  i.-  _ '•  « j' 

'--  - 1-  , '*  -•■  ■ '■  '•;«ir  ^ ■ ' ■'■  ■ \-j  ' 

tS-f  ^ i ; ‘'‘'’'  Z >• 

»“'■■  ■’,  ' -'.1.= 

H ■ fi' 

'w' 


VI  .’-  ■ <>,(•  ■ . 

%•  UrS#  f . ‘-  - 

■ - ' «.  ■> 

.*•.•.((  - • . ■' 
>'  '-  . • 


x 


I 


, - '•■1;.  •’■'■s'. 

I ^yr  '■  •-::->■  •■ 


mX-  • 


J 


:yi. 


'K 


-^W 


r-_— ^ 

V ,■^  ■ ^'- 


• • 


^ • i 


-1 


V r.rf  1 j 


<i 


I ^»-, ' 


■ife 


'?>«■ 


• O?'. 


S^**Ws*^*“  '<44^-a 


THE 


GRAMMAE  OF  ORNAMENT 

BY 

OWEN  JONES. 


ILLUSTRATED  BY  EXAMPLES 
FROM  VARIOUS  STYLES  OF  ORNAMENT. 

ONE  HUNDRED  AND  TWELVE  PLATES. 


LONDON : 

PUBLISHED  BY  DAY  AND  SON,  LIMITED, 
GATE  STEEET,  LINCOLN’S  INN  FIELDS. 


|!tinpr-TiNi'-#''r-' 


:V-V>; 


5^21 


* >. 


^ ♦ 


■-r^./  '•■■■^■;>  .q  /*Tfl-/,A  U'P*' 

.'JJ.../,\  f'.  ..-J.  •.X.-./  ..iv_/.^ilA_  •. 


M'  i 


i*  ••■T,  > ' • f . • * ^ ’ . * 


vVv  :v 


• • ‘j 


• If’-  • ^ 


x-c— 


At./  -i-iaV. • • *• 

t **.  ■ ’ 

' - : .4t 


4- A'  ^ - M7,T 


. . . * • • ■'  ••  • 

iV I-  t -I y. o' 


ry 


• .•  .1 


..  4 


' • • ■::  vsv^S3Ki''  % •■: 


•w  *■ 


* •>  * » #l 


i 


t f 


♦-  i..  • 


,y4.^ 


*:  • . I 


t 4 


■ ’ ' Xd'  • 


♦ • 


>;V., 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FOLIO  EDITION. 


It  would  be  far  beyond  the  limits  of  the  powers  of  any  one  individual  to 
attempt  to  gather  together  illustrations  of  the  innumerable  and  ever-varying 
phases  of  Ornamental  Art.  It  would  he  harely  possible  if  undertaken  by  a 
government,  and  even  then  it  would  be  too  voluminous  to  be  generally  useful. 
All,  therefore,  that  I have  proposed  to  myself  in  forming  the  collection  which  I 
have  ventured  to  call  the  Gramm, ar  of  Ornament,  has  been  to  select  a few  of 
the  most  prominent  types  in  certain  styles  closely  connected  with  each  other,  and 
in  which  certain  general  laws  appeared  to  reign  independently  of  the  individual 
peculiarities  of  each.  I have  ventured  to  hope  that,  in  thus  bringing  into 
immediate  juxtaposition  the  many  forms  of  beauty  which  every  style  of  ornament 
presents,  I might  aid  in  arresting  that  unfortunate  tendency  of  our  time  to 
be  content  with  copying,  whilst  the  fashion  lasts,  the  forms  peculiar  to  any 
bygone  age,  without  attempting  to  ascertain,  generally  completely  ignoring,  the 
peculiar  circumstances  which  rendered  an  ornament  beautiful,  because  it  was 
appropriate,  and  which  as  expressive  of  other  wants,  when  thus  transplanted,  as 
entirely  fails. 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  first  result  of  sending  forth  to  the  world 


E 


1 


PREFACE. 


this  collection  will  be  seriously  to  increase  this  dangerous  tendency,  and  that 
many  will  be  content  to  borrow  from  the  past  those  forms  of  beauty  which 
have  not  already  been  used  up  ad  nauseam.  It  has  been  my  desire  to  arrest 
this  tendency,  and  to  awaken  a higher  ambition. 

If  the  student  will  but  endeavour  to  search  out  the  thoughts  which  have 
been  expressed  in  so  many  different  languages,  he  may  assuredly  hope  to  find 
an  ever-gushing  fountain  in  place  of  a half-filled  stagnant  reservoir. 

In  the  following  chapters  I have  endeavoured  to  establish  these  main  facts, — 

First.  That  whenever  any  style  of  ornament  commands  universal  admira- 
tion, it  will  always  be  found  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  laws  which  regulate 
the  distribution  of  form  in  nature. 

Secondly.  That  however  varied  the  manifestations  in  accordance  with  these 
laws,  the  leading  ideas  on  which  they  are  based  are  very  few. 

Thirdly.  That  the  modifications  and  developments  which  have  taken  place 
from  one  style  to  another  have  been  caused  by  a sudden  throwing  off  of  some 
fixed  trammel,  which  set  thought  free  for  a time,  till  the  new  idea,  like  the  old, 
became  again  fixed,  to  give  birth  in  its  turn  to  fresh  inventions. 

Lastly.  I have  endeavoured  to  show,  in  the  twentieth  chapter,  that  the 
future  progress  of  Ornamental  Art  may  be  best  secured  by  engrafting  on  the 
experience  of  the  past  the  knowledge  we  may  obtain  by  a return  to  Nature 
for  fresh  inspiration.  To  attempt  to  build  up  theories  of  art,  or  to  form  a style, 
independently  of  the  past,  would  be  an  act  of  supreme  folly.  It  would  be  at 
once  to  reject  the  experiences  and  accumulated  knowledge  of  thousands  of 
years.  On  the  contrary,  we  should  regard  as  our  inheritance  all  the  successful 
labours  of  the  past,  not  blindly  following  them,  but  employing  them  simply  as 
guides  to  find  the  true  path. 

In  taking  leave  of  the  subject,  and  finally  surrendering  it  to  the  judgment  of 
the  public,  I am  fully  aware  that  the  collection  is  very  far  from  being  complete : 
there  are  many  gaps  which  each  artist,  however,  may  readily  fill  up  for  himself. 
My  chief  aim,  to  place  side  by  side  types  of  such  styles  as  might  best  serve 


2 


PREFACE. 


as  landmarks  and  aids  to  the  student  in  his  onward  path,  has,  I trust,  been 
fulfilled. 

It  remains  for  me  to  offer  my  acknowledgment  to  all  those  friends  who  have 
kindly  assisted  me  in  the  undertaking. 

In  the  formation  of  the  Egyptian  Collection  I received  much  valuable 
assistance  from  Mr.  J.  Bonomi,  and  from  Mr.  James  Wild,  who  has  also  con- 
tributed the  materials  for  the  Arabian  Collection,  his  long  residence  in  Cairo 
having  afforded  him  the  opportunity  of  forming  a very  large  collection  of 
Cairean  Ornament,  of  which  the  portion  contained  in  this  work  can  give  but 
an  imperfect  idea,  and  which  I trust  he  may  some  day  be  encouraged  to 
publish  in  a complete  form. 

I am  indebted  to  Mr.  T.  T.  Bury  for  the  plate  of  Stained  Glass.  From 
Mr.  C.  J.  Richardson  I obtained  the  principal  portion  of  the  materials  of  the 
Elizabethan  Collection;  from  Mr.  J.  B.  Waring,  those  of  the  Byzantine,  and  I 
am  also  indebted  to  him  for  the  very  valuable  essays  on  Byzantine  and  Eliza- 
bethan Ornament.  Mr.  J.  O.  Westwood  having  directed  especial  attention  to 
the  Ornament  of  the  Celtic  races,  has  assisted  in  the  Celtic  Collection,  and 
written  the  very  remarkable  history  and  exposition  of  the  style. 

Mr.  C.  Dresser,  of  Marlborough  House,  has  provided  the  interesting  plate 
No.  8 of  the  twentieth  chapter,  exhibiting  the  geometrical  arrangement  of 
natural  flowers. 

My  colleague  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  M.  Dighy  M^yatt,  has  enriched  the 
work  with  his  admirable  essays  on  the  Ornament  of  the  Renaissance  and  the 
Italian  periods. 

Whenever  the  material  has  been  gathered  from  published  sources,  it  has 
been  acknowledged  in  the  body  of  the  work. 

The  remainder  of  the  drawings  have  been  chiefly  executed  by  my  pupils, 
Mr.  Albert  Warren  and  Mr.  Charles  Auhert,  who,  with  Mr.  Stubbs,  have 
reduced  the  whole  of  the  original  drawings,  and  prepared  them  for  publication. 


3 


PREFACE. 


The  drawing  upon  stone  of  the  wdiole  collection  was  entrusted  to  the  care 
of  Mr.  Francis  Bedford,  who,  \Yith  his  able  assistants,  Messrs.  H.  Fielding, 
W.  R.  Tymms,  A.  Warren,  and  S.  Sedgfield,  with  occasional  help,  have  executed 
the  One  Hundred  Plates  in  less  than  one  year. 

My  special  thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  Bedford  for  the  care  and  anxiety  which 
he  has  evinced,  quite  regardless  of  all  personal  consideration,  to  render  this 
work  as  perfect  as  the  advanced  state  of  chromolithography  demanded ; and 
I feel  persuaded  that  his  valuable  services  will  be  fully  recognised  by  all  in 
any  way  acquainted  with  the  difficulties  and  uncertainties  of  this  process. 

Messrs.  Day  and  Son,  the  enterprising  publishers,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  printers  of  the  work,  have  put  forth  all  their  strength ; and  notwith- 
standing the  care  required,  and  the  vast  amount  of  printing  to  be  performed, 
the  resources  of  their  establishment  have  enabled  them,  not  only  to  deliver  the 
work  with  perfect  regularity  to  the  Subscribers,  but  even  to  complete  it 
before  the  appointed  time. 


OWEN  JONES. 


9 Argyll  Place, 
Dec.  15,  185(). 


4 


GENEKAL  PEINCIPLES  IN  THE  ARRANGEMENT  OF  FORM  AND  COLOUR, 
IN  ARCHITECTURE  AND  THE  DECORATIVE  ARTS,  WHICH 
ARE  ADVOCATED  THROUGHOUT  THIS  WORK. 


General 

principles. 


Peoposition  1. 

The  Decorative  Arts  arise  from,  and 
should  properly  he  attendant  upon.  Ar- 
chitecture. 

Proposition  2. 

Architecture  is  the  material  expression 
of  the  -wants,  the  faculties,  and  the  senti- 
ments, of  the  age  in  -which  it  is  created. 

Style  in  Architecture  is  the  peculiar  form  that 
expression  takes  under  the  influence  of  climate 
and  materials  at  command. 

Peoposition  3. 

As  Architecture,  so  all  works  of  the 
Decorative  Arts ; should  possess  fitness, 
proportion,  harmony,  the  result  of  all 
which  is  repose. 

Proposition  4. 

True  beauty  results  from  that  repose 
which  the  mind  feels  when  the  eye,  the 
intellect,  and  the  affections,  are  satisfied 
from  the  absence  of  any  want. 

Proposition  5. 

Construction  should  be  decorated. 
Decoration  should  never  be  purposely 
constructed. 

That  which  is  beautiful  is  trae ; that  which  is  true 
must  he  beautiful. 


Proposition  6. 

Beauty  of  form  is  produced  by  lines 
growing  out  one  from  the  other  in 
gradual  undulations : there  are  no  ex- 
crescences ; nothing  could  be  removed 
and  leave  the  design  equally  good  or 
better. 

Proposition  7. 

The  general  forms  being  first  cared 
for,  these  should  be  subdivided  and  orna- 
mented by  general  lines;  the  interstices 
may  then  be  filled  in  with  ornament, 
which  may  again  be  subdivided  and  en- 
riched for  closer  inspection. 

Proposition  8. 

All  ornament  should  be  based  upon  a 
geometrical  construction. 

Proposition  9. 

As  in  every  perfect  work  of  Archi- 
tecture a true  proportion  will  be  found 
to  reign  between  all  the  members  which 
compose  it,  so  throughout  the  Decorative 
Arts  every  assemblage  of  forms  should 
be  arranged  on  certain  definite  propor- 
tions ; the  whole  and  each  particular 
member  should  be  a multiple  of  some 
simple  unit. 


On  general 
form. 


Decoration 
of  the  sur- 
face. 


On  propor- 
tion. 


PROPOSITIONS. 


On  harmony 
and  contrast. 


Distribution. 

Radiation. 

Continuity. 


On  the  con- 
ventionality 
of  natural 
forms. 


On  colour 
generally. 


Those  proportions  will  be  the  most  beautiful 
which  it  will  be  most  difficult  for  the  eye  to 
detect. 

Thus  the  proportion  of  a double  square^ 
or  4 to  8j  will  be  less  beautiful  than 
the  more  subtle  ratio  of  5 to  8 ; 3 to  6, 
than  3 to  7 ; 3 to  9,  than  3 to  8; 
3 to  4;  than  3 to  5. 

Proposition  10. 

Harmony  of  form  consists  in  the 
proper  balancing,  and  contrast  of,  the 
straight,  the  inclined,  and  the  curved. 

Peoposition  11. 

In  surface  decoration  all  lines  should 
flow  out  of  a parent  stem.  Every  orna- 
ment, however  distant,  should  be  traced 
to  its  branch  and  root.  Orienial  practice. 

Proposition  12. 

All  junctions  of  curved  lines  with 
curved  or  of  curved  lines  with  straight 
should  be  tangential  to  each  other. 
Natural  law.  Oriental  practice  in  accord- 
ance with  it. 

Proposition  13. 

Flowers  or  other  natural  objects  should 
not  be  used  as  ornaments,  but  conven- 
tional representations  founded  upon  them 
sufficiently  suggestive  to  convey  the  in- 
tended image  to  the  mind,  without  de- 
stroying the  unity  of  the  object  they  are 
employed  to  decorate.  Universally  obeyed 
in  the  best  periods  of  Art,  equally  violated 
when  Art  declines. 

Proposition  14. 

Colour  is  used  to  assist  in  the  devel- 
opment of  form,  and  to  distinguish 
objects  or  parts  of  objects  one  from 
another. 


Proposition  15. 

Colour  is  used  to  assist  light  and 
shade,  helping  the  undulations  of  form 
by  the  proper  distribution  of  the  several 
colours. 

Proposition  16. 

These  objects  are  best  attained  by  the 
use  of  the  primary  colours  on  small  sur- 
faces and  in  small  quantities,  balanced 
and  supported  by  the  secondary  and  ter- 
tiary colours  on  the  larger  masses. 

Proposition  17. 

The  primary  colours  should  be  used 
on  the  upper  portions  of  objects,  the 
secondary  and  tertiary  on  the  lower. 

Proposition  18. 

{Field’s  Chromatic  equivalents.) 

The  primaries  of  equal  intensities  will 
harmonise  or  neutralise  each  other,  in  the 
proportions  of  3 yellow,  5 red,  and  8 
blue, — integrally  as  16. 

The  secondaries  in  the  proportions  of 
8 orange,  13  purple,  11  green, — integrally 
as  32. 

The  tertiaries,  citrine  (compound  of 
orange  and  green),  19;  russet  (orange 
and  purple),  21 ; olive  (green  and 
purple),  24 ; — integrally  as  64. 

It  follows  that, — 

Each  secondary  being  a compound  of 
two  primaries  is  neutralised  by  the  re- 
maining primary  in  the  same  proportions: 
thus,  8 of  orange  by  8 of  blue,  1 1 of  green 
by  5 of  red,  13  of  purple  by  3 of  yellow. 

Each  tertiary  being  a binary  com- 
pound of  two  secondaries,  is  neutralised 
by  the  remaining  secondary:  as,  24  of 
olive  by  8 of  orange,  21  of  russet  by  11 
of  green,  19  of  citrine  by  13  of  purple. 


On  the  pro- 
portions by 
which  har- 
mony in 
colouring  is 
produced 


6 


PROPOSITIONS. 


On  the  con- 
trasts and 
.haimonious 
equivalents 
of  tones, 
shades,  and 
hues. 


On  the  posi- 
tions the 
several 
colours 
should  oc- 
cupy. 


Proposition  19. 

The  above  supposes  the  colours  to  be  used  in 
their  prismatic  intensities,  but  each  colour  has 
a variety  of  tones  when  mixed  with  white,  or 
of  shades  when  mixed  with  grey  or  black. 

When  a full  colour  is  contrasted  with 
another  of  a lower  tone,  the  volume  of 
the  latter  must  be  proportionally  in- 
creased. 


Peopositiow  20. 

Each  colour  has  a variety  of  hues,  obtained  by 
admixture  with  other  colours,  in  addition  to 
white,  grey,  or  black : thus  we  have  of  yellow, 
— orange-yellow  on  the  one  side,  and  lemon- 
yellow  on  the  other;  so  of  red, — scarlet-red, 
and  crimson-red;  and  of  each  every  variety  of 
tone  and  shade. 

When  a primary  tinged  with  another 
primary  is  contrasted  with  a secondary, 
the  secondary  must  have  a hue  of  the 
third  primary. 

PnoposmoN  21. 

In  using  the  primary  colours  on 
moulded  surfaces,  we  should  place  blue, 
which  retires,  on  the  concave  surfaces ; 
yellow,  which  advances,  on  the  convex; 
and  red,  the  intermediate  colour,  on  the 
undersides ; separating  the  colours  by 
white  on  the  vertical  planes. 

When  the  proportions  required  by  Proposition  18 
cannot  be  obtained,  we  may  procure  the  balance 
by  a change  in  the  colours  themselves : thus, 
if  the  surfaces  to  be  coloured  should  give  too 
much  yellow,  we  should  make  the  red  more 
crimson  and  the  blue  more  purple, — i.e.  we 
should  take  the  yellow  out  of  them ; so  if  the 
surfaces  should  give  too  much  blue,  we  should 
make  the  yellow  more  orange  and  the  red  more 
scarlet. 

Proposition  22. 

The  various  colours  should  be  so 
blended  that  the  objects  coloured,  when 
viewed  at  a distance,  should  present  a 
neutralised  bloom. 


Proposition  23. 

No  composition  can  ever  be  perfect 
in  which  any  one  of  the  three  primary 
colours  is  wanting,  either  in  its  natural 
state  or  in  combination. 


Proposition  24. 


When  two  tones  of  the  same  colour  Ontiieiaw 

, of  simulta- 

are  juxtaposed,  the  light  colour  will  moiMoon- 
appear  lighter,  and  the  . dark  colour  colours,  de- 

rived  from 

darker.  Mons.  chev 

ruil. 

Proposition  25. 


When  two  different  colours  are  juxta- 
posed, they  receive  a double  modification; 
first,  as  to  their  tone  (the  light  colour 
appearing  lighter,  and  the  dark  colour 
appearing  darker) ; secondly,  as  to  their 
hue,  each  will  become  tinged  with  the 
complementary  colour  of  the  other. 


Proposition  26. 

Colours  on  white  grounds  appear 
darker ; on  black  grounds,  lighter. 


Proposition  27. 

Black  grounds  suffer  when  opposed 
to  colours  which  give  a luminous  comple- 
mentary. 

Proposition  28. 

Colours  should  never  be  allowed  to 
impinge  upon  each  other. 


Proposition  29. 

When  ornaments  in  a colour  are  on  a 
ground  of  a contrasting  colour,  the  orna- 


On  the 
means  of  in- 
creasing the 
harmonious 
effects  of 


ment  should  be  separated  from  the  ground 
by  an  edging  of  lighter  colour ; 


as 


colours. 

1 Observa- 
3.  r6Cl  ,tions  derived 

flower  on  a green  ground  should  have  an"*dSatio™of 
edging  of  lighter  red. 


7 


ground  may  be  used  without  outline; 
but  a dark  ornament  on  a light  ground 
requires  to  be  outlined  with  a still  darker 
tint. 

Pkoposition  35. 


Pkoposition  31. 

Gold  ornaments  on  any  coloured 
ground  should  be  outlined  with  black. 


Proposition  32. 

Ornaments  of  any  colour  may  be  sepa- 
rated from  grounds  of  any  other  colour 
by  edgings  of  white,  gold,  or  black. 

Proposition  33. 

Ornaments  in  any  colour,  or  in  gold, 
may  be  used  on  white  or  black  grounds, 
without  outline  or  edging. 


Proposition  34. 

In  “self-tints,"  tones,  or  shades  of  the 
same  colour,  a light  tint  on 


Imitations,  such  as  the  graining  of  onimita- 
woods,  and  of  the  various  coloured 
marbles,  allowable  only,  when  the  em- 
ployment of  the  thing  imitated  would  not 
have  been  inconsistent. 

Proposition  36. 

The  principles  discoverable  in  the 
works  of  the  past  belong  to  us ; not  so 
the  results.  It  is  taking  the  end  for  the 
means. 

Proposition  37. 

No  improvement  can  take  place  in 
the  Art  of  the  present  generation  until 
all  classes.  Artists,  Manufacturers,  and 
the  Public,  are  better  educated  in  Art, 
and  the  existence  of  general  principles  is 
more  fully  recognised. 


LIST  OF  PLATES. 


Chap.  I.  Ornament  of  Savage  Tribes. 

Plate.  No. 

1 1 Ornaments  from  Articles  belonging  to  various  Savage  Tribes,  exhibited  in  the  United  Service  and 

British  Museums. 

2 2 Ditto  ditto  ditto. 

3 3 Ditto  ditto  ditto. 


Chap.  II.  Egyptian  Ornament. 

4 1 The  Lotus  and  Papynis,  types  of  Egyptian  ornament. 

5 2 Ditto  ditto,  with  Feathers  and  Palm-branches. 

6 3 Capitals  of  Columns,  showing  the  varied  applications  of  the  Lotus  and  Papynis. 

6*  3*Ditto  ditto  ditto. 

7 4 Various  Cornices,  formed  by  the  Pendent  Lotus. 

8 5 Ornaments  from  Mummy  Cases  in  the  British  Museum  and  the  Louvre. 

9 6 Geometrical  Ornaments  from  Ceilings  of  Tombs. 

10  7 Ornaments  with  Curved  Lines  from  Ceilings  of  Tombs. 

11  8 Various  Ornaments  from  Ceilings  and  Walls  of  Tombs. 


Chap.  III.  Assyrian  and  Persian  Ornament. 

12  1 Painted  Ornaments  from  Nineveh. 

13  2 Ditto  ditto. 

14  3 Carved  Ornaments  from  Persepolis,  and  Sassanian  Ornaments  from  Ispahan  and  Bi-Sutoun. 


Chap.  IV.  Greek  Ornament. 


15  1 The  Various  Forms  of  the  Greek  Fret. 

16  21 

17  3 

18  4 


Ornaments  from  Greek  and  Etruscan  Vases  in  the  British  Museum  and  the  Louvre. 


19  5 

20  6 

21  7. 

22  8 Painted  Greek  Ornaments  from  the  Temples  and  Tombs  in  Greece  and  Sicily. 

D 


Arabian  Ornament. 


1 Arabian  Ornaments  of  the  Ninth  Century  from  Cairo. 

2 Ditto  Thirteenth  Century  ditto. 

3 Ditto  ditto  ditto. 

4 Portion  of  an  Illuminated  Copy  of  the  Koran.^^ 

5 Mosaics  from  Walls  and  Pavements  from  Houses  in  Cairo. 


Turkish  Ornament. 

1 Ornaments  in  Relief  from  Mosques^  Tombs_,  and  Fountains  at  Constantinople. 

2 Painted  Ornaments  from  the  Mosque  of  Soliman  at  Constantinople. 

3 Decoration  of  the  Dome  of  the  Tomb  of  Soliman  I.  at  Constantinople. 


Chap 


Moresque  Ornament  from  the  Alhambra. 


1 Varieties  of  Interlaced  Ornaments. 

2 Spandrils  of  Arches. 

3 Lozenge  Diapers. 

41=^=  3*Ditto  ditto. 

42  4 Square  Diapers. 

43*  4*Ditto  ditto. 

43t  4tDitto  ditto. 

43  5 Mosaics. 

Chap.  XI.  Persian  Ornament. 

Ornaments  from  Persian  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum. 

45  2 Ditto  ditto. 

46  3 Ditto  ditto. 

47  4 Prom  a Persian  Manufacturer's  Pattern-Book,  South  Kensington  Museum. 

47*  4*Ditto  ditto  ditto. 

48  5 From  a Persian  MS.  South  Kensington  Museum. 

10 


LIST  OF  PLATES. 


Chap.  XII.  Indian  Ornament. 

Plate.  No. 

49  1 Ornaments  from  Metal-work  from  the  Exhibition  of  1851. 


50  2 

51  3 

52  4 

53  5 
53*  5* 

54  6 
54*  6* 

65  7 Ornaments  from  Woven  and  Embroidered  Fabrics  and  Painted  Boxes  exhibited  at  Paris  in  1855. 


Ditto  from  Embroidered  and  Woven  Fabrics  and  Paintings  on  Vases  exhibited  in  the  Indian  Collection 
in  1851,  now  at  South  Kensington  Museum. 


'i  Specimens  of  Painted  Lacquer-work  from  the  Collection  at  the  India-Hoase. 


Chap.  XIII.  Hiadoo  Ornament. 

56  1 Ornaments  from  a Statue  at  the  Asiatic  Society’s  House. 

57  2 From  the  Collection  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  Sydenham. 

58  3 From  the  Collection  at  the  India  House. 


Chap.  XIV.  Chinese  Ornament. 


59 

60 
61 
63 


t' 

2 

3. 

4 


Chinese  Ornaments  painted  on  Porcelain,  and  on  Wood,  and  from  Woven  Fabrics. 
Conventional  Renderings  of  Fruits  and  Flowers. 


Chap.  XV.  Celtic  Ornament. 

63  1 Lapidary  Ornamentation. 

64  2 Interlaced  Styles. 

65  3 Spii’al,  Diagonal,  Zoomorphic,  and  later  Anglo-Saxon  Ornament. 


Chap.  XVI.  Mediaeval  Ornament. 

66  1 Conventional  Leaves  and  Flowers  from  Illuminated  MSS. 

67  2 Borders  from  Illuminated  MSS.  and  Paintings. 

67*  2*  Ditto  ditto  ditto. 

68  3 Diapers  from  Illuminated  MSS.  and  Backgrounds  of  Pictures. 

69  4 Stained  Glass  of  various  periods. 

69*  4*  Ditto  ditto. 

70  5 Encaustic  Tiles,  ditto. 

Illuminated  MSS. 

71  1 Portions  of  Illuminated  MSS.  of  the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Centuries. 

72  2 Ditto  ditto  Thirteenth  and  Fourteenth  ditto. 

73  3 Ditto  ditto  Fourteenth  and  Fifteenth  ditto. 


11 


LIST  OF  PLATES. 


Plate. 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
83 


83  1 

84  2 

85  3 


86  1 

86*  1 

87  2 

88  3 

89  4 

90  5 


91  1 

92  2 

93  3 

94  4 

96  5 

96  6 

97  7 

98  8 

99  9 
100  10 


Chap.  XVII.  Renaissance  Ornament. 

0. 

J Renaissance  Ornaments  in  Relief,  from  Photographs  taken  from  Casts  in  the  Crystal  Palace,  Syden- 
' I ham. 
r 

; Enamels  from  the  Louvre  and  H6tel  Cluny. 

1 Ornaments  from  Potteiy  at  South  Kensington  Museum, 
i Ditto  from  ditto,  H6tel  Cluny  and  the  Louvre. 

Ditto  ditto,  ditto. 

jomaments  from  Stone  and  Wood  from  the  Collections  of  the  Louvre  and  Hotel  Cluny. 


Chap.  XVIIL  Elizabethan  Ornament. 

jvarious  Ornaments  in  Belief  from  tlie  Time  of  Henry  Till,  to  that  of  Charles  II. 
Painted  Ornaments  and  Ornaments  on  Woven  Eabrics,  ditto. 


Chap.  XIX.  Italian  Ornament. 

Pilasters  and  Ornaments  from  the  Loggie  of  the  Vatican,  reduced  from  the  full-size  Paintings  at  South 
Kensington  Museum. 

'Ditto  ditto  ditto  ditto. 

Ornaments  from  the  Palazzo  Ducale,  Mantua. 

Ditto  from  the  Palazzo  Ducale  and  the  Church  of  St.  Andrea,  Mantua. 

Ditto  from  the  Palazzo  del  Te,  Mantua. 

Ornaments  from  Printed  Books. 


Chap.  XX.  Leaves  and  Flowers  from  Nature. 

Horse-chestnut  leaves. 

Vine  leaves. 

Ivy  leaves. 

leaves  of  the  Oak,  Fig-tree,  Maple,  White  Bryony,  Laurel,  and  Bay-tree. 
Leaves  of  the  Vine,  Hollyoak,  Turkey  Oak,  and  Laburnum. 

Wild  Rose,  Ivy,  and  Blackberry. 

Hawthorn,  Yew,  Ivy,  and  Strawberry-tree. 

Various  Flowers  in  Plan  and  Elevation. 

Honeysuckle  and  Convolvulus. 

Passion  Flowers. 


13 


Chapter  I. — Plates  1,  2,  3. 

ORNAMENT  OF  SAVAGE  TRIBES. 


PLATE  1. 


1.  Cloth.  Otaheite. — United  Service  Museum. 

2.  Matting  from  Tongotabu,  Friendly  Islands. 

3.  Cloth.  Otaheite.— U.  S.  M. 

4.  Cloth.  Sandwich  Islands. — U.  3-  M. 

5-8.  Cloths.  Sandwich  Islands. — British  Museum. 


9.  Cloth  Matting  from  Tongotabn,  Friendly  Islands. 

10.  Cloth.  Otaheite.— U.  S.  M. 

11.  Cloth.  Sandwich  Islands. — B.  M. 

12.  Cloth. 

13.  Cloth  made  from  Paper  Mulberry,  Feejee  Islands.— B.  M. 


PLATE  11. 


1. 

South  America. — United  Service  Museum. 

9, 10. 

Tahiti.  Adze. 

U.  S.  M. 

2. 

Sandwich  Islands. 

U.  S.  M. 

11,  12. 

Friendly  Islands.  Drum. 

U.  S.  M. 

3. 

Owhyhee. 

U.  S.  M. 

13, 14. 

Tahiti.  Adze, 

U.  S.  M. 

4. 

New  Hebrides.  Inlaid  Shield. 

U.  S.  M. 

15.  Sandwich  Islands. 

U.  S.  M. 

5. 

Sandwich  Islands, 

U.  S.  M. 

16, 17. 

New  Zealand. 

U.  S.  M. 

6. 

South  Sea  Islands. 

U.  S.  M. 

18-20. 

Sandwich  Islands. 

U.  S.  M. 

7, 

8.  Sandwich  Islands. 

U.  S.  M. 

PLATE  III. 


Owhyhee.  Club. — United  Service  Museum. 


Sandwich  Islands.  Club.  U.  S.  M. 
New  Zealand.  Patoo-Patoo.  U.  S.  M. 
Tahiti.  Adze.  U.  S.  M. 

New  Zealand.  Paddle.  U.  S.  M. 


6.  New  Zealand.  Pajee,  or  War  Club. — U.  S.  M. 

7.  South  Sea  Isles.  War  Club.  U.  S.  M. 

8.  Handle,  full  size  of  Fig.  5.  U.  S.  M. 

9.  Feejee  Islands.  Club.  U.  S.  M. 


From  the  universal  testimony  of  travellers  it  would  appear,  that  there  is  scarcely  a people,  in  however 
early  a stage  of  civilisation,  with  whom  the  desire  for  ornament  is  not  a strong  instinct.  The  desire  is 
absent  in  none,  and  it  grows  and  increases  with  all  in  the  ratio  of  their  progress  in  civilisation.  Man 
appears  everywhere  impressed  with  the  beauties  of  Nature  which  surround  him,  and  seeks  to  imitate  to  the 
extent  of  his  power  the  works  of  the  Creator. 

Man’s  earliest  ambition  is  to  create.  To  this  feeling  must  be  ascribed  the  tattooing  of  the  human  face 
and  body,  resorted  to  by  the  savage  to  increase  the  expression  by  which  he  seeks  to  strike  terror  on  his 
enemies  or  rivals,  or  to  create  what  appears  to  him  a new  beauty.*  As  we  advance  higher,  from  the 

* The  tattooing  on  the  head  which  we  introduce  from  the  Museum  at  Chester  is  very  retoarkahle,  as  showing  that  in  this  'very 
barbarous  practice  the  principles  of  the  very  highest  ornamental  art  are  manifest,  every  line  upon  the  face  is  the  best  adapted  to 
develope  the  natural  features. 


£ 


13 


OENAMENT  OF  SAVAGE  TRIBES. 


decoration  of  the  rude  tent  or  wigwam  to  the  sublime  works  of  a Phidias  and  Praxiteles,  the  same  feeling  is 
everywhere  apparent:  the  highest  ambition  is  still  to  create,  to  stamp  on  this  earth  the  impress  of  an 
individual  mind. 

From  time  to  time  a mind  stronger  than  those  around  will  impress  itself  on  a generation,  and  carry  with 
it  a host  of  others  of  less  power  following  in  the  same  track,  yet  never  so  closely  as  to  destroy  the  individual 
ambition  to  create ; lienee  the  cause  of  styles,  and  of  the  modifications  of  styles.  The  efforts  of  a people  in 

an  eai-ly  stage  of  civilisation  are  like  those  of 
children,  though  presenting  a want  of  power,  they 
possess  a grace  and  nalveU  rarely  found  in  mid-age, 
and  never  in  manhood’s  decline.  It  is  equally  so  in 
the  infancy  of  any  art.  Cimabue  and  G-iotto  have 
not  the  material  charm  of  Raphael  or  the  manly 
power  of  Michael  Angelo,  but  surpass  them  both  in 
grace  and  earnest  truth.  The  very  command  of 
means  leads  to  their  abuse : when  Art  struggles,  it 
succeeds ; when  revelling  in  its  own  successes,  it  as 
signally  fails.  The  pleasure  we  receive  in  con- 
templating the  rude  attempts  at  ornament  of  the 
most  savage  tribes  arises  from  our  appreciation  of 
a difficulty  accomplished;  we  are  at  once  charmed 
by  the  evidence  of  the  intention,  and  surprised  at 
the  simple  and  ingenious  process  by  which  the  result 
is  obtained.  In  fact,  what  we  seek  in  every  work  of 
Art,  whether  it  be  humble  or  pretentious,  is  the 
evidence  of  mind,— the  evidence  of  that  desire  to 
create  to  which  we  have  referred,  and  which  all, 
feeling  a natural  instinct  within  them,  are  satisfied 
with  when  they  find  it  developed  in  others.  It  is 

Female  Head  from  Kerr  Zealand,  to  the  Muaenm,  Cheater.  strange,  but  SO  it  IS,  that  this  evidence  of  mind  Will 

be  more  readily  found  in  the  rude  attempts  at 
ornament  of  a savage  tribe  than  in  the  innumerable  productions  of  a highly-advanced  civilisation. 
Individuality  decreases  in  the  ratio  of  the  power  of  production.  When  Art  is  manufactured  by  combined 
effort,  not  originated  by  individual  effort,  we  fail  to  recognise  those  true  instincts  which  constitute  its 
greatest  charm. 

Plate  I.  The  ornaments  on  this  Plate  are  from  portions  of  clothing  made  chiefly  from  the  bark 
of  trees.  Patterns  Nos.  2 and  9 are  from  a dress  brought  by  Mr.  Oswald  Brierly  from  Tongotabu,  the 
principal  of  the  Friendly  Island  group.  It  is  made  from  thin  sheets  of  the  inner  rind  of  the  bark  of 
a species  of  hibiscus,  beaten  out  and  united  together  so  as  to  form  one  long  parallelogram  of  cloth,  which 
being  wrapped  many  times  round  the  body  as  a petticoat,  and  leaving  the  chest,  arms,  and  shoulders 
bare,  forms  the  only  dress  of  the  natives.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  more  primitive,  and  yet  the 
arrangement  of  the  pattern  shows  the  most  refined  taste  and  skiU.  No.  9 is  the  border  on  the  edge 
of  the  cloth;  with  the  same  limited  means  of  production,  it  would  be  difficult  to  improve  upon  it.  The 
patterns  are  formed  by  small  wooden  stamps,  and  although  the  work  is  somewhat  rude  and  irregular 
in  execution,  the  intention  is  everywhere  apparent ; and  we  are  at  once  struck  with  the  skilful  balancing 
of  the  masses,  and  the  judicious  correction  of  the  tendency  of  the  eye  to  run  in  any  one  direction  by 
opposing  to  them  lines  having  an  opposite  tendency. 


14 


ORNAMENT  OF  SAVAGE  TRIBES. 


WTien  Mr.  Brierly  visited  the  island  one  woman  was  the  designer  of  all  the  patterns  in  use  there, 
aud  for  every  new  pattern  she  designed  she  received  as  a reward  a certain  number  of  yards  of  cloth. 
The  pattern  No.  2,  from  the  same  place,  is  equally  an  admirable  lesson  in  composition  which  we 
may  derive  from  an  artist  of  a savage  tribe.  Nothing  can  be  more  judicious  than  the  general  arrange- 
ment of  the  four  squares  and  the  four  red  spots.  Without  the  red  spots  on  the  yellow  ground  there 

would  have  been  a great  want  of  repose  in  the  general  arrangement;  without  the  red  lines  round  the 

red  spots  to  carry  the  red  through  the  yellow,  it  would  have  been  still  imperfect.  Had  the  small  red 
triangles  turned  outwards  instead  of  inwards,  the  repose  of  the  pattern  would  again  have  been  lost, 
and  the  effect  produced  on  the  eye  would  have  been  that  of  squinting;  as  it  is,  the  eye  is  centred  in 
each  square,  and  centred  in  each  group  by  the  red  spots  round  the  centre  square.  The  stamps  which 

form  the  pattern  are  very  simple,  each  triangle  A and  each  leaf 

how  readily  the  possession  of  a simple  tool,  even  4Bkby  the  most 
stinctive  observation  of  the  forms  in  which  all  the  works  of  Nature 

creation  of  all  the  geometrical  arrangements  of  form  with  which 
we  are  acquainted.  On  the  upper  left-hand  corner  of  pattern 
No.  2,  the  eight-pointed  star  is  formed  by  eight  applications  of 
the  same  tool ; as  also  the  black  flower  with  sixteen  pointing 
inwards  f and  sixteen  pointing  outwards.  1 The  most  com- 
plicated patterns  of  the  Byzantine,  Arabian,  I and  Moresque 
mosaics  would  be  generated  by  the  same  means.  The  secret  of  success  in  all  ornament  is  the  pro- 
duction of  a broad  general  effect  by  the  repetition  of  a few  simple  elements;  variety  should  rather  be 
sought  in  the  arrangement  of  the  several  portions  of  a design,  than  in  the  multiplicity  of  varied 
forms. 

The  stamping  of  patterns  on  the  coverings  of  the  body,  when  either  of  skins  of  animals  or  material  such 
as  this,  would  be  the  first  stage  towards  ornament  after  the  tattooing  of  the  body  by  an  analogous  process. 
In  both  there  would  remain  a greater  variety  and  individuality  than  in  subse- 
quent processes,  which  would  become  more  mechanical.  The  first  notions  of 
weaving  which  would  be  given  by  the  plaiting  of  straws  or  strips  of  bark, 
instead  of  using  them  as  thin  sheets,  would  have  equally  the  same  result  of 
gradually  forming  the  mind  to  an  appreciation  of  the  proper  disposition  of 
masses : the  eye  of  the  savage,  accustomed  only  to  look  upon  Nature’s 
harmonies,  would  readily  enter  into  the  perception  of  the  true  balance  both 
of  form  and  colour ; in  point  of  fact,  we  find  that  it  is  so,  that  in  savage 
ornament  the  true  balance  of  both  is  always  maintained. 

After  the  formation  of  ornament  by  stamping  and  weaving,  would  naturally 
follow  the  desire  of  forming  ornament  in  relief  or  carving.  The  weapons  for 
defence  or  the  chase  would  first  attract  attention.  The  most  skilful  and  the 
bravest  would  desire  to  be  distinguished  from  their  fellows  by  the  possession 
of  weapons,  not  only  more  useful,  but  more  beautiful.  The  shape  best  fitted  Plaited  straw  from  the  sandwich  islands, 
for  the  purpose  having  been  found  by  experience,  the  enriching  of  the  surface  by  carving  would  naturally 
follow ; and  the  eye,  already  accustomed  to  the  geometrical  forms  produced  by  weaving,  the  hand  would 
seek  to  imitate  them  by  a similar  repetition  of  cuts  of  the  knife.  The  ornaments  on  Plate  II.  show  this 
instinct  very  fully.  They  are  executed  with  the  utmost  precision,  and  exhibit  great  taste  and  judgment 
in  the  distribution  of  the  masses.  Nos.  11  and  12  are  interesting,  as  showing  how  much  this  taste  and 
skill  may  exist  in  the  formation  of  geometrical  patterns,  whilst  those  resulting  from  curved  lines,  and  the 
human  form  more  especially,  remain  in  the  very  first  stage. 


♦ 


being  a single  stamp,  we  thus  see 
uncultivated,  if  guided  by  an  in- 
are  arranged,  would  lead  to  the 


15 


!i3f- 


to 


ORNAMENT  OF  SAVAGE  TRIBES. 


The  ornaments  in  the  woodcuts  below  and  at  the  side  show  a far  higher  advance  in  the  distribution 
of  curved  lines,  the  twisted  rope  forming  the  type  as  it  naturally  would  be  of  all  curved  lines  in  ornament. 

The  uniting  of  two  strands  for  additional  strength  would  early  accustom 
the  eye  to  the  spiral  line,  and  we  always  find  this  form  side  by  side  with 


Head  of  Cauoe,  New  Guinea. 


geometrical  patterns  formed  by  the  interlacing  of  equal  lines  in  the  orna- 
ment of  every  savage  tribe,  and  retained  in  the  more  advanced  art  of  every 
civilised  nation. 


Head  of  Canoe,  New  Guinea. 

The  ornament  of  a savage  tribe,  being  the  result  of  a natural  instinct, 
is  necessarily  always  true  to  its  purpose ; whilst  in  much  of  the  ornament  of  civilised  nations,  the  first 
impulse  which  generated  received  forms  being  enfeebled  by  constant  repetition,  the  ornament  is  often- 
times misapplied,  and  instead  of  first  seeking  the  most  convenient  form  and  adding  beauty,  all  beauty  is 
destroyed,  because  all  fitness,  by  superadding  ornament  to  iU-oontrived  form.  If  we  would  return  to 
a more  healthy,  condition,  we  must  even  be  as  little  children  or  as  savages ; we  must  get  rid  of  the 
acquired  and  artificial,  and  return  to  and  develope  natural  instincts. 

The  beautiful  New  Zealand  paddle.  Nos.  6-8,  on  Plate  III.,  would  rival  works  of  the  highest  civilisa- 
tion : there  is  not  a line  upon  its  surface  misapplied.  The  general  shape  is  most  elegant,  and  the 
decoration  everywhere  the  best  adapted  to  develope  the  form.  A modem  manufacturer,  with  his 
16 


ORNAMENT  OF  SAVAGE  TRIBES. 


stripes  and  plaids,  would  have  continued  the  bands  or  rings  round  the  handle  across  the  blade.  The 
New  Zealander’s  instinct  taught  him  better.  He  desired  not  only  that  his  paddle  should  be  strong, 
but  should  appear  so,  and  his  ornament  is  so  disposed  to  give  an  appear- 
ance of  additional  strength  to  what  it  would  have  had  if  the  surface 
had  remained  undecorated.  The  centre  band  in  the  length  of  the  blade 


Handle  of  a Paddle. — B.  M, 

is  continued  round  on  the  other  side,  binding  together  the  border  on 
the  edge,  which  itself  fixes  all  the  other  bands.  Had  these  bands  run 
out  like  the  centre  one,  they  would  have  appeared  to  slip  off.  The  centre 
one  was  the  only  one  that  could  do  so  without  disturbing  the  repose. 

The  swelling  form  of  the  handle  where  additional  weight  was  required 
is  most  beautifully  contrived,  and  the  springing  of  the  swell  is  well 
defined  by  the  bolder  pattern  of  the  rings.* 


Club,  Eastern  Archipelago. 

* Captain  Cook  and  other  voyagers  repeatedly  notice  the  taste  and  ingenuity  of  the  islanders  of  the  Pacific  and  South  Seas  : 
instancing  especially  cloths,  painted  “ in  such  an  endless  variety  of  figures  that  one  might  sxxppose  they  borrowed  their  patterns  from  a 
mercer’s  shop  in  which  the  most  elegant  productions  of  China  and  Europe  are  collected,  besides  some  original  patterns  of  their  own.” 
The  “ thousand  different  patterns  ” of  their  basket-work,  their  mats,  and  the  fancy  displayed  in  their  rich  carvings  and  inlaid  shell-work, 
are,  likewise,  constantly  mentioned.  See  The  Three  Voyages  of  Captain  Cook,  3 vols.  Lend.  1841— i3j  Dumont  D’Urville’s  Voyage  au 
Po/c  Surf,  8vo.  Paris,  1841 ; Ditto,  rf’.ffisfoire,  fol.;  Prichard's  Natural  History  of  Man, G.  W.  Earle’s  .Jfaijwe  Races  of 
Indian  Archipelago,  Lond.  1853 ; Kerr’s  General  History  and  Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels,  London,  1811-17. 


F 


17 


|r 

5 k 

^ ► 

• 

1 ' 

.is  ■*« 

' * 

.<■0^ " 

■ 

!«■ 

I'fe  ''iik 

i'y  - .,,-,r/W.  j^;,c-^  ; 

G,.  , v — C3 


V4;: 

t;'  .-■  ■ ■ 

\S';. 


, ,•'  : T*- 

.^T  '!/'■►.  ••■  -T*  #^• 


v..-> 


f ■ 

f" . ■■  t-  -. 


■:.  -r: 


m 


V 

t'-'- 

1 -.  -i;-  ' 


A^L. 

!?  ■ i:  ^ 


•#^'  '/*r''i3j 


,1  --  . 
£ 


i'-  -.J 


i;iu  ;>rv.  •; 

:■  . .'i.'J 

^ » U ' 

*,  < -irf-i.*  .Jf  ii  . . 


’ j»’r  <^T  ••  ■■ 
- V.  V 


ai 


WILDE  STAMME 

TAFEL  1, 


SAVAGE  TRIBES  NM.  TRIBUS  SAIIYAGES 

PL  1. 


A 

w-  Ar 


1 V 1 

^ 1 

m 

E\ 

1 


mHH 

►♦♦♦♦♦♦< 
♦♦♦♦♦  t 


lllllll  ■ I IIIIIIIIIKI  ■ ■ 111111111111  ■ ■ lllillllll  ■ ■ I 


MR 


I 


^ -V'-' 
' . :f^- 

•‘v:  'm 


- ■' -/■^fl 

Ojg^.*0. 


>■  ■ r I"..,". 

' • •'  ■'  ' '’v'-J-vV.. 


<?^y- 


« . --^  ,• 


i'-  'Vr'^llih?'.'''  - 'V  '■■  '•  -■'■V  ; *■ 


'J>  '•■  .< 


I<|«  ••  • > .IV  ' ■ • ''■  ^ 


■'■fc'4'*«»i<  ■ ■'«  "'.  '■■•'■■-•'  ■■  , '■  ■■ 

■>'  *'  ■/  ':" ' .,  v'-  'i^  ■ ■ .'■;•'■'■■■■ 

..•^.s  . •■  ' 

..j--  ' . .,.w'  -v  -^v 

"*  * ■ « . . r' 

.-- ■'  V.  •'  • . :.  • • . 

■'  >'v  ->f  ~ ...  •■  .i^j#  ..  . '. 


J'fk 


. ■•I''  ’.'. 


. - . i.  *v  • 


■ 'tr''  • 


■» «;  ; — . ... 


■7’:V;k  ' • 

■ ,'  '.'■'  ..  ■ -..  ■ 


STAMM  E 


SAVAGE  TRIBES  N"E 


TRIBUS  SAUYAGE 


3S!S<e3^^3^S!)g<63s;egst«iK<^|^lSie3lg<g<lS!Sl^ae 


jy^pyrnV 


SAVAGE  TRIBES  N°3 


TRIBUS  SAUVAGR 


WILDE  STAMME 


AFEL  UI 


Chapter  II.— Plates  4,  5,  6,  6*,  7,  8,  9,  10,  II. 

EGYPTIAN  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  IV. 


1.  The  Lotus,  drawn  from  Nature. 

2.  Egyptian  representation  of  the  Lotus. 

3.  Another,  in  a different  stage  of  growth. 

4.  Three  Papyrus  Plants,  and  three  full-blown  Lotus 

Flowers  with  two  Buds,  held  in  the  hand  of  a 
King  as  an  offering  to  a God. 

5.  A full-blown  Lotus  and  two  Buds,  bound  together  with 

Eibbons,  the  type  of  the  Capitals  of  Egyptian 
Columns. 

6.  The  Lotus  and  Buds  in  the  form  of  a Column,  bound 

round  with  Matting,  from  a Painting  representing 
the  Portico  of  a Temple. 

7.  The  Base  of  the  Stem  of  the  Papyrus,  drawn  from 

Nature ; the  type  of  the  Bases  and  Shafts  of 
Egyptian  Columns. 


8.  Expanding  Bud  of  the  Papyrus,  drawn  from  Nature. 

9.  Another,  in  a less  advanced  stage  of  growth. 

10.  Egyptian  representation  of  the  Papyrus  Plant ; the  com- 

plete type  of  the  Capital,  Shaft,  and  Base  of  the 
Egyptian  Columns. 

11.  The  same,  in  combination  with  Lotus  Buds,  Grapes,  and 

Ivy. 

12.  A combination  of  the  Lotus  and  Papyrus,  representing  a 

Column  bound  with  Matting  and  Eibbons. 

13.  Egyptian  representation  of  the  Lotus  and  Buds. 

14^  "i  Eepresentations  of  the  Papyrus,  from  an  Egyptian 

15. )  Painting. 

16.  Representation  of  Plants  growing  in  the  Desert. 

17.  Representation  of  the  Lotus  and  Papyrus  growing  in 

the  Nile. 

18.  Another  variety  of  Desert  Plants. 


PLATE  V. 


1.  Fan  made  of  Feathers,  inserted  into  a wooden  Stem  in 

the  form  of  a Lotus. 

2.  Feathers  from  the  Head-dress  of  the  Horses  of  the  Royal 

Chariots. 

3.  Another  variety,  from  Aboo-Simbel. 

4.  Fans  made  of  dried  Leaves. 

5.  Ditto. 

6.  Fan. 

7.  Royal  Head-dress. 

8.  Ditto. 

9.  Representation  of  a species  of  Lotus. 


10.  The  true  Lotus. 

11.  Insignia  borne  by  certain  Officers  of  the  time  of  the 

Pharaohs. 

12.  Another  variety. 

13.1 

14,  > Gold  and  enamelled  Vases  in  the  Form  of  the  Lotus. 
16.) 

16.  A Rudder  Oar  decorated  with  the  Lotus  and  the  Eye, 

representing  the  Divinity. 

1 7.  Ditto,  another  variety. 

18.1 

f Boats  made  of  Papyrus  Plants  bound  together. 


PLATE  VI. 


1.  Capital  of  the  large  Columns  of  the  Temple  of  Luxor, 

Thebes,  of  the  time  of  Amunoph  III.,  1250  B.C.,  ac- 
cording to  Sharpe.  It  represents  the  full-blown 
Papyrus,  and  around  it  Papyri  and  Lotus  Buds  alter- 
nating. 

2.  Capital  of  the  smaller  Columns  of  the  Memnonium, 

Thebes,  b.c.  1200.  Represents  a single  Bud  of  the 


Papyrus  decorated  with  the  coloured  pendent  Fascise 
that  are  seen  in  the  painted  representations  of  Columns 
of  Plate  rV.  Nos.  5,  6, 12. 

3.  Capital  of  the  smaller  Columns  of  the  Temple  of  Luxor, 
B.c.  1250.  Representing  eight  Buds  of  the  Papyrus 
bound  together,  and  adorned  with  pendent  and 
coloured  Fasciae. 


19 


EGYPTIAN  ORNAMENT. 


Capital  from  the  unfinished  hypjethral  Temple  in  the 
Island  of  Philae.  Roman  period,  b.c.  140.  Composed 
of  the  Papyrus  Plant  in  three  stages  of  growth,  and 
arranged  in  three  tiers : the  first  composed  of  four 
full-blown  and  four  large  expanding  Papyri ; the 
second  tier,  of  eight  smaller  expanding  flowers ; and 
the  third  tier,  of  sixteen  buds : making  in  all  a 
bundle  of  thirty-two  plants.  The  stem  of  each  plant 
may  be  traced,  by  the  size  and  colour  of  its  stalk, 
down  to  the  horizontal  bands  or  fascise.  See  Plate 
IV.  Nos.  5,  6, 12. 

Capital  from  the  Temple  at  Koom-Ombos.  The  full- 
grown  Papyrus  surrounded  by  various  flowers. 

Capital  from  the  principal  Temple,  Philse.  Representing 
two  tiers  of  the  Papyrus,  in  three  stages  of  growith. 
The  first  tier  composed  of  eight  plants,  four  full-blown 
and  four  expanding ; the  second  tier  composed  of  eight 


buds : making  sixteen  plants.  In  this  capital  the 
circular  form  is  not  disturbed,  as  in  No.  11. 

Capital  from  the  unfinished  hypsethral  Temple,  Philge. 
Composed  of  three  tiers  of  the  Papyrus  Plant  in 
three  stages  of  growth.  The  first  tier  has  eight  full- 
blown and  eight  expanding  plants ; the  second  tier,  six- 
teen expanding  flowers  ; and  the  third  tier,  thirty-two 
buds  of  the  Papyrus : in  all,  sixty-four  plants.  The 
stem  of  each  plant  is  distinguished  by  its  size  and 
colour,  and  continued  down  to  the  horizontal  bands 
which  bind  them  together  round  the  shaft. 

Capital  from  the  Portico  of  Edfu,  b.c.  146.  Represents 
the  Palm-tree,  with  nine  branches,  or  faces.  The 
horizontal  fasciae  of  the  Palm-tree  Capital  differ  from 
the  fasciae  of  all  the  other  capitals,  inasmuch  as  there 
is  always  a pendent  loop. 


PLATE  VP. 


Capital  from  a Temple  in  the  Oasis  of  Thebes.  Repre- 
senting a collection  of  Aquatic  Plants,  with  triangular 
Stalks  tied  round  a single  full-blown  Papyrus. 

Capital  from  the  Portico  of  Edfu,  b.c.  145,  of  similar 
structure  to  No.  4. 

Capital  from  the  principal  Temple  in  the  Island  of  Philse, 
B.C.  106.  The  full-blown  Papyrus  surrounded  by  the 
same  flower  in  various  stages  of  growth. 

Capital  from  a Temple  in  the  Oasis  of  Thebes. 

Capital  from  the  Colonnade  of  the  Island  of  Philse. 
Representing  sixteen  Lotus  Flowers  bound  together 
in  three  tiers.  Shown  in  elevation. 

The  Capital  No.  8 seen  in  Perspective. 


10.  Capital  from  a Temple  in  the  Oasis  of  Thebes.  Re- 
presenting eight  Lotus  Flowers  bound  together  in  two 
tiers. 

15.  Capital  from  the  unfinished  hyp^thral  Temple,  Phil». 
Composed  of  the  Papyrus  in  two  stages  of  grcwth, 
arranged  in  three  tiers.  The  first  composed  of  four 
full-blown  and  four  expanding  flowers ; the  second 
tier,  of  eight  smaller,  full-blown ; and  the  third  tier,  of 
sixteen,  still  smaller. 

17.  Capital  of  the  Orseco-Egyptian  form,  but  of  tlie  Roman 
period.  Very  remarkable,  as  showing  the  Egyptian 
and  Greek  elements  combined,  viz.  the  Papyrus  in 
two  stages  of  growth,  with  the  Acanthus  leaf  and  the 
tendrils  of  the  Honeysuckle. 


PLATE  VIL 


7, - 

8, 
9.. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17, 

18, 

19. 

20. 
21. 


Ornament  on  the  top  of  the  Walls  of  a Tomb  at  Beni- 
hassan. 

Ditto  ditto. 

Ditto,  from  Karnac,  Thebes. 

Ditto,  from  Gouma,  Thebes. 

Ditto,  from  Sakhara. 

Decoration  of  the  Torus  moulding  of  some  of  the  early 
Tombs  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Pyramids  of  Giza. 

^From  a wooden  Sarcophagus. 

From  the  Tombs,  El  E[ab. 

From  the  Tombs,  Benihassan. 

From  the  Tombs,  Gourna. 

Ditto. 

Ditto. 

From  a Necklace. 

From  the  Wall  of  a Tomb,  Gourna,  immediately  under 
the  Ceiling. 

Portions  of  a Necklace. 

From  the  Wall  of  a Tomb. 

From  a Necklace. 

20 


22.  From  the  upper  part  of  the  Wall  of  a Tomb,  Sakhara. 

23.  Ditto,  at  Thebes. 

24.  From  a Necklace. 

25.  From  the  Wall  of  a Tomb,  Gourna. 

26.  From  a Sarcophagus. 

27.  From  the  Wall  of  a Tomb. 

28.  From  a Sarcophagus. 

29.  From  the  upper  part  of  a Picture. 

30.  Arrangement  of  Lines  from  dados. 

31.  From  a Sarcophagus  in  the  Louvre. 

32.  From  the  Wall  of  a Tomb,  Gourna,  representing  the 

Lotus,  in  plan  as  well  as  in  elevation. 

33.  From  a Ceiling  at  Medinet  Haboo. 

34.  Arrangement  of  Lines  from  dados,  in  Tombs. 

Nos.  1-5,  10,  11,  always  occur  on  vertical  surfaces,  and  on 
the  upper  part  of  the  walls  of  tombs  and  temples.  Nos.  7-9, 
12, 14, 18,  20,  are  all  derived  from  the  same  elements,  viz.  the 
lotus  in  a pendent  position,  with  a bunch  of  grapes  interven- 
ing. This  very  constant  Egyptian  ornament  in  some  of  its 
forms  so  much  resembles  the  Greek  moulding,  usually  termed 
the  egg-and-tongue,  or  egg-and-dart  moulding,  that  we  can 
hardly  doubt  that  the  Greek  moulding,  was  derived  from  this 
source.  Nos.  13,  15,  24,  32,  exhibit  another  element  of 
Egyptian  ornamentation  derived  from  the  separated  leaves 
of  the  Lotus. 


EGYPTIAN  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  VIII. 


The  whole  of  the  Ornaments  on  this  Plate  are  from  Mummy- 
cases  in  the  British  Museum  and  the  Louvre,  and,  like 
those  of  the  last  Plate,  are  mostly  composed  of  the 
Lotus-flower  and  single  leaves  of  the  same  plant.  In 
No.  2,  above  the  Lotus-leaves,  is  a white  ornament  on 
a black  ground,  very  common  in  the  tombs,  suggested 


by  the  interwoven  strands  of  a rope ; and  in  No.  7 
we  have  the  chequered  pattern,  one  of  the  earliest 
ornaments,  evidently  derived  from  the  weaving  to- 
gether of  different-coloured  strands.  In  the  lower 
part  of  No.  18  we  have  another  very  common  orna- 
ment, derived  from  feathers. 


PLATE  IX. 


The  Ornaments  on  this  Plate  are  taken  from  Paintings  on 
Tombs  in  various  parts  of  Egypt,  from  original  Draw- 
ings. They  are  chiefly  patterns  that  could  be  pro- 
duced by  the  loom,  and  a single  glance  will  show  that 
this  is  doubtless  the  origin  of  most  of  them. 

1-8  are  representations  of  Mats  on  which  the  kings  stand. 
They  were  evidently  formed  of  interwoven  straws  of 
different  colours.  The  transition  from  this  state  to  the 
formation  of  patterns,  such  as  9-12, 17-19,  21,  would 
be  very  rapid,  and  they  are  most  probably  only  repro- 


ductions of  woven  articles  of  daily  use.  Nos.  9 and 
10  may  have  suggested  the  fret  to  the  Greeks,  unless 
they  arrived  at  it  themselves  by  a similar  process. 

20  is  from  a Ceiling  of  a Tomb  at  Gourna.  It  represents  the 
Trellis-work  of  a Garden  Walk,  covered  with  a Vine. 
It  is  by  no  means  an  uncommon  ornament  for  the 
curved  ceilings  of  small  tombs,  and  usually  occupies 
the  whole  ceiling  of  each  excavation  at  the  period  of 
the  nineteenth  dynasty, 

21-23  are  derived  from  Mummy-cases  in  the  Louvre,  of  a late 
period. 


PLATE  X. 


1-5.  From  Mummy-cases  in  the  Louvre,  of  a late  period. 
Geometrical  arrangements  of  the  single  Lotus-leaf. 

6.  From  a Tomb  at  Thebes.  Each  circle  is  formed  of  four 

Lotus-flowers  and  four  Buds,  the  inteimediate  star 
probably  intended  for  four  Lotus-leaves. 

7,  From  a Tomb  at  Thebes. 


8,  9,  From  a Mummy-case, 

10-24  are  from  Ceilings  of  Tombs  in  various  parts  of  Egypt. 
In  Nos.  10,  13-16,  18-23,  are  various  examples  of  an 
ornament  representing  the  unvTinding  of  a pile  of 
rope,  which  may  have  given  the  first  suggestion  of 
the  volute.  In  No.  24  the  continuous  blue  line  is 
evidently  from  the  same  type. 


PLATE  XL 


1,  4,  6,  7,  are  from  Tombs  at  Thebes,  and  are  further  examples 
of  the  Rope  Ornament  given  in  the  last  Plate.  Nos. 
2 and  3 are  varieties  of  arrangements  of  Stars,  very 
common  on  the  ceilings  both  of  tombs  and  temples. 
No  2 is  formed  on  squares,  No,  3 on  equilateral 
triangles. 

9.  From  a Mummy-case. 

10.  From  the  Embroidery  on  a King’s  Robe. 

11-16  are  varieties  of  Borders  from  Paintings  in  Tombs. 

17.  From  the  Dress  of  a Figure  in  one  of  the  Royal  Tombs 
of  Biban  el  Moluk.  It  represents  the  Scales  of  the 
Armour  worn  by  the  Heroes  and  Gods  of  Egypt. 

18-20  are  similar,  and  most  probably  were  suggested  by  the 
feathers  of  birds. 


21.  Ornament  on  the  Dress  of  the  god  Amun,  from  Aboo- 

simbel. 

22.  From  a Fragment  in  the  Louvre. 

23.  Dado  from  the  Tomb  of  Ramses,  Biban  el  Moluk,  pro- 

bably representing,  in  diagram,  a Papyrus -grove,  as 
it  occupies  a similar  position  to  those  dados  of  a 
later  period  which  were  formed  of  buds  and  flowers 
of  the  papyrus. 

24.  From  a very  ancient  Tomb  at  Giza,  opened  by  Dr. 

Lepsius.  The  upper  part  represents  the  usual 
Egyptian  torus ; the  lower  portion  is  from  the  dado 
of  the  same  tomb,  and  shows  that  the  practice  of 
imitating  grained  woods  in  painting  is  of  the  highest 
antiquity. 


G 


21 


EGYPTIAN  ORNAMENT. 


The  Architecture  of  Egypt  has  this  peculiarity  over  all  other  styles,  that  the  more  ancient  the  monu- 
ment tlie  more  perfect  is  the  art.  All  the  remains  with  which  we  are  acquainted  exhibit  Egyptian  Art  in 
a state  of  decline.  Monuments  erected  two  thousand  years  before  the  Christian  era  are  formed  from  the 
ruins  of  still  more  ancient  and  more  perfect  buildings.  We  are  thus  carried  back  to  a period  too  remote 
from  our  time  to  enable  us  to  discover  any  traces  of  its  origin  ; and  whilst  we  can  trace  in  direct  succession 
the  G-reek,  the  Eoman,  the  Byzantine,  with  its  offshoots,  the  Arabian,  the  Moresque,  and  the  Gothic, 
from  this  great  parent,  we  must  believe  the  architecture  of  Egypt  to  be  a pure  original  style,  which 
arose  with  civilisation  in  Central  Africa,*  passed  through  countless  ages,  to  the  culminating  point  of 
perfection  and  the  state  of  decline  in  which  we  see  it.  Inferior  as  this  state  doubtless  is  to  the  unknown 
perfection  of  Egyptian  Art,  it  is  far  beyond  all  that  followed  after ; the  Egyptians  are  inferior  only  to 
themselves.  In  all  other  styles  we  can  trace  a rapid  ascent  from  infancy,  founded  on  some  bygone 
style,  to  a culminating  point  of  perfection,  when  the  foreign  influence  was  modified  or  discarded,  to  a 
period  of  slow,  lingering  decline,  feeding  on  its  owm  elements.  In  the  Egyptian  we  have  no  traces 
of  infancy  or  of  any  foreign  influence ; and  we  must,  therefore,  believe  that  they  went  for  inspiration 
direct  from  nature.  This  view  is  strengthened  when  we  come  to  consider  more  especially  the  ornament 
of  Eg3q)t ; the  types  are  few  and  natural  types,  the  representation  is  but  slightly  removed  from  the  type. 
The  later  we  descend  in  art,  the  more  and  more  do  we  find  original  types  receded  from ; till,  in  much 
ornament,  such  as  the  Arabian  and  Moresque,  it  is  difficult  to  discover  the  original  type  from  which  the 
ornament  has  been  by  successive  mental  efforts  developed. 

The  lotus  and  papyrus,  growing  on  the  banks  of  their  river,  symbolising  the  food  for  the  body  and 
mind;  the  feathers  of  rare  birds,  which  were  carried  before  the  king  as  emblems  of  sovereignty;  the 
palm-branch,  with  the  twisted  cord  made  from  its  stems ; these  are  the  few  types  which  form  the  basis 
of  that  immense  variety  of  ornament  with  which  the  Egyptians  decorated  the  temples  of  their  gods,  the 
palaces  of  their  kings,  the  covering  of  their  persons,  their  articles  of  luxury  or  of  more  modest  daily  use, 
from  the  wooden  spoon  which  fed  them  to  the  boat  which  carried  their  similarly  adorned  embalmed  bodies 
across  the  Nile  to  their  last  home  in  the  valley  of  the  dead.  Following  these  types  as  they  did  in  a 
manner  so  nearly  allied  to  their  natural  form,  they  could  hardly  fail  to  observe  the  same  laws  which  the 
works  of  nature  ever  display;  and  we  find,  therefore,  that  Egyptian  ornament,  however  conventionalised, 
is  always  true.  We  are  never  shocked  by  any  misapplication  or  violation  of  a natural  principle.  On 
the  other  hand,  they  never,  by  a too  servile  imitation  of  the  type,  destroyed  the  consistency  of  the 
representation.  A lotus  carved  in  stone,  forming  a graceful  termination  to  a column,  or  painted  on  the 
walls  as  an  offering  to  their  gods,  was  never  such  a one  as  might  be  plucked,  but  an  architectural 

* In  the  British  Museum  may  be  seen  a east  of  a bas-relief  from  Kalabshee  in  Nubia,  representing  the  conquests  of  Eamses  II. 
over  a black  people,  supposed  to  be  Ethiopians.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  amongst  the  presents  which  these  people  are  represented 
as  bringing  with  them  as  a tribute  to  the  King,  besides  the  leopard  skins  and  rare  auiroals,  ivory,  gold,  and  other  products  of  the  country, 
there  are  three  ivory  carved  chairs  precisely  Similar  to  that  on  which  the  King  sits  to  receive  them ; from  which  it  would  appear  that 
these  highly.elaborated  articles  of  luxury  were  derived  by  the  Egj-ptians  from  the  interior  of  Africa. 

22 


EGYPTIAN  ORNAMENT. 


representation ; in  eitlier  case  the  best  adapted  for  the  purpose  it  had  to  fill,  sufficiently  resembling  the 
type  to  call  forth  in  the  beholder  the  poetic  idea  which  it  was  sought  to  supply,  without  shocking  his 
feeling  of  consistency. 

Egyptian  ornament  is  of  three  kinds : that  which  is  constructive,  or  forming  part  of  the  monument 
itself,  of  which  it  is  the  outward  and  graceful  covering  of  the  skeleton  within;  that  which  is  representative, 
but  at  the  same  time  conventionally  rendered ; and  that  which  is  simply  decorative.  In  all  cases  it  was 
symbolic,  and,  as  we  have  observed,  formed  on  some  few  types,  which  were  but  slightly  changed  during 
the  whole  period  of  Egyptian  civilisation. 

Of  the  first  kind,  viz.  constructive  ornament,  are  the  decorations  of  the  means  of  support  and  the 
crowning  members  of  the  walls.  The  column  only  a few  feet  high,  or  one  forty  or  sixty  feet,  as  at 
Luxor  and  Karnac,  was  an  enlarged  papyrus  plant : the  base  representing  the  root ; the  shaft,  the  stalk  ; 
and  the  capital,  the  full-blown  flower,  surrounded  by  a bouquet  of  smaller  plants  (No.  1,  Plate  VI.), 
tied  together  by  bands.  Not  only  did  a series  of  columns  represent  a grove  of  papyri,  but  each  column 
was  in  itself  a grove ; and  at  No.  17  of  Plate  IV.  we  have  a representation  of  a grove  of  papyri  in 
various  stages  of  growth,  which  would  only  have  to  be  assembled  as  they  stand,  and  be  tied  round  with 
a string,  and  we  should  have  the  Egyptian  shaft  and  its  highly-ornamental  capital ; and  further,  we  have 
in  Nos.  5,  6,  10,  11,  12,  on  Plate  IV.,  painted  representations  of  columns  forming  parts  of  temples,  in 
which  the  original  idea  is  unmistakably  portrayed. 

We  may  imagine  it  the  custom  of  the  Egyptians  in  early  times  to  decorate  the  wooden  posts  of 
their  primitive  temples  with  their  native  flowers  tied  round  them ; and  this  custom,  when  their  art 
took  a more  permanent  character,  became  solidified  in  their  monuments  of  stone.  These  forms,  once 
sacred,  their  religious  laws  forbade  a change;  but  a single  glance,  however,  at  Plates  VI.  and  VI.*, 
will  show  how  little  this  possession  of  one  leading  idea  resulted  in  uniformity.  The  lotus  and  papyrus 
form  the  type  of  fifteen  of  the  capitals  we  have  selected  for  illustration ; yet  how  ingeniously  varied, 
and  what  a lesson  do  they  teach  us ! From  the  Greeks  to  our  own  time  the  world  has  been  content 
with  the  acanthus  leaf  arranged  round  a bell  for  the  capitals  of  columns  of  all  architecture  called 
classic,  differing  only  in  the  more  or  less  perfection  of  the  modelling  of  the  leaves,  or  the  graceful 
or  otherwise  proportions  of  the  bell;  a modification  in  plan  has  but  rarely  been  attempted.  And  this 
it  was  that  opened  the  way  to  so  much  development  in  the  Egyptian  capital;  beginning  with  the 

circle,  they  surrounded  it  with  four,  eight,  and  sixteen  other  circles.  If  the  same  change  were 

attempted  with  the  Corinthian  capital,  it  could  not  fail  to  produce  an  entirely  new  order  of  forms 
whilst  still  retaining  the  idea  of  applying  the  acanthus  leaf  to  the  surface  of  a bell-shaped  vase. 

The  shaft  of  the  Egyptian  column,  when  circular,  was  made  to  retain  the  idea  of  the  triangular 

shape  of  the  papyrus  stalk,  by  three  raised  lines,  which  divided  its  circumference  into  three  equal 

portions;  when  the  column  was  formed  by  a union  of  four  or  eight  shafts  bound  together,  these  had 
each  a sharp  arris  on  their  outer  face  with  the  same  intention.  The  crowning  member  or  comice  of 
an  Egyptian  building  was  decorated  with  feathers,  which  appear  to  ha^e  been  an  emblem  of  sovereignty ; 
whilst  in  the  centre  was  the  winged  globe,  emblem  of  divinity. 

The  second  kind  of  Egyptian  ornament  results  from  the  conventional  representation  of  actual  things 
on  the  walls  of  the  temples  and  tombs ; and  here  again,  in  the  representations  of  offerings  to  the  gods 
or  of  the  various  articles  of  daily  use,  in  the  paintings  of  actual  scenes  of  their  domestic  life,  every 
flower  or  other  object  is  portrayed,  not  as  a reality,  but  as  an  ideal  representation.  It  is  at  the  same 
time  the  record  of  a fact  and  an  architectural  decoration,  to  which  even  their  hieroglyphical  writing, 
explanatory  of  the  scene,  by  its  symmetrical  arrangement  added  effect.  In  No.  4,  on  Plate  TV.,  we 
have  an  example  in  the  representation  of  three  papyrus  plants  and  three  lotus  flowers,  with  two  buds, 
in  the  hand  of  a king  as  an  offering  to  the  gods.  The  arrangement  is  symmetrical  and  graceful,  and 

23 


EGYPTIAN  ORNAMENT. 


we  here  see  that  the  Egyptians,  in  thus  conventionally  rendering  the  lotus  and  papyrus,  instiactively 
obeyed  the  law  which  we  find  everywhere  in  the  leaves  of  plants,  viz.  the  radiation  of  the  leaves,  and 
all  veins  on  the  leaves,  in  graceful  curves  from  the  parent  stem ; and  not  only  do  they  follow  this  law 
in  the  drawing  of  the  individual  flower,  but  also  in  the  grouping  of  several  flowers  together,  as  may 
be  seen,  not  only  in  No.  4,  but  also  in  their  representation  of  plants  growing  in  the  desert.  Nos.  16 
and  18  of  the  same  plate,  and  in  No.  13.  In  Nos.  9 and  10  of  Plate  V.  they  learned  the  same 
lesson  from  the  feather,  another  type  of  ornament  (11  and  12,  Plate  V.);  the  same  instinct  is  again  at 
work  at  Nos.  4 and  5,  where  the  type  is  one  of  the  many  forms  of  palm-trees  so  common  in  the  country. 

The  third  kind  of  Egyptian  ornament,  viz.  that  which  is  simply  decorative,  or  which  appears  so  to 
our  eyes,  but  which  had  doubtless  its  own  laws  and  reasons  for  its  application,  although  they  are  not 
so  apparent  to  us.  Plates  VIII.,  IX.,  X.,  XI.,  are  devoted  to  this  class  of  ornament,  and  are  from 
paintings  on  tombs,  dresses,  utensils,  and  sarcophagi.  They  are  all  distinguished  by  graceful  symmetry 
and  perfect  distribution.  The  variety  that  can  be  produced  by  the  few  simple  types  we  have  referred 
to  is  very  remarkable. 

On  Plate  IX.  are  patterns  of  ceilings,  and  appear  to  be  reproductions  of  woven  patterns.  Side  by 
side  with  the  conventional  rendering  of  actual  things,  the  first  attempts  of  every  people  to  produce 
works  of  ornament  take  this  direction.  The  early  necessity  of  plaiting  together  straw  or  bark  of  trees, 
for  the  formation  of  articles  of  clothing,  the  covering  of  their  rude  dwelling,  or  the  ground  on  which 
they  reposed,  induced  the  employment  at  first  of  straws  and  bark  of  different  natural  colours,  to  be 
afterwards  replaced  by  artificial  dyes,  which  gave  the  first  idea,  not  only  of  ornament,  but  of  geome- 
trical arrangement.  Nos.  1-^,  Plate  IX.,  are  from  Egyptian  paintings,  representing  mats  whereon  the 
king  stands ; whilst.  Nos.  6 and  7 are  from  the  ceilings  of  tombs,  which  evidently  represent  tents 
covered  by  mats.  Nos.  9,  10,  12,  show  how  readily  the  meander  or  G-reek  fret  was  produced  by  the 
same  means.  The  universality  of  this  ornament  in  every  style  of  architecture,  and  to  be  found  in  some 
shape  or  other  amongst  the  first  attempts  of  ornament  of  every  savage  tribe,  is  an  additional  proof  of 
their  having  had  a similar  origin. 

The  formation  of  patterns  by  the  equal  division  of  similar  lines,  as  by  weaving,  would  give  to  a 
rising  people  the  first  notions  of  symmetry,  arrangement,  disposition,  and  the  distribution  of  masses. 
The  Egyptians,  in  their  decoration  of  large  surfaces,  never  appear  to  have  gone  beyond  a geometrical 
arrangement.  Flowing  lines  are  very  rare,  comparatively,  and  never  the  motive  of  the  composition, 
though  the  germ  of  even  this  mode  of  decoration,  the  volute  form,  exists  in  their  rope  ornament. 
(Nos.  10,  13-16,  18—24,  on  Plate  X.,  and  1,  2,  4,  7,  Plate  XI.)  Here  the  several  coils  of  rope  are 
subjected  to  a geometrical  arrangement ; but  the  unrolling  of  this  cord  gives  the  very  form  which  is 
the  source  of  so  much  beauty  in  many  subsequent  styles.  We  venture,  therefore,  to  claim  for  the 
Egyptian  style,  that  though  the  oldest,  it  is,  in  all  that  is  requisite  to  constitute  a true  style  of  art, 
the  most  perfect.  The  language  in  which  it  reveals  itself  to  us  may  seem  foreign,  peculiar,  formal, 
and  rigid ; but  the  ideas  and  the  teachings  it  conveys  to  us  are  of  the  soundest.  As  we  proceed  with 
other  styles,  we  shall  see  that  they  approach  perfection  only  so  far  as  they  followed,  in  common  with 
the  Egyptians,  the  true  principles  to  be  observed  in  every  flower  that  grows.  Like  these  favourites  of 
Nature,  every  ornament  should  have  its  perfume;  i.e.  the  reason  of  its  application.  It  should 
endeavour  to  rival  the  grace  of  construction,  the  harmony  of  its  varied  forms,  and  due  proportion  and 
subordination  of  one  part  to  the  other  found  in  the  model.  When  we  find  any  of  these  characteristics 
wanting  in  a work  of  ornament,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  belongs  to  a borrowed  style,  where  the  spirit 
which  animated  the  original  work  has  been  lost  in  the  copy. 

The  architecture  of  the  Egyptians  is  thoroughly  polychromatic, — they  painted  everything ; therefore 
we  have  much  to  learn  from  them  on  this  head.  They  dealt  in  flat  tints,  and  used  neither  shade 
24 


nor 


EGYPTIAN  ORNAMENT. 


shadow,  yet  found  no  difficulty  in  poetically  conveying  to  the  mind  the  identity  of  the  object  they 
desired  to  represent.  They  used  colour  as  they  did  form,  conventionally.  Compare  the  representation 
of  the  lotus  (No.  3,  Plate  IV.)  with  the  natural  flower  (No.  1);  how  charmingly  are  the  characteristics 
of  the  natural  flower  reproduced  in  the  representations  I See  how  the  outer  leaves  are  distinguished 
by  a darker  green,  and  the  inner  protected  leaves  by  a lighter  green ; whilst  the  purple  and  yellow 
tones  of  the  inner  flower  are  represented  by  red  leaves  floating  in  a field  of  yellow,  which  most 
completely  recalls  the  yellow  glow  of  the  original.  We  have  here  Art  added  to  Nature,  and  derive 
an  additional  pleasure  in  the  perception  of  the  mental  effort  which  has  produced  it. 

The  colours  used  by  the  Egyptians  were  principally  red,  blue,  and  yellow,  with  black  and  white 
to  define  and  give  distinctiveness  to  the  various  colours ; with  green  used  generally,  though  not 
universally,  as  a local  colour,  such  as  the  green  leaves  of  the  lotus.  These  were,  however, 
indifferently  coloured  green  or  blue;  blue  in  the  more  ancient  times,  and  green  during  the  Ptolemaic 
period;  at  which  time,  also,  were  added  both  purple  and  brown,  but  with  diminished  effect.  The  red 
also,  which  is  found  on  the  tombs  or  mummy-cases  of  the  Greek  or  Roman  period,  is  lower  in  tone 
than  that  of  the  ancient  times ; and  it  appears  to  be  a universal  rule  that,  in  all  archaic  periods  of 
art,  the  primary  colours,  blue,  red,  and  yellow,  are  the  prevailing  colours,  and  these  used  most 
harmoniously  and  successfully.  Whilst  in  periods  when  art  is  practised  traditionally,  and  . not 
instinctively,  there  is  a tendency  to  employ  the  secondary  colours  and  hues,  and  shades  of  every 
variety,  though  rarely  with  equal  success.  We  shall  have  many  opportunities  of  pointing  this  out  in 
subsequent  chapters. 


H 


25 


*( 


EGYPTIAN  N°E 


EGYPT  IE  NS 


AEGYPTISCH 


T\FEL  VI 


AEGYPTISCH  EGYPTIAN  N°4  egyptiens 


TAFEL  YTT 


FLYII, 


AEGYPTISCH 


EGYPTIAN  N°5 


EGYPTIENS 


I I ilMI:  JH  II  tl■IJI  I lit  f It  I 


O C C G C O G'G  C G O O G 


14 


ilMlWI 


iPPiPiiiiiiiiiiiiilF 


fTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTrV 


46 


aegyptisch 


EGYPTIAN  N°  6,  egyptiehs 


V^A/WWS^VWS^ 

WS^^^^\^A(WW 

ywwvs<^<vv^^/v 

Sivyv^wwwv 


i'AFEI.  IX. 


Niliiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiii 

niiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

liiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

UlMlllillilllllilllillllll 

tlUillllllllllllillllilllH 

Niiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimii 

liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

liiiiiiiiiMiiniiiiiiHiii 

liiiimHiiMiittiiiiiiiiiii 


V/ 

vr| 

Ivrl 

/\ 

w 

y\ 

w 

VN 

y.i 

ys 

>;<• 

W 

W 

y.< 

vr 

VN 

V/ 

i/.\ 

V/ 

y\ 

y,< 

/A 

w 

vv 

PEK 


X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

V 

✓ \ 

X 

X 

X 

Y \ 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

\/ 

X 

X 

X 

13 


AEGYPTISCH 


EGYPTIAN  N°7 


EGYPTIENS 


mw^mi 

pjpS^S^yM 


?L.X 


EGYPTIAN  N°  8. 


■k  'k  k 

■ ^ k ?5f  A Sf  s 


^ k k '')lt  ft  'A  * )Sf  "5^  '* 

^ lr<  K ^ ^ ^ ^ 


^ ?V  ^ Ai,*  **,**/„ 

^ ^ ^ *<■  j>\ 


AEGYPTISCH 


V.X 

o o 

© 

© 

©■ 

© 

©©© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

©© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

((% 

S...* 

(Pi 

©© 

© 

© 

© 

•*..» 

© 

(?) 

© 

©•© 

<D 

© 

© 

© 

© 

€> 

©e 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

€> 

©e 

C5 

© 

o 

0 

© 

© 

©© 

© 

© 

EGYPTIENS 


I utiitut  rn  i 


^ n H H W h 

L^  ^ ^ ua,  aai  <ai^ 


mmim^ 


jiHHHUtUfil 


« !i  I i * !i.i  » I » » » « 1 1 


r n iMTini 


miiiiiiiiiHiir 


1 1 1 1 1 

U-U-UJW44W^ 


I I I I I Winl'iy' 

III  II I 


IKimi 


Chaptek  III.  Plates  12,  13,  14, 


ASSYRIAN  AND  PERSIAN  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  XII. 


1.  Sculptured  Pavement,  Kouyunjik.  6-11.  Painted  Ornaments  from  Nimroud. 

2-4.  Painted  Ornaments  from  Nimroud.  12-14.  Sacred  Trees  from  Nimroud. 

5.  Sculptured  Pavement,  Kouyunjik. 

The  whole  of  the  ornaments  on  this  Plate  are  taken  from  Mr.  Layard’s  great  work,  The  Monvments  of  Nineveh.  Nos.  2,  3, 
4,  6,  7,  8, 10, 11,  are  coloured  as  published  in  his  work.  Nos.  1,  5,  and  the  three  Sacred  Trees,  Nos.  12, 13, 14,  are  in  relief, 
and  only  in  outline.  We  have  treated  them  here  as  painted  ornaments,  supplying  the  colours  in  accordance  with  the  prin- 
ciples indicated  by  those  above,  of  which  the  colours  are  known. 


PLATE  XIII. 


1-4.  Enamelled  Bricks  from  Khorsabad. — Flandin  & Coste. 

5.  Ornament  on  King’s  Dress,  from  Khorsabad. — F.  & C. 

6,  7.  Ornaments  on  a Bronze  Shield,  Ditto.  F.  & 0. 

8,  9.  Ornaments  on  a King’s  Dress,  Ditto.  F.  & C. 

10,  11.  Ornaments  from  a Bronze  Vessel,  Nimroud.— 

Layard. 

12.  Ornament  on  a King’s  Dress,  from  Khorsabad. — 
Flandin  & Coste. 


13.  Enamelled  Brick,  from  Khorsabad.  F.  & C. 

14.  Ornament  on  a Battering  Bam,  Khorsabad. — F.  & C. 

15.  Ornament  from  a Bronze  Vessel,  Nimroud. — Layard. 

1 6-21.  Enamelled  Bricks,  from  Khorsabad. — Flandin&  Coste. 

22.  Enamelled  Brick,  from  Nimroud. — Layard. 

23.  Ditto,  from  Bashikhah. — Layard. 

24.  Ditto,  from  Khorsabad. — Flandin  & Coste. 


The  ornaments  Nos.  5,  8,  9, 12,  are  very  common  on  the  royal  robes,  and  represent  embroidery.  We  have  restored  the 
colouring  in  a way  which  we  consider  best  adapted  for  developing  the  various  patterns.  The  remainder  of  the  ornaments  on 
this  Plate  are  coloured  as  they  have  been  published  by  Mr.  Layaid  and  Messrs.  Flandin  and  Coste. 


PLATE  XIV. 


1.  Feathered  Ornament  in  the  Curvetto  of  the  Cornice, 

Palace  No.  8,  Persepolis. — Flandin  & Coste. 

2.  Base  of  Column  from  Ruin  No.  13,  Persepolis. — F.  & C. 

4.  Ornament  on  the  Side  of  the  Staircase  of  Palace  No.  2, 

Persepolis. — F.  & C. 

5.  Base  of  Column  of  Colonnade  No.  2,  Persepolis. — F.  & C. 


6.  Base  of  Column,  Palace  No.  2,  Persepolis.  F.  & C. 

7.  Base  of  Column,  Portico  No.  1,  Persepohs.  F.  & C. 

8.  Base  of  Column  at  Istakhr.  F.  & C. 

9-12.  From  Sassanian  Capitals,  Bi  Sutoun.  F.  & C. 


13-15.  From  Sassanian  Capitals,  at  Ispahan. — Flandin  & 


Coste. 

16.  From  a Sassanian  Moulding,  Bi  Sutoun.  F.  & C. 

17.  Ornament  from  Tak  I Bostan.  F.  & C. 

18, 19.  Sassanian  Ornaments  from  Ispahan.  F.  & C. 

20.  Archivolt  from  Tak  I Bostan.  F.  & C. 

21.  Upper  part  of  Pilaster,  Tak  I Bostan.  F.  & C. 

22.  Sassanian  Capital,  Ispahan.  F.  & C. 

23.  Pilaster,  Tak  I Bostan.  F.  & C. 

24.  Capital  of  Pilaster,  Tak  I Bostan.  F.  & C. 

25.  Sassanian  Capital,  Ispahan.  F.  & C. 


27 


ASSYKIAN  AND  PERSIAN  ORNAMENT. 


Eich  as  has  been  the  harvest  gathered  by  Mods.  Botta  and  Mr.  Layard  from  the  rnins  of  Assyrian  Palaces, 
the  monuments  which  they  have  made  known  to  us  do  not  appear  to  carry  us  back  to  any  remote  period 
of  Assyrian  Art.  Like  the  monuments  of  Egypt,  those  hitherto  discovered  belong  to  a period  of  decline, 
and  of  a decline  much  farther  removed  from  a culminating  point  of  perfection.  The  Assyrian  must  have 

either  been  a borrowed  style,  or  the  ‘ 
remains  of  a more  perfect  form  of  art 
have  yet  to  be  discovered.  We  are 
strongly  inclined  to  believe  that  the 
Assyrian  is  not  an  original  style,  but 
was  borrowed  from  the  Egyptian, 
modified  by  the  difference  of  the  reli- 
gion and  habits  of  the  Assyrian  people. 

On  comparing  the  bas-reliefs  of 
Nineveh  with  those  of  Egypt  we  can- 
not but  be  struck  with  the  many  points 
of  resemblance  in  the  two  styles;  not 
only  is  the  same  mode  of  representa- 
tion adopted,  but  the  objects  repre- 
sented are  oftentimes  so  similar,  that 
it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  same 
style  could  have  been  arrived  at  by  two 
people  independently  of  each  other. 

The  mode  of  representing  a river,  a 
tree,  a besieged  city,  a group  of  prison- 
ers, a battle,  a king  in  his  chariot,  are 
almost  identical, — the  differences  which 
exist  are  only  those  which  would  result 
from  the  representation  of  the  habits  of 
two  different  people ; the  art  appears  to 
us  to  be  the  same.  Assyrian  sculpture 
seems  to  be  a development  of  the 
Egyptian,  but,  instead  of  being  carried 
forward,  descending  in  the  scale  of 
perfection,  bearing  the  same  relation  to 
the  Egyptian  as  the  Eoman  does  to  the 
Greek.  Egyptian  sculpture  gradually 
declined  from  the  time  of  the  Pharaohs  to  that  of  the  Greeks  and  Eomans  ; the  forms,  which  were 
at  first  flowing  and  graceful,  became  coarse  and  abrupt  ; the  swelling  of  the  limbs,  which  was  at  first 
28  ' 


ASSYRIAIT  AND  PEESIAN  ORNAMENT. 


ratlier  indicated  than  expressed,  became  at  last  exaggerated;  the  conventional  was  abandoned  for  an 
imperfect  attempt  at  the  natural.  In  Assyrian  sculpture  this  attempt  was  carried  still  farther,  and 
while  the  general  arrangement  of  the  subject  and  the  ^ose  of  the  single  figure  were  still  conventional, 
an  attempt  was  made  to  express  the  muscles  of  the  limbs  and  the  rotundity  of  the  flesh;  in  all  art 
this  is  a symptom  of  decline.  Nature  should  be  idealised  not  copied.  Many  modem  statues  differ  in 
the  same  way  from  the  Venus  de  Milo,  as  do  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  Ptolemies  from  those  of  the 
Pharaohs. 

Assyrian  Ornament,  we  think,  presents  also  the  same  aspect  of  a borrowed  style  and  one  in  a state 
of  decline.  It  is  tme  that,  as  yet,  we  are  but  imperfectly  acquainted  with  it;  the  portions  of  the 
Palaces,  which  would  contain  the  most  ornament,  the  upper  portions  of  the  walls  and  the  ceilings, 
having  been,  from  the  nature  of  the  construction  of  Assyrian  edifices,  destroyed.  There  can  be  little 
doubt,  however,  that  there  was  as  much  ornament  employed  in  the  Assyrian  monuments  as  in  the 
Egyptian : in  both  styles  there  is  a total  absence  of  plain  surfaces  on  the  walls,  which  are  either 
covered  with  subjects  or  with  writing,  and  in  situations  where  these 
would  have  been  inapplicable,  pure  ornament  must  have  been  employed 
to  sustain  the  general  effect.  What  we  possess  is  gathered  from  the 
dresses  on  the  figures  of  the  bas-reliefs,  some  few  fragments  of  painted 
bricks,  some  objects  of  bronze,  and  the  representations  of  the  sacred 
trees  in  the  bas-reliefs.  As  yet  we  have  had  no  remains  of  their  con- 
structive ornament,  the  columns  and  other  means  of  support,  which 
would  have  been  so  decorated,  being  everywhere  destroyed;  the  con- 
structive ornaments  which  we  have  given  in  Plate  XIV.,  from  Persepolis, 
being  evidently  of  a much  later  date,  and  subject  to  other  influences, 
would  be  very  unsafe  guides  in  any  attempt  to  restore  the  constructive 
ornament  of  the  Assyrian  Palaces. 

Assyrian  ornament,  though  not  based  on  the  same  types  as  the 
Egyptian,  is  represented  in  the  same  way.  In  both  styles  the  orna- 
ments in  relief,  as  well  as  those  painted,  are  in  the  nature  of  diagrams. 

There  is  but  little  surface-modelling,  which  was  the  peculiar  invention 
of  the  Grreeks,  who  retained  it  within  its  true  limits,  but  the  Eomans 
caiTied  it  to  great  excess,  till  at  last  all  breadth  of  effect  was  destroyed. 

The  Byzantines  returned  again  to  moderate  relief,  the  Arabs  reduced 
the  relief  still  farther,  while  with  the  Moors  a modelled  surface  became 
extremely  rare.  In  the  other  direction,  the  Romanesque  is  distinguished 
in  the  same  way  from  the  Early  -Grothic,  wMch  is  itself  much  broader  Assyrian, 

in  effect  than  the  later  Grothic,  where  the  surface  at  last  became  so  laboured  that  all  repose  was 
destroyed. 

With  the  exception  of  the  pine-apple  on  the  sacred  trees,  Plate  XII.,  and  in  the  painted  ornaments, 
and  a species  of  lotus.  Nos.  4 and  5,  tlie  ornaments  do  not  appear  to  be  formed  on  any  natural  type, 
which  still  farther  strengthens  the  idea  that  the  Assyrian  is  not  an  original  style.  The  natural  laws 
of  radiation  and  tangential  curvature,  which  we  find  in  Egyptian  ornament,  are  equally  observed 
here,  but  much  less  truly, — rather,  as  it  were,  traditionally  than  instinctively.  Nature  is  not  followed 
so  closely  as  by  the  Egyptians,  nor  so  exquisitely  conventionalised  as  by  the  Greeks.  Nos.  2 and  3, 
Plate  XIII.,  are  generally  supposed  to  be  the  types  from  which  the  Greeks  derived  some  of  their 
painted  ornaments,  but  how  inferior  they  are  to  the  Greek  in  purity  of  form  and  in  the  distribution 
of  the  masses ! 

I 29 


ASSYRIAN  AND  PERSIAN  ORNAMENT. 


The  colours  in  use  by  the  Assyrians  appear  to  have  been  blue,  red,  white,  and  black,  on  their 
painted  ornaments;  blue,  red,  and  gold,  on  their  sculptured  ornaments;  and  green,  orange,  buff,  white 
and  black,  on  their  enamelled  bricks. 

The  ornaments  of  Persepolis,  represented  on  Plate  XIV.,  appear  to  be  modifications  of  Roman 
details.  Nos.  3,  5,  6,  7,  8,  are  from  bases  of  fluted  columns,  which  evidently  betray  a Roman  influ- 
ence. The  ornaments  from  Tak  I Bostan, — 17,  20,  21,  23,  24, — are  all  constructed  on  the  same 
principle  as  Roman  ornament,  presenting  only  a similar  modification  of  the  modelled  surface,  such  as 
we  find  in  Byzantine  ornament,  and  which  they  resemble  in  a most  remarkable  manner. 

The  ornaments,  12  and  16,  from  Sassanian  capitals,  Byzantine  in  their  general  outline,  at  Bi 
Sutoun,  contain  the  germs  of  all  the  ornamentation  of  the  Arabs  and  Moors.  It  is  the  earliest  example 
we  meet  with  of  lozenge-shaped  diapers.  The  Egyptians  and  the  Assyrians  appear  to  have  covered 
large  spaces  with  patterns  formed  by  geometrical  arrangement  of  lines;  but  this  is  the  first  instance 
of  the  repetition  of  curved  lines  forming  a general  pattern  enclosing  a secondary  form.  By  the  prin- 
ciple contained  in  No.  16  would  be  generated  all  those  exquisite  forms  of  diaper  which  covered  the 
domes  of  the  mosques  of  Cairo  and  the  walls  of  the  Alhambra. 


Sassanian  Capital  from  Bi  Siitoun.— Flandin  & Costs. 


30 


ASSYRISCH &PERSISCH.  NINEVEH  & PER  SIA  N°  2 assyriens  et  perses 


rAFELXlII. 


omnBnH 

ansoEin 

□□□□□□ 


a\/\/\/\A/^A/^ 


TQ>A/>7\ymA: 
’!C?\/\A  AAA 

7pVAA:A.AA.Ay; 


PLXin, 


!••••« 
• •••• 
!••••< 


20 


0 

Dlsla 

0 

PlPln 

n 

o|  D |d 

a 

p 

£ 

P 

0 

n 

_Q_ 

□ 

0 

P 

_b 

a 

0 

3 

£ 

a 

a. 

n|ald 

B 

alctln 

o 

□ C [a 

ft- 

n 

n 

t; 

0 

tt 

U 

0 

n 

11 

5 

0 

£ 

£ 

a 

n 

n|o|n 

a 

nm|o 

a 

n|Dlcr 

B 

P_ 

D 

n 

0 

a 

a 

a 

0 

n. 

£ 

n 

0 

□ 

£ 

P 

a 

ninln 

o 

n. 

ninln 

ti 

21 


24 


Chapter  IV. 


Plates  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22. 


GREEK  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  XV. 

A collection  of  the  various  forms  of  the  Greek  Fret  from  Vases  and  Pavements. 


PLATE  XVI.-XXI. 


Ornaments  from  Greek  and  Etrascan  Vases  in  the  British  Museum  and  the  Louvre. 


PLATE  XXII. 


1 and  4. 
3,  5-11. 
12-17. 
IS. 

19-21,  24-26. 
22  and  27. 
29. 

30-33. 


From  a Sarcophagus,  in  Sicily. — Hittorpf. 

From  the  Propylsea,  Athens. — Hittorpf. 

From  the  Coffers  of  the  Ceiling  of  the  Propylaea. — Penrose. 

String-course  oyer  tlie  Panathenaic  Frieze.  Pnblislled  by  Mr,  Penrose  in  gold  only,  we  have  supplied  the  blue 
and  red. 

Painted  Ornaments. — Hittorpf. 

Ornaments  in  Terra  Cotta. 

Painted  Ornament  from  the  Cymatium  of  theraking  Cornice  of  the  Parthenon. — L.  Vulliamy,  the  blue 
and  red  supplied. 

Various  Frets,  the  traces  of  which  exist  on  all  the  Temples  at  Athens.  The  colours  supplied. 


We  have  seen  that  Egyptian  Ornament  was  derived  direct  from  natural  inspiration,  that  it  was 
founded  on  a few  types,  and  that  it  remained  unchanged  during  the  whole  course  of  Egyptian 
civilization,  except  in  the  more  or  less  perfection  of  the  execution,  the  more  ancient  monuments  being 
the  most  perfect.  We  have  further  expressed  our  belief  that  the  Assyrian  was  a borrowed  style, 
possessing  none  of  the  characteristics  of  original  inspiration,  but  rather  appearing  to  have  been 
suggested  by  the  Art  of  Egypt,  already  in  its  decline,  which  decline  was  carried  still  farther.  Greek 
Art,  on  the  contrary,  though  borrowed  partly  from  the  Egyptian  and  partly  from  the  Assyrian,  was  the 
development  of  an  old  idea  in  a new  direction;  and,  unrestrained  by  religious  laws,  as  would  appear 

31 


GEEEK  ORNAMENT. 


to  have  been  both  the  Assyrian  and  the  Egyptian,  Greek  Art  rose  rapidly  to  a high  state  of  perfection, 
from  which  it  was  itself  able  to  give  forth  the  elements  of  future  greatness  to  other  styles.  It  carried 


Upper  part  ofa  Stole.  L.  Vctlliamy.  The  upperpart  ofa'Stele.  L.  Vulliamt. 


the  perfection  of  pure  form  to  a point  which  has  never  since  been  reached;  and  from  the  very 
abundant  remains  we  have  of  Greek  ornament,  we  must  believe  the  presence  of  refined  taste  was 
32 


GREEK  ORNAMENT. 


almost  universal,  and  that  the  land  was  overflowing  with  artists,  whose  hands  and  minds  were  so 
trained  as  to  enable  them  to  execute  these  beautiful  ornaments  with  unerring  truth, 

Greek  ornament  was  wanting,  however,  in  one  of  the  great  charms  which  should  always  accompany 
ornament, — viz.  Symbolism,  It  was  meaningless,  purely  decorative,  never  representative,  and  can 
hardly  be  said  to  be  constructive;  for  the  various  members  of  a Greek  monument  rather  present 
surfaces  exquisitely  designed  to  receive  ornament,  which  they  did,  at  flrst,  painted,  and  in  later  times 
both  carved  and  painted.  The  ornament  was  no  part  of  the  construction,  as  with  the  Egyptian : it 
could  be  removed,  and  the  structure  remained  unchanged.  On  the  Corinthian  capital  the  ornament  is 
applied,  not  constructed : it  is  not  so  on  the  Egyptian  capital ; there  we  feel  the  whole  capital  is  the 
ornament, — to  remove  any  portion  of  it  would  destroy  it. 

However  much  we  admire  the  extreme  and  almost  divine  perfection  of  the  Greek  monumental 
sculpture,  in  its  application  the  Greeks  frequently  went  beyond  the  legitimate  bounds  of  ornament. 
The  frieze  of  the  Parthenon  was  placed  so  far  from  the  eye  that  it  became  a diagram ; the  beauties 
which  so  astonish  us  when  seen  near  the  eye  could  only  have  been  valuable  so  far  as  they  evidenced 
the  artist-worship  which  cared  not  that  the  eye  saw  the  perfection  of  the  work  if  conscio.us  that  it  was 
to  be  found  there : but  we  are  bound  to  consider  this  an  abuse  of  means,  and  that  the  Greeks  were 
in  this  respect  inferior  to  the  Egyptians,  whose  system  of  incavo  relievo  for  monumental  sculpture 
appears  to  us  the  more  perfect. 

The  examples  of  representative  ornament  are  very  few,  with  the  exception  of  the  wave  ornament 
and  the  fret  used  to  distinguish  water  from  land  in  their  pictures,  and  some  conventional  renderings 
of  trees,  as  at  No.  12,  Plate  XXI.,  we  have  little  that  can  deserve  this  appellation,  but  of  decorative 
ornament  the  Greek  and  Etruscan  vases  supply  us  with  abundant  materials;  and  as  the  painted 
ornaments  of  the  Temples,  which  have  as  yet  been  discovered  in  no  way  differ  from  them,  we  have 
little  doubt  that  we  are  acquainted  with  Greek  ornament  in  all  its  phases.  Like  the  Egyptian 
the  types  are  few,  but  the  conventional  rendering  is  much  further  removed  from  the  types.  In 
the  well  - known  honeysuckle  ornament  it  is  difficult  to  recognise  any  attempt  at  imitation,  but 
rather  an  appreciation  of  the  principle  on  which  the  flower  gr^ws ; and,  indeed,  on  examining 
the  paintings  on  the  vases,  we  are  rather  tempted  to  believe  that  the  various  forms  of  the  leaves 
of  a Greek  flower  have  been  generated  by  the  brush  of  the  painter, 
according  as  the  hand  is  turned  upwards  or  downwards  in  the 
formation  of  the  leaf  would  the  character  be  given,  and  it  is  more 
likely  that  the  slight  resemblance  to  the  honeysuckle  may  have  been 
an  after  recognition  than  that  the  natural  flower  should  have  ever 
served  as  the  model.  In  Plate  XCIX.  will  be  found  a representation 
of  the  honeysuckle : and  how  faint  indeed  is  the  resemblance.  What  is  evident  is,  that  the  Greeks 
in  their  ornament  were  close  observers  of  nature,  and  although  they  did  not  copy,  or  attempt  to 
imit^e,  they  worked  on  the  same  principles.  The  three  great  laws  which  we  find  everywhere  in 
nature — radiation  from  the  parent  stem,  proportionate  distribution  of  the  areas,  and  the  tangential 
curvature  of  the  lines — are  always  obeyed,  and  it  is  the  unerring  perfection  with  which  they  are, 
in  the  most  humble  works  as  in  the  highest,  which  excites  our  astonishment,  and  which  is  only 
fully  realised  on  attempting  to  reproduce  Greek  ornament,  so  rarely  done  with  success.  A very 
characteristic  feature  of  Greek  ornament,  continued  by  the  Romans,  but  abandoned  during  the 
Byzantine  period,  is,  that  the  various  parts  of  a scroll  grow  out  of  each  other  in  a continuous  Hne, 
as  the  ornament  from  the  Choragic  Monument  of  Lysicrates. 

In  the  Byzantine,  the  Arabian  Moresque,  and  Early  English  styles,  the  flowers  flow  off  on 
either  side  from  a continuous  line.  We  have  here  an  instance  how  slight  a change  in  any 

K 33 


GREEK  ORNAMENT. 


generally  received  principle  is  sufficient  to  generate  an  entirely  new  order  of  forms  and  ideas. 
Koman  ornament  is  constantly  struggling  against  this  apparently  fixed  law.  At  the  head  of  the 
Eoman  chapter  is  a fine  example,  which  may  be  taken  as  a type  of  all  other  Roman  ornament, 
which  scarcely  ever  got  beyond  the  arrangement  of  a volute  springing  from  a stem  fitting  into 


From  the  Choragic  Monument  of  Lysicaates,  Athens.  L.  Vuluamt. 


another  stem,  encircling  a flower.  The  change  which  took  place  during  the  Byzantine  period  in 
getting  rid  of  this  fixed  law  was  as  important  in  its  results  to  the  development  of  ornament, 
as  was  the  substitution  of  the  arch  by  the  Eomans  for  the  straight  architrave,  or  the  introduction 
of  the  pointed  arch  in  Gothic  architecture.  These  changes  have  the  same  influence  in  the 
development  of  a new  style  of  ornament  as  the  sudden  discovery  of  a general  law  in  science, 
or  the  lucky  patented  idea  which  in  any  work  .of  industry  suddenly  lets  loose  thousands  of  minds 
to  examine  and  improve  upon  the  first  crude  thought. 

Plate  XXII.  is  devoted  to  the  remains  of  coloured  ornaments  on  the  Greek  monuments.  It  will 
be  seen  that  there  is  no  difference  whatever  in  the  character  of  the  drawing  to  those  found  on  the 
vases.  It  is  now  almost  universally  recognised,  that  the  white  marble  temples  of  the  Greeks  were 
entirely  covered  with  painted  ornament.  Whatever  doubts  may  exist  as  to  the  more  or  less  colouring 
of  the  sculpture,  there  can  be  none  as.  to  the  ornaments  of  the  mouldings.  The  traces  of  colour  exist 
everywhere  so  strongly,  that  in  taking  casts  of  the  mouldings  the  traces  of  the  pattern  are  strongly 
marked  on  the  plaster  cast.  What  the  particular  colours  were,  however,  is  not  so  certain.  Different 
authorities  give  them  differently : where  one  will  see  green,  another  finds  blue, — or  imagines  gold 
where  another  sees  brown.  We  may  be  quite  certain,  however,  of  one  point, — all  these  ornaments  on 
the  mouldings  were  so  high  from  the  ground,  and  so  small  in  proportion  to  the  distance  from  which 
they  were  seen,  that  they  must  have  been  coloured  in  a manner  to  render  them  distinct  and  to  bring 
out  the  pattern.  It  is  with  this  consideration  that  we  have  ventured  to  supply  the  colour  to  18,  29 
31,  32,  33,  which  have  hitherto  been  published  only  as  gold  or  brown  ornaments  on  the  white 
marble. 

Plate  XV.  In  this  Plate  are  given  a collection  of  the  different  varieties  of  the  Greek  fret,  from 
the  simple  generating  form  No.  3,  to  the  more  complicated  meander  No.  13.  It  will  be  seen,  that 
the  variety  of  arrangement  of  form  that  can  be  produced  by  the  interlacing  of  lines  at  right  angles  in  this 
form  is  very  limited.  We  have,  first,  the  simple  fret.  No.  1,  running  in  one  direction  with  a single  line ; 

34 


GEEEK  ORNAMENT. 


the  double  fret,  No.  11,  with  the  second  line  interlacing  with  the  first;  all  the  others  are  formed  by 
placing  these  frets  one  under  the  other,  running  in  different  directions,  as  at  No.  17 ; back  to  back, 
as  at  Nos.  18  and  19;  or  enclosing  squares,  as  at  No.  20.  All  the  other  kinds  are  imperfect  frets, — 
that  is,  not  forming  a continuous  meander.  The  raking  fret.  No.  2,  is  the  parent  of  all  the  other  forms 
of  interlacing  ornament  in  styles  which  succeeded  the  Greek.  From  this  was  first  derived  the  Arabian 
fret,  which  in  its  turn  gave  birth  to  that  infinite  variety  of  interlaced  ornaments  formed  by  the 
intersection  of  equidistant  diagonal  lines,  which  the  Moors  carried  to  such  perfection  in  the 
Alhambra. 


Greek. 


Arabian. 


Arabian.  Moresque. 


Celtic. 


The  knotted  work  of  the  Celts  differs  from  the  Moresque  interlaced  patterns  only  in  adding 
curved  terminations  to  the  diagonal  intersecting  lines.  The  leading  idea 
once  obtained,  it  gave  birth  to  an  immense  variety  of  new  forms. 

The  knotted  rope  ornament  of  the  Greeks  may  also  have  had  some 
influence  in  the  formation  both  of  these  and  the  Arabian  and  Moresque 
interlaced  ornaments. 

The  Chinese  frets  are  less  perfect  than  any  of  these.  They  are 
formed,  like  the  Greek,  by  the  intersection  of  perpendicular  with  horizontal  lines,  but  they  have 
not  the  same  regularity,  and  the  meander  is  more  often  elongated  in  the  horizontal  direction. 


They  are  also  most  frequently  used  fragmentally,— that  is,  there  is  a repetition  of  one  fret  after 
the  other,  or  one  below  the  other,  without  forming  a continuous  meander. 

The  Mexican  ornaments  and  frets,  of  which  we  here  give  some  illustrations  from  Mexican  pottery 
in  the  British  Museum,  have  a remarkable  affinity  with  the  &reek  fret ; and 
in  Mr.  Catherwood’s  illustra- 
tions  of  the  architecture  of 
Yucatan  we  have  several  va- 
rieties of  the  Greek  fret : one 
especially  is  thoroughly  Greek. 

But  they  are,  in  general,  fragmentary,  like  the  Chinese:  there  is  also  to  be 
found  at  Yucatan  a fret  with  a diagonal  line,  which  is  peculiar. 

The  ornaments  on  Plate  XVI.  have  been  selected  to  show  the  various  forms 
of  conventional  leafage  to  be  found  on  the  Greek  vases.  They  are  all  very  far  removed  from  any  natural 

35 


E/3  E\3 


From  Yucatan. 


GREEK  ORNAMENT. 


type^  and  are  rather  constructed  on  the  general  principles  which  reign  in  all  plants,  than  attempt  to 
represent  any  particular  one.  The  ornament  No.  2 is  the  nearest  approach  to  the  honeysuckle, — that  is, 
the  leaves  have  the  peculiar  turn  upwards  of  that  flower,  but  it  can  hardly  be  called  an  attempt  to 
represent  it.  Several  of  the  ornaments  on  Plate  XVII.  are  much  nearer  to  Nature : the  laurel,  the  ivy, 
and  vine  will  be  readily  distinguished.  Plates  XVIII.,  XIX.,  XX.,  and  XXI.,  present  further  varieties 
from  borders,  necks,  and  lips  of  vases  in  the  British  Museum  and  the  Louvre.  Being  produced  by  one 
or  two  colours,  they  all  depend  for  their  effect  on  pure  form : they  have 
mostly  this  peculiarity,  that  the  groups  of  leaves  or  flowers  all  spring  from 
a curved  stem,  with  a volute  at  either  end,  and  all  the  lines  grow  out 
of  this  parent  stem  in  tangential  curves.  The  individual  leaves  all  radiate  from  the  centre 
of  the  group  of  leaves,  each  leaf  diminishing  in  exquisite  proportion  as  it  approaches  the 
springing  of  the  group. 

When  we  consider  that  each  leaf  was  done  with  a single  stroke  of  the  brush,  and  that  from  the 
differences  which  appear  we  may  be  sure  no  mechanical  aids  were  employed,  we  must  be  astonished 
at  the  high  state  of  the  Arts  which  must  have  existed  for  artists  to  be  found  in  such  numbers  able 
to  execute  with  unerring  truth  what  it  is  almost  beyond  the  skill  of  modern  times  even  to  copy  with 
the  same  happy  result. 


36 


GREEK  ORNAMENT. 


ORNAMENTS  FROM  MEXICAN  POTTERY  IN  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM. 


r 


37 


GRIECIHSCH 


GREEK  N°I. 


TAFELXY. 

151515151515151! 


grecs 

PL  XV 

iiiiiimiiiiinmiiii 

3 


5 


mi! 


nig 


sBsa 


g 

m 

E 

E 

E 

E 

E 

E 

E 

E 

o 

0 

o 

0 

D 

O 

O 

o 

o 

2 

El 

EI 

\b 

Ie 

Is 

Ie 

b 

b 

b 

b 

^1^ 


giki3ra 


P 

ii 

l5| 

m 

pi 

m 

[p 

m 

iZfS 

iii 

19 


20 


GREEK  N°  3. 


GRIECIHSCH 

TAFELXVIL 


szmsEi  .iMmU 

i] 


GREGS 

, PLX-'lf 

^ •IfflllfflOl 


1 iiiiiii  iiiiiii  II 


“I 


36  37  3K  39  40  4t  4-;  43  4^44  .«S 


I * m^i 

A A A * A 


*■^AA/Wv^A/'VWWV 

f f f f f 


GRIECIHSCH. 


GREEK  N°  4^ 


GREGS. 


TAPJ2U  XV!U 


r-6-aOT^V>i 


GREEK  N°  5 


GRIECIHSCH 

TAFEL.  XIX 


GREGS 

PI.  XIX, 


\AAAAA/ 

AAA/V\A 

\AAA/\/V 

AAAAAA 

VWVW 

AAAAAA 


GREGS, 


PL  rxi 


GRiBciHscH.  GRE.E.K  N°  7. 


\\\\ 


7'A£^ 


7 


Chapter  V. — Plates  23,  24,  25. 


POMPEIAN  OKNAMENT. 


PLATE  XXTTT. 


Collection  of  Borders  from  different  Houses  in  Pompeii.— Zahn^s  Pompeii. 


PLATE  XXIV. 


V arious  Pilasters  and  Friezes  from  different  Houses  in  Pompeii. — Zahn’s  Pompeii. 


PLATE  XXV. 


Collection  of  Mosaics  from  Pompeii  and  the  Museum  at  Naples. — From  the  Author’s  Sketches. 


The  ornament  of  Pompeii  has  been  so  ably  and  so  fully  illustrated  in  Zahn’s  magnificent 
work,  that  we  have  thought  it  only  necessary  for  this  series  to  borrow  from  him  the  materials 
for  two  plates,  to  illustrate  the  two  distinct  styles  of  ornament  which  prevail  in  the  decorations 
of  the  edifices  of  Pompeii.  The  first  (Plate  XXIII.)  are  evidently  of  Grreek  origin,  composed  of 
conventional  ornaments  in  fiat  tints,  either  painted  dark  on  a light  ground,  or  light  on  a dark 
ground,  but  without  shade  or  any  attempt  at  relief;  the  second  (Plate  XXPV.)  are  more  Roman 
in  character,  based  upon  the  acanthus  scroll,  and  interwoven  "with  ornament  in  direct  imitation  of 
Nature. 

We  refer  the  reader  to  Zahn’s  work*  for  a full  appreciation  of  the  system  of  ornamentation 
in  use  at  Pompeii.  An  examination  of  this  work  will  show  that  this  system  was  carried  to  the 
very  limit  of  caprice,  and  that  almost  any  theory  of  colouring  and  decoration  could  be  supported 
by  authority  from  Pompeii. 

The  general  arrangement  of  the  decoration  on  the  walls  of  the  interior  of  a Pompeian  house 

* Les  plus  Beaux  Ornemens  et  les  Tableaux  let  plus  Remarquables  de  Pompei,  d’Herculanum,  et  de  Stabiee,  (to.,  par  GruUlaunie  Zahn : 
Berlin,  1828. 


39 


POMPEIAN  ORNAMENT. 


consists  of  a dado,  about  one-sixtb  of  the  height  of  the  wall,  upon  which  stand  broad  pilasters, 
half  the  width  of  the  dado,  dividing  the  wall  into  three  or  more  panels.  The  pilasters  are 
united  by  a frieze  of  varjring  width,  about  one  - fourth  of  the  height  of  the  wall  from  the  top. 
The  upper  space  is  frequently  white,  and  it  is  always  sub- 
jected to  a much  less  severe  treatment  than  the  parts  below, 
generally  representing  the  open  air,  and  upon  the  ground  are 
painted  those  fantastic  architectural  buildings  which  excited 
the  ire  of  Vitruvius.  In  the  best  examples  there  is  a gra- 
dation of  colour  from  the  ceiling  downwards,  ending  with 
black  in  the  dado,  but  this  is  very  far  from  being  a fixed 
law.  We  select  from  the  coloured  illustrations  in  Zahn’s 
work  several  varieties  which  will  show  how  little  this  was 

the  result  of  system: — Diagram  ofthe  side  ofa  Pompeian  House. 


Dado. 

Pilasters. 

Yellow 

Green 

Bed 

Bed 

Black 

Yellow 

Black 

Yellow 

Blue 

Yellow 

Blue 

Yellow 

Black 

Green 

Black 

Grey 

Black 

Black 

Pands. 

Freize. 

Bed 

Black 

Black 

Purple 

Black 

Red 

Green 

Green 

Green 

Green 

Blue 

Blue 

Yellow  and  Bed 

White 

(alternately) 
Yellow  and  Bed 

Black 

(alternately) 

Green  and  Red 

White 

(alternately) 

The  most  effective  arrangement  appears  to  be  black  dado,  red  pilasters  and  frieze,  with 
yellow,  blue,  or  white  panels,  the  upper  part  above  the  frieze  being  in  white,  with  coloured 
decorations  upon  it.  The  best  arrangement  of  colours  for  the  ornaments  on  the  ground,  appears 
to  be,  on  the  black  grounds,  green  and  blue  in  masses,  red  sparingly,  and  yellow  still  more  so. 
On  the  blue  grounds,  white  in  thin  lines,  and  yellow  in  masses.  On  the  red  grounds,  green, 
white,  and  blue  in  thin  lines;  the  yellow  on  red  is  not  effective  unless  heightened  with  shade. 

Almost  every  variety  of  shade  and  tone  of  colour  may  be  found  at  Pompeii.  Blue,  red,  and 
yellow  are  used,  not  only  in  small  quantities  in  the  ornaments,  but  also  in  large  masses  as 
grounds  for  the  panels  and  pilasters.  The  yellow  of  Pompeii,  however,  nearly  approaches  orange, 
and  the  red  is  strongly  tinged  with  blue.  This  neutral  character  of  the  colours  enables  them 
to  be  so  violently  juxtaposed  without  discord,— a result  still  further  assisted  by  the  secondary  and 
tertiary  colours  by  which  they  are  surrounded. 

The  whole  style,  however,  of  the  decoration  is  so  capricious  that  it  is  beyond  the  range  of 
true  art,  and  strict  criticism  cannot  be  applied  to  it.  It  generally  pleases,  but,  if  not  absolutely 
vulgar,  it  oftentimes  approaches  vulgarity.  It  owes  its  greatest  charm  to  the  light,  sketchy, 
free-hand  manner  of  its  execution,  which  it  Is  quite  impossible  to  render  in  any  drawing ; and 
40 


POMPEIAN  ORNAMENT. 


whicl\  kas  never  been  accomplished  in  any  restoration  of  the  style.  The  reason  is  obvious : the 
artists  of  Pompeii  invented  as  they  drew;  every  touch  of  their  brush  had  an  intention  which  no 
copyist  can  seize. 

Mr.  Digby  Wyatt’s  restoration  of  a Pompeian  house  in  the  Crystal  Palace,  Sydenham,  admirable 
and  faithful  as  it  is  in  all  other  respects,  necessarily  failed  in  this;  no  one  could  possibly  have 
brought  greater  knowledge,  experience,  and  zeal  to  bear  upon  the  realisation  of  that  accuracy  in 
the  decorations  which  was  so  much  desired  than  did  Signor  Abbate.  The  want  of  his  perfect 
success  consisted  in  the  fact,  that  his  paintings  were  at  the  same  time  too  well  executed  and  not 
sufficiently  individual. 

The  ornaments  which  are  given  on  Plate  XXIII.,  and  which  have  evidently  a Greek  character, 
are  generally  borders  on  the  panels,  and  are  executed  with  stencils.  They  have  a thinness  of 
character  compared  with  Greek  models,  which  show  a marked  inferiority ; we  no  longer  find 
perfect  radiation  of  lines  from  the  parent  stem,  nor  perfect  distribution  of  masses  and  proportional 
areas.  Their  charm  lies  in  an  agreeable  contrast  of  colour,  which  is  still  further  heightened  when 
surrounded  with  other  colours  in  situ. 

The  ornaments  from  pilasters  and  friezes  on  Plate  XXIV.,  after  tlie  Eoman  type,  are  shaded 
to  give  rotundity,  but  not  sufficiently  so  to  detach  them  from  the  ground.  In  this  the  Pompeian 
artists  showed  a judgment  in  not  exceeding  that  limit  of  the  treatment  of  ornament  in  the  round, 
altogether  lost  sight  of  in  subsequent  times.  We  have  here  the  acanthus  - leaf  scroll  forming  the 
groundwork,  on  which  are  engrafted  representations  of  leaves  and  flowers  interlaced  with  animals, 
precisely  similar  to  the  remains  found  in  the  Eoman  baths,  and  which,  in  the  time  of  Eaphael, 
became  the  foundation  of  Italian  ornament. 

In  Plate  XXV.  we  have  gathered  together  all  the  forms  of  mosaic  pavement,  which  was  such 
a feature  in  every  home  of  the  Eomans,  wherever  their  dominion  extended.  In  the  attempt  at 
relief  shown  in  several  of  the  examples,  we  have  evidence  that  their  taste  was  no  longer  so  refined 
as  that  of  their  Greek  teachers.  The  borders  formed  by  a repetition  of  hexagons  at  the  top  and 
the  sides  of  the  page,  are  the  types  from  which  we  may  directly  trace  all  that  immense  variety 
of  Byzantine,  Arabian,  and  Moresque  mosaics. 


4 


M 


41 


POMPEIEHS 

PL  XXIIl 


I^OMPE-IISCH 


POMPEIAN  3 


-Mi 


Fragment  in  White  Marble  from  the  Mattel  Palace,  Rome.—L.  Vulliamy.' 


Chapter  VI. — Plates  26,  27. 

ROMAN  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  XXVI. 

1, 2.  Fragments  from  the  Forum  of  Trajan,  Rome.  1 4.  Pilaster  from  the  Villa  Medici,  Rome. 

3.  Pilasters  from  the  Villa  Medici,  Rome.  ] 5,  6.  Fragments  from  the  Villa  Medici,  Rome. 

Nos.  1-5  are  from  Casts  in  the  Crystal  Palace  ; No.  6 from  a Cast  at  South  Kensington  Museum. 


PLATE  XXVII. 


1-3.  Fragments  of  the  Frieze  of  the  Roman  Temple  at 
Brescia. 

4.  Fragment  of  the  Soffits  of  the  Architraves  of  the  Roman 
Temple  at  Brescia. 

Nos.  1-4  from  the  Museo  Bresciano  ;f 


6.  Fragment  of  the  Soffits  of  the  Architraves  of  the  Roman 
Temple  at  Brescia. 

6.  From  the  Frieze  of  the  Arch  of  the  Goldsmiths,  Rome. 
No.  6 from  Taylor  and  Crest’s  Rome. 


Examples  of  Ornamentul  Sculpture  in  Archilecture,  by  Lewis  Vulliamy,  Architect.  London, 
f Masco  Brcsciano,  itliistrato,  Brescia,  1833. 


43 


ROMAN  ORNAMENT. 


The  real  greatness  of  tlie  Romans  is  rather  to  be  seen  in  their  palaces,  baths,  theatres,  aqueducts, 
and  other  works  of  public  utility,  than  in  their  temple  architecture,  which  being  the  expression  of  a 
religion  borrowed  from  tlie  Greeks,  and  in  which  probably  they  had  little  faith,  exhibits  a corre- 
sponding want  of  earnestness  and  art-worship. 

In  the  Greek  temple  it  is  everywhere  apparent  that  the  struggle  was  to  arrive  at  a perfection 
worthy  of  the  gods.  In  the  Roman  temple  the  aim  was  self-glorification.  From  the  base  of  the 
column  to  the  apex  of  the  pediment  every  part  is  overloaded  with  ornament,  tending  rather  to  dazzle 
by  quantity,  than  to  excite  admiration  by  the  quality  of  the  work.  The  Greek  temples  when  painted 
were  as  ornamented  as  those  of  the  Romans,  but  with  a very  different  result.  The  ornament  was  so 
arranged  that  it  threw  a coloured  bloom  over  the  whole  structure,  and  in  no  way  disturbed  the 
exquisitely  designed  surfaces  which  received  it. 

The  Romans  ceased  to  value  the  general  proportions  of  the  structure  and  the  contours  of  the 
moulded  surfaces,  which  were  entirely  destroyed  by  the  elaborate  surface-modelling  of  the  ornaments 
carved  on  them;  and  these  ornaments  do  not  grow  naturally  from  the  surface,  but  are  applied 
on  it.  The  acanthus  leaves  under  the  modillions,  and  those  round  the  bell  of  the  Corinthian 
capitals,  are  placed  one  before  the  other  most  unartistically.  They  are  not  even  bound  together 
by  the  necking  at  the  top  of  the  shaft,  but  rest  upon  it.  Unlike  in  this  the  Egyptian  capital, 
where  the  stems  of  the  flowers  round  the  bell  are  continued  through  the  necking,  and  at  tlie 
same  time  represent  a beauty  and  express  a truth. 

The  fatal  facilities  which  the  Roman  system  of  decoration  gives  for  manufacturing  ornament, 
by  applying  acanthus  leaves  to  any  form  and  in  any  direction,  is  the  chief  cause  of  the  invasion 
of  this  ornament  into  most  modern  works.  It  requires  so  little  thought,  and  is  so  completely  a 
manufacture,  that  it  has  encouraged  architects  in  an  indolent  neglect  of  one  of  their  especial 
provinces,  and  the  interior  decorations  of  buildings  have  fallen  into  hands  most  unfitted  to  supply 
their  place. 

In  the  use  of  the  acanthus  leaf  the  Romans  showed  but  little  art.  They  received  it  from  the 
Greeks  beautifully  conventionalised ; they  went  much  nearer  to  the  general  outline,  but  exaggerated 
the  surface-decoration.  The  Greeks  confined  themselves  to  expressing  the  principle  of  the  foliation 
of  the  leaf,  and  bestowed  all  their  care  in, the  delicate  undulations  of  its  surface. 

The  ornament  engraved  at  the  head  of  the  chapter  is  typical  of  all  Roman  ornament,  which 
consists  universally  of  a scroll  growing  out  of  another  scroll,  encircling  a flower  or  group  of  leaves. 
This  example,  however,  is  constructed  on  Greek  principles,  but  is  wanting  in  Greek  refinement. 
In  Greek  ornament  the  scrolls  grow  out  of  each  other  in  the  same  way,  but  they  are  much  more 
delicate  at  the  point  of  junction.  The  acanthus  leaf  is  also  seen,  as  it  were,  in  side  elevation. 
The  purely  Roman  method  of  using  the  acanthus  leaf  is  seen  in  the  Corinthian  capitals,  and  in  the 
44 


ROMAN  ORNAJIENT. 


examples  on  Plites  XXVL  and  XXVII.  The  leaves  are  flattened  out,  and  they  lay  one  over  the 
other,  as  in  the  cut. 


Fragment  of  the  Frieze  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sun,  Colomia  Palace,  Boroe. — L.  Vdlliamy. 


The  various  capitals  which  we  have  engraved  from  Taylor  and  Cresy’s  work  have  been  placed  in 
juxtaposition,  to  show  how  little  variety  the  Eomans  were  able  to  produce  in  following  out  this  application 
of  the  acanthus.  The  only  difference  which  exists  is  in  the  proportion  of  the  general  form  of  the  mass  ; 
the  decline  in  this  proportion  from  that  of  Jupiter  Stator  may  be  seen  readily.  How  different  from  the 
immense  variety  of  Eg3rptian  capitals  which  arose  from  the  modification  of  the  general  plan  of  the 
capital,  even  the  introduction  of  the  Ionic  volute  in  the  Composite  order  fails  to  add  a beauty,  but 
rather  increases  the  deformity. 

The  pilasters  from  the  Villa  Medici,  Xos.  3 and  4,  Plate  XXVL,  and  the  fragment.  No.  5,  are  as 
perfect  specimens  of  Eoman  ornament  as  could  be  found.  As  specimens  of  modelling  and  drawing 
they  have  strong  claims  to  be  admired,  but  as  ornamental  accessories  to  the  architectural  features  of 
a building,  they  most  certainly,  from  their  excessive  relief  and  elaborate  surface  treatment,  are  defi- 
cient in  the  first  principle,  viz.  adaptation  to  the  purpose  they  have  to  fill. 

The  amount  of  design  that  can  be  obtained  by  working  out  this  principle  of  leaf  within  leaf  and 
leaf  over  leaf  is  very  limited;  and  it  was  not  till  this  principle  of  one  leaf  growing  out  of  another  in  a 
continuous  line  was  abandoned  for  the  adoption  of  a continuous  stem  throwing  off  ornaments  on 
either  side,  ^hat  pure  conventionrd  ornament  received  any  development.  The  earliest  examples  of  the 
change  are  found  in  St.  Sophia  at  Constantinople ; and  we  introduce  here  an  example  from  St.  Denis, 
where  although  the  swelling  at  the  stem 
and  the  turned  back  leaf  at  the  junction  of 
stem  and  stem  have  entirely  disappeared, 
the  continuous  stem  is  not  yet  fully  deve- 
loped, as  it  appears  in  the  narrow  border 
top  and  bottom.  This  principle  became 
very  common  in  the  illuminated  MSS.  of 
the  eleventh,  twelfth,  and  thirteenth  cen- 
turies, and  is  the  foundation  of  Early 
English  foliage. 

The  fragments  on  Plate  XXVII.,  from 
the  Museo  Bresciano,  are  more  elegant  than 
those  from  the  Villa  Medici;  the  leaves  are  more  sharply  accentuated  and  more  conventionally  treated. 
The  frieze  from  the  Arch  of  the  Goldsmiths  is,  on  the  contrary,  defective  from  the  opposite  cause. 

N 45 


From  the  Abbey  of  St.  Deiiis,  Paris. 


ROMAN  ORNAMENT. 


We  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  give  in  this  series  any  of  the  painted  decorations  of  the 
Romans,  of  which  remains  exist  in  the  Roman  baths.  We  had  no  reliable  materials  at  command  ; 
and,  further,  they  are  so  similar  to  those  at  Pompeii,  and  show  rather  what  to  avoid  than  what  to 
follow,  that  we  have  thought  it  sufficient  to  introduce  the  two  subjects  from  the  Forum  of  Trajan, 
in  which  figures  terminating  in  scrolls  may  be  said  to  be  the  foundation  of  that  prominent  feature 
in  their  painted  decorations. 


Tlie  Aciintiua,  full  si®,  from  a Photogrraph. 


4G 


ROMAN  ORNAMENT. 


Arch  of  Trajan,  Ancoua. 


Aroh  of  Titus,  Borne. 


V* 

Temple  of  Mars  Victor,  Borne. 


Pantheon,  Rome.  Portico. 


Pantheon,  Rome. 


Interior  of  Pantheon,  Home.  Arch  ot  Septimius  Sevcrua,  Rome. 

Corinthian  and  Composite  Capitals  reduced  from  Taylor  and  Crest’s  Rome.* 

* The  Architectural  Antiquities  of  Rome,  by  G.  L.  Taylor  and  Cresy,  Architects.  London,  1821. 


47 


iUliiAiCI[ii!|iU‘u  f .ijin.''  vi r.^ a diljn! i;iL< L| il  LU J liiJlljlMIU^  llJ.iiJiiii«J ^4«ii  v iik ‘■: -^iimhiai' ^■^takW^Khi ii  iiJiiMiM Jt|.llii<|iiiMiUlil ilil 


Chapter  VII. — Plates  28,  29,  29*,  30. 


BYZANTINE  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE 

1,  2,  3.  Stone  Sculptured  Ornament,  Sta.  Sofia,  Constanti- 
nople. 6th  Century. — Salzenberg,  Alt  Christliche 
Baudenkmale,  Conatantinopel. 

4,  5.  From  the  Bronze  Gates,  Sta.  Sofia. — Saxzenbeeg,  u.  a. 

6,  7.  Pox-tions  of  Ivory  Diptychs,  Beauvais  Cathedral; 
apparently  Anglo-Saxon  work  of  the  11th  century. 
— WiLLEMiN,  Monuments  Frangais  inedits. 

8.  Portion  of  Bronze  Door,  Basilica  of  the  Nativity,  Beth- 
lehem. 3rd  or  4th  century. — Gailhabaud,  L" Ar- 
chitecture et  les  Arts  qui  en  dependent. 

9-13.  Stone  Sculptures,  from  St.  Mark’s,  Venice.  11th 
century. — J.  B.  W.  from  Casts  at  Sydenham. 

14,  15,  16.  Portion  of  a Capital,  St.  Michael’s  Church, 
Schwabisch  Hall.  12th  Centuiy. — Heideloff, 
OrnameniiJc  des  Mittelalters. 

17.  From  a Doorway,  preserved  at  Murrhard  Monastery 

— Heideloff,  u.  a. 

18.  Composition  of  Bosses,  from  St.  Sebald,  Nuremberg, 

and  the  Church  of  Nosson,  Saxony. — Heideloff. 

19,  20.  Friezes  from  the  Church  of  St.  John,  Gmund 
Swabia. — Heideloff. 

21.  Romanesque  Wood  and  Ivory  Carving,  in  the  Collec- 
tion of  Heir  Leven,  Cologne. — Heideloff. 


XXVIII. 

22.  From  the  principal  Bronze  Door, 

Monreale,  near  Palermo.— J.  B.  W. 

23.  From  the  Bronze  Door  of  the 

Duomo,  RaveEo,  near  Amalfi. — 

J.  B.  W. 

24.  25.  From  the  Bronze  Door  of  the  Duomo,  Trani.  12th 

century. — Barras  et  Ltjynes,  Recherches  sur  les  Monu- 
ments des  Normands  en  Sidle. 

26.  Stone  Sculpture,  from  the  small  Cloister,  Huelgas 

Monastery,  near  Burgos,  Spaia  12th  century. — J.  B.  W. 

27.  From  the  Porch  of  Lucca  Cathedral.  Circa  1204  a.d. 

— J.  B.  W. 

28.  From  St.  Denis  (Porch),  near  Paris.  12th  century. — 

J.  B.  W. 

29.  From  the  Cloisters  of  Sant’  Ambrogia,  Milan. — J.  B.  W. 

30.  From  the  Chapel  of  Heilsbronn,  Bavaria. — Heideloff. 

31.  From  St.  Denis.— J.  B.  W. 

32.  From  Eayeux  Cathedral.  12th  century. — Pugin,  An- 

tiquities of  Normandy. 

33.  From  St  Denis. — J.  B.  W. 

34.  Bayeux  Cathedral. — Pugin,  u.  a. 

35.  From  Lincoln  Cathedral  Porch.  Close  of  12th  cen- 

txxry. — J.  B.  W. 

36.  From  the  Kilpeck  Porch,  Herefordshire.  12th  century. 

— J.  B.  W. 


tilth  and  12th  cen- 
turies. 


PLATE  XXIX. 


1-6.  Mosaics  from  Sta.  Sofia,  Constantinople.  6th  century. 
— Salzenberg,  Alt  Christliche  Baudenkmale  von 
Constantinopel. 

7.  Msu'ble  Pavement,  Agios  Pantokrator, 'Constantinople. 
First  half  of  12th  century. — Salzenberg,  u.  a. 

8,  9.  Mai’ble  Pavement,  Sta.  Sofia. 

10,  11.  Mosaics,  Sta.  Sofia. — Salzenberg. 


12-15.  From  Illuminated  Greek  MSS.,  British  Museum. — 
J.  B.  W. 

16, 17.  Borders,  from  Illuminated  Greek  MSS. — Champolijon 
Figeac,  Palceographie  Universelle. 

18.  The  centre,  from  St.  Mark’s,  Venice. — Digby  Wyatt, 
Mosaics  of  the  Middle  Ages. 


O 


49 


BYZANTINE  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  XXIX*. 


19.  From  a Greek  MS.,  British  Museum. — J.  B.  W. 

The  border  beneath  from  Monreale. — Digby  Wyatt’s 
Mosaics. 

20.  From  the  Homilies  of  Gregory  Nazianzen.  12th 

century. — Champollion  Figeac,  u.  a. 

21,  22.  From  Greek  MSS.,  British  Museum. — J.  B.  W. 

23.  From  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Greek  MS.,  Vatican 

Library,  Rome.— Digby  Wyatt,  u.  a. 

24.  St.  Mark’s,  Venice. — Digby  Wyatt,  u.  a. 

25.  Portion  of  a Greek  Diptych.  10th  century.  Florence. 

— J.  B.  W.  (The  Jieurs-de-lys  are  believed  to  be 
of  later  workmanship.) 


26.  Enamel  of  the  13th  contury  (French). — Willemiy, 

Monuments  Franqais  in^dits. 

27.  From  an  Enamelled  Casket  (the  centre  from  the 

Statue  of  Jean,  son  of  St.  Louis). — Du  Sommerard, 
Les  Arts  du  Moyen  Age. 

28.  From  the  Enamelled  Tomb  of  Jean,  son  of  St.  Louis, 

A.D.  1247. — WiT.LEMIN,  u.  a. 

29.  Limoges  Enamel,  probably  of  the  close  of  12th 

century. — Willemin,  u.  a. 

30.  Portion  of  Mastic  Pavement,  12th  century.  Preserved 

at  St.  Denis,  near  Paris. — Willemin. 


1,  2. 

3. 
4,  5. 
6. 

7-10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15, 16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 
21. 


PLATE  XXX. 


Mosaics  (opus  Grecanicum)  from  Monreale  Cathe- 
dral, near  Palermo.  Close  of  12th  century.— 
J.  B.  W. 

Mosaics  from  the  Church  of  Ara  Cceli,  Rome.— J.B.W. 

Monreale  Cathedral. — J.  B.  W. 

Marble  Pavement,  St.  Mark’s,  Venice. — J.  B.  W. 

From  San  Lorenzo  Fuori,  Rome.  Close  of  12th 
century. — J.  B.  W. 

San  Lorenzo  Fuori,  Rome. — J.  B.  W. 

Ara  Cceli,  Rome. — J.  B.  W. 

Marble  Pavement,  St.  Mark’s,  Venice. — J.  B.  W. 

San  Lorenzo  Fuori,  Rome. — Architectural  Art  in  Italy 
and  Spain,  hy  Waring  and  MacQuoid. 

Palermo.— Digby  Wyatt,  Mosaics  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

From  the  Cathedral,  Monreale. — J.  B.  W. 

From  Ai’a  Cceli,  Rome. — J.  B.  W. 

Marble  Pavement,  S.  M.  Maggiore,  Rome. — Hessemer, 
Arahische  und  alt  Italidnische  Bau  Yerzierungen. 

Marble  Pavement,  San  Vitale,  Ravenna. — Hessemer, 
u.  a. 

Marble  Pavement,  S.  M.  in  Cosmedin,  Rome.— Hes- 
SEMER,  11.  a. 


22,  23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33-36. 

36-38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 


Mosaic,  St.  Mark’s,  Venice. — Specimens  of  the  Mosaics 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  Digby  Wyatt. 

Baptistery  of  St.  Mark,  Venice. — Architectural  Art  in 
Italy  and  Spain,  Waring  and  MacQuoed. 


San  Giovanni  Laterano,  Rome. 
The  Duomo,  Civita  Castellana. 


From  Digby  Wyatt’s 
Mosaics  of  the  Mid- 
dle Ages. 


Ara  Cceli,  Rome. — J.  B.  W. 

San  Lorenzo,  Rome.  ) Architectural  Art  in  Italy  and 
Ara  Cceli,  Rome.  I Spain,  Waring  and  Mac- 
San  Lorenzo,  Rome,  j Quoid. 


San  Lorenzo  Fuori,  Rome. — J.  B.  W. 

San  Giovanni  Laterano,  Rome. — Digby  Wyatt’s 
Mosaics  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

Monreale  Cathedral. — J.  B.  W. 

Marble  Pavement,  S.  M.  Maggiore,  Rome. — Hesse- 
MER,  u.  a. 


St.  Mark’s,  Venice. — Mosaics  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
Digby  Wyatt. 


From  the  Baptistery,  St.  Mark’s,  Venice.— J.  B.  W. 
From  St.  Mark’s,  Y qtAcq.— Architectural  Art  in  Italy 
and  Spain. 

From  the  Duomo,  Monreale. — J.  B.  W. 


BYZANTINE  ORNAMENT. 


The  vagueness  with  wliich  writers  on  Art  have  treated  the  Byzantine  and  Romanesque  styles  of 
Architecture,  even  to  within  the  last  few  years,  has  extended  itself  also  to  their  concomitant  decoration. 
This  vagueness  has  arisen  chiefly  from  the  want  of  examples  to  which  the  writer  could  refer;  nor 
was  it  until  the  publication  of  Herr  Salzenberg’s  great  work  on  Sta.  Sofia  at  Constantinople,  that 
we  could  obtain  any  complete  and  definite  idea  of  what  constituted  pure  Byzantine  ornament.  San 
Vitale  at  Ravenna,  though  thoroughly  Byzantine  as  to  its  architecture,  still  afforded  us  but  a very 
incomplete  notion  of  Byzantine  ornamentation:  San  Marco  at  Venice  represented  but  a phase  of  the 
Byzantine  school;  and  the  Cathedral  of  Monreale,  and  other  examples  of  the  same  style  in  Sicily, 
served  only  to  show  the  influence,  but  hardly  to  illustrate  the  true  nature,  of  pure  Byzantine  Art ; 

50 


BYZANTINE  OENAMENT. 


fully  to  understand  that,  we  required  what  the  ravages  of  time  and  the  whitewash  of  the  Mahom- 
medan  had  deprived  us  of,  namely,  a Byzantine  building  on  a grand  scale,  executed  during  the  best 
period  of  the  Byzantine  epoch.  Such  an  invaluable  source  of  information  has  been  opened  to  us 
through  the  enlightenment  of  the  present  Sultan,  and  been  made  public  to  the  world  by  the  liberality 
of  the  Prussian  government;  and  we  recommend  all  those  who  desire  to  have  a graphic  idea  of  what 
Byzantine  decorative  art  truly  was,  to  study  Herr  Salzenberg’s  beautiful  work  on  the  churches  and 
buildings  of  ancient  Byzantium. 

In  no  branch  of  art,  probably,  is  the  observation,  ex  nihilo  nihil  Jit,  more  applicable  than  in 
decorative  art.  Thus,  in  the  Byzantine  style,  we  perceive  that  various  schools  have  combined  to  form 
its  peculiar  characteristics,  and  we  shall  proceed  to  point  out  briefly  what  were  the  principal  formative 
causes. 

Even  before  the  transfer  of  the  seat  of  the  Koman  Empire  from  Eome  to  Byzantium,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  fourth  century,  we  see  all  the  arts  in  a state  either  of  decline  or  transformation. 
Certain  as  it  is  that  Rome  had  given  her  peculiar  style  of  art  to  the  numerous  foreign  peoples 
ranged  beneath  her  sway,  it  is  no  less  certain  that  the  hybrid  art  of  her  provinces  had  powerfully 
reacted  on  the  centre  of  civilisation ; and  even  at  the  close  of  the  third  century  had  materially 
affected  that  lavish  style  of  decoration  which  characterised  the  magnificent  baths  and  other  public 
buildings  of  Rome.  The  necessity  which  Constantine  found  himself  under,  when  newly  settled  in 
Byzantium,  of  employing  Oriental  artists  and  workmen,  wrought  a still  more  vital  and  marked  change 
in  the  traditional  style;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  each  surrounding  nation  aided  in 
giving  its  impress  to  the  newly-formed  school,  according  to  the  state  of  its  civilisation  and  its 
capacity  for  Art,  until  at  last  the  motley  mass  became  fused  into  one  systematic  whole  during  the 
long  and  (for  Art)  prosperous  reign  of  the  first  Justinian. 


b 


In  this  result  we  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  important  influence  exercised  by  the  great 
temples  and  theatres  built  in  Asia  Minor  during  the  rule  of  the  Caesars ; in  these  we  already  see  the 
tendency  to  elliptical  curved  outlines,  acute-pointed  leaves,  and  thin  continuous  foliage  without  the 
springing-ball  and  flower,  which  characterise  Byzantine  ornament.  On  the  frieze  of  the  theatre  at 

51 


BYZANTINE  ORNAMENT. 


c 


!) 


c 


6 


Patara  (a),  and  at  the  Temple  of  Venus  at  Aphrodisias  (Caria),  are  to  be  seen  examples  of  flowing 
foliage  such  as  we  allude  to.  On  the  doorway  of  the  temple  erected  by  the  native  rulers  of  Gralatia 
at  Ancyra  (b'),  in  honour  of  Augustus,  is  a still  more  characteristic  t3Tpe ; and  the  pilaster  capital  of 
a small  temple  at  Patara  (c),  ascribed  by  Texier  to  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  is  almost 
identical  with  one  drawn  by  Salzenberg  at  Smyrna  (c2),  which  he  believes  to  be  of  the  first  part  of 
Justinian’s  reign,  or  about  the  year  525  A.D. 

In  the  absence  of  authentic  dates  we  cannot  decide  satisfactorily  how  far  Persia  influenced  the 
Byzantine  style,  but  it  is  certain  that  Persian  workmen  and  artists  were  much  employed  at  Byzantium ; 
and  in  the  remarkable  monuments  at  Tak-i-Bostan,  Bi-Sutoun,  and  Tak-i-Gihero,  and  in  several 

ancient  capitals  at  Ispahan — given  in  Flandin  and 
Coste’s  great  work  on  Persia — we  are  struck  at 
once  with  their  thoroughly  Byzantine  character; 
but  we  are  inclined  to  believe  that  they  are  pos- 
terior, or  at  most  contemporaneous  with  the  best 
period  of  Byzantine  art,  that  is,  of  the  sixth  century. 

However  that  may  be,  we  find  the  forms  of  a still 
earlier  period  reproduced  so  late  as  the  year  363 
A.D. ; and  in  Jovian’s  column  at  Ancyra  (e),  erected 
during  or  shortly  after  his  retreat  with  Julian’s 
army  from  their  Persian  expedition,  we  recognise 
an  application  of  one  of  the  most  general  orna- 
mental forms  of  ancient  Persepolis.  At  Persepolis 
also  are  to  be  seen  the  pointed  and  channelled 
leaves  so  characteristic  of  Byzantine  work,  as  seen 
in  the  accompanying  example  from  Sta.  Sofia  (/) ; 
and  at  a later  period,  i.e.  during  the  rule  of  the 
Cgesars,  we  remark  at  the  Boric  temple  of  Kangovar  (g)  contours  of  moulding  precisely  similar 
to  those  affected  in  the  Byzantine  style. 

Interesting  and  instructive  as  it  is  to  trace  the  derivation  of  these  forms  in  the  Byzantine  style, 
it  is  no  less  so  to  mark  the  transmission  of  them  and  of  others  to  later  epochs.  Thus  in  No.  1, 

Plate  XXVIII.,  we  perceive  the  peculiar  leaf,  as  giveD  in 
Texier  and  in  Salzenberg,  reappear  at  Sta.  Sofia;  at  No.  3, 
Plate  XXVIII.,  is  the  foliated  St.  Andrew’s  cross  within  a 
circle,  so  common  as  a Bomanesque  and  Giothic  ornament. 
On  the  same  frieze  is  a design  repeated  with  but  slight  altera- 
tion at  No.  17,  from  Hermany.  The  curved  and  foliated  branch 
of  No.  4 of  the  sixth  century  ^Sta.  Sofia)  is  seen  reproduced, 
with  slight  variation,  at  No.  11  of  the  eleventh  century  (St. 
Mark’s).  The  toothings  of  the  leaves  of  No.  19  (Germany) 
are  almost  identical  with  those  of  No.  1 (Sta.  Sofia)  ; and  be- 
tween all  the  examples  on  the  last  row  but  one  (Plate  XXVIII.) 
is  to  be  remarked  a generic  resemblance  in  subjects  from  Germany,  Italy,  and  Spain,  founded  on 
a Byzantine  type. 

The  last  row  of  subjects  in  this  plate  illustrates  more  especially  the  Eomanesque  style  (Nos.  27 
and  36),  showing  the  interlaced  ornament  so  afifected  by  the  Northern  nations,  founded  mainly  on  a 
native  type;  whilst  at  No.  35  (St.  Denis)  we  have  one  instance  out  of  numbers  of  the  reproduction 
52 


BYZANTINE  ORNAMENT. 


of  Roman  models;  tlie  type  of  the  present  subject, — a common  one  in  the  Romanesque  style, — being 
found  on  the  Roman  column  at  Cussy,  between  Dijon  and  Chalons-sur-Saone. 

Thus  we  see  that  Rome,  Syria,  Persia,  and  other  countries,  all  took  part  as  formative  causes  in 
the  Byzantine  style  of  art,  and  its  accompanying  decoration,  which,  complete  as  we  find  it  in  Justinian’s 
time,  reacted  in  its  new  and  systemised  form  upon  the  Western  world,  undergoing  certain  changes 
in  its  course ; and  these  modifying  causes,  arising  from  the  state  of  religion,  art,  and  manners  in 
the  countries  where  it  was  received,  frequently  gave  it  a specific  character,  and  produced  in  some 
cases  co-relative  and  yet  distinct  styles  of  ornament  in  the  Celtic,  Anglo-Saxon,  Lombardic,  and 
Arabian  schools.  Placing  on  one  side  the  question  of  how  far  Byzantine  workmen  or  artists  were 
employed  in  Europe,  there  can  be  no  possible  doubt  that  the  character  of  the  Byzantine  school  of 
ornament  is  very  strongly  impressed  on  aU  the  earlier  works  of  central  and  even  Western  Europe, 
which  are  generically  termed  Romanesque. 

Pure  Byzantine  ornament  is  distinguished  by  broad-toothed  and  acute-pointed  leaves,  which  in 
sculpture  are  bevelled  at  the  edge,  are  deeply  channelled  throughout,  and  are  drilled  at  the  several 
springings  of  the  teeth  with  deep  holes ; the  running  foliage  is  generally  thin  and  continuous,  as  at 
Nos.  1,  14,  and  20,  Plate  XXIX*.,  Plate  XXIX.  The  ground,  whether  in  Mosaic  or  painted  work, 
is  almost  universally  gold;  thin  interlaced  patterns  are  preferred  to  geometrical  designs.  The 
introduction  of  animal  or  other  figures  is  very  limited  in  sculpture,  and  in  colour  is  confined  prin- 
cipally to  holy  subjects,  in  a stiff,  conventional  style,  exhibiting  little  variety  or  feeling ; sculpture 
is  of  very  secondary  importance. 

Romanesque  ornament,  on  the  other  hand,  depended  mainly  on  sculpture  for  effect : it  is  rich  in 
light  and  shade,  deep  cuttings,  massive  projections,  and  a great  intermixture  of  figure-subjects  of 
every  kind  with  foHage  and  conventional  ornament.  The  place  of  mosaic  work  is  generally  supplied 
by  paint;  in  coloured  ornament,  animals  are  as  freely  introduced  as  in  sculpture,  vide  No.  26,  Plate 
XXIX*.;  the  ground  is  no  longer  gold  alone,  but  blue,  red,  or  green,  as  at  Nos.  26,  28,  29,  Plate 
XXIX*.  In  other  respects,  allowing  for  local  differences,  it  retains  much  of  the  Byzantine  character; 
and  in  the  case  of  painted  glass,  for  example,  handed  it  down  to  the  middle,  and  even  the  close  of 
the  thirteenth  century. 

One  style  of  ornament,  that  of  geometrical  mosaic  work,  belongs  particularly  to  the  Romanesque 
period,  especially  in  Italy;  numerous  examples  of  it  are  given  in  Plate  XXX.  This  art  flourished 
principally  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  and  consists  in  the  arrangement  of  small  diamond- 
shaped pieces  of  glass  into  a complicated  series  of  diagonal  lines ; the  direction  of  which  is  now 
stopped,  now  defined,  by  means  of  different  colours.  .The  examples  from  central  Italy,  such  as  Nos. 
7,  9,  11,  27,  31,  are  much  simpler  than  those  of  the  southern  provinces  and  Sicily,  where  Saracenic 
artists  introduced  their  innate  love  of  intricate  designs,  some  ordinary  examples  of  which  are  to  be 
seen  in  Nos.  1,  5,  33,  from  Monreale,  near  Palermo.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  there  are  two 
distinct  styles  of  design  coexistent  in  Sicily:  the  one,  such  as  we  have  noted,  consisting  of  diagonal 

interlacings,  and  eminently  Moresque  in  character,  as  may  be  seen  by  reference  to  Plate  XXXIX.; 

the  other,  consisting  of  interlaced  curves,  as  at  Nos.  33,  34,  35,  also  from  Monreale,  in  which  we 
may  recognise,  if  not  the  hand,  at  least  the  influence,  of  Byzantine  artists.  Altogether  of  a different 
character,  though  of  about  the  same  period,  are  Nos.  22,  24,  39,  40,  41,  which  serve  as  examples 

of  the  Veneto-Byzantine  style ; limited  in  its  range,  being  almost  local,  and  peculiar  in  style.  Some 

are  more  markedly  Byzantine,  however,  as  No.  23,  with  interlaced  circles;  and  the  step  ornament, 
so  common  at  Sta.  Sofia,  as  seen  at  Nos.  3,  10,  and  11,  Plate  XXIX. 

The  o^us  Alexandrinum,  or  marble  mosaic  work,  differs  from  the  ojpus  Grecanicum,  or  glass 
mosaic  work,  chiefly  from  the  different  nature  of  the  material ; the  principal  (that  of  complicated 

53 


p 


BYZANTINE  ORNAMENT. 


geometric  design)  is  still  ttie  same.  The  pavements  of  the  Romanesque  churches  in  Italy  are  rich 
in  examples  of  this  class ; the  tradition  of  which  was  handed  down  from  the  Augustan  age  of  Rome ; 
a good  idea  of  the  nature  of  this  ornament  is  given  in  Nos.  19,  21,  36,  37,  and  38. 

Local  styles,  on  the  system  of  marble  inlay,  existed  in  several  parts  of  Italy  during  the  Roman- 
esque period,  which  bear  little  relation  either  to  Roman  or  Byzantine  models.  Such  is  No.  20,  from 
San  Vitale,  Ravenna;  such  are  the  pavements  of  the  Baptistery  and  San  Miniato,  Florence,  of  the 
eleventh,  twelfth,  and  thirteenth  centuries;  in  these  the  effect  is  produced  by  black  and  white 
marble  only;  with  these  exceptions,  and  those  produced  by  Moresque  influence  in  the  South  of  Italy, 
the  principles  both  of  the  glass  and  marble  inlay  ornament  are  to  be  found  in  ancient  Roman  inlay, 
in  every  province  under  Roman  sway,  and  especially  is  it  remarkable  in  the  various  mosaics  found 
at  Pompeii,  of  which  striking  examples  are  given  in  Plate  XXV. 

Important  as  we  perceive  the  influence  of  Byzantine  Art  to  have  been  in  Europe,  from  the  sixth 
to  the  eleventh  century,  and  still  later,  there  is  no  people  whom  it  affected  more  than  the  great  and 
spreading  Arab  race,  who  propagated  the  creed  of  Mahomet,  conquered  the  finest  countries  of  the 
East,  and  finally  obtained  a footing  even  in  Europe.  In  the  earlier  buildings  executed  by  them  at 
Cairo,  Alexandria,  Jerusalem,  Cordova,  and  Sicily,  the  influence  of  the  Byzantine  style  is  very  strongly 
marked.  The  traditions  of  the  Byzantine  school  affected  more  or  less  all  the  adjacent  countries ; 
in  Greece  they  remained  almost  unchanged  to  a very  late  period,  and  they  have  served,  in  a great 
degree,  as  the  basis  to  all  decorative  art  in  the  East  and  in  Eastern  Europe. 

J.  B.  WARING. 

September  1856. 


***  For  more  information  on  this  subject,  see  “Handbook”  to  Byzantine  and  Romanesque  Court  at  Sydenham. — 

■Wyatt  and  Waking. 


BOOKS  EEFEEKED  TO  FOE  ILLESTEATIOKS. 


Saxzenberg.  Alt  Christliche  Baudenkmale  von  Constantinopel. 
Flandin  et  Coste.  f^oynge  en  Perse. 

Texiek,  Description  de  I’Armdnie,  Perse,  dc. 

Heideloee.  Die  Ornamentik  des  Mittelaltei's. 

Kkeutz.  La  Basilica  di  San  Marco. 

Gailhabatjd.  L'Architecture  et  les  Arts  qui  en  dependent. 

Du  SoiffMERABD.  Les  Arts  du  Moyen  Age. 


I Baekas  et  Luynes  (Due  de).  Recherches  sur  les  Monuments  des 
Normands  en  Sidle. 

Chasitollion  Figeac.  Palaographie  UniverseUe. 

W11J.EMIN.  Monuments  Frangnis  inedits. 

Hessemer.  Arabische  und  alt  Italidnische  Bau  Verzierungen, 
Digby  Wyatt.  Geometrical  Mosaics  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

Waring  and  MacQuoid.  Architectural  Arts  in  Italy  and  Spain. 
Waring.  Architectural  Studies  at  Burgos  and  its  Neighbourhood. 


54 


V V - ' 1-  " • ' . I --.I  - • --T*.— 1.,^. 


BYZANTINISCH 


BYZANTINE  N°  Z 


BYZANTINS 


BYZAHTINISGH 

TAFEl,  XXIX 


BYZANTINE  N"2^  byzantihs 


FL  xx;x 


m 

mi 


h * ;y  pMkM^<^  i%  I 

&m^M. 


^;®^|g85#S.2SK«M4 


'sxsxnexaaai 


■>Z  ZiC  wi^- 


BYZANTINISCH 

TAFEL  XXX 


■ BYZANTINE  N°  B 


BYZANTINS 


PL  XXX 


m 


■Aa2»'9I^X'  ■ 


m 


K: 


§g 

^ itiill 


;•  i-4.''f  ’ i ■iV'!-’  ^V<S.V «'''«' 


e-'x-- 


4»4i»«i 


Am%,A 


Chapter  VIII. — Plates  31,  32,  33,  34,  35. 

ARABIAN  ORNAMENT, 


FROM  CAIRO. 


PLATE  XXXL 


This  Plate  consists  of  the  ornamented  Architraves  and  Soffits  of  the  Windows  in  the  interior  of  the  Mosque  of 
Tooloon,  Cairo.  They  are  executed  in  plaster,  and  nearly  all  the  windows  are  of  a different  pattern.  The  main  arches 
of  the  building  are  decorated  in  the  same  way ; but  only  a fragment  of  one  of  the  soffits  now  remains,  sufficiently  large 
to  make  out  the  design.  This  is  given  in  Plate  XXXIII.,  No.  14. 

Nos.  1-14,  27,  29,  34-39,  are  designs  from  architraves  round  the  windows.  The  rest  of  the  patterns  are  from  their 
soffits  and  jambs. 

The  Mosque  of  Tooloon  was  founded  a.d.  876-7,  and  these  ornaments  are  certainly  of  that  date.  It  is  the  oldest 
Arabian  building  in  Cairo,  and  is  specially  interesting  as  one  of  the  earliest  known  examples  of  the  pointed  arch. 


PLATE  XXXII. 


1-7.  From  the  Parapet  of  the  Mosque  of  Sultan  Kalaoon. 
9,  16.  Ornaments  round  Arches  in  the  Mosque  En  Nasi- 
reeyeh. 

11-13.  Ornaments  round  curved  Architrave  sin  the  Mosque 
Sultan  Kalaoon. 


14.  Soffit  of  one  of  the  Main  Arches  in  the  Mosque  of 
Tooloon. 

15-21.  Ornaments  on  the  Mosque  of  Kalaoon. 

22.  Wooden  Stringcourse  Pulpit. 

23-26.  From  the  Mosque  of  Kalaoon. 


The  Mosque  of  Kalaoon  was  founded  in  the  year  1284-6.  All  these  ornaments  are  executed  in  plaster,  and  seem  to 
have  been  cut  on  the  stucco  while  still  wet.  There  is  too  great  a variety  on  the  patterns,  and  even  disparities  on  the 
corresponding  parts  of  the  same  pattern,  to  allow  of  their  having  been  cast  or  struck  from  moulds. 


PLATE  XXXIII. 


1-7. 

8-10. 

12. 

13. 

14 


From  the  Parapet  of  the  Mosque  of  Sultan  Kalaoon. 
Curved  Architraves  from  ditto. 

Soffit  of  Arch,  Mosque  En  Nasireeyeh. 

From  Door  in  the  Mosque  El  Barkookeyeh. 

Wooden  Architrave,  Mosqire  En  Nasireeyeh. 


These  designs  were  traced  from  a splendid  copy  of  the  Koran  in  the  Mosque  El  Barkookeyeh,  founded  a.d.  1384. 

55 


. 


ARABIAN  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  XXXV. 

Consists  of  different  Mosaics  taken  from  Pavements  and  Walla  in  Private  Houses  and  Mosques  in  Cairo.  They  are 
executed  in  black  and  white  marble,  with  red  tile. 

Nos.  14-16  are  patterns  engraved  on  the  white  marble  slab,  and  filled  in  with  red  and  black  cement. 

The  ornament  on  the  white  marble  on  the  centre  of  No.  21  is  slightly  in  relief. 

The  materials  for  these  five  Plates  have  been  kindly  furnished  by  Mr.  James  William  Wild,  who  passed  considerable  time 
in  Cairo  studying  the  interior  decoration  of  the  Arabian  houses,  and  they  may  be  regarded  as  very  faithful  transcripts  of 
Cairean  ornament. 




ARABIAN  ORNAMENT. 

When  the  religion  of  IMohammad  spread  mth  such  astounding  rapidity  over  the  East,  the  growing 
wants  of  a new  civilisation  naturally  led  to  tlie  formation  of  a new  style  of  Art ; and  whilst  it  is  certain 
that  the  early  edifices  of  the  Mohammadans  were  either  old  Roman  or  Byzantine  buildings  adapted 


S]  ar.i^ril  of  au  arch  from  Sta.  Sophia.  S^iLZEMSEEG. 

to  their  own  uses,  or  buildings  constructed  on  the  ruins  and  with  the  materials  of  ancient  monuments 
it  is  equally  certain  that  the  new  wants  to  he  supplied,  and  the  new  feelings  to  be  expressed,  must 
at  a very  early  period  have  given  a peculiar  character  to  their  architecture. 

56 


ARABIAN  ORNAMENT. 


In  the  buildings  which  they  constructed  partly  of  old  materials  they  endeavoured,  in  the  new 
parts  of  the  structure,  to  imitate  the  details  borrowed  from  old  buildings.  The  same  result  followed 
as  had  already  taken  place  in  the  transformation  of  the  Roman  style  to  the  Byzantine:  the  imitations 
were  crude  and  imperfect.  But  this  very  imperfection  gave  birth  to  a new  order  of  ideas ; they  never 
returned  to  the  original  model,  but  gradually  threw  off  the  shackles  which  the  original  model  imposed. 
The  Mohammadans,  very  early  in  their  history,  formed  and  perfected  a style  of  Art  peculiarly  their 
own.  The  ornaments  on  Plate  XXXI.  are  from  the  Mosque  of  Tooloon  in  Cairo,  which  was  erected  in 
876,  only  250  years  after  the  establishment  of  Mohammadanism,  and  we  in  this  mosque  already  find 
a style  of  architecture  complete  in  itself, — retaining,  it  is  true,  traces  of  its  origin,  but  being  entirely 
freed  from  any  direct  imitation  of  the  previous  style.  This  result  is  very  remarkable  when  compared 
with  the  results  of  the  Christian  religion  in  another  direction.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  Christianity 
produced  an  architecture  peculiarly  its  own,  and  entirely  freed  from  traces  of  paganism,  until  the  twelfth 
or  thirteenth  century. 

The  mosques  of  Cairo  are  amongst  the  most  beautiful  buildings  in  the  world.  They  are  remarkable 
at  the  same  time  for  the  grandeur  and  simpHcity  of'  their  general  forms,  and  for  the  refinement  and 
elegance  which  the  decoration  of  these  forms  displays. 

This  elegance  of  ornamentation  appears  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Persians,  from  whom  the 
Arabs  are  supposed  to  have  derived  many  of  their  arts.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  this  influence 
reached  them  by  a double  process.  The  art  of  Byzantium  already  displays  an  Asiatic  influence.  The 
remains  at  Bi  Sutoun,  published  by  Flandin  and  Coste,  are  either  Persian  under  Byzantine  influence, 
or,  if  of  earlier  date,  there  must  be  much  of  Byzantine  art  which  was  derived  from  Persian  sources, 
so  similar  are  they  in  general  character  of  outline.  We  have  already,  in  Chapter  III.,  referred  to  an 
ornament  on  a Sassanian  capital.  No.  16,  Plate  XIV.,  which  appears  to  be  the  type  of  the  Arabian 
diapers ; and  on  the  spandril  of  the  arch  which  we  here  introduce  from  Salzenberg’s  work  on  Sta.  Sophia, 
will  be  seen  a system  of  decoration  totally  at  variance  with  much  of  the  G-rgeco-Roman  features  of  that 
building,  and  which  it  may  not  be  impossible  are  the  result  of  some  Asiatic  influence.  Be  that  as  it 
may,  this  spandril  is  itself  the  foundation  of  the  surface  decoration  of  the  Arabs  and  Moors.  It  will 
be  observed  that,  although  the  leafage  which  surrounds  the  centre  is  still  a reminiscence  of  the  acanthus 
leaf,  it  is  the  first  attempt  at  throwing  off  the  principle  of  leafage  growing  out  one  from  the  other: 
the  scroll  is  continuous  without  break.  The  pattern  is  distributed  all  over  the  spandril,  so  as  to  produce 
one  even  tint,  which  was  ever  the  aim  of  the  Arabs  and  Moors.  There  is  also  another  feature  connected 
with  it, — the  mouldings  on  the  edge  of  the  arch  are  ornamented  from  the  surface,  and  the  soffit  of  the 
arch  is  decorated  in  the  same  way  as  the  soffits  of  Arabian  and  Moresque  arches. 

The  collection  of  ornaments  from  the  Mosque  of  Touloon,  on  Plate  XXXI.,  are  very  remarkable 

as  exhibiting  in  this  early  stage  of  Arabian  art  the  types  of  all  those  arrangements  of  form  which 

reach  their  culminating  point  in  the  Alhambra.  The  differences  which  exist  result  from  the  less  perfection 
of  the  distribution  of  the  forms,  the  leading  principles  are  the  same.  They  represent  the  first  stage  of 
surface  decoration.  They  are  of  plaster,  and  the  surface  of  the  part  to  be  decorated  being  first  brought 
to  an  even  face,  the  patterns  were  either  stamped  or  traced  upon  the  material  whilst  still  in  a plastic 
state,  with  a blunt  instrument,  which  in  making  the  incisions  slightly  rounded  the  edges.  We  at  once 
recognise  that  the  principles  of  the  radiation  of  the  lines  from  a parent  stem  and  the  tangential  curva- 
ture of  those  lines  had  been  either  retained  by  Greeco-Roman  tradition,  or  was  felt  by  them  from 
observation  of  nature. 

Many  of  the  patterns,  such  as  2,  3,  4,  5,  12,  13,  32,  38,  still  retain  traces  of  this  Greek  origin: 

two  flowers,  or  a flower  turned  upwards  and  another  downwards,  from  either  end  of  a stalk  ; but 

57 


Q 


ARABIAN  ORNAMENT. 


there  was  this  difference,  that  with  the  Greeks  the  flowers  or  leaves  do  not  form  part  of  the  scroll, 
but  grow  out  of  it,  whilst  with  the  Arabs  the  scroll  was  transformed  into  an  intermediate  leaf.  No.  37 
shows  the  continuous  scroll  derived  from  the  Romans,  with  the  division  at  each  turn  of  the  scroll,  so 
characteristic  of  Roman  ornament,  omitted.  The  ornament  we  engrave  here  from  Sta.  Sophia  would 
seem  to  be  one  of  the  earliest  examples  of  the  change. 


*1  1 ® 1 ® I ■ ® ® 1 

Arabifiu. 

Arabian. 

Arabian. 

Moresque. 


The  upright  patterns  on  this  Plate,  chiefly  from  the  soffits  of  windows,  and  therefore  having  all 
an  upright  tendency  in  their  lines,  may  be  considered  as  the  germs  of  all  those  exquisitely-designed 
patterns  of  this  class,  where  the  repetition  of  the  same  patterns  side  by  side  produces  another  or 
several  others.  Many  of  the  patterns  on  this  Plate  should  be  double  in  the  lateral  direction : 
our  anxiety  to  exhibit  as  many  varieties  as  possible  preventing  the  engraving  of  the  repeat 


With  the  exception  of  the  centre  ornament  on  Plate  XXXIL,  which  is  from  the  same  mosque  as 
the  ornament  on  the  last  plate,  the  whole  of  the  ornaments  on  Plates  XXXIII.  and  XXXIV.  are 
of  the  thirteenth  century,  i.e.  fom-  hundred  years  later  than  those  of  the  Mosque  of  Touloon.  The 
progress  which  the  style  had  made  in  this  period  may  be  seen  at  a glance.  As  compared,  however, 
with  the  Alhambra,  which  is  of  the  same  period,  they  are  very  inferior.  The  Arabs  never  arrived 
at  that  state  of  perfection  in  the  distribution  of  the  masses,  or  in  the  ornamenting  of  the  surfaces 
of  the  ornaments,  in  which  the  Moors  so  excelled.  The  guiding  instinct  is  the  same,  but  the 
execution  is  very  inferior.  In  Moresque  ornament  the  relation  of  the  areas  of  the  ornament  to  the 
ground  is  always  perfect;  there  are  never  any  gaps  or  holes;  in  the  decoration  of  the  surfaces  of 
the  ornaments  also  they , exhibited  much  greater  skill,— there  was  less  monotony.  To  exhibit  dearly 
the  difference,  we  repeat  the  Arabian  ornament.  No.  12,  from  Plate  XXXIII.,  compared  with  two 
varieties  of  lozenge  diapers  from  the  Alhambra. 

The  Moors  also  introduced  another  feature  into  their  surface  ornament,  viz.,  that  there  were 
often  two  and  sometimes  three  planes  on  which  the  patterns  were  drawn,  the  ornaments  on  the 


58 


ARABIAN  ORNAMENT. 


upper  plane  being  boldly  distributed  over  the  mass,  whilst  those  on  the  second  interwove  themselves 
with  the  first,  enriching  the  surface  on  a lower  level ; by  which  admirable  contrivance  a piece  of 
ornament  retains  its  breadth  of  effect  when  viewed  at  a distance,  and  affords  most  exquisite,  and 
oftentimes  most  ingenious,  decoration  for  close  inspection.  G-enerally  there  was  more  variety  in 
their  surface  treatment;  the  feathering  which  forms  so  prominent  a feature  on  the  ornaments  on 
Plates  XXXIL,  XXXIIL,  was  intermixed  with  plain  surfaces,  such  as  we  see  at  Nos.  17,  18,  32, 
Plate  XXXIL  The  ornament  No.  13,  Plate  XXXIII.,  is  in  pierced  metal,  and  is  a very  near 


Arabian. 


approach  to  the  perfection  of  distribution  of  the  Moorish  forms ; it  finely  exhibits  the  proportionate 
diminution  of  the  forms  towards  the  centre  of  the  pattern,  and  that  fixed  law,  never  broken  by 
the  Moors,  that  however  distant  an  ornament,  or  however  intricate  the  pattern,  it  can  always  be' 
traced  to  its  branch  and  root. 

Grenerally,  the  main  differences  that  exist  between  the  Arabian  and  Moresque  styles  may  be 
summed  up  thus,  the  constructive  features  of  the  Arabs  possess  more  grandeur,  and  those  of  the 
Moors  more  refinement  and  elegance. 

The  exquisite  ornaments  on  Plate  XXXIV.,  from  a copy  of  the  Koran,  will  give  a perfect 
idea  of  Arabian  decorative  art.  Were  it  not  for  the  introduction  of  flowers,  which  rather 
destroy  the  unity  of  the  style,  and  which  betray  a Persian  influence,  it  would  be  impossible  to 
find  a better  specimen  of  Arabian  ornament.  As  it  is,  however,  it  is  a very  perfect  lesson  both 
in  form  and  colour. 

The  immense  mass  of  fragments  of  marble  derived  from  Roman  ruins  must  have  very  early 
led  the  Arabs  to  seek  to  imitate  the  universal  practice  of  the  Romans,  of  covering  the  floors  of 
their  houses  and  monuments  with  mosaic  patterns,  arranged  on  a geometrical  system ; and  we  have 
on  Plate  XXXV.  a great  number  of  the  varieties  which  this  fashion  produced  with  the  Arabs. 
No  better  idea  can  be  obtained  of  what  style  in  ornament  consists  than  by  comparing  the  mosaics 
on  Plate  XXXV.  with  the  Roman  mosaics,  Plate  XXV. ; the  Byzantine,  XXX. ; the  Moresque, 
Plate  XLIII,  There  is  scarcely  a form  to  be  found  in  any  one  which  does  not  exist  in  all  the 
others.  Yet  how  strangely  different  is  the  aspect  of  these  plates ! It  is  like  an  idea  expressed 
in  four  different  languages.  The  mind  receives  from  each  the  same  modified  conception,  by  the 
sounds  so  widely  differing. 


59 


AEABIAN  OENAMENT. 


The  twisted  cord,  the  interlacing  of  lines,  the  crossing  of  two  squares  Hv  ✓ the  equilateral 
triangle  arranged  within  a hexagon,  are  the  starting-points  in  each;  the  main  differences  resulting  in 
the  scheme  of  colouring,  which  the  material  employed  and  the  uses  to  which  they  were  applied 
mainly  suggested.  The  Arabian  and  the  Roman  are  pavements,  and  of  lower  tones ; the  Moresque 
are  dados ; whilst  those  of  the  brighter  hues,  on  Plate  XXX.,  are  decorations  on  the  constructive 
features  of  the  buildings. 


ARABI3CH 


ARABIAN  Wl 


ARABES 


TAFEL  XXXI 


1 T 


ARABISCH 


ARABIAN  N ® A 


ARABES 


PLXXXIV 


tafel  xxxiy. 


Chaptee  IX. — Plates  36,  37,  38. 

TURKISH  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  XXXVI. 


1,  2,  3, 16, 18.  From  a Fountain  at  Pera,  Constantinople. 

4.  From  the  Mosque  of  Sultan  Achmet,  Constantinople. 

6,  6,  7,  8, 13.  From  Tombs  at  Constantinople. 

9,  12,  14,  16.  From  the  Tomb  of  Sultan  Soliman  I.,  Con- 
stantinople. 


10,  11,  17,  19,  21.  From  the  Yeni  D'jami,  or  new  mosque, 
Constantim>ple. 

20,  22.  From  a Fountain  at  Tophana,  Constantinople. 


PLATE  XXXVII. 

1,  2,  6,  7,  8.  From  the  Yeni  D’jami,  Constantinople.  I 4,5.  Ornaments  in  Spandrils  under  the  Dome  of  the  Mosque 

3.  Rosace  in  the  Centre  of  the  Dome  of  the  Mosque  of  of  Soliman  I.,  Constantinople. 

Soliman  I.,  Constantinople. 


PLATE  XXXViri. 

Portion  of  the  Decoration  of  the  Dome  of  the  Tomb  of  Soliman  I.,  Constantinople. 


The  architecture  of  the  Turks,  as  seen  at  Constantinople,  is  in  all  its  structural  features  mainly 
based  upon  the  early  Byzantine  monuments ; their  system  of  ornamentation,  however,  is  a modifi- 
cation of  the  Arabian,  bearing  about  the  same  relation  to  this  style  as  Elizabethan  ornament  does  to 
Italian  Renaissance. 

When  the  art  of  one  people  is  adopted  by  another  having  the  same  religion,  but  differing  in 
natural  character  and  instincts,  we  should  expect  to  find  a deficiency  in  all  those  qualities  in  which 
the  borrowing  people  are  inferior  to  their  predecessors.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  art  of  the  Turks  as 
compared  with  the  art  of  the  Arabs : there  is  the  same  difference  in  the  amount  of  elegance  and 
refinement  in  the  art  of  the  two  people  as  exists  in  their  national  character. 

We  are,  however,  inclined  to  believe  that  the  Turks  have  rarely  themselves  practised  the  arts ; 
but  that  they  have  rather  commanded  the  execution  than  been  themselves  executants.  All  their 
mosques  and  public  buildings  present  a mixed  style.  On  the  same  building,  side  by  side  with 
ornaments  derived  from  Arabian  and  Persian  floral  ornaments,  we  find  debased  Roman  and  Renaissance 
details,  leading  to  the  belief  that  these  buildings  have  mostly  been  executed  by  artists  differing  in 
religion  from  themselves.  In  more  recent  times,  the  Turks  have  been  the  first  of  the  Mohammadan 

61 


R 


i 

V 


2 


TURKISH  ORNAMENT. 

races  to  abandon  the  traditional  style  of  building  of  their  forefathers,  and  to  adopt  the  prevailing 
fashions  of  the  day  in  their  architecture ; the  modern  buildings  and  palaces  being  not  only  the  work 
of  European  artists,  but  designed  in  the  most  approved  European  style. 

The  productions  of  the  Turks  at  the  Great  Exhibition  of  1851  were  the  least  perfect  of  all  the 
Mohammadan  exhibiting  nations. 

In  Mr.  M.  Digby  Wyatt’s  admirable  record  of  the  state  of  the  Industrial  Arts  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century,  will  be  found  specimens  of  Turkish  embroidery  exhibited  in  1851,  and  which  may  be 
compared  with  the  many  valuable  specimens  of  Indian  embroidery  represented  in  the  same  work. 


TURKISH  ORNAMENT. 


distribution  of  form,  and  in  all  the  principles  of  ornamentation,  as  the  most  elaborate  and  important 
article  of  decoration.  ^ 

The  only  examples  we  have  of  perfect  ornamentation  are  to  be  found  in  Turkey  carpets ; but 
these  are  chiefly  executed  in  Asia  Minor,  and  most  probably  not  by  Turks.  The  designs  are 
thoroughly  Arabian,  differing  from  Persian  carpets  in  being  much  more  conventional  in  the  treatment 
of  foliage. 

By  comparing  Plate  XXXVII.  with  Plates  XXXII.  and  XXXIII,  the  differences  of  style  will  be 
readily  perceived.  The  general  principles  of  the  distribution  of  form  are  the  same,  but  there  are  a 
few  minor  differences  that  it  will  be  desirable  to  point  out. 

The  surface  of  an  ornament  both  in  the  Arabian  and  Moresque  styles  is  only  slightly  rounded, 
and  the  enrichment  of  the  surface  is  obtained  by  sinking  lines  on  this  surface ; or  where  the  surface 
was  left  plain,  the  additional  pattern  upon  pattern  was  obtained  by  painting. 

The  Turkish  ornament,  on  the  contrary,  presents  a carved  surface,  and  such  ornaments  as  we 
find  painted  in  the  Arabian  MSS.,  Plate  XXXPV.,  in  black  lines  on  the  gold  flowers,  are  here 
carved  on  the  surface,  the  effect  being  not  nearly  so  broad  as  that  produced  by  the  sunk  feathering  of 
the  Arabian  and  Moresque. 

Another  peculiarity,  and  one  which  at  once  distinguishes  a piece  of  Turkish  ornament  from 
Arabian,  is  the  great  abuse  which  was  made  of  the  re-entering  curve  A A. 

This  is  very  prominent  in  the  Arabian,  but  more  especially  in  the  Persian  styles.  See  Plate 
XLVI. 

With  the  Moors  it  is  no  longer  a feature,  and  appears  only  exceptionally. 

This  peculiarity  was  adopted  in  the  Elizabethan  ornament,  which,  through  the  Benaissance  of 
France  and  Italy,  was  derived  from  the  East,  in  imitation  of  the  damascened  work  which  was  at  that 
period  so  common. 

It  will  be  seen  on  reference  to  Plate  XXXVI.,  that  this  swell  always  occurs  on  the  inside  of  the 
spiral  curve  of  the  main  stem ; with  Elizabethan  ornament  the  swell  often  occurs  indifferently  on  the 
inside  and  on  the  outside. 

It  is  very  difficult,  nay,  almost  impossible,  thoroughly  to  explain  by  words  differences  in  style  of 
ornament  having  such  a strong  family  resemblance  as  the  Persian,  Arabian,  and  Turkish ; yet  the  eye 
readily  detects  them,  much  in  the  same  way  as  a Roman  statue  is  distinguished  from  a Greek.  The 
general  principles  remaining  the  same  in  the  Persian,  the  Arabian,  and  the  Turkish  styles  of  ornament, 
there  will  be  found  a peculiarity  in  the  proportions  of  the  masses,  more  or  less  grace  in  the  flowing 
of  the  curves,  a fondness  for  particular  directions  in  the  leading  lines,  and  a peculiar  mode  of  inter- 
weaving forms,  the  general  form  of  the  conventional  leafage  ever  remaining  the  same.  The  relative 
degree  of  fancy,  delicacy,  or  coarseness,  with  which  these  are  drawn,  will  at  once  distinguish  them  as 
the  works  of  the  refined  and  spiritual  Persian,  the  not  less  refined  but  reflective  Arabian,  or  the  unimagi- 
native Turk. 

Plate  XXXVIII.  is  a portion  of  the  decoration  of  the  dome  of  the  tomb  of  Soliman  I.  at  Constan- 
tinople; it  is  the  most  perfect  specimen  of  Turkish  ornament  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  and  nearly 
approaches  the  Arabian.  One  great  feature  of  Turkish  ornament  is  the  predominance  of  green  and 
black;  and,  in  fact,  in  the  modern  decoration  of  Cairo  the  same  thing  is  observed.  Green  is  much 
more  prominent  than  in  ancient  examples  where  blue  is  chiefly  used. 


63 


u 


TURKISCH.  T-URKIS'H  N°2.  turgs 


PL.XXXYIl 


TAFEL  XXXVII. 


mmk 


LlRKISCK 


TURKISH  N°  a 


T LI  R C S 


Chapter  X. — Plates  39,  40,  41,  41*,  42,  42*,  42'f,  43. 

MORESQUE  ORNAMENT, 

FROM  THE  ALHAMBRA. 



PLATE  XXXIX. 

INTERLACED  ORNAMENTS. 

1-5, 16,  18,  are  Borders  on  Mosaic  Dados.  j 13,  16.  Square  Stops  in  the  Bands  of  the  Inscriptions. 

6-12,14.  Plaster  Ornaments,  used  as  upright  and  horizon-  17.  Painted  Ornament  from  the  Great  Arch  in  the  Hall  of 
tal  Bands  enclosing  Panels  on  the  walls.'  1 the  Boat. 


PLATE  XL. 

SPANDRILS  OF  ARCHES. 


1.  From  the  centre  Arch  of  the  Court  of  the  Lions. 

2.  From  the  Entrance  to  the  Divan  Hall  of  the  Two  Sisters. 

3.  From  the  Entrance  to  the  Court  of  the  Lions  from  the 

Court  of  the  Fish-ponds. 


4.  From  the  Entrance  to  the  Court  of  the  Fish-pond  from 
the  Hall  of  the  Boat. 

6,  6.  From  the  Arches  of  the  Hall  of  Justice. 


PLATE  XLI. 


LOZENGE 

1.  Ornament  in  Panels  from  the  Hall  of  the  Boat. 

2.  „ „ from  the  HaU  of  the  Ambassadors. 

3.  „ in  Spandril  of  Arch,  entrance  to  Court  of  Lions. 

4.  „ in  Doorway  of  the  Divan,  Hall  of  the  Two 

Sisters. 


PLATE 

9, 10.  Ornaments  in  Panels,  Court  of  the  Mosque. 

11.  Soffit  of  Great  Arch,  entrance  to  Court  of  Fish-pond. 

12.  Ornaments  in  Sides  of  Windows,  Upper  Story,  Hall 

of  Two  Sisters. 


DIAPERS. 

5.  Ornament  in  Panels  of  the  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors. 

6.  „ in  Panels  of  the  Courts  of  the  Mosque. 

7.  5,  in  Panels,  Hall  of  the  Abencerrages. 

8.  „ over  Arches,  entrance  to  the  Court  of  Lions. 


XLI*. 

13.  Oraaments  in  Spandrils  of  Arches,  Hall  of  the  Abencer- 
rages. 

14, 15.  Ornaments  in  Panels,  Hall  of  Ambassadors. 

16.  „ inSpandrils  ofArches, Hall  ofthe  Two  Sisters. 


PLATE  XLII. 

SQUARE  DIAPERS. 


1.  Frieze  over  Columns,  Court  of  the  Lions. 


2.  Panelling  in  Windows,  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors. 


PLATE  XLII*. 

3.  Panelling  of  the  centre  Recess  of  the  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors.  4.  Panelling  on  the  Walls,  Tower  of  the  Captive. 

65 


s 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 

PLATE  XLIIf. 

6.  Panelling  on  the  Walls,  House  of  Sanchez.  6.  Part  of  the  Ceiling  of  the  Portico  of  the  Court  of  the  Fish-pond. 


PLATE  XLIII. 


Pilaster,  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors. 
Dado,  ditto. 

Dado,  Hall  of  the  Two  Sisters. 
Pilaster,  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors. 
Dados,  Hall  of  the  Two  Sisters. 

7.  Pilaster,  Hall  of  Justice. 

8.  Dado,  HaU  of  the  Two  Sisters. 


MOSAICS. 


10. 
11. 
12, 13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 


Dado  in  centre  Window,  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors. 
Pilaster,  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors. 

Dado,  Hall  of  Justice. 

Dados,  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors. 

From  a Column,  Hall  of  Justice. 

Dado  in  the  Baths. 

Dado  in  Divan,  Court  of  the  Fish-pond. 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 

Our  illustrations  of  the  ornament  of  the  Moors  have  been  taken  exclusively  from  the  Alhambra, 
not  only  because  it  is  the  one  of  their  works  with  which  we  are  best  acquainted,  but  also  because  it 
is  the  one  in  which  their  marvellous  system  of  decoration  reached  its  culminating  point.  The 
Alhambra  is  at  the  very  summit  of  perfection  of  Moorish  art,  as  is  the  Parthenon  of  Greek  art.  We 
can  find  no  work  so  fitted  to  illustrate  a Grammar  of  Ornament  as  that  in  which  every  ornament 
contains  a grammar  in  itself.  Every  principle  which  we  can  derive  from  the  study  of  tlie  ornamental 
art  of  any  other  people  is  not  only  ever  present  here,  but  was  by  the  Moors  more  universally  and 
truly  obeyed. 

We  find  in  the  Alhambra  the  speaking  art  of  the  Egyptians,  the  natural  grace  and  refinement  of 
the  Greeks,  the  geometrical  combinations  of  the  Romans,  the  Byzantines,  and  the  Arabs.  The 
ornament  wanted  but  one  charm,  which  was  the  peculiar  feature  of  the  Egyptian  ornament,  symbolism. 
This  the  religion  of  the  Moors  forbade ; but  the  want  was  more  than  supplied  by  the  inscriptions, 
which,  addressing  themselves  to  the  eye  by  their  outward  beauty,  at  once  excited  the  intellect  by  the 
difficulties  of  deciphering  their  curious  and  complex  involutions,  and  delighted  the  imagination  when 
read,  by  the  beauty  of  the  sentiments  they  expressed  and  the  music  of  their  composition. 


“ There  is  no  conqueror  but  God.”  Arabic  inscription  from  the  Alhambra. 

To  the  artist  and  those  provided  with  a mind  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  beauty  to  which  they 
gave  a life  they  repeated,  Looh  dud  Ibcitti.  To  the  people  they  proclaimed  the  might,  majesty,  and 
good  deeds  of  the  king.  To  the  king  himself  they  never  ceased  declaring  that  there  was  none 
powerful  but  God,  that  He  alone  was  conqueror,  and  that  to  Him  alone  was  for  ever  due  praise  and 
glory. 

66 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 


The  builders  of  this  wonderful  structure  were  fully  aware  of  the  greatness  of  their  work.  It  is 
asserted  in  the  inscriptions  on  the  walls,  that  this  building  surpassed  all  other  buildings ; that  at  sight 
of  its  wonderful  domes  all  other  domes  vanished  and  disappeared ; in  the  playful  exaggeration  of  their 
poetry,  that  the  stars  grew  pale  in  their  light  through  envy  of  so  much  beauty ; and,  what  is  more  to 
our  purpose,  they  declare  that  he  who  should  study  them  with  attention  would  reap  the  benefit  of  a 
commentary  on  decoration. 

We  have  endeavoured  to  obey  the  injunctions  of  the  poet,  and  will  attempt  here  to  explain -some 
of  the  general  principles  which  appear  to  have  guided  the  Moors  in  the  decoration  of  the  Alhambra — 
principles  which  are  not  theirs  alone,  but  common  to  all  the  best  periods  of  art.  The  principles  which 
are  everywhere  the  same,  the  forms  only  differ. 

1. *  The  Moors  ever  regai’ded  what  we  hold  to  be  the  first  principle  in  architecture — to  decorate 
construction^  never  to  construct  decoration : in  Moorish  architecture  not  only  does  the  decoration  arise 
naturally  from  the  construction,  but  the  constructive  idea  is  carried  out  in  every  detail  of  the 
ornamentation  of  the  surface. 

We  believe  that  true  beauty  in  architecture  results  from  that  ^‘repose  which  the  mind  feels  when 
the  eye,  the  intellect,  and  the  affections  are  satisfied,  from  the  absence  of  any  want.”  When  an 
object  is  constructed  falsely,  appearing  to  derive  or  give  support  without  doing  either  the  one  or  the 
other,  it  fails  to  afford  this  repose,  and  therefore  never  can  pretend  to  true  beauty,  however  harmonious 
it  may  be  in  itself ; the  Mohammadan  races,  and  Moors  especially,  have  constantly  regarded  this  rule ; 
we  never  find  a useless  or  superfluous  ornament ; every  ornament  arises  quietly  and  naturally  from 
the  surface  decorated.  They  ever  regard  the  useful  as  a vehicle  for  the  beautiful ; and  in  this  they 
do  not  stand  alone : the  same  principle  was  observed  in  all  the  best  periods  of  art ; it  is  only  when 
art  declines  that  true  principles  come  to  be  disregarded;  or,  in  an  age  of  copying,  like  the  present, 
when  the  works  of  the  past  are  reproduced  without  the  spirit  which  animated  the  originals. 

2.  All  lines  grow  out  of  each  other  in  gradual  undulations ; there  are  no  excrescences  ; nothing 
could  be  removed  and  leave  the  design  equally  good  or  better. 

In  a general  sense,  if  construction  be  properly  attended  to,  there  could  be  no  excrescences ; but 
we  use  the  word  here  in  a more  limited  sense  : the  general  lines  might  follow  truly  the  construction, 
and  yet  there  might  be  excrescences,  such  as  knobs  or  bosses,  which  would  not  violate  the  rule  of 
construction,  and  yet  would  be  fatal  to  beauty  of  form,  if  they  did  not  grow  out  gradually  from  the 
general  lines. 

There  can  be  no  beauty  of  form,  no  perfect  proportion  or  arrangement  of  lines,  which  does  not 
produce  repose. 

All  transitions  of  curved  lines  from  curved,  or  of  curved  lines  from  straight,  must  be  gradual. 
Thus  the  transition  would  cease  to  be  agreeable  if  the  break  at  A were  too  deep  in  proportion  to 
the  curves,  as  at  B.  Where  two  curves  are  separated  by  a 
break  (as  in  this  case),  they  must,  and  with  the  Moors  always 
do,  run  parallel  to  an  imaginary  line  (c)  where  the  curves  would 
be  tangential  to  each  other ; for  were  either  to  depart  from  this, 
as  in  the  case  at  D,  the  eye,  instead  of  following  gradually  down  the  curve,  would  run  outwards,  and 
repose  would  be  lost.f 

* This  essay  on  the  general  principles  of  the  ornamentation  of  the  Alhambra  is  partially  reprinted  from  the  “ Guide  Book 
to  the  Alhambra  Court  in  the  Crystal  Palace,”  by  the  Author, 

f These  transitions  were  managed  most  perfectly  by  the  Greeks  in  all  their  mouldings,  which  exhibit  this  refinement  in  the 
highest  degree ; so  do  also  the  exquisite  contom*s  of  their  vases. 


67 


3.  The  general  forms  were  first  cared  for ; these  were  subdivided  by  general  lines ; the  interstices 
were  then  filled  in  with  ornament,  which  was  again  subdivided  and  enriched  for  closer  inspection. 
They  carried  out  this  principle  with  the  greatest  refinement,  and  the  harmony  and  beauty  of  all  their 
ornamentation  derive  their  chief  success  from  its  observance.  Their  main  divisions  contrast  and 
balance  admirably;  the  greatest  distinctness  is  obtained;  the  detail  never  interferes  with  the  general 
form.  When  seen  at  a distance,  the  main  lines  strike  the  eye;  as  we  approach  nearer,  the  detail 
comes  into  the  composition ; on  a closer  inspection,  we  see  still  further  detail  on  the  surface  of  the 
ornaments  themselves. 

4.  Harmony  of  form  appears  to  consist  in  the  proper  balancing  and  contrast  of  the  straight,  the 
inclined,  and  the  curved. 

As  in  colour  there  can  be  no  perfect  composition  in  which  either  of  the  three  primary  colours  is 
wanting,  so  in  form,  whether  structural  or  decorative,  there  can  be  no  perfect  composition  in  which 
either  of  the  three  primary  figures  is  wanting ; and  the  varieties  and  harmony  in  composition  and 
design  depend  on  the  various  predominance  and  subordination  of  the  three.* 

In  surface  decoration,  any  arrangement  of  forms,  as  at  A,  consisting  only  of  straight  lines,  is 
monotonous,  and  affords  but  imperfect  pleasure;  but  introduce  lines  which  tend  to  carry  the  eye 
towards  the  angles,  as  at  B,  and  you  have  at  once  an  increased  pleasure.  Then  add  lines  giving  a 
circular  tendency,  as  at  c,  and  you  have  now  complete  harmony.  In  this  case  the  square  is  the 

leading  form  or  tonic ; the  angular  and  curved  are  subor- 
dinate. 

We  may  produce  the  same  result  in  adopting  an  angular 
composition,  as  at  D : add  the  lines  as  at  E,  and  we  at  once 
correct  the  tendency  to  follow  only  the  angular  direction 
of  the  inclined  lines ; but  unite  these  by  circles,  as  at  f, 
ABC  and  we  have  still  more  perfect  harmony,  i.e.  repose,  for  the 

eye  has  now  no  longer  any  want  that  could  be  supplied.^ 

5.  In  the  surface  decoration  of  the  Moors  all  lines  flow 
out  of  a parent  stem : every  ornament,  however  distant,  can 
be  traced  to  its  branch  and  root.  They  have  the  happy  art 
of  so  adapting  the  ornament  to  the  surface  decorated,  that  the 
ornament  as  often  appears  to  have  suggested  the  general  form 
as  to  have  been  suggested  by  it.  In  all  cases,  we  find  the 
foliage  flowing  out  of  a parent  stem,  and  we  are  never  offended, 
as  in  modern  practice,  by  the  random  introduction  of  an 
ornament  just  dotted  down,  without  a reason  for  its  existence.  However  irregular  the  space  they 


^ \ 

/ S 

/ \ 

;o: 

A 

a; 

a: 

a: 

:o: 

:o; 

A 

))K 

o 

)^o) 

o)^( 

p 

* There  can  be  no  better  example  of  this  harmony  than  the  Greek  temple,  where  the  straight,  the  angular,  and  the  curved, 
are  in  most  perfect  relation  to  each  other.  Gothic  architecture  also  offers  many  illustrations  of  this  principle;  every  tendency  of 
lines  to  run  in  one  direction  is  immediately  counteracted  by  the  angular  or  the  curved:  thus,  the  capping  of  the  buttress  is  exactly 
what  is  required  to  counteract  the  upwai'd  tendency  of  the  sti’aight  lines;  so  the  gable  contrasts  admirably  with  the  ouiwed  window- 
head  and  its  perpendicular  raullions. 

t It  is  to  the  neglect  of  this  obvious  rule  that  we  find  so  many  failures  in  paper-hangings,  carpets,  and  more  especially  articles 
of  costume;  the  lines  of  papers  generally  run  through  the  ceiling  most  disagreeably,  because  the  straight  is  not  coixected  by  the 
angular,  or  the  angular  by  the  curved;  so  of  carpets,  the  lines  of  cai'pets  are  constantly  running  in  one  direction  only,  carrying  the 
eye  right  through  the  walls  of  the  apai-tment.  Again,  to  this  we  owe  all  those  abominable  checks  and  plaids  which  constantly 
disfigure  the  human  form — a custom  detrimental  to  the  public  taste,  and  gradually  lowering  the  tone  of  the  eye  for  form  of  this 
generation.  If  children  were  bom  and  bred  to  the  sound  of  hurdy-gurdies  grinding  out  of  tune,  their  ears  would  no  doubt 
suffer  deterioration,  and  they  would  lose  their  sensibility  to  the  harmonious  in  sound.  This,  then,  is  what  is  certainly  taking  place 
with  regard  to  form,  and  it  requires  the  most  strenuous  efforts  to  be  made  by  all  who  would  take  an  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the 
rising  generation  to  put  a stop  to  it. 

68 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 


haye  to  fill,  they  always  commence  by  dividing  it  into  equal  areas,  and  round  these  trunk-lines  they 
fill  in  their  detail,  but  invariably  return  to  their  parent  stem. 

They  appear  in  this  to  work  by  a process  analogous  to  that  of 
nature,  as  we  see  in  the  vine-leaf;  the  object  being  to  distribute  the 
sap  from  the  parent  stem  to  the  extremities,  it  is  evident  the  main  stem 
would  divide  the  leaf  as  near  as  may  be  into  equal  areas.  So,  again, 
of  the  minor  divisions  ; each  area  is  again  subdivided  by  intermediate 
lines,  which  all  follow  the  same  law  of  equal  distribution,  even  to  the 
jnost  minute  filling-in  of  the  sap-feeders. 

6.  The  Moors  also  follow  another  principle ; that  of  radiation  from 
the  pai’ent  stem,  as  we  may  see  in  nature  with  the  human  hand,  or 
in  a chestnut  leaf. 

We  may  see  in  the  example  how  beautifully  all  these  lines  radiate  from  the  parent  stem ; how 
each  leaf  diminishes  towards  the  extremities,  and  how  each  area  is  in  pro- 
portion to  the  leaf.  The  Orientals  carry  out  this  principle  with  marvellous 
perfection ; so  also  did  the  G-reeks  in  their  honeysuckle  ornament.  We  have 
already  remarked,  in  Chapter  IV.,  a peculiarity  of  Greek  ornament,  which 
appears  to  follow  the  principle  of  the  plants  of  the  cactus  tribe,  where  one 
leaf  grows  out  of  another.  This  is  generally  the  case  with  G-reek  ornament ; 
the  acanthus  leaf-scrolls  are  a series  of  leaves  growing  out  one  from  the  other 
in  a continuous  line,  whilst  the  Arabian  and  Moresque  ornaments  always  grow 
out  of  a continuous  stem. 

7.  All  junctions  of  curved  lines  with  curved,  or  of  curved  with  straight,  should  be  tangential  to 
each  other;  this  also  we  consider  to  be  a law  found  everywhere  in  nature,  and  the 
Oriental  practice  is  always  in  accordance  with  it.  Many  of  the  Moorish  ornaments 
are  on  the  same  principle  which  is  observable  in  the  lines  of  a feather  and  in  the  articu- 
lations of  every  leaf;  and  to  this  is  due  that  additional  charm  found  in  all  perfect 
ornamentation,  which  we  call  the  graceful.  It  may  be  called  the  melody  of  form,  as 
what  we  have  before  described  constitutes  its  harmony. 

We  shall  find  these  laws  of  equal  distribution,  radiation  from  a parent  stem, 
continuity  of  line,  and  tangential  curvature,  ever  present  in  natural  leaves. 

8.  We  would  call  attention  to  the  nature  of  the  exquisite  curves  in  use  by  the  Arabs  and  Moors. 

As  with  proportion,  we  think  that  those  proportions  will  be  the  most  beautiful  which  it  will  be 

most  difficult  for  the  eye  to  detect;*  so  we  think  that  those  compositions  of  curves  will  be  most 
agreeable,  where  the  mechanical  process  of  describing  them  shall  be  least  apparent;  and  we  shall  fiod 
it  to  be  universally  the  case,  that  in  the  best  periods  of  art,  all  mouldings  and  ornaments  were  founded 
on  curves  of  the  higher  order,  such  as  the  conic,  sections ; whilst,  when  art  declined,  circles  and 
compass-work  were  much  more  dominant. 

The  researches  of  Mr.  Penrose  have  shown  that  the  mouldings  and  curved  lines  in  the  Parthenon 
are  all  portions  of  curves  of  a very  high  order,  and  that  segments  of  circles  were  very  rarely  used. 
The  exquisite  curves  of  the  G-reek  vases  are  well  known,  and  here  we  never  find  portions  of  circles. 
In  Roman  architecture,  on  the  contrary,  this  refinement  is  lost ; the  Romans  were  probably  as  little 
able  to  describe  as  to  appreciate  curves  of  a high  order ; and  we  find,  therefore,  their  mouldings 
mostly  parts  of  circles,  which  could  be  struck  with  compasses. 

* All  compositions  of  squares  or  of  circles  will  lie  monotonous,  and  afford  lut  little  pleasure,  because  the  means  whereby  they 
are  produced  are  very  apparent.  So  we  think  that  compositions  distiibuted  in  equal  lines  or  divisions  will  be  less  beautiful  than 
those  which  require  a higher  mental  effort  to  appreciate  them. 


T 


69 


In  the  early  works  of  the  Gothic  period,  the  tracery  would  appear  to  have  been  much  less  the 
offspring  of  compass-work  than  in  the  later  period,  which  has  most  appropriately  been  termed  the 
Geometrical,  from  the  immoderate  use  of  compass-work. 

Here  is  a curve  (a)  common  to  Greek  Art,  to  the  Gothic 
period,  and  so  much  delighted  in  by  the  Mohammadan  races. 
This  becomes  graceful  the  more  it  departs  from  the  curve  which 
the  union  of  two  parts  of  circles  would  give. 

9.  A still  further  charm  is  found  in  the  works  of  the  Arabs 
and  Moors  from  their  conventional  treatment  of  ornament,  which, 
forbidden  as  they  were  by  their  creed  to  represent  living  forms, 
they  carried  to  the  highest  perfection.  They  ever  worked  as  nature  worked,  but  always  avoided  a 
direct  transcript;  they  took  her  principles,  but  did  not,  as  we  do,  attempt  to  copy  her  works.  In 
this,  again,  they  do  not  stand  alone;  in  every  period  of  faith  in  art,  all  ornamentation  was  ennobled 
by  the  ideal ; never  was  the  sense  of  propriety  violated  by  a too  faithful  representation  of  nature. 

Thus,  in  Egypt,  a lotus  carved  in  stone  was  never  such  an  one  as  you  might  have  plucked,  but  a 
conventional  representation  perfectly  in  keeping  with  the  architectural  members  of  which  it  formed  a 
part ; it  was  a symbol  of  the  power  of  the  king  over  countries  where  the  lotus  grew,  and  added  poetry 
to  what  would  otherwise  have  been  a rude  support. 

The  colossal  statues  of  the  Egyptians  were  not  little  men  carved  on  a large  scale,  but  architectural 
representations  of  Majesty,  in  which  were  symbolised  the  power  of  the  monarch,  and  his  abiding  love 
of  his  people. 

In  Greek  art,  the  ornaments,  no  longer  symbols,  as  in  Egypt,  were  still  further  conventionalised ; 
and  in  their  sculpture  applied  to  architecture,  they  adopted  a conventional  treatment  both  oi  pose  and 
relief  very  different  to  that  of  their  isolated  works. 

In  the  best  periods  of  Gothic  art  the  floral  ornaments  are  treated  conventionally,  and  a direct 
imitation  of  nature  is  never  attempted ; but  as  art  declined,  they  became  less  idealised,  and  more 
direct  in  imitation. 

The  same  decline  may  be  traced  in  stained  glass,  where  both  figures  and  ornaments  were  treated 
at  first  conventionally ; but  as  the  art  declined,  figures  and  draperies,  through  which  light  was  to  be 
transmitted,  had  their  own  shades  and  shadows. 

In  the  early  illuminated  MSS.  the  ornaments  were  conventional,  and  the  illuminations  were  in  flat 
tints,  with  little  shade  and  no  shadow;  whilst  in  those  of  a later  period  highly-finished  representations 
of  natural  flowers  were  used  as  ornament,  casting  their  shadows  on  the  page. 


ON  THE  COLOURING  OF  MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 

When  we  examine  the  system  of  colouring  adopted  by  the  Moors,  we  shall  find,  that  as  with 
form,  so  with  colour,  they  followed  certain  fixed  principles,  founded  on  observations  of  nature’s  laws, 
and  which  they  held  in  common  with  all  those  nations  who  have  practised  the  arts  with  success.  In 
all  archaic  styles  of  art,  practised  during  periods  of  faith,  the  same  true  principles  prevail ; and 
although  we  find  in  all  somewhat  of  a local  or  temporary  character,  we  yet  discern  in  all  much  that 
is  eternal  and  immutable ; the  same  grand  ideas  embodied  in  different  forms,  and  expressed,  so  to 
speak,  in  a different  language. 

10.  The  ancients  always  used  colour  to  assist  in  the  development  of  fo'inn,  always  employed  it 
as  a further  means  of  bringing  out  the  constructive  features  of  a building. 

70 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 


Thus,  iu  the  Egyptian  column,  the  base  of  which  represented  the  root — the  shaft,  the  stalk — 
the  capital,  the  buds  and  flowers  of  the  lotus  or  papyrus,  the  several  colours  were  so  applied  that 
the  appearance  of  strength  in  the  column  was  increased,  and  the  contours  of  the  various  lines  more 
fully  developed. 

In  Gothic  architecture,  also,  colour  was  always  employed  to  assist  in  developing  the  forms  of  the 
panel-work  and  tracery ; and  this  it  effected  to  an  extent  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  form  an  idea,  in 
the  present  colourless  condition  of  the  buildings.  In  the  slender  shafts  of  their  lofty  edifices,  the 
idea  of  elevation  was  still  further  increased  by  upward-running  spiral  lines  of  colour,  which,  while 
adding  to  the  apparent  height  of  the  column,  also  helped  to  define  its  form. 

In  Oriental  art,  again,  we  always  find  the  constructive  lines  of  the  building  well  defined  by  colour; 
an  apparent  additional  height,  length,  breadth,  or  bulk  always  results  from  its  judicious  application ; and 
with  the  ornaments  in  relief  it  developes  constantly  new  forms  which  would  have  been  altogether 
lost  without  it. 

The  artists  have  in  this  but  followed  the  guiding  inspiration  of  Nature,  in  whose  works  every 

transition  of  form  is  accompanied  by  a modification  of  colour,  so  disposed  as  to  assist  in  producing 

distinctness  of  expression.  For  example,  flowers  are  separated  by  colour  from  their  leaves  and  stalks, 
and  these  again  from  the  earth  in  which  they  grow.  So  also  in  the  human  figure  every  change  of 

form  is  marked  by  a change  of  colour;  thus  the  colour  of  the  hair,  the  eyes,  the  eyelids,  and 

lashes,  the  sanguine  complexion  of  the  lips,  the  rosy  bloom  of  the  cheek,  all  assist  in  producing 
distinctness,  and  in  more  visibly  bringing  out  the  form.  We  all  know  how  much  the  absence  or  im- 
pairment of  these  colours,  as  in  sickness,  contributes  to  deprive  the  features  of  their  proper  meaning 
and  expression. 

Had  nature  applied  but  one  colour  to  all  objects,  they  would  have  been  indistinct  in  form  as  well 
as  monotonous  in  aspect.  It  is  the  boundless  variety  of  her  tints  that  perfects  the  modelling  and 
defines  the  outline  of  each ; detaching  equally  the  modest  lily  from  the  grass  from  which  it  springs, 
and  the  glorious  sun,  parent  of  all  colour,  from  the  firmament  in  which  it  shines. 

11.  The  colours  employed  by  the  Moors  on  their  stucco-work  were,  in  all  cases,  the  primaHes, 
blue,  red,  and  yellow  {gold).  The  secondary  colowrs,  purple,  green,  and  orange,  occur  only  in  the 
Mosaic  dados,  which,  being’  near  the  eye,  formed  a point  of  repose  from  the  more  brilliant  colouring 
above.  It  is  true  that,  at  the  present  day,  the  grounds  of  many  of  the  ornaments  are  found  to  be 
green ; it  will  always  be  found,  however,  on  a minute  examination,  that  the  colour  originally  employed 
was  blue,  which,  being  a metallic  pigment,  has  become  green  from  the  effects  of  time.  This  is  proved 
by  the  presence  of  the  particles  of  blue  colour,  which  occur  everywhere  in  the  crevices : in  the  restora- 
tions, also,  which  were  made  by  the  Catholic  kings,  the  grounds  of  the  ornaments  were  repainted 
both  green  and  purple.  It  may  be  remarked  that,  among  the  Egyptians  and  the  Greeks,  the  Arabs 
and  the  Moors,  the  primary  colours  were  almost  entirely,  if  not  exclusively,  employed,  during  the 
early  periods  of  art ; whilst,  during  the  decadence,  the  secondary  colours  became  of  more  importance. 
Thus,  in  Egypt,  in  Pharaonic  temples,  we  find  the  primary  colours  predominating ; in  the  Ptolemaic 
temples,  the  secondary;  so  also  on  the  early  Greek  temples  are  found  the  primary  colours,  whilst  at 
Pompeii  every  variety  of  shade  and  tone  was  employed. 

In  modern  Cairo,  and  in  the  East  generally,  we  have  green  constantly  appearing  side  by  side  with 
red,  where  blue  would  have  been  used  in  earlier  times. 

This  is  equally  true  of  the  works  of  the  Middle  Ages.  In  the  early  manuscripts  and  in  stained 
glass,  though  other  colours  were  not  excluded,  the  primaries  were  chiefly  used;  whilst  in  later  times 
we  have  every  variety  of  shade  and  tint,  but  rarely  used  with  equal  success. 

12.  With  the  Moors,  as  a general  rule,  the  primary  colour's  were  used  on  the  upper  portions 

71 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 


of  objects,  the  secondary  and  tertiary  on  the  lower.  This  also  appears  to  he  in  accordance  with  a 
natural  law ; we  have  the  primary  blue  in  the  sky,  the  secondary  green  in  the  trees  and  fields,  ending 
with  the  tertiaries  on  the  earth  ; as  also  in  flowers,  where  we  generally  find  the  primaries  on  the 
buds  and  flowers,  and  the  secondaries  on  the  leaves  and  stalks. 

The  ancients  always  observed  this  rule  in  the  best  periods  of  art.  In  Egypt,  however,  we  do  see 
occasionally  the  secondary  green  used  in  the  upper  portions  of  the  temples,  but  this  arises  from  the 
fact,  that  ornaments  in  Egypt  were  symbolical;  and  if  a lotus  leaf  were  used  on  the  upper  part  of 
a building,  it  would  necessarily  be  coloured  green;  but  the  law  is  true  in  the  main;  the  general 
aspect  of  an  Egyptian  temple  of  the  Pharaonic  period  gives  the  primaries  above  and  the  secondaries 
below ; but  in  the  buildings  of  the  Ptolemaic  and  Eoman  periods  more  especially,  this  order  was 
inverted,  and  the  palm  and  lotus  leaf  capitals  give  a superabundance  of  green  in  the  upper  portions 
of  the  temples. 

In  Pompeii  we  find  sometimes  in  the  interior  of  the  houses  a gradual  gradation  of  colour  downwards 
from  the  roof,  from  light  to  dark,  ending  with  black;  but  this  is  by  no  means  so  universal  as  to 
convince  us  that  they  felt  it  as  a law.  We  have  already  shown  in  Chapter  V.  that  there  are  many 
examples  of  black  immediately  under  the  ceiling. 

13.  Although  the  ornaments  which  are  found  in  the  Alhambra,  and  in  the  Court  of  the  Lions 
especially,  are  at  the  present  day  covered  with  several  thin  coats  of  the  whitewash  which  has  at  various 
periods  been  applied  to  them,  we  may  be  said  to  have  authority  for  the  whole  of  the  colouring  of 
our  reproduction ; for  not  only  may  the  colours  be  seen  in  the  interstices  of  the  ornaments  in  many 
places  by  scaling  off  the  whitewash,  but  the  colouring  of  the  Alhambra  was  carried  out  on  so  perfect 
a system,  that  any  one  who  will  make  this  a study,  can  with  almost  absolute  certainty,  on  being 
shown  for  the  first  time  a piece  of  Moorish  ornament  in  white,  define  at  once  the  manner  in  which  it 
was  coloured.  So  completely  were  all  the  architectural  forms  designed  with  reference  to  their  subsequent 
colouring,  that  the  surface  alone  will  indicate  the  colours  they  were  destined  to  receive.  Thus,  in 
using  the  colours  blue,  red,  and  gold,  they  took  care  to  place  them  in  such  positions  that  they  should 
be  best  seen  in  themselves,  and  add  most  to  the  general  effect.  On  moulded  surfaces  they  placed 
red,  the  strongest  colour  of  the  three  in  the  depths,  where  it  might  be  softened  by  shadow,  never 
on  the  surface;  blue  in  the  shade,  and  gold  on  all  surfaces  exposed  to  light;  for  it  is  evident  that 
by  this  arrangement  alone  could  their  true  value  be  obtained.  The  several  colours  are  either 
separated  by  white  bands,  or  by  the  shadow  caused  by  the  relief  of  the  ornament  itself — and  this 
appears  to  be  an  absolute  principle  required  in  colouring — colours  should  never  be  allowed  to  impinge 
upon  each  other. 

14.  In  colouring  the  grounds  of  the  various  diapers  the  blue  always  occupies  the  largest  area; 
and  this  is  in  accordance  with  the  theory  of  optics,  and  the  experiments  which  have  been  made 
with  the  prismatic  spectrum.  The  rays  of  light  are  said  to  neutralise  each  other  in  the  proportions 
of  3 yellow,  5 red,  and  8 blue;  thus,  it  requires  a quantity  of  blue  equal  to  the  red  and  yellow 
put  together  to  produce  a harmonious  effect,  and  prevent  the  predominance  of  any  one  colour  over 
the  others.  As  in  the  “Alhambra,”  yellow  is  replaced  by  gold,  which  tends  towards  a reddish- 
yellow,  the  blue  is  still  further  increased,  to  counteract  the  tendency  of  the  red  to  overpower  the 
other  colours. 


INTEKLACED  PATTERNS. 

We  have  already  suggested,  in  Chapter  IV.,  the  probability  that  the  immense  variety  of  Moorish 
ornaments,  which  are  formed  by  the  intersection  of  equidistant  lines,  could  be  traced  through  the 
72 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 


Arabian  to  the  Greek  fret.  The  ornaments  on  Plate  XXXIX.  are  constructed  on  two  general 
principles;  Nos.  1—12,  16—18,  are  constructed  on  one  principle  (Diagram  No,  1),  No.  14  on  the  other 
(Diagram  No.  2).  In  the  first  series  the  lines  are  equidistant  diagonally  crossed  by  horizontal  and 


ilgpSiiPHSiliKgpl! 

iiiliiliiisisSstili! 

KiKSliSiiSnSIKSWSKii 

■ ■ BTB  a B'B  B k'BBKM  ■ m ■ W B W'B 

ssasasasHsasliiifSiK 

llSilswi! 

lisisKW 

laiisisi 

iililil'!* 

iilliiiiS 

lliirSiiii 

isisiiSsisSsSiisS 

SliiiaiiiaiiijKwiiSS 

iiiiiiizii 

•IB  la^B  B v.B  B^«B  »;« 1 

ikTBBBraaKBBa.^aKBBWBaacBiKaav.B 

asa!a!ai»8ai5»!aisa 

iaTBBK«B».;«BaMB»iaBR:«a»:«aKBBK« 

BtlB  B BTB  BBIB  a KB  a KBI 

Diagram  No.  1. 


Diagram  No.  2. 


perpendicular  lines  on  each  square.  But  the  system  on  which  No.  14  is  constructed,  the  perpendicular 
and  horizontal  lines  are  equidistant,  and  the  diagonal  lines  cross  only  each  alternate  square.  The 
number  of  patterns  that  can  be  produced  by  these  two  systems  would  appear  to  be  infinite ; and  it 
will  be  seen,  on  reference  to  Plate  XXXIX.,  that  the  variety  may  be  still  further  increased  by  the 
mode  of  colouring  the  ground  or  the  surface  lines.  Any  one  of  these  patterns  which  we  have 
engraved  might  be  made  to  change  its  aspect,  by  bringing  into  prominence  different  chains  or  other 
general  masses. 


LOZENGE  DIAPERS. 

The  general  effect  of  Plate  XLI.  and  XLI*.  will,  we  think,  at  once  justify  the  superiority  we  have 
claimed  for  the  ornament  of  the  Moors.  Composed  of  but  three  colours,  they  are  more  harmonious 
and  effective  than  any  others  in  our  collection,  and  possesses  a peculiar  charm  which  all  the  others 
fail  to  approach.  The  various  principles  for  which  we  have  contended,  the  constructive  idea  whereby 
each  leading  line  rests  upon  another,  the  gradual  transitions  from  curve  to  curve,  the  tangential 
curvatures  of  the  lines,  the  flowing  off  of  the  ornaments  from  a parent  stem,  the  tracing  of  each 
flower  to  its  branch  and  root,  the  division  and  subdivision  of  general  lines,  will  readily  be  perceived  in 
every  ornament  on  the  page. 


SQUARE  DIAPERS. 

The  ornament  No.  1,  on  Plate  XLII.,  is  a good  example  of  the  principle  we  cofitend  for,  that  to 
produce  repose  the  lines  of  a composition  should  contain  in  equilibrium  the  straight,  the  inclined,  and 
the  curved.  We  have  lines  running  horizontally,  perpendicularly,  and  diagonally,  again  contrasted  by 
circles  in  opposite  directions.  So  that  the  most  perfect  repose  is  obtained,  the  tendency  of  the  eye  to 
run  in  any  direction  is  immediately  corrected  by  lines  giving  an  opposite  tendency,  and  wherever  the 
eye  strikes  upon  the  patterns  it  is  inclined  to  dwell.  The  blue  ground  of  the  inscriptions  and 
ornamental  panels  and  centres,  being  carried  over  the  red  ground  by  the  blue  feathers,  produces  a 
most  cheerful  and  brilliant  effect. 

The  leading  lines  of  the  ornaments  Nos.  2-4,  Plates  XLII.  and  XLII*.,  are  produced  in  the  same 
way  as  the  interlaced  ornaments  on  Plate  XXXIX.  In  Nos.  2 and  4 it  will  be  seen  how  the  repose 

73 


u 


MORESQUE  ORNAMENT. 


of  tke  pattern  is  obtained  by  the  arrangement  of  tbe  coloured  grounds ; and  bow,  also,  by  this  means 
an  additional  pattern  besides  that  produced  by  form  results  from  the  arrangement  of  the  colours. 

Pattern  No.  6,  Plate  XLIIf.,  is  a portion  of  a ceiling,  of  which  there  are  immense  varieties  in  the 
Alhambra,  produced  by  divisions  of  the  circle  crossed  by  intersecting  squares.  It  is  the  same  principle 
which  exists  in  the  copy  from  the  illuminated  Koran,  Plate  XXXIV.,  and  is  also  very  common  on  the 
ceilings  of  Arabian  houses. 

The  ornament  No.  5,  Plate  XLIIf.,  is  of  extreme  delicacy,  and  is  remarkable  for  the  ingenious 
system  on  which  it  is  constructed.  All  the  pieces  being  similar,  it  illustrates  one  of  the  most 
important  principles  in  Moorish  design, — one  which  more  perhaps  than  any  other  contributed  to  the 
general  happy  result,  viz.,  that  by  the  repetition  of  a few  simple  elements  the  most  beautiful  and 
complicated  effects  were  produced. 

However  much  disguised,  the  whole  of  the  ornamentation  of  the  Moors  is  constructed 
geometrically.  Their  fondness  for  geometrical  forms  is  evidenced  by  the  great  use  they  made  of 
mosaics,  in  which  their  imagination  had  full  play.  However  complicated  the  patterns  on  Plate  XLIII. 
may  appear,  they  are  all  very  simple  when  the  principle  of  setting  them  out  is  once  understood. 
They  all  arise  from  the  intersection  of  equidistant  lines  round  fixed  centres.  No.  8 is  constructed  on 
the  principle  of  Diagram  No.  2,  cited  on  the  other  side,  and  is  the  principle  which  produces  the 
greatest  variety;  in  fact,  geometrical  combinations  on  this  system  may  be  said  to  be  infinite. 


74 


MORESQUE  N° I 


MAURIS  CH 


MAURESQUES 


PL  XXXIX 


TAEEL  XXXIX. 


tmm 


16 


6 


•V'M 


MORESQUE 


MALI  R I S C H 


MAUR  tSQUE'? 


• r Wi\jitWir?inMi' 


JliiiiiiilyMilllliiilj  jiil  i iiiiiii^a,iiiyd 


MAURisGH  MORESQUE. N°  5 mauresqurs 

TAfEL^CUIl  PLXLIII. 


®*S*z*S 


H ^ ^ 'm  I 

fur  fw  fT'i, 


000m 

mm^m 

mmmm 


Chapter  XI.— Plates  44,  45,  46,  47,  47*,  48. 


PERSIAN  ORNAMENT. 


PLATES  XLIV.,  XLY.,  XLVI. 

Ornaments  from  Persian  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum. 


PLATES  XLYII.,  XLYII*. 


From  a Persian  Manufacturer’s  Pattern-Book,  South  Kensington  Museum. 


PLATE  XLYIII. 


From  a Persian  MS.  South  Kensington  Museum. 


The  Mohammadan  architecture  of  Persia,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  representations  published  in 
Flandin  and  Coste’s  ^‘Voyages  en  Perse,”  does  not  appear  to  have  ever  reached  the  perfection  of  the 
Arabian  buildings  of  Cairo.  Although  presenting  considerable  grandeur  in  the  main  features,  the 
general  outlines  are  much  less  pure,  and  there  would  appear  to  be  a great  want  of  elegance  in  all 
the  constructive  features  as  compared  with  those  of  Cairo.  Their  system  of  ornamentation  also  appears 
to  us  much  less  pure  than  the  Arabian  and  Moresque.  The  Persians,  unhke  the  Arabs  and  the 
Moors,  were  free  to  introduce  animal  life,  and  this  mixing  up  of  subjects  drawn  from  real  life  in 
their  decoration  led  to  a much  less  pure  style  of  ornament.  With  the  Arabs  and  Moors,  ornaments 
with  their  inscriptions  had  to  supply  every  want,  and  therefore  it  became  of  more  importance  in  their 
structures,  and  reached  a higher  point  of  elaboration.  Persian  ornament  is  a mixed  style;  combining 
the  conventional,  which  is  similar  to  the  Arabian,  and  probably  derived  from  a common  origin,  with 
an  attempt  at  the  natural  which  sometimes  has  influenced  both  the  Arabian  and  Turkish  styles,  and 
is  even  felt  in  portions  of  the  Alhambra.  The  great  attention  paid  to  the  illuminating  of  manuscripts 

75 


PERSIAN  ORNAMENT. 

in  Persia,  which,  doubtless,  were  widely  disseminated  in  Mohammadan  countries,  would  readily  spread 
the  influence  of  this  mixed  style.  The  decorations  of  the  houses  of  Cairo  and  Damascus,  the  mosques 
and  fountains  of  Constantinople  more  especially,  exhibit  this  mixed  style;  groups  of  natural  flowers 
are  constantly  found  growing  from  a vase  and  enclosed  in  panels  of  conventional  Arabian  ornament. 
The  ornament  of  modern  India  also  feels  this  ever-present  influence  of  the  Persian  mixed  style.  In  a 
book-cover  fropa  the  India  House  (Plates  LIII.  and  LIV.)  is  an  example  of  this;  the  outside  is 
treated  in  the  ^ure  Arabian  manner,  whilst  the  inside  (Plate  LIV.)  is  quite  Persian  in  character. 

The  ornaments  on  Plate  XLIV.,  from  illuminated  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  present  also  the 
mixed  character  we  have  referred  to.  The  geometrical  patterns  are  purely  conventional  ornament,  and 
have  great  aflSnity  with  the  Arabian,  but  are  less  perfect  in  distribution.  Nos.  1-10,  on  the  contrary, 
are  from  backgrounds  of  pictures,  representing  tapestry  on  the  walls ; they  possess  great  elegance,  and 
the  masses  are  well  contrasted  with  the  grounds. 

The  patterns  on  Plate  XLV.  are  chiefly  representations  of  pavements  and  dados,  and  probably 
were  intended  for  glazed  tiles  so  abundantly  used  by  the  Persians.  Compared  with  the  Arabian 
and  Moresque  mosaics,  they  exhibit  a marked  inferiority,  both  in  the  distribution  of  form  and  in 
the  arrangement  of  colour;  it  will  be  observed  that,  throughout  our  Persian  subjects,  the  secondary 
and  tertiary  colours  are  much  more  dominant  than  in  the  Arabian  (Plate  XXXIV.),  or  in  the  Moresque, 
where  blue,  red,  and  gold,  are  the  prevailing  harmonies,  and,  as  may  be  seen  at  a glance,  with  much- 
increased  effect. 

The  ornaments  on  Plate  XLVI.  have  a much  greater  affinity  with  the  Arabian:  Nos.  7,  16,  17,  21, 
23-25,  are  very  common  ornaments  for  the  heads  of  chapters  in  Persian  MSS.,  indeed  there  is  but 
little  variety  to  be  found  in  these,  numerous  as  they  are.  Compared  with  the  Arabian  MSS.  (Plate 
XXIV.),  a great  similarity  will  be  found  in  all  the  leading  lines  of  the  construction  of  the  ornaments 
and  also  in  the  surface  decoration  of  the  ornaments  themselves ; but  the  masses  are  much  less  evenly 
distributed.  However  the  same  general  principles  prevail. 

Plates  XLVII.  and  XLVII*.  are  arranged  from  a very  curious  Persian  book  at  South  Kensington 
Museum,  which  appears  to  be  a manufacturer’s  pattern-book.  The  designs  exhibit  much  elegance, 
and  there  is  great  simplicity  and  ingenuity  displayed  in  the  conventional  rendering  of  natural  flowers. 
Both  these  Plates  and  Plate  XLVIII.  are  very  valuable,  as  showing  the  extreme  limit  of  this  conven- 
tional rendering,  reached,  but  not  exceeded.  When  natural  flowers  are  used  as  decoration,  and  subjected 
to  a geometrical  arrangement,  they  can  have  neither  shade  nor  shadow,  as  was  the  case  with  the  later 
MSS.  of  the  Mediaeval  School,  see  Plate  LXXIII. ; without  falling  under  that  reproach  so  justly  due 
to  the  floral  papers  and  floral  carpets  of  modern  times.  The  ornament  at  the  top  of  Plate  XLVIII., 
which  forms  the  title-page  to  the  book  as  well  as  the  borders  throughout,  present  that  mixed  character 
of  pure  ornament,  arranged  in  conjunction  with  the  ornamental  rendering  of  naturai  forms,  which  we 
have  considered  as  characteristic  of  the  Persian  style,  and  which,  we  think,  renders  it  so  much  inferior 
to  the  Arabian  and  the  Moresque. 


7? 


TAFEL  XLIY 


IT 


<8 


19 


PERSISCH. 


PERSIAN  N°  3 


PERSE  S. 


TAFEL  XLYI 


PL  XLYi. 


PER  SI'S  CH 


PERSIAN  N°4* 


PER  S £ ' 


PLXLYIi' 


TAFEL  XlVn* 


PERSISCH. 


PERSIAN  N°  5 


TAFEL  XLYIU 


PERSE  S. 

PL  XLYIU 


Chapter  XII.— Plates  49,  50,  51,  52,  53,  53%  54,  54*,  55. 


INDIAN  ORNAMENT, 

FROM  THE  EXHIBITIONS  OF  1851  AND  1855. 

^ r-9iiir38pii<  

PLATE  XLIX. 

Ornaments  from  Works  in  Metal,  exlubited  in  the  Indian  Collection  in  1851. 


PLATES  L.,  LL,  LII. 


Ornaments  from  Embroidered  and  Woven  Eabrics,  and  Paintings  on  Vases,  exhibited  in  the  Indian  Collection  in  1851, 

and  now  at  South  Kensington  Museum. 


PLATES  LIIL,  LIII*.,  LIV.,  LIV*. 

Specimens  of  Painted  Lacquer-work,  from  the  Collection  at  the  India  House. 


PLATE  LV. 


Ornaments  from  Woven  and  Embroidered  Fabrics,  and  Painted  Boxes,  exhibited  in  the  Indian  Collection  at  Paris  in  1855. 


C 8-  =■ 

The  Exhibition  of  the  Works  of  Industry  of  all  Nations  in  1851  was  barely  opened  to  the  public 
ere  attention  was  directed  to  the  gorgeous  contributions  of  India. 

Amid  the  general  disorder  everywhere  apparent  in  the  application  of  Art  to  manufactures,  the 
presence  of  so  much  unity  of  design,  so  much  skill  and  judgment  in  its  application,  with  so  much  of 
elegance  and  refinement  in  the  execution,  as  was  observable  in  all  the  works,  not  only  of  India,  but 
of  all  the  other  Mohammadan  contributing  countries, — Tunis,  Egypt,  and  Turkey, — excited  a degree 
of  a.ttention  from  artists,  manufacturers,  and  the  public,  which  has  not  been  without  its  fruits. 

Whilst  in  the  works  contributed  by  the  various  nations  of  Europe,  there  was  everywhere  to  be 
observed  an  entire  absence  of  any  common  principle  in  the  application  of  Art  to  manufactures, — whilst 
from  one  end  to  the  other  of  the  vast  structure  there  could  he  found  but  a fruitless  struggle  after 
novelty,  irrespective  of  fitness,  that  all  design  was  based  upon  a system  of  copying  and  misapplying 

77 


X 


INDIAN  ORNAMENT. 


the  received  forms  of  beauty  of  every  bygone  style  of  Art,  without  one  single  attempt  to  produce  an 
Art  in  harmony  with  our  present  wants  and  means  of  production — the  carver  in  stone,  the  worker 
in  metal,  the  weaver  and  the  painter,  borrowing  from  each  other,  and  alternately  misapplying  the 
forms  peculiarly  appropriate  to  each— there  were  to  be  found  in  isolated  collections  at  the  four 
corners  of  the  transepts  all  the  principles,  all  the  unity,  all  the  truth,  for  which  we  had  looked  elsewhere 
in  vain,  and  this  because  we  were  amongst  a people  practising  an  art  which  had  grown  up  with  their 
civilisation,  and  strengthened  with  their  growth.  United  by  a common  faith,  their  art  had  necessarily 
a common  expression,  this  expression  varying  in  each  according  to  the  influence  to  which  each  nation 
was  subject.  The  Tunisian  still  retaining  the  art  of  the  Moors,  who  created  the  Alhambra ; the  Turk 
exhibiting  the  same  art,  but  modified  by  the  character  of  the  mixed  population  over  which  they  rule ; 
the  Indian  uniting  the  severe  forms  of  Arabian  art  with  the  graces  of  Persian  refinement. 

All  the  laws  of  the  distribution  of  form  which  we  have  already  observed  in  the  Arabian  and 
Moresque  Ornament  are  equally  to  be  found  in  the  productions  of  India.  From  the  highest  work  of 
embroidery,  or  most  elaborate  work  of  the  loom,  to  the  constructing  and  decorating  of  a child’s  toy 
or  earthen  vessel,  we  find  everywhere  at  work  the  same  guiding  principles, — there  is  always  the  same 
care  for  the  general  form,  the  same  absence  of  all  excrescences  or  superfluous  ornament ; we  find 
nothing  that  has  been  added  without  purpose,  nor  that  could  be  removed  without  disadvantage.  The 
same  division  and  subdivision  of  their  general  lines,  which  form  the  charms  of  Moresque  ornament, 
is  equally  to  be  found  here ; the  difference  which  creates  the  style  is  not  one  of  principle,  but  of 
individual  expression.  In  the  Indian  style  ornaments  are  somewhat  more  flowing  and  less  convention- 
alised, and  have,  doubtless,  been  more  subjected  to  direct  Persian  influence. 

The  ornaments  on  Plate  XLIX.,  are  chiefly  taken  from  Hookhas,  of  which  there  was  an  immense 
variety  exhibited  in  1851,  and  all  remarkable  for  great  elegance  of  outline,  and  for  such  a judicious 
treatment  of  the  surface  decoration  that  every  ornament  tended  to  further  develope  the  general 
form. 

It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  ornament, — the  one  strictly  architectural  and  conven- 
tional: such  as  Nos,  1,  4,  5,  6,  8,  which  are  treated  as  diagrams ; and  the  other,  such  as  Nos.  13,  14,  15, 
in  which  a more  direct  imitation  of  nature  is  attempted : these  latter  are  to  us  very  valuable  lessons, 
showing  how  unnecessary  it  is  for  any  work  of  decoration  to  more  than  indicate  the  general  idea  of 
a flower.  The  ingenious  way  in  which  the  full-blown  flower  is  shown  in  No.  15,  in  three  positions 
in  Nos.  14  and  15,  the  folding  back  of  the  leaf  in  No.  20,  are  very  suggestive.  The  intention  of 
the  artist  is  fully  expressed  by  means  as  simple  as  elegant.  The  unity  of  the  surface  of  the 
object  decorated  is  not  destroyed,  as  it  would  be  by  the  European  method  of  making  the  flower 
as  near  like  a natural  flower  as  possible,  with  its  own  light  and  shade  and  shadow,  tempting  you  to 
pluck  it  from  the  surface.  On  the  Persian,  Plate  XLVII.,  will  be  seen  a similar  treatroent  of 
natural  flowers ; the  comparison  shows  how  much  of  Persian  influence  there  is  in  this  floral  style  of 
India. 

In  the  apphcation  of  the  various  ornaments  to  the  different  portions  of  the  objects  the  greatest 
judgment  is  always  shown.  The  ornament  is  invariably  in  perfect  scale  with  the  position  it  occupies ; 
on  the  narrow  necks  of  the  Hookhas  are  the  small  pendent  flowers,  the  swelling  forms  of  the  base 
are  occupied  by  the  larger  patterns ; at  the  lower  edge,  again,  appear  ornaments  having  an  upward 
tendency,  and,  at  the  same  time,  forming  a continuous  line  round  the  form  to  prevent  the  eye  running 
out  of  it.  Whenever  narrow  flowing  borders  are  used,  as  in  No.  24,  they  are  contrasted  by  others 
with  lines  flowing  in  an  opposite  direction ; the  general  repose  of  the  decoration  is  never  for  a moment 
lost  sight  of. 

In  the  equal  distribution  of  the  surface  ornament  over  the  grounds,  the  Indians  exhibit  an  instinct 
78 


INDIAN  OENAMENT. 


and  perfection  of  drawing  perfectly  marvellous.  The  ornament  No.  1,  on  Plate  L.,  from  an  embroidered 
saddle-cloth,  excited  universal  admiration  in  1851.  The  exact  balance  obtained  by  the  gold  embroidery 
on  the  green  and  red  grounds,  was  so  perfect  that  it  was  beyond  the  power  of  a European  hand  to 
copy  it  with  the  same  complete  balance  of  form  and  colour.  The  way  in  which  the  colours  are  fused 
in  all  their  woven  fabrics,  so  as  to  obtain  what  they  always  appear  to  seek,  viz.,  that  coloured  objects 
when  viewed  at  a distance  should  present  a neutralised  bloom,  is  very  remarkable,  A due  regard  to 
economy  in  the  production  of  our  Plates  has  necessarily  limited  the  number  of  printings,  and  we  have 
not  always  therefore  been  able  to  obtain  the  proper  balance  of  colour.  The  Indian  collection  at  South 
Kensington  Museum  should  be  visited  and  studied  by  all  in  any  way  connected  with  the  production 
of  woven  fabrics.  In  this  collection  will  be  found  the  most  brilliant  colours  perfectly  harmonised  — 
it  is  impossible  to  find  there  a discord.  All  the  examples  show  the  nicest  adjustment  of  the  massing 
of  the  ornament  to  the  colour  of  the  ground ; every  colour  or  tint  from  the  palest  and  most  delicate 
to  the  deepest  and  richest  shades,  receiving  just  the  amount  of  ornament  that  it  is  adapted  to 
bear. 

The  following  general  rules,  which  are  applicable  to  all  woven  fabrics,  may  be  observed : — 

1.  When  gold  ornaments  are  used  on  a coloured  ground,  where  gold  is  used  in  large  masses,  there 
the  ground  is  darkest.  Where  the  gold  is  used  more  thinly,  there  the  ground  is  lighter  and  more 
delicate. 

2.  When  a gold  ornament  alone  is  used  on  a coloured  ground,  the  colour  of  the  ground  is  carried 
into  it  by  ornaments  or  hatchings  worked  in  the  ground-colours  on  the  gold  itself. 

3.  When  ornaments  in  one  colour  are  on  a ground  of  a contrasting  colour,  the  ornament  is  separated 
from  the  ground  by  an  edging  of  a lighter  colour,  to  prevent  all  harshness  of  contrast. 

4.  When,  on  the  contrary,  ornaments  in  a colour  are  on  a gold  ground,  the  ornaments  are  separated 
from  the  gold  ground  by  an  edging  of  a darker  colour,  to  prevent  the  gold  overpowering  the  ornament. — 
See  No.  10,  Plate  L. 

5.  In  other  cases,  where  varieties  of  colour  are  used  on  a coloured  ground,  a general  outline  of  gold, 
of  silver,  or  of  white  or  yellow  silk,  separates  the  ornament  from  the  ground,  giving  a general  tone 
throughout. 

The  carpets  and  low-toned  combinations  of  colour,  a black  general  outline  is  used  for  this  purpose. 

The  object  always  appears  to  be,  in  the  woven  fabrics  especially,  that  each  ornament  should  be  softly, 
not  harshly,  defined;  that  coloured  objects  viewed  at  a distance  should  present  a neutralised  bloom; 
that  each  step  nearer  should  exhibit  fresh  beauties ; and  a close  inspection,  the  means  whereby  these 
effects  are  produced. 

In  this  they  do  but  carry  out  the  same  principles  of  surface  decoration  which  we  find  in  the 

architecture  of  the  Arabs  and  Moors.  The  spandrU  of  a Moorish  arch,  and  an  Indian  shawl,  are 

constructed  precisely  on  the  same  principles. 

The  ornament  on  Plate  LIII.,  from  a book-cover  at  the  India  House,  is  a very  brilliant  example 
of  painted  decoration.  The  general  proportions  of  the  leading  lines  of  the  pattern,  the  skilful  distribu- 
tion of  the  flowers  over  the  surface,  and,  notwithstanding  the  intricacy,  the  perfect  continuity  of  the 
Unes  of  the  stalks,  place  it  far  before  any  European  effort  of  this  class.  On  the  inside  of  the  same 

cover,  Plate  LIV.,  the  ornaments  are  less  conventional  in  their  treatment ; but  how  charmingly  is 

observed  the  limit  of  the  treatment  of  flowers  on  a flat  surface ! This  book-cover  offers  in  itself  a 
specimen  of  two  marked  styles,  the  outside  Plate  LIII.,  being  after  the  Arabian  manner,  and  the 
inside  after  the  Persian. 


79 


INDISCH 


INDIAN  N"  I 


INDIEN  S 


INDISCH 


INDIAN  4 


INDIEN  S . 

PL  U) 


INDIAN  5 


INDISGH 


N D I E N S 


TA-FEL  UII 


IKD.SCH 


INDIAN  N°  7 


I N D I £ N S 


Chapter  XIII.— Plates  56,  57,  58. 

HINDOO  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  LVI. 

Ornameuts  from  a Statue  in  Basalt  at  tbe  House  of  the  Eoyal  Asiatic  Society. 


PLATE 

1.  Burmese,  of  Glass. — Crystal  Palace. 

2.  Burmese  Shrine.  C.  P. 

3.  Burmese  Standard.  C.  P. 

4-6.  From  Burmese  Shrine.  C.  P. 


LVII. 

7-10,  12-17.  Ornaments  from  the  Copies  of  the 
Paintings  on  the  walls  of  the  Caves  at  Ajunta. — 
Crystal  Palace. 

11.  Burmese,  from  a Monastery  near  Prome. — C.  P. 


1.  Burmese. — East  India  House. 

2,  3.  Burmese  Shrine. — Crystal  Palace. 

4.  Burmese  Gilt  Chest. — C.  P. 

5.  Hindoo. — United  Service  Museum 
6-9.  Hindoo  Ornaments. — E.  I.  H. 

10.  Burmese. — C.  P. 

11.  Hindoo. — U.  S.  M. 


We  have  not  been  able,  with  the  materials  at  command  in  this  country,  to  procure  sufficient 
illustrations  for  a fair  appreciation  of  the  nature  of  Hindoo  ornament. 

In  the  works  hitherto  published  on  the  ancient  architecture  of  India,  sufficient  attention  has  not 
been  directed  to  the  ornamental  portions  of  the  buildings  to  enable  us  to  recognise  the  true  character 
of  Hindoo  ornament. 

In  early  publications  on  the  art  of  Egypt  all  the  works  of  sculpture  and  ornament  were  so  falsely 
rendered,  that  it  has  taken  considerable  time  for  the  European  public  to  become  persuaded  that  there 
existed  so  much  grace  and ' refinement  in  the  works  of  the  Egyptians. 

The  Egyptian  remains,  however,  which  have  been  transported  to  this  country,  the  casts  of  others 
existing  in  Egypt,  and  the  more  trustworthy  representations  which  have  of  late  been  published,  have 
placed  this  beyond  doubt,  and  Egyptian  art  is  taking  its  true  place  in  the  estimation  of  the  public. 

81 


PLATE  LVIIL 

12.  Burmese.— Britkh  Museum. 

13.  Hindoo.— E.  I.  H. 

14.  Hindoo.— U.S.M. 

15.  Hindoo. — E.  I.  H. 

16-19,  21.  Burmese. — C.  P. 

20,  22-25.  Burmese. — U.  S.  M. 
26.  Burmese. — 0.  P. 


Y 


HINDOO  ORNAMENT. 


When  the  same  thing  shall  have  been  done  for  the  ancient  architecture  of  India,  we  shall  be  in  a 
better  position  than  we  are  at  present  to  form  an  opinion  how  far  it  is  entitled  to  take  rank  as  a 
really  fine  art,  or  whether  the  Hindoos  are  only  heapers  of  stones,  one  over  the  other,  adorned  with 
grotesque  and  barbaric  sculpture. 

Had  we  possessed  only  picturesque  views  of  the  Parthenon  and  the  Temples  of  Balbeck  and  Palmyra, 
we  should  unhesitatingly  have  said  that  the  Romans  were  far  greater  architects  than  the  Grreeks. 
But  the  contour  of  a single  moulding  from  the  Parthenon  would  at  once  reverse  the  judgment,  and 
proclaim  loudly  that  we  were  viewing  the  works  of  a people  who  had  reached  the  highest  point  in 
civilisation  and  refinement. 

Although  ornament  is  most  properly  an  accessory  to  architecture,  and  should  never  be  allowed  to 
usurp  the  place  of  proper  structural  features,  or  to  overload  or  to  disguise  them,  it  is  in  all  cases  the 
very  soul  of  an  architectural  monument;  and  by  the  ornament  alone  can  we  judge  truly  of  the 
amount  of  care  and  mind  which  has  been  devoted  to  the  work.  All  else  in  any  building  may  be  the 
result  of  rule  and  compass,  but  by  the  ornament  of  a building  we  can  best  discover  how  far  the 
architect  was  at  the  same  time  an  artist. 

No  one  can  peruse  the  Essay  on  Hindoo  Architecture  by  Ram  Raz  * without  feeling  that  a 
higher  state  of  architectural  perfection  has  been  reached  than  the  works  published  up  to  the  present 
time  would  lead  us  to  believe.  In  this  work  not  only  are  precise  rules  laid  down  for  the  general 
arrangement  of  structures,  but  also  minute  directions  are  given  for  the  divisions  and  subdivisions  of 
each  ornament. 

One  of  the  precepts  quoted  by  Ram  Raz  deserves  to  be  cited,  as  showing  how  much  the  general 
perfection  was  cared  for : ” Woe  to  them  who  dwell  in  a house  not  built  according  to  the  proportions 
of  symmetry.  In  building  an  edifice,  therefore,  let  aU  its  parts,  from  the  basement  to  the  roof,  be 
duly  considered.” 

Among  the  directions  for  the  various  proportions  of  columns,  bases,  and  capitals,  is  a rule  for  finding 
the  proper  diminution  of  the  upper  diameter  of  a column  in  proportion  to  the  lower. 

Ram  Raz  says,  that  the  general  rule  adopted  by  the  Hindoo  architects  was  to  divide  the  diameter 
of  the  column  at  the  base  by  as  many  parts  as  there  were  diameters  in  the  whole  height  of  the 
column,  and  that  one  of  these  parts  was  invariably  deducted  to  form  the  upper  diameter.  From 
which  it  is  apparent  that  the  higher  the  column  the  less  it  will  diminish;  and  that  this  was  done 
because  the  apparent  diminution  of  the  diameter  in  columns  of  the  same  proportion  is  always  greater 
according  to  the  height. 

The  best  specimens  of  Hindoo  ornament  we  have  been  able  to  procure  are  represented  in  Plate 
LVI.,  from  a statue  of  Surga,  or  the  Sun,  in  basalt,  at  the  house  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  and  supposed 
to  belong  to  a period  between  the  fifth  and  ninth  century  A.D.  The  ornaments  are  very  beautifully 
executed,  and  evidently  betray  Greek  influence.  The  ornament  No.  8 represents  the  lotus,  seen  as  it 
were  in  plan,  with  the  buds  in  side  elevation : it  is  held  in  the  hand  of  the  god. 

In  the  sacred  books  quoted  by  Ram  Raz  are  several  directions  to  ornament  the  various  archi- 
tectural members  with  lotuses  and  jewels ; which  seem  to  be  the  chief  types  of  the  decorations  on 
the  mouldings. 

The  architectural  features  of  Hindoo  buildings  consist  chiefly  of  mouldings  heaped  up  one  over 
the  other.  Definite  instructions  are  quoted  by  Ram  Raz  for  the  varying  proportions  of  each,  and  it 
is  evident  that  the  whole  value  of  the  style  will  consist  in  the  more  or  less  perfection  with  which 
these  transitions  are  effected ; but,  as  we  said  before,  we  have  no  opportunity  of  judging  how  far  this 
is  the  case. 

* “ Histoiy  of  the  Architecture  of  the  Hindoos.”  By  Ram  Raz.  London,  1834. 

82 


HINDOO  ORNAMENT. 


On  Plate  LVII.  we  have  gathered  together  all  the  examples  of  decorative  ornament  that  we  could 
find  on  the  copies  of  the  paintings  from  the  Caves  of  Ajunta,  exhibited  by  the  East  India  Company 
at  the  Crystal  Palace.  As  these  copies,  notwithstanding  that  they  are  said  to  be  faithful,  are  yet  by 
a European  hand,  it  is  difficult  to  say  how  far  they  may  be  relied  upon.  In  the  subordinate  portions, 
such  as  the  ornaments,  at  all  events,  there  is  so  little  marked  character,  that  they  might  belong  to 
any  style.  It  is  very  singular,  that  in  these  paintings  there  should  be  so  little  ornament ; a peculiarity 
that  we  have  observed  in  several  ancient  paintings  in  the  possession  of  the  Asiatic  Society.  There  is 
a remarkable  absence  of  ornament  even  on  the  dresses  of  the  figures. 


83 


HINDOO  N ° I HiNDons 


oooooo 


ooooooo 


HINDOO  N°  2 


HINDOUS. 

PL.  mi 


HINDUS. 

TAFEL  u;i] 


10 


HiNDOUS 


HINDOO  N°3 


HINDHS 


TAFEl.  LYU; 


jiimoimooooooT 


, '^V>>  vr'  0 


PL.LYIII 


^ /:'|V  /j'N.1  /'ivv  /■  |\N  /'  v.  /'X  //i\,  /-y 

f vD  \y/)  y-D  ^ a v /' ya'  \ 
AiV)  Y/i'Y.  //,M  a7v  <ok  < AN-,  / 
ayD  v 

//tY)  Al^'  A|Y)  aS  A|^  A.Y  A\  A.^,  A; 

<><Ai5\  A_Y  aL}'  Daa: 

Vn  AjYN  A|\^  Aj^  Aj^  AjYY  AjY.  /.  A^C  Y 


,.  A '^x//  Y.’A  Y ■; 


5 


Chapter  XIY.— Plates  59,  60,  61,  62. 


CHINESE  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  LIX. 

The  Ornaments,  Nos.  1,  8-17,  24-28,  33-36,  40,  42,  are  Painted  on  Porcelain. 
Nos.  2-7,  18-23,  29-32,  36-39,  41,  are  from  Paintings. 


PLATE  LX. 

The  Ornaments,  Nos.  1-12,  16, 19—24,  are  Painted  on  Porcelain. 
Nos,  17,  18,  from  Pictures. 

Nos.  13,  22,  23,  from  Woven  Fabrics. 

Nos.  14, 15,  Painted  on  Wooden  Boxes. 


PLATE  LXI. 

The  Ornaments,  Nos.  1-3,  are  Painted  on  Wood. 
Nos.  4-6,  9,  10, 12-15, 17, 18,  are  Painted  on  Porcelain. 
Nos.  7,  8,  11,  Woven  Fabrics. 

No.  16,  from  a Picture. 


PLATE  LXII. 


Conventional  Eenderings  of  Flowers  and  Fruit,  Painted  on  Porcelain. 


Notwithstanding  the  high  antiquity  of  the  civilisation  of  the  Chinese,  and  the  perfection  which 
all  their  manufacturing  processes  reached  ages  before  our  time,  they  do  not  appear  to  have  made 
much  advance  in  the  Fine  Arts.  Mr.  Fergusson,  in  his  admirable  ^‘Handbook  of  Architecture,” 
observes  that  China  possesses  scarcely  anything  worthy  of  the  name  of  Architecture,”  and  that  all 
their  great  engineering  works,  with  which  the  land  is  covered,  are  wholly  devoid  of  either 
architectural  design  or  ornament.” 


z 


85 


CHINESE  OENAMENT. 


In  their  ornamentation,  with  which  the  world  is  so  familiar  through  the  numerous  manufactured 
articles  of  every  kind  which  have  been  imported  into  this  country,  they  do  not  appear  to  have  gone 
beyond  that  point  which  is  reached  by  every  people  in  an  early  stage  of  civilisation : their  art,  such 
as  it  is,  is  fixed,  and  is  subject  neither  to  progression  nor  retrogression.  In  the  conception  of  pure 
form  they  are  even  behind  the  New  Zealander ; but  they  possess,  in  common  with  all  Eastern  nations, 
the  happy  instinct  of  harmonising  colours.  As  this  is  more  a faculty  than  an  acquirement,  it  is  just 
what  we  should  expect ; the  arriving  at  an  appreciation  of  pure  form  is  a more  subtle  process,  and  is 
the  result  of  either  more  highly  endowed  natural  instincts,  or  of  the  development  of  primitive  ideas 
by  successive  generations  of  artists  improving  on  each  other’s  efforts. 

The  general  forms  of  many  of  the  Chinese  porcelain  vases  are  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  their 
outline,  but  not  more  so  than  the  rude  water-bottles  of  porous  clay  which  the  untutored  Arabian 
potter  fashions  daily  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  assisted  only  by  the  instincts  of  his  gentle  race ; and 
the  pure  form  of  the  Chinese  vases  is  often  destroyed  by  the  addition  of  grotesque  or  other  unmeaning 
ornaments,  built  up  upon  the  surface,  not  growing  from  it : from  which  we  argue,  that  they  can 
possess  an  appreciation  of  form,  but  in  a minor  degree. 

In  their  decoration,  both  painted  and  woven,  the  Chinese  exhibit  only  just  so  much  art  as  would 
belong  to  a primitive  people.  Their  most  successful  efforts  are  those  in  which  geometrical 
combinations  form  the  basis;  but  even  in  these,  whenever  they  depart  from  patterns  formed  by  the 
intersection  of  equal  lines  they  appear  to  have  a very  imperfect  idea  of  the  distribution  of  spaces. 
Their  instinct  of  colour  enables  them,  in  some  measure,  to  balance  form,  but  when  deprived  of  this 
aid  they  do  not  appear  to  be  equally  successful.  The  diapers  on  Plate  LXIX.  will  furnish  us  with 
examples.  Patterns  1,  8,  13,  18,  19,  being  generated  by  figures  which  ensure  an  equal  distribution, 
are  more  perfect  than  Nos.  2,  4-7,  41,  where  the  arrangement  depends  more  upon  caprice;  on  the 
other  hand.  Nos.  28,  33,  35,  49,  and  the  other  patterns  of  this  class  on  the  Plate,  are  examples  in 
which  the  instinct  of  the  amount  of  balancing  colour  required  would  determine  the  mass.  The 
Chinese  share  with  the  Indian  this  happy  power  in  their  woven  fabrics;  and  the  tone  of  the  ground 
of  any  fabric  is  always  in  harmony  with  the  quantity  of  ornament  which  it  has  to  support.  The 
Chinese  are  certainly  colourists,  and  are  able  to  balance  with  equal  success  both  the  fullest  tones  of 
colour  and  the  most  delicate  shades. 

They  are  not  only  successful  in  the  use  of  the  primaries,  but  also  of  the  secondaries  and  tertiaries ; 


CHINESE  ORNAMENT. 


1,  Plate  LXI.,  is  a continuous  meander  like  the  Greek;  Nos.  2-9,  18,  specimens  of  irregular  frets; 
No.  4,  Plate  LX.,  a curious  instance  of  a fret  with  a curved  termination. 

On  the  whole,  Chinese  ornament  is  a very  faithful  expression  of  the  nature  of  this  peculiar  people; 
its  characteristic  feature  is  oddness, — we  cannot  call  it  capricious,  for  caprice  is  the  playful  wandering 
of  a lively  imagination;  hut  the  Chinese  are  totally  unimaginative,  and  all  their  works  are  accordingly 
wanting  in  the  highest  grace  of  art, — the  ideal. 


87 


5 


emNESiscH 


CHINESE  1 


CHINO  I S 


10 


© 


GHmESiSi:H,  CHINESE  N°2.  chinois. 


PL.  LX 


p 

mra  uir^ 

iff 

HINESE  N°  3 


CHINESISCH 


CHIN0I3 


PL  LXI 


CHINESSISH 


CHINESE  N°  4 


CHINOIS 


TAFKI.  Wl  PLUll 


20 


Chapter  XV. — Plates  63,  64,  65 


CELTIC  OENAMENT. 


PLATE  LXIII. 


LAPIDARY  OENAMENTATIOH. 


1.  The  Aberlemno  Cross,  formed  of  a single  Slab,  7 ft.  high — 
Chalmers,  Stone  Monuments  of  Angus. 

% Circular  Ornament  on  the  Base  of  Stone  ■ Cross  in  the 
Churchyard  of  St.  Yigean’s,  Angusshire. — Chalmers. 


3.  Central  portion  of  Stone  Cross  in  the  Cemetery  in  the 

Island  of  Inchbrayoe,  Scotland. 

4.  Ornament  on  the  Cross  in  the  Churchyard  of  Meigle, 

Angusshire.— Chalmers. 


5.  Ornament  of  Base  of  Cross  near  the  old  Church  of  Eassie,  Angusshire. — Chalmers. 

Note. — In  addition  to  the  various  ornaments  observed  on  the  stones  here  figured,  a peculiar  ornament  occurs  only  in 
many  of  the  Scotch  crosses,  which  has  been  called  the  Spectacle  Pattern,  consisting  of  two  circles,  connected  by  two  curved 
lines,  which  latter  are  crossed  by  the  oblique  stroke  of  a decorated  Z.  Its  origin  and  meaning  have  long  puzzled 
antiquaries : the  only  other  instance  which  we  have  ever  met  with  of  the  occurrence  of  this  ornament  is  upon  a Gnostic 
Gem  engraved  in  Walsh’s  Essay  on  Christian  Coins. 

On  some  of  the  Manx  and  Cumberland  crosses — as  well  as  on  that  at  Penmon,  Anglesea — a pattern  occurs  analogous 
to  the  classical  one  represented  in  our  Greek  Plate  VIII.  Figs.  22  and  27.  It  was  probably  borrowed  from  the  Roman 
tessellated  pavements,  on  which  it  is  occasionally  foxmd : it  never  occurs  in  MSS.  or  Metal-work. 


PLATE  LSiy. 

INTEELACED  STYLE. 


1-5,  10-22,  26,  42-44,  are  Borders  of  Interlaced  Ribbon 
Patterns,  copied  from  Anglo-Saxon  and  Irish  MSS. 
in  the  British  Museum,  the  Bodleian  Library,  Oxford, 
and  the  Libraries  of  St.  Gall  and  Trinity  College, 
Dublin. 

6,  7.  Interlaced  Ribbon  Patterns,  from  the  Golden  Gospels 
in  the  Harleian  Library  in  the  British  Museum. — 
Humphries. 

8.  Terminal  Ornament  of  Initial  Letter,  formed  of  inter- 

laced and  spiral  lines,  from  the  copy  of  the  Gospels 
in  the  Paris  Library,  No.  693. — Silvestre. 

9.  Interlaced  Ornament,  from  Irish  MS.  at  St.  Gall. — 

Keiler. 

23.  Terminal  Ornament  of  Initial  Letter,  from  the  Corona- 

tion Book  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Kings,  a production  of 
Franco-Saxon  artists. — Humphries. 

24.  Terminal  Interlaced  Ornament,  from  the  Tironian 

Psalter  in  the  Paris  Libraiy. — Silvestre. 

25.  Terminal  Ornament,  with  Foliage  and  naturally-drawn 

Animals  introduced,  from  the  Golden  Gospels. — 
Humphries. 

27.  Angulated  Ornament,  with  interlacement,  from  the 

Bible  of  St.  Denis.  9th  century. 

28.  Pattern  of  Angulated  Lines,  from  the  Gospels  of  Lindis- 

farne.  End  of  7th  century. 


Interlaced  Pannel,  from  the  Psalter  of  St.  Augustine  in 
the  British  Museum.  6th  or  7th  century. 

Ornament  formed  of  four  Triquetrse  conjoined,  from  the 
Franco-Saxon  Sacramentarium  of  St.  Gregory,  in  the 
Library  of  Rheims.  9th  or  10th  century.— Silvestre. 

31.  Part  of  Gigantic  Initial  Letter,  from  the  Franco-Saxon 

Bible  of  St.  Denis.  9th  century. — Silvestre. 

32.  Quatrefoil  Interlaced  Ornament,  from  the  Rheims  Sacra- 

mentarium. — Silvestre. 

33.  Angularly  Interlaced  Ornament,  from  the  Golden  Gospels. 

(Magnified.) 

34  and  37.  Interlaced  Ornaments,  formed  of  red  dots,  from 
the  Gospels  of  Lindisfarne. 

35.  Interlaced  Triquetral  Pattern,  from  the  Coronation 

Gospels  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Kings. 

36.  Circular  Ornament  of  four  conjoined  Tilqueti-se,  from  the 

Sacramentarium  of  Rheims.  (Magnified  ) 

38  and  40.  Initial  Letters  from  the  Gospels  of  Lindisfarne, 
with  interlaced  Patterns,  Animals,  and  Angulated  lines. 
End  of  7th  century.  (Magnified.) 

39.  Terminal  Ornament,  with  Dogs’ -heads,  from  the  Franco- 
Saxon  Sacramentarium  of  Rheims. — Silvestre. 

41  and  45.  Quadrangular  Interlaced  Ornaments,  from  the 
Missal  of  Leofric  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 


29. 

30. 


A A 


89 


CELTIC  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  LXY. 

SPIRAL,  DIAGONAL,  ZOOMOEPHIC,  AND  LATER  ANGLO-SAXON  ORNAMENTS. 


1.  Initial  Letter,  from  the  Gospels  of  Lindisfarne.  End  of 

7tli  century.  British,  Museum.  (Magnified.) 

2.  Ornament  of  Angulated  Lines,  from  the  Gregorian 

Gospels,  British  Museum.  (Magnified.) 

3.  Interlaced  Animals,  from  the  Book  of  Kells,  in  the 

Library  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  (Magnified.) 

4.  Diagonal  Pattern.  Gospels  of  Mac  Durnan,  in  the 

Library  of  Lambeth  Palace.  9th  century.  (Magnified.) 
5 and  12.  Spiral  Patterns,  from  Gospels  of  Lindisfarne. 
(Magnified.) 

6.  Diagonal  Patterns,  from  Irish  MS.  at  St.  Gall.  9th 

century.  (M  agnified.) 

7.  Interlaced  Ornament,  from  ditto. 

8.  Interlaced  Animals.  Gospels  of  Mac  Durnan.  (Mag- 

nified.) 

9.  10,  13.  Diagonal  Patterns.  Gospels  of  Mao  Durnan. 

(Magnified.) 

11.  Diagonal  Patterns,  from  Gospels  of  Lindisfarne.  (Mag- 
nified.) 


14.  Terminal  Border  of  Interlaced  Animals,  from  Gospels  of 
Lindisfarne.  (Magnified.) 

15  and  17,  Panels  of  interlaced  Beasts  and  Birds,  from  Irish 
Gospels  at  St.  Gall.  8th  or  9th  century. 

16.  Initial  Q,  formed  of  an  elongated  Angulated  Animal,  from 
Psalter  of  Ricemarchus,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  End 
of  11th  century, 

18.  One  Quarter  of  Fi‘ame,or  Border,  of  an  illuminated  Page 

of  the  Benedictional  of  .^thelgar  at  Rouen.  10th 
century. — Silvestre. 

19.  Ditto,  from  the  Arundel  Psalter,  No.  155,  British  Museum. 

— Humphries. 

20.  Ditto,  from  the  Gospels  of  Canute,  in  British  Museum. 

End  of  10th  century. 

21.  Ditto,  from  the  Benedictional  of  iEthelgar. 

22.  Terminal  Ornament  of  spiral  Pattern,  with  Birds.  Part 

of  large  Initial  Letter  in  the  Gospels  of  Lindisfarne. 
(Real  size.) — Humphries. 


II  )»I38C»|(  

CELTIC  ORNAMENT. 


The  genius  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  British  Islands  has,  in  all  ages,  been  indicated  by  productions 
of  a class  or  style  singularly  at  variance  with  those  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  Peculiar  as  are  our 
characteristics  at  the  present  time,  those  of  our  forefathers,  from  the  remotest  ages,  have  been  equally 
so.  In  the  Fine  Arts,  our  immense  Druidical  temples  are  still  the  wonder  of  the  beholder;  and  in 
succeeding  ages  gigantic  stone  crosses,  sometimes  thirty  feet  high,  most  elaborately  carved  and  ornamented 
with  devices  of  a style  unlike  those  of  other  nations,  exhibited  the  old  genius  for  lapidary  erections 
under  a modified  form  inspired  by  a new  faith. 

The  earliest  monuments  and  relics  of  ornamental  art  which  we  possess  (and  they  are  far  more 
numerous  than  the  generality  of  persons  would  conceive, ) are  so  intimately  connected  with  the  early 
introduction  of  Christianity  into  these  islands,*  that  we  are  compelled  to  refer  to  the  latter  in  our 
endeavours  to  unravel  the  history  and  peculiarities  of  Celtic  Art;  a task  which  has  hitherto  been 
scarcely  attempted  to  be  performed,  although  possessing,  from  its  extreme  nationality,  a degree  of 
interest  equal,  one  would  have  thought,  to  that  connected  with  the  history  of  ornamental  art  in  other 
countries. 

1.  Historical  Evidence. — Without  attempting  to  reconcile  the  various  statements  which  have 
been  made  by  historians  as  to  the  precise  manner  of  the  introduction  of  religion  into  Britain,  we 
have  the  most  ample  evidence,  not  only  that  it  had  been  long  established  previous  to  the  arrival  of 

» The  Pagan  Celtic  remains  at  Gavr'  Innis,  in  Brittany,  New  Grange,  in  Ireland,  and  I believe  one  Druidical  monument  near  Har- 
lech, in  Wales,  exhibit  a very  rude  attempt  at  ornamentation,  chiefly  consisting  of  incised  spiral  or  circular  and  angulated  lines. 

90 


CELTIC  ORNAMENT. 


St.  Augustine  in  A.d.  596,  but  that  in  several  important  points  of  doctrine  the  old  British  religionists 
differed  from  the  missionary  sent  by  St.  Gregory  the  Great.  This  statement  is  most  completely  borne 
out  by  still  existing  artistic  evidences.  St.  Gregory  sent  into  England  various  copies  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  and  two  of  these  are  still  preserved ; one  in  the  Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford,  and  the  other 
in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge.  They  are  copies  of  the  Holy  Gospels,  written  in 
Italy,  in  the  large  uncial  or  rounded  characters  common  in  that  country,  and  destitute  of  ornament;  the 
initial  letter  of  each  Gospel  scarcely  differing  from  the  ordinary  writing  of  the  text,  the  first  line  or 
two  being  merely  written  in  red  ink,  each  Gospel  preceded  by  a portrait  of  the  Evangelist  (one  only 
still  remains,  namely,  that  of  St.  Luke),  seated  under  a round-headed  arch,  supported  upon  marble 
columns,  and  ornamented  with  foliage  arranged  in  a classical  manner.  All  the  most  ancient  Italian 
manuscripts  are  entirely  destitute  of  ornamental  elaboration. 

The  case  is  totally  different  with  the  most  ancient  manuscripts  known  to  have  been  written  in 
these  islands;  and  as  these  are  the  chief  supports  of  our  theory  of  the  independent  origin  of  Celtic 
ornament,  and  as,  moreover,  we  are  constantly  opposed  by  doubts  as  to  the  great  age  which  has  been 
assigned  to  these  precious  documents,  we  must  enter  into  a little  palseographical  detail  in  proof  of 
their  venerable  antiquity.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  none  of  them  are  dated ; but  in  some  the  scribe 
has  inserted  his  name,  which  the  early  annals  have  enabled  us  to  identify,  and  thus  to  fix  the  period 
of  the  execution  of  the  volume.  In  this  manner  the  autograph  Gospels  of  St.  Columba ; the  Leabhar 
Dhimma,  or  Gospels  of  St.  Dimma  Mac  Nathi;  the  Bodleian  Gospels,  written  by  Mac  Begol;  and 
the  Book  of  Armagh,  have  been  satisfactorily  assigned  to  periods  not  later  than  the  ninth  century. 
Another  equally  satisfactory  evidence  exists,  in  proof  of  the  early  date  of  the  volumes,  in  the  unrivalled 
collection  of  contemporary  Anglo-Saxon  Charters  existing  in  the  British  Museum  and  other  libraries, 
from  the  latter  half  of  the  seventh  century  up  to  the  Norman  Conquest ; and  although,  as  Astle 
observes,  “ these  Charters  are  generally  written  in  a more  free  and  expeditious  manner  than  the 
books  written  in  the  same  ages,  yet  a similarity  of  character  is  observable  between  Charters  and  books 
written  in  the  same  century,  and  they  authenticate  each  other.”  Now  it  is  quite  impossible  to 
compare,  for  example,  the  Cottonian  MS.  Vespasian,  A 1,  generally  known  under  the  name  of  the 
Psalter  of  St.  Augustine,  with  the  Charters  of  Sebbi  King  of  the  East  Saxons,  A.D.  670  (Casley’s 
Catal.  of  MSS.  p.  xxiv.);  of  Lotharius  King  of  Kent,  dated  at  Eeculver,  A.D.  679;  or,  again,  the 
Charter  of  ^thelbald,  dated  A.D.  769,  with  the  Gospels  of  Mac  Regol  or  St.  Cbad;  without  being 
perfectly  convinced  that  the  MSS.  are  coeval  with  the  Charters. 

A third  species  of  evidence  of  the  great  antiquity  of  our  very  ancient  national  manuscripts  is 
afforded  by  the  fact  of  many  of  them  being  still  preserved  in  various  places  abroad,  whither  they 
were  carried  by  the  Irish  and  Anglo-Saxon  missionaries.  The  great  number  of  monastic  establishments 
founded  by  our  countrymen  in  different  parts  of  Europe  is  matter  of  historical  record ; and  we  need 
only  cite  the  case  of  St.  Gall,  an  Irishman,  whose  name  has  not  only  been  given  to  the  monastic 
establishment  which  he  founded,  but  even  to  the  Canton  of  Switzerland  in  which  it  is  situated.  The 
monastic  books  of  this  establishment,  now  transferred  to  the  public  library,  comprise  many  of  the 
oldest  manuscripts  in  Europe,  and  include  a number  of  fragments  of  elaborately-ornamented  volumes 
executed  in  these  islands,  and  long  venerated  as  relics  of  the  founder.  In  like  manner,  the  Book 
of  the  Gospels  of  St.  Boniface  is  still  preserved  at  Fulda  with  religious  care  ; and  that  of  St.  Kilian 
(an  Irishman),  the  Apostle  of  Franconia,  was  discovered  in  his  tomb,  stained  with  his  blood,  and  is 
still  preserved  at  Wurtzburgh,  where  it  is  annually  exhibited  on  the  altar  of  the  cathedral  on  the 
anniversary  of  his  martyrdom. 

Now  all  these  manuscripts,  thus  proved  to  have  been  written  in  these  islands  at  a period  prior 
to  the  end  of  the  ninth  century,  exhibit  peculiarities  of  ornamentation  totally  at  variance  with  those 

91 


CELTIC  OENAMENT. 


of  all  other  countries,  save  only  in  places  where  the  Irish  or  Anglo-Saxon  missionaries  may  have 
introduced  their  own,  or  have  modified  the  already  existing  styles.  And  here  we  may  observe  that, 
although  our  arguments  are  chiefly  derived  from  the  early  manuscripts,  tlie  results  are  equally  applicable 
to  the  contemporary  ornamental  metal  or  stone-work;  the  designs  of  which  are  in  many  cases  so 
entirely  the  counterparts  of  those  of  the  manuscripts,  as  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  designers 
of  the  one  class  of  ornaments  supplied  also  the  designs  for  the  other.  So  completely,  indeed,  is  this 
the  case  in  some  of  the  great  stone  crosses,  that  we  might  almost  fancy  we  were  examining  one  of 
tlie  pages  of  an  illuminated  volume  with  a magnifying  glass. 

2.  Peculiarities  of  Celtic  Ornament. — The  chief  peculiarities  of  the  Celtic  ornamentation  consist, 
first,  in  the  entire  absence  of  foliage  or  other  phyllomorphic  or  vegetable  ornament,  the  classical 
acanthus  being  entirely  ignored ; and  secondly,  in  the  extreme  intricacy,  and  excessive  minuteness 
and  elaboration,  of  the  various  patterns,  mostly  geometrical,  consisting  of  interlaced  ribbon-work, 
diagonal  or  spiral  lines,  and  strange,  monstrous  animals  and  birds,  with  long  top-knots,  tongues,  and 
tails,  intertwining  in  almost  endless  knots. 

The  most  sumptuous  of  the  manuscripts,  such  for  instance  as  the  Book  of  Kells,  the  G-ospels  of 
Lindisfarne  and  St,  Chad,  and  some  of  the  manuscripts  at  St.  Gall,  have  entire  pages  covered  with 
the  most  elaborate  patterns  in  compartments,  the  whole  forming  beautiful  cruciform  designs,  one 
of  these  facing  the  commencement  of  each  of  the  four  Gospels.  The  labour  employed  in  such  a 
mass  of  work*  must  have  been  very  great;  the  care  infinite,  since  the  most  scrutinizing  examination 
with  a magnifying  glass  will  not  detect  an  error  in  the  truth  of  the  lines,  or  the  regularity  of  the 
interlacing ; and  yet,  with  all  this  minuteness,  the  most  harmonious  effect  of  colouring  has  been 
produced. 

Contrary  to  the  older  plan  of  commencing  a manuscript  with  a letter  in  noways  or  scarcely  differing 
from  the  remainder  of  the  text,  the  commencement  of  each  Gospel  opposite  to  these  grand  tessellated 
pages  was  ornamented  in  an  equally  elaborate  manner.  The  initial  letter  was  often  of  gigantic 
size,  occupying  the  greater  part  of  the  page,  which  was  completed  by  a few  of  the  following  letters 
or  words,  each  letter  generally  averaging  about  an  inch  in  height.  In  these  initial  pages,  as  in 
those  of  the  cruciform  designs,  we  find  all  the  various  styles  of  ornament  employed  in  more  or  less 
detail. 

The  most  universal  and  singularly-diversified  ornament  employed  by  artificers  in  metal,  stone,  or 
manuscripts,  consists  of  one  or  more  narrow  ribbons  interlaced  and  knotted,  often  excessively  intricate 
in  their  convolutions,  and  often  symmetrical  and  geometrical.  Plates  LXIII.  and  LXIV.  exhibit 
numerous  examples  of  this  ornament  in  varied  styles.  By  colouring  the  ribbons  with  different  tints, 
either  upon  a coloured  or  black  ground,  many  charming  effects  are  produced.  Of  the  curious  intricacy 
of  some  of  these  designs,  an  idea  may  easily  be  obtained  by  following  the  ribbon  in  some  of  these 
patterns;  as,  for  instance,  in  the  upper  compartment  in  Fig.  5 of  Plate  LXIII.  Sometimes  two 
ribbons  run  parallel  to  each  other,  but  are  interlaced  alternately,  as  in  Fig.  12  of  Plate  LXIV. 
When  allowable  the  ribbon  is  dilated  and  angulated  to  fill  up  particular  spaces  in  the  design,  as  in 
Plate  LXIV.,  Fig.  11.  The  simplest  modification  of  this  pattern  of  course  is  the  double  oval,  seen 
in  the  angles  of  Fig.  27,  Plate  LXIV.  This  occurs  in  Greek  and  Syriac  MSS.,  in  Eoman  tessellated 
pavements,  but  rarely  in  our  early  MSS.  Another  simple  form  is  that  known  as  the  triquetra, 
which  is  extremely  common  in  MSS.  and  metal-work ; an  instance  in  which  four  of  these  triquetree 
are  introduced  occurs  in  Plate  LXIV.,  Fig.  36.  Figures  30  and  35  in  the  same  Plate  are  modifications 
of  this  pattern. 

* In  one  of  these  pages  in  the  Gospels  of  St.  Chad,  which  we  have  taken  the  trouble  to  copy,  there  are  not  fewer  than  one  hundred 
and  twenty  of  the  most  fantastic  animals. 

92 


CELTIC  ORNAMENT. 


Another  very  distinguishing  ornament  profusely  introduced  into  early  work  of  all  kind  consists  of 
monstrous  animals,  birds,  lizards,  and  snakes  of  various  kinds,  generally  extravagantly  elongated,  with 
tails,  top-knots,  and  tongues,  extended  into  long  interlacing  ribbons,  intertwining  together  in  the 
most  fantastic  manner ; often  symmetrical,  but  often  irregular,  being  drawn  so  as  to  till  up  a required 
space.  Occasionally,  but  of  rare  occurrence,  the  human  figure  is  also  thus  introduced ; as  on  one 
of  the  panels  of  the  Monasterboice  Cross  in  the  Crystal  Palace,  where  are  four  figures  thus  singularly 
intertwined,  and  on  one  of  the  bosses  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire’s  Lismore  crozier  are  several  such 
fantastic  groups.  In  Plate  LXIII.  are  groups  of  animals  thus  intertwined.  The  most  intricate 
examples  are  the  groups  of  eight  dogs  (Plate  LXV.,  Fig.  17)  and  eight  birds  (Plate  LXV.,  Fig.  15) 
from  one  of  the  St.  G-all  MSS.,  and  the  most  elegant  is  the  marginal  ornament  (Plate  LXV.,  Fig.  8) 
from  the  G-ospels  of  Mac  Durnan,  at  Lambeth  Palace.  In  the  later  Irish  and  Welsh  MSS.  the  edges 
of  the  interlaced  ribbons  touch  each  other,  and  tlie  designs  are  far  less  geometrical  and  much  more 
confused.  The  strange  design  (Plate  LXV.,  Fig.  16)  is  no  other  than  the  initial  Q of  the  Psalm, 
Quid  G-loriaris,  from  the  Psalter  of  Ricemarchus,  Bishop  'of  St.  David’s,  A.D.  1088.  It  will  be  seen 
that  it  is  intended  for  a monstrous  animal,  with  one  top-knot  extended  in  front  over  its  nose,  and  a 
second  forming  an  extraordinary  whorl  above  the  head,  the  neck  with  a row  of  pearls,  the  body  long 
and  angulated,  terminated  by  two  contorted  legs  and  grim  claws,  and  a knotted  tail,  which  it  would 
be  difficult,  indeed,  for  the  animal  to  unravel.  Very  often,  also,  the  heads  alone  of  birds  or  beasts 
form  the  terminal  ornament  of  a pattern,  of  which  various  examples  occur  in  Plate  LXIV.,  the  gaping 
mouth  and  long  tongue  forming  a not  uijgraceful  finish. 

The  most  characteristic,  however,  of  all  the  Celtic  patterns,  is  that  produced  by  two  or  three 
spiral  lines  starting  from  a fixed  point,  their  opposite  extremities  going  off  to  the  centres  of  coils 
formed  by  other  spiral  lines.  Plate  LXV.,  Figs.  1,  5,  and  12,  are  instances  of  this  ornament,  all 
more  or  less  magnified ; and  Fig.  22,  which  is  of  the  real  size.  Plate  LXIII.,  Fig.  3,  shows  how 
ingeniously  this  pattern  may  be  converted  into  the  diagonal  pattern.  In  the  MSS.,  and  all  the  finer 
and  more  ancient  metal  and  stone-work,  these  spiral  lines  always  take  the  direction  of  a C,  and  never 
that  of  a S.  It  is,  therefore,  evident,  not  only  from  the  circumstance,  but  also  from  the  irregularity 
of  the  design  itself,  that  the  central  ornament  in  Plate  LXIII.,  Fig.  1,  was  not  drawn  by  an  artist 
skilled  in  the  genuine  Celtic  patterns,  but  indicates  a certain  amount  either  of  carelessness  or  of 
extraneous  influence.  This  pattern  has  also  been  called  the  trumpet  pattern,  from  the  spaces  between 
any  two  of  the  lines  forming  a long,  curved  design,  like  an  ancient  Irish  trumpet,  the  mouth  of  which 
is  represented  by  the  small  pointed  oval  placed  transversely  at  the  broad  end.  Instances  in  metal- 
work of  this  pattern  occur  in  several  circular  objects  of  bronze  of  unknown  use,  about  a foot  in 
diameter,  occasionally  found  in  Ireland ; also  in  small,  circular,  enamelled  plates  of  early  Anglo-Saxon 
work,  found  in  different  parts  of  England.  It  is  more  rarely  found  in  stone-work,  the  only  instance 
of  its  occurrence  in  England,  as  far  as  we  are  aware,  being  on  the  font  of  Deerhui'st  Church.  Bearing 
in  mind  that  this  ornament  does  not  appear  in  MSS.  executed  in  England  after  the  ninth  century, 
we  may  conclude  that  this  is  the  oldest  ornamented  font  in  this  country. 

Another  equally  characteristic  pattern  is  composed  of  diagonal  lines,  never  interlacing,  but  generally 
arranged  at  equal  intervals  apart,  forming  a series  of  Chinese-like  patterns,*  and  which,  as  the  letter 
Z,  or  Z reversed,  seems  to  be  the  primary  element,  may  be  termed  the  Z pattern.  It  is  capable  of 
great  modification,  as  may  be  seen  in  Plate  LXV.,  Figs.  6,  4,  9,  10,  11,  and  13.  In  the  more 
elaborate  MSS.  it  is  purely  geometrical  and  regular,  but  in  rude  work  it  degenerates  into  an  irregular 
design,  as  in  Plate  LXIII.,  Figs.  1 and  3. 

* Several  of  the  patterns  given  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Chinese  Plate  LIX,  occur  with  scarcely  any  moclificatiou  in  our  stone 
and  metal-work,  as  well  as  in  our  MSS. 


B B 


93 


CELTIC  ORNAMENT. 


Another  very  simple  ornament  occasionally  used  in  our  MSS.  consists  of  a series  of  angulated  lines, 
placed  at  equal  distances  apart,  forming  a series  of  steps.  See  Plate  LXIV.,  Figs.  28  and  36  ; and 
Plate  LXV.,  Fig.  2.  This  is,  however,  hy  no  means  characteristic  of  Celtic  ornament,  occurring  elsewhere 
from  the  earliest  period. 

The  last  ornament  we  shall  notice  is,  indeed,  the  simplest  of  all,  consisting  merely  of  red  dots  or 
points.  These  were  in  great  use  as  marginal  ornaments  of  the  great  initial  letters,  as  well  as  of  the 
more  ornamental  details,  and  are,  indeed,  one  of  the  chief  characteristics  distinguishing  Anglo-Saxon 
and  Irish  MSS.  Sometimes,  also,  they  were  even  formed  into  patterns,  as  in  Plate  LXIV.,  Figs.  34 
and  37. 

3.  Origin  of  Celtic  Ornament. — The  various  styles  of  ornament  described  above  were  practised 
throughout  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  from  the  fourth  or  fifth  to  the  tenth  or  eleventh  centuries ; and 
as  they  appear  in  their  purest  and  most  elaborate  forms  in  those  parts  where  the  old  Celtic  races  longest 
prevailed,  we  have  not  hesitated  to  give  the  Celtic  as  their  generic  name. 

We  purposely,  indeed,  avoid  entering  into  the  question,  whether  the  Irish  in  the  first  instance 
received  their  letters  and  styles  of  ornament  from  the  early  British  Christians,  or  whether  it  was  in 
Ireland  that  the  latter  were  originated,  and  thence  dispersed  over  England.  A careful  examination 
of  the  local  origin  of  the  early  Anglo-Saxon  MSS.,  and  of  the  Eoman,  Eomano-British,  and  early 
Christian  , inscribed  and  sculptured  stones  of  the  western  parts  of  England  and  Wales,  would,  we  think, 
materially  assist  in  determining  this  question.  It  is  sufficient  for  our  argument  that  Venerable  Bede 
informs  us,  that  the  British  and  Irish  Churches  were  identical  in  their  peculiarities,  and  the  like 
identity  occurs  in  their  monuments.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  Anglo-Saxons,  as  well  as  the  Irish, 
employed  all  these  styles  of  ornamentation.  The  famous  Gospels  of  Lindisfarne,  or  Book  of  St.  Cuthbert, 
preserved  in  the  Cottonian  Library  in  the  British  Museum,  is  an  unquestionable  proof  of  such  employ- 
ment ; and  it  is  satisfactorily  known  that  this  volume  was  executed  by  Anglo-Saxon  artists  at  Lindisfarne 
at  the  end  of  the  seventh  century.  But  it  is  equally  true  that  Lindisfarne  was  an  establishment  founded 
by  the  monks  of  Iona,  who  were  the  disciples  of  the  Irish  St.  Columba,  so  that  it  is  not  at  all  surprising 
that  their  Anglo-Saxon  scholars  should  have  adopted  the  styles  of  ornamentation  used  by  their  Irish 
predecessors.  The  Saxons,  pagans  as  they  were  when  they  arrived  in  England,  had  certainly  no 
peculiarities  of  ornamental  design  of  their  own;  and  no  such  remains  exist  in  the  north  of  Germany 
as  would  give  the  least  support  to  the  idea  that  the  ornamentation  of  Anglo-Saxon  MSS.,  &c.,  was  of 
a Teutonic  origin. 

Various  have  been  the  conjectures  whence  all  these  peculiarities  of  ornament  were  derived  by  the 
early  Christians  of  these  islands.  One  class  of  writers,  anxious  to  overthrow  the  independence  of  the 
ancient  British  and  Irish  Churches,  has  referred  them  to  a Eoman  origin,  and  has  even  gone  so  far  as 
to  suppose  that  some  of  the  grand  stand  crosses  of  Ireland  were  executed  in  Italy.  As,  however,  not 
a single  Italian  MS.  older  than  the  ninth  century,  nor  a single  piece  of  Italian  stone  sculpture  having 
the  slightest  resemblance  to  those  of  this  country,  can  be  produced,  we  at  once  deny  the  assertion. 
An  examination  of  the  magnificent  work  upon  the  Catacombs  of  Eome,  lately  published  by  the  French 
Government,  in  which  all  the  inscriptions  and  mural  drawings  executed  by  the  early  Christians  are 
elaborately  represented,  will  fully  prove  that  the  early  Christian  art  and  ornamentation  of  Eome  had 
no  share  in  developing  that  of  these  islands.  It  is  true  that  the  grand  tessellated  pages  of  the  MSS. 
above  described  bear  a certain  general  resemblance  to  the  tessellated  pavement  of  the  Eomans,  and  had 
they  been  found  only  in  Anglo-Saxon  MSS.,  we  might  have  conjectured  that  such  pavements  existing 
in  various  parts  of  England,  and  which  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries  must  still  have  remained 
uncovered,  were  the  originals  from  which  the  illuminator  of  the  MSS.  had  taken  his  idea ; but  it  is  in 
the  Irish  MSS.,  and  in  the  MSS.  which  are  clearly  traceable  to  Irish  influence,  that  we  find  these  pages 
94 


CELTIC  ORNAMENT. 


most  elaborately  ornamented,  and  we  need  hardly  say  that  there  are  no  Roman  tessellated  pavements 
in  Ireland,  the  Romans  never  having  visited  that  island. 

It  may,  again,  be  said  that  the  interlaced  ribbon  patterns,  so  common  in  the  MSS.,  &c.,  were  derived 
from  the  Roman  tessellated  and  mosaic  work ; but  in  the  latter  the  interlacing  was  of  the  simplest  and 
most  inartificial  character,  bearing  no  resemblance  to  such  elaborate,  interlaced  knotwork  as  is  to  be 
seen,  for  instance,  in  Plate  LXIII.  In  fact,  in  the  Roman  remains  the  ribbons  are  simply  alternately 
laid  over  each  other,  whilst  in  the  Celtic  designs  they  are  knotted. 

Another  class  of  writers  insist  upon  the  Scandinavian  origin  of  these  ornaments,  which  we  are  still 
perpetually  accustomed  to  hear  called  Runic  knots,  and  connected  with  Scandinavian  superstitions. 
It  is  certainly  true  that  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  as  well  as  at  Lancaster  and  Bewcastle,  we  find  Runic 
inscriptions  upon  crosses,  ornamented  with  many  of  the  peculiar  ornaments  above  described.  As, 
however,  the  Scandinavian  nations  were  Christianised  by  missionaries  from  these  islands,  and  as  our 
crosses  are  quite  unlike  those  still  existing  in  Denmark  and  Norway ; as,  moreover,  they  are  several  cen- 
turies more  recent  than  the  oldest  and  finest  of  our  MSS.  there  can  be  no  grounds  for  asserting  that  the 
ornaments  of  the  MSS.  are  Scandinavian,  A comparison  of  our  plates  with  those  contained  in  the 
very  excellent  series  of  illustrations  of  the  ancient  Scandinavian  relics  in  the  Copenhagen  Museum, 
lately  published,*  is  sufficient  to  disprove  such  an  assertion.  Only  one  figure  (No.  398)  in  the  whole 
of  the  460  representations  given  in  that  work  exhibits  the  patterns  of  our  MSS.,  and  we  have  no 
hesitation  in  asserting  it  to  be  a reliquary  of  Irish  work.  That  the  Scandinavian  artists  adopted  Celtic 
ornamentation,  especially  such  as  was  practised  about  the  end  of  the  tenth  or  eleventh  centuries,  is 
evident  from  the  similarity  between  their  carved  wooden  churches  (illustrated  in  detail  by  M.  Dahl) 
and  Irish  metal-work  of  the  same  period,  such  as  the  Cross  of  Cong  in  the  Museum  of  the  Royal 
Irish  Academy  in  Dublin. 

Not  only  the  Scandinavian,  but  also  the  earlier  and  more  polished  artists  of  the  school  of  Charle- 
magne and  his  successors,  together  with  those  of  Lombardy,  adopted  many  of  the  peculiar  Celtic 
ornaments  in  their  magnificently  illuminated  MSS.  They,  however,  interspersed  with  them  classical 
ornaments,  introducing  the  acanthus  and  foliage,  giving  a gracefulness  to  their  pages  which  we  look 
for  in  vain  in  the  elaborate,  but  often  absolutely  painfully  intricate,  work  of  our  artists.  Our  Fig.  25, 
in  Plate  LXIV.,  is  copied  from  the  Golden  Gospels  in  the  British  Museum,  a magnificent  production 
of  Frankish  art  of  the  ninth  century,  in  which  we  perceive  such  a combination  of  ornament.  The 
Anglo-Saxon  and  Irish  patterns  were,  however,  so  closely  copied  (always,  however,  of  a much  larger 
size)  in  some  of  the  grand  Frankish  MSS.  that  the  term  Franco-Saxon  has  been  applied  to  them. 
Such  is  the  case  with  the  Bible  of  St.  Denis  in  the  Biblioth^que  Nationale,  Paris,  of  which  forty  pages 
are  preserved  in  the  Library  of  the  British  Museum.  Plate  LXIV.,  fig.  31,  is  copied  from  this  MS. 
of  the  real  size. 

It  remains  to  inquire,  whether  Byzantium  and  the  East  may  not  have  afforded  the  ideas  which 
the  early  Celtic  Christian  artists  developed  in  the  retirement  of  their  monasteries  into  the  elaborate 
patterns  which  we  have  been  examining.  The  fact  that  this  style  of  ornament  was  fully  developed 
before  the  end  of  the  seventh  century,  taken  in  connexion  with  that  of  Byzantium  having  been  the 
seat  of  Art  from  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century,  will  suggest  the  possibility  that  the  British  or 
Irish  missionaries  (who  were  constantly  travelling  to  the  Holy  Land  and  Egypt)  might  have  there 
obtained  the  ideas  or  principles  of  some  of  these  ornaments.  To  prove  this  assertion  will,  indeed,  be 

* In  the  division  of  this  Danish  work  devoted  to  the  Bronze  age  we  find  various  examples  of  spiral  ornaments  on  metaUwork,  hut 
always  arranged  in  the  CO  manner,  and  with  but  very  few  inartificial  combinations.  In  the  second  division  of  the  Iron  period,  we  also 
find  various  examples  of  fantastical-intertwined  animals  also  represented  on  metal-work.  Nowhere,  however,  do  the  interlaced  ribbon 
patterns,  or  the  diagonal  Z-like  patterns,  or  the  trumpet-like  spiral  patterns,  occur. 


95 


CELTIC  OKNAMENT. 


difficult,  Lecause  so  little  is  known  of  real  Byzantine  Art  previous  to  the  seventh  or  eighth  century. 
Certain,  however,  it  is  that  the  ornamentation  of  St.  Sophia,  so  elaborately  illustrated  by  H.  Salzenberg, 
exhibits  no  analogy  with  our  Celtic  patterns;  a much  greater  resemblance  exists,  however,  between 
the  latter  and  the  early  monuments  of  Mount  Athos,  representations  of  some  of  which  are  given  by 
M.  Didron,  in  his  Iconographie  de  Dieu.  In  our  Egyptian  Plate  X.,  Figs,  10,  13—16,  18—23,  and 
Plate  Xi.,  Figs.  1,  4,  6,  and  7,  will  be  perceived  patterns  formed  of  spiral  lines  or  ropes,  which  may 
have  suggested  the  spiral  pattern  of  our  Celtic  ornaments;  but  it  will  be  perceived  that  in  the 
majority  of  these  Egyptian  examples  the  spiral  line  is  arranged  like  a S.  In  Plate  X.,  Fig.  11, 
however,  it  is  arranged  C-wise,  and  thus  to  a greater  degree  agrees  with  our  patterns,  although  wide 
enough  in  detail  for  them.  The  elaborate  interlacements,  so  common  in  Moresque  ornamentation, 
agree  to  a certain  extent  with  the  ornaments  of  Sclavonic,  Ethiopic,  and  Syriac  MSS.,  numerous  examples 
of  which  are  given  by  Silvestre,  and  in  our  Palceographia  Sacra  Pictoria ; and  as  all  these,  probably, 
had  their  origin  in  Byzantium  or  Mount  Athos,  we  might  be  led  to  infer  a similar  origin  in  the  idea, — 
worked  out,  however,  in  a different  manner  by  the  Irish  and  Anglo-Saxon  artists. 

We  have  thus  endeavoured  to  prove  that,  even  supposing  the  early  artists  of  these  islands  might 
have  obtained  the  germ  of  their  peculiar  styles  of  ornament  from  some  other  source  than  their  own 
national  genius,  they  had,  between  the  period  of  the  introduction  of  Christianity  and  the  beginning 
of  the  eighth  century,  formed  several  very  distinct  systems  of  ornamentation,  perfectly  unlike  in  their 
developed  state  to  those  of  any  other  country;  and  this,  too,  at  a period  when  the  whole  of  Europe, 
owing  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  great  Roman  Empire,  was  involved  in  almost  complete  darkness  as 
regards  artistic  productions. 

4.  Later  Anglo-Saxon  Ornament. — About  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century  another  and  equally 
striking  style  of  ornament  was  employed  by  some  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  artists,  for  the  decoration  of 
their  finest  MSS.,  and  equally  unlike  that  of  any  other  country.  It  consisted  of  a ffiame-like  design, 
composed  of  gold  bars  entirely  surrounding  the  page,  the  miniatures  or  titles  being  introduced  into 
the  open  space  in  the  centre.  These  frames  were  ornamented  with  foliage  and  buds ; but  true  to  the 
interlaced  ideas,  the  leaves  and  stems  were  interwoven  together,  as  well  as  with  the  gold  bars — the 
angles  being,  moreover,  decorated  with  elegant  circles,  squares,  lozenges,  or  quatrefoils.  It  would 
appear  that  it  was  in  the  south  of  England  that  this  style  of  ornament  was  most  fully  elaborated, 
the  grandest  examples  having  been  executed  at  Winchester,  in  the  Monastery  of  St.  ^thelwold,  in 
the  latter  half  of  the  tenth  century.  Of  these  the  Benedictional  belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire, 
fully  illustrated  in  the  Archceologiat  is  the  most  magnificent ; two  others,  however,  now  in  the  public 
library  of  Rouen,  are  close  rivals  of  it ; as  is  also  a copy  of  the  Gospels  in  the  library  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge.  The  Gospels  of  King  Canute  in  the  British  Museum  is  another  example  which  has  afforded 
us  the  Figure  20  in  Plate  LXV. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  grand  MSS.  of  the  Frankish  schools  of  Charlemagne,  in  which 
foliage  was  introduced,  were  the  originals  whence  our  later  Anglo-Saxon  artists  adopted  the  idea  of 
the  introduction  of  foliage  among  their  ornaments. 

J.  0.  WESTWOOD. 


96 


CELTIC  ORNAMENT. 


BIBLIOG-KAPHICAL  EEFERENCES. 


Ledwick,  Antiquities  of  Ireland.  4to. 

O’Conor.  Biblioth.  Stowcnsis.  2 vols.  4to.  1818.  Also,  Rerum 
Hibernicarum  Scriptores  veteres.  4 vols.  4to. 

Petrie.  Essay  on  tlie  Round  Totvers  of  Ireland.  Large  8vo. 
Betham.  Irish  Antiquarian  Researches.  2 vols.  8vo. 

O’NEUi.  Illustrations  of  the  Crosses  of  Ireland.  Folio,  in  Parts. 
Keller,  Ferdinand,  Dr.  Bilder  vnd  Schriflzuge  in  den  Irischen 
Manuscripten ; in  the  Mittheilunffeji  der  Antiq.Gesellsch.in Zurich. 
Bd.  7, 1851. 

Westwood,  J.  0.  Paleographia  Sacra  Pictoria.  4to.  1843-1845. 

„ In  Journal  of  the  Archaoloyical  Institute,  vols.  vii. 

and  X.  Also  numerous  articles  in  the  Ar- 
chcEologia  Cambrensis. 

Gumming.  Illustrations  of  the  Crosses  of  the  Isle  of  Man.  4to. 
Chalmers.  Stone  Monuments  of  Angusshire.  Imp.  fol. 


Spaij)ING  Club.  Sculptured  Stones  of  Scotland.  Fol.  1856. 

Gage,  J.  Dissertation  on  St.  .Mlhelwold’s  Benedictional,  in  Archao- 
logia,  vol.  xxiv. 

Ellis,  H.  Sir.  Account  of  Cadmon's  Paraphrase  of  Scripture  History, 
in  ArchcBologia,  vol.  xxiv. 

Goodwin,  James,  B.D.  Evangelia  Augustmi  Qregoriana ; in  Trans. 
Cambridge  Antiq.  Soc,  No.  13,  4to.  1847,  with  eleven  plates. 

Bastard,  Le  Comte  de.  Ornemcnts  et  Miniatures  des  Manuscrits 
Franfaises.  Imp.  fol.  Paris. 

WoRSAAE,  J.  J.  A.  Afbildninger  fra det Kong. Museum  i Kjobenhavn. 
8vo.  1854. 

And  the  general  works  of  WrLLEMiN,  Strutt,  Du  Sommerard, 
Langlois,  Shaw,  Silvestre  and  Champollion,  Astle  {on 
Writing),  Humphreys,  La  Croix,  and  Lysons  {Magna  Britan- 
nia). 


97 


i£  I 


Chapter  XVI.— Plates  66,  67,  67*,  68,  69,  69*,  70,  71,  72,  73, 


MEDIEVAL  OKNAMENT. 


PLATE  LXVI. 

Conventional  Leaves  and  Flowers,  from  MSS.  of  different  periods. 


PLATES  LXVIL,  LXVIP. 

Collection  op  Borders,  from  Illuminated  MSS.,  from  the  9th  to  the  14th  century. 


PLATE  LXVIII. 


Diapers  on  "Walls,  from  Miniatures  in  Illuminated  MSS.  from  the  12th  to  the  16th  century. 


PLATE  LXIX. 

Stained  Glass  op  different  Periods  and  Styles. 

1,  5,  6,  8.  Church  of  Attenberg,  near  Cologue.  I 9, 11.  Cathedral  of  Soisson. 

3.  Southwell  Church,  Nottinghamshire.  i 10.  St.  Thomas  at  Strasburg. 

2,4.  Chaptei'-house,  York  Cathedral.  13.  Cathedral  of  Troyes. 

7.  North  Transept,  York  Cathedral.  ' 14.  Canterbury  Cathedral. 


PLATE  LXIX*. 

Stained  Glass  of  different  Periods  and  Styles. 

12, 17.  St.  Cunibert,  Cologne 
16.  Canterbury  Cathedral 
16,  26.  Abbey  of  St.  Denis. 


18-24,  25,  27,  29.  Cathedral  of  Bourges. 
28.  Cathedral  of  Angers. 


99 


MEDMVAL  OENAMENT. 


PLATE  LXX. 

Encaustic  Tiles.  13th  and  14th  centuries. 


PLATE  LXXL 

Illuminated  MSS.,  No.  1. 

1-12  are  of  the  12th  century  ; 13  is  of  the  13th  century,  12  and  13  are  from  the  Illuminated  Boohs  of  the  Middle  Ages. — 

Humphreys. 

The  remainder  of  the  Ornaments  on  this  Plate  from  the  British  Museum. 


PLATE  LXXII. 

Illuminated  MSS,,  No.  2, 

13, 14,  of  the  13th  century.  1,  3-6,  8-11, 14th  century.  2,  7, 12, 15,  of  the  15th  century. 

2,  3,  7,  8,  and  15,  are  from  the  Illuminated  Boohs  of  the  Middle  Ages  ; 16,  from  a MS.  in  the  possession  of  the  Author, 
The  remainder  from  the  British  Museum. 


PLATE  LXXIII. 

Illuminated  MSS.,  No.  3. 

MSS.  from  the  Beginning  to  the  End  of  the  15th  century.  11-15,  from  the  Eluminated  Boohs  of  the  Middle  Ages. 
The  remainder  from  the  British  Museum. 


MEDIEVAL  OENAMENT. 


The  transition  from  the  round  arch,  characteristic  of  the  Eomanesque  style,  to  the  pointed  style 
of  the  thirteenth  century,  is  readily  traced  in  the  buildings  in  which  the  two  styles  are  intermingled  ; 
but  the  passage  from  Eomanesque  Ornament  to  that  which  prevailed  so  universally  in  the  thirteenth 
century  is  not  so  clear.  All  traces  of  the  acanthus  leaf  have  disappeared,  and  we  find  a purely  con- 
ventional style  of  ornament  universally  prevalent  in  all  the  buildings  of  the  time.  The  nearest  approach 
to  this  style  is  found  in  the  illuminated  MSS.  of  the  twelfth  century,  which  appear  to  have  been 
derived  in  some  of  their  features  from  the  Greek  MSS.  The  ornaments  are  formed  of  a continuous 
100 


MEDT/EVAL  ORNAMENT. 


Early  English.  Wells.  Collins. 


Warmington  Church,  Northamptonshire.  W.  Twopkn  v. 


Warmington  Church,  Northamptonshire.  W.  Twopeky. 


Decorated.  Wells.  Collins. 


stem,  throwing  off  leaves  on  the  outer  side,  and  terminating  in  a flower.  The  general  disposition 
and  arrangement  of  the  lines  in  any  given  space  is  exactly  similar  to  the  arrangement  of  Early  English 
sculptured  ornament. 

Early  English  Ornament  is  the  most  perfect,  both  in  principle  and  in  execution,  of  the  Grothic 
period.  There  is  as  much  elegance  and  refinement  in  modulations  of  form  as  there  is  in  the  ornament 
of  the  Greeks.  It  is  always  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  structural  features,  and  always  grows  naturally 
from  them.  It  fulfils’  every  one  of  the  conditions  which  we  desire  to  find  in  a perfect  style  of  Art. 
But  it  remained  perfect  only  so  long  as  the  style  remained  conventional.  As  this  style  became  less 
idealised  and  more  direct  in  imitation,  its  peculiar  beauties  disappeared,  and  it  ceased  to  be  an  orna- 
mentation of  structural  features,  but  became  ornament  applied. 


D D 


101 


MEDIEVAL  ORNAMENT. 


In  the  capitals  of  the  colnmns  in  the  Early  English  architecture  the  ornament  arises  directly  from 
the  shaft,  which  above  the  necking  splits  up  into  a series  of  stems,  each  stem  terminating  in  a 
flower.  This  is  analogous  to  the  mode  of  decorating  the  Egyptian  capital.  In  the  Decorated  style, 
on  the  contrary,  where  a much  nearer  approach  to  Nature  was  attempted,  it  was  no  longer  possible 
to  treat  a natural  leaf  as  part  of  the  shaft ; and,  therefore,  the  shaft  is  terminated  by  a bell-shape. 


Stoije  Church,  Kent.  Published  by  the  Topographical  Society. 

round  which  the  leaves  are  twined.  The  more  and  more  natural  these  were  made,  the  less  artistic 
became  the  arrangement. 

The  same  thing  occurs  in  the  bosses  which  cover  the  intersection  of  the  ribs.  On  the  vaulting ; 
in  the  Early  English  bosses  the  stems  of  the  flowers  forming  the  bosses  are  continuations  of  the 
mouldings  of  the  ribs,  whilst  in  subsequent  periods  the  intersections  of  the  ribs  were  concealed  ‘by 
the  overlaying  of  the  boss,  which  was  here  as  much  an  application  as  was  the  acanthhs  leaf  to  the 
bell  of  the  Corinthian  capital. 

In  the  spandrils  of  the  arches,  so  long  as  the  conventional  style  was  retained,  one  vigorous  main 
stem  was  distributed  over  the  spandril,  from  which  sprang  the  leaves  and  flowers ; but  when  the 
natural  was  attempted,  the  stem  ceased  to  be  the  guiding  form  of  the  ornament,  and  lost  all  grace 
in  the  endeavour  to  represent  in  stone  the  softness  of  nature.  The  main  stem  as  a leading  feature 
gradually  disappears,  and  the  spandrils  are  often  filled  with  three  immense  leaves  springing  from  a 
twisted  stem  in  the  centre. 

From  the  few  remains  which  still  exist  of  the  decorations  of  the  interior  of  buildings,  we  are 
unable  to  form  a very  complete  idea  of  this  class  of  ornament  of  the  thirteenth  century.  The  ornaments 
from  illuminated  MSS.  are  not  a safe  guide,  as,  after  the  twelfth  century,  the  style  is  rarely  very 
architectural,  and  there  were  so  many  schools  of  illumination,  and  they  borrowed  so  much  one  from 
the  other,  that  there  is  often  great  mixture  in  the  same  illumination.  It  is  unlikely,  that  while  the 
sculptured  ornament  was  so  universally  conventional,  that  the  decorated  portion  of  the  same  building 
could  have  departed  from  the  style.  » 


I 


MEDIEVAL  ORNAMENT. 


On  Plates  LXVII.  and  LXVII  we  give  a selection  of  borders  found  on  illuminated  MSS., 
ranging  from  the  ninth  to  the  fourteenth  century;  and  on  Plate  LXVIII.  diapers  from  walls,  chiefly 
taken  from  the  back-grounds  of  illuminations,  from  the  twelfth  to  the  sixteenth.  There  are  very  few 
of  either  class  that  could  be  worthy  accompaniments  to  the  pure  conventional  ornament  of  the  Early 
English  style. 

In  the  thirteenth  century,  beyond  all  others,  architecture  was  in  its  zenith.  The  mosques  of  Cairo, 
the  Alhambra,  Salisbury,  Lincoln,  Westminster,  all  possess  the  same  secret  of  producing  the  broadest 


Wells  Cathedral.  Collins. 


general  effects  combined  with  the  most  elaborate  decoration.  In  all  these  buildings  there  is  a family 
likeness;  although  the  forms  widely  differ,  the  principles  on  which  they  are  based  are  the  same. 
They  exhibit  the  same  care  for  the  leading  masses  of  the  composition,  the  same  appreciation  of  the 
undulations  of  form,  the  same  correct  observation  of  natural  principles  in  the  ornamentation,  the 
same  elegance  and  refinement  in  all  the  decoration. 

The  attempt  to  reproduce  in  our  time  a building  of  the  thirteenth  century  must  be  vain  indeed. 
Whitewashed  walls,  with  stained  glass  and  encaustic  tiles,  cannot  alone  sustain  the  effect  which  was 
arrived  at  when  every  moulding  had  its  colour  best  adapted  to  develope  its  form,  and  when,  from 
the  floor  to  the  roof,  not  an  inch  of  space  but  had  its  appropriate  ornament,  an  effect  which  must 
have  been  glorious  beyond  conception.  So  glorious  a point,  indeed,  had  the  style  reached  that  it  was 
exhausted  by  the  effort, — the  light  burnt  out ; not  only  architecture,  but  all  the  decorative  arts 
which  accompanied  it,  immediately  began  to  decline, — a decline  which  never  stops  till  the  style  dies 
out. 

In  the  examples  of  encaustic  tiles  on  Plate  LXX.  it  will  be  seen  that  the  broadest  in  effect, 
and  the  best  adapted  to  their  purpose,  are  the  earliest,  such  as  Nos.  17,  27.  Although  there  was 
never  so  much  decline  as  to  attempt  an  appearance  of  relief,  yet  a near  approach  to  a representation 
of  the  natural  forms  of  leaves  may  be  seen  in  No.  16;  and  a very  marked  decline  is  observed 
in  patterns  such  as  No.  23,  where  tracery  and  the  structural  features  of  buildings  were  represented. 

103 


MEDIEVAL  OENAMENT. 


On  Plate  LXVI.  are  arranged  a great  variety  of  conventional  leaves  and  flowers  from  illuminated 
MSS.  Although  many  of  them  are  in  the  originals  highly  illuminated,  we  have  printed  them  here 
in  two  colours  only,  to  show  how  possible  it  is  to  represent  in  diagram  the  general  character  of 
leaves.  By  adapting  these  leaves  or  flowers  to  a volute  stem,  almost  as  many  styles  in  appearance 
could  be  produced  as  there  are  separate  ornaments  on  the  page.  By  a combination  of  different  varieties, 
they  might  be  still  further  increased,  and  by  adding  to  the  stock  by  conventionalising  the  form  of 
any  natural  leaf  or  flower  on  the  same  principle,  there  need  be  no  limit  to  an  artist’s  invention. 

In  Plates  LXXI.,  LXXII.,  LXXIII.,  we  have  endeavoured  to  gather  together  types  of  the  various  styles 
of  ornamental  illumination  from  the  twelfth  to  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.  There  is  here,  also, 
evidence  of  decline  from  the  very  earliest  point.  On  Plate  LXXI.  the  letter  N is  not  surpassed  by 
any  example  in  the  subsequent  styles  we  have  reproduced.  Here  the  true  purpose  of  illumination 
is  fulfilled ; in  every  way,  it  is  pure  decorative  writing.  The  letter  itself  forms  the  chief  ornament ; 
from  this  springs  a main  stem,  sweeping  boldly  from  the  base,  swelling  out  into  a grand  volute 
exactly  at  the  point  best  adapted  to  contrast  with  the  angular  line  of  the  letter;  this  is  beautifully 
sustained  again  by  the  green  volute,  which  embraces  the  upper  part  of  the  N,  and  prevents  it  falling 
over,  and  is  so  nicely  proportioned  that  it  is  able  to  sustain  the  red  volute  which  flows  from  it.  The 
colours,  also,  are  most  beautifully  balanced  and  contrasted ; and  the  way  in  which  the  rotundity  of 
the  stems  is  expressed,  without  attempting  positive  relief,  is  a fruitful  lesson.  There  are  an  immense 
number  of  MSS.  in  this  style,  and  we  consider  it  the  finest  kind  of  illumination.  The  general 
character  of  the  style  is  certainly  Eastern,  and  was  probably  a development  of  the  illumination 
of  the  Byzantines.  We  believe  that,  from  its  universal  prevalence,  it  led  to  the  adoption  of  the  same 
principle  so  universally  in  the  ornamentation  of  the  Early  English  which  follows  exactly  the  same 
laws  in  the  general  distribution  of  form. 

This  style,  from  constant  repetition,  gradually  lost  the  peculiar  beauty  and  fitness  which  it  had 
derived  from  first  inspiration,  and  died  out  by  the  scroll-work  becoming  too  minute  and  elaborate, 
as  we  see  in  No.  13  of  the  same  plate.  We  have  no  longer  the  same  balance  of  form,  but  the  four 
series  of  scrolls  repeating  each  other  most  monotonously. 

From  this  period  we  no  longer  find  the  initial  letters  forming  the  chief  ornament  on  the  page, 
but  the  general  text  becomes  enclosed  either  in  borders  round  the  page,  as  at  No.  1,  Plate  LXXII., 
or  with  tails  on  one  side  of  the  page,  such  as  9,  10,  11,  12.  The  border  gradually  comes  to  be  of 
more  importance,  and  from  the  vignette  form  which  was  at  first  general,  we  gradually  arrive  through 
the  manner  of  No.  15  to  that  of  Nos.  7 and  2,  where  the  border  is  bounded  on  the  outer  edge  by 
a red  line,  and  the  border  is  filled  up  by  intermediate  stems  and  flowers,  so  as  to  produce  an  even 
tint.  No.  8 is  a specimen  of  a style  very  prevalent  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  which  is  very 
architectural  in  character.  It  is  generally  to  be  found  on  small  missals,  and  surrounding  very  beautiful 
miniatures. 

The  gradual  progress  from  the  flat  conventional  ornament.  Nos.  13  and  14,  to  the  attempt  at 
rendering  the  relief  of  natural  forms  in  Nos,  15,  7,  2,  will  readily  be  traced  through  Nos.  9,  10,  11. 
There  is  also  to  be  remarked  a gradual  decline  in  the  idea  of  continuity  of  the  main  stems,,  and 
although  each  flower  or  group  of  leaves  in  Nos.  15,  7,  2,  may  still  be  traced  to  their  roots,  the  arrange- 
ment is  fragmentary. 

Up  to  this  period  the  ornaments  are  still  within  the  province  of  the  scribe,  and  are  all  first 
outlined  with  a black  line  and  then  coloured,  but  on  Plate  LXXIII.  we  shall  find  that  the  painter 
began  to  usurp  the  office  of  the  scribe;  and  the  farther  we  proceed  the  more  does  the  legitimate  object 
of  illumination  seem  to  be  departed  from. 

We  have  the  first  stage  in  No.  5,  where  a geometrical  arrangement  is  obtained  with  conventional 
104 


MEDIAEVAL  ORNAMENT. 


ornament  enclosing  gold  panels,  on  wMoh  are  painted  groups  of  flowers  slightly  conventionalised.  In 
6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  15,  we  find  conventional  ornament  intermingled  with  natural  flowers  arranged  in  a 
fragmentary  way.  All  continuity  of  design  being  abandoned,  we  arrive  through  this  to  No.  11,  when 
a natural  flower  and  a conventional  ornament  appear  on  the  same  stem,  to  Nos.  12,  13,  where  the 
painter  has  full  sway,  and  represents  flowers  and  insects  casting  their  shadow  on  the  page.  AVhen 
the  art  of  illumination  had  arrived  at  this  stage  it  could  go  no  farther, — all  ideality  had  fled — and 
it  ends  in  the  desire  to  copy  an  insect  so  faithfully  that  it  should  appear  to  be  alighting  on  the  page. 

Nos.  1,  2,  are  specimens  of  a peculiar  style  of  Italian  MSS.,  which  was  a revival  in  the  fifteenth 
century  of  the  system  of  ornament  so  prevalent  in  the  twelfth.  It  led  to  the  style  No.  3,  where  the 
interlaced  pattern  became  highly  coloured  on  the  gold  ground.  This  style  also  died  out  in  the  same 
way,  the  interlacings,  from  being  purely  geometrical  forms,  became  imitations  of  natural  branches, 
and,  of  course,  when  it  arrived  thus  far  there  could  be  no  further  progress. 

• The  character  of  the  ornament  on  stained  glass  appears  to  follow  much  more  closely  that  of  the 
illuminated  MSS.  than  it  does  the  sculptured  ornament  of  the  monuments  of  the  same  period,  and, 
like  the  ornament,  of  the  illuminated  MSS.,  it  appears  to  us  to  be  always  in  advance  of  structural 
ornament.  For  instance, — the  stained  glass  of  the  twelfth  century  possesses  the  same  breadth  of 
effect,  and  is  constructed  in  the  same  way  as  the  sculptured  ornament  of  the  thirteenth,  whilst  the 
stained  glass  of  the  thirteenth  century  is,  according  to  our  view,  already  in  a state  of  decline.  The 
same  change  has  taken  place  which  we  have  already  observed  on  comparing  No.  13  with  No.  12, 
Plate  LXXI. 

The  constant  repetition  of  the  same  forms  has  gradually  led  to  an  over-elaboration  of  detail,  from 
which  the  general  effect  considerably  suffers.  The  ornaments  are  out  of  scale  with  the  general 
masses.  Now  as  it  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  features  of  the  Early  English  style,  that  the  ornament 
is  in  such  perfect  relation  in  point  of  scale  and  effect  to  the  members  which  it  decorates,  this  seems 
a very  curious  fact,  if  fact  it  is.  On  Plates  LXIX.  and  LXIX*.,  all  the  ornaments  from  No.  12  to  28 
are  of  the  twelfth  century.  Nos.  3 and  7 are  of  the  thirteenth.  Nos.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  10,  11,  are 
of  the  fourteenth,  and  we  think  a mere  glance  at  the  general  effect  of  the  plates  will  establish  what 
we  have  here  advanced. 

In  the  stained  glass  of  the  twelfth  century  we  shall  always  find  all  the  principles  which  we  have 
shown  to  belong  to  a true  style  of  art.  We  need  only  call  attention  here  to  the  very  ingenious  way 
in  which  the  straight,  the  inclined,  and  the  curved,  are  balanced  and  contrasted  in  all  the  diapers. 

In  Nos.  2 and  4 we  have  an  example  of  a very  common  principle,  which  is  thoroughly  Eastern  in 
character,  viz.,  a continuous  ground  pattern  forms  a tint  interlacing  with  a more  general  surface  pattern. 

In  Nos.  1,  5,  6,  8,  of  the  fourteenth  century  we  see  the  commencement  of  the  direct  natural  style, 
which  ended  in  the  total  neglect  of  the  true  principles  of  stained  glass,  when  both  ornaments  and 
figures  through  which  life  was  to  be  transmitted,  in  the  attempt  to  render  them  over-true,  had  their 
own  shades  and  shadows. 


E E 


105 


MITTELALTEK 

F’AftL  LXVIU. 


» ♦ ♦ 0 

* * 


•...L.A>jMALEriEL  STAINED  GLASS^  yitraux  pei-nts 


24 


lUUMINIRTE  MANUSCRIFTE.  I LLU  M I NATED  M.S.S.  N°  E MANUSCRIPTS  ENLUMINE 


TAPEL  IXXll 


PU  LXXIl 


umHINIRTE  MAHnSCHIPTE  ILLUMINATED  ML.S  N°S.  MANUSCRIPTS  ENLIIMINES 

TAFEl,  WXIU.  o- 


Chapter 


XVII.— Plates  74,  75,  76,  77,  78,  79,  80, 

EENAISSANCE  OKNAMENT. 


81,  82. 


PLATE  LXXIV. 


1,  8,  9.  Bas-reliefs  from  the  Church  of  Sta.  Maria  dei  Mira- 
coli,  Venice. 

2.  Bas-relief  from  the  Scuola  di  Sau  Marco,  Venice. 

3.  Bas-relief  forming  the  continuation  upwards  of  Fig.  2. 


4,  6.  Bas-reliefs  from  the  Church  of  San  Michele  in  Murano 

Venice. 

5,  7.  Bas-reliefs  from  the  Scala  dei  Giganti,  Venice. 


PLATE  LXXV. 


1,  2.  From  a Collection  of  Casta  taken  under  the  super- 
intendence of  Professor  Varny,  from  the  principal 
Cinque-cento  Monuments  of  Genoa. 

3.  From  the  first  Ghiberti  Gate  of  the  Baptistery,  Florence. 


4,  5,  8,  9, 11.  From  Genoa. 

6.  From  Venice. 

7.  From  the  Church  of  Santi  Giovanni  e Paolo,  Venice. 
10.  From  the  H6tel  Bourgtheroulde,  Eouen. 


PLATE  LXXVI. 


Bas-relief  by  Andrea  Sansovino,  from  the  Church  of  Sta. 
Maria  del  Popolo,  Eome. 

Bas-relief  from  the  Church  of  Sta.  Maria  dei  Miracoli, 
Venice. 

Bas-relief  from  the  H6tel  Bourgtheroulde,  Rouen. 
Bas-relief  from  a Collection  of  Casts  of  the  best  Cinque- 


cento  Ornaments  of  Genoa,  taken  under  the  superin- 
tendence of  Professor  Varny, 

5,  7, 8, 10.  Bas-reliefs  from  Genoa. 

6.  Bas-relief  from  the  Martinengo  Tomb,  Brescia. 

9.  Bas-relief  from  the  Base  of  the  “ Trois  Graces of  Germain 
Pilon,  in  the  Louvre. 


PLATE  LXXVII. 


1-3.  Ornaments  enamelled  on  Copper  in  the  early  Li- 
moges Champlev6  style,  from  the  HOtel  Cluny 
Museum,  Paris. 

4-8.  Ditto,  of  a later  period. 

9.  Ornaments  from  the  background  of  a Picture,  in  the 
Hotel  Cluny. 

10, 11.  Enamels  on  Gold  Ground,  from  the  Louvre. 

12.  Silver  Inlay  in  Ivory,  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  from 

the  Hotel  Cluny. 

13.  From  a Casket  in  the  HOtel  Cluny. 

14.  From  a Powder-horn  in  Iron  of  the  Sixteenth  Cen- 

tury, in  the  HOtel  Cluny. 

15-17.  Similar  objects  in  Boxwood,  from  the  same  Museum. 
18-20.  From  Sixteenth  Century  Limoges  Enamels,  in  the 
same  Museum. 

21.  From  ditto,  in  the  Louvre. 

22-24.  Enamels  on  Gold  Ground,  Sixteenth  Century,  Louvre. 

25.  Portion  of  an  Ebony  Cabinet  of  the  Sixteenth  Cen- 

tury, in  the  HOtel  Cluny. 

26.  Inlaid  Ornament  on  a Dagger  Sheath  of  the  Sixteenth 

Century,  in  the  HOtel  Cluny. 


27,  28.  From  Pottery  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  in  the 
Louvre. 

29.  Limoges  ChamplevO  Enamel  on  Copper,  from  the 

Hotel  Cluny. 

30.  Painted  Ornaments,  HOtel  Cluny. 

31.  From  the  Armour  of  Henri  III.,  in  the  Louvre. 

32.  A Metal  Plate  in  the  same  Museum. 

33-35.  From  Metal  Work,  in  the  Louvre. 

36.  From  the  Armour  of  Fran§ois  II.,  in  the  Louvre. 
37-39.  Repousse  Ornaments  in  Copper,  from  the  HOtel 
Cluny. 

40, 41.  Limoges  ChamplevO  Enamel,  from  the  same  Museum. 
42-44.  From  Goldsmiths’  Work  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  in 
the  Louvre. 

45,  46.  From  a Picture  in  Limoges  Painted  Enamel,  Six- 
teenth Century,  in  the  HOtel  Cluny. 

47.  Ornament  in  Copper,  from  the  above. 

48-  Ivory  Inlay  in  Ebony,  from  the  above. 

49.  Painted  Ornament,  from  the  above. 

50-63.  Limoges  ChamplevO  Enamel,  from  the  above. 

54-56.  From  Accessories  to  Pictures,  from  the  above. 

57-61.  Limoges  Champleve  Enamel. 


107 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE  LXXYIIL 

1-36.  Ornaments  taken  from  Specimens  of  Hispano-Arabic,  French,  and  Italian  Earthenware,  preserved  in  the  South 
Kensington  Museum,  and  principally  from  the  Majolican  Wares  of  Pesaro,  Gubbio,  Urbino,  Castel  Durante,  and 
other  Italian  towns  of  the  Fifteenth,  Sixteenth,  and  Seventeenth  Centuries. 


PLATE  LXXIX. 


1-3.  Ornaments  selected  from  the  faience,  or  enamelled 
Earthenware,  of  Bernard  de  Palissy,  in  the  Hotel 
Cluny. 

4-10.  From  Specimens  of  Majolica,  in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 
11-13.  From  faience  of  the  Fifteenth  Century,  in  the  H6tel 
Cluny. 

14-18,  21.  From  faience  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  in  the 
Louvre. 


PLATE 

1, 2.  Ornaments  ivom  faience. 

3-6.  Ornaments  from  faience  of  the  Sixteenth  Century. 
7-10.  Ornaments  from  faience  of  the  Seventeenth  Cen- 
tury. 

11, 12.  From  faience  with  Metallic  Lustre. 

13.  From  a Vase  in  Venetian  Glass  of  the  Sixteenth 
Century. 

14-21.  'Svo'ca.  faience  of  the  Sixteenth  Century. 

22, 23.  From  faience  of  an  Earlier  Date. 


19,  20.  From  Porcelain  of  the  Seventeenth  Century,  in  the 
Louvre. 

22,  23.  From  the  German  Pottery,  m grhs,  with  Painted 
Glaze  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

24-33.  From  Earthenware,  French,  Spanish,  and  Italian,  in 
the  Hotel  Cluny. 

34.  From  the  Louvre. 


LXXX. 

24-27.  From  Qrh  Flamand,  or  Earthenware. 

28-32,  From  faience  of  the  Sixteenth  Century. 

33.  From  a Carved  Wood  Panel  of  the  Seventeenth 
Century. 

34-38.  From  Enamelled  Earthenware. 

39—42.  From  Silk  Embroidery  on  Velvet. 

N.B. — The  whole  of  the  Specimens  on  this  Plate  have 
been  derived  from  the  H6tel  Cluny,  Paris. 


1.  From  a Sideboard  carved  in  wood,  dated  1554,  in  the 

H6tel  Cluny. 

2.  Wood  Panels  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  in  the  H6tel 

Cluny. 

3.  From  an  Oak  Chair-back,  in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

4-6.  From  Carved  Wood-stalls  of  the  Fifteenth  Century, 
in  the  HOtel  Cluny. 

7-10,  25,  26,  35,  36.  From  Furniture,  in  the  HOtel  Cluny. 

11.  End  of  a Beam  of  the  end  of  the  Fifteenth  Century, 
in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

12, 13,  20,  21,  39,  40.  From  Furniture  of  the  Sixteenth  Cen- 
tury, in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

14, 15.  From  Furniture  of  the  Fifteenth  Century,  in  the 
Hotel  Cluny. 

16.  From  a Sideboard,  in  the  HOtel  Cluny, 


Shutter  Panels  of  the  end  of  the  Fifteenth  Century, 
in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

18.  Carved  Ornament,  from  the  Louvre. 

19.  From  a Boxwood  Comb,  in  the  Hotel  Cluny. 

22.  Stone  Balustrading,  from  the  Chateau  d’Anet, 

23.  Stone  Carving,  from  the  Louvre. 

24.  From  a Chimney-piece,  in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

27-30.  Carving  in  Marble  from  the  celebrated  Basin  of  the 
Fountain  of  the  Chateau  Gaillon,  now  in  the  Louvre. 
31, 32.  Stone  carving.  Seventeenth  Century,  in  the  Louvre. 

33.  Wood-carving  from  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

34, 38.  From  the  Fountain  of  the  Chateau  Gaillon,  Louvre. 
37.  From  the  Stock  of  an  Arquebuss  of  the  Sixteenth 
Century,  in  the  Hdtel  Climy. 


PLATE  LXXXL 

17. 


PLATE  LXXXII. 


1-9.  Carved  Ornament,  from  Oak  Furniture  of  the  Six- 
teenth Century,  in  the  Hotel  Cluny. 

10, 11, 19,  34.  From  the  Bed  of  Franqois  I.,  in  the  Hotel 
Cluny. 

12,  13,  14,  32,  33.  From  Oak  Furniture  of  the  Sixteenth 
Century,  in  the  H6tel  Cluny. 

108 


15-17.  From  a Sideboard  of  the  Fifteenth  Century. 

18.  From  an  Oak  Sideboard,  dated  1524,  in  the  H6tel 
Cluny. 

20-29.  From  Furniture  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  in  the 
Hotel  Cluny. 

30,  31.  Panels  of  Shutters  of  the  end  of  the  Fifteenth  Cen- 
tury,  in  the  Hotel  Cluny. 


EENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


If  two  intelligent  students  of  Italian  Art  and  Literature  diligently  set  themselves  to  trace,  the 
one  the  latest  date  at  which  the  direct,  though  lingering,  light  of  Roman  greatness  waned  to  its  feeblest 
glimmer  in  the  land  over  which  it  had  once  shed  its  dazzling  rays,  and  the  other  the  earliest  effort  made 
to  excite  a veneration  for  what  most  historians  declare  to  have  almost  utterly  died  out  in  the  lapse  of 
ages — classical  beauty — there  is  little  doubt  that  they  would  not  only  meet,  but  cross  one  another, 
in  the  progress  of  their  researches.  The  truth  is,  that  the  material  monuments  of  the  ancient  Romans, 
scattered  thickly  over  the  soil  of  Italy,  were  so  substantial  and  majestic,  that  it  was  impossible  to 
live  under  their  shadow  and  to  forget  them.  Fragments  of  exquisite  beauty,  in  stone,  bronze,  and 
marble,  were  to  be  had  for  the  trouble  of  turning  up  the  soil  that  scarcely  covered  them;  and  thus 
they  were,  from  time  to  time,  pressed  into  service  for  tombs,  and  as  accessories  in  buildings,  in  the 
construction  of  which  the  principles  of  Art  to  which  those  fragments  owed  their  beauty  had  been 
entirely  lost  sight  of.  Hence,  the  G-othic  style  was  at  once  slow  to  take  root  in  Italy,  and  destined 
to  bloom  brilliantly,  but  for  a short  season.  Almost  concurrently  with  the  introduction  of  the  pointed 
arch  into  Northern  Italy  by  an  Englishman,  in  the  construction  of  St.  Andrea,  at  Vercelli,  early  in 
the  thirteenth  century,  and  with  the  German  works  of  Magister  Jacobus,  at  Assisi,  a protest  was 
commenced  in  favour  of  the  ancients  and  their  arts,  by  that  great  reviver  of  antique  sculpture,  Nicola 
Pisano.  The  close  of  the  thirteenth  century  was  further  marked  by  a complete  revolution  in  the 
world  of  letters.  Dante,  in  his  time,  was  scarcely  less  known  as  a Christian  poet  than  as  an  emulator 
of  the  great  Mantuan,  and  a profound  student  in  classical  learning.  In  the  fourteenth  century, 
Petrarch  and  Boccaccio,  intimate  friends,  spent  long  and  laborious  lives,  not  in  writing  Italian  poetry 
or  prose,  as  is  often  fancied,  but  in  labouring  incessantly  in  the  preservation  and  restoration  to  the 
world  of  the  long-lost  texts  of  the  Roman  and  G-recian  authors.  Cino  da  Pistoia  and  other  learned 
commentators  and  jurists,  brought  into  fashion  the  study  of  the  great  “ Corpus  ” of  ancient  law  and 
maintained  academies  in  which  it  was  adopted  as  a text.  Boccaccio  it  was  who  first  gave  to  Italy  a 
lucid  account  of  Heathen  Mythology,  and  who  first  instituted  a chair  for  the  study  of  the  Grecian 
language  at  Florence,  bringing  over  Leontius  Pilatus,  a learned  Greek,  from  Constantinople,  to  be 
the  first  professor.  These  efforts  at  a revival  of  classical  learning  were  seconded  by  a numerous  band 
of  notables,  among  whom  the  names  of  John  of  Ravenna  (Petrarch’s  pupil),  Lionardo  Aretino,  Poggio 
Bracciolini,  iEneas  Sylvius  (ultimately  Pope  Pius  II.,  1458-1464),  and  Cosmo,  the  father  of  the 
Medici,  are  most  popularly  and  familiarly  known.  It  was  at  a moment  when  the  labours  of  such 
men  as  these  had  accumulated  in  public  and  private  libraries  all  that  could  be  recovered  of  classical 
learning,  that  about  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  art  of  printing  was  introduced  into  Italy. 
Under  the  auspices  of  the  Benedictines  of  Subiaco,  the  Germans  Sweynheim  and  Pannartz  set  up  their 
press  in  the  celebrated  Monastery  of  Santa  Scholastica,  from  which  issued,  in  the  year  1465,  their 
edition  of  Lactantius.  Removing  to  Rome  in  1467,  the  first-fruits  of  their  labour  was  ‘^Cicero  de 
Oratore.”  Thus,  while  in  Germany  and  France  biblical  and  ecclesiastical  literature,  and  in  England 
popular,  first  gave  employment  to  the  printer;  in  Italy,  classical,  for  a time,  almost  exclusively 

F F 109 


EENAISSA2^CE  OENAMENT. 


engaged  his  attention.  Nicholas  Jenson,  the  Frenchman,  who  was  sent  by  Louis  XL  to  the  ateliers 
of  Fust  and  Scheffer,  to  learn  “ le  nouvel  art  par  lequel  on  faisait  des  livres,”  carried  his  acquired 
knowledge  from  Mayence  to  Venice,  where  he  invented  the  Italic  character,  subsequently  adopted  by 
the  learned  Aldus  Manutius.  This  remarkable  man,  who  was  a no  less  learned  editor  than  he  was 
zealous  printer,  from  about  the  year  1490,  gave  to  the  world  in  rapid  succession  editions  of  the 
G-reek  and  Latin  Classics.  Among  his  earliest  works  is  one  ever  memorable  in  the  history  of  Art, 
the  Hypnerotomachia,”  or  dream  of  Poliphilus,  written  by  the  learned  ecclesiastic  Fra  Colonna. 
It  is  profusely  illustrated  with  engravings  on  wood,  the  design  of  which  has  been  frequently  ascribed 
to  no  less  great  an  artist  than  Andrea  Mantegna.  Through  those  illustrations,  which  display  a 
profound  study  of  ancient  ornament,  types  of  form  diametrically  opposed  to  those  of  the  middle 
ages  were  disseminated  over  the  Continent  of  Europe.  The  publication  of  Vitruvius  at  Rome,  about 
1486,  at  Florence  in  1496,  and  at  Venice,  with  illustrations,  in  1511,  as  well  as  of  Alberti’s  great 
work,  ‘'^De  Re  vEdificatoria,”  at  Florence,  in  1485,  set  the  seal  upon  the  classical  tendency  of  the 
age  in  matters  of  Art,  and  afforded  the  means  of  speedily  transmitting  to  other  countries  the  details 
of  ancient  design,  so  warmly  taken  up  throughout  Italy.  The  successors  of  the  first  Aldus  at  Venice, 
the  G-ioliti  in  the  same  city,  and  the  Giunti  at  Florence,  rapidly  multiplied  the  standard  classics; 
and  thus  the  art  of  printing  speedily  caused  a movement  of  revival  to  become  cosmopolitan,  which, 
had  that  noble  art  remained  undiscovered,  would  very  probably  have  been  limited,  to  a great  extent, 
to  the  soil  of  Italy. 

Long,  however,  as  we  have  already  asserted,  before  the  aspirations  of  the  first  labourers  in  the 
mine  of  antiquity  had  been  thus  brought  to  fruition,  indications  had  been  given  in  the  world  of  Art 
of  an  almost  inherent  antagonism  on  the  part  of  the  Italians  to  Gothic  forms.  In  the  ornaments 
which  surround  the  ceilings  of  the  Church  of  Assisi,  ascribed  to  Cimabue,  the  father  of  painting,  the 
acanthus  had  been  drawn  with  considerable  accuracy;  while  Nicola  Pisano  and  other  masters  of  the 
trecento,  or  thirteenth  century,  had  derived  many  important  elements  of  design  from  a study  of 
antique  remains.  It  was  scarcely,  however,  until  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century  that  the 
movement  can  be  said  to  have  borne  really  valuable  fruit.  In  its  earliest  stage  the  Renaissance  of 
Art  in  Italy  was  unquestionably  a revival  of  principles,  and  it  was  scarcely  until  the  middle  of  the 
fifteenth  century  that  it  came  to  be  in  anywise  a literal  revival.  Conscious  as  we  may  be,  that  in 
some  productions  of  this  earlier  stage,  when  Nature  was  recurred  to  for  suggestion,  and  the  actual 
details  of  classic  forms  were  comparatively  unknown  and  unimitated,  there  may  exist  occasional 
deficiencies,  supplied  at  a later  period,  and  under  a more  regular  system  of  education;  we  are  yet 
free  to  confess  a preference  for  the  freshness  and  naiveU  with  which  the  pioneers  worked,  over  the  more 
complete  but  more  easily  obtained  graces  of  an  almost  direct  reproduction  of  the  antique. 

The  first  great  step  in  advance  was  taken  by  the  celebrated  Jacopo  della  Quercia,  who  having 
been  driven  from  his  birth-place,  Sienna,  to  Lucca,  executed  about  the  year  1413,  in  the  Cathedral 
of  that  city,  a monument  to  Ilaria  di  Caretto,  wife  of  Giunigi  di  Caretto,  Lord  of  the  City.  In  this 
interesting  work  (of  which  a good  cast  may  be  seen  in  the  Crystal  Palace)  Jacopo  exhibited  a careful 
recourse  to  nature,  both  in  the  surrounding  festoons  of  the  upper  part  of  the  pedestal  and  the  “puttini,” 
or  chubby  boys  supporting  them;  the  simplicity  of  his  imitation  being  revealed  by  the  little  bandy 
legs  of  one  of  the  “ puttini.”  His  great  work,  however,  was  the  fountain  in  the  Piazza  del  Mercato 
Siena,  which  was  completed  at  an  expense  of  two  thousand  two  hundred  gold  ducats,  and  even  in  its 
present  sad  state  of  decay  offers  unmistakable  evidence  of  his  rare  ability.  After  his  execution  of 
this  capo  d’opera,  he  was  known  as  Jacopo  della  Fonte;  this  work  brought  him  much  distinction, 
and  he  was  made  Warden  of  the  Cathedral  in  that  city,  where,  after  a life  of  much  labour  and 
many  vicissitudes,  he  died  in  the  year  1424,  aged  sixty-four.  Although  one  of  the  unsuccessful 
110 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


candidates  for  the  second  bronze  door  of  the  Florence  Baptistery,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  he  was 
much  esteemed  during  his  life,  and  exercised  a great  and  salutary  influence  on  sculpture  after  his 
death.  G-reat,  however,  as  were  his  merits,  he  was  far  surpassed  in  the  correct  imitation  of  nature, 
and  in  grace,  dexterity,  and  facility  in  ornamental  combination,  by  Lorenzo  G-hiberti,  who  was  one 
of  his  immediate  contemporaries. 

In  the  year  1401,  Florence,  under  an  essentially  democratic  form  of  government,  had  risen  to  be 
one  of  the  most  flourishing  cities  of  Europe.  In  this  civic  democracy  the  trades  were  distinguished 
as  guilds,  called  ‘^Arti,”  represented  by  deputies  (consoli).  The  Consuls  resolved  in  the  above- 
mentioned  year  to  raise  another  gate  of  bronze  to  the  Baptistery,  as  a pendant  to  that  of  Andrea 
Pisano,  which  had  been  previously  executed  in  a very  noble,  but  still  G-othic  style. 

The  SignoHa,  or  executive  government,  made  known  this  resolve  to  the  best  artists  of  Italy,  and 
a public  competition  was  opened.  Lorenzo  Ghiberti,  a native  of  Florence,  at  that  time  very  young 
(twenty-two),  ventured  on  the  trial,  and  with  two  others,  Brunelleschi  and  Donatello,  was  pronounced 
worthy.  These  two  last-named  artists  appear  to  have  voluntarily  retired  in  his  favour  ; and  in  twenty- 
three  years  from  that  date  the  gate  was  finished,  and  put  up.  The.  beauty  of  its  design  and  work- 
manship induced  the  Signoria  to  order  another  of  him,  which  was  ultimately  finished  about  the  year 
1444.  It  would  be  impossible  to  overrate  the  importance  of  this  work,  either  as  regards  its  historical 
influence  on  art  or  its  intrinsic  merit, — standing,  as  it  does,  unrivalled  by  any  similar  specimen  in 
any  age  for  excellence  of  design  and  workmanship.  The  ornament  (for  a portion  of  which  see  Plate 
LXXV.,  Fig.  3),  which  encloses  and  surrounds  the  panels,  is  worthy  of  the  most  careful  study. 
Lorenzo  Ghiberti  belonged  to  no  school,  neither  can  it  be  said  he  founded  one,  he  received  his 
education  from  his  father-in-law,  a goldsmith ; and  his  influence  on  Art  is  to  be  seen  rather  in  the 
homage  and  study  his  works  received  from  men  such  as  Buonarotti  and  Eaffaelle,  than  from  his 
formation  of  any  school  of  pupils.  He  died  in  his  native  city  at  a good  old  age,  in  the  year  1455. 
One  of  his  immediate  followers,  Donatello,  imparted  a life  and  masculine  vigour  to  the  art,  which,  in 
spite  of  all  their  beauty,  were  often  wanting  in  the  compositions  of  Ghiberti ; and  the  qualities  of  both 
these  artists  were  happily  united  in  the  person  of  Luca  della  Kobbia,  who,  during  his  long  life 
(which  extended  from  1400  to  1480),  executed  an  infinity  of  works,  the  ornamental  details  of  which 
were  carried  out  in  a style  of  the  freest  and  most  graceful  analogy  with  the  antique.  In  the  person 
of  Filippo  Brunelleschi  the  talents  of  the  sculptor  and  the  architect  were  combined.  The  former  are 
sufficiently  evinced  by  the  excellence  of  the  trial-piece  in  which  he  competed  with  Ghiberti  for  the 
execution  of  the  celebrated  gates  of  San  Giovanni  Battista ; and  the  latter,  by  his  magnificent 
Cathedral  of  Sta.  Maria  delle  Fiore  at  Florence.  This  combination  of  architectural  and  sculptur- 
esque ability  was,  indeed,  a distinguishing  feature  of  the  period.  Figures,  foliage,  and  conventional 
ornaments,  were  so  happily  blended  with  mouldings  and  other  structural  forms,  as  to  convey  the 
idea  that  the  whole  sprang  to  life  in  one  perfect  form  in  the  mind  of  the  artist  by  whom  the  work 
was  executed. 

A development  of  taste  coincident  with  that  noticeable  in  Tuscany  took  place  at  Naples,  Rome, 
Milan,  and  Venice.  At  Naples,  the  torch  that  was  lit  by  Massuccio  was  handed  on  by  Andrea  Ciccione, 
Bamboccio,  Monaco,  and  Amillo  Fiore. 

At  Rome,  the  opulence  of  the  princes,  and  the  great  works  undertaken  by  the  successive  pontiffs, 
attracted  to  the  Imperial  city  the  highest  procurable  ability;  and  hence  it  is,  that  in  the  various 
palaces  and  churches  fragments  of  exquisite  decorative  sculpture  are  still  to  be  met  with.  Bramante, 
Baldassare  Peruzzi,  and  Baccio  Pintelli  (of  whose  arabesques  on  the  exterior  of  the  Church  of  Sant’ 
Agostino,  one  of  the  earliest  buildings  of  the  pure  revival  executed  in  the  Imperial,  our  woodcuts 
give  some  elegant  examples),  and  even  the  great  Raffaelle  himself,  did  not  disdain  to  design  ornaments 

111 


Arabesques  designed  by 
Baccio  Pintelli,  for  the 
Church  of  Sant' Agostino,  Rome. 
112 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 

for  carvers,  of  the  purest  taste  and  most  exquisite 
fancy.  Of  the  perfection  attained  in  this  depart- 
ment of  art  by  the  last-named  artist,  the  celebrated 
wooden  stalls  of  the  choir  of  San  Pietro  dei  Casinensi, 
at  Perugia,  will  long  remain  unquestionable  evidence. 
The  carrying  out  of  these  carvings  by  Stefano  da 
Bergamo  does  full  justice  to  the  admirable  composi- 
tions of  Raffaelle. 

At  Milan,  the  important  works  of  the  Duomo, 
and  the  Certosa  at  Pavia,  created  a truly  remark- 
able school  of  art;  among  the  most  celebrated  mas- 


Panel  from  the  Piscina  of  the  High  Altar  of  the  Certosa,  Pavia. 


ters  of  which  may  be  noticed,  Fusina,  Solari,  Agrati, 
Amadeo,  and  Sacchi.  The  sculptor’s  talent  had  long 
been  traditional  in  that  locality,  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  these  artists  embodied  in  the  highest 
forms  the  lingering  traditions  of  the  Maestri  Goma- 
schi,  or  Freemasons,  of  Como ; from  whose  genius 
many  of  the  most  celebrated  buildings  of  the  middle 
ages  derived  their  highest  graces  of  adornment.  Of 


Panels  from  the  Piscina  of 
the  High  Altar  of  the 
Certosa,  Pavia. 


Arabesques  designed  by 
Baccio  Pintelli,  for  the 
Church  of  Sant’  Agostino,  Rome 


HENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


all  the  Lombard  Cinque-centists,  however,  the  highest  admiration  m\ist  he  reserved  for  Agostino  Buati, 
better  known  as  Bambaja,  and  his  pupil  Brambilla,  whose  exquisite  works  in  arabesque  at  the  Certosa 
must  ever  remain  marvels  of  execution.  Our  woodcuts,  selected  from  the  Piscina  of  the  High  Altar, 
furnish  some  idea  of  the  general  style  of  the  Pavian  arabesques. 

At  Venice,  the  first  great  names  which  call  for  notice  are  those  of  the  Lombardi  (Pietro,  Tullio, 
Giulio,  Sante,  and  Antonio),  through  whose  talents  that  city  was  adorned  with  its  most  famous  monu- 
ments. They  were  followed  by  Eiccio,  Bernardo,  and  Domenico  di  Mantua,  and  many  other  sculptors ; 
but  their  lesser  glories  are  altogether  eclipsed  by  those  of  the  great  Jacopo  Sansovino.  At  Lucca, 
Matteo  Civitale  (born  1435,  died  1501)  fully  maintained  the  reputation  of  the  period.  Eeturning  to 
Tuscany,  we  find,  towards  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  greatest  perfection  of  ornamental  sculp- 
ture, the  leading  characteristic  of  which,  however,  we  now  no  longer  find  to  be  the  sedulous  and  simple 

imitation  of  nature,  but  rather  a conventional  rendering  of  the  antique.  The  names  of  Mino  da  Fiesole 

the  greatest  of  the  celebrated  school  of  the  Fiesolani  — Benedetto  da  Majano,  and  Bernardo  Eossellini, 
bring  to  our  recollection  many  exquisite  monuments  which  abound  in  the  churches  of  Florence,  and  the 
other  principal  towns  of  the  Grand  Duchy.  These  artists  excelled  alike  in  wood,  in  stone,  and  in  marble, 
and  their  works  have  been  surpassed  in  this  style  of  art  only  by  those  of  their  predecessors  we  have 
already  named,  and  by  some  few  others,  their  contemporaries.  Of  these,  Andrea  Contucci,  better  known 
as  the  elder  Sansovino,  was  pre-eminent  in  his  art;  and  it  would  appear  impossible  to  carry  ornamental 
modelling  to  greater  perfection  than  he  has  exhibited  in  the  wonderful  monuments  which  form  the  pride 
of  the  Church  of  Sta.  Maria  del  Popolo,  at  Eome.  His  pupil,  Jacopo  Tatti,  who  subsequently  took  his 
master’s  name,  may  be  regarded  as  his  only  rival.  Of  him,  however,  more  hereafter. 


Ornameate  the  Pis-  Portions  of  Pilasters  from  the  Church  of  Sta.  Maria  doi  Mii-acoli,  Venice, 

cina  of  the  High  Altar 
of  the  Certosa,  Pavia. 


G G 


113 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


Having  thus  succinctly  traced  the  historical  succession  of  the  great  sculptors  of  Italy,  all  of  whom, 
it  must  constantly  be  borne  in  mind,  were  ornamentists  also,  we  proceed  io  point  out  some  few  of  those 
lessons  which  may,  as  we  conceive,  be  derived  from  a study  of  their  works  by  the  artist  and  art- 
workman.  One  of  the  most  peculiar  and  most  fascinating  qualities  of  the  best  Cinque-cento  ornament 
in  relief  is  the  skill  with  which  those  by  whom  it  was  wrought  availed  themselves  of  the  play  of  light 
and  shade  produced  by  infinite  variations  of  plane,  not  only  in  surfaces  parallel  to  the  grounds 
from  which  the  ornament  was  raised,  but  brought  to  a tangent  with  it  at  ever-varying  angles  of  impact. 

The  difference  in  effect  between  a scroll  of  the  volute  form,  in  which  the  relief  gradually  diminishes 
from  the  starting  of  the  volute  to  its  eye,  and  one  in  which  the  relief  is  uniform  throughout,  is  very 
great;  and  it  is  to  their  undeviating  preference  for  the  former  over  the  latter,  that  the  Cinque-cento 
artists  are  indebted  for  the  infallibly  pleasing  results  they  attained  alike,  in  their  simplest  and  most 
complicated  combinations  of  spiral  forms. 

This  refined  appreciation  of  delicate  shades  of  relief  in  sculpture  was  carried  to  its  greatest  per- 
fection by  Donatello,  whose  authority  in  matters  of  taste  was  held  in  the  highest  possible  esteem  by  the 
contemporary  Florentines,  and  whose  example  was  followed  with  respect  and  devotion  by  all  classes 
of  artists.  Not  only  was  he  the  first  to  practise  the  hassissimo  relievo^  in  which  the  effect  of  pro- 
jection and  of  rounded  modelling  is  obtained  within  apparently  impracticable  limits  of  relief,  but  he 
was  the  first  to  combine  that  style  of  work  with  mezzo  and  alto  relievo ; thus  maintaining  an  almost 
pictorial  division  of  his  subject  into  several  planes.  Too  good  a master 
of  his  craft  to  ever  overstep  the  special  conventions  of  sculpture, 

Donatello  enriched  the  Florentine  practice  of  the  Cinque-centisti  with 
many  elements  derived  from  the  sister  art  of  Painting.  These  inven- 
tions — for  they  are  almost  worthy  of  the  name,  though  arrived  at 
only  through  a sedulous  study  of  the  Antique — were  adopted  and  imi- 
tated with  the  greatest  avidity  by  the  ornamentists  of  the  period ; and 
hence  we  may  trace  some  of  the  most  peculiar  and  striking  technical 
excellence  of  the  best  Kenaissance  carving  and  modelling. 

Ultimately,  and  at  its  acme  of  perfection,  this  system  of  regular 
arrangement  of  ornament  in  planes  was  so  ingeniously  managed  in  rela- 
tion to  light  and  shade,  that,  viewed  from  a distance,  the  relievo  pre- 
sented only  certain  points  symmetrically  disposed  with  reference  to 
some  dominant  geometrical  figures.  An  approach  of  a few  paces  served 
to  bring  to  the  sense  of  vision  the  lines  and  figures  connecting  the 
points  of  greatest  salience.  A yet  nearer  approach  revealed  the  leafage 
and  delicate  tendrils  necessary  to  convey  a tangible  idea  of  the  type 
of  nature  selected  for  convention,  while  no  inspection  could  be  too 
close  to  test  the  artist’s  perfect  appreciation  of  the  refinements  of  sur- 
face texture.  The  “ cisellatura,”  or  ‘‘  chasing,”  of  the  best  Italian  Cinque- 
cento  ornament,  such  as  may  be  seen  in  the  Church  of  the  Miracoli, 

Venice  (Figs.  1,  8,  9,  Plate  LXXIV.),  by  the  Lombardi ; in  the  Church 
of  Sta.  Maria  del  Popolo  (Fig.  1,  Plate  LXXVI.),  Rome,  by  Sansovino; 
in  the  gates  of  the  Baptistery,  Florence  (Fig.  3,  Plate  LXXV.),  by 
G-hiberti ; in  the  carvings  of  San  Michele  di  Murano  (Figs.  4,  6, 

Plate  LXXIV.) ; the  Scuola  di  San  Marco  (Fig.  2,  Plate  LXXIV.) ; 

Small  PilasteraofMar-  del  Miracoli,  Venice, 

ble  Staircase  in  the  Tullio  Lombardo,  a.d. 

Church  of  Sta.  Maria  1485,  about. 

114 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


the  Scala  dei  Giganti  (Figs.  5,  7,  Plate  LXXIV.) ; and  other  buildings  at  Venice,  is  beyond  al)  praise. 
The  fibres  of  a leaf  or  tendril  are  never  misdirected,  nor  is  Nature’s  tendency  to  grace  in  growth  per- 
verted or  misapprehended.  Smoothness  and  detail  are  never  added  excepting  where  they  have  some 
specific  function  to  perform ; and  while  labour  is  so  prodigally  bestowed  as  to  show  that  every  additional 
touch  was  a labour  of  love,  it  is  never  thrown  away,  as  is  too  often  the  case  in  the  present  day,  in 
converting  those  portions  of  a design  which  should  l)e  secondaries  or  tertiaries  in  point  of  interest  into 
primaries. 

In  the  hands  of  artists  less  profoundly  impressed  than  was  Donatello  with  a sense  of  the  just  limit 
of  convention  in  sculpture,  the  importation  of  pictorial  elements  into  bas-relief  soon  degenerated  into 
confusion.  Even  the  great  Ghiberti  marred  the  effect  of  many  of  his  most  graceful  compositions  by 
the  introduction  of  perspective,  and  accessories  copied  too  directly  from  nature.  In  many  of  the  orna- 
mental sculptures  of  the  Certosa  the  fault  is  exaggerated  until  monuments,  which  should  impress  the 
spectator  with  grave  admiration  at  their  beauty  and  dignity,  serve  only  to  amuse  him  — resembling 
dolls’  houses  peopled  by  fairies,  decked  with  garlands,  hung  with  tablets,  and  fancifully  overgrown  with 
foliage,  rather  than  serious  works  of  Art  commemorating  the  dead,  or  dedicated  to  sacred  uses. 
Another  reproach  which  may  with  justice  be  addressed  to  many 
such  monuments  is  the  incongruity  of  the  association  of  ideas  con- 
nected with  their  purport,  and  those  suggested  by  the  ornaments 
displayed  in  their  friezes,  pilasters,  panels,  spandrils,  and  other  en- 
riched features.  Tragic  and  comic  masques,  musical  instruments, 
semi-Priapic  terminals,  antique  altars,  tripods,  and  vessels  of  libation, 
dancing  amorini,  and  hybrid  marine  monsters,  and  chimeras,  har- 
monise but  ill  with  monuments  reared  in  consecrated  edifices  or  dedi- 
cated to  religious  rites.  This  fault,  of  the  confusion  of  things  sacred 
and  profane,  may  not,  however,  be  altogether  justly  laid  upon  the 
shoulders  of  the  artists  of  the  Renaissance,  whose  works  served  but 
to  reflect  the  dominant  spirit  of  an  age  in  which  the  revival  of  mytho- 
logic  symbolism  was  but  a protest  against  the  hampering  trammels 
of  ascetic  tradition  erected  into  dogmatism  under  the  rulers  of  the 
East,  and  endorsed  by  the  Church  during  those  centuries  when  its  as- 
cendancy over  an  ignorant  and  turbulent  population  was  at  its  greatest 
height.  The  minds  of  even  the  most  religious  men  were  imbued 
with  such  incongruous  associations  in  the  fourteenth  century ; and  it 
is  not  necessary  to  go  farther  than  the  “ Commedia”  of  Dante,  which 
all  the  world  of  literature  has  designated  as  the  Divine  Epic,  to  re- 
cognise the  tangled  skeins  of  Gothic  and  classical  inspiration  with 
which  the  whole  texture  of  contemporary  literature  was  interwoven. 

To  the  architect,  the  study  of  Italian  Cinque-cento  ornament  in 
relief  is  of  no  less  utility  than  it  can  possibly  be  to  the  sculptor, 
since  in  no  style  has  ornament  ever  been  better  spaced  out,  or 
Small  Pilaster  of  arranged  to  contrast  more  agreeably  with  the  direction  of  the  ad- 


Jviarble  Staircase 


Small  Pilaster  of  the  Giant's 


...  the  Church  of  laceut  architectural  lines  by  which  it  is  bounded  and  kept  in  subor-  staircase.  Ducai  Palace, 

Sta.  Maria,  dei  ^ Venice,  _hy  Bcndetto  and 

Miracoh,  Venice.  d.ination.  Rarely,  if  ever,  is  an  ornament  suitable  for  a horizontal  Domemco  da  Mantua, 
position  placed  in  a vertical  one,  or  vice  versa;  and  rarely,  if  ever,  are  the  proportions  of  the  orna- 
ments and  the  mouldings,  or  the  styles  and  rails,  by  which  regularity  and  symmetry  are  given  to  the 
whole,  at  variance  with  one  another.  In  Plates  LXXIV.,  LXXV.,  and  LXXVL,  are  collected  a series 


115 


EENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


of  specimens,  in  the  majority  of  which  gracefulness  of  line,  and  a highly  artificial,  though  apparently 
natural,  distribution  of  the  ornament  upon  its  field,  are  the  prevailing  characteristics.  The  Lombardi, 
in  their  works  at  the  Church  of  Sta.  Maria  dei  Miracoli,  Venice  (Plate  LXXIV.,  Figs.  1,  8,  9 ; Plate 
LXXVI.,  Fig.  2);  Andrea  Sansovino  at  Eome  (Plate  LXXVI.,  Fig.  1);  and  Domenico  and  Bernardino 
di  Mantua,  at  Venice  (Plate  LXXIV.,  Figs.  5 and  7),  attained  the  highest  perfection  in  these  respects. 
At  a subsequent  period  to  that  in  which  they  flourished,  the  ornaments  were  generally  wrought  in  more 
uniformly  high  relief,  and  the  stems  and  tendrils  were  thickened,  and  not  so  uniformly  tapered,  the 
accidental  growth  and  play  of  nature  were  less  sedulously  imitated,  the  field  of  the  panel  was  more 
fully  covered  with  enrichments,  and  its  whole  aspect  made 
more  bustling  and  less  refined.  The  sculptor’s  work  as- 
serted itself  in  competition  with  the  architect’s ; the  latter 
in  self-defence,  and  to  keep  the  sculpture  down,  soon  be- 
gan to  make  his  mouldings  heavy : 
and  a more  ponderous  style  altogether 
crept  into  fashion.  Of  this  tendency 
to  'plethora  in  ornament  we  already 
perceive  indications  in  much  of  the 
G-enoese  work  represented  in  Plate 
LXXV,,  Figs.  1,  2,  4,  5,  8,  9,  and  11  ; 
and  in  Plate  LXXVI.,  Figs.  4,  5,  7,  8, 
and  10.  Fig.  6 in  the  last-mentioned 
plate,  from  the  celebrated  Martinengo 
Tomb,  at  Brescia,  also  clearly  exhibits 
this  tendency  to  filling  up. 

In  the  art  of  painting,  a move- 
ment took  place  concurrent  with  that 
we  have  thus  briefly  noticed  in  sculp- 
ture. Giotto,  the  pupil  of  Cimabue, 
threw  off  the  shackles  of  Greek  tra- 
dition, and  gave  his  whole  heart  to 
nature.  His  ornament,  like  that  of 
his  master,  consisted  of  a combination 
painted  mosaic  work,  interlacing 

Maria  dei  Miracoli,  Venice.  , , . p , . „ 

bends,  and  tree  rendering  of  the  acan- 
thus.  In  his  work  at  Assisi,  Naples,  Florence,  and  Padua,  he  has  invariably  shown  a graceful  appre- 
hension of  the  balance  essential  to  be  maintained  between  mural  pictures  and  mural  ornaments,  both 
in  quantity,  distribution,  and  relative  colour.  These  right  principles  of  balance  were  very  generally 
understood  and  adopted  during  the  fourteenth  century;  and  Simone  Memmi,  Taddeo  Bartolo,  the 
Orcagnas,  Pietro  di  Lorenzo,  Spinello  Aretino,  and  many  others,  were  admitted  masters  of  mural  em- 
bellishmeut.  That  rare  student  of  nature  in  the  succeeding  century,  Benozzo  Gozzoli,  was  a no  less 
diligent  student  of  antiquity,  as  may  be  recognised  in  the  architectural  backgrounds  to  his  pictures  in 
the  Campo  Santo,  and  in  the  noble  arabesques  which  divide  his  pictures  at  San  Gimignano.  Andrea 
Mantegna,  however,  it  was  who  moved  painting  as  Donatello  had  moved  sculpture,  and  that  not  in 
figures  alone,  hut  in  every  variety  of  ornament  borrowed  from  the  antique.  The  magnificent  cartoons 
we  are  so  fortunate  as  to  possess  of  his  at  Hampton  Court,  even  to  their  minutest  decorative  details 
might  have  been  drawn  by  an  ancient  Roman.  Towards  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  style 
' 116 


Portion  of  a Doorway  in  ono  of  the  Palaces  of  the  Dorias  near  the 
Church  of  San  Mattoo,  Genoa. 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


of  polychromy  took  a fresk  and  marked  turn,  the  peculiarities  of  which,  in  connexion  with  arabesque 
and  grotesque  ornament,  we  reserve  for  a subsequent  notice. 

Turning  from  Italy  to  France,  which  was  the  first  of  the  European  nations  to  light  its  torch  at 
the  fire  of  Renaissance  Art,  which  had  been  kindled  in  Italy,  we  find  that  the  warlike  expeditions 
of  Charles  VIIT,  and  Louis  XII.  infected  the  nobility  of  France  with  an  admiration  for  the  splendours 
of  Art  met  with  by  them  at  Florence,  Rome,  and  Milan.  The  first  clear  indication  of  the  coming 
change  might  have  been  seen  (for  it  was  unfortunately  destroyed  in  1793)  in  the  monument  erected 
in  1499  to  the  memory  of  the  first-named  monarch,  around  which  female  figures,  in  gilt  bronze,  of 
the  Virtues,  were  grouped  completely  in  the  Italian  manner.  In  the  same  year,  the  latter  sovereign 
invited  the  celebrated  Fra  Griocondo,  architect,  of  Verona,  friend  and  fellow  - student  of  the  elder 
Aldus,  and  first  good  editor  of  Vitruvius,  to  visit  France.  He  remained  there  from  1499  to  1506, 
and  designed  for  his  royal  master  two  bridges  over  the  Seine,  and  probably  many  minor  works  which 
have  now  perished.  The  magnificent  Chateau  de  Graillon,  begun  by  Cardinal  d’Amboise  in  the  year 
1502,  has  been  frequently  ascribed  to  him,  but,  according  to  Emeric  David  and  other  French  archgeo- 
logists, upon  insufficient  grounds.  The  internal  evidence  is  entirely  in  favour  of  a French  origin, 
and  against  Griocondo,  who  was  more  of  an  engineer  and  student  than  an  ornamental  artist.  Moreover, 
intermingled  with  much  that  is  very  fairly  classical,  is  so  much  Burgundian  work,  that  it  would  be 
almost  as  unjust  to  Giocondo  to  ascribe  it  to  him,  as  to  France  to  deprive  her  of  the  credit  of  having 
produced,  by  a French  artist,  her  first  great  Renaissance  monument.  The  whole  of  the  accounts 
which  were  published  by  M.  Deville  in  1850,  set  the  question  almost  entirely  at  rest;  for  from  them 
we  learn  that  Guillaume  Senault  was  architect  and  master  mason.  It  is,  however,  just  possible  that 
Giocondo  may  have  been  consulted  by  the  Cardinal  upon  the  general  plan,  and  that  Senault  and 
his  companions,  for  the  most  part  French,  may  have  carried  out  the  details.  The  principal  Italian 
by  whom,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  style  some  of  the  most  classical  of  the  arabesques  were  wrought, 
was  Bertrand  de  Meynal,  who  had  been  commissioned  to  carry  from  Genoa  the  beautiful  Venetian 
fountain,  so  well  known  as  the  Vasque  du  Chateau  de  Gaillon,  now  in  the  Louvre,  and  from  which 
(Plate  LXXXI.,  Figs.  27,  30,  34,  38)  we  have  engraved  some  elegant  ornaments.  Colin  Castille,  who 
especially  figures  in  the  list  of  art-workmen  as  “ tailleur  a 1’ antique,”  may  very  possibly  have  been 
a Spaniard  who  had  studied  in  Rome.  In  all  essential  particulars,  the  portions  of  Renaissance  work 
not  Burgundian  in  style  are  very  pure,  and  differ  scarcely  at  all  from  good  Italian  examples. 

It  was,  however,  in  the  monument  of  Louis  XIL,  now  at  St.  Denis,  near  Paris,  and  one  of  the 
richest  of  the  sixteenth  century,  that  symmetry  of  architectural  disposition  was  for  the  first  time 
united  to  masterly  execution  of  detail  in  France.  This  beautiful  work  of  Art  was  executed  between 
1518  and  1530,  under  the  orders  of  Francis  I.,  by  Jean  Juste  of  Tours.  Twelve  semicirculaj  arches 
inclose  the  bodies  of  the  royal  pair,  represented  naked ; under  every  arch  is  placed  an  apostle ; and 
at  the  four  corners  are  four  large  statues  of  Justice,  Strength,  Prudence,  and  Wisdom  ; the  whole 
being  surmounted  by  statues  of  the  King  and  Queen  on  their  knees.  The  bas-reliefs  represent  the 
triumphal  entry  of  Louis  into  Genoa,  and  the  battle  of  Aguadel,  where  he  signalised  himself  by 
his  personal  valour. 

The  monument  of  Louis  XII.  has  been  often  ascribed  to  Trebatti  (Paul  Ponee),  but  it  was  finished 
before  he  came  to  France,  as  the  following  extract  from  the  royal  records  proves.  Francis  I.  addresses 
the  Cardinal  Duprat : — “ H est  deu  a Jehan  Juste  mon  sculteur  ordinaire,  porteur  de  ceste  la 
somme  de  400  escus,  restans  des  1200  que  je  lui  avoie  pardevant  or  donnez  pour  la  menage  et  conduite 
de  la  ville  de  Tours  au  lieu  de  St.  Denis  en  France,  de  la  sculpture  de  marbre  de  feuz  Roy  Loys  et 
Royne  Anne,  &c.  Novembre  1531.” 

Not  less  worthy  of  study  than  the  tomb  of  Louis  XIL,  and  executed  at  the  same  period,  are  the 


H H 


117 


Portions  of  the  Tomb  of  Francis  II.,  Duke  of  Brittany,  and  his  wife,  Mai-guerite  de  Foix,  erected  by  Anne  of  Brittany  in  the  Carmelite  Church,  at  Nantes, 

by  Michel  Colombe,  a.d.  1607. 

and  beauty,  the  figures  animated  and  natural,  the  drapery  free  and  graceful,  and  the  heads  full  of 
life;  but  the  arabesque  ornaments,  which  almost  entirely  cover  the  projecting  parts  of  the  pilasters, 
friezes,  and  mouldings  of  the  base,  are,  perhaps,  the  most  beautiful  portions ; they  are  very  diminutive 
118 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


in  size ; the  largest  of  the  groups,  which  are  those  which  cover  the  pilasters,  being  only  eight  or  nine 
inches  in  breadth.  Though  so  minute,  the  spirit  of  the  carving,  and  variety  of  devices  in  these  orna- 
ments, are  marvellous.  Masses  of  foliage,  branches  of  trees,  birds,  fountains,  bundles  of  arms,  satyrs, 

military  ensigns,  and  tools  belonging  to  various  arts,  are  arranged  with  much  taste.  The  F.  crowned 

the  monogram  of  Francis  I. — is  conspicuous  in  these  arabesques,  and  the  dates  of  the  years  1525,  1527, 
and  1529,  are  traced  upon  the  draperies. 

The  tomb  which  Anne  of  Brittany  caused  to  be  erected  to  the  memory  of  her  father  and  mother 
was.  finished  and  placed  in  the  choir  of  the  Carmelite  Church  at  Nantes  on  the  1st  of  January,  1507. 
It  is  the  master-piece  of  an  artist  of  great  ability  and  riaivete — Michel  Colombe.  The  ornamental 
details  are  peculiarly  elegant.  The  monument  to  Cardinal  d’Amboise,  in  the  Cathedral  at  Kouen, 
was  begun  in  the  year  1515,  under  Eoulant  le  Boux,  master  mason  of  the  Cathedral.  No  Italian 
appears  to  have  assisted  in  its  execution,  and  we  may,  therefore,  fairly  regard  it  as  an  expression 
of  the  vigour  with  which  the  Benaissance  virus  had  indoctrinated  the  native  artists. 

It  was  in  1530  and  1531  that  F’rancis  I.  invited  Bosso  and  Primaticcio  into  France,  and  those 
distinguished  artists  were  speedily  followed  by  Nicolo  del’  Abbate,  Luca,  Penni,  Cellini,  Trebatti,  and 
Girolamo  della  Bobbia.  With  their  advent,  and  the  foundation  of  the  school  at  Fontainebleau,  new 
elements  were  introduced  into  the  French  Benaissance,  to  which  we  shall  subsequently  advert. 

It  would  exceed  the  limits  of  our  present  sketch  to  enter  fully  into  the  historical  details  con- 
nected with  the  art  of  wood-carving.  It  may  suffice  to  point  out  that  every  ornamental  feature 
available  for  stone,  marble,  or  bronze,  was  rapidly  transferred  also  to  wood -work,  and  that  at  no 
period  of  the  history  of  Industrial  Art  has  the  talent  of  the  sculptor  been  more  gracefully  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  enrichment  of  sumptuous  furniture.  Our  Plates,  Nos.  LXXXI.  and  LXXXII., 
furnish  brilliant  evidence  of  the  justice  of  our  remarks  on  this  head.  The  attentive  student,  how- 
ever, as  he  goes  over  them,  will  be  unable  to  avoid  perceiving  a gradual  withdrawing  from  the 
original  foliated  ornament  which  formed  the  stock  in  trade  of  the  early  Benaissance  artists.  He  will 
next  notice  a heaping  up  of  various  objects  and  “ capricci,”  derived  from  the  antique,  accompanied 
by  a fulness  of  projection  and  slight  tendency  to  heaviness;  and  then,  finally,  he  will  recognise 
the  general  adoption  of  a particular  set  of  forms  differing  from  the  Italian,  and  altogether  national, 
such  as  the  conventional  volute  incised  with  small  square  or  oblong  indentations  (Plate  LXXXI.  Figs.  17 
and  20),  and  the  medallion  heads  (Plate  LXXXI.  Figs.  1 and  17). 

The  dawning  rays  of  the  coming  revival  of  Art  in  France  can  scarcely  be  traced  in  the 
painted  glass  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  ornaments,  canopies,  foliage,  and  inscriptions,  are 
generally  flamboyant  and  angular  in  character,  although  freely  and  crisply  made  out,  and  the  figures 
are  influenced  by  the  prevailing  style  of  drawing.  The  glass,  although  producing  a pleasing  effect, 
is  much  thinner — especially  the  blue — than  that  of  the  thirteenth  century.  An  immense  number 
of  windows  were  executed  during  this  epoch,  and  specimens  are  to  be  found  more  or  less  perfect 
in  almost  every  large  church  in  France.  St.  Ouen,  at  Bouen,  has  some  fine  figures  upon  a white  quarry 
ground  in  the  clerstory  windows ; and  good  examples  of  the  glass  of  the  century  will  be  found  in 
St.  Gervais  at  Paris,  and  Notre  Dame  at  Chalons-sur-Mame. 

Many  improvements  were  introduced  into  the  art  at  the  epoch  of  the  Benaissance.  The  first 
masters  were  employed  to  make  cartoons ; enamel  was  used  to  give  depth  to  the  colours  without 
losing  the  richness,  and  much  more  white  was  employed.  Many  of  the  windows  are  very  little  more 
than  grisailles,  as  those  designed  by  Jean  Cousin  for  the  Sainte  Chapelle  at  Vincennes  ; one  of  those 
representing  the  angel  sounding  the  fourth  trumpet  is  admirable  both  in  composition  and  drawing. 
The  Cathedral  of  Auch  also  contains  some  exceedingly  fine  examples  of  the  work  of  Arneaud  Demole ; 
Beauvais  also  possesses  a great  deal  of  the  glass  of  this  period,  especially  a very  fine  Jesse  window, 

119 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 

the  work  of  Enguerand  le  Prince ; the  heads  are  grand,  and  the  foses  of  the  figures  call  to  mind 
the  works  of  Albert  Purer. 

The  grisailles,  which  ornamented  the  windows  in  the  houses  of  the  nobility,  and  even  of  the 
bourgeoisie,  although  small,  were  executed  with  an  admirable  delicacy,  and  in  drawing  and  grouping 
leave  little  to  be  desired. 

Toward  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  art  began  to  decline,  the  numerous  glass-painters 
found  themselves  without  employment,  and  the  celebrated  Bernard  de  Palissy,  who  had  been  brought 
up  to  the  trade,  left  it  to  engage  in  another  presenting  greater  difficulties,  but  which  eventually 
secured  him  the  highest  reputation.  To  him,  however,  we  are  indebted  for  the  charming  grisailles 
epresenting  the  story  of  Cupid  and  Psyche,  from  the  designs  of  Raffaelle,  which  formerly  decorated 
the  Chateau  of  Ecouen,  the  residence  of  his  great  patron  the  Constable  Montmorency. 

Renaissance  ornament  penetrated  into  Germany  at  an  early  period,  but  was  absorbed  into  the 
hearts  of  the  people  but  slowly,  until  the  spread  of  books  and  engravings  quickened  its  general 
acceptation.  From  an  early  period  there  had  been  a steady  current  of  artists  leaving  Germany  and 
Flanders  to  study  in  the  great  Italian  ateliers.  Among  them,  men  like  Roger  of  Bruges,  who  spent 
much  of  his  life  in  Italy,  and  died  in  1464, — Hemskerk,  and  Albert  Purer,  more  especially  influenced 
their  countrymen.  The  latter,  who  in  many  of  his  engravings  showed  a perfect  apprehension  of  the 
conditions  of  Italian  design,  leaning  now  to  the  Gothic  manner  of  his  master  Wohlgemuth,  and  now 
to  the  Eaflaellesque  simplicity  of  Marc’  Antonio.  The  spread  of  the  engravings  of  the  latter,  however, 
in  Germany,  unquestionably  conduced  to  the  formation  of  the  taste  of  men  who  like  Peter  Vischer 
first  brought  Italian  plastic  art  into  fashion  in  Germany.  Even  at  its  best  the  Renaissance  of 
Germany  is  impure — her  industrious  affection  for  difficulties  of  the  hand,  rather  than  of  the  head, 
soon  led  her  into  crinkum-crankums ; and  strap- work,  jewelled  forms,  and  complicated  monsters,  rather 
animated  than  graceful,  took  the  place  of  the  refined  elegance  of  the  early  Italian  and  French 
arabesques. 


Araboaqyc  by  Theodor  de  Bry,  one  of  the  “Pe:ita  Maltros”  of  Germany  (160SX  in  imitation  of  Italian  work,  but 
introducing  strap-work,  caricature,  and  iewelled  forms. 


It  may  be  well  now  to  turn  from  the  Fine  to  the  Industrial  Arts,  and  to  trace  the  manifestation 
of  the  revival  in  the  designs  of  contemporary  manufactures.  From  the  unchanging  and  unchangeable 
nature  of  vitreous  and  ceramic  products,  no  historical  evidence  of  style  can  be  more  complete  and 
120 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


satisfactory  than  that  which  they  afford,  and  hence  we  have  devoted  three  entire  Plates  (Nos. 
LXXVIII.,  LXXIX.,  and  LXXX.)  to  their  illustration.  The  majority  of  the  specimens  thereon 
represented  have  been  selected  from  the  ‘‘Majolica”  of  Italy,  on  which  interesting  ware  and  its 
ornamentation  we  proceed  to  offer  a few  remarks. 

The  art  of  glazing  pottery  appears  to  have  been  introduced  into  Spain  and  the  Balearic  Isles  by 
the  Moors,  by  whom  it  had  long  been  known  and  used  in  the  form  of  coloured  tiles  for  the  decoration 
of  their  buildings.  The  earthenware  called  “majolica”  is  believed  to  derive  its  name  from  the  Island 
of  Majorca,  whence  the  manufacture  of  glazed  pottery  is  supposed  to  have  found  its  way  into  Central 
Italy;  and  this  belief  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  of  the  earliest  Italian  ware  being  ornamented  with 
geometrical  patterns  and  trefoil-shaped  “foliations”  of  Saracenic  character  (Plates  LXXIX.  and 
LXXX.,  Figs.  31  and  13).  It  was  first  used  by  introducing  coloured  concave  tiles  among  brickwork, 
and  later  in  the  form  of  encaustic  flooring.  The  manufacture  of  this  ware  was  extensively  carried  on 
between  1450  and  1700,  in  the  towns  of  Nocera,  Arezzo,  Citta  de  Castillo,  Forli,  Faenza  (whence 
comes  fayence),  Florence,  Spello,  Perugia,  Deruta,  Bologna,  Eimini,  Ferrara,  Pesaro,  Fermignano, 
Castel  Durante,  Gubbio,  Urbino,  and  Kavenna,  and  also  at  many  places  in  the  Abruzzi ; but  Pesaro 
is  admitted  to  be  the  first  town  in  which  it  attained  any  celebrity.  It  was  at  first  called 
or  “half”  majolica,  and  was  usually  made  in  the  form  of  thick  clumsy  plates,  many  of  large  size. 
They  are  of  a dingy  grey  colour,  and  often  have  a dull  yellow  varnish  at  the  back.  The  texture  is 
coarse  and  gritty,  but  the  golden  and  prismatic  lustre  is  now  and  then  seen,  though  they  are  more 
frequently  of  a pearly  hue.  This  “half”  majolica  is  believed  by  Passeri  and  others  to  have  been 
made  in  the  fifteenth  century;  and  it  was  not  until  after  that  time  that  the  manufacture  of  “fine” 
majolica  almost  entirely  superseded  it. 

A mode  of  glazing  pottery  was  also  discovered  by  Lucca  della  Robbia,  who  was  born  at  Florence 
in  1399.  It  is  said  that  he  used  for  this  purpose  a mixture  of  antimony,  tin,  and  other  mineral 
substances,  applied  as  a varnish  to  the  surface  of  the  beautiful  terra-cotta  statues  and  bas-reliefs 
modelled  by  him.  The  secret  of  this  varnish  remained  in  the  inventor’s  family  till  about  1550,  when 
it  was  lost  at  the  death  of  the  last  member  of  it.  «Attempts  have  been  made  at  Florence  to  revive 
the  manufacture  of  the  Robbian  ware,  but  with  small  success,  owing  to  the  great  difliculties  attending 
it.  The  subjects  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  Della  Robbia  are  chiefly  religious,  to  which  the  pure  glistening 
white  of  the  figures  is  well  adapted;  the  eyes  are  blackened  to  heighten  the  expression,  and  the  white 
figures  well  relieved  by  the  deep  blue  ground.  Wreaths  of  flowers  and  fruits  in  their  natural  tints 
were  introduced  by  the  followers  of  Della  Robbia,  by  some  of  whom  the  costumes  were  coloured, 
whilst  the  flesh  parts  were  allowed  to  remain  unglazed.  Passeri  claims  the  discovery  of  this  coloured 
glaze  at  a still  earlier  date  for  Pesaro,  where  the  manufacture  of  earthenware  was  carried  on  in  the 
fourteenth  century ; but  though  the  art  of  combining  it  with  colour  may  have  been  known  at  that 
early  time,  it  had  not  attained  much  celebrity  until  1462,  -when  Matteo  di  Raniere  of  Gagli  and 
Ventura  di  Maestro  Simone  dei  Piccolomini  of  Siena  established  themselves  at  Pesaro,  for  the  purpose 
of  carrying  on  the  manufacture  of  earthenware  already  existing  there;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that 
their  attention  was  attracted  by  the  works  of  Della  Robbia,  who  had  been  employed  by  Sigismond 
Pandolfo  Malatesta  at  Rimini.  Some  confusion  appears  to  have  arisen  with  respect  to  the  precise 
process  invented  by  Della  Robbia,  and  looked  upon  by  himself  and  his  family  as  the  really  valuable 
secret.  We  feel  little  doubt  that  it  consisted  rather  in  the  tempering  and  firing  of  the  clay  to  enable 
it  to  burn  large  masses  truly  and  thoroughly  than  in  the  protecting  glaze,  about  which  there  appears 
to  have  been  very  little  novelty  or  necessity  for  concealment. 

Prismatic  lustre  and  a brilliant  and  transparent  white  glaze  were  the  qualities  chiefly  sought  for 
in  the  “fine’  majolica  and  Gubbian  ware;  the  metallic  lustre  was  given  by  preparations  of  lead, 

1 1 121 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


silver,  copper,  and  gold,  and  in  this  the  Guhbian  ware  surpassed  all  others.  The  dazzling  white  glaze 
was  obtained  by  a varnish  made  from  tin,  into  which,  when  half-baked,  the  pottery  was  plunged ; the 
designs  were  painted  before  this  was  dry,  and,  as  it  immediately  absorbed  the  colours,  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  that  we  so  frequently  find  inaccuracies  in  the  drawings. 

A plate  of  the  early  Pesaro  ware  in  the  Museum  at  the  Hague  bears  a cipher,  the  letters  of 
which  appear  to  be  C.  H.  0.  N.”  Another,  mentioned  by  Pungileoni,  has  “ G.  A.  T.”  interlaced, 
forming  a mark.  These  instances  are  rare,  as  the  artists  of  these  plates  seldom  signed  their  works. 

The  subjects  generally  chosen  were  saints  and  historical  events  from  Scripture;  but  the  former 
were  preferred,  and  continued  in  favour  till  the  sixteenth  century,  when  they  were  displaced  by  scenes 
from  Ovid  and  Virgil,  though  designs  from  Scripture  were  still  in  use.  The  subject  was  generally 
briefly  described  with  a reference  to  the  text  in  blue  letters  at  the  back  of  the  plate.  The  fashion 
of  ornamenting  the  ware  with  the  portraits  of  historical,  classical,  and  living  persons,  with  the 
names  attached  to  each,  was  of  rather  later  date  than  the  sacred  themes.  All  these  subjects  are 
painted  in  a flat,  tame  manner,  with  little  attempt  at  shading,  and  are  surrounded  by  a kind  of  rude 
Saracenic  ornament,  differing  completely  from  the  Rafifaellesque  arabesques,  which,  in  the  latter  years 
of  Guidobaldo’s  reign,  were  so  much  in  fashion.  The  plates  full  of  coloured  fruits  in  relief  were 
probably  taken  from  the  Robbian  ware. 

The  decline  of  this  manufacture  caused  by  the  Duke’s  impaired  income  and  the  want  of  interest 
in  the  manufacture  felt  by  his  successor,  was  hastened  by  the  introduction  of  Oriental  china  and 
the  increased  use  of  plate  in  the  higher  and  more  wealthy  classes;  still,  though  historical  subjects 
were  laid  aside,  the  majolica  was  ornamented  with  well-executed  designs  of  birds,  trophies,  flowers, 
musical  instruments,  sea  monsters,  &c.,  but  these  became  gradually  more  and  more  feeble  in 
colouring  and  execution  till,  at  last,  their  place  was  taken  by  engravings  from  Sadeler  and  other 
Flemings.  From  all  these  causes  the  manufacture  fell  rapidly  to  decay  in  spite  of  the  endeavours 
made  to  revive  it  by  Cardinal  Legate  Stoppani. 

The  “fine”  majolica  of  Pesaro  attained  its  greatest  perfection  during  the  reign  of  Guidobaldo 
II.,  who  held  his  court  in  that  city,  and  g»eatly  patronised  its  potteries.  From  that  time,  the 
majolica  of  Pesaro  so  closely  resembled  that  of  Urbino,  that  it  is  not  possible  to  distinguish  the 
manufacture  of  the  two  places  from  each  other,  the  texture  of  the  ware  being  alike,  and  the  same 
artists  being  often  employed  in  both  potteries.  As  early  as  1486  the  Pesaro  ware  was  considered 
so  superior  to  all  other  Italian  ware,  that  a protection  was  granted  to  it  by  the  lord  of  Pesaro 
of  that  date,  not  only  forbidding,  under  penalty  of  fine  and  confiscation,  the  importation  of  any 
kind  of  foreign  pottery,  but  ordering  that  all  foreign  vases  should  be  sent  out  of  the  state 
within  eight  days.  This  protection  was  confirmed,  in  1532,  by  Francesco  Maria  I.  In  1569,  a 
patent  for  twenty-five  years,  with  a penalty  of  500  scudi  for  infringing  it,  was  granted  by 
Guidobaldo  II,  to  Giacomo  Lanfranco  of  Pesaro,  for  his  inventions  in  the  construction  of  vases 
wrought  in  relief,  of  great  size  and  antique  forms,  and  his  application  of  gold  to  them.  In 
addition  to  this,  his  father  and  himself  were  freed  from  all  taxes  and  imposts. 

From  its  variety  and  novelty,  majolica  was  generally  chosen  by  the  lords  of  the  Duchy  for  their 
presents  to  foreign  princes.  In  1478,  Costanza  Sforza  sent  to  Sixtus  IV.  certain  “vasa  fictilia;”  and 
in  a letter  from  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent  to  Robert  Malatista,  he  returns  thanks  for  a present  of  a 
similar  kind.  A service  painted  by  Orazio  Fontana  from  designs  by  Taddeo  Zuccaro,  was  presented 
by  Guidobaldo  to  Philip  II.  of  Spain.  A double  service  was  also  given  by  him  to  Charles  V.  The 
set  of  jars  presented  to  the  Treasury  of  Loreto  by  Francesco  Maria  II.,  were  made  by  the  order  of 
Guidobaldo  II.,  for  the  use  of  his  own  laboratory ; some  of  them  are  ornamented  with  a portrait,  or 
subject  of  some  other  description,  and  all  are  labelled  with  the  name  of  a drug  or  mixture.  The 
122 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


colours  of  these  jars  are  blue,  green,  and  yeUow;  about  380  of  them  still  remain  in  the  Treasury  of 
Loreto.  Passeri  gives  an  interesting  classification  of  ornamental  pottery,  with  the  terms  made  use  of 
by  the  workmen  to  distinguish  the  various  kinds  of  paintings  used  in  ornamenting  the  plates,  and 
also  the  sums  paid  to  the  artists  by  whom  they  were  painted.  He  gives  a curious  extract  from  a 
manuscript  in  the  handwriting  of  Piccolpasso,  a “majolicaro”  of  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
who  wrote  upon  his  art;  to  understand  which  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  the  holognino  was 
equivalent  to  the  ninth  part,  and  the  gros  to 
the  third  part,  of  a paul  (5J  pence);  the  livre 
was  a third,  and  the  florin  two-thirds  of  a petit 
ecu ; and  the  petit  ecu,  or  ecu  ducal,  two-thirds 
of  a Roman  crown  (now  value  four  shillings  and 
threepence  one  farthing). 

Trophies. — This  style  of  ornament  consisted 
of  ancient  and  modern  arms,  musical  and  ma- 
thematical instruments,  and  open  books ; they 
are  generally  painted  in  yellow  cameo  on  a blue 
ground.  These  plates  were  chiefly  sold  in  the 
province  (Castel  Durante)  in  which  they  were 
manufactured,  one  ducal  crown  a hundred  being 
the  sum  paid  to  the  painters  of  them.  This 
style  was  much  affected  by  the  Cinque-centisti 
in  marble  and  stone : witness  the  monument  to 
Gian  Galeazzo  Visconti,  in  the  Certosa,  Pavia, 
and  portions  of  the  Genoese  doorway,  we  en- 
grave. 

Arabesques  were  ornaments  consisting  of  a 
sort  of  cipher,  loosely  tied  and  interlacing  knots 
and  bouquets.  Work  thus  ornamented  was  sent 
to  Venice  and  Genoa,  and  obtained  one  ducal 
florin  the  hundred. 

Cerquate  was  a name  given  to  the  interlacing 
of  oak-branches,  painted  in  a deep  yellow  upon 
a blue  ground ; it  was  called  the  “ Urbino  painting,”  from  the  oak  being  one  of  the  bearings  of  the 
ducal  arms.  This  kind  of  decoration  received  fifteen  gros  the  hundred;  and  when,  in  addition,  the 
bottom  of  the  plate  was  ornamented,  by  having  some  little  story  painted  upon  it,  the  artist  received 
one  petit  ecu. 

Grotesques  were  the  interlacing  of  winged  male  and  female  monsters,  with  their  bodies  terminated 
by  foliations  or  branches.  These  fanciful  decorations  were  generally  painted  in  white  cameo  upon  a 


Pedestal  forming  part  of  a Doorway  of  the  Palace,  presented  by  the  Genoese 
to  Andrea  Doria. 


blue  ground ; the  payment  for  them  being  two  ecus  the  hundred,  unless  they  were  painted  on  commission 
from  Venice,  when  the  price  was  eight  ducal  livres. 

Leaves.  This  ornament  consisted  of  a few  branches  of  leaves,  small  in  size,  and  sprinkled  over 
the  ground.  Their  price  was  three  livres. 

Flowers  and  Fruits — These  very  pleasing  groups  were  sent  to  Venice,  and  the  artists  received 
for  them  five  livres  the  hundred.  Another  variety  of  the  same  style  merely  consisted  in  three  or 
four  large  leaves,  painted  in  one  colour  upon  a different-coloured  ground.  Their  price  -was  half  a 
florin  the  hundred. 


123 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


Porcelain  was  the  name  of  a style  of  work  which  consisted  of  the  most  delicate  blue  flowers, 
with  small  leaves  and  buds  painted  upon  a white  ground.  This  kind  of  work  obtained  two  or  more 
livres  the  hundred.  It  was,  in  all  probability,  an  imitation  of  Portuguese  importations. 

Tratti  were  wide  bands,  knotted  in  different  ways,  with  small  branches  issuing  from  them.  Their 
price  was  also  two  livres  the  hundred. 

So'prahianco  was  a painting  in  white  upon  a white-lead  ground,  with  green  or  blue  borders  round 
the  margin  of  the  plate.  These  obtained  a demi-ecu  the  hundred. 

Quai'tieri. — In  this  pattern,  the  artist  divided  the  bottom  oi  the  plate  into  six  or  eight  rays 
diverging  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference ; each  space  was  of  a particular  colour,  upon  which 
were  painted  bouquets  of  different  tints.  The  painters  received  for  this  kind  of  ornament  two  livres 
the  hundred. 

Gh'uppi. — These  were  broad  bands  interwoven  with  small  flowers.  This  pattern  was  larger  than 
the  tratti,”  and  was  sometimes  embellished  by  a little  picture  in  the  centre  of  the  plate,  in  that  case 
the  price  was  a demi-ecu,  but  without  it  only  two  jules. 


Portions  of  tbo  Pilaster  of  a Doorway  in  the  Palace  at  Genoa,  presented  by  the  Genoese  to  Andrea  Doria. 


Candelabri. — This  ornament  was  an  upright  bouquet  extending  from  one  side  of  the  plate  to 
the  other,  the  space  on  each  side  being  filled  up  with  scattered  leaves  and  flowers.  The  price  of  the 
Candelabni  was  two  florins  the  hundred.  The  adjoining  woodcut  shows  how  common,  how  early, 
and  how  favourite  a subject  this  was  with  the  best  artists  of  the  Cinque-cento. 

To  dwell  in  detail  upon  the  merits  and  particular  works  of  artists,  such  as  Maestro  G-iorgio  Andreoli, 
Orazio  Fontana,  and  Francesco  Xanto  of  Eovigo,  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  notice,  and  is  the 
less  necessary  as  Mr.  Robinson,  in  his  Catalogue  of  the  Soulages  Collection,  has  so  recently  thrown 
out  some  new  and  highly  interesting  speculations  upon  various  difficult  questions  connected  with  the 
subject.  Neither  will  it  be  desirable  here  to  do  more  than  to  point  out  the  interesting  modifications 
of  ceramic  design  and  practice  carried  out  in  France  through  the  indomitable  perseverance  of  Bernard 
de  Palissy,  master-potter  to  Francis  I.  In  Plate  LXXIX.  Figs.  1,  3,  we  have  engraved  several 
specimens  of  the  decorations  of  his  elegant  ware,  which  occupy  as  to  design,  in  reference  to  other 
monuments  of  the  French  Renaissance,  much  the  same  position  that  the  design  of  the  early  majolica 
does  to  the  monuments  of  the  Italian  revival.  Although  that  style  began  to  make  its  appearance  in 
124 


KENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


the  -works  of  the  French  jewellers  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XII.,  when  the  extensive  patronage  of  the 
powerful  Cardinal  d’Amboise  gave  considerable  impetus  to  the  art,  it  was  under  Francis  I.  who  invited 
to  his  Court  the  great  master  of  the  Eenaissance — Cellini — that 
the  jeweller’s  art  reached  its  highest  perfection.  To  rightly 
appreciate,  however,  the  precise  condition  and  nature  of  the 
precious  metal-work,  it  is  necessary  to  pass  in  rapid  review  the 
leading  characteristics  of  the  admirable  school  of  enamellers, 
whose  productions  in  the  fifteenth  century,  and  much  more  in 
the  sixteenth,  served  to  disseminate  far  and  wide  some  of  the 
most  elegant  ornaments  which  have  ever  been  applied  to  metal- 
work. 

About  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  artists  of  Li- 
moges found  not  only  that  the  old  champleve  enamels, — of  which, 
in  Plate  LXXVIL,  Figs.  1,  3,  4,  8,  29,  40,  41,  50,  53,  57,  61, 
we  have  given,  for  the  sake  of  contrast,  numerous  examples, — 
had  entirely  gone  out  of  fashion,  but  that  almost  every  gold- 
smith either  imported  the  translucid  enamels  from  Italy,  or  ex- 
ecuted them  himself  with  more  or  less  skill,  according  to  his 
talents.  In  this  state  of  things,  instead  of  attempting  competi- 
tion, they  invented  a new  manufacture,  the  processes  of  which 
belonged  solely  to  the  enameller,  and  enabled  him  to  dispense 
entirely  with  the  burin  of  the  goldsmith.  The  first  attempts 
were  exceedingly  rude,  and  very  few  of  them  now  remain;  but 
that  the  art  progressed  slowly  is  evident  from  the  fact,  that 
it  is  not  until  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  centuiy  that  specimens 
are  to  be  found  in  any  quantity,  or  possessing  any  degree  of 
merit.  The  process  was  this : — The  design  was  traced  with 
a sharp  point  upon  an  unpolished  plate  of  copper,  which  was  IlSil 

then  covered  with  a thin  coat  of  transparent  enamel.  The 
artist,  after  going  over  his  tracing  with  a thick  black  line, 
filled  in  the  intervals  with  the  various  colours,  which  were,  for 
the  most  part,  transparent,  the  black  lines  performing  the  office 

of  the  gold  strips  of  the  cloissonne  work.  The  carnations  pre-  ’-p'^  J j \ Y 

sented  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  were,  first  of  all,  covered  over 
with  the  black  colour,  and  the  high  lights  and  half-tints  were 
then  modelled  upon  that  with  opaque  white,  which  occasionally 
received  a few  touches  of  light  transparent  red.  The  last  opera- 
tion was  to  apply  the  gilding,  and  to  affix  the  imitations  of  / 

precious  stones,— almost  the  last  trace  of  the  Byzantine  school,  Lowerportioushowingthesprinringofeuroll-workofasmall 

, Pilaster,  by  the  Lombardi,  in  the  Church  of  Sta. 

which  had  formerly  exercised  so  much  influence  in  Aquitaine.  iiiracou,  Venice. 

The  appearance  of  the  finished  works  was  very  similar  to  that  of  a large  and  coarse  translucid 
enamel, — a resemblance  not  unlikely  to  have  been  intentional,  more  especially  as  specimens  of  the 
latter  were  never  made  of  any  considerable  size,  and  were  therefore  fit  to  supply  the  place  of  ivory 
in  the  construction  of  those  small  triptyohs  which  were  so  necessary  an  appendage  to  the  chambers 
and  oratories  of  the  rich  in  the  middle  ages.  Accordingly,  we  find  nearly  all  the  early  painted  enamels 
are  either  in  the  form  of  triptychs  or  diptychs,  or  have  originally  formed  parts  of  them ; ' and  a great 

KK  125 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


number  preserve  their  original  brass  frames,  and  are  supposed  by  antiquaries  to  have  been  produced 
in  the  atelier  of  Monvearni,  as  tbe  name  or  initials  of  that  master  are  generally  found  upon  them. 
As  to  the  other  artists,  they  followed,  unfortunately,  the  but  too  common  practice  of  most  of  the 
workmen  of  the  middle  ages,  and,  with  the  exceptions  of  Monvearni  and  P.  E.  Nicholat,  or,  as  the 
inscriptions  have  been  more  correctly  read,  Penicaud,  their  names  are  buried  in  oblivion. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  Penaissance  had  made  great  progress ; and 
among  other  changes,  a great  taste  for  paintings  in  ^‘camaieu,”  or  ^‘grisaille,”  had  sprung  up.  The 
ateliers  of  Limoges  at  once  adopted  the  new  fashion,  and  what  may  be  called  the  second  series  of 
painted  enamels  was  the  result.  The  process  was  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  employed  with  regard 
to  the  carnations  of  the  earlier  specimens,  and  consisted  in,  firstly,  covering  the  whole  plate  of  copper 
over  with  a black  enamel,  and  then  modelling  the  lights  and  half-tints  with  opaque  white ; those  parts 
requiring  to  be  coloured,  such  as  the  faces  and  the  foliage,  receiving  glazes  of  their  appropriate  tints 
touches  of  gold  are  almost  always  used  to  complete  the  picture  ; and,  occasionally,  when  more  than 
ordinary  brilliancy  was  wanted,  a thin  gold  or  silver  leaf,  called  a “ pallion,”  was  applied  upon 
the  black  ground,  and  the  glaze  afterwards  superposed.  All  these  processes  are  to  be  seen  in  the 
two  pictures  of  Francis  I.  and  Henry  II.,  executed  by  Leonard  Limousin,  for  the  decoration  of  the 
Sainte  Chapelle,  but  which  have  now  been  removed  to  the  Museum  of  the  Louvre.  Limoges,  indeed, 
owed  no  small  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  former  monarch,  who  not  only  established  a manufactoiy  in 
the  town,  but  made  its  director  Leonard,  peintre,  emailleur,  valet-de-chambre  du  Roi,”  giving  him, 
at  the  same  time,  the  appellation  of  le  Limousin,”  to  distinguish  him  from  the  other  and  still  more 
famous  Leonardo  da  Vinci.  And,  indeed,  the  Limousin  was  no  mean  artist,  whether  we  regard  his 
copies  of  the  early  German  and  Italian  masters,  or  the  original  portraits  of  the  more  celebrated  of 
his  contemporaries,  such  as  those  of  the  Duke  of  Guise,  the  Constable  Montmorency,  Catherine  de 
Medicis,  and  many  others  — executed,  we  must  remember,  in  the  most  difficult  material  which  has 
ever  yet  been  employed  for  the  purposes  of  art.  The  works  of  Leonardo  extend  from  1532  to  1574, 
and  contemporaneously  with  him  flourished  a large  school  of  artist-enamellers,  many  of  whose  works 
quite  equalled,  if  they  did  not  surpass,  his  own.  Among  them  we  may  mention  Pierre  Raymond 
and  the  families  of  the  Penicauds,  and  the  Courteys,  Jean  and  Susanna  Court,  and  M.  D.  Pape.  The 
eldest  of  the  family  of  the  Courteys,  Pierre,  was  not  only  a good  artist,  but  has  the  reputation  of 
having  made  the  largest-sized  enamels  which  have  ever  been  executed  (nine  of  these  are  preserved  in 
the  Museum  of  the  Hotel  de  Cluny — the  other  three,  M.  Labarte  informs  us,  are  in  England)  for 
decorating  the  fapade  of  the  Chateau  de  Madrid,  upon  which  building  large  sums  were  lavished  by 
Francis  I.  and  Henry  11,  We  should  observe  that  this  last  phase  of  Limoges  enamelling  was  not 
confined,  like  its  predecessor,  to  sacred  subjects ; but,  on  the  contrary,  the  most  distinguished  artists 
did  not  disdain  to  design  vases,  caskets,  basins,  ewers,  cups,  salvers,  and  a variety  of  other  articles 
of  every-day  life,  which  were  afterwards  entirely  covered  with  the  black  enamel,  and  then  decorated 
with  medallions,  &c.,  in  the  opaque  white.  At  the  commencement  of  the  new  manufacture,  the 
subjects  of  most  of  the  enamels  were  furnished  from  the  prints  of  the  German  artists,  such  as  Martin 
Schoen,  Israel  van  Mecken,  &c.  These  were  afterwards  supplanted  by  those  of  Marc’  Antonio  Raimondi 
and  other  Italians,  which,  in  their  turn,  gave  way  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  to  the 
works  of  Virgilius  Solis,  Theodore  de  Bry,  Etienne  de  I’Aulne,  and  others  of  the  'petits^aitres. 

The  production  of  the  painted  enamels  was  carried  on  with  great  activity  at  Limoges,  during  the 
whole  of  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  centuries,  and  far  into  the  eighteenth,  when  it 
finally  expired.  The  last  artists  were  the  families  of  the  Nouaillers  and  Laudins,  whose  best  works 
are  remarkable  for  the  absence  of  the  paillons,  and  a somewhat  undecided  style  of  drawing. 

In  conclusion,  it  remains  for  us  only  to  invite  the  student  to  cultivate  the  beauties,  as  sedulously 
126 


EENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


as  he  should  eschew  the  extravagancies,  of  the  Eenaissanoe  style.  Where  great  liberty  is  afforded 
m Art  no  less  than  in  Polity,  great  responsibility  is  incurred.  In  those  styles  in  which  the  imagina- 
tion of  the  designer  can  be  checked  only  from  within,  he  is  especially  bound  to  set  a rein  upon  his  fancy. 
Ornament  let  him  have  in  abundance  ; but  in  its  composition  let  him  be  modest  and  decorous,  avoid- 
ing over-finery  as  he  would  nakedness.  If  he  has  no  story  to  tell,  let  him  be  content  with  floriated 
forms  and  conventional  elements  in  his  enrichments,  which  please  the  eye  without  making  any  serious 
call  upon  the  intellect;  then,  where  he  really  wishes  to  arrest  observation  by  the  comparatively  direct 
representation  of  material  objects,  he  may  be  the  more  sure  of  attaining  his  purpose.  In  a style 
which,  like  the  Renaissance,  allows  of,  and  indeed  demands,  the  association  of  the  Sister  Arts,  let 
the  artist  never  lose  sight  of  the  unities  and  specialties  of  each.  Keep  them  as  a well-ordered  family, 
on  the  closest  and  most  harmonious  relations,  but  never  permit  one  to  assume  the  prerogatives  of 
another,  or  even  to  issue  from  its  own,  to  invade  its  Sister’s  province.  So  ordered  and  maintained, 
those  styles  are  noblest,  richest,  and  best  adapted  to  the  complicated  requirements  of  a highly  artificial 
social  system,  m which,  as  in  that  of  the  Renaissance,  Architecture,  Painting,  Sculpture,  and  the 
highest  technical  excellence  in  Industry,  must  unite  before  its  essential  and  indispensable  conditions 
of  effect  can  be  efiSciently  realised. 

M.  DIGBY  WYATT. 


BOOKS  EEFEERED  TO  FOE  ILLUSTRATIONS, 
LITERARY  AND  PICTORIAL. 


Alciati  (A.)  Embiemata  D.  A.  Alciati,  denuo  ab  ipso  Antore  recog- 
nita ; ac,  qute  desiderabnnitir,  imaginibus  locupletata.  Accessmtnt 
vo^la  nJiquot  ab  Auiorc  Emhlemata  svis  quoque  eiconibus  itisigniin. 
Small  8vo.,  Lyons,  1551. 

Antonelli  (G.)  Collezione  dti  migliori  Ornnmenti  antichi,  sparsi 
nelln  citta  di  Venezia,  coll'  agginnta  di  ulcuni  frammenti  di  Goticu 
archilettura  e di  varie  invenzioni  di  un  Giovnrie  Alunno  di  questa 
I.  R.  Accadcmia.  Oblong  4to.,  Venezia,  18J11. 

Baltard.  Paris,  ei  ses  Alonumens,  mesvres,  dessines,  et  graves,  avec 
des  Descnptions  Historiques,  par  le  Ciioyen  Amaury  Duval; 
Louvre,  St.  Cloud,  Fontainbleau,  Ghdleau  d'Ecouen,  Ac,  S vols. 
lai-ge  folio.  Paris,  1808-5. 

C.  Becker  and  J.  von  Hefner.  Kunslxverhe  und  Ger'dthschaften 
des  Mittelalters  und  der  Renaissance.  3 vols.  4to.  Frankfurt 
1853.  ’ 

Bergamo  Stefano  Da.  Wood-Carvings  from  the  Choir  of  the  Mon- 
aslery  of  San  Pietro  at  Perugia,  IbZb.  {Cinque-cento.)  Said  to 
be  from  Designs  by  Raffaelle. 

Bernard  (A.)  Reciieil  d’Ornements  de  la  Renaissance.  Dessines  et 
graves  a I’eau-forte.  4to.  Paris,  n.  d. 

Ceaput.  Le  Moyen-Age  Pilforesqtie.  Manxmens  ft  Fx-agmens 
d'Architectxire,  Mexibles,  Ax-mes,  Armures,  et  Ohjeis  de  Cxxriosite 
X°  au  XI  IP  Siecle.  Dessine  d'upres  Nature,  qxar  Chapuy,  Ac. 
Avec  un  texte  archdologique,  descriptif  et  hisiorique,  par  M. 
Maret,  5 vols.  small  folio.  Paris,  1838-40. 

Oleroet  et  George.  Collection  portative  d’  Ornements  de  la  Renais- 
sance, recueillis  ct  choisis  par  Ch.  Ernest  Clergct.  Graves  siir 
cuivre  d’apr'es  Ics  originaux  par  C.  E.  Clerget  ei  Mme.E.  George. 
8vo.  Paris,  1851. 


D’Agincodrt,  J.  B.  L.  G.  S.  Histoire  de  VAx't  par  ses  Monximens, 
depuis  .sa  Decadence  au  IV^.  siecle  jusqu’a  son  Renouvellcment 
XVP.  Oxixrrage  enrichi  de  ^2^  planches.  6 vols.  folio,  Paris, 
1833. 

Dennistoun  (J.)  Memoirs  of  the  Dukes  ofUrbinu,  illxistrating  the 
Arms,  Arts,  and  Literature  of  Italy  from  1440  to  1C30.  3 vols. 

8vo.  London,  1851. 

Deatlle  (A).  Unedited  Documents  on  the  Histox'xy  of  France. 

Oompies  de  Depexxses  de  la  Construction  du-  Ch&ieau  de  Gaillon, 
publics  d'apres  les  Registres  Manvseriis  des  Trdsoriexs  du  Car- 
dinal AAmboise.  With  an  Atlas  of  Philes.  4to.  Paris,  1 850. 

' Tombeaux  de  la  Calh^drale  de  Roxien  ; avec  doxize  planches, 

gravdes.  8vo.  Eouen,  1837. 

Durelli  (G.  & F.)  La  Cei-tosa  di  Pavia,  descriiia  ed  illustx'ata  con 
tavole,  incise  daifratelli  Gaetano  e Francesco  Durelli,  62  plates. 
Folio,  Milan,  1853. 

Dussieux  (L.)  Essai  sur  VSistoire  de  la  Pelniure  sur  Email.  8vo. 
Paris,  1839. 

Gailhabaud  (J.)  L' Architecture  du  F«.  au  XVP.  Siecle  et  les  Arts 
qui  en  dependent,  le  Sculpture,  la  Peintxxre  Murah,  la  Peintxxre  sur 
Verre,  la  Mosu'ique,  la  Ferronnexne,  Ac.,  puhlies  d'aprh  les  tra- 
vuux  inedits  des  PrincipauX  Archilectes  Frangais  et  Elrangers. 
4to.  Paris,  1851,  et  seq. 

Ghiberti  (Lorenzo).  Le  tre  Porte  del  Battisterio  di  San  Giovanni 
di  Firenze.  46  plates  engraved  in  outline  by  Lasinio,  with 
description  in  French  and  Italian.  Folio,  half -morocco, 
Firenze,  1821. 

Hoffer.  Collection  of  Ornaments  in  the  Grotesque  Style,  by  Hopfer. 


127 


RENAISSANCE  ORNAMENT. 


Iotbard.  Tombean  dc  Louis  XII.  ft  de  Franfoi.^  I.,  dessinds  et  gravds 
au  trait,  par  E.  F.  Imbard,  d'aprh  des  Marbres  du  Mnsdc  des 
Petits  Augustins.  Small  folio,  Paris,  1823. 

Jt'BlNAL  (A.)  Edcherches  svr  I'Usage  et  I'Origine  des  Tapisseries  a 
Personnagcs,  dites  Histondes,  depuis  PAntiquite  jusqu'au  XVP. 
Si^le  iuclnsivement.  8vo.  ph.  Paris,  184(1. 

De  Laborde  (Le  Comte  Alexandre).  Lis  Momtmens  de  la  France, 
classes  chronologiqvement,  et  considdrds  sous  le  Rappoi't  des  Fails 
historiques  ei  de  I'Etude  des  Arts.  2 vols.  folio,  Paris,  1818-36. 

De  Laborde.  Eolice  des  Emaux  exposes  dans  les  Gaieties  du  Musee 
du  Louvre,  Premiere  partie,  Histoire  et  Descriptions,  8vo. 
Paris,  1852. 

LaBARTE  (J.)  Description  des  Ohjeis  d'Art  qui  composent  la  Collec- 
tion Debruge-Dvmenil,  precedes  d’une  Introduction  Historique. 
Svo.  Paris,  1847. 

Lacroix  et  Serb.  Le  Moycn  Age  et  la  Renaissance,  Histoire  et 
Description  des  Meeurs  et  Zhoges,  du  Commerce  et  de  I'Industrie, 
des  Sciences,  des  Arts,  des  Lilteratvres,  ei  des  Beaux  Arts  en 
Europe.  Direction  Lilteraire  de  M.  Patil  Lacroix.  Direction 
Artistique  de  M.  Ferdinand  Sere.  Dessins  facsimiles  par  M. 

A,  Rivatid.  5 vols.  4to.  Paris,  1848-51. 

Lenoir  (Alex.)  Atlas  des  Monumens  des  Arts  liberaux,  mdcaniques, 
et  industriels  de  la  France,  depuis  les  Gaulois  jusqu'au  rhgne  de 
Frangois  I.  Folio,  Paris,  1823. 

— Musee  des  Monumens  Franpais:  ou  Description  historique 

et  chronologiqiie  des  Statues  en  Marbre  et  en  Bronze,  Bas-reliefs 
et  Tombeaux  des  Hommes  et  des  Femmes  c^lebres,  pour  servir  d 
I'Histoire  de  France  et  a celle  de  II  Art.  Ornee  de  gravures  et 
augmentie  d!iine  DisserlaHon  sur  les  Costumes  de  chaque  siecle. 
6 vols.  8vo.,  Paris,  1800-6. 

Marryat  (J.)  Collections  towards  a History  of  Pottery  and  Porcelain 
in  the  Fifteenth,  Sixteenth,  Seventeenth,  and  Eighteenth  Centuries, 
with  a Description  of  the  Manufacture  ; o Glossary,  and  a List  of 
Monograms.  Illustrated  with  Colmircd  Plates  and  Woodcuts. 
8vo.  London,  1850. 

Morley  (H.)  Palissy  the  Potter.  The  Life  of  Bernard  Paltssy,  of 
Saintes,  his  Labours  and  Discoveries  in  Art  and  Science,  with  an 
outline  of  his  Philosophical  Doctrines,  and  a Translation  of  Illus- 
trative Selections  from  his  Works.  2 vols.  8vo.,  London,  1852. 


Passeri  (J.  B.)  Histoire  des  Peintures  sur  Majoliques  failes  a Pesari 
el  dans  les  lieux  circonvoisins,  decrite  par  Giambattista  Passeri 
{de  Pesaro).  Traduite  de  I’ltalien  et  suivie  d'un  Appendice  par 
Henri  Delange.  8vo.  Palis,  1853. 

Queriere  (E.  de  la).  Essai  sur  les  Girouettes,  Epis,  Crgtes,  Ac.,  des 
Anciens  Combles  et  Pignons.  Numerous  plates  of  Ancient  Vanes 
and  Terminations  of  Roofs,  Paris,  1846. 

Renaissance.  La  Fleur  de  la  Science  de  Pourtraicture  et  Patrons  de 
Brodcrie.  Fapon  Arabicque  et  Ytalique.  Cum  PrivUegio  Regis. 
4to.  Paris. 

Reynard  (0.)  Ornemens  des  Anciens  Mattres  des  XV.,  XVI., 
XVII.  et  XVIII.  Siecles.  30  plates  comprising  copies  of  some 
of  the  most  ancient  and  rare  prints  of  Ornaments,  Alphabets, 
Silverwork.  Folio,  Paris,  1844. 

Serb  (F.)  Les  Arts  Somptunires  de  V^.  au  XVIP  Siecle.  Histoire 
du  Costume  et  de  V Ameuhlement  en  Europe,  et  des  Arts  que  en  de- 
pendent. Small  4to.  Paris,  1853. 

Sommerard  (A.  Du.)  Les  Arts  au  Moyen  Age.  (Collection  of  the 
HStel  de  Cluny.)  Text,  5 vols.  8vo. ; Plates,  6 vols.  folio. 
Paris,  1838-46. 

Verdier  et  Cattois.  Architecture  Civile  et  Domestique  au  Moyen 
Age  et  a la  Renaissance.  4to.  Paris,  1852. 

Waring  and  MacQuoed.  Examples  of  Architectural  Art  in  Italy  and 
Spain,  chiefly  of  the  13fA  and  16</i  centuries.  Folio,  London, 

1850. 

Wellemin  (N.  X.)  Monuments  Frangais  inedits,  pour  servir  a I'His- 
toire des  Arts,  depuis  le  VD.  sikcle  jusqu’au  commencement  du 
XVIP.  Choix  de  Costumes  chiles  et  militaires,  d'Armes, 
Armures,  Instruments  de  Musique,  Meubles  de  tovle  espkee,  el  de 
Decorations  inteneures  et  ext&ieures  des  Maisons,  dessines, graves, 
et  calorics  d'aprh  les  originaiix.  Classes  chronologiqvement,  et 
accompagnes  d'  iin  texte  historique  et  descriptif,  par  Andr4 Potiier. 
6 vols.  small  folio,  Paris,  1806-39. 

Wyatt,  M.  Digby,  and  J.  B.  Waring.  Hand-book  to  the  Renaissance 
Court  in  the  Crystal  Palace,  Sydenham.  London,  1854. 

Wyatt,  M.  Digby.  Metal  Work  and  its  Artislic  Design.  London, 

1851. 


128 


RENAISSANCE 

TAFEL  LXXIY 


RENAISSANCE  NM, 


RENAISSANCE 

PL  LXXIY, 


RENAISSANCIi 


RENAISSANCE  N""  2^ 


RENAISSANCE 


8 9 II  12 


EENAISSANCE 


RENAISSANCE  N'’3. 


RENAISSANCE 


TAFEL  LXXYl 


PL  LXXYl 


RENAISSANCE. 


RENAISSANCE 


TsV  ' 

A 1 


RENAISSANCE 


PL  LX’KVII 


9 


E 

Ea 

SS 

13 

ISl 

E3 

0 

0 

E! 

E 

H 

B 

0 

E3 

a 

[®1 

0 

ca 

IS 

S 

B 

ID 

13  : 

RENAISSANCE 


RENAISSANCE  N°  6 


RENAISSANCE 


TAF£LI.XX:X 


PL  UXXIX 


4 5 


RENAISSANCE 


RENAISSANCE  N°  7 


RENAISSANCE 


TAFEL  I.XXX: 


RENAISSANCE 


RENAISSANCE  N®8.  renaissance 


TAFEL  LXXXl 


rl.  lxxx: 


N° 


RENAISSANCE 


RENAISSANCE 

TAKE!,  IXXXII 


f/inl  TH 

'^fn  'f  irn,  rrn 

rti 

■'  T 

u 

f 

1 

i 

\ 


Chapter  XVIII. — Plates  83,  84,  85, 

ELIZABETHAN  OKNAMENT. 


PLATE  LXXXIIL 


1.  The  centre  portion  of  the  Ornament  in  a Stone  Chim- 

neypiece,  formerly  in  the  Royal  Palace,  Westminster, 
new  in  the  Robing  Room  of  the  Judges’  Court  of 
Queen’s  Bench. 

2.  Stone  Carving,  from  an  old  House,  Bristol.  James  I. 

3.  Frieze,  from  Goodrich  Court,  Herefordshire.  Time  of 

Henry  VIII.  or  Elizabeth.  Flemish  Workmanship. 

4.  Ornament  in  a Church  Pew,  Wiltshire.  Elizabeth. 

5,  7.  Wood  Carving  from  Burton  Agnes  in  Yorkshire. 
James  I. 

6.  Wood  Carving  over  a Doorway  to  a house  near  Norwich. 
Elizabeth. 


8.  Wood  Carving,  from  a Pew,  Pavenham  Church,  Bedford- 

shire. James  I. 

9.  Wood  Carving,  from  a Chimneypiece,  Old  Palace,  Brom- 

ley, near  Bow.  James  I. 

10, 15.  Carving  in  Stone  from  the  Tomb  at  Westminster 
Abbey.  James  I. 

11,  12. 

13.  Wood  Carving,  from  Montacute,  in  Somersetshire. 

Elizabeth. 

14.  Stone  Carving,  Crewe  Hall.  James  1. 

16.  Wood  Carving,  from  the  Hall  of  Trinity  College,  Cam- 
bridge. 


PLATE  LXXXIV. 


1.  Stone  Oi’nament,  Burton  Agnes,  Yorkshire.  James  I. 

2.  Painted  Ornament,  Staircase,  Holland  House,  Kensing- 

ton. James  I. 

3.  Wood  Carving,  Holland  House. 

4.  Ditto,  ditto. 

5.  Wood  Carving,  Aston  Hall,  Warwickshire.  Late  James  I. 

6.  From  an  Old  Chair.  Elizabeth. 

7.  Stone  Ornament  from  one  of  the  Tombs  at  West- 

minster. Elizabeth. 

8,  9.  Ornaments  from  Burton  Agnes,  Yorkshire.  James  I. 

10.  Wood  Diaper,  Old  Palace,  Enfield.  Elizabeth. 

11.  Wood  Diaper,  Aston  Hall.  James  I. 

12, 16.  Wood  Ornaments,  from  the  Pewing,  Pavenham 
Church,  Bedfordshire.  James  I. 

L 


13, 14.  From  Burton  Agnes.  The  last  of  late  date  pub. 
Charles  II. 

15,  24, 26.  Stone  Diapers,  from  Crewe  Hall,  Cheshire. 
James  I. 

17,  Ornament  on  a Bethesdan  Marble  Chimneypiece,  Little 

Charlton  House,  Kent. 

18,  20.  Wood  Ornaments,  in  Peter  Paul  Pindar’s  House, 

Bishopsgate.  James  I. 

19,  21.  Wood  Ornament,  from  Burton  Agnes,  Yorkshire. 

James  I. 

22.  From  a Cabinet.  James  I.  French  Workmanship. 

23.  From  a Tomb,  Westminster  Abbey.  James  I. 

25.  From  a Tomb,  Aston  Church.  James  I. 

27.  Wood  Carving,  from  the  Staircase,  Aston  Hall,  War- 

wickshire. Late  James  1. 

28.  Plaster  Enrichment  to  a Panel  Ceiling  at  Cromwell 

Hall,  Highgate.  Charles  II. 


129 


ELIZABETHAN  ORNAMENT. 


PLATE 

1, 15, 18.  Diapers  from  Burton  Agnes,  Yorkshire. 

2.  Wood  Diaper,  from  the  Hall  of  Trinity  College,  Cam- 

bridge. 

6,  8.  Ditto,  ditto.  Late  James  I. 

3.  From  Drapery  in  a Tomb  at  Westminster.  Eliza- 

beth. 

4.  Wood  Diaper,  from  an  old  House  at  Enfield.  James  I. 

5.  Plaster  Diaper,  from  an  old  House  near  Tottenham 

Church.  Elizabeth. 

7.  Needle-work  Tapestry.  Elizabeth.  (|  size.)  From  the 

collection  of  Mr.  Mackinlay.  The  ground,  light  green  ; 
the  subject  in  light  yellow,  blue,  or  green ; the  out- 
line, yellow  silk  cord. 


LXXXY. 

9.  Pattern  fi-om  Drapery  in  a Tomb  at  Westminster. 
Elizabeth. 

10.  From  a Damask  Cover  to  a Chair  at  Knowle,  in  Kent. 

James  I. 

11.  Appliqu6  Needlework.  James  I.  or  Charles  I.  In  the 

collection  of  Mr.  Mackinlay.  The  ground  in  dark  red ; 
the  ornament  in  yellow  silk  ; outline,  yellow  silk 
cord. 

12,14,16,17.  Patterns  from  Dresses,  Old  Portraits.  Eliza- 
beth or  James  1. 

13.  Applique  Needlework.  James  I.  or  Charles  I.  By  an 
Italian  Artist. 


ELIZABETHAN  OENAMENT. 

Pride  to  describing  the  characteristics  of  what  is  commonly  termed  the  Elizabethan  style,  it  will 
be  well  to  trace  briefly  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  revival  of  the  Antique  in  England  to  its  final 
triumph  over  the  late  Grothic  style  in  the  sixteenth  century.  The  first  introduction  of  the  Revival 
into  England  dates  from  the  year  1518,  when  Torrigiano  was  employed  by  Henry  VIII.  to  design  a 
monument  in  memory  of  Henry  VII.,  which  still  exists  in  Westminster  Abbey,  and  which  is  almost  a 
pure  example  of  the  Italian  school  at  that  period.  In  the  same  style,  and  of  about  the  same  date,  is 
the  monument  of  the  Countess  of  Richmond  at  Westminster ; Torrigiano  designed  this  also,  and,  very 
shortly  afterwards,  went  to  Spain,  leaving,  however,  behind  him  several  Italians  attached  to  the  service 
of  Henry,  by  whom  a taste  for  the  same  style  could  not  be  otherwise  than  propagated.  Amongst  the 
names  preserved  to  us  at  this  time  are  Grirolamo  da  Trevigi,  employed  as  an  architect  and  engineer, 
Bartolomeo  Penni,  and  Antony  Toto  (del  ’Nunziata),  painters,  and  the  well-known  Florentine  sculptor, 
Benedetto  da  Rovezzano;  to  these  may  be  added,  though  at  a later  period,  John  of  Padua,  who  appears 
to  have  been  more  extensively  employed  than  any  of  the  others,  and,  amongst  other  important  works, 
designed  old  Somerset  House  in  1549.  But  it  was  not  a purely  Italian  influence  which  aided  in  the 
development  of  the  new  style  in  this  country ; and  already  we  find  the  names  of  G-erard  Hornebande, 
or  Horebout,  of  Ghent,  Lucas  Cornells,  John  Brown,  and  Andrew  Wright,  serjeant-painters  to  the 
king.  In  the  year  1524  the  celebrated  Holbein  came  to  England,  and  to  him  .and  John  of  Padua  is 
mainly  due  the  naturalization  of  the  new  style  in  this  country,  modified  by  the  individual  genius  and 
German  education  of  the  one,  and  the  local  models  and  reminiscences  of  the  other,  by  whom  many 
features  of  the  earlier  Venetian  school  of  the  Revival  were  reproduced,  with  great  modifications,  however, 
in  this  country.  Holbein  died  in  1554,  but  John  of  Padua  survived  him  many  years,  and  designed 
the  noble  mansion  of  Longleat  about  the  year  1570.  On  the  occasion  of  the  funeral  of  Edward  VI. 
A.D.  1553,  we  find  in  the  rule  for  the  procession  {Archceol.  vol.  xii.  1796)  the  names  of  Antony  Toto 
(before  mentioned),  Nicholas  Lyzarde,  painters,  and  Nicholas  Modena,  carver ; all  the  other  names 
of  master  masons,  &c.  being  English.  Somewhat  later,  during  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  we  find  only 
two  Italian  names,  Federigo  Zucchero  (whose  house  at  Florence,  said  to  have  been  designed  by  himself, 
would  rather  serve  to  show  that  the  English  style  of  architecture  had  influenced  him,  than  vice  versa), 
and  Pietro  Ubaldini,  painter  of  illuminated  books. 

It  is  from  Holland  that,  at  this  period,  when  the  Elizabethan  style  may  be  justly  said  to  have 


130 


ELIZABETHAN  ORNAMENT. 


been  formed,  -we  must  look  for  the  greater  number  of  artists:  Lucas  de  Heere  of  Ghent,  Cornelius 
Ketel  of  Gouda,  Marc  Garrard  of  Bruges,  H.  C.  Vroom  of  Haarlem,  painters;  Richard  Stevens,  a 
Hollander,  -who  executed  the  Sussex  monument  in  Boreham  church,  Suffolk:  and  Theodore  Havens 
of  Cleves,  who  was  architect  of  the  four  gates,  Humilitatis,  Virtutis,  Honoris,  et  Sapientige,  at  Cains 
College,  Cambridge,  and,  moreover,  designed  and  executed  the  monument  of  Dr.  Caius  about  the  year 
1573.  Besides  these  we  approach  now  a goodly  array  of  English  names,  the  most  remarkable  being 
the  architects, — Robert  and  Bernard  Adams,  the  Smithsons,  Bradshaw,  Harrison,  Holte,  Thorpe,  and 
Shute  (the  latter,  author  of  the  first  scientific  work  on  Architecture  in  English,  A.D.  1563),  Hilliard  the 
goldsmith  and  jeweller,  and  Isaac  Oliver,  the  portrait-painter.  Most  of  the  above-named  architects 
were  employed  also  during  the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  at  which  time  the  knowledge  of 
the  new  style  was  still  more  extended  by  Sir  Henry  Wooton’s  “Elements  of  Architecture.”*  Bernard 
Jansen  and  Gerard  Chrismas,  both  natives  of  Holland,  were  much  in  vogue  during  the  reign  of  James  1. 
and  Charles  I.,  and  to  them  is  due  the  fapade  of  Northumberland  House,  Strand. 

Before  the  close  of  James  L’s  reign — i,e,  in  1619  — the  name  of  Inigo  Jones  brings  us  very 
nearly  to  the  complete  downfall  of  the  Elizabethan  style,  on  the  occasion  of  the  rebuilding  of  Whitehall 
Palace ; an  example  which  could  hardly  fail  of  producing  a complete  revolution  in  Art.  The  Palladian 
style  of  the  sixteenth  century  had  been,  moreover,  introduced  even  before  this  by  Sir  Horatio 
Pallavicini,  in  his  house  (now  destroyed)  at  Little  Shelford,  Cambridgeshire ; and  although  Nicholas 
Stone  and  his  son,  architects  and  sculptors,  appear  to  have  continued  the  old  style,  especially  in 
sepulchral  monuments,  it  was  displaced  speedily  for  the  more  pure,  but  less  picturesque  fashion  of 
the  best  Italian  schools. 

Thus,  taking  the  date  of  Torrigiano’s  work  at  Westminster  1519,  and  that  of  the  commencement 
of  Whitehall  by  Inigo  Jones  in  1619,  we  may  include  most  of  the  works  of  art  during  tiat  century 
as  -within  the  so-called  Elizabethan  period. 

In  the  foregoing  list  of  artists,  we  perceive  a fluctuating  mixture  of  Italian,  Dutch,  and  English 
names.  In  the  first  period,  or  (during  the  reign  of  Henry  Till.,  the  Italian  names  are  clearly  dominant, 
and  amongst  them  we  are  justified  in  placing  Holbein  himself,  since  his  ornamental  works  in  metal, 

— for  example,  the  goblet  designed  by  him  for  Jane  Seymour,  and  a dagger  and  sword,  probably 
executed  for  the  king — exhibit  a purity  and  gracefulness  of  style  worthy  of  Cellini  himself.  The 
arabesques  painted  by  him  in  the  large  picture  of  Henry  VIII.  and  his  family  at  Hampton  Court, 
though  more  grotesque  and  heavy,  are  still  close  imitations  of  cinque-cento  models;  and  the  ceiling 
of  the  Royal  Chapel  at  St.  James’s  Palace,  designed  by  him  in  1540,  is  quite  in  the  style  of  many  rich 
examples  at  Venice  and  Mantua. 

During  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  we  meet  with  a great  preponderance  of  Dutch  names,  for  this 
country  was  bound  both  by  political  and  religious  sympathy  with  Holland;  and  although  the  greater 
number  are  described  as  painters  only,  yet  we  must  remember  how  closely  all  the  Arts  were  connected 
in  those  days,  painters  being  frequently  employed  to  design  models  for  ornament,  both  painted  and 
carved,  and  even  for  architecture;  and  in  the  accessories  of  their  own  pictures  was  found  frequent 
scope  for  ornamental  design, — as,  for  example,  may  be  seen  in  the  portrait  of  Queen  Mary,  painted 
by  Lucas  de  Heere,  having  panelled  compartments  of  geometrical  interlaced  forms,  filled  up  -with 
jewelled  foliage.  During  the  early  part  of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  reign  we  are,  then,  justified  in  concluding 
that  a very  important  influence  must  have  been  exercised  on  English  Art  through  the  medium  of  the 
Protestant  States  of  the  Low  Countries,  and  of  Germany  also.f  It  was  during  this  period,  also,  that 

* The  works  of  Lomazzo  and  De  Lorrne  are  said  to  have  been  translated  into  English  dming  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  but  I have 
never  met  with  copies  of  them. 

t The  remarkable  monument  of  Sir  Francis  Vere  (time,  James  I.)  at  Westminster,  is  almost  identical  in  design  'with  that  of  Engle- 
bert  of  Nassau,  in  the  cathedral  of  Breda  (sixteenth  century). 


131 


ELIZABETHAN  ORNAMENT. 


Heidelberg  Castle  was  principally  built  (1556— 1559);  and  it  would  not  appear  unlikely  that  it  may 
have  had  an  effect  on  English  Art  when  we  remember  that  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  James  I., 
held  court  here  as  Queen  of  Bohemia,  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century. 

At  the  latter  part  of  Elizabeth’s  reign,  and  during  that  of  James  I.,  English  artists  are  numerous, 
and  appear,  with  the  exception  of  Jansen  and  Chrismas,  to  have  the  field  to  themselves ; consequently 
it  is  at  this  period  that  we  expect  to  find  a more  decidedly  native  school.  And,  in  fact,  it  is  now 
that  we  meet  with  the  names  of  English  designers  connected  with  such  buildings  (and  with  their  con-r 
comitant  decoration)  as  Audley  End,  Holland  House,  Wollaton,  Knowle,  and  Burleigh. 

Thus  we  may  expect  to  meet  with  the  purest  Italian  ornament  in  the  works  of  the  artists  of  Henry 
VIII.’s  reign;  and  this  will  be  found  to  be  the  case,  not  only  on  the  subjects  we  have  already  mentioned, 
but  in  the  examples  given  in  Plate  LXXXIII.,  Nos.  1 and  3.  During  Elizabeth’s  reign,  we  perceive 
but  a slight  imitation  of  Italian  models,  and  a complete  adoption  of  the  style  of  ornament  practised 
by  the  decorative  artists  of  G-ermany  and  the  Netherlands.  In  the  reign  of  James  I.  we  find  the  same 
style  continued  by  English  artists,  but  generally  in  a larger  manner,  as  at  Nos.  5 and  11,  Plate  LXXXIV., 
from  Aston  Hall,  built  at  the  latter  part  of  his  reign.  There  is  little  then,  that  can  be  justly  termed 
original  in  the  character  of  the  ornament  of  this  period,  and  it  is  simply  a modification  of  foreign 
models.  Even  at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century  may  be  seen  the  germs  of  the  open  scroll-work 
in  many  decorative  works  in  Italy,  such  as  stained  glass  and  illuminated  books.  The  beautifully 
executed  oruamental  borders,  &c.  of  G-iulio  Clovio  (1498-1578),  pupil  of  Giulio  Romano,  present 
in  many  parts  all  the  character  of  Elizabethan  scroll,  band,  nail-head,  and  festoon  work : the  same 
may  be  remarked  of  the  stained  glass  windows  of  the  Laurentian  Library,  Florence,  by  G-iovanni  da 
Udine  (1487-1561);  and  still  more  noticeable  is  it  in  the  frontispieces  of  Serlio’s  great  work  on 
Architecture,  published  in  Paris  in  1515.  As  regards  another  main  feature  in  Elizabethan  ornament, 
viz.  the  complicated  and  fanciful  interlaced  bands,  we  must  seek  its  origin  in  the  numerous  and 
excellent  designs  of  the  class  of  engravers  known  as  the  “ petits  maitres  ” of  G-ermany  and  the  Nether- 
lands, and  more  particularly  in  those  of  Aldegrever,  Virgilius  Solis  of  Nuremberg,  Daniel  Hopfer  of 
Augsburg,  and  Theodore  de  Bry,  who  sent  forth  to  the  world  a great  number  of  engraved  ornamental 
designs  during  the  sixteenth  century.  Nor  should  we  forget  to  mention,  at  the  close  of  this  century, 
the  very  fanciful  and  thoroughly  Elizabethan  compositions,  architectural  and  ornamental,  of  W. 
Dieterlin,  which  Vertue  asserts  were  used  by  Chrismas  in  his  designs  for  the  fapade  of  Northumberland 
House.  These  were  the  principal  sources  from  which  the  so-called  Elizabethan  style  of  ornament 
was  mainly  founded ; and  we  may  here  remark,  that  whilst  it  is  evident  that  decoration  ought,  and 
indeed  in  some  cases  must,  vary  in  its  character,  according  to  the  different  subjects  and  materials 
on  which  it  is  applied,  and  whilst  the  Italian  masters,  recognising  this  sesthetical  fact,  did  in  most 
instances  carefully  abstain  from  carrying  the  pictorial  style  into  sculptured  and  architectural  works, 
confining  it  to  its  just  limits,  such  as  illuminated  books,  engravings.  Damascene  metal-work,  and 
other  purely  ornamental  subjects, — so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  artists  employed  in  England  during 
the  period  of  which  we  treat  carried  the  pictorial  style  of  ornament  into  every  branch  of  Art,  and 
reproduced  even  on  their  buildings  the  unfettered  fancies  of  the  decorative  artists  as  they  received 
them  through  the  medium  of  the  engraver. 

As  regards  the  characteristics  of  Elizabethan  ornament,  they  may  be  described  as  consisting  chiefly 
of  a grotesque  and  complicated  variety  of  pierced  scroll-work,  with  curled  edges ; interlaced  bands, 
sometimes  on  a geometrical  pattern,  but  generally  flowing  and  capricious,  as  seen,  for  example,  on 
No.  12,  Plate  LXXXIII.,  and  Nos,  26  and  27,  Plate  LXXXIV.;  strap  and  nail-head  bands;  curved 
and  broken  outlines ; festoons,  fruit,  and  drapery,  interspersed  with  roughly-executed  figures  of  human 
beings;  grotesque  monsters  and  animals,  with  here  and  there  large  and  flowing  designs  of  natural 
132 


ELIZABETHAN  ORNAMENT. 

branch  and  leaf  ornament,  as  shown  in  No.  7,  Plate  LXXXIIL,  a noble  example  of  which  still  exists 
also  on  the  great  gallery  ceiling  at  Burton  Agnes,  in  Yorkshire ; rustications  of  ball  and  diamond  work, 
paneled  compartments  often  filled  with  foliage  or  coats-of-arms ; grotesque  arch  stones  and  brackets 
are  freely  used;  and  the  carving,  whether  in  stone  or  wood,  is  marked  by  great  boldness  and  effect, 
though  roughly  executed.  Unlike  the  earliest  examples  of  the  Eevival  on  the  Continent,  especially 
in  France  and  Spain,  these  ornaments  are  not  applied  to  Gothic  forms;  but  the  groundwork  or 
architectural  mass  is  essentially  Italian  in  its  nature  (except  in  the  case  of  windows) : consisting  of  a 
rough  application  of  the  orders  of  architecture  one  over  another,  external  walls  with  cornice  and 
balustrade,  and  internal  walls  bounded  with  frieze  and  cornice,  with  flat  or  covered  ceilings;  even 
the  gable  ends,  with  their  convex  and  concave  outlines,  so  common  in  the  style,  were  founded  on 
models  of  the  early  Renaissance  school  at  Venice. 

The  coloured  patterns  of  diaper  work  — on  wood,  on  the  dresses  of  the  monumental  statues,  and 
on  tapestries,— show  in  most  cases  more  justness  and  purity  of  design  than  the  carved  work:  the 
colours,  moreover,  being  rich  and  strongly  marked.  A great  quantity  of  this  kind  of  work,  especially 
the  arras,  with  which  walls  and  furniture  were  constantly  decorated,  no  doubt  came  from  the  looms 
of  Flanders,  and  in  some  cases  from  Italy,  since  the  first  native  factory  of  the  kind  was  established 
at  Mortlake  in  the  year  1619. 

Nos.  9,  10,  11,  and  13,  Plate  LXXXV.,  ai-e  the  most  Italian  in  their  character  of  the  examples 
given;  No.  13  being  stated,  indeed,  to  be  the  design  of  an  Italian  artist.  Nos.  12,  14,  and  16,  also 
9f  a good  Italian  character,  being  taken  from  portraits  of  the  time  of  Elizabeth  and  James  I.,  are 
probably  the  work  of  Dutch  or  ItaUan  artists.  Nos.  1,  4,  5,  15,  and  18,  though  in  the  Italian  taste, 
are  marked  by  much  originality ; whilst  No.  6 and  8 are  in  the  ordinary  Elizabethan  style.  Fine 
examples  of  coloured  ornament  are  still  preserved  in  the  pall  belonging  to  the  Ironmongers’  Company, 
date  1515,  the  ground  of  which  is  gold,  with  a rich  and  flowing  purple  pattern;  similar  in  every 
respect  to  the  painted  antependiums  of  several  altars  at  Santo  Spirito,  Florence  (fifteenth  century), 
and  probably  of  Italian  manufacture. 

At  St.  Mary’s  Church,  Oxford,  is  preserved  a rich  pulpit  hanging  of  gold  ground  with  a blue  pattern ; 
and  at  Hardwicke  Hall,  Derbyshire,  is  a fine  piece  of  tapestry  of  a yellow  silk  ground,  with  a crimson 
and  gold  thread  pattern.  But,  perhaps,  the  most  beautiful  specimen  of  this  kind  of  work  is  in 
the  possession  of  the  Saddlers’  Company,  a gold  pattern  on  a crimson  velvet  pall,*  made  in  the  early 
^part  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Although  in  these  we  have  referred  to,  and  in  the  examples  given  in 
'Plate  LXXXV.,  two  colours  only  are  principally  relied  on  for  effect,  yet  in  other  subjects  every  variety 
of  colour  is  freely  used;  gilding,  however,  being  generally  predominant  over  colour  — a taste  probably 
derived  from  Spain,  where  the  discovery  of  gold  in  the  New  World  led  to  an  extravagant  use  of  it 
as  a means  of  decoration  in  the  reigns  of  Charles  V.  and  Philip  II.  An  example  of  this  style  may  be 
seen  in  the  magnificent  chimney-piece,  with  elaborate  gilt  carving  combined  with  black  marble, 
now  preserved  in  the  Governor’s  room  at  the  Charter-house. 

By  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  more  marked  characteristics  of  the  style  had  com- 
pletely died  out,  and  we  lose  sight,  not  without  some  regret,  of  that  richness,  variety,  and  picturesque- 
ness ; which,  although  deficient  in  good  guiding  principles,  and  liable  to  fall  into  straggling  confusion, 
could  not  fail  to  impress  the  beholder  with  a certain  impression  of  nobility  and  grandeur. 

J.  B.  WARING. 

October  1856. 

* For  these,  see  Shaw’s  very  beautiful  work  on  the  “ Arts  of  the  Middle  Ages." 


M M 


133 


ELIZABETHAN  ORNAMENT. 


BOOKS  REFERRED  TO. 


H.  Shaw.  Dresses  and  Decoratio7is  of  the  Middle  Ages, 

,,  The  Decorative  Arts  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

„ Details  of  Elizabethan  Architecture. 

C.  J.  Eichaudson.  Studies  of  Ornamental  Design. 

„ Architectural  Remains  of  the  Reigns  of  Elizabeth 

and  James  I. 

„ Studies  from  Old  English  Mansions, 

Joseph  Nash.  The  Mansions  of  England  in  the  Olden  Time, 


S.  C.  Haxl.  The  Baronial  Halh  of  England. 

Joseph  Gwilt.  Encyclopedia  of  Architecture. 

Horace  Walpole.  Anecdotes  of  Painting  in  England, 
Archmologia,  vol.  xii.  (1796), 

'The  Builder  (several  Articles  by  C.  J.  Eichardson),  1846. 
Dallaway,  Anecdotes  of  the  Arts  in  England. 

Clayton.  The  Ancient  Timber  Edifices  of  England. 
Britton,  Architectural  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain. 


134 


ELIZABETHEISCH  ELIZABETHAN  N^I.  ELISABETHEENS 


PLATE  LXXXIll. 


14- 


16 


EUZABETHEISCH 


ELIZABETHAN  N°2.  elisabetheens 


TAFEL  LXXXIV 


PLATE  LXXXIV 


s 

8 

1 

■ 0 . 

s 

S. 

Chapter  XIX Plates  86,  86*,  87,  88,  89,  90. 

ITALIAN  OENAMENT. 


PLATES  LXXXVI.,  LXXXVI*. 

A series  of  Arabesques,  painted  in  Fresco  by  Giovanni  da  Udine,  Perino  del  Vaga,  Giulio  Bomano,  Polidoro  da 
Carravaggio,  Francesco  Penni,  Vincenzio  da  San  Gimignano,  Pellegrino  da  Modena,  Bartolomeo  da  Bagnacavallo,  and 
possibly  other  artists,  from  designs  by  Eaffaelle,  selected  from  the  decorations  of  the  Loggie,  or  central  open  Ai’cade 
of  the  Vatican,  Rome. 


PLATE  LNXSYIL 

A series  of  Arabesques  painted  in  Fresco  on  a white  ground,  in  the  Palazzo  Ducale  at  Mantua. 


PLATE  LXXXA^IIL 

A series  of  Arabesques  painted  in  Fresco  on  partially-coloured  grounds,  for  the  most  part  in  the  Palazzo  Ducale  at  Mantua. 


PLATE  LXXXIX. 


A series  of  Arabesques,  painted  in  Fresco  on  fully-  coloured  grounds,  in  the  Palazzo  del  Te,  at  Mantua,  from  Designs 

by  Giulio  Romano. 


PLATE  XC. 

A series  of  Specimens  of  Typographic  Embellishment  of  the  Sixteenth  Century  in  Italy  and  France  ; selected  from  works 
published  by  the  Aldines,  the  Giuntas,  the  Stephans,  and  other  celebrated  Planters. 


Shortly  after  the  commencement  of  the  sixteenth  century,  that  movement  towards  the  restoration 
of  the  antique  which  we  have  recognised  in  Italy  as  fragmentary  and  imperfect  during  the  fifteenth, 
became  systematised,  and  consequently  invigorated,  mainly  through  the  means  of  popularisation,  afforded 
by  the  arts  of  printing  and  engraving.  Through  them  translations  of  Vitruvius  and  Alberti,  copiously 
illustrated  and  ably  commented  upon,  were  speedily  in  the  possession  of  every  designer  of  eminence 
in  the  country,  and  without  its  limits  also ; while,  before  the  close  of  the  century,  the  treatises  of 

135 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


SerliOj  Palladioj  Vignola,  and  Eusconi,  presented  permanent  records  of  the  zeal  with  which  the 
monuments  of  antiquity  had  been  studied.  But  inasmuch  as  the  requirements  of  the  Italian  Social 

system  of  the  sixteenth  century  differed  from  those  of  the 
Imperial  ages  of  Eome,  so  of  a necessity  the  nature  of  the 
monuments  created  to  supply  those  wants  materially  differed. 
In  the  Eenaissance  styles  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  artist’s 
attention  had  been  mainly  directed  to  the  imitation  of  ancient 
ornament;  in  the  sixteenth,  however,  it  was  principally  the 
restoration  of  ancient  proportions,  both  of  the  five  orders  and 
of  architectural  symmetry  generally,  that  engaged  the  designer’s 
attention ; pure  ornament  having  been  to  a great  extent  neg- 
lected in  its  details,  and  considered  only  in  its  mass  as  a decor- 
ative adjunct  to  architecture.  Those  arts  which  during  the 
fifteenth  century  had  been  so  frequently  united  in  the  persons  of 
the  maestri,  under  whom  great  monuments  had  been  carried 
into  execution,  in  the  sixteenth  became  individualised.  The 
genius  of  such  intellectual  giants  as  Eaffaelle  and  Michael  An- 
gelo could  alone  maintain  the  triple  attributes  of  painters,  archi- 
tects, and  sculptors,  in  due  relative  subordination;  when,  in 
after  times,  men  such  as  Bernini  and  Pietro  da  Cortona 
attempted  similar  combinations,  the  result  was  little  else  than 
general  confusion  and  failure.  As  the  rules  of  Art  became 
more  complex,  academies  arose  in  which  the  division-of-labour 
system  was  introduced.  The  consequences,  with  certain  rare 
and  notable  exceptions,  were  obvious : architects  thought  of 
little  else  but  plans,  sections,  and  elevations,  in  which  the 
setting  out  of  columns,  arches,  pilasters,  entablatures,  &c.,  was 
all  in  all ; painters  worked  more  in  their  studios,  and  less  in  the 
buildings,  their  works  were  to  adorn ; forgetting  altogether 
general  decorative  effect,  and  looking  only  to  anatomical  pre- 
cision, powerful  chiar’oscuro,  masterly  composition,  and  breadth 
of  tone  and  handling-  Sculptors  of  a high  class  deserted  orna- 
mental carving  and  gave  their  attention,  almost  exclusively,  to 
isolated  statues  and  groups,  or  monuments  in  which  general 
effects  of  beauty  were  made  subservient  to  the  development  of 
the  plastic  features  alone.  Ornament  was  left  in  a gi-eat  degree 
to  accident  or  caprice  in  its  design,  and  to  second-rate  artists 
in  its  execution.  Favourable  specimens  of  such  ornaments  may 
be  seen  in  our  woodcuts.  The  painted  arabesques  of  the  Italian 
style,  and  the  stucchi  with  which  they  were  occasionally  accom- 
panied, form  so  remarkable  an  exception  to  the  above,  that  it 
will  be  well  to  reserve  them  for  special  notice.  Although  the 
architecture  which  EaffaeUe  has  left  to  us  in  the  Pandolfini 
SofBte  Panel,  from  one  of  the  Genoese  Palaces.  Palace  at  Florence,  and  the  Cafferelli,  late  Stoppani,  at  Eome, 

is  excellent;  it  is  in  his  connexion  with  the  subject  of  arabesque  that  his  celebrity  as  an  ornamentist 
consists,  and  we  shall  not  therefore  further  allude  to  him  here.  Neither  shall  we  dwell  upon  the 
136 


ITALIAN  OENAMENT. 


works  of  Baldassare  Peruzzi,  interesting  though  they  be,  since,  so  far  as  ornament  was  concerned,  they 
approached  so  closely  to  the  antique  as  to  offer  no  striking  individuality.  Bramante,  too,  is  to  be 
regarded  rather  as  a Renaissance  artist  than  iu  any  other  light.  It  is  to  the  great  Florentine,  whose 
fervid  genius,  impatient  of  restraint,  broke  away  from  tradition,  that  we  must  look 
for  that  germ  of  self-willed  originality  that  infected  all  his  contemporaries  in  every 
department  of  art,  and  engendered  a license  which,  it  is  vain  to  deny,  ultimately, 
and  in  feebler  hands  than  his,  resulted  in  a departure  from  taste  and  refinement  in 
every  branch  of  art. 

Michael  Angelo  was  born  in  1474  of  the  noble  Florentine  family  of  the 
Buonarrotti,  descendants  of  the  Counts  of  Canossa;  he  was  a pupil  of  Domenico 
Ghirlandaio;  and  having  early  distinguished  himself  by  his  talent  for  sculpture,  he 
was  invited  to  study  in  the  school  founded  for  its  culture  by  Lorenzo  de  Medici. 

On  the  banishment  of  the  Medici  family  from  Florence  in  1494,  Michael  Angelo 
retired  to  Bologna,  where  he  worked  at  the  tomb  of  St.  Dominic;  after  some  little 
time  he  returned  to  Florence,  and,  before  he  was  twenty-three  years  of  age,  he 
had  executed  the  celebrated  “Cupid,”  which  was  the  cause  of  his  being  invited 
to  Rome,  and  also  his  “ Bacchus.”  At  Rome,  amongst  many  other  works  by 
him,  is  the  Pieta  ” sculptured  by  order  of  Cardinal  d’Amboise,  and  now  in  St. 

Peter  s.  The  gigantic  statue  of  “ David,”  at  Florence,  was  his  next  great 
performance;  and  at  twenty-nine  years  of  age  he  returned  to  Rome,  summoned  by 
Julius  II.  for  the  purpose  of  erecting  his  mausoleum ; for  this  building  the  “ Moses  ” 
at  San  Pietro  in  Vincoli,  and  the  “ Slaves  ” in  the  Louvre,  were  originally  destined, 
but  it  was  completed  on  a smaller  scale  than  was  at  first  intended.  The  painting  of 
the  Sistine  Chapel  was  the  next  work  undertaken  by  him,  and  one  of  his  greatest, 
whether  we  regard  the  sublimity  of  the  performance,  or  the  influence  which  it 
exercised  on  contemporary  art,  as  well  as  on  that  of  after-times.  In  1541  he 
completed  his  vast  fresco  of  the  “ Last  Judgment,”  painted  for  Pope  Paul  III.  The 
remainder  of  his  long  life  was  chiefly  devoted  to  the  construction  of  St.  Peter’s,  on 
which  work  he  was  employed  at  the  time  of  his  death,  in  1564,  and  for  which  he  ' 
refused  all  remuneration. 

In  everything  executed  during  the  long  life  of  Michael  Angelo  the  desire  for 
novelty  seems  to  have  divided  his  attention  from  the  study  of  excellence  alone.  His 
daring  innovations  in  ornament  are  no  less  striking  than  in  other  departments  of 
design.  His  large  broken  pediments  and  mouldings,  his  sweeping  consoles  and 
scrolls,  his  direct  imitation  (saving  an  alloy  of  exaggeration)  of  Nature  in  some 
of  his  enrichments,  and  the  amount  of  plain  face  he  uniformly  preserved  in  his  architectural  compo- 
sitions, brought  new  elements  into  the  field,  which  were  greedily  snapped  up  by  men  of  less  inventive 
power  than  he  himself  possessed.  The  style  of  the  Roman  School  of  Design  was  altogether  changed 
through  Michael  Angelo  ; and  Giacomo  della  Porta,  Domenico  Fontana,  Bartolomeo  Ammanati,  Carlo 
Maderno,  and,  last  not  least,  Vignola  himself,  so  far  as  ornament  was  concerned,  adopted,  with  a few 
of  his  beauties,  many  of  his  defects,  the  greatest  being  exaggeration  of  manner.  At  Florence,  Baccio 
Bandinelli  and  Benvenuto  Cellini  were  among  his  ardent  admirers  and  imitators.  Happily  Venice 
escaped  the  contagion  in  a great  degree,— or,  at  least,  resisted  its  influence  longer  than  almost  any 
other  part  of  Italy.  This  immunity  was  due,  in  a great  degree,  to  the  counteracting  influence  of 
a genius  less  hardy  than  that  of  Michael  Angelo,  but  far  more  refined,  and  scarcely  less  universal.  We 
allude,  of  course,  to  the  greatest  of  the  two  Sansovinos  — &iacopo. 


Vertical  Ornament  from 
Genoa. 


N N 


137 


ITALIAN  OENAMENT. 


This  nohle  artist  was  born  at  Florence,  of  an  ancient  family  in  the  year  1477.  Having  at  an 
early  age  displayed  a remarkable  predisposition  for  Art,  he  was  placed  by  his  mother  with  Andrea 
Contucci  of  Monte  Sansovino  (of  whom  we  have  briefly  spoken  in  Chapter  XVII.),  then  working  at 
Florence,  who,  says  Vasari,  “ soon  perceived  that  the  young  man  promised  to  become  very  eminent.” 
Their  attachment  speedily  assumed  such  a character  that,  being  regarded  almost  as  father  and  son, 
Jacopo  was  no  longer  called  “ de’  Tatti,”  but  di  Sansovino ; ” and  as  he  was  then  named  so  is  he 
called  now,  and  ever  will  be.  Having  distinguished  himself  by  his  abilities  at  Florence,  and  being  con- 
sidered a young  man  of  great  genius  and  excellent  character,  he  was  taken  to  Home  by  Griuliano  da 
San  G-allo,  architect  to  Pope  Julius  II.  At  Eome  he  attracted  the  notice  of  Bramante,  and  made 
a large  copy  in  wax  of  the  “ Laocoon  ” (under  Bramante’s  direction),  in  competition  with  other  artists, 
among  whom  was  Alonzo  Berruguete,  the  celebrated  Spanish  architect.  Sansovino’s  was  adjudged  to 
be  the  best,  and  a cast  was  taken  of  it  in  bronze,  which  finally  coming  into  the  possession  of  the 
Cardinal  de  Lorraine,  was  taken  by  him  into  France  in  the  year  1534.  San  G-allo  falling  ill  was 
obliged  to  leave  Rome,  and  Bramante,  therefore,  found  a dwelling  for  Jacopo  in  the  same  house  with 
Pietro  Perugino,  who  was  then  painting  a ceiling  for  Pope  Julius  in  the  Torre  Borgia,  and  who  was 
so  pleased  ■with  Jacopo’s  ability,  that  he  caused  him  to  prepare  many  models  in  wax  for  his  use.  He 
also  became  acquainted  with  Luca  Signorelli,  Bramantino  di  Milano,  Pinturicchio,  Cesare  Cesariano, 
famous  for  his  commentaries  on  Vitruvius ; and  was  finally  presented  to  and  employed  by  the  Pope 
(Julius).  He  was  in  a fair  way  of  advancement,  when  a serious  illness  caused  him  to  return  to  his 
native  city.  Here  he  recovered,  and  successfully  competed  with  Bandinelli  and  others  for  a large 
marble  fig-ure.  He  was  in  continual  employment  at  this  time,  and  among  other  works  he  executed 
for  Giovanni  Bartolini  the  beautiful  "Bacchus”  (now  in  the  Gallery  degli  Uflizii  at  Florence). 

In  the  year  1514,  great  preparations  being  made  at  Florence  for  the  entry  of  Leo  X.,  Jacopo  was 
employed  in  making  various  designs  for  triumphal  arches  and  statues,  with  which  the  Pontiff  was 
so  much  pleased,  that  Jacopo  Salviati  took  his  friend  Sansovino  to  kiss  the  feet  of  the  Pope,  by 
whom  he  was  received  very  kindly.  His  Holiness  immediately  gave  him  an  order  to  make  a design 
for  the  fajade  of  San  Lorenzo  at  Florence,  which  would  seem  to  have  given  so  much  satisfaction, 
that  Michael  Angelo,  who  was  to  compete  with  him  for  the  control  of  its  construction,  would  appear 
to  have  outwitted  Sansovino,  and  effectually  prevented  his  success;  for,  says  Vasari,  "Michael  Angelo 
was  determined  to  keep  all  for  himself.”  Not  disheartened,  however,  he  continued  in  Rome,  and 
was  employed  both  in  sculpture  and  architecture,  and  gained  the  great  honour  of  being  the  successful 
competitor  for  the  Church  of  St.  John  of  the  Florentines,  against  Raffaelle,  Antonio  da  Sangallo, 
and  Balthazar  Peruzzi.  Whilst  superintending  the  commencement  of  the  works  he  fell,  and  was 
so  severely  hurt  that  he  left  the  city.  Various  causes  led  to  the  suspension  of  the  works  until  the 
pontificate  of  Clement,  when  Jacopo  returned  and  recommenced  it.  From  that  period  he  was  engaged 
in  every  work  of  importance  at  Rome,  until,  on  the  6th  of  May,  1527,  that  city  was  taken  and 
sacked  by  the  French. 

Jacopo  sought  refuge  in  Venice,  intending  to  visit  France,  where  the  King  had  offered  him  employ- 
ment. The  Doge,  Andrea  Gritti,  however,  persuaded  him  to  remain,  and  to  undertake  the  restoration 
of  the  cupolas  of  St.  Mark’s.  This  work  he  performed  so  satisfactorily,  that  he  was  appointed  Proto- 
Maestro  to  the  Republic,  assigned  a house,  and  pro-dded  with  a stipend.  The  duties  of  this  office  he 
performed  -with  such  sagacity  and  diligence,  that  by  various  improvements  and  alterations  of  the  city  he 
materially  added  to  the  income  of  the  State.  Among  his  finest  works  here — and,  indeed,  among  the 
finest  examples  of  Italian  Art  anywhere  — are  to  be  noted,  the  Libreria  Vecchia,  the  Zecca  or  Mint,  the 
Palaces  Cornaro  and  Moro,  the  Loggia  round  the  Campanile  of  St.  Mark,  the  Church  of  San  Georgio 
dei  Greci,  the  Statues  of  the  Giant’s  Staircase,  the  monument  of  Francesco  Veniero,  and  the  bronze 
138 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 

gates  of  the  Sacristy.  His  character  as  depicted  by  Vasari  (edit.  Bohn,  vol.  v.  p.  426)  is  eminently 
agreeable,  sagacious,  amiable,  courageous,  and  active.  He  appears  to  have  been  generally  honoured, 
and  had  a large  school  of  pupils,  amongst  whom  may  be  mentioned  Tribolo  and  Solosmeo  Danese,  Cat- 
taneo  G-irolamo  of  Ferrara,  Jacopo  Colonna  of  Venice,  Luco  Lancia  of  Naples,  Bartolommeo  Ammanati, 
Jacopo  de  Medici  of  Brescia,  and  Alessandro  Vittoria  of  Trent.  He  died  on  the  2d  of  November,  1570, 
aged  ninety-three ; “ and  (as  Vasari  tells  us)  notwithstanding  that  the  years  of  his  life  had  come  to  an 
end  in  the  pure  course  of  nature,  yet  all  Venice  lamented  his  loss.”  It  is  mainly  to  the  happy  influence 
exerted  by  Sansovino  that  the  School  of  Venice  is  indebted  for  its  celebrity  in  ornamental  bronze-work. 

Turning  from  Italy  to  France,  we  resume  the  thread  of  national  progress,  interrupted  by  the 
introduction  into  the  service  of  Francis  I.  {circa  A.D.  1530)  of  those  Italian  artists  who  formed  what  is 
familiarly  known  as  the  “School  of  Fontainebleau.”  The  leading  and  most  popular  member  of  that 
fraternity  was  Primaticcio,  a master  whose  style  of  drawing  was  founded  upon  the  Michael-Angelesque 
system  of  proportion,  somewhat  attenuated  in  limb,  and  moulded  into  a somewhat  more  artificial  and 
serpentine  Line  of  grace.  The  manner  of  arranging  and  defining  drapery  peculiar  to  the  Fontainebleau 
masters  exerted  a singular  influence  upon  the  native  artists,  and  that  not  only  in  the  corresponding 
department  of  art,  but  in  ornament  generally.  The  peculiar  crinkled  folds  of  the  garments,  disposed, 
not  as  they  would  obviously  fall  if  left  to  themselves,  but  as  they  would  best  fill  up  voids  in  composition, 
induced  a general  levity  in  the  treatment  of  similar  elements,  and  led  to  that  ^%c.vM?ix\y  fluttering  style 
which  may  be  recognised  in  the  works  of  all  those  artists  who  reflected  and  reproduced  the  prevalent 
mode  of  the  day.  Among  the  most  remarkable  of  these,  and  moreover  a man  of  singular  originality 
of  intellect,  stands  conspicuous  the  renowned  Jean  Goujon,  who  was  born  in  France  early  in  the  sixteenth 
century.  His  principal  works  are  (for  happily  they  have  for  the  most  part  survived  to  our  days)  the 
“Fontaine  des  Innocents,”  at  Paris  (1550);  the  gallery  of  the  “Salle  des  Cent  Suisses,”  now  “des 
Caryatides,”  supported  by  four  colossal  female  figures,  which  are  considered  among  his  best  works.  The 
celebrated  Diana  of  Poitiers,  called  “ Diane  Chasseresse,”  a small  and  very  beautiful  bas-relief  of  the 
same  subject,  his  wooden  doors  to  the  Church  of  St.  Maclou  at  Rouen,  his  carvings  of  the  Court  of  the 
Louvre,  and  his  “ Christ  at  the  Tomb,”  in  the  Museum  of  the  Louvre.  Goujon  partook  warmly  of  the 
enthusiasm  the  recovery  of  the  writings  of  Vitruvius  excited  universally,  and  contributed  an  essay  in 
respect  to  them  in  Martin’s  translation.  He  was  unfortunately  shot  during  the  massacre  of  St.  Bar- 
tholomew, whilst  working  on  a scaffold  at  the  Louvre,  in  1572.  An  artist  who  had  imbibed  even  more 
of  the  Italian  spirit  of  the  School  of  Fontainebleau  than  did  Jean  Goujon,  narrowly  escaped  sharing  his 
fate.  Barthelemy  Prieur  was  only  saved  from  immolation  by  the  protection  of  the  Constable  Mont- 
morency, whose  monumental  effigy  he  was  ultimately  destined  to  place  upon  its  pedestal.  Contemporary 
with  Goujon  and  Prieur  was  Jean  Cousin,  the  most  ardent  disciple  of  Michael-Angelesque  form.  He  is 
principally  known  as  the  sculptor  of  the  noble  statue  of  Admiral  Chabot,  and,  as  we  have  already 
stated  (Chapter  XVII.),  by  his  designs  for  stained  glass.  Prominent,  however,  among  the  artistic  band 
of  the  period,  was  Germain  Pilon,  who  was  born  at  Loue,  near  Mans.  The  statues  at  the  Convent  of 
Soulesmes  are  among  his  earliest  works.  About  the  year  1550  his  father  sent  him  to  Paris,  and  in 
1557  his  monument  to  Guillaume  Langei  du  Bellay  was  placed  in  the  Cathedral  of  Mans.  About  the 
same  time  he  executed  the  monument  of  Henry  II.  and  Catherine  de  Medici,  in  the  Church  at  St. 
Denis,  near  Paris,  from  a design  by  Philibert  de  Lorme.  One  of  his  best  works  was  the  monument  to 
the  Chancellor  de  Birague. 

The  beautiful  and  well-known  group  of  the  “Three  Graces,”  cut  out  of  one  solid  block  of  marble, 
was  intended  to  support  an  um  containing  the  hearts  of  Henry  II.  and  Catherine  de  Medici;  it  is 
now  in  the  Louvre.  In  order  to  give  an  idea  of  the  ornamental  style  of  Pilon,  we  have  engraved 
the  base  of  this  monument,  see  Plate  LXXVI.,  Fig.  9.  The  statues  and  bas-reliefs  on  the  monument 

139 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


of  Francis  L are  by  Pilon  and  Pierre  Bontemps.  After  1590  no  works  of  his  are  known,  and  Kugler 
gives  it  as  the  date  of  his  death. 

The  length  of  limb  and  artificial  grace  peculiar  to  the  school  of  Fontainebleau,  was  pushed  to  the 
farthest  point  of  extravagance  by  Francavilla,  or  Pierre  Francheville,  of  Cambray  (born  1548),  who 
introduced  into  France  the  even  greater  wiriness  of  the  style  of  John  of  Bologna,  whose  pupil  he  had 
been  during  many  years.  The  general  characteristics  of  the  style  of  ornament  prevalent  during  the 
first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  which  served  as  an  induction  into  what  is  generally  known 
as  Louis  XIV.  work,  cannot  be  better  studied  than  in  the  apartments  of  Marie  de  Medici,  executed 
for  her  in  the  Palace  of  the  Luxembourg,  Paris,  about  1620. 

This  manner  was  succeeded  by  that  of  Le  Pautre,  an  artist  of  great  cleverness  and  fertility.  Our 
woodcut  gives  an  idea  of  his  style. 


Panel  for  a Ceiling,  from  a Design  by  Le  Pautre. 


Leaving  for  awhile  the  subject  of  sculptured  Italian  and  French  Ornament,  it  may  be  well  to 
advert  to  that  of  painted;  the  more  especially  as  for  a short  time,  during  which  a great  degree  of  zeal 
for  the  preservation  of  old  Eoman  vestiges  of  polychromatic  decoration  was  exercised,  a very  high  and 
remarkable  degree  of  perfection  and  beauty  was  attained.  It  is  ever  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  a 
very  wide  difference  existed  between  the  painted  and  carved  arabesques  of  the  ancients.  The  latter 
during  the  period  of  the  Early  Eenaissanoe  were  almost  entirely  neglected,  whilst  the  former  were 
imitated  with  great  success,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  interesting  pilaster  panels,  designed  by  Baccio 
Pintelli  for  the  Church  of  Sant’  Agostino  at  Eome,  and  which  form  the  subject  of  our  woodcuts  'on 
the  next  page. 

The  study  of  ancient  Eoman  and  Greek  sculptures  was  naturally  followed  by  that  of  the  antique 
decorations  in  marble  and  stone  which  throughout  Italy  abounded  so  profusely,  and  which  every  day’s 
excavation  brought  to  Ught,  — such,  for  instance,  as  perfect  remains  or  shattered  fragments  of 
140 


ITALIAN  OENAMENT. 


Arabesnuo  designed  by 
Baccio  Pintelli,  for  the 
Church  of  Sant’  Agostino,  Borne. 


ornamented  vases,  altars,  friezes,  pilasters,  &c.,  groups, 
or  single  figures,  busts,  or  beads,  in  medallions  or  on 
architectural  backgrounds ; fruit,  flowers,  foliage,  and 
animals,  intermixed  with  tablets  of  various  forms,  bear- 
ing allegorical  inscriptions.  An  infinite  variety  of  such 
gems  of  beauty  offered  themselves  to  the  notice  of  the 
artists  of  that  period  who  visited  Eome  for  the  express 
purpose  of  making  drawings  of  such  remains;  and  in 
transferring  the  subject  so  sketched  to  the  modem  ara- 
besques, it  was  scarcely  possible  that  the  early  artists 
should  avoid  also  transferring  to  their  paintings  some- 
what of  the  formal  character  inseparable  from  the  sculp- 
tured and  material  character  of  the  objects  from  which 
their  original  drawings  had  been  made. 

Such  circumstances  may  go  far  to  explain  the  differ- 
ence we  cannot  fail  to  recognise  between  the  imitation 
and  the  object  imitated,  in  many  of  the  first  attempts 
to  reproduce  the  painted  decorations  of  the  Eomans  of 
Imperial  times.  Among  such  diligent  students,  none 
was  more  conspicuous  than  was  Pietro  Peragino,  during 
his  residence  in  Rome  at  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth 
century.  How  fully  and  to  what  good  purpose  he  ac- 
cumulated studies  of  ancient  ornament  was  shown  by 
the  immediate  commission  he  received  from  his  fellow- 
townsmen  to  decorate  the  vaults  of  their  Exchange,  or 
“Sala  di  Cambio,”  with  frescoes,  in  which  the  ancient 
style  and  certain  antique  subjects  should  be  vividly 
reproduced.  This  beautiful  work  of  art,  for  such  it 
proved  to  be,  was  executed  soon  after  his  return  to 
Perugia  from  Rome ; and  manifests  how  deeply  he  must 
have  drunk  at  the  classic  fountain  of  antique  Art.  It  is, 
without  doubt,  the  first  complete  reproduction  of  the 
grotesques  ” of  the  ancients,  and  is  singularly  interest- 
ing, not  only  as  establishing  the  claim  of  Pietro  to  be 
regarded  as  the  first  great  and  accurate  reviver  of  this 
graceful  style  of  decoration,  but  as  having  been  the 
“ trial -piece  ” on  which  so  many  ’prentice  hands  ” were 
exercised,  whose  efforts  subsequently  carried  it  to  the 
highest  perfection. 

The  principal  scholars  of  Perugino,  whose  labours 
there  is  little  doubt  materially  aided  in  the  elaboration 
of  these  graceful  fancies,  were  Raffaelle,  then  aged  six- 
teen or  seventeen ; Francesco  Ubertini,  better  known  as 
Bacchiacca ; and  Pinturicchio.  And  it  is  curious  to 
trace  the  influence  of  the  success  of  this  their  first 
attempt  upon  the  after  career  of  each  of  the  three.  It 
0 0 


Arabesque  designed  by 
Baccio  Pintelli  for  the 
Church  of  Sant’  Agostino,  Romo. 

141 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


led  immediately  to  the  employment  of  Raflfaelle  and  Pinturicchio,  in  conjunctioBj  in  the  decoration 
of  the  celebrated  Library  at  Sienna,  and  subsequently,  to  the  cultivation  of  such  studies  on  the  part  of 
the  former  as  induced  his  composition  of  the  inimitable  arabesques  of  the  Loggie  of  the  Vatican, 
&c.  &c. ; and  on  that  of  the  latter  artist  to  the  execution  of  the  ceilings  of  the  choir  of  Sta.  Maria  del 
Popolo,  and  those  of  the  Apartamenti  Borgia,  &c.  at  Eome.  Bacchiacca  became  so  completely  ena- 
moured of  the  style,  that  his  whole  life  was  devoted  to  painting  animals,  flowers,  &c.  in  grotesque  ’ 
decoration ; and  he  ultimately  became  famous  throughout  Italy  as  a perfect  master  of  that  variety 
of  design. 

In  freedom  and  cleverness  of  drawing,  in  harmony  of  colour,  in  brilliancy  of  touch,  in  nice  balance 
of  the  “ pieni  ” and  “vuoti,”  and  in  close  imitation  of  the  paintings  of  the  ancient  Bomans,  this  speci- 
men is  one  of  the  most  successful  that  has  ever  been  executed,  although,  in  delicacy  of  finish  and 
refined  study,  it  can  scarcely  be  expected  to  equal  the  subsequent  productions  of  G-iovanni  da  Udine  and 
Morto  da  Feltro. 

During  the  stay  of  Eaffaelle  in  Eome,  under  the  pontificate  of  Leo  X.,  he  was  commissioned  by 
that  pontiff  to  decorate  an  arcade,  which  had  been  constructed  during  the  reign  of  his  predecessor, 
Julius  II.,  by  Bramante,  whose  daughter  Eatfaelle  married. 

It  was  determined  that  while  the  theme  of  the  necessary  decorations  should  be  sacred,  their  style 
and  manner  of  execution  should  rival  the  finest  remains  of  ancient  painting  which  had  been  discovered 
at  Eome  up  to  that  period.  The  general  designs  appear  to  have  been  made  by  Eaffaelle  himself,  and 
the  details  to  have  been  carried  out  by  a chosen  band  of  assistants,  who  unquestionably  entered  with 
wonderful  zeal  into  the  realisation  of  the  great  work.  It  was  by  their  hands,  controlled  by  the  exquisite 
taste  of  the  great  Urbinese,  that  those  celebrated  loggie,”  which  have  ever  since  their  execution  been 
a theme  of  admiration  for  all  artists,  were  created.  We  have  given  a careful  selection,  showing  the 
principal  ornamental  motives  comprised  in  them  in  Plate  LXXXVI. 

These  arabesques  cannot  fairly  be  compared  with  the  ancient,  as  the  former  were  executed  by 
the  greatest  masters  of  the  age,  and  are  applied  to  the  decoration  of  an  edifice  of  the  highest 
magnificence  and  importance,  whilst  the  latter  were  the  productions  of  a less  distinguished  period 
of  Alt;,  and  those  now  in  existence  ornament  buildings  of  a class  relatively  far  less  important  to 
Imperial  magnificence  than  the  Vatican  was  to  Papal.  The  comparison  might  be  fairer  if  we  could 
but  recall  the  faded  glories  of  the  Palace  of  the  Csesars,  or  the  “ Golden  House  ” of  NTero. 

“ The  ancient  arabesques  have,  in  almost  every  instance,  all  their  parts  kept  upon  a reduced 
scale,  in  order  to  favour  the  apparent  extent  of  the  locality  they  decorate ; in  addition  to  which  they 
generally  manifest  a predominating  general  proportion  between  their  several  parts.  ’They  never  present 
such  striking  differences  in  scale  between  the  principal  subjects  as  we  find  in  the  arabesques  of 
Eaffaelle,  the  component  parts  of  which  are  sometimes  as  unreasonably  large  as  they  sometimes  are 
unreasonably  small.  The  greater  is  often  placed  beside  and  above  the  less,  thereby  emphaticising 
the  dissonances,  and  being  the  more  offensive  by  a deficiency  in  symmetry,  as  well  as  in  the  very 
choice  of  the  motives  for  decoration.  Thus,  close  to  the  richest  arabesques,  presenting,  on  a very 
small  scale,  elegant  and  minute  combinations  of  flowers,  fruit,  animals,  human  figures,  and  views  of 
temples,  landscapes,  &c.,  we  find  calices  of  flowers  putting  forth  twisted  stalks,  leaves,  and  blossoms 
— all  which,  with  reference  to  the  adjoining  and  first-described  arabesques,  are  of  colossal  proportion; 
thereby  not  only  injuring  the  accompanying  decorations,  but  also  destroying  the  grandeur  of  the 
whole  architectural  design.  Lastly,  on  examining  the  choice  of  subjects  with  respect  to  the  association 
of  ideas  indicated  thereby,  and  the  decorations  in  the  symbols  and  allegories  employed  to  convey 
them,  we  find  that  the  works  of  the  ancients,  who  reverted  to  no  other  source  than  their  mythology, 
appear  to  great  advantage,  in  point  of  unity  of  idea,  when  compared  with  the  prevailing  intermixture 
142 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


in  tlie  Loggie  of  that  imaginary  world  with  the  symbols  of  Christianity.”  Such  are  among  the  general 
conclusions  to  which  that  profound  student  of  ancient  polychromy,  M.  Hittorflf,  has  arrived,  and  it  is 
impossible  not  to  concur  in  their  propriety;  while  condemning,  however,  such  faults  of  ensemble,  we 
must  not  lose  sight  of  the  exquisite  graces  of  detail  wrought  out  in  their  execution  by  Raffaelle  and 
his  scholars.  “ Proceeding  from  the  Vatican  to  the  Villa  Madama,  we  find,  immediately  on  entering 
its  halls,  that  divisions  create  a less  confusing  general  effect.  In  all  the  principal  decorations  there 
is  a better  regulated  proportion,  and  greater  symmetry;  and  in  the  magnificent  roofs,  notwithstanding 
the  multiplicity  of  their  ornaments,  a more  gratifying  and  calming  influence  is  exerted  upon  us. 
Here,  where  all  the  principal  subjects  represent  scenes  from  the  mythology  of  the  ancients,  we  find  a 
pervading  unity  conceived  more  in  the  spirit  of  the  ancients.  If  we  adopt  the  general  opinion,  and 
look  upon  this  beautiful  work  as  a second  undertaking  conceived  by  KaffaeUe  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Loggie,  and  executed  entirely  by  G-iulio  Romano  and  G-iovanni  da  Udine,  we  see  how  the  favourite 
pupils  of  the  incomparable  master  succeeded  in  avoiding  faults  against  good  taste,  which  he  and  his 
contemporaries  cannot  fail  to  have  recognised  in  his  former  work,  favourably  as  it  was  received  by 
the  popular  voice,  not  only  of  courtiers,  but  of  artists.”  Unlike  the  arabesques  of  the  Vatican,  which 
are  executed,  for  the  most  part,  upon  white  grounds,  those  of  this  delicious  suburban  retreat  are  for 
the  most  part,  worked  out  upon  variously  coloured  grounds — a habit  to  which  Giulio  Romano  appears 
to  have  been  more  partial  than  either  Raffaelle  or  Giovanni  da  Udine. 

The  villa  itself  was  built  by  Romano  and  his  fellow-labourer  for  Pope  Clement  VII.  when  Cardinal 
Gmlio  de  Medici,  the  first  designs  having  been  given  by  Raffaelle.  The  work  was  still  incomplete 
when  it  was  partially  destroyed  by  Cardinal  Pompeo  Colonna,  to  revenge  himself  upon  Clement  VII. 
who  had  burnt  fourteen  of  his  castles  in  the  Campagna  of  Rome.  The  villa  is  now  rapidly  going 


to  decay ; but  the  grandeur  of  the  three  arches  still  remaining  is  sufficient  to  show  that  the  design 
was  worthy  of  Raffaelle ; and  that  it  was  his  is  proved  beyond  a doubt,  by  a letter  to  Francesco 
Maria,  Duke  of  Urbino,  written  by  Castiglione,  as  well  as  by  some  drawings,  which,  together  with 
the  letter,  are  still  in  existence. 

The  Villa  Madama  was  purchased  after  the  confiscation  of  the  Medicis  property,  in  1537,  by 

143 


ITALIAN  OBNAMENT. 


Margaret,  daughter  of  Charles  V.,  and  widow  of  Duke  Alexander  de  Medici,  and  from  her  title  of 
Madama  the  viUa  takes  its  name.  The  building  was  partially  restored,  though  never  completed, 
and  Margaret  resided  there  on  her  marriage  with  Ottavio  Farnese.  The  crown  of  Naples  afterwards 
became  possessed  of  it,  with  the  rest  of  the  Farnese  property,  through  a marriage  with  that  family. 

So  large  a number  of  arabesque  decorations  were  executed  by  the  pupils  and  followers  of  Raffaelle, 
and  so  great  was  the  skill  acquired  by  them  in  this  art,  that  it  is  now  difficult  to  ascertain  to  whom 
we  owe  the  beautiful  arabesques  which  still  decorate  many  of  the  palaces  and  country-houses  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Eome.  After  the  premature  death  of  Raffaelle,  the  bond  that  had  united  the 
brotherhood  which  had  gathered  around  his  person  was  snapped,  and  those  who  had  so  ably  worked 
with  him  spread  themselves  in  various  directions  throughout  Italy,  carrying  with  them  the  experience 
and  knowledge  they  had  acquired  in  the  conduct  of  the  great  undertakings  placed  under  his  charge. 
Thus  sown  broadcast  over  the  land  were  the  elements  of  painted  arabesque  decoration.  In  proportion, 
however,  as  the  artists,  by  whom  subsequent  works  were  undertaken,  removed  from  the  classic  influences 
of  Rome,  their  styles  became  more  pictorial,  and  less  purely  decorative ; and  in  the  seventeenth  century 
the  arabesque  manner  became  almost  entirely  merged  in  such  florid  decorations  as  suited  the  extravagant 
ideas  of  architectural  magnificence  nourished  by  the  Jesuits.  In  the  days  of  Bernini,  and  at  a later 
period  in  those  of  Borromini,  the  Stuccatore  triumphed  in  every  species  of  flourish,  while  in  the  scanty 
openings  left  between  the  fluttering  wings,  and  draperies  of  angels  and  saints  suspended  in  vaults  and 
cupolas  in  mid-air,  the  decorative  painter  was  allowed  to  place  little  else  than  the  perspective  tricks 
of  the  Padre  Pozzo  and  his  school. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  arabesque  altogether,  it  may  be  well  to  trace  a few  anomalies  in 
its  varied  local  aspects.  As  may  reasonably  be  inferred,  the  presence  of  ancient  remains  has  almost 
invariably  affected  the  local  style  of  ornament  in  those  spots  where  they  have  most  abounded.  Thus 
at  Rome  the  school  of  arabesque  ornament  most  nearly  approached  the  antique,  while  in  cities,  such 
as  Mantua,  Pavia,  and  Grenoa,  other  and  distinct  types  and  influences  may  be  traced.  The  Mantuan 
system  of  ornamentation,  for  instance,  may  be  distinctly  subdivided  into  the  school  of  nature  and 
that  of  conventional  vigour  approaching  caricature,  imported  by  Griulio  Romano,  and  a reflex  of  the 
favourite  Paganism  of  Rome.  In  the  deserted  chambers  of  the  Palazzo  Ducale  are  fast  fading  into 
nothingness  the  graceful  frescoes,  of  which  we  have  presented  numerous  specimens  in  Plates  LXXXVII. 
and  LXXXVIII. ; executed  for  the  most  part  upon  a white  ground.  Leaves,  flowers,  and  tendrils, 
frequently  wind  round  a central  reed,  as  at  Figs.  7 and  9,  Plate  LXXXVII. ; and  in  such  cases  Nature 
appears  as  the  directly  inspiring  deity.  In  other  instances,  as  in  Figs.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6,  of  the 
same  plate,  a simple  style  of  convention  is  followed,  in  which  the  hand  of  the  artist  sweeps  out  as 
wayward  fancy  prompts,  an  ever-recurring,  yet  rarely  monotonous,  series  of  scrolls  and  curves;  the 
leading  points  of  which  are  generally  accentuated  by  calices,  and  the  dominant  lines  of  which  are 
adorned,  and  from  time  to  time  interrupted,  by  foliage  of  parasitic  growth. 

A marked  difference  of  style  in  the  decoration  of  the  same  building  is  inaugurated  in  the 
specimens  (Figs.  1,  2,  4,  and  5),  we  have  collected  in  Plate  LXXXVIII.  In  them  the  artist  has 
withdrawn  himself  farther  from  nature,  retaining  at  the  same  time  an  even  more  pictorial  mode  of 
representation  than  in  the  earlier  and  purer  examples.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  assert  that  beauty  of 
the  highest  and  most  architectonic  character  may  not  be  obtained  in  ornament  entirely  conventional 
in  conception ; but  certain  it  is  that  to  be  agreeable  such  ornament  should  be  expressed  in  a simple 
and  flat  style  of  treatment,  both  as  regards  light,  shade,  and  colour.  In  direct  proportion  as  the 
elements  of  which  an  ornament  is  composed  have  been  taken  with  more  or  less  divergence  from  the 
ordinary  aspect  of  nature,  so  should  the  mode  be  varied  in  which  that  ornament  should  be  portrayed. 
Thus,  in  the  more  refined  arabesques  of  Plate  LXXXVII.,  in  which  the  forms  of  growing  plants 
144 


liave  been  freely  sketched  from  the  garden  and  field,  an  amount  of  delicate  modelling  and  indication 
of  accidental  effect  is  admissible,  which  in  the  representation  of  the  more  absolutely  conventional 
elements  of  the  specimens  given  in  Plate  LXXXVIIL,  strikes  us  as  somewhat  officious  and  feeble. 
Already  in  the  bustle  of  line,  the  fluttering  ribbons,  and  vague  jewelled  forms  of  No.  5,  and  in  the 
monotonous  masques  and  foolscaps  of  No.  1 (Plate  LXXX.),  may  be  traced  that  tendency  to  caricature 
which  disfigured  so  much  that  the  genius  of  Eomano  threw  off  with  masterly  power,  but  unfortunately 
with  too  great  fecundity.  So  long,  as  at  the  Villa  Madama,  and  in  other  of  his  Eoman  works,  his 
exuberance  was  controlled  by  association  with  artists  of  purer  taste  than  himself,  there  is  little  with 
which  to  reproach  him;  but  when  he  subsequently  emerged  into  the  “ Giran  Signore”  at  Mantua,  his 
vanity  fairly  intoxicated  him,  and  with  much  that  was  beautiful  he  blended  not  a little  that  was 
ridiculous. 

The  specimens  of  his  arabesques,  which  we  have  collected  in  Plate  LXXXVIII.,  illustrate  at 
once  his  ability  and  his  weakness  as  an  ornamentist.  Unable  to  divest  himself  of  his  recollections  of 
the  antique,  and  at  the  same  time  too  egotistic  to  be  content  with  its  careful  reproduction,  the 
motives  he  borrowed  from  it  assume  an  aspect  of  unquiet  rarely  to  be  recognised  in  the  remains  of 
classic  antiquity.  The  motives  he  derived  from  Nature  are  equally  maltreated,  since  he  gathered 
flowers  from  her  bosom  only  to  crush  them  in  his  rude  grasp.  There  are  yet,  however,  a daring  in 
his  fancy,  and  a rare  sweep  and  certainty  in  his  handling,  which  must  secure  for  him  an  honourable 
niche  in  the  Temple  of  Art.  Like  ^*Van  who  wanted  grace,  yet  never  wanted  wit,”  it  is  on  the  score 
of  taste  that  he  who  in  his  time  was  one  of  its  chief  arbiters  most  frequently  fails.  This  fallibility 
is  stamped  upon  several  of  the  ornaments  we  have  engraved  in  Plate  LXXXIX.,  which  are  taken 
principally  from  the  Palazzo  del  Te,  at  Mantua.  Thus,  in  No.  2,  a scroll  ornament  freely  dashed  out 
is  entii’ely  spoilt  by  the  ludicrous  object  from  which  it  springs.  Again  in  No.  3,  the  ridiculous 
masques  seem  sneering  at  the  graceful  forms  which  surround  them;  and  in  No.  4,  nature  and  the 
antique  are  alike  maltreated.  No.  6 in  the  same  plate  points  a”  severe  ''moral.”  Servile,  where 
an  ornament  should  be  most  free  in  the  disposition  of  its  main  lines;  and  free,  where  deference  to 
some  received  type  of  form  ceases  to  be  servile,  in  the  accessory  elements  of  which  it  is  composed- 


Typographic  Omamout  from  one  of  the  productions  of  the  early  Parisian  Press.  (Stephans'  Greek  Testament.) 

Ms  running  scroll,  wliicli  is  adapted  from  one  of  the  commonest  patterns  of  antiquity,  betrays  at 
once  G-iulio’s  feebleness  of  imagination,  and  bis  want  of  taste. 

The  peouUar  influence  of  local  association  upon  styles  of  ornament,  which  we  have  already  noticed 
in  the  case  of  arabesques,  may  be  traced  with  equal  facility  in  the  best  typographic  and  xylographic 
illustrations  of  the  early  printers.  Thus,  in  the  ornaments.  Figs.  4-7,  9-16,  Plate  XC.,  taken  from 
the  celebrated  “ Etymologion  Magnum,”  printed  at  Venice  in  the  year  1499,  the  forms  of  the  ornament, 
and  the  almost  even  distribution  of  the  “pieni”  and  “vuoti,”  have  been  evidently  based  on  the  style 
of  those  Oriental  or  Byzantine  fragments,  in  which  Venice  was  so  pre-eminently  rich.  Many  of  tlie 
Aldine  initial  letters  in  the  last-named  plate,  appear  as  though  they  might  have  been  engraved  by 

PP  145 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


the  very  same  hands  that  ploughed  out  the  damascene  patterns  in  the  metal-work  of  the  period.  The 
Tuscan  Bible  of  1538  presents  us  with  endless  conventional  renderings  of  the  ordinary  Cinque-oento 
sculpture,  which  abounded  in  the  churches  of  Florence.  Nor  are  the  specimens  of  the  Parisian  press 
less  worthy  of  the  veneration  of  the  virtuoso. 

In  the  productions  of  the  Stephans  (Fig.  29,  from  the  celebrated  Greek  Testament),  of  Colinseus, 
his  pupil  (Fig.  3),  of  Mace  Bonhomme,  of  Lyons,  in  1558,  Theodore  Hihel  of  Frankfort,  in  1574, 
Jacques  de  Liesveldt  of  Antwerp,  in  1544,  Jean  Palier  and  Eegnault  Chauldi^re  of  Paris,  may  be 
found  many  agreeable  and  interesting  illustrations  of  local  differences  in  ornamental  detail  of  a 
semi-antique  character. 

Eeturning  to  Italy,  and  to  its  purer  style,  before  briefly  proceeding  to  trace  the  “ first  causes  ” 
of  the  general  decline  of  revived  Classical  Art,  we  propose  glancing  at  one  or  two  branches  of  industry 
it  would  be  unfair  to  altogether  pass  over.  The  first  and  most  interesting  of  them  is  that  of  Venetian 
Glass — a commodity  which  helped  to  spread  the  fame  of  Venice  far  and  wide  over  the  habitable 
globe. 

The  taking  of  Constantinople  by  the  Turks,  in  1453,  drove  the  skilled  Greek  workmen  thence 
to  Italy;  and  at  that  period  the  glass-manufacturers  at  Venice  learned  from  the  exiled  Greeks  their 
modes  of  enriching  their  productions  by  colouring,  gilding,  and  enamelling.  In  the  early  part  of  the 


Oruanieuts Designed  for  llaiquetry  by  Fay,  in  the  style  of  Louis  Seiise. 


Panels  designed  by  Fay,  in  the  style  Louis  Seize. 


sixteenth  century,  the  Venetians  appear  to  have  invented  the  art  of  introducing  threads  of  coloured 
and  opaque  white  (latticinio')  glass  into  the  substance  of  the  articles  they  manufactured,  forming  a 
beautiful  and  enduring  enrichment,  suitable,  from  the  lightness  of  its  character,  to  the  delicate  forms 
of  the  objects  to  which  it  was  applied.  The  secret  of  this  art  was  most  jealously  guarded  by  the  State ; 
and  the  severest  penalties  were  enacted  against  any  workmen  who  should  divulge  it,  or  exercise  their 
craft  in  any  other  country.  On  the  other  hand,  the  masters  of  the  glass-houses  at  Murano  received  great 
privileges,  and  even  the  workmen  were  not  classed  with  ordinary  artisans.  In  1602,  a gold  coin  was 
struck  at  Murano,  with  the  avowed  object  of  handing  down  to  posterity  the  names  of  those  who 
146 


ITALIAN  OENAMENT. 


established  the  first  glass-houses  on  the  island;  and  from  it  we  learn  that  they  were  the  following: 
Muro,  Legiiso,  Motta,  Bigaglia,  Miotti,  Briati  Gazzabin,  Vistosi,  and  Ballarin.  For  about  two 
centuries  the  Venetians  contrived  to  retain  their  valuable  secret,  and  monopolised  the  glass  trade  of 
Europe;  but  at  the  commencement  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  taste  for  heavy  cut  glass  began  to 
prevail,  and  the  trade  was  dispersed  to  Bohemia,  France,  and  England. 

Many  very  splendid  works  in  the  precious  metals  were  executed  at  this  period.  A very  large 
amount  of  these  is  supposed  to  have  been  melted  down,  in  Italy,  about  the,  date  of  the  sack  of  Kome; 
and  in  France  to  pay  the  ransom  of  Francis  I.:  and  much  more  was,  no  doubt,  re-fashioned  in  after 
times ; but  the  Cabinet  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany  at  Florence,  and  the  Museum  of  the  Louvre 
at  Paris,  still  contain  fine  collections  of  jewelled  and  enamelled  cups  and  other  objects,  which 
sufficiently  attest  the  skill  and  taste  of  the  goldsmiths  and  jewellers  of  the  sixteenth  century.  One 
of  the  richest  jewels  which  the  fashion  of  the  period  introduced,  and  which  continued  to  be  used  for 
a considerable  time,  was  the  “ enseigne,”  a species  of  medal  generally  worn  in  the  hats  of  the  nobles, 
and  in  the  head-dress  of  the  ladies.  The  custom  of  giving  presents  on  all  important  occasions 
furnished  constant  employment  to  the  jewellers  of  both  countries,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  courts 
even  during  the  most  troubled  periods.  The  restoration  of  peace  in  Italy,  by  the  conventions  of 
Chateau  Cambresis,  and  in  France  at  the  accession  of  Henry  IV.,  caused  an  increased  demand  for 
the  goldsmiths’  productions ; and  subsequently  the  magnificence  of  the  Cardinals  Richelieu  and 
Mazarin  paved  the  way  for  the  age  of  “Louis  le  Grand”  in  France,  for  whom  numerous  fine  works 
of  art  were  executed  by  the  Parisian  goldsmith,  Claude  Ballin,  who,  together  with  Labarre,  Vincent 
Petit,  Julian  Desfontaines,  and  others,  worked  in  the  Louvre.  One  of  the  objects  which  greatly 
employed  the  ingenuity  of  the  jeweller  at  this  period  was  the  “ aigrette,”  which  was  generally  worn 
by  the  nobility.  From  this  time  the  style  of  the  French  jewellery  rapidly  declined,  perfection  of 
workmanship  in  metal-work  having  been  transferred  to  bronze  and  brass,  in  which  last  alloy,  the 
chasings  of  the  celebrated  Gouthier,  in  the  days  of  Louis  XVI.,  were  above  all  praise.  Of  designs 
for  such  work  we  engrave  two  pleasing  specimens  of  the  Parisian  burin.  The  wiriness  and  frivolity 
of  this  class  of  ornament  were  redeemed  by  its  faultless  execution. 


Arabesque  by  Theodore  de  Bry,  one  of  ihe  ‘‘Petits  Maitres,’’ 


The  details  of  the  art,  and  its  popularity,  were  not  \vithout  their  influence  upon  general  design; 

147 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


for  since  the  delicate  draughtsmen  and  engravers  of  the  day  were  much  employed  by  the  goldsmiths 
in  working  out  their  designs  and  patterns,  it  followed,  as  no  unnatural  consequence,  that  many  of 
the  forms  peculiar  to  jewellers’  work  were  introduced  into  decorations  designed  for  altogether  different 
purposes.  This  was  especially  the  case  in  Germany,  and  more  particularly  in  Saxony,  where  a great 
deal  of  a mixed  style  of  Renaissance  and  bastard  Italian,  with  strap  and  ribbon  work,  cartouches,  and 
intricate  complications  of  architectural  members,  was  executed  for  the  Electors.  The  engraving  we 
present  of  a decoration  composed  by  Theodore  de  Bry  affords  no  bad  illustration  of  the  way  in  which 
motives  expressly  adapted  for  enamelling  in  the  style  of  Cellini  were  thrown  together,  to  make  up  the 
ordinary  grotesque  of  the  day.  It  is  by  no  means  in  the  works  of  Theodore  de  Bry  alone  that  such 
solecisms  are  to  be  found ; for  in  the  French  etchings  of  Etienne  de  Laulne,  Gilles  I’Egare,  and  others, 
the  same  features  are  presented. 

Engravers  and  designers  of  this  class  were  also  much  employed,  both  in  Germany  and  France,  in 
providing  models  for  the  damascene  work,  which  was  long  popular  in  both  those  countries,  as  well  as 
in  Italy. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  although  we  find  that  the  Crusaders  bought  Oriental  arms  at  Damascus, 
and  sometimes  brought  the  more  elaborate  articles  to  Europe,  as  in  the  case  of  the  ‘^Yase  de 
Vincennes,”  no  attempts  should  have  been  made  to  imitate  the  manufacture  until  the  middle  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  when  we  find  it  in  use  in  Italy  for  decorating  the  plate-armour,  which  was  then 
adopted  in  that  country.  It  is  most  probable  that  the  art  was  first  introduced  by  the  great  trading 
cities,  such  as  Venice,  Pisa,  and  Genoa,  from  the  East,  and  was  afterwards  taken  up  as  a more 
permanent  decoration  for  armour  than  parcel-gilding  by  the  artists  of  Milan,  which  city  was  then  to 
Europe  what  Damascus  had  been  to  the  East,  viz.,  the  great  emporium  for  the  best  arms  and  armour. 
So  exclusively,  indeed,  was  the  art,  in  the  first  instance,  employed  upon  weapons,  that  to  the  very 
last  the  Italian  writers  designate  it  under  the  title  of  “lavoro  all’  azzimina.”  At  the  beginning  of 
the  sixteenth  century,  the  art  began  to  be  exercised  out  of  Italy;  and  it  is  by  no  means  improbable 
that  it  was  taught  to  the  workmen  of  France  and  Spain  by  those  travelling  artists  whom  the  good 
taste,  or  possibly  the  vanity,  of  the  kings  of  those  countries  attached  to  their  courts.  Probably  the 
finest  existing  specimen  of  damascening  is  the  armour  of  Francis  L,  now  in  the  Cabinet  de  Medailles, 
at  Pans.  Both  this  and  the  shield  in  Her  Majesty’s  possession  at  Windsor  have  been  attributed  to 
the  famous  Cellini;  hut  on  comparing  them  with  any  of  his  known  works,  the  drawing  of  the  figures 
indicates  rather  an  Augsburg  artist  than  the  broad  style  which  CelUni  had  acquired  from  his  study 
of  the  works  of  Michael  Angelo. 

From  that  time  down  to  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  a great  number  of  arms  were 
decorated  with  damascening,  of  which  the  Louvre,  the  Cabinet  de  Medailles,  and  the  Musee  d’Artillerie, 
contain  numerous  fine  specimens;  and  the  names  of  Michael  Angelo,  Negroli,  the  Picoinini,  and 
Cursmet,  may  be  mentioned  as  excelling  in  damascene  work,  as  well  as  in  the  art  of  the  armourer 
generally. 

In  our  own  country,  the  process  does  not  appear  to  have  been  much  exercised;  parcel-gilding, 
engraving,  blacking,  and  russetting,  being  well  received  as  substitutes;  and  the  few  specimens  we  possess 
were  probably  imported,  or  captured  in  our  foreign  wars,  as  in  the  case  of  the  splendid  suits  of 
armour  brought  to  England  by  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  after  the  battle  of  St.  Quentin. 

As  it  has  been  onr  pleasant  task  to  record  how  French  Ornamental  Art  was  regenerated  by  imitation 
of  Italian  models  in  the  sixteenth  century,  so  it  now  becomes  our  less  agreeable  duty  to  note  how 
deleterious  an  influence  was  exercised  in  the  seventeenth  from  the  same  procedure.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  two  highly-gifted,  but  overrated,  Italian  artists,  set  during  their  lives  upon  pinnacles  which 
made  them  the  -‘observed  of  all  observers,”  effected  an  immense  amount  of  mischief  to  French  Art. 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 

These  artists  were  Lorenzo  Bernini  and  Francesco  Borromini.  The  former  was  the  son  of  a Florentine 
sculptor,  and  was  horn  in  1589.  He  evinced  an  unusually  precocious  talent  for  sculpture ; and 
whilst  yet  a youth,  was  fully  employed,  not  only  as  a sculptor,  but  as  an  architect.  He  resided  almost 
entirely  at  Eome,  where  he  designed  the  fountain  of  the  Barcaccia  in  the  Piazza  di  Spagna,  the 
celebrated  Triton  in  the  Piazza  Barberini,  and  the  large  fountains  of  the  Piazza  Havona ; the  College 
de  Propaganda  Fide;  the  great  hall  and  facade  of  the  Barberini  Palace,  facing  the  Strada  Felice;  a 
campanile  to  St.  Peter’s  (afterwards  taken  down);  the  Ludovico  Palace,  on  the  Monte  Citorio ; the 
celebrated  Piazza  of  St.  Peter’s ; and  the  great  staircase  from  St.  Peter’s  to  the  Vatican,  besides 
numerous  other  works.  Busts  by  Bernini  were  eagerly  sought  after  by  the  sovereigns  and  nobles 
of  Europe;  so  much  so,  that  when  he  was  sixty-eight  years  of  age,  Louis  XIV.,  who  was  unused  to 
be  refused  anything,  and  much  less  to  be  forced  to  beg,  was  actually  obliged  to  write  supplicatory 
letters  to  the  Pope,  and  to  Bernini,  requesting  the  sculptor’s  presence  at  Paris.  During  his  residence 
there,  though  he  did  but  little,  he  is  said  to  have  received  five  golden  louis  a-day,  and  at  his  departure 


Ornamental  Composition,  from  a dasiffo  by  Le  Pautre. 

fifty  thousand  crowns,  with  an  annual  pension  of  two  thousand  crowns,  and  one  of  five  hundred  for 
his  sons,  who  accompanied  him.  On  his  return  to  Home,  he  made  an  equestrian  statue  in  honour  of 
Louis,  which  is  now  at  Versailles.  Besides  his  works  in  architecture,  sculpture,  and  bronze,  he  appears 
to  have  had  a decided  mechanical  turn ; and,  moreover,  to  have  painted  as  many  as  five  hundred 
pictures  in  the  Case  Barberini  and  Chigi.  He  died  in  the  year  1680. 

Francesco  Borromini  was  born  near  Como,  in  the  year  1599.  Apprenticed  at  an  early  age  to 
Carlo  Maderno,  he  speedily  became  both  a brilliant  carver  and  architect.  On  Maderno’s  death  he 

Q Q 149 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


succeeded  to  the  charge  of  the  works  at  St.  Peter’s  under  Bernini,  with  whom  he  very  shortly  quarrelled. 
From  his  fervid  imagination  and  rare  facility  as  a draughtsman  and  designer,  he  soon  obtained  ample  _ 
employment ; and  in  his  capricious  vagaries,  every  tendency  to  extravagance  that  Bernini’s  style 
possessed  Borromini  contrived  to  caricature.  Until  near  his  death,  in  1667,  he  continued  sedulously 
occupied  in  subverting  all  known  principles  of  order  and  symmetry,  not  only  to  his  own  enrichment, 
but  to  the  admiration  of  the  leaders  of  fashion  of  the  day.  The  anomalies  he  introduced  into  design, 
the  disproportionate  mouldings,  broken,  contrasted,  and  re-entering  curves,  interrupted  and  crooked 
lines  and  surfaces,  became  the  Ttiode  of  the  day,  and  all  Europe  was  speedily  busy  in  devising  similar 
enormities.  In  France  the  fever  raged  speedily,  and  the  popular  style,  in  place  of  the  quaint  but 
picturesque  forms  to  be  seen  in  the  engravings  of  Du  Cerceau,  1576  substituted  the  more  elaborate, 
but  less  agreeable  ones  to  be  found  in  Marot,  1727— and  Mariette  1726-7.  Borromini’s  works,  which 
were  published  in  the  year  1725  — and  Bibiena’s,  which  were  not  much  purer,  and  which  were  given 
to  the  world  in  1740 — had  a large  circulation,  and  tended  to  confirm  the  public  taste  in  facility  and 
elaboration  versus  simplicity  and  beauty.  Despite  this  debasing  influence,  many  of  the  French  artists 
of  the  time,  both  of  Louis  XIV.  and  XV.,  in  the  midst  of  their  extravagance,  made  many  beautiful 
ornamental  designs,  showing  in  them  a sense  of  capricious  beauty  of  line  rarely  surpassed.  In  some 
of  Le  Pautre’s  designs  (reign  of  Louis  XIV.),  this  quality  may  be  recognised,  as  well  as  in  many  of 
the  interior  decorations  given  in  Blondel’s  works  published  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XV. 

De  Neufforge  is,  however,  the  master  of  the  ceremonies  in  this  latter  court  of  revels,  and  does 
sufficiently  graceful  fooling  in  the  900  plates  comprised  in  his  great  body  of  Ornament.  To  dwell 
upon  individuals  among  the  mass  of  clever  ornamental  designers,  draughtsmen,  and  engravers,  to 
whom  the  Orand  Monarque  and  the  brilliant  court  of  his  successor  gave  good  pay  and  plenty  of  work, 
would  be  out  of  place  here.  There  is  one,  however,  Jean  Berain,  who  cannot  be  passed  over,  seeing 
that  he  held  the  special  appointment  of  “ Dessinateur  des  Menus  Plaisirs  du  Eoi  ” (Louis  XIV.),  and 
that  to  him  we  are  indebted  for  the  best  designs  which  will  render  the  name  of  Buhl  famous  so  long 


as  a taste  for  beautiful  furniture  exists.  He  contributed  materially  to  the  decoration  of  the  Galerie 
d’Apollou  of  the  Louvre,  and  of  the  State  apartments  in  the  Tuileries,  as  is  elegantly  testified  in  a 
work  published  in  the  year  1710.  Another  large  collection  of  his  admirably  sportive  designs  was 
engraved  by  Daigremont,  Scotin,  and  others.  With  the  advent  of  Louis  XV.  to  the  throne  in  1715- 
the  manner  of  designing  grew  far  more  “rococo”  and  “ baroeque  ” than  it  had  been  during  the 
greatest  part  of  his  predecessor’s  reign.  In  spite  of  the  fine  talents  and  good  example  set  by  the 
architect  Soufaot  in  his  works,  the  twisted  and  foliated  scrolls  and  shells  of  the  former  grew  into 

1 CIA  ® 


ITALIAN  OENAMENT. 

the  “rocaille”  and  grotto-work  of  the  latter;  degenerating  at  last  into  all  the  eccentricities  of 
“ Chinoiserie.”  From  this  style  of  approaching  inanition,  ornament  revived  under  Louis  XVI.  to  an 
elegant  though  liny  style,  corresponding  in  some  degree  to  that  introduced  into  this  country  by 
Robert  Adams,  principally  in  his  buildings  in  the  Adelphi,  The  genius  of  three  very  able  men 

exercised  a beneficial  influence  over  industrial  design  at  a period  shortly  preceding  the  Revolution 

Eeisner,  the  cabinet-maker,  celebrated  for  his  exquisite  marquetry;  Gouthier,  brass-chaser  to  Marie 
Antoinette;  and  Demontreuil,  carver  in  wood  to  the  royal  family.  During  the  Revolution  Chaos 
reigned,  and  out  of  it  came  order  in  the  shape  of  an  utter  abjuration  of  the  “colifichets”  of  the 
Monarchy  in  favour  of  the  Republican  severity  of  a David.  As  the  Republic,  however,  ripened  into 


Panel  suitable  for  Eeisner  Marquetry,  designed  by  Fay. 

the  Empire,  the  “ mode  ” from  stern  Republican  grew  magnificent  Imperialist.  The  best  artists  were 
liberally  employed  by  Napoleon  I.,  and  the  talent  of  Percier,  Fontaine,  Normand,  Fragonard,  Prudhon, 
and  Cavelier,  developed  in  its  highest  perfection  the  graceful  and  learned,  but  stiff  and  cold,  “style 
de  1 Empire.  With  the  Restoration,  the  antique  went  out  of  fashion,  and  confusion  again  ensued. 
The  native  ability  of  the  country,  however,  aided  by  judicious  and  liberally  conducted  educational 
institutions,  soon  revived  the  public  interest,  and  an  enthusiasm  for  rivals  of  a somewhat  archeeological 
nature  supervened.  The  monuments  of  the  middle  ages  and  of  the  Renaissance  were  cared  for, 
sought  for,  restored,  and  imitated  on  all  hands ; and  out  of  the  manifold  studies  so  made,  styles  of 
eclectic  character,  but  approaching  originality,  are  rapidly  forming  themselves  throughout  the  country. 

France  is,  it  must  be  confessed,  at  the  present  time,  master  of  the  field  in  the  distribution  and 
execution  of  ornament  of  almost  every  class ; but  so  rapid  and  hopeful  is  the  progress  now  taking 
place  in  this  country,  that  it  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  an  historian  writing  some  few  years  hence 
may,  happily,  be  enabled  to  place  the  Allies,  as  they  should  be,  upon  a footing  of  equality. 


M.  DIGBY  WYATT, 


i I 


4 


ITALIAN  ORNAMENT. 


BOOKS  REFERRED  TO  FOR  ILLUSTRATIONS, 

LITERARY  AND  PICTORIAL. 


Adams  (E.)  ThePolychromatic  Ornamentof  Italy.  4to.  London,  n.  d. 

Alberti  (L.  B.)  De  Re  .^dificatoria  Opus.  Elorent.  1485,  in  folio. 

Albertolli,  Omamenli  diversi  mventaii,  dc,,  da,  Milano.  In  folio. 

D’Androuet  Dtr  Cerceau.  Xiwe  d' Architecture.  Palis,  1559,  in 
folio. 

B’Aviler,  Cours  d' Architecture,  par.  Paris,  1706,  in  4to. 

Bibiena,  Arrhitettura  di.  Augustse,  1740,  in  folio. 

Borromini  (F.)  Opus  Architectonicum.  Romas,  1725,  in  folio. 

Clochar  (P.),  .(l/oHjmens  et  Tomheaux  m^sures  et  dessines  en  Italie, 
par.  40  Plans  and  Views  of  the  most  remarkable  Monuments 
in  Italy.  Paris,  1815. 

Dedadx.  Chambre  de  Marie  de  MHicis  au  Palais  du  Luxemburg ; 
ou  Recueil  d’ Arabesques,  Peintures,  et  Oi'nements  qui  la  decorent. 
Folio,  Paris,  1838. 

Disbo  e Zanotto.  Sepulchral  Monuments  of  Venice.  I AIouu- 
menti  cospicui  di  Venezia,  illustrali  dal  Cav,  Antonio  Liedo  e da 
Francesco  Zanotto.  Folio,  Milan,  1839. 

Boppelmayr  (J.  G.)  Mathematicians  and  Artists  of  Nurembiirg,  dc. 
Historishe  Nachricht  von  den  Nurnbergischen  Mathematicis  und 
Kiinstlern,  dc.  Folio,  Niirnberg,  1730. 

Gozzini  (V.)  Mommens  Sepula-aux  de  la  Toscane,  dessines  par 
Vincent  Oozzini,  et  graves  par  Jerdme  Scotto.  Nouvelle  Edition, 
augmentee  de  vingt-neuf  planches,  avec  lenr  Descriptions.  4to. 
Florence,  1821. 

Gruner  (L.)  Description  of  the  Plates  of  Fresco  Decorations  and 
Stuccoes  of  Churches  and  Palaces  in  Italy  duriny  the  Fifteenth 
and  Sixteenth  Centuries.  With  an  Essay  by,  J.  J.  Hitlorff,  on 
the  Arabesques  of  the  Ancients  compared  with  those  ofRaffaelle 
and  his  School.  New  ediUon,  largely  augmented  by  numerous 
plates,  plain  and  coloured.  4to.  London,  1854. 

■ Fresco  Decorations  and  Stuccoes  of  Churches  and 

Palaces  in  Italy  during  the  Fifteenth  and  Sixteenth  Centuries, 
with  descriptions  by  Lewis  Gruner,  K.A.  New  edition,  aug- 
mented  by  numerous  plates,  plain  and  coloured.  Folio,  Loudon, 
1854. 

Specimens  of  Ornamental  Art  selected  from  the  best 

models  of  the  Classical  Epochs.  Ilhistrnted  by  80  plates,  with 
descriptive  text,  by  Emil  Braun.  {By  authority.)  Folio,  Lon- 
don, 1850. 

Magazzari  (G.)  The  most  select  Ornaments  of  Bologna.  RaccoUa 
de'  piu  scelti  Ornati  sparsi  per  la  Citta  di  Bologna,  desegnnti 
ed  incisi  da  Giovanni  Magazzari.  Oblong  4to.,  Bologna  1827. 

De  Nedfeorge,  Recueil  ilcmeniaire  d'  Architecture,  par.  Paris 
(1757).  8 vols.  in  folio. 

Pain’s  British  Palladio.  London,  1797,  in  folio. 


Palladio,  Architetlura  di.  Venet.  1570,  in  folio. 

Passavant  (J.  D.)  Rafael  von  Urhino  und  sein  Vater  Giovanni 
Sanii,  In  zwnilheilen  mit  vierzehn  abbildvngen.  2 fols.  8vo.  1 
Tol.  folio,  Leipzig,  1839. 

PeRCIERET  Fontaine,  Recueil  de  decorations  intericures,  par.  Paris, 
1812,  in  folio. 

PerRAULT,  Ordonnance  des  cinq  speces  de  Colonnes,  selon  Ivs  Anciens, 
par.  Paris,  1683,  in  folio. 

Philibert  de  Loeme,  CEuvres  d'  Architecture  de.  Paris,  1626,  in 
folio. 

Piranesi  (Fr.)  Differentes  Manieres  dlorner  les  Cheminecs,iS:c,,  par. 
Rome,  1768,  in  folio,  and  other  works. 

Ponce  (N.)  Deso'iption  des  Bains  de  Tiic.  40  plates,  folio. 

Raphael.  Life  of  Raphael,  by  Quairemere  de  Quincy.  8vo.  Paris, 
18.35. 

Receuil  d'  Arabesques,  contenant  les  Logos  du  Vatican  d’apres  Raphael, 
et  grand  nombre  dautres  Compositions  du  mime  genre  dans  le 
Style  Antique,  d'apres  Nomiand,  Queverdo,  Boucher,  dc.,  114 
plates,  imperial  folio.  Paris,  1802. 

Rusooni  (G.  Ant.),  Dell'  Architettura,  lib.  X.,  da.  Venez.  1593, 
in  folio. 

ScAMOZZi,  Idea  del'  Architettura  da.  Venez.  1615.  2 vols.  in 

folio. 

Seelio  (See.)  Tutte  le  Operc  d'  Architettura  di.  Venet.  1584.  In4to. 

Libri  cinque  d' Architetlura  di.  Venet.  1551.  In  folio. 

Terme  de  Tito.  A series  of  61  engravings  of  the  paintings,  ceil- 
ings, arabesque  decoi-ations,  &c.,  of  the  batlis  of  Titus,  en- 
graved by  Carloni.  2 vols.  in  1,  atlas. — Folio,  oblong.  Rome, 
n.  d. 

Tosi  AND  Becchio.  Altars,  Tabernacles,  and  Sepulchral  Monuments 
of  the  Fozirteenih  and  Fifteenth  Centuries,  exisliny  at  Rome. 
Published  under  the  patronage  of  the  celebrated  Academy  of 
St.  Luke,  by  MM.  Tosi  and  Becchio.  Descriptions  in  Italian, 
English,  and  French,  by  Mrs.  Spry  Bartlett.  Folio.  Laguy, 
1853. 

\iGNOLA,  Reyola  dei  cinque  Ordini  d’  Architetlura,  da.  In  folio. 

\oLPATO  ED  Ottaviano.  Logyie  del  Raffaele  nel  Vaticano,  dc. 
Roma,  1782. 

*Zahn  (W.)  Ornamente  aller  Klussischeji  Kunst-Epochen  nach  den 
oriyinalen  in  ihren  eiyentkumlichen  farben  dargestellt.  Oblong 
folio.  Berlin,  1849. 

ZoBi  (Ant.)  Notizie  Storiche  sull’  Origine  e Progressi  dei  Lavori 
di  Commesso  hi  Pietre  Dure  che  si  esequiscono  nelt  I.  e R. 
Stabilimento  di  Firenze.  Second  Edition,  with  additions  and 
con-ections  by  the  author.  4to.  Florence,  1583. 


* Trom  tills  interesting  work  the  materials  for  Plates  LXXVII,  IXXVIll.,  LXXIX.,  have  been  derived. 


'Ilf -v ::^ -3Ntiig^>-. 


ITALIENISCH 


ITALIAN  N°  P 


ITALIEHS 


TAFEL  UXXYI  f 


PL.UXXYI* 


1 ^ 

f4 


i6 


ITALIEHI3CH  ITALIAN  ITALilEHS 


ITALIENISCH 


ITALIAN  5^  italiehs 


TAFfc  o xr 


PI.  y.c 


iri7ii'~fi 


R R 


153 


LEAVES  AND  FLOWEES  FEOM  NATUKE. 


1.  Isis. 

2.  mite  Lily. 

3.  Daffodil. 

4.  Narcissus. 

5.  Onion. 

6.  Dog-Eose. 


PLATE  XCVIII. 

Plans  and  Elevations  of  Flowers. 

7.  Mouse-ear. 

8.  Honeysuckle. 

9.  Mallow. 

10.  Ladies’smock. 

11.  Speedwell. 

12.  Harebell. 


13.  Glossocomia  clematidca. 

14.  Convolvulus. 

15.  Primrose. 

16.  Periwinckle. 

17.  Clarkia. 

IS.  Leycesteria  forraosa. 


PLATE  XCIX. 

1.  Honeysuckle.  2.  Convolvulus.  Full  size. 


PLATE  C. 

Passion  Flowers.  Full  size. 


LEAVES  AND  FLOWEES  EKOM  NATUEE. 

We  have  endeayoured  to  show  in  the  preceding  chapters,  that  in  the  best  periods  of  art,  all  ornament 
was  rather  based  upon  an  observation  of  the  principles  which  regulate  the  arrangement  of  form  in 
nature,  than  on  an  attempt  to  imitate  the  absolute  forms  of  those  works;  and  that  whenever  this 
limit  was  exceeded  in  any  art,  it  was  one  of  the  strongest  symptoms  of  decline : true  art  consisting  in 
idealizing,  and  not  copying,  the  forms  of  nature. 

We  think  it  desirable  to  insist  rather  strongly  on  this  point,  as  in  the  present  uncertain  state  in 
which  we  are,  there  seems  a general  disposition  arising  to  reproduce,  as  faithfully  as  may  be  possible, 
natural  form  as  works  of  ornament.  The  world  has  become  weary  of  the  eternal  repetition  of  the 
same  conventional  forms  which  have  been  borrowed  from  styles  which  have  passed  away,  and  there- 
fore can  excite  in  us  but  little  sympathy.  There  has  risen,  we  say,  a universal  cry  of  “ Gro  back  to 
nature,  as  the  ancients  did ; ” we  should  be  amongst  the  first  to  echo  that  cry,  but  it  will  depend 
much  on  what  we  go  to  seek,  how  far  we  may  succeed.  If  we  go  to  Nature  as  the  Egyptians  and 
the  Greeks  went,  we  may  hope;  but  if  we  go  there  like  the  Chinese,  or  even  as  the  Gothic  artists 
of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries,  we  should  gain  but  little.  We  have  already,  in  the  floral 
carpets,  floral  papers,  and  floral  carvings  of  the  present  day,  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  no  art 
can  be  produced  by  such  means;  and  that  the  more  closely  nature  is  copied,  the  farther  we  are  re- 
moved-  from  producing  a work  of  art. 

Although  ornament  is  most  properly  only  an  accessory  to  architecture,  and  should  never  be  allowed 
to  usurp  the  place  of  structural  features,  or  to  overload  or  to  disguise  them,  it  is  in  all  cases  the 
very  soul  of  an  architectural  monument. 


154 


LEAVES  AND  FLOWEES  FROM  NATURE. 


By  the  ornament  of  a building,  we  can  judge  more  truly  of  the  creative  power  which  the  artist 
has  brought  to  bear  upon  the  work.  The  general  proportions  of  the  building  may  be  good,  the 
mouldings  may  be  more  or  less  accurately  copied  from  the  most  approved  models;  but  the  very 
instant  that  ornament  is  attempted,  we  see  how  far  the  architect  is  at  the  same  time  the  artist.  It 
is  the  best  measure  of  the  care  and  refinement  bestowed  upon  the  work.  To  put  ornament  in  the 
right  place  is  not  easy;  to  render  that  ornament  at  the  same  time  a superadded  beauty  and  an  expression 
of  the  intention  of  the  whole  work,  is  still  more  difficult. 

Unfortunately  it  has  been  too  much  the  practice  in  our  time  to  abandon  to  hands  most  unfitted 
for  the  task  the  adornment  of  the  structural  features  of  buildings,  and  more  especially  their  interior 
decorations. 

The  fatal  facility  of  manufacturing  ornament  which  the  revived  use  of  the  acanthus  leaf  has 
given,  has  tended  very  much  to  this  result,  and  deadened  the  creative  instinct  in  artists’  minds.  What 
could  so  readily  be  done  by  another,  they  have  left  that  other  to  do  ; and  so  far  have  abdicated  their 
high  position  of  the  architect,  the  head  and  chief. 

How,  then,  is  this  universal  desire  for  progress  to  be  satisfied — how  is  any  new  style  of  ornament 
to  be  invented  or  developed  ? Some  will  probably  say,  A new  style  of  architecture  must  first  be 
found,  and  we  should  be  beginning  at  the  wrong  end  to  commence  with  ornament. 

We  do  not  think  so.  We  have  already  shown  that  the  desire  for  works  of  ornament  is  co-existent 
with  the  earliest  attempts  of  civilisation  of  every  people;  and  that  architecture  adopts  ornament, 
does  not  create  it. 

The  Corinthian  order  of  architecture  is  said  to  have  been  suggested  by  an  acanthus  leaf  found 
growing  round  an  earthen  pot ; but  the  acanthus  leaf  existed  as  an  ornament  long  before,  or,  at  all 
events,  the  principle  of  its  growth  was  observed  in  the  conventional  ornaments.  It  was  the  peculiar 
application  of  this  leaf  to  the  formation  of  the  capital  of  a column  which  was  the  sudden  invention 
that  created  the  Corinthian  order. 

The  principle  of  the  foliation,  and  even  the  general  form  of  the  leaves,  which  predominate  in  the 
architecture  of  the  thirteenth  century,  existed  long  before  in  the  illuminated  MSS. ; and  derived 
as  they  were,  most  probably,  from  the  East,  have  given  an  almost  Eastern  character  to  Early  English 
ornament.  The  architects  of  the  thirteenth  century  were,  therefore,  very  familiar  with  this  system 
of  ornamentation ; and  we  cannot  doubt,  that  one  cause  of  the  adoption  so  universally  of  this  style 
during  the  thirteenth  century  arose  from  the  great  familiarity  with  its  leading  forms  which  already 
existed. 

The  floral  style,  in  direct  imitation  of  nature,  which  succeeded,  was  also  preceded  by  the  same  style 
in  works  of  ornament.  The  facility  of  painting  flowers  in  direct  imitation  of  nature  in  the  pages  of  a 
missal,  induced  an  attempt  to  rival  them  in  stone  in  the  buildings  of  the  time. 

The  architectural  ornament  of  the  Elizabethan  period  is  mostly  a reproduction  of  the  works  of  the 
loom,  the  painter,  and  the  engraver.  In  any  borrowed  style,  more  especially,  this  would  be  so.  The 
artists  in  the  Elizabethan  period  were  necessarily  much  more  familiar  with  the  paintings,  hangings, 
furniture,  metal-work,  and  other  articles  of  luxury,  which  England  received  from  the  Continent,  than 
they  would  be  with  the  architectural  monuments ; and  it  is  this  familiarity  with  the  ornamentation 
of  the  period,  but  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  architecture,  which  led  to  the  development  of  those 
peculiarities  which  distinguish  Elizabethan  architecture  from  the  purer  architecture  of  the  Eevival. 

We  therefore  think  we  are  justified  in  the  belief,  that  a new  style  of  ornament  may  be  produced 
independently  of  a new  style  of  architecture ; and,  moreover,  that  it  would  be  one  of  the  readiest 
means  of  arriving  at  a new  style ; for  instance,  if  we  could  only  arrive  at  the  invention  of  a new  termi- 
nation to  a means  of  support,  one  of  the  most  difficult  points  would  be  accomplished. 


155 


LEAVES  AND  FLOWERS  FROM  NATURE. 


The  chief  features  of  a building  which  form  a style,  are,  first,  the  means  of  support ; secondly, 

the  means  of  spanning  space  between  the  supports ; and,  thirdly,  the  formation  of  the  roof.  It  is  the 

decoration  of  these  structural  features  which  gives  the  characteristics  of  style,  and  they  all  follow  so 

naturally  one  from  the  other,  that  the  invention  of  one  will  command  the  rest. 

It  would  appear,  at  first  sight,  that  the  means  of  varying  these  structural  features  had  been  ex- 
hausted, and  that  we  have  nothing  left  but  to  use  either  one  or  the  other  of  the  systems  which  have 

already  run  their  course. 

If  we  reject  the  use  of  the  column  and  horizontal  beam  of  the  Greeks  and  Egyptians,  the  round 
arch  of  the  Eomans,  the  pointed  arch  and  vault  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  domes  of  the  Mohammedans, 
it  will  be  asked — WTiat  is  left?  We  shall  perhaps  be  told  that  all  the  means  of  covering  space  have 
already  been  exhausted,  and  that  it  were  vain  to  look  for  other  forms.  But  could  not  this  have 
been  said  in  all  time  ? Could  the  Egyptian  have  ever  imagined  that  any  other  mode  of  spanning 
space  would  ever  be  found  than  his  huge  blocks  of  stone  ? Could  the  Mediseval  architect  have  ever 
dreamed  that  his  airy  vaults  could  be  surpassed,  and  that  gulfs  could  be  crossed  by  hollow  tubes  of 
iron?  Let  us  not  despair;  the  world  has  not  seen,  most  assuredly,  the  last  of  the  architectural 
systems.  If  we  are  now  passing  through  an  age  of  copying,  and  architecture  with  us  exhibits  a want 
of  vitality,  the  world  has  passed  through  similar  periods  before.  From  the  present  chaos  there  will 
arise,  undoubtedly  (it  may  not  be  in  our  time),  an  architecture  which  shall  be  worthy  of  the  high 
advance  which  man  has  made  in  every  other  direction  towards  the  possession  of  the  tree  of  knowledge. 

To  return  to  our  subject,  how  is  any  new  style  of  art  or  new  style  of  ornament  to  be  formed,  or 
even  attempted  to  be  formed?  In  the  first  place,  we  have  little  hope  that  we  are  destined  to  see 

more  than  the  commencement  of  a change;  the  architectural  profession  is  at  the  present  time  too 

much  under  the  influence  of  past  education  on  the  one  hand,  and  too  much  influenced  by  an  ill- 
informed  public  on  the  other ; but  the  rising  generation  in  both  classes  are  born  under  happier  auspices, 
and  it  is  to  them  we  must  look  for  hope  in  the  future.  It  is  for  their  use  that  we  have  gathered 
together  this  collection  of  the  works  of  the  past;  not  that  they  should  be  slavishly  copied,  but  that 
artists  should,  by  an  attentive  examination  of  the  principles  which  pervade  all  the  works  of  the  past, 
and  which  have  excited  universal  admiration,  be  led  to  the  creation  of  new  forms  equally  beautiful. 
VI  e believe  that  if  a student  in  the  arts,  earnest  in  liis  search  after  knowledge,  will  only  lay  aside 
all  temptation  to  indolence,  will  examine  for  himself  the  works  of  the  past,  compare  them  with  the 
works  of  nature,  bend  his  mind  to  a thorough  appreciation  of  the  principles  which  reign  in  each,  he 
cannot  fail  to  be  himself  a creator,  and  to  individualise  new  forms,  instead  of  reproducing  the  forms 
of  the  past.  We  think  it  impossible  that  a student  fully  impressed  with  the  law  of  the  universal  fit- 
ness of  things  in  nature,  with  the  wonderful  variety  of  form,  yet  all  arranged  around  some  few  fixed 
laws,  the  proportionate  distribution  of  areas,  the  tangential  curvatures  of  lines,  and  the  radiation 
from  a parent  stem,  whatever  type  he  may  borrow  from  Nature,  if  he  will  dismiss  from  his  mind 
the  desire  to  imitate  it,  but  will  only  seek  to  follow  still  the  path  which  it  so  plainly  shows  him,  we 
doubt  not  that  new  forms  of  beauty  will  more  readily  arise  under  his  hand,  than  can  ever  follow 
from  a continuation  in  the  prevailing  fashion  of  resting  only  on  the  works  of  the  past  for  present 
inspiration.  It  will  require  but  a few  minds  to  give  the  first  impulse  ; the  way  once  pointed  out, 
others  will  follow,  readily  improving,  refining  upon  each  other’s  efforts,  till  another  culminating  point 
of  Art  shall  be  again  reached  to  subside  into  decline  and  disorder.  For  the  present,  however,  we 
are  far  enough  removed  from  either  stage. 

We  have  been  desirous  to  aid  this  movement  to  the  extent  of  our  power;  and  in  the  ten  plates 
of  leaves  and  flowers  which  accompany  this  chapter,  we  have  gathered  together  many  of  those  natural 
types  which  we  thought  best  calculated  to  awaken  a recognition  of  the  natural  laws  which  prevail  in 
156 


LEAVES  AND  FLOWERS  FROM  NATURE. 


the  distribution  of  form.  But,  indeed,  these  laws  will  be  found  to  be  so  universal,  that  they  are  as 
well  seen  in  one  leaf  as  in  a thousand.  The  single  example  of  the  chestnut  leaf,  Plate  XCI.,  contains 
the  whole  of  the  laws  which  are  to  be  found  in  Nature : no  art  can  rival  the  perfect  grace  of  its  form, 
the  perfect  proportional  distribution  of  the  areas,  the  radiation  from  the  parent  stem,  the  tangential 
curvatures  of  the  lines,  or  the  even  distribution  of  the  surface  decoration.  We  may  gather  this  from 
a single  leaf.  But  if  we  further  study  the  law  of  their  growth,  we  may  see  in  an  assemblage  of  leaves 
of  the  vine  or  the  ivy,  that  the  same  law  which  prevails  in  the  formation  of  the  single  leaf  prevails 
also  in  the  assemblage  of  leaves.  As  in  the  chestnut  leaf,  Plate  XCI.,  the  area  of  each  lobe  diminishes 
in  equal  proportion  as  it  approaches  the  stem,  so  in  any  combination  of  leaves  each  leaf  is  everywhere 
in  harmony  with  the  group:  as  in  one  leaf  the  areas  are  so  perfectly  distributed  that  the  repose  of 
the  eye  is  maintained,  it  is  equally  so  in  the  group:  we  never  find  a disproportionate  leaf  interfering 
to  destroy  the  repose  of  the  group.  This  universal  law  of  equilibrium  is  everywhere  apparent  in  Plates 
XCVIII.,  XCIX.,  C.  The  same  laws  prevail  in  the  distribution  of  lines  on  the  surface  of  flowers; 
not  a line  upon  the  surfaces  but  tends  more  surely  to  develope  the  form, — not  a line  which  could  be 
removed,  and  leave  the  form  more  perfect;  and  this  why?  Because  the  beauty  arises  naturally 

from  the  law  of  the  growth  of  each  plant.  The  life-blood, — ^the  sap,  as  it  leaves  the  stem,  takes  the 

readiest  way  of  reaching  the  confines  of  the  surface,  however  varied  that  surface  may  he;  the  greater 
the  distance  it  has  to  travel,  or  the  weight  it  has  to  support,  the  thicker  will  be  its  substance.  (See 
Convolvulus,  XCVIII.,  XCIX.) 

On  Plate  XCVIII.  we  have  shown  several  varieties  of  flowers,  in  plan  and  elevation,  from  which 
it  will  be  seen  that  the  basis  of  all  form  is  geometry,  the  impulse  which  forms  the  surface,  starting 
from  the  centre  with  equal  force,  necessarily  stops  at  equal  distances;  the  result  is  symmetry  and 
regularity. 

Who  then  will  dare  say  that  there  is  nothing  left  for  us  but  to  copy  the  five  or  seven-lobed 
flowers  of  the  thirteenth  century ; the  Honeysuckle  of  the  Greeks  or  the  Acanthus  of  the  Romans, — 
that  this  alone  can  produce  art, — is  Nature  so  tied  ? See  how  various  the  forms,  and  how  unvarying 
the  principles.  We.  feel  persuaded  that  there  is  yet  a future  open  to  us;  we  have  but  to  arouse  from 
our  slumbers.  The  Creator  has  not  made  all  things  beautiful,  that  we  should  thus  set  a limit  to  our 

admiration;  on  the  contrary,  as  all  His  works  are  offered  for  our  enjoyment,  so  are  they  offered  for 

our  study.  They  are  there  to  awaken  a natural  instinct  implanted  in  us,— a desire  to  emulate  in 
the  works  of  our  hands,  the  order,  the  symmetry,  the  grace,  the  fitness,  which  the  Creator  has  sown 
broadcast  over  the  earth. 


London Day  and  Son,  Limited,  Gate  Street,  Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields. 


157 


ii 


F ; 


=’iC'  '■  ■ 

m *•,  ■,.•  '.'•i'’('./^  •"  ■■■  ■ - ■■  .,  •'.Iim^'---  . 

- ^.r  ■ ■ T:  Si'.’^'  .'■■  * '■;  . . '.V  JHji^,, ;-  . 


■ ■"  ■''Wy*-  'f-  ■/:  ' ■'"■'■’■  .■'V'X'  - - K 


# H,  ,,^:J-t-J.,,,. 


Y.  ■:••.  :■. 


*l}rU  ■ .'  V 

"rT.  ^cry'''tW;4£*^.»- 


- '^’V  r ■'  ■■*)■'  ^ 


^ *1 


L^  n**  **^*'»' 

■-’ sSK^K 

' 


m 


Nfy.'., 


r*'^'  ijc^  ■ 


i'M&i 


a.  ; 


h;.ATTKH  NACH  OER  HATUR  LEAVES  FROM  NATURE  N°2  feuilles  dapreb  nature 

TAFEL  XCIl 


PL  XCL 


SLCTSH  SACH DER NATUR  LEAVES  FROM  NATURE  N°3:  feuilles  d'apres  nature 

■AFfc;L  PT.ynii 


BLATTER  SACK  DER  NATUR  LEAYE.S  FROM  NATURE  N°4,  FEUILLES  D'APRES  NATURE 


iujmil4 


BLATTER  KACH  DER  HATUR  LEAVES  FROM  NATURE  N®7.  FEUILLES  D'APRES  NATURE. 

'lAFE.UXCyU. ' PL.  XCYII 


