LONGMANS-^ 


~ rfl  l"c 


THE  GOTHIC  OR  MEDIAEVAL  REVIVAL  IN  ENGLAND. 


Ill  One  Volume,  imperial  8vo,  with  48  Illustrations  engraved  on  Wood 
(36  the  full  size  of  the  page),  price  31.5-.  6d.  cloth, 

A 

HISTORY  of  the  GOTHIC  REVIVAL: 

An  Attempt  to  shew  how  far  the  taste  for  Mediseval  Architecture  which  lingered  in 
England  during  the  Two  last  Centuries,  has  since  been  encouraged  and  developed. 

By  CHARLES  LOCKE  EASTLAKE,  F.R.I.B.A.  Architect ; 

Author  of  ‘ Hints  on  Household  Taste.' 


THE  TIMES. 

During  the  last  fifty  years  countless  churches  have  been  restored  or  rebuilt,  and  those 
who  feel  interested  to  know  exactly  what  has  been  done  in  one  branch  of  church  architec- 
ture alone  cannot  do  better  than  possess  themselves  of  Mr.  Eastlake' s History  of  the 
Gothic  Revival  in  England  (Longmans  & Co. ) We  name  it  among  the  gift  books  of  the 
season,  not  only  because  it  contains  a great  many  illustrations,  but  because  we  believe  it  is 
just  the  book  which  the  large  number  of  persons  whose  tastes  run  in  the  direction  of  ecclesi- 
astical rather  than  of  profane  art  would  like  to  give  and  to  receive.  . . . Mr.  Eastlake 
writes  well,  and  has  a large  and  thorough  knowledge  of  his  subject.  His  engravings  are 
so  carefully  and  exactly  done  that  they  might  serve  the  purpose  of  an  architect.  His  work 
is  not  limited  to  sacred  architecture,  and  he  gives  us  various  examples  of  the  houses  and 
public  buildings  which  have  followed  the  fashion  for  Gothic.  He  is  an  enthusiast  for  the 
Gothic  Revival — if  he  were  not  he  would  scarcely  have  written  a book  about  it — but  he  is 
no  bigot. 

SATURDAY  REVIEW. 

The  great  reaction  from  the  Renaissance  which  has  characterised  the  present  century, 
and  which  has  stamped  indelible  traces  on  the  current  art  and  literature  of  Europe,  deserves 
and  demands  an  historian.  Mr.  Eastlake,  the  Secretary  of  the  Institute  of  Architects, 
has  undertaken,  in  the  volume  before  us,  to  trace  the  course  of  this  movement  in  one  of  its 
most  important  developments — that  of  architecture.  ...  It  is  clear  that,  unless  the 
materials  for  a complete  history  of  this  new  Renaissance  of  the  nineteenth  century  are 
speedily  collected,  many  of  them  will  perish  from  men's  memories.  We  shall  see,  in  our 
examination  of  Mr.  Eastlake’ s volume,  that,  with  all  his  pains  and  industry,  some  im- 
portant facts  have  escaped  his  research  or  have  been  forgotten.  This  reflection  enhances 
our  sense  of  gratitude  to  this  accomplished  writer  for  the  zeal  and  impartiality  with  which 
he  has  undertaken,  without  further  delay,  a difficult  and  very  important  task. 

DAILY  NEWS. 

Mr.  Eastlake,  cherishing  a decided  sympathy  with  the  (Gothic)  movement,  is  yet  so 
candid  and  impartial  in  his  estimates  of  the  different  schools  and  examples,  so  temperate 
in  the  spirit  of  his  criticism,  whether  to  praise  or  to  censure,  that  we  find  his  book  very 
pleasant  reading.  It  is  not  overloaded  with  technical  details,  and  the  frequent  introduction 
of  short  biographical  notices,  or  anecdotes  of  the  personal  and  professional  career  of 
modern  architects,  enlivens  the  descriptive  account  of  their  works.  . . . He  brings  together 
in  one  view  a great  variety  of  instances,  and  constantly  presents  to  our  attention  those  main 
features,  or  architectural  principles,  which  are  displayed  in  them  with  more  consistency  as 
the  movement  now  proceeds.  The  volume  is  furnished  with  about  fifty  illustrations  en- 
graved on  wood. 

ILLUSTRATED  LONDON  NEWS. 

A very  exact  and  considerate  view  of  the  whole  subject  in  all  its  bearings  on  the  social, 
ecclesiastical,  and  artistic  conditions  of  the  age.  . . \ The  work  is  both  instructive  and 
interesting  to  all  who  care  for  the  building  arts  of  construction  and  decoration. 


2 


Eastlake’s  Gothic  Revival. 


STANDARD. 

Mr.  EastlAKe’s  ‘ Hints  on  Household  Taste,’  published  some  time  ago,  are  working 
a silent  revolution  in  many  a home  ill  which  he  was  never  heard  of.  In  his  present  book 
he  surveys  the  whole  field  of  post-Reformation  Gothic  art  in  England.  Himself  a Fellow 
of  the  Institute  of  British  Architects,  he  brings  to  the  consideration  of  his  subject  perfect 
knowledge  and  no  small  literary  capacity.  . . . His  criticisms,  if  sometimes  restrained  by 
consideration  for  contemporaries,  are  always  marked  by  true  artistic  feeling  and  by  manifest 
ability.  To,  we  hope,  hundreds,  if  not  thousands  of  people,  A History  of  the  Gothic 
Revival  will  be  an  exceedingly  welcome  Christmas  book ; and  the  engravings,  from  well 
chosen  examples  of  the  Pointed  style,  will  render  the  volume  valuable  as  a book  of  reference. 

GLOBE. 

Mr.  Eastlake  has  so  richly  illustrated  his  book  with  drawings  of  many  of  the  most 
original  or  successful  buildings,  that  it  is  hard  to  turn  it  over  without  wishing  to  get  an 
architect  to  work  at  once.  . . . The  volume  will  be  found  a valuable  addition  to  every 
artistic  library. 

THE  GRAPHIC. 

This  handsome  volume  may  with  justice  be  described  as  a good  book  on  a good 
subject.  For  a thorough  appreciation  of  its  merits,  no  doubt  some  knowledge  of  archi- 
tectural details  is  necessary  ; nevertheless  there  is  much  within  its  pages  that  will  prove 
interesting  to  the  merest  ‘ outsider.  ’ 

NOTES  AND  QUERIES. 

We  heartily  commend  Mr.  Eastlake’s  well-compiled  work  to  our  readers,  not  only 
for  being  written  in  a spirit  of  great  fairness  to  all  those  concerned,  but  as  also  calculated 
to  bring  about  the  enforcement  of  the  only  true  principles  on  which  a real  living  Gothic 
revival  can  be  developed.  The  value  of  the  book  is  considerably  enhanced  by  a tabular 
statement  of  selected  examples  of  Gothic  buildings  erected  between  1820  and  1870,  and 
of  each  building  thus  selected  there  is  given  a concise  and  lucid  description. 

JOHN  BULL. 

Mr.  Eastlake’s  is  a work  of  much  excellence  and  of  great  general  interest.  No 
doubt,  fully  to  appreciate  it,  and  to  enter  into  all  his  criticisms,  requires  a professional  train- 
ing. But  there  is  very  much  in  it  which  will  amuse  the  general  reader,  and  which  the  most 
ignorant  can  enjoy.  It  forms  indeed,  both  for  the  architect  and  layman,  a valuable 
contribution  to  the  history  of  that  art  with  which  it  is  mainly  concerned.  At  the 
same  time,  the  tasteful  manner  in  which  it  has  been  produced,  and  the  numerous  illustra- 
tions which  adorn  it,  some  from  photographs,  others  from  original  sketches,  make  it  little 
less  attractive  for  the  drawing-room  table  than  it  is  for  the  library  or  the  study. 

BELL’S  WEEKLY  MESSENGER. 

While  the  substance  of  this  work  is  comprehensive,  minute,  and  technically  sound,  a 
more  readable  book  on  the  subject  was  never  presented  to  the  public.  It  forms  an  admir- 
able commentator  on  and  companion  to  all  that  has  been  done  in  Gothic  in  recent  years. 
It  notices  all  the  architects  who  have  left  their  mark  in  work  since  the  Revival  began,  and 
it  helps  one  to  a just  appreciation  of  their  merits.  The  most  important  buildings  of  the 
last  forty  years  are  criticised  broadly  and  instructively,  and  more  especially  in  an  historical 
and  illustrative  point  of  view.  All  recent  churches  and  mansions  round  which  criticism 
and  controversial  opinion  have  fought  their  battles  are  described  and  carefully  appreciated. 
Such  a work  was,  in  truth,  sorely  needed  : it  worthily  fills  a gap  which  thousands  in  their 
architectural  studies  were  painfully  sensible  of,  and  it  has  been  executed  with  an  ability, 
fairness,  and  charm  of  manner  which,  not  architects  only,  but  the  thoughtful  and  well- 
informed  among  the  public,  wil  fully  enjoy. 

ATHENJEUM. 

Mr.  Eastlake  traces  the  history  of  what  he  calls  ' the  Gothic  Revival  ’ with  care, 
rudition,  and  discrimination.  . . . The  book  contains  a learned*  and  careful  account  of 
the  productions  of  architects  who  built  in  the  Gothic  style  during  the  early  decades  of  this 
century,  and  carries  the  history  forward  to  the  present  time. 

London,  LONGMANS  & CO. 


HOUSEHOLD  TASTE 


LONDON  : PRINTED  BY 


SPOTT1SWOODE  AND  CO.,  NEW-STREET 
AND  PARLIAMENT  STREET 


SQUARE 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/hintsonhousehold00east_0 


Portion  of  a Cabinet , 

executed  from  a Design  by  Charles  L.  Eastlake. 


HINTS 


ON 


HOUSEHOLD  TASTE 

IN 

FURNITURE,  UPHOLSTERY 


AND  OTHER  DETAILS 


BY 


CHARLES  L.  EAST  LAKE 

F.R.I.B.A.,  Architect 

AUTHOR  OF  ‘a  HISTORY  OF  THE  GOTHIC  REVIVAL’ 


* Parmi  ces  splendeurs  a bon  marche,  ce  faux  gout  et  ce  faux  luxe,  nous  sommes 
ravis  quand  nous  trouvons  un  banc  bien  fait,  une  bonne  table  de  chene  portant 
d’aplomb  sur  ses  pieds,  des  rideaux  de  laine  qui  paraissent  etre  en  laine,  une  chaise 
commode  et  solide,  une  armoire  qui  s’ouvre  et  se  ferme  bien,  nous  montrant  en  dedans 
et  en  dehors  le  bois  dont  elle  est  fait,  et  laissant  deviner  son  usage.  Esperons  un 
retour  vers  ces  idees  saines,  et  qu’en  fait  de  mobilier,  comme  en  toute  chose,  on  en 
viendra  a comprendre  que  le  gout  consiste  a paraitre  ce  que  l’on  est  et  non  ce  que 
l’on  voudrait  etre  ’ 

Viollet-le-Duc 


FOURTH  EDITION 

( REVISED ) 


LONDON 

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  AND  CO. 

1878 


All  rights  reserved 


PREFACE. 


In  earlier  editions  of  this  book  I expressed  my  hope 
that  a time  would  arrive  when  those  who  are  chiefly 
concerned  with  the  control  and  management  of  in- 
dustrial art  in  this  country  would  perceive  the  necessity 
of  meeting  a demand,  which  has  existed  for  some  time 
past  among  our  art-loving  public,  for  improved  taste  in 
objects  of  modern  manufacture. 

I am  glad  to  find  that  hope  at  length  realised — 
if  not  to  the  full  extent  which  I had  anticipated — 
at  least  as  regards  many  branches  of  trade  in  which 
the  principles  of  good  design  had  long  been  obsolete. 

No  one  truly  interested  in  such  matters  can  fail 
to  have  noticed  the  remarkable  change  which  has 
taken  place  within  the  last  few  years  in  the  character 
of  domestic  furniture,  especially  of  cabinet  work,  tex- 
tile fabrics,  and  pottery  ; and  although  the  benefit 


VI 


Preface. 


of  this  change  is  occasionally  marred  by  the  ignorance 
of  second-rate  tradesmen,  who,  in  their  plagiarisms  of 
good  work,  have  missed  the  real  spirit  of  its  design, 
it  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  some  of  the  oldest  and 
most  reputable  firms  of  manufacturers  in  London,  Man- 
chester, and  Birmingham,  are  seeking  advice  and  as- 
sistance from  competent  designers,  with  a result  which 
has  a directly  beneficial  influence  on  the  nature  of 
their  productions. 

Of  course  it  will  take  some  time  before  this  in- 
fluence will  extend  to  that  unfortunately  large  class 
of  the  British  public  who  are  indifferent  to  art  of  any 
kind,  and  who  only  care  to  secure  * novelties  ’ (which 
may  be  as  remarkable  for  ugliness  as  beauty)  in  fur- 
nishing their  homes.  But,  inasmuch  as  the  number 
of  artistically  appointed  houses  is  steadily  increasing, 
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  those  who  have  had  no  op- 
portunity of  forming  a judgment  on  such  matters  will 
by  degrees  take  their  cue  from  others  of  more  culti- 
vated taste. 

The  progress  of  industrial  art  is  not  likely  to  be 
arrested  by  the  narrow  prejudice  of  those  wdiose 
perceptions  of  beauty  in  human  handiwork  are  strictly 


Preface . 


Vll 


limited  to  the  fields  of  painting  and  sculpture,  nor  by 
the  sneers  of  ignorant  critics  who  imagine  that  every 
departure  from  the  conventional  type  of  chair  or  table 
in  ordinary  use  must  necessarily  be  attended  by  per- 
sonal inconvenience. 

It  is  true  that  when  the  attention  of  the  public  was 
first  directed  to  this  subject,  the  furniture  of  the  day  was 
of  such  a vulgar  and  extravagant  kind,  that  those  who 
advocated  a reform  in  this  department  of  art  were 
tempted  to  recommend  a return  to  the  earliest  and  most 
archaic  types  of  design,  as  an  escape  from  the  evil  which 
they  denounced.  But  study  and  experience  have 
since  proved  that  the  internal  fittings  of  a house  may 
be  made  picturesque  and  interesting  without  being 
rude  and  clumsy  in  form,  and  that  it  is  not  necessary 
to  sacrifice  the  refinements  and  comfort  to  which  we 
are  accustomed  in  the  nineteenth  century,  in  order  to 
secure  simplicity  of  style. 

In  revising  this  volume  for  the  press,  I have  taken 
the  opportunity  to  replace  some  of  the  original  illus- 
trations by  others  more  representative  of  the  advance 
which  has  lately  been  made  in  the  character  of  con- 
temporary manufacture. 


viii  Preface. 

I would,  however,  caution  my  readers  against  sup- 
posing that  any  designs  represented  on  such  a small 
scale  as  in  the  following  wood-cuts,  can  serve  as  correct 
models  for  reproduction  by  upholsterers  and  cabinet- 
makers, without  the  working  drawings  necessary  for 
their  proper  execution  ; and  I think  it  the  more  neces- 
sary to  state  this,  as  I find  American  tradesmen  con- 
tinually advertising  what  they  are  pleased  to  call 
‘ Eastlake  ’ furniture,  with  the  production  of  which  I 
have  had  nothing  whatever  to  do,  and  for  the  taste  of 
which  I should  be  very  sorry  to  be  considered  re- 
sponsible. 

The  only  detailed  designs  I have  made  for  furniture 
(beyond  those  supplied  to  private  clients)  have  been 
for  a few  English  firms,  most  of  whose  names  are 
mentioned  in  this  book,  and  to  whom  of  course  the 
copyright  of  such  designs  belongs. 

Charles  L.  Eastlake. 

41  Leinster  Square, 

Bayswater,  W. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

PREFACE  V 

INTRODUCTION I 

CHAPTER 

I.  . . STREET  ARCHITECTURE 16 

II.  . . THE  ENTRANCE  HALL 41 

III.  . . THE  DINING-ROOM 71 

IV.  . . THE  FLOOR  AND  THE  WALL  . . .104 

V.  . . THE  LIBRARY 126 

VI.  . . THE  DRAWING-ROOM.  .....  156 

VII.  . . WALL-FURNITURE 183 

VIII.  . . THE  BED- ROOM 199 

IX.  . . CROCKERY 218 

X.  . . TABLE  GLASS 241 

XI.  . . DRESS  AND  JEWELLERY 258 

XII.  . . PLATE  AND  CUTLERY 282 


297 


INDEX 


ERRATA. 


210,  for  Plate  XXVIII.  read  Plate  XXVII. 


XXIX. 


XXVIII. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PLATE  PAGE 

T r.  ,.  r j ..  r-  i • *,  f Designed  by  C.  L.  East  lake.  Fron- 

I.  Portion  of  a decorative  Cabinet  * 

[_  tispiece 

II.  Street  in  Nuremberg Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake.  To  face  16 

III.  Area  railings  (of  the  Georgian  1 H.W.  Brewer.  To_ face  26 

period) J 

Window  in  Dining-room,  Cothele,  j c L Eastlake.  To  face  34 

Devon J 

Ancient  Iron  Door-knocker  at  J H w_  44 

Wurzburg  ........  J 

Do.  (another  example)  . do.  45 


IV. 


V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 


X. 


Examples  of  Modern  Encaustic  Tile  1 Manufactured  by  Maw  and  Co. 
Hall- Pavements  J To  face  50 

Mural  Decoration  (for  a ‘ Dado  ’)  . Designed  by  C.  Heaton.  To  face  52 

‘ Windsor  ’ Chair Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake  60 

Hall  Table Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake  65 

Hall  Chair  at  Cothele,  Devon  . . Drawnby  C.  L.  Eastlake.  To  face  67 

Modern  Dining-room  Table  . . . 

Ancient  do.  do.  1 

(Jacobean  period)  J 

Extensible  Dining-room  Table  . . Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 
Ancient  German  Table  ....  Drawn  by  H.  W.  Brewer 
Do.  do.  (another  example)  do.  do. 


do. 

do. 


do. 

do. 


75 

78 

79 

80 

81 


Illustrations . 


xii 


PLATE 

PAGE 

XI. 

Dining-room  Sideboard  . . . . 

f Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

l To  face  84 

Ancient  Chair  at  Knole  .... 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

86 

Trimmings  of  do 

do.  do. 

87 

Ancient  Arm-Chair  at  Knole  . . 

do.  do. 

88 

Finial  of  do.  . . 

do.  do. 

89 

XII. 

Ancient  Settee  at  Knole  . . . 

do.  do.  To  face 

90 

Window  Curtains  and  Curtain-Rod 

do.  do. 

94 

Hand-made  Lace 

Drawn  by  E.  J.  Tarver 

98 

Modern  Damask  Curtain  . . . 

„ C.  L.  Eastlake 

100 

XIII. 

Embroidered  Portiere  Curtains  . 

Designed  by  C.  Heaton.  To  face  101 

Modern  Swiss  Curtain-Lace  . . 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

102 

Scinde  Hearth-rug 

do.  do. 

107 

XIV.] 

i Examples  of  Modern  Parquetry 

1 Manufactured  by  A.  J. 

XV.  J 

| Floors 

J Arrow  smith  . . .To  face 

1 10 

Modern  Kidderminster  Carpet 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

hi 

Do.  (another  example)  . . 

„ E.  J.  Tarver 

1 12 

Do.  do.  . . 

„ do. 

113 

XVI. 

J Examples  of  Wall  Papers,  manu- 

] Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

XVII. 

J factured  by  Jeffrey  and  Co. . . 

j To  face  122 

XVIII. 

Do.  do.  . . 

„ B.  Binyon.  To  face 

122 

XIX. 

Mural  Decoration  (for  a Frieze)  . 

„ C.  Heaton.  To  face 

124 

XX. 

Library  Bookcase  executed  by ' 
Jackson  and  Graham  . . 

j-  „ C.  L.  Eastlake.  To  face 

132 

XXI. 

Mantelpiece  Shelves  do.  do. 

„ do.  To  face 

136 

Brass  Finger  Plates,  manufactured  y 
by  Benham  and  Froud  . . . j 

140 

Library  Fender  

„ A.  W.  Blomfield 

142 

Do.  (another  example) 

„ do. 

143 

Modern  Spanish  Brazier  . . . 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

144 

Gaselier,  executed  by  Benham  and 
F roud 

j-  Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

147 

Sconce  Light  and  Gas  Brackets  . 

do.  do.  j 48- 

149 

PLATE 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 


XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 


Illustrations. 


xm 


PAGE 


Siena  Torch-Bracket  .... 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

151 

Ancient  Iron  Candlestick  . . . 

„ H.  W.  Brewer.  To  face 

152 

Chimney-piece  ‘Spill 5 Vases,  exe- 
cuted by  Benham  and  Froud 

j.  Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

154 

Bell  Lever  do.  . . 

do.  do. 

155 

Ancient  Sofa  at  Knole  . . . 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake.  To  face  160 

Drawing-room  Sofa,  executed  by 
Jackson  and  Graham  . . . 

J Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 
J To  face  166 

Drawing-room  Arm-Chair,  exe- 
cuted by  Jackson  and  Graham 

j-  do.  do. 

165 

Do.  Chair  do.  . . 

do.  do 

166 

House-Bucket 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

168 

Florence  Oil- Flask  . . , . . 

do.  do. 

170 

Drawing-room  Arm-Chair  . . 

Designed  by  C.  L . Eastlake 

175 

Do.  Chair 

do.  do. 

176 

German  e Spindle5  Table  . . . 

Drawn  by  H.  W.  Brewer 

178 

Early  Italian  Casket  (inlaid) 

„ C.  L.  Eastlake 

180 

Drawing-room  Cheffonier,  exe- ' 
cuted  by  Jackson  and  Graham  , 

} Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 
j To  face  182 

Drawing-room  Sconce-Mirror  . 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

187 

Do.  Wall  Bracket  . . 

do.  do. 

189 

Picture-frame  Mouldings  . . . 

J Designed  by  E.  f.  Tarver 
t To  face 

192 

Picture  Frame 

do.  do. 

195 

Do.  in  Compartments  . 

do.  do. 

197 

Bed-room  Wash-stand,  executed 
by  Jackson  and  Graham 

| Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

205 

Iron  Bedstead  and  Canopy  . . 

do.  do.  To  face 

210 

Toilet  Table,  executed  by  Jack- 
son  and  Graham  . . . . • 

j do.  do. 

213 

Chest  of  Toilet-drawers  . . 


do. 


do. 


215 


XIV 


Illustrations. 


PLATE 

Hanging  Wardrobe,  executed ' 

PAGE 

by  Jackson  and  Graham  . . . 

j-  Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake  2 1 7 

Algerian  Earthenware  Dish 

Drawn  by  C.  L.  Eastlake  222 

Indian  Preserve  Jar  . . . . 

do. 

do. 

223 

Delf  Tea-Service,  manufactured  by  Copeland  and  Co. 

231 

XXVIII. 

Toilet  Ware  (Greek  Pattern)  . 

do. 

To  face  234 

XXIX. 

Modern  Venetian  Glass,  manu- 1 

Drawn  by  C. 

L.  Eastlake 

facturedby  Salviati  and  Co.  j 

To  face  252 

Portion  of  Indian  Necklace 

do. 

do. 

273 

Do.  do.  Head-ornament 

do. 

do. 

274 

Gold  Tablet  Link  (Indian  work) 

do. 

do. 

276 

Old  Russian  Pectoral  Cross 

do. 

do. 

2 77 

Cinque-cento  Pendant  of  ena-  ] 

j-  do. 

do. 

279 

melled  Gold J 

XXX. 

Locket,  manufactured  by  Howell  ] 

1 Designed  by  the  late 

and  James. J 

[ Sir  Digby  Wyatt 

. To  face  278 

XXXI. 

Locket,  Ear-ring,  and  Bracelet  J 

Designed  by  C.  L.  Eastlake 

do.  do.  J 

To  face  280 

Ancient  Engraved  Spoon  . . 

Drawn  by 

do. 

285 

Damascened  Knife-handle  . . 

do. 

do. 

290 

Old  Knife  and  F ork,  with  carved  < 
handles  J 

J-  do. 

do. 

292 

HINTS 


ON 

HOUSEHOLD  TASTE. 


Introduction. 

T is  unfortunate  for  the  interests  of  Art  at  the 
present  time  that  in  civilised  countries  it  has 
come  to  be  regarded  as  the  result  of  theories 
utterly  remote  from  the  question  of  ordinary  taste, 
totally  distinct  from  those  principles  which  influence 
manufacture  and  structural  science,  and  independent 
of  any  standard  of  excellence  which  we  might  expect 
to  be  derived  from  common  sense.  Let  us  suppose, 
for  instance,  a man  of  good  education,  accustomed  to 
associate  with  well-bred  people  from  his  youth,  but 
who  had  never  chanced  to  reckon  a painter  among  his 
intimate  friends,  and  had  acquired  no  more  knowledge 
of  pictures  than  what  it  is  possible  to  gather  from 
books  and  newspapers,  taken  for  the  first  time  in  his 
life  to  a second-rate  modern  exhibition,  and  afterwards 


B 


2 


Introduction. 


to  the  collection  of  old  masters  which  now  forms  our 
National  Gallery.  Can  anyone  doubt  for  a moment 
that  he  would  prefer  the  most  literal  representations 
of  contemporary  life  to  the  ideal  and  frequently  con- 
ventional treatment  of  the  classic  schools  ? He  would 
see  little  or  no  merit  in  the  glowing  colours  of  Titian, 
the  flowing  draperies  of  Veronese,  the  broad  handling 
of  Velasquez,  the  careful  detail  of  Van  Eyck.  But  the 
cheapest  form  of  sentiment  embodied  in  a modern 
picture,  so  long  as  it  seemed  to  realise  scenes,  inci- 
dents, and  action  which  he  was  accustomed  to  see 
about  him,  would  at  once  appeal  to  his  imagination 
and  interest  his  eye. 

This  commonplace  taste  was,  until  lately,  not  con- 
fined to  pictorial  art.  If  we  may  believe  those  who 
have  given  their  attention  to  the  subject  of  technical 
design,  it  pervaded  and  vitiated  the  judgment  by 
which  we  were  accustomed  to  select  and  approve  the 
objects  of  everyday  use  in  our  houses.  It  crossed  our 
path  in  the  Brussels  carpet  of  our  drawing-rooms  ; it 
was  about  our  beds  in  the  shape  of  gaudy  chintz  ; it 
compelled  us  to  rest  on  chairs  and  to  sit  at  tables 
which  were  designed  in  accordance  with  the  worst 
principles  of  construction  and  invested  with  shapes 
confessedly  unpicturesque.  It  sent  us  metal-work  from 


Degeneracy  of  Manufacture. 


3 


Birmingham  which  was  as  vulgar  in  form  as  it  was 
flimsy  in  execution.  It  decorated  the  finest  modern 
porcelain  with  the  most  objectionable  character  of 
ornament.  It  lined  our  walls  with  silly  representations 
of  vegetable  life,  or  with  a mass  of  uninteresting  diaper. 
It  bade  us,  in  short,  furnish  our  houses  after  the  same 
fashion  as  we  dress  ourselves,  and  that  is  with  no 
more  sense  of  real  beauty  than  if  art  were  a dead 
letter. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  general  public 
did  not  recognise  this  fact.  In  the  eyes  of  Mater- 
familias  there  was  no  upholstery  which  could  possibly 
surpass  that  which  the  most  fashionable  upholsterer 
supplied.  She  believed  in  the  elegance  of  window- 
curtains,  of  which  so  many  dozen  yards  had  been  sent 

to  the  Duchess  of , and  concluded  that  the  dinner- 

service  must  be  perfect  which  was  described  as  ‘ quite 
a novelty.’  When  did  people  first  adopt  the  monstrous 
notion  that  the  ‘ last  pattern  out  ’ must  be  the  best  ? 
Is  good  taste  so  rapidly  progressive  that  every  mug 
which  leaves  the  potter’s  hands  surpasses  in  shape  the 
last  which  he  moulded  ? Far  from  this,  it  is  to  be 
feared  that,  instead  of  progressing,  we  have,  for  some 
ages  at  least,  gone  hopelessly  backward  in  the  arts  of 
manufacture.  And  this  is  true  not  only  with  respect 


B 2 


4 


Introduction . 


to  the  character  of  design,  but  often  in  regard  to  the 
actual  quality  of  material  employed.  It  is  generally 
admitted  by  every  housewife  who  has  attained  a 
matronly  age,  that  linen,  silk,  and  other  articles  of 
textile  fabric,  though  less  expensive  than  formerly,  are 
far  inferior  to  what  was  made  in  the  days  of  our  grand- 
fathers. Metal-workers  tell  us  that  it  is  almost  im- 
possible to  procure,  for  the  purpose  of  their  trade, 
brass  such  as  appears  to  have  been  in  common  use  a 
century  ago.  Joinery  is  neither  so  sound  nor  so  ar- 
tistic as  it  was  in  the  early  Georgian  era.  A cheap 
and  easy  method  of  workmanship — an  endeavour  to 
produce  a show  of  finish  with  the  least  possible  labour, 
and,  above  all,  an  unhealthy  spirit  of  competition  in 
regard  to  price,  such  as  was  unknown  to  previous 
generations- — have  combined  to  deteriorate  the  value 
of  our  ordinary  mechanics’  work. 

Now  although  in  the  field  of  art,  as  well  as  in  the 
researches  of  science,  it  is  not  always  easy  for  the 
uninitiated  to  determine  of  two  collateral  phenomena, 
which  may  be  referred  to  cause  and  which  to  effect, 
it  must  be  evident  to  all  who  have  thought  earnestly 
on  the  subject,  that  there  is  an  intimate  connection 
between  this  falling  off  in  the  excellence  of  our  manu- 
factures, and  the  tame  vapid  character  which  distin- 


National  A rt. 


5 


guished  even  our  best  painters’  work  in  the  early  part 
of  the  present  Victorian  age.  Doubtless  in  this  parti- 
cular epoch  there  have  been  individual  instances  of 
men  who,  like  Turner,  created  a new  impulse  in  some 
special  branch  of  their  profession — just  as  Wedgwood 
distinguished  himself  by  his  strenuous  efforts  to  throw 
fresh  life  and  vigour  into  the  system  of  ceramic  design  ; 
but  these  are  solitary  cases,  and  can  hardly  be  quoted 
as  indicative  of  a generally  advancing  taste.  National 
art  is  not  a thing  which  we  may  inclose  in  a gilt  frame 
and  hang  upon  our  walls,  or  which  can  be  locked 
up  in  the  cabinet  of  a collector.  To  be  genuine  and 
permanent,  it  ought  to  animate  with  the  same  spirit 
the  blacksmith’s  forge  and  the  sculptor’s  atelier , the 
painter’s  studio  and  the  haberdasher’s  shop.  In  the 
great  ages  of  art  it  was  so.  Francia,  a carpenter’s  son, 
was  brought  up  as  a niello  engraver.  He  became  a 
great  painter,  but  he  was  not  for  that  reason  ashamed 
to  work  at  decorating  jewellery.  He  loved  to  sign  his 
pictures  ‘ Aurifex,’  and  on  his  trinkets  he  inscribed  the 
word  ‘ Pictor.’  The  most  liberal  salary  which  Messrs. 
Hunt  and  Roskell  might  be  prepared  to  pay  would 
not  secure  such  assistance  now.  Modern  jewellers,  as 
a rule,  know  nothing  of  pictorial  art  ; painters,  it  is  to 
be  feared,  have  but  little  taste  in  jewellery.  Every 


6 


Introduction . 


branch  of  manufacture  is  inclosed  within  its  own  limits 
— has  its  own  particular  style.  Our  china,  which  once 
imitated  Oriental  ware,  not  long  ago  promised  to 
assume,  through  Minton’s  influence,  a quasi-mediae val 
character.  The  goldsmiths  who  once  produced  no- 
thing but  rococo  ornaments  have  since  endeavoured 
to  imitate  Etruscan  necklaces  and  armlets.  We  had 
French  mirrors  and  Persian  rugs,  Greek  vases  and 
Roman  lamps — designs  of  every  age  and  country  but 
our  own  ; or  if  by  some  chance  we  could  point  to  any 
special  instance  of  a genuine  English  design,  it  was 
generally  mean  and  uninteresting. 

As  this  was  especially  the  case  with  those  articles 
of  household  use  on  which  the  eye  had  constantly  to 
rest,  we  can  scarcely  be  surprised  that  there  was  so 
little  popular  sympathy  with  works  of  high  aim  in  pic- 
torial art.  People  fell  into  a way  of  ridiculing  things  as 
‘ quaint  ’ and  ‘ peculiar  ’ which  happened  to  differ  from 
the  conventional  ugliness  of  the  modern  drawing-room. 
When  crinoline,  for  instance,  was  in  the  height  of  its 
fashion,  any  young  lady  who  had  the  courage  to  appear 
without  it  would  have  been  called  a ‘ fright  ’ in  regard 
to  her  toilet,  without  reference  to  the  patent  fact  that  her 
dress,  allowed  to  fall  into  natural  folds,  disposed  itself 
much  more  gracefully  than  when  stretched  over  the  steel 


Effect  of  Fashion. 


7 


hoop,  which,  happily  for  us,  is  once  more  trundled  into 
oblivion.  Now,  if  we  reflect  on  the  baneful  influence 
which  this  wretched  invention  must  have  had  some 
years  ago  on  the  tastes  of  the  rising  generation,  and 
how  children  grew  up  in  the  belief  that  it  actually  lent 
a sort  of  charm  to  the  skirts  of  their  mothers’  dresses, 
we  shall  feel  less  surprised  at  the  apathy  and  want  of 
appreciation  with  which  the  Venus  of  Milo,  or  the 
drapery  of  any  other  antique  statue,  is  regarded  by 
young  Avomen  of  fashion  at  the  present  day.  In  the 
same  way,  if  we  contemplate  with  satisfaction— nay,  if 
we  even  tolerate  the  extravagant  and  graceless  ap- 
pointments of  the  modern  boudoir,  let  us  not  be  sur- 
prised that  we  find  it  mirrored  on  the  modern  canvas. 
The  most  natural  instinct  of  the  painter’s  mind  is,  after 
all,  to  depict  life  as  he  finds  it ; and  in  all  the  best 
ages  of  art  this  was  practically  done,  even  by  those 
whose  aim  tended  towards  the  ideal.  Phidias,  Ra- 
phael, and  (if  we  venture  to  place  their  names  together) 
Hogarth  may  here  be  said  to  meet  on  common  ground. 
We  can  hardly  hope  then,  in  our  own  time,  to  sustain 
anything  like  a real  and  national  interest  in  art  while 
we  tamely  submit  to  ugliness  in  modern  manufacture. 
We  cannot  consistently  have  one  taste  for  the  drawing- 
room and  another  for  the  studio ; but,  perhaps,  the 


8 


Introduction. 


best  discipline  which  could  be  devised  for  the  latter 
would  be  initiated  by  a thorough  reform  of  the  first. 

The  faculty  of  distinguishing  good  from  bad  design 
in  the  familiar  objects  of  domestic  life  is  a faculty 
which  most  educated  people — and  women  especially — 
conceive  that  they  possess.  How  it  has  been  acquired, 
few  would  be  able  to  explain.  The  general  impression 
seems  to  be,  that  it  is  the  peculiar  inheritance  of  gentle 
blood,  and  independent  of  all  training  ; that,  while  a 
young  lady  is  devoting  at  school,  or  under  a governess, 
so  many  hours  a day  to  music,  so  many  to  languages, 
and  so  many  to  general  science,  she  is  all  this  time  un- 
consciously forming  that  sense  of  the  beautiful,  which 
we  call  taste  : that  this  sense,  once  developed,  will 
enable  her,  unassisted  by  special  study  or  experience, 
not  only  to  appreciate  the  charms  of  nature  in  every 
aspect,  but  to  form  a correct  estimate  of  the  merits  of 
art-manufacture.  That  this  impression  has  gained 
ground  so  far  as  to  amount  to  positive  conviction,  may 
be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  there  is  no  single  point 
on  which  well-bred  women  are  more  jealous  of  dispar- 
agement than  on  this.  We  may  condemn  a lady’s 
opinion  on  politics — criticise  her  handwriting— correct 
her  pronunciation  of  Latin,  and  disparage  her  favourite 
author  with  a chance  of  escaping  displeasure.  But  if 


A cquirement  of  Taste . 


9 


we  venture  to  question  her  taste — in  the  most  ordinary 
sense  of  the  word,  we  are  sure  to  offend.  It  is,  how- 
ever, a lamentable  fact  that  this  very  quality  was  until 
recently  deficient,  not  only  among  the  generally  igno- 
rant, but  also  among  the  most  educated  classes  in  this 
country.  How  could  it  be  otherwise?  Even  the 
simplest  and  most  elementary  principles  of  decorative 
art  form  no  part  of  early  instruction,  and  the  majority 
of  the  public,  being  left  completely  uninformed  of  them, 
is  content  to  be  guided  by  a few  people  who  are  them- 
selves not  only  uninformed  but  misinformed  on  the 
subject.  It  is  scarcely  too  much  to  say  that  ninety-nine 
out  of  every  hundred  English  gentlewomen  who  have 
the  credit  of  dressing  well  depend  entirely  upon  their 
milliners  for  advice  as  to  what  they  may,  and  what  they 
may  not,  wear.  The  latest  novelty  from  Paris  is  re- 
commended, not  because  it  has  any  special  merit  on 
the  score  of  artistic  beauty,  but  simply  because  it  is  a 
novelty.  Of  course  it  would  be  useless  to  urge,  in 
answer  to  this,  that  a certain  form  of  dress,  once 
accepted  as  good,  must  always  be  good ; or  to  deny 
that  a particular  combination  of  colours,  recognised  as 
harmonious,  can  become  discordant,  simply  because  it 
does  not  appear  in  the  pages  of  Le  Follet.  Unfortu- 
nately, the  world  of  fashion  is  so  constituted  that  people 


IO 


Introduction. 


who  move  in  it  are  obliged  to  conform  more  or  less  to 
its  rules  ; and  as  no  lady  likes  to  make  herself  con- 
spicuous by  her  dress,  she  may  reasonably  abstain  from 
wearing  what  has  been  long  out  of  date.  But  there  is 
a limit  to  all  things ; and  the  capricious  tyranny  which 
insists  on  a monthly  change  of  style  ought  to  be  firmly 
resisted  by  women  who  are  too  sensible  to  give  up  their 
whole  time  and  attention  to  their  toilet.  Of  course  it 
is  the  interest  of  milliners  to  multiply  these  changes  as 
frequently  as  possible,  and  the  waste  of  money  thus 
incurred  (to  say  nothing  of  higher  considerations)  has 
been  a just  cause  of  complaint  with  many  a husband 
and  father.  Leaving  the  moral  aspect  of  the  matter, 
however,  out  of  the  question,  it  must  be  confessed 
that  to  hear  a young  shopman  defining  to  his  fair  cus- 
tomers across  the  counter  what  is  ‘ genteel  ’ or  ‘ lady- 
like/ sounds  very  ludicrous,  and  even  impertinent.  Yet 
in  this  sort  of  advice  apparently  lies  the  only  guiding 
principle  of  their  selection.  They  choose  not  what 
they  like  best,  but  what  is  ‘ very  much  worn/  or 
what  their  obsequious  adviser  recommends  them  as 
suitable. 

Counsel  of  such  a kind,  and  the  easy  confidence  in  its 
worth,  are,  unfortunately,  not  confined  to  the  haber- 
dasher’s shop.  They  seem  inseparable  from  the  pur- 


‘ Counter  ’ Influences.  1 1 

chase  of  every  article  which,  from  the  nature  of  its 
design  or  manufacture,  can  claim  to  be  of  an  ornamental 
character.  When  Materfamilias  enters  an  ordinary  up- 
holsterer s warehouse,  how  can  she  possibly  decide  on 
the  pattern  of  her  new  carpet,  when  bale  after  bale  of 
Brussels  is  unrolled  by  the  indefatigable  youth,  who  is 
equal  in  his  praises  of  every  piece  in  turn  ? Shall  it  be 
the  ‘ House  of  Lords  ’ diaper,  of  a yellow  spot  upon  a 
blue  ground  ; or  the  ‘ imitation  Turkey,’  with  its  multi- 
farious colours  ; or  the  beautiful  new  moird  design  ; or 
yonder  exquisite  invention  of  green  fern-leaves,  tied  up 
with  knots  of  white  satin  ribbon  ?#  The  shopman  re- 
marks of  one  piece  of  goods  that  it  is  ‘ elegant  ’ ; of  an- 
other, that  it  is  4 striking  ’ ; of  a third,  that  it  is  ‘ unique,’ 
and  so  forth.  The  good  lady  looks  from  one  carpet  to 
another  until  her  eyes  are  fairly  dazzled  by  their  hues. 
She  is  utterly  unable  to  explain  why  she  should,  or  why 
she  should  not,  like  any  of  them.  Perhaps  a friend  is 
appealed  to,  who,  being  a strong-minded  person  (with 
the  additional  incentive  of  a wish  to  bring  the  matter 
to  an  issue  as  speedily  as  possible),  at  once  selects  the 
very  pattern  which  Materfamilias  pronounced  to  be  ‘ a 


* This  preposterous  pattern  has  not  only  been  employed  for  carpets, 
but  was  once  very  popular,  and  may  be  noticed  as  an  instance  of  the 
degradation  to  which  the  arts  of  design  can  descend. 


12 


Introduction . 


fright’  only  two  minutes  ago.  In  this  dilemma  the 
gentleman  with  the  yard-wand  again  comes  to  the 
rescue,  states  his  firm  opinion  as  to  which  is  most 
‘ fashionable,’  and  this  at  once  carries  the  day.  The 
carpet  is  made  up,  sent  home,  and  takes  its  chance  of 
domestic  admiration  together  with  all  other  house- 
hold  appointments.  It  may  kill  by  its  colour  every  piece 
of  tapisserie  in  the  room.  It  may  convey  the  notion  of  a 
bed  of  roses,  or  a dangerous  labyrinth  of  rococo  orna- 
ment— but  if  it  is  ‘ fashionable,’  that  is  all-sufficient. 
While  new,  it  is  admired  ; when  old,  everybody  will 
agree  that  it  was  always  ‘ hideous.’ 

Glass,  china,  table-linen,  window-curtains,  tables, 
chairs,  and  cabinet-work,  used  all  to  be  chosen  on  this 
plan.  The  latest  invention,  although  it  might  violate 
every  principle  of  good  design,  was  sure  to  be  a 
favourite  with  the  majority.  An  article  which  dated 
from  a few  years  back  was  rejected  as  old-fashioned. 
This  absurd  love  of  change — simply  for  the  sake  of 
change,  is  even  now  carried  to  such  an  extent  that  if 
one  desires  to  replace  a jug  or  a table-cloth  with 
another  of  the  same  pattern,  even  a few  months  after 
the  first  has  been  bought,  however  good  the  style  may 
have  been,  it  is  extremely  difficult,  sometimes  im- 
possible, to  do  so.  The  answer  is  always  the  same  : 


Demand  for  Novelties. 


13 


‘ Last  year’s  goods,  sir ; we  couldn’t  match  them 
now.’ 

This  state  of  things  is  the  fault,  not  only  of  the 
manufacturer,  but  of  the  purchaser.  So  long  as  a thirst 
for  mere  novelty  exists  independently  of  all  artistic 
considerations,  the  aim  at  Manchester  and  Sheffield 
will  be  to  produce  objects  which,  by  their  singular  form, 
or  striking  combination  cf  colours,  shall  always  appear 
new.  From  such  an  endeavour  some  originality  indeed 
resulted,  but  also  a vast  deal  of  ugliness.  Now  and 
then  a good  thing  found  its  way  into  the  sale-room  or 
shop-window,  struck  the  fancy  of  some  buyer,  and  was 
sent  home.  But  if  we  searched  for  the  same  article 
next  season,  we  probably  found  that  it  had  been  con- 
demned to  make  room  for  some  trash,  which  was  in 
request  for  no  better  reason  than  because  nothing  like 
it  had  appeared  before. 

For  many  years  past  there  has  been,  as  I have  said, 
a great  deficiency  in  public  taste  on  such  points,  but  by 
degrees  people  are  beginning  to  awaken  to  the  fact, 
that  there  is  a right  and  a wrong  notion  of  taste  in 
upholstery,  in  jewellery — perhaps  in  millinery,  too — 
and  in  many  other  fields  which  stand  apart  from  a 
connoisseurship  of  what  is  commonly  called  ‘ high  art.’ 
The  revival  of  ecclesiastical  decoration,  for  instance, 


H 


Introduction. 


has  called  ladies’  attention  to  the  subject  of  embroidery  ; 
and  they  are  relinquishing  the  ridiculous  custom  of 
endeavouring  to  reproduce,  in  cross-stitch  worsted- 
work,  the  pictures  of  Landseer  and  Frank  Stone. 
There  is  a growing  impatience  of  paperhangings  which 
would  beguile  the  unwary  into  a shadowy  suspicion 
that  the  drawing-room  walls  are  fitted  up  with  trellis- 
work  for  training  Brobdignag  convolvuli  ; and  por- 
traits of  the  once-celebrated  Bengal  tiger  no  longer 
appear  on  the  domestic  hearth-rug.  The  modern 
fashion  of  dining  a la  Russe  has  given  a new  impulse 
to  the  manufacture  of  dessert  services  and  table-glass  ; 
and  the  improved  education  of  students  in  the  schools 
of  design  has  been  attended  with  beneficial  results  in 
more  quarters  than  one.  Still  there  seems  to  be  a 
great  want  of  popular  information  for  the  guidance  of 
those  who  have  neither  time  nor  inclination  to  study 
the  abstruse  works  on  various  departments  of  decora- 
tive art  which  have  from  time  to  time  appeared  in  this 
country. 

It  is  hoped,  therefore,  that  a few  familiar  hints  on 
what  may  be  called  4 household  taste  ’ will  not  be  un- 
acceptable to  the  readers  of  this  book.  There  is  a 
class  of  young  ladies  who  are  in  the  habit  of  anticipat- 
ing all  differences  of  opinion  in  a picture-gallery  or 


Principles  of  Taste . 


15 


concert-room  by  saying  that  they  ‘ know  what  they 
like.’  Whatever  advantage  may  be  derived  from  this 
remarkable  conviction  in  regard  to  music  or  painting, 
I fear  it  would  assist  no  one  in  furnishing  a house— at 
least,  in  accordance  with  any  established  principles  of 
art.  It  will  be  my  endeavour,  in  the  following  chapters, 
to  point  out  those  principles,  so  far  as  they  have  been 
laid  down  by  writers  of  acknowledged  authority,  taking 
care  to  avoid  all  technical  details  in  regard  to  manu- 
facture, which,  however  interesting  to  the  specialist, 
would  be  useless  to  the  general  reader ; and  if  I am 
thus  enabled,  even  indirectly,  to  encourage  a dis- 
crimination between  good  and  bad  design  in  those 
articles  of  daily  use  which  we  are  accustomed  to  see 
around  us,  my  object  will  be  attained. 


i6 


Household  Taste. 


Chapter  L 

STREET  ARCHITECTURE . 

is  always  interesting  to  note  the  early  im- 
pressions which  the  superficial  aspect  of  our 
country  produces  on  foreigners  who  visit  it 
for  the  first  time,  and  to  compare  those  impressions 
with  feelings  such  as  we  have  ourselves  experienced 
under  similar  conditions  on  the  Continent.  After 
making  every  allowance  for  the  charm  of  novelty, 
which  of  course  goes  far  to  enhance  a strangers  enjoy- 
ment on  these  occasions,  we  cannot  doubt  that  there  is 
much  in  the  external  appearance  of  foreign  life  which 
possesses  especial  attractions  for  our  countrymen.  The 
first  glimpse,  for  instance,  which  we  get,  after  crossing 
the  Channel,  of  such  a town  as  Dieppe,  or  the  grati- 
fication which  we  derive  from  wandering  for  the  first 
time  through  the  streets  of  a city  like  Nuremburg, 
whose  general  aspect  has  remained  almost  unaltered 
since  the  Middle  Ages,  is  associated  with  a sense  of 
what  may  be  called  eye-pleasure,  which  is  utterly 


VI  i 


II. 


Street  in  Nuremberg . 


Old  and  Modern  Paris . 


17 


absent  in  our  English  provincial  towns.  The  latter 
may  be  better  paved,  cleaner  swept,  and  more  expen- 
sively laid  out  than  their  French  or  German  rivals  ; but 
they  are  for  the  most  part  utterly  wanting  in  one  im- 
portant element  of  architectural  merit — viz.  the  pictur- 
esque. When  we  pass  on  to  compare  the  capital  of 
France  with  our  own  metropolis,  a still  wider  difference 
is  discernible,  though  from  causes  of  another  kind. 
Modern  Paris  is  fast  losing — if,  indeed,  it  has  not  quite 
lost — the  romantic  interest  which  once  attached  to  its 
genius  loci.  The  quaint  irregularly  built  streets,  the 
overhanging  corbelled  stories  and  high-pitched  gable- 
fronts  which  rise  before  us  as  we  read  ‘ The  Hunch- 
back of  Notre  Dame,’  and  which  lingered  down  to 
the  days  of  Smollett,  and  even  to  our  own  time,  have 
suddenly  disappeared  before  the  rapid  and  extensive 
improvements  which  were  carried  on  under  the  late 
Imperial  Government. 

Anyone  who  has  traced  on  an  old  map  of  Paris  the 
labyrinth  of  dark  and  narrow  streets  through  which  the 
Rue  de  Rivoli  has  boldly  cut,  or  who  can  remember 
the  former  aspect  of  those  quarters  now  intersected  by 
the  Boulevart  Sebastopol,  and  other  thoroughfares,  will 
bear  witness  to  the  almost  magical  effect  of  a trans- 
formation which  the  social  economist  or  the  sanitary 


c 


18 


Street  Architecture . 


commissioner  indeed  may  view  with  satisfaction,  but 
which  the  artist  and  antiquary  cannot  but  deplore. 
The  architecture  of  modern  Paris  is  by  no  means  all 
that  a man  of  sound  taste  can  approve.  It  is  cold  and 
formal  in  general  effect.  In  detail  it  is  somewhat 
garish,  but  more  often  simply  uninteresting.  The  long 
unbroken  line  of  cornice,  window-range,  or  parapet, 
which  presents  itself  to  the  eye  in  interminable  per- 
spective, becomes  wearisome  even  in  the  widest  and 
loftiest  of  streets.  Yet,  right  or  wrong,  there  is  a 
uniformity  of  purpose,  a character  and  completeness 
about  the  work,  which  not  only  bears  the  impress  of  a 
national  taste,  but  exhibits  the  influence  of  some  direct 
and  competent  supervision.  Unfortunately  in  England 
we  can  boast  of  no  national  taste  in  architecture,  and  the 
scheme  on  which  our  Executive  Government  is  based 
prevents  anything  like  State  interference  regarding  the 
design  of  buildings  devoted  to  private  enterprise  or 
occupation.  So  every  householder  or  merchant  builds 
according  to  his  own  fancy,  or  rather  according  to  the 
fancy  of  the  professional  gentleman  whom  he  employs 
to  plan  his  villa  or  his  warehouse. 

Of  course  I am  now  alluding  to  the  best  structures 
of  each  class.  As  for  the  myriads  of  cockney  cottages, 
suburban  streets,  tawdry  shop-fronts,  and  stuccoed 


London  Streets . 


19 


terraces,  which  are  rising  up  in  the  outskirts  of  London, 
they  speak  for  themselves  ; and  as  long  as  people  of 
humble  means  will  insist  on  assuming  the  semblance  of 
luxuries  which  they  cannot  really  afford,  vulgarities  of 
design  and  structural  deceits  must  prevail  in  this  direc- 
tion. But  where  there  is  no  stint  of  means — where 
the  work,  if  done  at  all,  should,  and  might  easily  be 
done  well,  and  where,  under  these  conditions,  we  find 
taste  neglected,  and  money  thrown  away,  the  result  is 
indeed  melancholy  to  contemplate. 

Perhaps  the  most  consistent  phase  of  modern  street 
architecture  in  London  is  that  which  has  appeared  in 
connection  with  the  West-end  clubs.  Yet  these,  as 
a rule,  are  but  copies,  and,  not  unfrequently,  vitiated 
copies,  of  actual  buildings  illustrating  an  exotic  school 
of  art  which  had  never  a footing  in  England  until  our 
own  had  been  lost  or  degraded.  The  so-called  Italian 
style — now  understood  to  include  every  variety  of 
Renaissance  design  which  prevailed  in  Rome,  Venice, 
and  Florence,  from  the  sixteenth  to  the  eighteenth 
century — has  its  aesthetic  merits  and  its  practical 
advantages.  But  they  are  merits  and  advantages 
which  are  unsuited  to  the  age,  to  the  climate,  and  to 
the  country  in  which  they  are  reproduced.  It  does 
not  require  the  judgment  of  an  accomplished  connois- 


20 


Street  A rchitecture . 


seur  to  perceive  that  mouldings  and  carved  enrich- 
ments which  look  well  under  the  glowing  effect  of  a 
Venetian  sky,  must  appear  tame  and  spiritless  through 
the  leaden  atmosphere  of  London.  We  want  in 
England  a less  refined  and  more  nervous  expression 
of  architectural  beauty  — bold  and  sturdy  features, 
which  will  hold  their  own  against  wind  and  rain,  and 
defy  the  smoke  and  traffic  of  our  busy  coal-burning 
towns.  But  it  is  not  often  that  we  can  complain  with 
any  reason  of  undue  refinement  in  our  imitations  of 
Italian  architecture.  Even  those  which  are  confessedly 
copied  from  old  examples  miss,  either  intentionally  or 
through  inaccurate  workmanship,  the  delicacy  of  the 
original  design.  And,  in  too  many  instances,  where 
our  architects  have  ignored  the  value  of  precedent,  and 
struck  out  a new  line  for  themselves,  the  result  has 
been  hopelessly  clumsy  or  bizarre.  It  is  only  by  a 
long  and  careful  course  of  study,  based  on  naturally 
good  and  inventive  taste,  that  these  mistakes  can  be 
avoided  on  the  part  of  the  designer.  And  it  is  only 
by  the  well-directed  and  long-sustained  efforts  of 
designers  that  the  British  public  will  ever  be  brought 
to  distinguish  good  from  bad  in  modern  architecture. 
Ignorant  amateurs  of  the  art  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes— those  who  have  a smattering  of  book  lore  on 


Pseudo-  Classic  A rchitecture.  2 1 

the  subject,  and  who  think  no  building  worth  looking 
at  which  is  not  based  on  ‘ authority,’  or,  in  other  words, 
which  is  not  copied  from  some  existing  work  ; and 
those  who  have  a morbid  craving  after  novelty  at  the 
expense  of  every  other  consideration,  including  that 
invaluable  standard  of  architectural  fitness  which  is 
supplied  by  common  sense. 

It  is  to  the  first  of  these  two  classes  that  we  are 
indebted  for  the  encouragement  and  support  of  the 
pseudo-classicism  with  which,  in  the  form  of  churches, 
clubs,  and  public  institutions,  London  was  deluged  in 
the  early  part  of  this  century.  The  tide  of  public 
favour  afterwards  turned  in  an  opposite  direction  ; and 
while  all  must  admit  the  laudable  zeal  with  which 
Pugin  and  his  followers  endeavoured  to  revive  old 
English  architecture  in  this  country,  it  is  lamentable 
to  reflect  how  many  monstrous  designs  were  per- 
petrated under  the  general  name  of  Gothic,  which 
neither  in  spirit  nor  letter  realised  the  character  of 
mediaeval  art.  In  London  these  extraordinary  ebulli- 
tions of  uneducated  taste  generally  appear  in  the  form 
of  meeting-houses,  music-halls,  and  similar  places  of 
popular  resort.  Showy  in  their  general  effect,  and 
usually  overloaded  with  meretricious  ornament,  they 
are  likely  enough  to  impose  upon  an  uninformed  judg- 


22 


Street  Architecture . 


ment,  which  is  incapable  of  discriminating  between 
what  Mr.  Ruskin  has  called  the  Lamp  of  Sacrifice — 
one  of  the  glories  of  ancient  art — and  the  lust  of  pro- 
fusion which  is  the  bane  of  modern  design.  These 
extravagances  are  not  confined  to  a perversion  of 
Gothic.  Some  of  the  ‘Monster’  hotels,  railway  stations, 
and  other  buildings  of  a type  unknown  to  our  fore- 
fathers, but  now  erected  in  London,  are  decorated 
after  a fashion  which  is  equally  novel,  and  which  has 
nothing  but  novelty  to  recommend  it.  But  then  most 
of  these  buildings  are  six  or  seven  stories  high,  make 
up  so  many  hundred  beds,  and  are  managed  by  a host 
who  is  so  important  a personage  that  we  never  see  him 
at  all ! These  facts,  doubtless,  enhance  our  respect  for 
an  establishment  which,  on  a smaller  scale,  might  be 
open  to  some  criticism  on  the  ground  both  of  personal 
convenience  and  of  artistic  propriety. 

Some  attempts  at  architectural  display  are  occasion- 
ally made  in  the  way  of  shop-fronts.  But  here  a 
certain  practical  difficulty  attends  the  designer.  How- 
ever elegant  the  superstructure  may  be,  it  has  one 
drawback ; it  must  rest  on  nothing,  or,  at  least,  appa- 
rently on  nothing ; the  aim  of  every  modern  retail 
dealer  being  to  expose  his  goods  for  sale  behind  a 
single  sheet  of  plate  glass.  In  accordance  with  this 


London  Shop-Fronts. 


23 


object — for  which  no  explanation  can  ever  be  given 
except  that  it  is  universal — iron  columns  are  furtively 
introduced,  and  as  carefully  concealed  by  millinery, 
upholstery,  or  sometimes  by  craftily-contrived  mirrors, 
so  that  when  all  is  finished  the  upper  portion  of  the 
building  seems  absolutely  suspended  in  the  air.  Such 
conditions  are  not  exactly  fitted  for  ordinary  treatment 
of  design ; yet  the  shop-front  architect  delights  in 
ignoring  them  altogether,  and  in  loading  his  upper 
stories  with  pediments,  columns,  niches,  and  cornices, 
just  as  if  they  stood  on  a basement  as  solid  as  that  of 
the  Pitti  Palace.  It  seems  astonishing  that  the  old 
practice  of  turning  a sound  arch  or  placing  a real 
lintel  over  every  shop-window  should  have  fallen  into 
such  disuse.  Yet  so  seldom  is  this  done,  and  so  much 
does  the  objectionable  practice  of  using  iron  columns  and 
girders  in  such  places  prevail,  that  some  blocks  of  newly 
re-built  shops  at  the  west-end  of  Oxford-street,  on  the 
Marquis  of  Westminsters  estate,  are  quite  conspicuous 
as  an  exception — and  in  this  respect  a creditable  excep- 
tion— to  the  general  rule. 

Of  the  dwelling-houses  in  London,  those  which 
have  any  pretension  to  architectural  design  are  few  in 
number,  and  lie  chiefly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
parks  or  of  the  oldest  West-end  squares.  But  the 


24 


Street  Architecture . 


ordinary  residences  of  fashionable  life— the  mansions 
of  Belgravia,  Tyburnia,  and  Mayfair — are  mere  shells 
of  brick  and  stucco,  which  present  such  a dreary 
appearance  outside  that  one  is  surprised  sometimes  to 
find  them  palaces  of  comfort  within. 

The  Frenchman  who  expressed  his  opinion  that 
London  had  ceased  to  be  a town,  and  was  becoming 
a vast  province,  uttered  no  mere  hyperbole.  Between 
the  years  1800  and  i860  this  metropolis  not  only 
doubled,  but  trebled,  the  size  which  it  had  assumed  at 
the  close  of  the  last  century.  At  the  present  time, 
including  the  suburbs,  it  occupies  a superficial  area 
of  at  least  130  square  miles.  On  an  average,  about 
1,000  houses  are  added  to  it  every  year;  and  so 
rapidly  does  building  go  on  in  every  direction,  that  no 
one  need  be  surprised  to  find  the  meadow-land  which 
he  walked  on  in  spring  laid  out  in  populous  streets 
by  Christmas.  There  is,  however,  a great  difference 
between  the  gradual  development  of  the  old  city  and 
the  additions  which  we  make  to  our  modern  capital. 
When  Bloomsbury  was  still  a fashionable  district,  its 
inhabitants  no  doubt  regarded  it  as  a permanent 
enlargement  of  London,  and  looked  forward  to  the 
time  when  their  children’s  children  might  own  the 
tenements  which  they  bought  or  rented.  That  is  a 


25 


Long  Leases. 

source  of  prospective  pleasure  in  which  the  inhabitants 
of  Belgravia  and  Tyburnia  cannot  indulge.  According 
to  the  present  system  of  tenure  adopted  for  house 
property,  the  rule  is  to  build  residences  which  are  only 
intended  to  last  a certain  number  of  years.  At  the 
end  of  that  term  they  fall  into  the  possession  of  the 
landowner  on  whose  estate  they  are  erected,  and  thus  it 
is  to  the  interest  of  his  tenant  (who,  in  nine  cases  out  of 
ten,  is  a speculating  builder)  not  to  spend  more  money 
on  their  construction  than  is  absolutely  necessary.* 

This  is  an  unsatisfactory  state  of  things  even  in 
a prima  facie  view  of  the  matter.  To  calculate  the 
stability  of  a house  so  nicely  that  at  the  expiration  of, 
say,  seventy  years,  it  shall  only  be  fit  to  be  pulled 
down  and  sold  for  old  materials,  is  a method  of 
reckoning  which  obviously  involves  some  discomfort, 
not  to  say  danger,  to  its  latest  occupant.  But,  unfor- 
tunately, this  is  not  the  extent  of  the  evil.  In  the 
earnest  endeavour  to  avoid  the  expense  of  an  unneces- 
sary stability,  these  economists  too  frequently  err  on 
the  side  of  weakness.  To  speak  plainly,  it  will  be  a 

* The  recently  revived  taste  for  the  so-called  ‘ Queen  Anne  ’ style,  or 
more  correctly  speaking  for  that  domestic  type  of  brick  architecture 
which  prevailed,  with  certain  variations,  from  the  Caroline  to  the 
Georgian  period,  has  resulted  in  the  erection  in  London  of  many  private 
mansions  which  are  very  picturesque,  and  which  reflect  great  credit  on 
the  architects  who  designed  them. 


26 


Street  A rchitecture. 


miracle  if  half  the  houses  which  are  now  being  raised 
in  and  about  London  do  not,  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
things,  tumble  down  long  before  their  allotted  time. 
Unfortunately,  their  flimsy  construction  is  not  always 
apparent  to  an  inexperienced  eye.  The  old  brick 
mansions  of  the  early  Georgian  era,  although  unpreten- 
tious in  appearance,  were  at  least  as  strong  as  good 
burnt  clay  and  duly  mixed  mortar  could  make  them  ; 
the  walls  were  of  substantial  thickness ; the  timber 
was  dry,  sound,  and  of  ample  dimensions  ; the  founda- 
tions were  well  laid  ; the  roof  was  of  a convenient 
pitch  and  covered  with  the  best  of  slates ; the  doors 
were  securely  hung,  and  a true  lintel  or  a real  arch, 
with  properly  tapering  voussoirs , was  turned  over  every 
window.  The  woodwork  and  fittings  of  these  houses, 
though  modelled  in  a pseudo-classic  taste,  were  excel- 
lent in  workmanship,  and  frequently  spirited  in  detail ; 
while  the  wrought  iron  introduced  to  decorate  their 
facades  in  the  shape  of  gates  and  area-railings  is 
designed  in  thorough  accordance  with  the  nature  and 
properties  of  the  material  employed.  The  truth  is, 
that  in  those  days,  inferior  or  dishonest  work  would 
soon  have  been  detected,  for  there  was  nothing  to 
conceal  it  from  public  view.  Plaster  was  of  course 
used  internally,  as  it  had  been  during  centuries  past, 


Area  Railings 

of  a House  in  Great  Ormond  Street , Bloomsbury. 


The  Use  of  Stucco. 


27 


for  the  sake  of  convenience  and  cleanliness  ; but  no  one 
had  yet  conceived  the  idea  of  coating  the  front  of  a 
brick  house  with  a composition  which  should  give  it 
the  appearance  of  masonry.  In  an  evil  hour  stucco 
was  invented  ; and  thenceforth,  wherever  it  was  em- 
ployed, good  and  bad  work  was  reduced,  in  the  eyes 
of  the  general  public,  to  one  common  level.  It  mat- 
tered little  whether  brick  or  rubble,  English  or 
Flemish  bond  were  used  ; whether  the  courses  ex- 
ceeded their  proper  height  by  a dangerous  preponde- 
rance of  mortar ; whether  the  openings  were  really 
arched  over  or  only  spanned  by  a fictitious  lintel. 
What  signified  such  considerations  as  these  when  the 
whole  front  was  to  be  enveloped  in  a fair  and  specious 
mask  of  cement  ? 

How  far  this  detestable  practice  has  increased  in 
London  anyone  familiar  with  the  principal  suburban 
squares  and  streets  can  well  testify.  But  what  the 
general  public  do  not  know  is  that  the  structural  deceits 
which  it  conceals  are  daily  becoming  so  numerous  and 
flagrant  that  they  positively  endanger  life  and  property. 
How  frequently  have  we  heard,  during  the  last  few 
years,  of  the  fall  of  houses  which  have  been  built  even 
within  the  recollection  of  the  rising  generation  ? The 
only  wonder  is  that  these  casualties  do  not  happen 


28 


Street  A rchitevture . 


every  day.  Of  course,  when  an  accident  has  occurred, 
the  district  surveyor  is  called  in  as  a responsible  agent 
to  give  evidence  before  the  authorities  of  the  state  in 
which  the  house  was  when  he  last  examined  it.  But 
this  examination  is  too  frequently  a mere  matter  of 
form.  It  is  the  surveyors  business  to  arrest  and 
remedy  any  gross  violation  of  the  Building  Act.  But 
in  a populous  and  suburban  district,  where  houses  are 
being  run  up  (as  the  phrase  is)  in  all  directions,  it  is 
impossible  for  him  to  be  in  all  places  at  once,  or  attempt 
to  keep  up  a constant  supervision.  Besides,  in  the 
matter  of  bricklaying,  as  in  all  other  concerns  of  life,  it 
is  very  easy  to  keep  within  the  letter  of  the  law  and  at 
the  same  time  disregard  its  spirit. 

The  Building  Act  itself,  though  framed  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  exclude  many  picturesque  features  from 
a London  street,  is  on  the  whole  rather  lenient  on  the 
subject  of  roof-scantlings  and  the  dimensions  of  a party 
wall.  An  architect  who  should  attempt  to  add  to  the 
effect  of  his  elevation  by  a bay  window  looking  into  the 
street  or  by  overhanging  eaves  (even  provided  with  a 
gutter)  would  find  himself  somewhat  impeded  by  exist- 
ing  legislation.  Yet  a heavy  ‘ compo  ’ cornice,  barely 
strong  enough  to  support  itself,  is  allowed  to  project  a 
considerable  distance  from  the  front  wall,  daily  threat- 


Structural  Deceits . 


29 


ening  the  lives  of  passers-by  ; and  a miserable  lintel, 
composed  of  fragments  of  brick,  stuck  together  with 
mortar  in  the  weakest  possible  form,  is  often  used  under 
the  name  of  a ‘ flat  arch.’ 

These  are  only  a few  of  the  legalised  evils  of  modern 
house  building.  As  for  those  which  are  forgotten, 
overlooked,  or  winked  at,  their  number  is  legion.  Not 
only  is  plaster  or  cement  used  as  a covering  for  inferior 
brickwork,  but  it  is  boldly  employed  for  columns, 
parapets,  and  verandah  balusters  in  place  of  stone.  It 
is  not  at  all  an  uncommon  thing  to  see  a would- 
be  Doric  or  Corinthian  shaft  shorn  of  its  base,  and 
actually  hanging  to  the  side  of  a house  until  the 
pedestal  (which,  of  course,  will  also  be  of  cement)  is 
completed.  Plaster  brackets  support  plaster  pediments  : 
stucco  bas-reliefs  are  raised  upon  a stucco  ground. 
The  whole  front  is  a sham,  from  the  basement  story  to 
the  attics.  But  murder  will  out,  and  by  degrees  this 
prodigious  imposition  begins  to  reveal  itself.  A mouldy 
green  dampness  exudes  from  the  hastily  finished  walls. 
The  ill-fated  stucco  blisters  up  and  peels  off  in  all 
directions.  Ugly  fissures  appear  on  the  house-front, 
caused  by  some  ‘ settlement,’  arising  from  bad  founda- 
tions. The  wretched  parodies  on  carved  work  become 
chipped  away  by  accident,  or  crumble  to  fragments 


30 


Street  A rchitecture. 


under  the  influence  of  the  weather.  There  is  an  air  of 
shabby  gentility  about  the  whole  structure  which  would 
be  ludicrous  if  it  were  not  pitiable.  It  had  only  a 
meretricious  excellence  when  fresh  from  the  painter’s 
hands.  A few  years  have  made  it  a dingy  abode  : a 
few  more  years  will  make  it  a ghastly  ruin. 

The  interior  arrangements  are  not  a whit  better. 
Floor-boards  come  up  unexpectedly  after  separating 
from  the  skirting  ; doors  shrink  so  that  they  cannot  be 
securely  fastened  ; window-sashes  warp  and  become  im- 
movable; marble  chimney-pieces  are  gradually  detached 
from  the  wall  behind  them.  In  short,  the  external  dis- 
order only  foreshadows  internal  discomfort.  Of  course, 
when  houses  of  this  class  are  intrusted  to  efficient  hands, 
under  the  management  of  an  honest  builder,  the  case 
is  very  different ; but,  judging  from  the  average  con- 
dition of  what  are  called  second-class  dwelling-houses, 

I believe  that  I have  drawn  no  exaggerated  picture  of 
their  state. 

The  shop-fronts  of  London  indicate  a still  greater 
disregard  of  the  first  principles  of  construction.  In 
former  days,  when  the  British  tradesman’s  place  of 
business  and  residence  were  under  the  same  roof,  a 
modest  display  of  goods  was  deemed  sufficient  for  the 
ground-floor,  and  nowise  interfered  with  the  stability 


Iron  Construction . 


3i 


of  the  superstructure  : but  at  the  present,  time,  when 
each  draper  and  silversmith  wants  to  make  a greater 
show  than  his  neighbour,  all  semblance  of  strength  is 
banished  from  the  street  level.  Everything  is  given 
up  to  plate  glass.  Now  plate  glass  is  an  excellent 
material  in  its  way,  but  we  cannot  expect  it  to  support 
three  or  four  stories  of  solid  brickwork.  To  meet  this 
requirement,  therefore,  iron  columns  and  iron  girders 
are  introduced,  and,  as  artistic  effect  must  yield  to  the 
stern  necessities  of  commercial  life,  it  would  be  idle  to 
urge  any  but  practical  objections  to  the  system.  Such 
objections,  however,  are  not  wanting.  The  nature  and 
properties  of  iron,  although  well  studied  by  scientific 
engineers,  are  but  imperfectly  understood  by  the  public. 
In  addition  to  the  chance  of  a flaw  in  the  casting,  or 
any  of  those  more  obvious  contingencies  to  which 
stone  and  wood  are  also  subject,  one  fact  stands  pre- 
eminently forward.  Every  schoolboy  knows  that  iron 
expands  with  heat  and  contracts  with  cold.  Let  us 
suppose  any  large  mansion  in  Belgravia,  or  a West-end 
draper  s establishment,  attacked  by  fire  ; iron  has  been 
profusely  introduced  in  its  construction,  and  is  affected 
in  the  ordinary  way  ; the  engines  arrive  and  distribute 
water  over  the  premises.  Can  any  one  doubt  what 
the  result  would  be  ? The  ironwork  thus  suddenly 


Street  A rchitecture . 


32 

cooled  must,  of  necessity,  be  liable  to  fracture  ; and  if 
the  whole  building  tumbles  to  the  ground,  it  need  be 
no  matter  of  surprise  to  those  who  are  acquainted  with 
the  secret  of  its  structure. 

It  is  quite  time  that  these  evils  should  be  remedied 
by  legislation.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  strengthen 
the  case  by  artistic  considerations,  but  in  the  main  the 
question  assumes  a practical  form.  It  is  unpleasant  to 
live  within  ugly  walls  ; it  is  still  more  unpleasant  to  live 
within  unstable  walls ; but  to  be  obliged  to  live  in  a 
tenement  which  is  both  unstable  and  ugly  is  disagree- 
able in  a tenfold  degree.  An  Englishman’s  house  was 
formerly  said  to  be  his  castle.  But  in  the  hands  of  the 
speculating  builder  and  advertising  tradesman,  we  may 
be  grateful  that  it  does  not  oftener  become  his  tomb. 

It  is  true  that  within  the  last  few  years  attempts  have 
here  and  there  been  made  to  invest  our  street  architec- 
ture— so  far  as  shops  and  warehouses  are  concerned — 
with  more  character  and  stability.  And  this  is  mainly 
owing  to  the  revival  of  a style  which,  however  modi- 
fied by  the  influence  of  climate  and  national  habits  in 
the  various  countries  where  it  prevailed,  was  every- 
where distinguished  by  a uniform  honesty  of  construc- 
tive purpose.  The  Gothic  Renaissance  may  seem  a 
paradoxical  term  to  use,  but  in  a literal  sense  it  may 


Victorian  A rchitecture. 


33 


be  fairly  applied  to  that  Reformation  in  the  style  of 
national  architecture,  which  required  sound  construction 
as  a primary  condition  of  excellence  in  house-building. 

The  art-historian  who,  in  a future  age,  shall  attempt 
to  describe  the  various  phases  of  taste  through  which 
English  painting  and  architecture  have  passed  during 
this  century,  will  have  no  easy  task  before  him.  If 
the  march  of  science  has  been  rapid,  it  has  also  been 
steady,  and  marked  by  events  and  discoveries  which 
will  enable  posterity  to  distinguish  between  true  and 
false  theory,  real  progress,  and  futile  digression.  But 
no  such  landmarks  exist  to  indicate  the  several  roads 
by  which  we  have  arrived,  or  hope  to  arrive,  at  aesthe- 
tic greatness  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Victoria.  The 
ancient  highways  of  art  are  seldom  traversed.  Our 
modern  geniuses  have  struck  out  new  paths  for  them- 
selves, which  here  and  there  cross,  indeed,  the  course 
of  their  predecessors,  but  rarely  coincide  with  it. 
These  are  so  diverse  in  their  direction  that  they  may 
be  said  to  have  formed  a sort  of  labyrinth  which  by 
and  by  it  will  be  difficult  to  survey. 

That  this  should  be  the  case  regarding  pictorial 
art  is  not  surprising.  Before  the  time  of  Hogarth  we 
never  had  a national  school  of  painting  ; and  even  our 
modern  English  styles  have  derived  more  from  foreign 

D 


34 


Street  Architecture. 


teaching  than  they  have  inherited  from  Hogarth. 
But  a national  architecture  we  did  once  possess. 
H ow  much  of  its  spirit  was  actually  indigenous — how 
much  was  introduced  by  the  Normans,  and  how  much 
it  subsequently  owed  to  external  influences,  we  may 
leave  the  antiquaries  to  settle  It  is  sufficient  to  know 
that,  during  at  least  four  centuries  of  English  history, 
our  houses,  castles,  churches,  and  country  mansions, 
were  designed  in  a fashion  which  was  as  characteristic 
of  this  country  as  the  dress  and  manners,  if  not  the 
language,  of  the  people.  Then  came  the  decadence  or 
decline  of  mediaeval  art,  which  was  followed  by  a re- 
vival of  classic  design,  modified  to  suit  the  require- 
ments of  modern  life.  It  took  its  rise  in  Italy,  and 
spread  gradually  over  the  whole  of  Western  Europe. 
Its  influence  was  at  first  only  partially  felt  in  this 
country.  Long  after  Florence  had  raised  her  palaces 
of  the  Pitti,  the  Pandolfini,  and  the  Strozzi ; long  after 
Raphael  had  completed  the  stately  basilica  which 
Bramante  had  begun  for  modern  Rome ; long  after 
Venice  and  Verona  could  boast  of  a splendid  Renais- 
sance, English  architecture  continued  in  a degraded 
state  of  transition  between  the  two  styles.  It  had 
lost  the  purity  of  ancient  Gothic.  It  had  not  yet 
developed  the  principles  of  Italian  design.  The  result 


IV. 


Window  in  Dining-room  at  Cothele , Devon . 


Decline  of  Gothic  A rt. 


35 


was  a miserable  compromise,  by  which  classic  details 
of  the  clumsiest  description  were  grafted  on  buildings 
supported  by  the  Tudor  arch,  and  crowned  with  the 
Tudor  gable.  It  is,  perhaps,  the  bizarre  and  pictur- 
esque character  of  this  bastard  style  which  still  renders 
it  popular  with  the  uneducated.  To  this  day  Eliza- 
bethan mansions  are  admired  by  sentimental  young 
ladies  (who,  by  the  way,  generally  call  them  Eliza- 
beth^^) as  the  perfection  of  architectural  taste.  But 
the  truth  is,  whatever  real  elements  of  beauty  belonged 
to  English  architecture  in  the  sixteenth  century,  were 
possessed  in  a tenfold  degree  by  the  style  which  preceded 
and  the  style  which  followed  that  epoch.  Inigo  Jones 
appears  to  have  been  the  first  of  our  countrymen  who 
designed  Italian  with  real  purity.  Even  he  in  his  earlier 
days  did  not  altogether  abandon  Gothic.  But  the  tide 
of  public  taste  had  now  begun  to  turn.  The  fire  of 
London  opened  a wide  field  for  the  genius  of  Wren  ; 
and  from  the  rebuilding  of  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral 
down  to  the  accession  of  Queen  Victoria  every  build- 
ing of  importance  raised  in  England  has  been  either 
Italian  in  character,  or  a modified  adaptation  of  that 
style. 

It  would  be  hazardous  to  ascribe  to  any  special 
cause  or  influence  the  change  of  popular  sentiment 


D 2 


36 


Street  A rchitecture. 


which  has  since  taken  place  with  regard  to  architecture 
in  this  country.  We  may,  however,  not  unreasonably 
infer  that  it  was  in  a great  measure  brought  about  by 
the  new  impulse  which  English  literature  received  in 
the  early  part  of  the  present  century.  Indeed  such  an 
influence  would  not  be  without  precedent.  It  was  the 
revival  of  classic  letters  which  induced  the  imitation  of 
classic  art.  It  was  the  love  of  mediaeval  lore,  of  Old 
English  traditions,  of  border  chivalry,  which,  by  the 
magic  power  of  association,  led  the  more  romantic  of 
our  sires  and  grandsires  first  to  be  interested  in  Gothic 
architecture,  and  then  to  discern  its  beauties.  Horace 
Walpole,  both  as  an  author  and  a virtuoso , may  be 
said  to  have  sown  the  seeds  of  this  taste,  but  it  is  to 
the  writings  of  Sir  Walter  Scott  that  we  must  refer  its 
further  development.  Even  in  his  day  it  was  but  a 
sentiment.  The  grossest  ignorance  still  prevailed  con- 
cerning the  practical  adaptation  of  a mediaeval  spirit  to 
masonry  and  sculpture.  One  of  the  chief  merits  of  the 
Pointed  style  is,  that  the  origin  of  every  decorative 
feature  may  be  traced  to  a constructive  purpose.  Thus 
the  stone  groining  over  a cathedral  aisle  not  only  pre- 
sents a vista  of  graceful  curves  to  the  eye  of  the  spec- 
tator, but  covers  the  area  below  it  with  an  almost 
imperishable  roof.  The  earliest  promoters  of  the 


Revival  of  Gothic. 


37 


Gothic  revival  appreciated  the  superficial  effect  of  such 
features  without  recognising  the  utility  which  justifies 
their  adoption.  Accordingly,  the  glories  of  the  ‘fretted 
vault  ’ were  not  unfrequently  imitated  in  lath  and 
plaster ; nor  were  there  men  of  taste  wanting  to  praise 
the  wretched  parody.'* 

Pugin  was  the  first  who  deftly  expounded  the  true 
principles  of  what  he  not  inaptly  named  Christian  art. 
No  man  of  his  day  was  better  fitted  to  undertake  the  task. 
He  was  by  profession  an  architect.  He  wrote  with  con- 
siderable ability.  He  entered  on  the  subject  with  the 
full  information  of  an  earnest  student,  and  with  the 
zeal  of  a religious  enthusiast.  There  was,  however, 
one  drawback  to  his  efforts.  He  blended  his  theo- 
logical convictions  with  his  theories  on  art,  and  the 
result  was  that  the  two  became  identified  in  the  public 
mind.  He  had  both  causes  deeply  at  heart,  but  he 
would  have  served  both  better  by  keeping  the  sub- 
jects distinct.  As  it  was,  he  sometimes  offended  the 
communion  he  had  left  by  needless  allusions  to  his 
faith,  and  sometimes  alarmed  his  fellow-Churchmen  by 
the  undue  importance  which  he  attached  to  the  style 
of  ecclesiastical  decoration.  Time  has  proved  that  the 

* I have  entered  on  this  subject  more  largely  in  my  History  of  the 
Gothic  Revival , published  by  Messrs.  Longman  and  Co.  in  1872. 


38 


Street  A rchitecture . 


revival  of  Gothic  architecture  is  due  no  more  to  the 
teaching  of  Rome  than  that  of  Geneva,  and  at  the  pre- 
sent day  the  pointed  arch  is  almost  as  much  in  vogue 
among  Dissenters  as  it  is  with  Ritualists.  The  de- 
cision of  a Parliamentary  Commission  in  1836 — that 
the  new  Houses  were  to  be  mediaeval  in  character — 
gave  great  impetus  to  the  growing  taste  ; and  though 
the  Palace  of  Westminster  may  not  have  realised  the 
highest  qualities  of  the  architecture  which  it  is  popu- 
larly supposed  to  represent,  it  has  at  least  proved  an 
excellent  school  for  the  encouragement  of  ancient  art. 
It  educated  many  a sculptor,  stonemason,  metal- 
worker, decorator,  and  cabinet  maker,  who  would 
otherwise  have  grown  up  ignorant  of  every  phase  of 
ornament  save  that  which  had  reached  him  by  a per- 
verted tradition.  Barry,  to  whose  talent  are  due  the 
merits  of  the  general  design,  wisely  entrusted  to  Pugin 
the  fashion  of  those  details  which  were  to  enrich  his 
structure.  Judged  by  the  light  of  a maturer  taste, 
they  may  appear  deficient  in  artistic  quality.  But  it 
is  certain  that  at  that  time  no  one  could  have  designed 
better. 

Pugin’s  active  and  brilliant  career  was  suddenly  in- 
terrupted by  a melancholy  end.  But,  long  before  he 
died,  his  principles  had  spread  far  and  wide  among  the 


A dapt  ability  of  Gothic. 


39 


lovers  of  art — had  been  adopted  and  acted  on  by  many 
of  his  professional  brethren. 

In  the  mind  of  the  general  public  the  spirit  of  me- 
diaeval design  is  chiefly  associated  with  what  has  been 
called  ‘ ecclesiastical  sentiment.’  But  the  Gothic  re- 
vival is  not  confined  to  Church  architecture.  Indeed, 
if  we  reflect  on  the  subject,  it  would  seem  absurd  so  to 
limit  its  extension.  In  the  best  ages  of  art  there  was 
but  one  style  of  architecture  at  one  time  for  every  sort 
of  building,  whether  ecclesiastical  or  domestic.  Some 
of  the  best  examples  of  Old  English  Gothic  which 
exist  are  certainly  either  churches  or  monastic  buildings. 
But  at  the  time  they  were  raised  they  did  not  differ  in 
style — they  only  differed  in  shape  and  feature — from 
the  structures  by  which  they  were  surrounded.  If  it 
be  urged  that  dwellings  of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth 
centuries  are  not  suited  to  our  notions  of  comfort  in 
regard  to  arrangement  of  rooms,  light,  and  ventilation, 
the  answer  is,  that  all  these  requirements  are  perfectly 
compatible  with  the  spirit  of  ancient  art,  and  that  the 
old  designers,  as  time  went  on,  never  hesitated  to 
avail  themselves  of  the  march  of  science,  slow  as  it  was 
in  their  day. 

Mr.  Ruskin  eloquently  described  to  us  the  poetry 
of  mediaeval  art ; Pugin  and  other  writers  insisted  on 


40 


Street  A rchitecture . 


its  practical  advantages.  It  remained  for  the  rising 
generation  of  architects  to  profit  by  the  labours  of 
those  able  apologists,  and  to  show  their  patrons  that 
the  prevailing  taste  had  not  been  called  forth  by  the 
whims  of  a clique  or  the  blind  passion  of  an  antiquary, 
but  that,  while  based  on  the  sound  artistic  principles 
of  early  tradition,  it  might  be  adapted  to  the  social 
habits  and  requirements  of  the  present  age. 

That  many  architects  of  the  present  day  succeeded 
in  this  effort  must  be  evident  to  all  who  have  examined 
the  best  examples  of  domestic  architecture  which, 
under  the  general  name  of  Gothic,  have  been  erected 
within  the  last  twenty  years.  But  artistic  taste  in  the 
nineteenth  century,  based  as  it  is  upon  eclecticism 
rather  than  on  tradition,  is  capricious  and  subject  to 
constant  variation.  Later  influences,  which  need  not 
be  detailed  here,  have  since  diverted  the  current  of 
public  favour  from  mediaeval  art  towards  those  princi- 
ples of  design  which  prevailed  during  the  seventeenth 
and  eighteenth  centuries,  and  many  an  architectural 
student  who  began  as  an  earnest  advocate  for  Gothic 
is  now  a follower  of  what  is  commonly  called  the 
‘ Queen  Anne  ’ school. 


Household  Taste . 


4i 


Chapter  II. 

THE  ENTRANCE  HALL. 

HE  external  aspect  of  a house,  which  has  not 
been  built  expressly  for  its  occupants,  is,  of 
course,  a question  of  taste  utterly  beyond  their 
control.  Those  who  are  lucky  enough  to  reside  in  the 
picturesque  old  country  mansions  which  were  in  vogue 
long  before  the  nineteenth-century  type  of  cockney 
villa  architecture  was  introduced,  will  have  no  reason 
to  complain  ; while  they  whose  means  have  enabled 
them  to  combine  in  their  abode  the  beauty  of  mediaeval 
design  with  the  necessary  comforts  and  appliances  of 
modern  life,  may  be  reckoned  still  more  fortunate. 
But  these  are  exceptions  to  the  general  rule.  Most  ot 
us  are  obliged  to  accept  the  outward  appearance  of  our 
abode  as  we  find  it.  In  London  it  is  as  a rule  irre- 
trievably ugly,  and  any  attempt  to  alter  its  character 
would  be  met  not  only  by  a remonstrance  on  the  part 
of  our  landlords,  but  by  an  universal  objection  shared 
by  all  of  us,  and  founded  upon  an  inherent  disinclination 


42 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


to  differ  conspicuously  from  our  neighbours.  So  long 
as  the  present  system  of  tenure  remains  as  it  is,  and 
the  interest  of  house  proprietors  is  to  run  up  buildings 
which  are  only  required  to  last  a limited  number  of 
years,  we  must  remain  content  with  plain  brick  fronts 
pierced  with  the  traditional  number  of  square  openings, 
or  decorated  (in  the  suburbs)  with  stucco  and  cement 
ornaments,  as  perishable  as  they  are  commonplace  and 
tasteless.  Our  only  license,  indeed,  is  to  conceal  what 
we  cannot  alter.  The  practice  of  training  ivy  and 
creepers  from  the  basement  story  to  the  first-floor,  and 
that  of  filling  the  drawing-room  balcony  with  flowering 
plants,  is  one  which  is  much  increasing  at  the  West- 
end  of  London,  and  it  is  really  the  best  means  by  which 
we  can  invest  our  street  fronts,  as  they  are  at  present 
designed,  with  even  the  smallest  degree  of  interest. 
The  only  external  feature,  therefore,  on  which  it  would 
be  worth  while  to  remark,  is  the  front-door.  And 
here,  I fear,  I must  begin  to  differ  from  those  whose 
principles  of  taste  are  derived  from  long-accepted  con- 
ventionalism. The  practice  of  graining  wood  has  not, 
however,  been  so  long  in  vogue  in  this  country  as  to 
command  a traditional  respect.  It  is  an  objectionable  . 
and  pretentious  deceit,  which  cannot  be  excused  even 
on  the  ground  of  economy.  In  the  last  century,  when 


Graining  Wood. 


43 


English  oak  and  Spanish  mahogany  could  be  pro- 
cured at  a reasonable  price,  the  grainer’s  work  was,  of 
course,  unneeded.  In  modern  days  the  usual  substi- 
tute for  those  now  expensive  woods  is  deal  ; but  deal 
is  so  soft  and  absorbent  in  its  fibre  that  it  becomes 
quickly  soiled,  and  in  most  situations,  especially  when 
exposed  to  the  air,  it  soon  requires  painting.  But  why 
should  we  paint  it  in  imitation  of  oak  ? Everybody 
can  see  at  a glance  that  it  is  not  oak,  and,  as  far  as 
appearance  is  concerned,  there  are  many  modes  of 
treatment  which  would  be  far  more  effective.  For 
newly-hung  doors  in  country-houses,  the  staining  fluids 
now  sold  are  infinitely  preferable,  and,  when  varnish 
is  superadded,  the  wood  thus  protected  not  only  resists 
the  effects  of  weather,  but  reveals  its  own  natural  vein, 
which  is  often  very  pretty.  In  London  we  find  our 
house-doors  painted  before  we  take  possession,  and 
therefore  we  have  no  choice  but  to  continue  painting 
them.  A good  flat  tint  of  olive  green  or  chocolate 
colour  will,  however,  answer  all  practical  purposes,  and 
besides  being  a more  honest  and  artistic,  is  really  a less 
expensive  style  of  decoration. 

It  is  a great  pity  that  the  old-fashioned  brass 
knocker  has  become  obsolete.  Though  seldom 
elegant  in  form,  there  was  something  in  its  brightness 


44 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


indicative  of  a hospitable,  well-ordered  house.  The  pre- 
sent cast-iron  knocker  is  a frightful  invention  ; the  only 
possible  fact  one  can  urge  in  its  favour  is  that  it  saves 
work  for  the  housemaids  arm,  and  gives  a little  more 
employment  to  the  footman’s.  Good  wrought- iron 


knockers,  of  very  fair  design  and  manufacture,  may  be 
bought  of  the  many  mediaeval  metal-workers  whose 
branch  of  art  has  now  become  a recognised  institution 
in  this  country.  Ladies  are  seldom  called  upon  to 
choose  between  the  merits  of  wrought  and  cast-iron  for 
objects  of  domestic  use.  But  when  this  is  the  case,  it 
should  be  remembered  that  the  work  of  the  hammer 


Door-Knockers. 


45 


and  anvil  is  infinitely  superior  in  every  way  to  the 
production  of  the  mould.  Annexed  are  two  specimens 
of  wrought- iron  door-knockers  from  Wurzburg  in 
Bavaria,  dating  probably  from  the  close  of  the  sixteenth 


century — somewhat  too  late  to  exhibit  quite  the  right 
spirit  of  design.  They  are  conceived  and  fashioned, 
however,  in  thorough  accordance  with  the  nature  of 
the  material  employed,  and  afford  a pleasant  contrast 
to  the  hackneyed  portraits  of  tame  lions  and  grinning 
satyrs  which  have  been  adopted  as  types  of  the  modern 
door-knocker. 


46 


The  Entrance  Hall . 


In  the  old  towns  of  Switzerland  may  frequently  be 
found  specimens  of  highly  decorative  door-knock- 
ers in  hammered  iron,  the  design  of  which  dates  from 
the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries.  Some  exam- 
ples of  these  have  been  reproduced  from  my  drawings 
by  Messrs.  Benham  and  Froud,  to  whose  ‘ mediaeval  ’ 
metal-work,  exemplified  in  other  articles  of  household 
use,  I shall  have  occasion  to  refer  in  another  chapter. 

All  cast-iron  ornament,  except  under  rare  condi- 
tions,* is  bad  in  style,  and  when  employed  to  represent 
wrought  work,  must  be  detestable  in  the  eyes  of  a true 
artist.  Better  the  simplest  form  of  grate  and  fender 
than  one  loaded  with  this  mean  and  spiritless  system 
of  decoration.  Perhaps  some  of  my  readers  may  be 
curious  to  know  why  such  an  application  of  this 
material  should  be  condemned.  > Although  it  will  not 
be  always  possible  in  this  work  to  enter  upon  a 
lengthy  justification  of  opinions  which  I do  not  offer 
on  my  own  authority  alone,  let  me  briefly  explain, 
at  the  outset,  a principle  universally  accepted  by  those 
who  have  made  a study  of  decorative  design.  Every 
material  used  in  art  manufacture  is  obviously  restricted 


* The  low  relief  ornament  of  old  Sussex  stoves  is  one  of  a very  few 
instances  in  which  cast  iron  has  been  judiciously  applied  for  decorative 
purposes. 


Conditions  of  Design. 


47 


by  the  nature  of  its  substance  to  certain  conditions  of 
form.  Thus  glass,  which  in  a state  of  fusion  can  be 
blown  or  cut  into  a thousand  fantastic  shapes,  admir- 
ably adapted  for  drinking-vessels,  &c.,  would,  from 
its  brittleness,  be  utterly  unfit  for  any  constructive 
purpose  in  which  even  moderate  strength  was  re- 
quired. The  texture  of  ordinary  free-stone,  though 
capable  of  being  treated  with  delicacy  and  refinement 
by  the  chisel  of  a practised  sculptor,  does  not  admit 
of  that  minute  elaboration  which  we  admire  in  wood- 
carving. In  the  manufacture  of  porcelain,  and  all 
kinds  of  ceramic  wares,  rotundity  is  the  prominent 
type  of  form,  while  furniture  and  cabinet-work  are 
generally  quadrangular  in  their  main  outline  ; the 
general  treatment  in  each  case  being  suggested  by  the 
character  and  properties  of  the  raw  material.  When- 
ever this  condition  is  lost  sight  of,  and  the  material  is 
allowed  to  assume  in  design  an  appearance  which  is 
foreign  to  its  own  peculiar  attributes,  the  result  is  in- 
variably inartistic  and  vulgar.  For  instance,  a glass  or 
plaster  column  would  convey  an  idea  of  weakness  at 
once  destructive  of  any  sense  of  beauty  which  its  mere 
form  could  excite.  A carpet,  of  which  the  pattern  is 
shaded  in  imitation  of  natural  objects,  becomes  an 
absurdity  when  we  remember  that  if  it  were  really 


48 


The  Entrance  HalL 


what  it  pretends  to  be,  no  one  could  walk  on  it  with 
comfort. 

If  we  apply  this  principle  to  the  treatment  of  cast- 
iron,  it  will  be  readily  perceived  that  a noble  material, 
which  has  lost  in  process  of  manufacture  its  most 
essential  quality  of  strength,  can  only  be  further 
degraded  by  being  invested  with  forms  which  feebly 
imitate  not  only  wrought-iron  ornament  but  stone 
carving,  and  even  plaster  decoration.  The  simplest 
argument  which  can  be  urged  in  support  of  this 
theory,  lies  in  the  fact  that  while  we  all  appreciate 
the  beauty  of  such  work  as  the  wrought  canopy  de- 
signed by  Quentin  Matsys  for  the  pump  at  Antwerp, 
and  the  forms  of  many  an  old  church-door  hinge,  no 
one  feels  the  least  interest  in  the  cast-iron  capitals  of  a 
railway-station,  or  can  see  aught  but  black  ugliness  in 
a modern  kitchen-range.  ‘ And  could  a kitchen-range 
ever  be  otherwise  than  ugly  ? ’ perhaps  some  of  my 
readers  may  be  inclined  to  ask.  The  fact  is,  that  if  the 
material  of  which  it  is  composed  were  properly  treated, 
there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  as  picturesque 
an  object  as  any  in  the  house.  Remember,  it  is  not 
the  humbleness  of  its  purpose  or  the  simplicity  of  its 
form  which  prevents  it  from  being  so.  How  many  of 
us  have  peeped  inside  the  threshold  of  a Welsh  cottage 


Rustic  Hearths. 


49 


or  Devonshire  farmhouse,  and  longed  to  sketch  its 
comfortable  chimney-corner  and  ample  hearth  ! Could 
we  say  as  much  for  any  basement  room  in  Mayfair  ? 
And  yet  there  was  a time  when  no  such  difference  ex- 
isted between  the  appointments  of  town  and  country 
dwellings. 

Let  us  then  quietly  enter  one  of  these  respectable, 
luxurious,  but  eminently  uninteresting  London  man- 
sions, and  try  to  discover  what  there  is  about  their 
internal  arrangement  which  makes  them  such  hopeless 
subjects  for  the  artists  pencil.  The  first  thing  on 
which  our  foot  rests  is  a useful  article  of  household 
furniture  with  the  style  of  which  no  one  can  find  fault — * 
the  street-door  mat.  In  common  with  most  objects  of 
its  class  which  for  many  generations  past  have  been 
made  in  the  country,  it  fulfils  its  purpose  in  every  way 
without  pretending  to  that  false  ‘ elegance  ’ of  design, 
which  we  shall  probably  detect  upstairs  in  the  silly 
lumps  of  blue  or  mauve-stained  wool,  called  drawing- 
room door-rugs.  What  people  want  to  rub  their  shoes 
upon  is  a strong  rough  material,  such  as  we  find  in  the 
i hall  or  at  the  foot  of  the  principal  staircase.  To  pre- 

I serve  the  fiction  of  this  necessity  throughout  the  rest 

of  the  house  is  a mistake,  but  to  manufacture  a false 
sheepskin,  and  dye  it  of  so  delicate  a colour  that  we 

E 

j 


! 


50 


The  Entrance  HalL 


are  afraid  even  to  step  upon  it  for  the  purpose  of 
wiping  our  boots,  becomes  absurd. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  best  mode  of  treat- 
ing a hall-floor,  whether  in  town  or  country,  is  to  pave 
it  with  encaustic  tiles.  This  branch  of  art-manufacture 
is  one  of  the  most  hopeful,  in  regard  to  taste,  now 
carried  on  in  this  country.  It  has  not  only  reached 
great  technical  perfection  as  far  as  material  and  colour 
are  concerned,  but,  aided  by  the  designs  supplied  by 
many  architects  of  acknowledged  skill,  it  has  gradually 
become  a means  of  decoration  which,  for  beauty  of 
effect,  durability,  and  cheapness,  has  scarcely  a parallel. 
To  Messrs.  Minton,  I believe,  we  are  indebted  for  the 
earliest  revival  of  this  ancient  art  in  modern  times. 
The  tiles  manufactured  by  Mr.  W.  Godwin  have  long 
been  noted  for  the  artistic  quality  of  their  colour  and 
design.  But  for  rich  variety  of  pattern,  and  for  the 
skill  with  which  the  best  types  of  ornament  have  been 
adapted  for  enamelled  ware,  plain  tile  pavements, 
mosaic  and  mural  decoration,  the  ware  produced  by 
Messrs.  Maw  & Co.,  of  Salop,  stands  almost  unrivalled. 
A few  specimens  of  their  pavements  and  tile  borders, 
especially  fitted  for  household  use,  have  been  selected 
for  illustration  here,  from  the  very  numerous  examples 
published  by  that  firm. 


V. 


Encaustic  Tile  Pavements. 

Manufactured  by  Messrs.  Maw  and  Co 


VI. 


Hall  Pavements. 

Manufactured,  by  Messrs.  Maw  and  Co. 


VII. 


Pavement  and  ' Tile  Borders. 

Manufactured  by  Messrs.  Maw  and  Co. 


VIII. 


i 


r.iitumi'mii 


Pavement  and  Tile  Borders. 
Manufactured  by  Messrs.  Maw  and  Co. 


‘ 


« 


* 

- 


Encaustic  Tile  Pavements . 


5i 


When  the  material  known  as  ‘ floor-cloth  ’ was  first 
used  in  this  country  for  halls  and  passages,  its  design 
began  with  an  imitation  of  marble  pavements  and 
parquetry  floors,  I have  even  seen  a pattern  which 
was  intended  to  represent  the  spots  on  a leopard’s 
skin.  These  conceits  were  thoroughly  false  in  prin- 
ciple, and  are  now  being  gradually  abandoned.  A 
floor-cloth,  like  every  other  article  of  manufacture  to 
which  design  can  be  implied,  should  seem  to  be  what 
it  really  is,  and  not  affect  the  appearance  of  a richer 
material.  There  are  endless  varieties  of  geometrical 
diaper  which  could  be  used  for  floor-cloth,  without  re- 
sorting to  the  foolish  expedient  of  copying  the  knots 
and  veins  of  wood  and  marble.  Some  very  fair 
examples  of  such  geometrical  patterns  may  occasionally 
be  met  with,  but,  as  a rule,  too  many  colours  are  intro- 
duced in  them.  However  attractive  it  may  appear  in 
the  shop,  this  kind  of  polychromy  ought  studiously 
to  be  avoided  on  the  floor  of  a private  house.  Two 
tints,  or— better  still — two  shades  of  the  same  tint 
(which  should  not  be  a positive  colour)  will  be  found 
most  suitable  for  the  purpose,  and  in  any  case  there 
should  be  no  attempt  to  indicate  relief  or  raised  orna- 
ment in  the  pattern. 

The  mural  decoration  of  the  hall  is  a point  con- 


52 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


cerning  which  modern  conventionalism  and  true  prin- 
ciples of  design  are  sure  to  clash.  There  can  be 
little  doubt  that  the  most  agreeable  wall-lining  which 
could  be  devised  for  such  a place  is  marble,  and  next 
to  that  real  wainscoting.  In  former  days,  when  wood 
was  cheaper  than  it  is  now,  oak  panels  were  commonly 
used,  not  only  in  the  halls  and  passages,  but  in  many 
rooms  of  even  a small-sized  London  house.  At  the 
present  time,  when  both  marble  and  oak  are  beyond 
the  reach  of  ordinary  incomes,  the  usual  practice  is  to 
cover  the  walls  with  a paper  stained  and  varnished  in 
imitation  of  marble.  This  is,  perhaps,  a more  excus- 
able sham  than  others  to  which  I have  alluded  ; but  still 
it  is  a sham,  and  ought  therefore  to  be  condemned.  Of 
course,  when  people  find  themselves  in  a house  where 
such  an  expedient  has  been  already  adopted,  any 
alteration  in  this  respect  would  involve  considerable 
expense.  But  in  cases  where  the  difficulty  may  be 
anticipated,  it  is  as  well  to  remember  that  modern 
manufacture,  or  rather  the  revival  of  an  ancient  art, 
has  supplied  an  admirable  substitute  for  marble  veneer- 
ing at  a comparatively  low  price.  An  inlay  of  encaustic 
tiles,  to  a height,  say,  of  three  or  four  feet  from  the 
ground,  would  form  an  excellent  lining  for  a hall 
or  ground-floor  passage.  Above  that  level  the  wall 


Mural  Decoration  ( for  a 1 Dado  ’) 

executed  by  Messrs.  Heaton , Butler , & Bayne. 


Mural  Decoration . 


53 


might  either  be  painted  in  the  usual  manner,  or  the 
plaster  washed  with  flatted  colour.  The  latter  is  cer- 
tainly more  liable  to  be  soiled  than  oil-paint,  but  is  far 
pleasanter  in  effect,  and  at  a level  of  four  feet  from  the 
floor-line  would  be  safely  removed  from  contact  with 
ladies’  dresses  and  the  chance  of  careless  finger-marks. 

A cheaper  and,  in  good  hands,  a very  effective  mode 
of  wall-decoration  for  a hall  is  by -distemper-painting. 
The  example  here  given  is  from  a sketch  by  Mr.  C. 
Heaton  (of  the  firm  of  Heaton,  Butler  & Bayne), 
whose  excellent  taste  in  the  design  of  stained-glass 
windows  and  mural  decoration  is  well  known. 

The  colour  of  the  walls  must  necessarily  depend  on 
circumstances,  the  amount  of  light  admitted  being  the 
first  consideration.  In  cases  where,  as  is  too  often  the 
case,  a small  fanlight  over  the  entrance-door  is  all  the 
provision  made  for  illumining  the  hall,  it  will  be  as  well 
to  choose  a delicate  green  or  warm  grey  tint.  Where, 
on  the  contrary,  there  is  plenty  of  light,  the  dull  red 
hue,  which  may  still  be  traced  on  the  walls  of  Pompeii, 
and  on  the  relics  of  ancient  Egypt,  will  be  found  an 
excellent  surface  colour. 

Before  discussing  the  subject  of  the  hall  furniture,  it 
will  be  as  well  to  say  something  on  the  subject  of  fur- 
niture in  general. 


54 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


Not  many  years  ago  there  was  scarcely  an  uphol 
sterer  in  London  at  whose  establishment  good  artistic 
furniture  of  modern  date  and  moderate  price  was  kept 
in  stock  for  sale.  For  years  past  this  branch  of  art- 
manufacture  had  been  entrusted  to  those  whose  taste, 
if  it  may  be  called  taste  at  all,  could  be  no  more  re- 
ferred to  correct  principles  of  design  than  the  gimcrack 
decorations  of  a wedding-cake  could  be  tested  by  any 
standard  of  sculpturesque  beauty.  It  may  be  urged,  in 
answer  to  this  parallel,  that  in  the  latter  case  it  would 
be  superfluous  to  apply  such  a test.  Without  even 
admitting  this  to  be  so  (for  in  the  best  ages  of  art  the 
commonest  article  of  household  use,  down  to  the  very 
door-nails,  had  an  appropriate  form  of  beauty  of  its 
own),  it  is  obvious  that,  although  we  may  tolerate  in- 
sipid prettiness  in  perishable  confectionary,  we  ought 
not  to  do  so  in  objects  which  become  associated  with 
our  daily  life,  and  which  are  so  eminently  characteristic 
of  our  national  habits.  There  are  few  persons  of  edu- 
cation and  refinement  who  do  not  feel  interested  in  ar- 
chitecture, but  I would  ask,  of  what  use  is  it  to  decorate 
the  exterior  of  our  country-houses  if  we  are  to  permit 
ugliness  within  them  ? — and  ugliness  we  shall  be  sure 
to  have  if  the  choice  of  furniture  is  left  to  ordinary 
upholsterers.  Indeed,  their  notions  of  the  beautiful 


Modern  Upholstery. 


55 


are  either  centred  in  mere  novelty,  or  derived  from 
traditions  of  the  Louis  Quatorze  period.  That  school 
of  decorative  art,  bad  and  vicious  in  principle  as  it 
was,  had  a certain  air  of  luxury  and  grandeur  about  it 
which  was  due  to  elaboration  of  detail  and  richness  of 
material.  Its  worst  characteristic  was  an  extravagance 
of  contour , and  this  is  just  the  only  characteristic  which 
the  tradition  of  upholstery  preserved.  The  sofas  and 
chairs  of  the  last  generation  laid  claim  to  elegance,  not 
for  their  gaily  embossed  silk  or  delicate  inlay  of  wood, 
but  simply  because  there  was  not  a straight  line  in 
their  composition.  Now  a curve,  especially  of  such  a 
kind  as  cannot  be  drawn  by  artificial  means,  is  a beau- 
tiful feature  when  rightly  applied  to  decorative  art, 
whether  we  find  it  as  the  appendage  to  an  old  Missal 
letter,  or  bounding  the  entasis  of  a Greek  column. 
But  a curve  at  the  back  of  a sofa  means  nothing  at  all, 
and  is  manifestly  inconvenient,  for  it  must  render  it 
either  too  high  in  one  place  or  too  low  in  another  to 
accommodate  the  shoulders  of  a sitter.  The  tendency 
of  the  last  age  of  upholstery  was  to  run  into  curves. 
Chairs  were  invariably  curved  in  such  a manner  as  to 
ensure  the  greatest  amount  of  ugliness  with  the  least 
possible  comfort.  The  backs  of  sideboards  were 
curved  in  the  most  senseless  and  extravagant  manner  ; 


56 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


the  legs  of  cabinets  were  curved,  and  became  in 
consequence  constructively  weak  ; drawing-room  tables 
were  curved  in  every  direction — perpendicularly  and 
horizontally — and  were  therefore  inconvenient  to  sit 
at,  and  always  rickety.  In  marble  wash-stands  the 
useful  shelf,  which  should  run  the  whole  length  of  the 
rear,  was  frequently  omitted  in  order  to  ensure  a curve. 
This  detestable  system  of  ornamentation  was  called 
‘shaping/  It  always  involves  additional  expense  in 
manufacture,  and  therefore  by  avoiding  ‘ shaped  ’ ar- 
ticles of  furniture,  the  public  will  not  only  discourage  a 
bad  style  of  art,  but  may  also  save  their  pockets. 

I am  only  now  treating  of  furniture  in  general  terms  ; 
but  under  this  head  may  be  discussed  two  important 
points  connected  with  its  ordinary  manufacture,  viz., 
veneering  and  carved  work.  The  former  has  been  so 
long  in  vogue,  and  is  apparently  so  cheap  and  easy  a 
means  of  obtaining  a valuable  result,  that  it  is  always 
difficult  to  persuade  people  of  its  inexpedience.  Ven- 
eering has  been  condemned  by  some  writers  on  the 
same  grounds  on  which  false  jewellery  should  (of 
course)  be  condemned.  But  the  two  cases  are  scarcely 
analogous.  If  we  are  to  tolerate  the  marble  lining  of  a 
brick  wall  and  the  practice  of  silver-plating  goods  of 
baser  metal — now  too  universally  recognised  to  be  con- 


Veneered  Furniture. 


57 


sidered  in  the  light  of  a deception— I do  not  see  ex- 
actly how  veneering  is  to  be  rejected  on  ‘ moral  ’ 
grounds.  The  nature  of  walnut- wood  prevents  it  from 
being  used,  except  at  a great  expense,  in  any  other 
way  than  as  a veneer  ; and  when,  for  instance,  in  piano 
cases,  the  leaves  are  so  disposed  as  to  reverse  their  grain 
symmetrically,  after  the  manner  of  the  marble  ‘ wall 
veils’  of  St.  Mark’s  at  Venice,  the  arrangement  is  not 
only  very  beautiful  in  effect,  but  at  once  proclaims  the 
means  by  which  that  effect  is  attained. 

There  are,  however,  many  practical  objections  to 
the  mode  of  veneering  in  present  use.  To  cover  in- 
ferior wood  completely  in  this  fashion,  thin  and  fragile 
joints  must  be  used,  which  every  cabinetmaker  knows 
are  incompatible  with  perfect  construction.  The  ve- 
neer itself  is  far  too  slight  in  substance,  and,  even  when 
laid  down  with  the  utmost  nicety,  is  liable  to  blister, 
especially  when  used  for  washing-stands,  or  in  any 
situation  where  it  is  exposed  to  accidental  damp.  It 
is  never  worth  while  to  buy  furniture  veneered  with 
mahogany,  for  a little  additional  cost  may  procure  the 
same  articles  in  solid  wood.  Not  long  ago  I had  a 
substantial  oak  table  made  from  my  own  design  at  a 
price  which  was  much  less  than  what  I should  have 
paid  for  one  veneered  with  rosewood  or  walnut. 


58 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


The  most  legitimate  mode  of  employing  veneer 
would  be  in  panels  not  less  than  a quarter  of  an  inch 
in  thickness,  and,  if  used  for  horizontal  surfaces,  the  in- 
ferior wood  should  be  allowed  to  retain  a border  of  its 
own  in  the  solid.  By  this  means  no  thin  edges  would 
be  exposed  to  injury,  and  the  design  might  be  treated 
in  an  honest  and  straightforward  manner. 

The  subject  of  carved  work  is  a more  important 
question,  because  nothing  but  a vigorous  and  radical 
reform  will  help  us  on  this  point.  It  may  be  laid 
down  as  a general  rule,  that  wherever  wood-carving  is 
introduced  in  the  design  of  second-rate  furniture  it 
is  egregiously  and  utterly  bad.  It  is  frequently  em- 
ployed in  the  most  inappropriate  places — it  is  generally 
spiritless  in  design,  and  always  worthless  in  execution. 
The  wood-carver  may  indeed  be  an  artist,  but  the  ordi- 
nary furniture-carver  has  long  since  degenerated  into  a 
machine.  The  fact  is  that  a great  deal  of  his  work  is 
literally  done  by  machinery.  There  are  shops  where 
enriched  wood-mouldings  may  be  bought  by  the  yard, 
leaf-brackets  by  the  dozen,  and  ‘ scroll-work,’  no  doubt, 
by  the  pound.  I use  the  word  ‘ scroll-work  ’ in  its 
common  acceptation  to  denote  that  indescribable  species 
of  ornament  which  may  be  seen  round  drawing-room 
mirrors  and  the  gilded  consoles  of  a pier-glass.  It  is 


Modern  Wood  Carving. 


59 


not  easy  to  say  whence  this  extraordinary  type  of 
decoration  first  arose.  The  most  charitable  supposi- 
tion is  that,  in  its  origin,  it  was  intended  for  convention- 
alised foliage  ; in  its  present  state  it  resembles  a con- 
glomeration of  capital  G’s.  Even  if  it  were  carved 
out  of  the  solid  wood,  it  would  be  very  objectionable 
in  design ; but  this  trash  is  only  lightly  glued  to 
the  frame  which  it  is  supposed  to  adorn,  and  may  in- 
deed frequently  be  removed  with  infinite  advantage  to 
the  general  effect.  The  carving  introduced  in  other 
articles  of  furniture  is,  as  a rule,  of  a very  meagre  de- 
scription. In  fact,  under  existing  circumstances,  and 
until  we  can  get  good  work  of  this  kind,  it  would  be 
far  better  to  omit  it  altogether. 

It  is  lamentable  to  notice  also  how  much  the  turner  s 
art  has  degenerated.  Even  down  to  the  middle  of  the 
last  century  it  was  employed  with  great  advantage  in 
the  manufacture  of  chairs,  tables,  banister-rails,  &c. 
The  judicious  association  of  the  ‘ bead,  fillet,  and 
hollow  ’ for  mouldings  was  a simple,  honest,  and  fre- 
quently effective  mode  of  decoration.  It  still  lingers 
in  some  of  the  minor  articles  of  household  use  which 
have  been  allowed  to  escape  the  innovations  of  modern 
taste.  Among  these  may  be  mentioned  the  common 
‘Windsor’  chair  and  the  bed-room  towel-horse.  A 


6o 


The  Entrance  Hall . 


careful  examination  of  these  humble  specimens  of 
home  manufacture  will  show  that  they  are  really 
superior  in  point  of  design  to  many  pretentious  elegan- 


cies of  fashionable  make.  Indeed,  it  will  generally  be 
found,  that  the  most  commonplace  objects  of  domestic 
use,  in  England  as  well  as  on  the  Continent,  are  the 
most  interesting  in  appearance.  We  have  at  the  pre- 


1 Windsor  ’ Chairs. 


61 


sent  time  no  more  artistic  workman  in  his  way  than 
the  country  Cartwright.  His  system  of  construction  is 
always  sound,  and  such  little  decoration  as  he  is 
enabled  to  introduce  never  seems  inappropriate, 
because  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  traditional  develop- 
ment of  original  and  necessary  forms. 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  decline  of  our  national 
taste  must  be  attributed  to  a cause  which  is  popularly 
supposed  to  have  encouraged  a contrary  effect,  viz., 
competition.  It  is  a general  complaint  with  those  who 
have  the  employment  of  art-workmen,  that,  while  a 
higher  price  is  paid  for  their  labour,  its  result  is  not 
nearly  so  satisfactory  as  it  was  before  the  Great 
Exhibition  of  1851.  That,  however,  is  a point  on 
which  it  would  be  beside  my  present  purpose  to  enter. 
But  it  is  very  certain  that,  if  our  ordinary  furniture  has 
cheapened  in  price,  it  has  also  deteriorated  in  quality, 
while  the  best  furniture  has  become  extravagantly 
dear.  Some  years  ago  I visited  the  establishment  of 
an  upholsterer,  who  announced  that  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  the  public  he  had  taken  up  the  spdci- 
alitd  of  mediaeval  art.  I inquired  whether  he  had  any 
drawing-room  chairs  in  that  style,  and  was  shown  some 
examples — rich  in  material,  but  very  simple  in  con- 
struction. I inquired  the  price,  and  found  it  was  no 


62 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


less  than  six  guineas  ! Their  prime  cost  must  have 
been  about  2I  10 s.  It  would  be  absurd  to  suppose 
that  while  such  profits  as  this  are  demanded  for  every 
article  of  furniture  which  does  not  partake  of  the 
stereotyped  form  in  use,  we  can  ever  hope  for  a re- 
vival of  good  manufacture.  Anyone  can  get  drawing- 
room chairs  designed  by  an  architect  and  executed  by 
private  contract  for  six  guineas  per  chair.  What  the 
public  required  was  a shop  where  such  articles  were 
kept  in  stock  and  could  be  purchased  for  half  that  sum. 

In  attempting  a solution  of  this  difficulty,  the  old 
question  of  ‘demand  and  supply’  was  once  more  raised. 
The  upholsterers  declared  themselves  willing  to  give 
more  attention  to  the  subject  of  design  as  soon  as  the 
nature  of  public  taste  became  defined.  The  public, 
on  the  other  hand,  complained  that  they  could  only 
choose  from  what  they  saw  in  the  shops.  It  is  not  im- 
probable that  there  was  a little  apathy  on  both  sides, 
but  it  was  necessary  that  one  should  take  the  lead, 
and  it  is  certain  that  at  the  present  time  when  well- 
designed  and  artistic  furniture  is  offered  for  sale  at  a 
reasonable  price,  and  under  proper  management,  there 
is  no  difficulty  in  finding  purchasers.* 

* Among  the  various  firms  which  have  lately  given  attention  to  this 
subject,  I may  mention  Messrs.  Jackson  and  Graham,  several  specimens 
of  whose  cabinet  work  are  illustrated  in  this  volume. 


Demand  and  Supply. 


63 


There  is  no  portion  of  a modern  house  which  indi- 
cates more  respect  for  the  early  traditions  of  art,  as 
applied  to  furniture,  than  the  Entrance-hall.  The 
dining-room  may  have  yielded  to  the  influence  of 
fashion  in  its  upholstery  ; the  drawing-room  may  be 
crowded  with  silly  knick-knacks,  crazy  chairs  and 
tables,  and  all  those  shapeless  extravagances  which 
passed  for  elegance  in  the  last  generation  ; the  bed- 
rooms may  depend  for  their  decoration  on  the  taste  of 
a man-milliner ; but  the  fittings  of  the  hall  at  least  as- 
sume an  appearance  of  solidity  which  is  characteristic 
of  a better  aim  in  design.  No  doubt  this  peculiarity 
is  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that,  being  only  used  as  a 
means  of  communication  between  the  street  and  the 
habitable  portion  of  a house,  it  is  not  thought  necessary 
that  its  furniture  should  be  of  that  light  and  easily 
moveable  description  which  is  deemed  requisite  else- 
where. And  here  it  will  be  well  to  note  two  facts 
connected  with  this  point  : first,  that  although  it  may 
be  desirable  to  make  drawing-room  chairs  and  tables 
conveniently  light,  it  is  no  convenience  to  find  them 
so  light  as  to  be  fragile,  rickety,  and  easily  upset ; 
secondly,  that  there  is  no  reasonable  condition  of 
modern  convenience  with  which  true  principles  of 
design  are  not  compatible. 


64 


The  Entrance  Hall ’ 


The  hall-table  is  generally  made  of  oak,  in  a plain 
and  substantial  manner,  flanked  by  chairs  of  the  same 
material,  with  a hat  and  umbrella-stand  to  correspond. 
Sometimes  a bench  is  substituted  for  the  chairs,  but 
in  any  case  this  group  of  furniture  is  generally  the 
best  in  the  house,  on  account  of  its  extreme  simplicity. 

The  design  given  in  the  annexed  woodcut  shows 
how  the  ordinary  type  of  hall-table  for  small  houses 
may  be  varied  without  increase  of  cost,  at  least  to  any 
appreciable  extent,  and  supposing  each  article  to  be  of 
sound  workmanship  and  material. 

I would  especially  caution  my  readers  against  the 
contemptible  specimens  of  that  pseudo-Gothic  joinery 
which  is  manufactured  in  the  back-shops  of  Soho.  No 
doubt  good  examples  of  mediaeval  furniture  and  cabi- 
net-work are  occasionally  to  be  met  with  in  the  curiosity 
shops  of  Wardour  Street ; but,  as  a rule,  the  ‘ Glaston- 
bury’ chairs  and  ‘antique’  book-cases  sold  in  that  vene- 
rable thoroughfare  will  prove  on  examination  to  be  no- 
thing but  gross  libels  on  the  style  of  art  which  they  are 
supposed  to  represent.  A fragment  of  Jacobean  wood- 
carving, or  a single  ‘ linen-fold  ’ panel,  is  frequently 
considered  a sufficient  authority  for  the  construction  of 
a massive  sideboard,  which  bears  no  more  relation  to 
the  genuine  work  of  the  Middle  Ages  than  the  dia- 


The  Hall  Table. 


65 


phanous  paper  of  recent  invention  does  to  the  stained- 
glass  of  our  old  cathedrals.  In  other  words,  these 
elaborate  fittings  for  the  hall  and  library  are  forgeries, 


made  up  of  odds  and  ends  grafted  on  modern  carpentry 
of  a weak  and  paltry  description.  Not  only  is  the 
rudeness  of  old  carving  parodied,  without  an  atom  of 
its  real  spirit,  but  the  very  construction  of  the  articles 


F 


66 


The  Entrance  Hall . 


in  question  is  defective.  Nails  and  screws  are  sub- 
stituted for  the  stout  wooden  pins  and  tenon-joints 
used  in  mediaeval  framing ; mouldings,  instead  of 
being  worked  in  the  solid  wood,  are  ‘ run  ’ in  separate 
strips,  and  only  glued  into  their  places ; cracks  and  fis- 
sures are  filled  up  with  putty,  and  the  whole  surface  is 
often  smeared  thickly  over  with  a dark  varnish,  partly 
to  conceal  these  flaws,  and  partly  to  give  that  appear- 
ance of  age  which  the  mere  virtuoso  will  always  regard 
with  interest. 

Now,  though  the  age  of  old  woodwork  does,  indeed, 
enhance  the  beauty  of  its  colour,  that  is  by  no  means 
its  highest  recommendation.  The  real  secret  of  its 
value  lies  in  the  immense  superiority  of  ancient  over 
modern  workmanship,  both  as  regards  joinery  and 
decorative  carving.  For  many  years  the  former  art  so 
declined  that  it  was  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossi- 
ble— except,  perhaps,  in  some  remote  provincial  town 
— to  meet  with  a specimen  of  thoroughly  good  work 
exposed  for  ordinary  sale.  At  the  present  time,  when 
direct  supervision  is  exercised  by  a qualified  designer, 
and  in  the  class  of  furniture  which  is  called  ‘ artistic,’ 
more  attention  is  given  to  this  branch,  and  the  result 
is  very  different ; but  the  goods  kept  in  stock  at  your 
ordinary  upholsterer’s,  however  showy  in  appearance, 


X 


Hall  Chair  at  Cothele , Devon , 

the  possession  of  the  Earl  of  Mount  Edgcumbe. 


Old  and  Modern  Woodwork. 


67 


are  still,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  put  together  on  com- 
pletely  false  principles  of  construction.  The  best  proof 
of  this  is,  that  whereas  an  old  oaken  chair  or  table 
made  a century  or  two  ago  will  frequently  be  found  in 
excellent  condition  at  the  present  day,  much  of  our 
modern  furniture  becomes  rickety  in  a few  years,  and 
rarely,  if  ever,  survives  a lifetime. 

The  sketch  of  a hall-chair  which  appears  as  an  illus- 
tration to  this  chapter  is  taken  from  one  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  Earl  of  Mount-Edgcumbe  at  Cothele, 
a charming  old  Tudor  mansion  on  the  Cornish  side 
of  the  River  Tamar,  where  there  are  many  excellent 
and  interesting  specimens  of  ancient  English  fur- 
niture. 

As  for  carving,  its  degeneracy  is  the  more  to  be 
lamented,  because  there  never  was  an  age  when  the 
hand  of  the  artisan  was  more  apt,  or  his  tools  more 
excellent,  than  at  the  present  time.  There  are  hun- 
dreds of  Englishmen  now  following  this  trade  who  will 
imitate  in  wood,  with  astonishing  precision  and  delicacy, 
the  feathered  forms  of  dead  game,  or  reproduce,  line 
for  line  and  leaf  for  leaf,  a festoon  of  real  flowers.  I 
am  sorry  to  tell  those  of  my  fair  readers  who  have  not 
turned  their  attention  to  these  matters  that  the  carver’s 
skill  is  utterly  wasted  on  such  work.  It  is  an  estab- 


68 


The  Entrance  Hall. 


lished  principle  in  the  theory  of  design,  that  decorative 
art  is  degraded  when  it  passes  into  a direct  imitation  of 
natural  objects.  Young  ladies  who  may  find  this  dif- 
ficult to  understand,  should  remember  that  they  recog- 
nise the  selfsame  principle  in  a hundred  different  ways 
on  matters  of  ordinary  and  even  conventional  taste. 
You  admire  the  roses  and  azaleas  which  the  most 
skilful  flower-painter  of  our  day — Miss  Mutrie — groups 
together  for  a picture  subject,  but  what  would  you  say 
to  see  them  transferred  as  a pattern  to  the  skirt  of 
your  dress,  or  even  to  the  tablecloth  of  your  boudoir  ? 
Well,  then,  precisely  as  your  good  taste  shows  you 
that  a naturally  shaded  and  coloured  representation  of 
flowers  would  be  out  of  place  on  silk  or  damask,  so  you 
may  conceive  that  to  an  educated  eye  a literal  repro- 
duction in  wood  or  stone  of  the  actual  forms  assumed 
by  animal  or  vegetable  life  is  by  no  means  agreeable. 
The  truth  is  that,  under  such  circumstances,  nature  may 
be  typified  or  symbolised,  but  not  actually  imitated. 
The  beauty  of  Indian  shawls,  and  indeed  of  all  Orien- 
tal objects  of  textile  fabric,  is  too  universally  admitted 
to  need  any  comment  in  these  pages.  Did  you  ever 
see  any  picture  of  bird,  beast,  or  flower  on  these  speci- 
mens of  Eastern  manufacture  ? Would  you  not  at 
once  set  down  as  vulgar  and  commonplace  any  attempt 


N aturalistic  Decoration . 


69 


in  this  direction,  whether  for  articles  of  dress  or  tapis- 
serie  ? Renounce  them  henceforth,  and  for  analogous 
reasons,  those  trophies  of  slaughtered  hares  and  par- 
tridges which  you  may  occasionally  see  standing  out  in 
bold  relief  from  the  backboard  of  a buffet  or  the  door 
of  a cabinet.  Many  of  them  are  cleverly  executed  it 
is  true,  but  they  are  in  a bad  and  vicious  style  of  art 
Wood-carving  applied  as  a means  of  decoration  in 
such  places  should  be  treated  after  a thoroughly  abstract 
fashion,  and  made  subservient  to  the  general  design  of 
the  furniture.  If  you  desire  an  example  of  this  mode 
of  treatment,  examine  the  choir-stalls  of  the  next  cathe- 
dral which  you  visit,  and  do  not  suppose  that  the 
sacred  nature  of  the  edifice  influenced  in  the  least 
degree  the  character  of  the  carved  work.  If  you  were 
to  light  upon  an  old  ‘ armoire  ’ or  buttery-safe  of  the 
same  period,  you  would  find  precisely  the  same  spirit  of 
design,  although  the  design  itself  might  be  of  a differ- 
ent character.  Many  people  suppose  that  Gothic 
architecture  means  ecclesiastical  architecture,  simply 
because  the  best  specimens  of  that  style  are  to  be  found 
in  old  churches  and  conventual  buildings.  But  though 
in  the  Middle  Ages  there  was  but  one  sort  of  archi- 
tecture at  a time,  no  one  ever  thought  of  giving  an 
ordinary  domestic  house  the  appearance  of  a church,  or 


?o 


The  Entrance  Hall . 


of  allowing  a church  to  appear  like  anything  but  what 
it  was.  Each  structure  at  once  proclaimed  its  object 
— not  by  a difference  of  style,  but  by  a certain  fitness 
of  arrangement  which  it  was  impossible  to  mistake. 
We  fall  into  the  double  error  of  adopting  endless 
varieties  of  style  at  one  time,  and  yet  allowing  build- 
ings raised  for  totally  opposite  purposes  to  resemble 
each  other  in  form.  The  same  fallacy  is  repeated 
throughout  the  whole  system  of  British  manufacture. 
We  copy  the  bronzes  of  France,  the  mosaics  of  Italy, 
the  pottery  of  China,  the  carpets  of  Turkey,  with  in- 
different success ; and,  not  content  with  this  jumble, 
we  invent  objects  constructed  of  one  material  with  the 
form  and  ornamental  character  which  should  be  the 
attributes  of  another.  By  this  means  decorative  art 
has  been  degraded  in  this  country  to  a level  from  which 
it  is  only  now  beginning  to  rise. 


7i 


Notions  of  Decorative  Art. 


Chapter  III. 

THE  DINING-ROOM. 

MONG  the  many  fallacies  engendered  in  the 
mind  of  the  modern  upholsterer,  and  deli- 
vered by  him  as  wholesome  doctrine  to  a 
credulous  public,  was  the  notion  that  all  conditions  of 
decorative  art  must  necessarily  vary  with  the  situation 
in  which  that  art  is  employed.  It  was  not  sufficient  for 
him  to  tell  us  that  the  dining-room  table  and  sideboard 
should,  on  account  of  the  use  to  which  they  are  put, 
be  made  after  a more  solid  fashion  than  the  drawing- 
room  table  and  the  cheffonier.  Not  content  with  in- 
forming his  customers  (if,  indeed,  they  need  such  in- 
formation) that  book-cases  would  be  required  for  the 
library,  and  that  flower-stands  are  suitable  for  the 
boudoir,  he  proceeded  with  great  gravity  to  lay  down 
a series  of  rules  by  which  certain  types  of  form  and 
certain  shades  of  colour  were  to  be,  for  some  mysterious 
reason  best  known  to  himself,  for  ever  associated  with 
certain  apartments  in  the  house.  In  obedience  to  this 


72 


The  Dining-Room . 


injunction,  people  whose  taste  is  guided  by  mere  custom 
sit  down  to  dine  upon  an  oaken  chair  before  an  oaken 
table,  with  a turkey  carpet  under  their  feet,  and  a red 
flock-paper  staring  them  in  the  face.  After  dinner  the 
ladies  ascend  into  a green-and-gold-papered  drawing- 
room, to  perform  on  a walnut-wood  piano,  having  first 
seated  themselves  on  walnut-wood  music-stools,  while 
their  friends  are  reclining  on  a walnut-wood  sofa,  pro- 
tected from  the  heat  of  the  fire  by  a walnut-wood 
screen.  A few  years  ago,  all  these  last-mentioned 
articles  of  household  furniture  were  made  of  rosewood. 
In  the  early  part  of  this  century  it  was  de  rigueur  that 
they  should  be  mahogany  ; so  the  fashion  of  taste  goes 
on  changing  from  age  to  age ; and  I firmly  believe 
that,  if  Society  prescribed  that  staircases  should  be 
hung  with  moire  antique , and  that  the  drawing-room 
fender  ought  in  summer  time  to  be  planted  with  mig- 
nonette, there  are  people  who  would  repose  implicit 
confidence  in  such  opinions. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  carpets.  If  the 
chaste  and  deftly  associated  colours  which  characterize 
the  Oriental  loom  are  right,  and  content  us  downstairs, 
why  should  we  lapse  into  the  vulgarity  of  garlands  and 
bouquets  for  the  decoration  of  our  drawing-room  floors  ? 
And  so  with  regard  to  cabinet-work.  It  is  of  course 


Conventionalities  of  Upholstery . 73 

unnecessary  to  fit  up  a boudoir  with  furniture  of  the  size 
and  capacity  which  we  require  in  a dining-room  side- 
board. But  though  the  shape  of  a cheffonier  may 
differ  from  that  of  a buffet,  there  can  be  no  reason 
whatever  why  the  style  of  design  in  these  respective 
articles  of  furniture  should  vary.  We  may  require,  in 
a modern  reception-room,  chairs  of  a lighter  make  and 
more  easily  moveable  than  those  in  a library,  but  why 
the  former  should  necessarily  have  round  seats  and  the 
latter  square,  ones  is  a mystery  which  no  one  but  an 
upholsterer  could  explain. 

The  truth  is,  there  used  to  be  an  absurd  convention- 
ality about  such  points  as  these,  to  which  most  of  us 
submitted  under  a vague  impression  that  if  we  differed 
from  our  neighbours  we  should  be  violating  good  taste. 
We  passed  from  one  principle  of  design  for  the  ground- 
floor,  to  another  completely  distinct  one  when  we  had 
ascended  two  flights  of  stairs.  We  left  a solid,  gloomy, 
and  often  cumbersome  class  of  furniture  below,  to  find 
a flimsy  and  extravagant  one  above.  It  may  be  a 
question  which  of  these  two  extremes  is  the  more 
objectionable.  Judged  by  the  standard  of  any  recog- 
nised principles  in  art-manufacture,  they  would  pro- 
bably both  be  considered  wrong.  But  it  is  obvious 
that  they  cannot  both  be  right. 


74 


The  Dining-Room. 


In  the  early  part  of  the  present  century  a fashionable 
conceit  prevailed  of  fitting  up  separate  apartments  in 
large  mansions  each  after  a style  of  its  own.  Thus  we 
had  Gothic  halls,  Elizabethan  chambers,  Louis  Qua- 
torze  drawing-rooms,  &c.,  &c.,  all  under  one  roof.  It 
is  scarcely  possible  to  imagine  any  system  of  house- 
furnishing more  absurd  and  mischievous  in  its  effect 
upon  uneducated  taste  than  this.  Indeed,  it  was  the 
practical  evidence  that  a healthy  and  genuine  taste  was 
altogether  wanting.  Choose  what  style  of  furniture  we 
may,  it  should  surely  be  adopted  throughout  the  house 
we  live  in. 

Among  the  dining-room  appointments,  the  table  is 
an  article  of  furniture  which  still  stands  greatly  in  need 
of  reform.  It  is  generally  made  of  planks  of  polished 
oak  or  mahogany  laid  upon  an  insecure  framework  of 
the  same  material,  and  supported  by  four  gouty  legs, 
ornamented  by  the  turner  with  mouldings  which  look 
like  inverted  cups  and  saucers  piled  upon  an  attic 
baluster.  I call  the  framework  insecure  because  I am 
describing  what  is  commonly  called  a ‘ telescope 9 table, 
or  one  which  can  be  pulled  out  to  twice  its  usual 
length,  and,  by  the  addition  of  extra  leaves  in  its 
middle,  accommodates  twice  the  usual  number  of 
diners.  Such  a table  cannot  be  soundly  made  in  the 


The  Dining-Tcible . 


75 


same  sense  that  ordinary  furniture  is  sound.  It  must 
depend  for  its  support  on  some  contrivance  which  is 
not  consistent  with  the  material  of  which  it  is  made. 
Few  people  would  like  to  sit  on  a chair  the  legs  of 


which  were  made  to  slide  in  and  out,  and  were  fastened 
at  the  required  height  with  a pin.  There  would  be  a 
sense  of  insecurity  in  the  notion  eminently  unpleasant. 
You  might  put  up  with  such  an  invention  in  camp,  or 
on  a sketching  expedition,  but  to  have  it  and  use  it 
under  your  own  roof,  instead  of  a strong  and  service- 


76 


The  Dining-Room. 


able  chair,  would  be  absurd.  Yet  this  is  very  much 
what  we  do  in  the  case  of  the  modern  dining-room 
table.  When  it  is  extended  it  looks  weak  and  untidy 
at  the  sides  ; when  it  is  reduced  to  its  shortest  length, 
the  legs  appear  heavy  and  ill-proportioned.  It  is 
always  liable  to  get  out  of  order,  and  from  the  very 
nature  of  its  construction  must  be  an  inartistic  object. 
Why  should  such  a table  be  made  at  all  ? A dining- 
room is  a room  to  dine  in.  Whether  there  are  few  or 
many  people  seated  for  that  purpose,  the  table  might 
well  be  kept  of  an  uniform  length  ; and  if  space  is  an 
object,  it  is  always  possible  to  use  in  its  stead  two 
small  tables,  one  of  them  being  fitted  with  ‘ flap  ’ 
leaves,  but  each  on  four  legs.  These  tables  might  be 
placed  end  to  end  when  dinner-parties  are  given,  and 
one  of  them  would  suffice  for  family  use,  while  the 
other  with  its  ‘ flap  ’ leaves  folded  down  might  stand 
against  the  wall  or  be  used  elsewhere.  Tables  of  this 
kind  might  be  solidly  and  stoutly  framed,  so  as  to  last 
for  ages,  and  become,  as  all  furniture  ought  to  become, 
an  heirloom  in  the  family.  When  a man  builds  himself 
a house  on  freehold  land,  he  does  not  intend  that  it 
shall  only  last  his  lifetime ; he  bequeaths  it  in  sound 
condition  to  posterity.  We  ought  to  be  ashamed  of 
furniture  which  is  continually  being  replaced.  At  all 


A yacobean  Table. 


77 


events,  we  cannot  possibly  take  any  interest  in  such 
furniture.  In  former  days,  when  the  principles  of 
good  joinery  were  really  understood,  the  legs  of  such  a 
large  table  as  that  of  the  dining-room  would  have  been 
made  of  a very  different  form  from  the  lumpy  pear- 
shaped  things  of  modern  use. 

The  annexed  woodcut  is  from  a sketch  of  a table  in 
the  possession  of  Mr.  E.  Corbauld,  dating  probably 
from  the  Jacobean  period.  It  is  of  a very  simple  but 
picturesque  design,  and  is  certainly  sound  in  principle 
of  construction.  Observe  how  cleverly  the  mouldings 
are  distributed  in  the  legs  to  give  variety  of  outline 
without  weakening  them.  In  the  modern  ‘ telescope 
table/  on  the  contrary,  the  mouldings  are  extravagant 
in  contour,  and  the  diameter  of  the  legs  is  thereby 
reduced  in  some  places  to  much  less  than  the  width 
necessary  for  strength.  The  whole  ingenuity  of  the 
modern  joiner  has  been  concentrated  on  a clumsy 
attempt  to  make  his  table  serve  two  purposes,  viz,,  for 
large  or  small  dinner-parties  ; but  the  old  joiner  has 
shown  his  skill  in  decorating  his  table-frame  with  a 
delicate  bas-relief  of  ornament.  And  remember  that  it 
was  from  no  lack  of  skill  that  this  old  table  was  not 
made  capable  of  being  enlarged  at  pleasure.  The 
social  customs  of  the  age  in  which  it  was  produced  did 


78 


The  Dining-Room . 


not  require  such  a piece  of  mechanism.  In  those  days 
the  dining-table  was  of  one  uniform  length  whether 
a few  or  many  guests  were  assembled  at  it ; and  of 
the  two  fashions  the  ancient  one  certainly  seems  to 
indicate  a more  frequent  and  open  hospitality.  But  be 


that  as  it  may,  if  the  Jacobean  table  had  been  required 
for  occasional  extension,  we  may  be  certain  it  would 
have  been  so  constructed,  and  that  too  on  a more 
workmanlike  principle  than  our  foolish  telescope  slide. 
In  like  manner,  if  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  King 
Jamess  time  had  found  (as  probably  those  of  Queen 


A Modern  Dining-table . 79 

Victoria’s  time  would  find)  the  wooden  rail  which  runs 
from  end  to  end  of  the  table  inconvenient  for  their 
feet,  it  would  assuredly  have  been  omitted.  As  it 
was,  they  probably  kept  their  feet  on  the  other  side  of 


it,  or  used  it  as  a footstool.  But  to  show  how  both 
these  modern  requirements  may  be  met  without 
forsaking  the  spirit  of  ancient  work,  I give  a sketch  of 
a modern  table  constructed  in  accordance  with  old 
principles  of  design,  but  in  such  a manner  that  it  may 


8o 


The  Dining-Room. 


be  lengthened  for  occasional  use  at  each  end,  while 
the  framing  is  arranged  so  that  any  one  may  sit  at  it 
with  perfect  convenience.  In  this  case  the  additional 
‘ leaves  ’ are  supported  by  wooden  bearers  which  run 


parallel  with  the  sides  of  the  table,  and  may  be  pulled 
out  by  means  of  little  rings  attached  to  their  ends. 

In  this  example,  as  in  that  of  the  Jacobean  table, 
sunk  castors  could  easily  be  introduced  in  the  foot  of 
each  leg ; but  such  an  appliance  is  by  no  means 
necessary  or  desirable.  A dining-table  rarely  requires 


Old  German  Tables.  81 

to  be  moved  from  its  ordinary  position.  It  should 
stand  firmly  on  its  legs  at  each  corner.  When  it  is 
fitted  with  castors,  servants  are  perpetually  pushing  it 
awry. 

The  other  tables  represented  are  portions  of  the 
ancient  furniture  contained  in  the  Rathhaus  at  Ochsen- 


furth,  near  Wurzburg,  in  Bavaria.  They  are  made 
of  pine,  and  constructed  in  such  a manner  that  they 
can  be  taken  to  pieces  with  the  greatest  ease  when 
occasion  requires.  The  building  which  contains  these 
and  many  other  curious  examples  of  mediaeval  furni- 


G 


82 


The  Dining-Room. 


ture  was  completed  in  the  year  1499,  and  probably  the 
tables  date  from  the  same  period,  when  it  was  custom- 
ary to  sit  at  only  one  side  of  the  dining-table,  while 
servants  waited  at  the  other.  For  this  reason  the 
tables  are  narrow,  and  do  not  afford  accommodation 
for  sitters  at  each  end.  With  a little  alteration  they 
might,  however,  be  easily  adapted  for  modern  use,  and 
in  any  case  they  may  serve  as  good  examples  of  a 
design  which  is  not  only  picturesque  in  effect,  but 
practical  and  workmanlike  as  far  as  construction  is 
concerned. 

Without  both  these  qualities  all  furniture  is,  in  an 
artistic  sense,  worthless.  And  they  are  precisely  the 
qualities  which,  until  lately,  were  disregarded  in  modern 
manufacture.  Examine  the  framing  of  a fashionable 
sofa  made  say  ten  years  ago,  and  you  will  find  it  was 
put  together  in  such  a manner  as  to  conceal  as  far  as 
possible  the  principle  of  its  strength.  Ask  any  artist  of 
taste  whether  there  is  a single  object  in  an  ordinary 
upholsterers  shop  that  he  would  care  to  paint  as  a 
study  of  ‘ still  life,’  and  he  would  tell  you,  not  one. 
We  must  not  infer  from  this  that  such  objects  are 
unpaintable  simply  because  they  are  new.  A few 
years’  wear  will  soon  fade  silk  or  damask  down  to 
what  might  be  a pleasant  gradation  of  tint  if  the 


Faded  Furniture . 


83 


material  be  originally  of  a good  and  noble  colour.  A 
few  years’  use  would  soon  invest  our  chairs  and  tables 
with  that  sort  of  interest  which  age  alone  can  give,  if 
their  designs  were  originally  artistic.  But,  unfortu- 
nately, most  of  our  modern  furniture  does  not  become 
picturesque  with  time — it  only  grows  shabby.  The 
ladies  like  it  best  when  it  comes  like  a new  toy  from 
the  shop,  fresh  with  recent  varnish  and  untarnished 
gilding.  And  they  are  right ; for  in  this  transient 
prettiness  rests  the  single  merit  which  it  possesses. 

The  annexed  woodcut  represents  a sofa  suitable  for 
a dining-room,  and  really  far  more  comfortable  than 
one  with  a ‘ shaped  ’ back  and  sides.  It  may  be  made 
either  in  oak  or  walnut,  and  covered  with  figured  vel- 
vet or  one  of  the  many  artistically  designed  textile 
fabrics  which  are  now  manufactured. 

Some  years  ago,  when  our  chairs  and  tables  were 
‘ hand-polished,’  the  English  house-wife  took  a certain 
pride  in  their  sheen,  which  was  produced  by  a vast 
amount  of  manual  labour  on  the  part  of  footmen  or 
housemaids.  The  present  system  of  French-polishing, 
or  literally  varnishing , furniture  is  destructive  of  all 
artistic  effect  in  its  appearance,  because  the  surface  of 
wood  thus  lacquered  can  never  change  its  colour,  or 


84 


The  Dining-Room . 


acquire  that  rich  hue  which  is  one  of  the  chief  charms 
of  old  cabinet-work. 

To  return,  however,  to  the  question  of  design  ; it  is 
obvious  that  whatever  reform  is  attempted  in  the  field 
of  household  taste  should  be  in  strict  conformity  with 
modern  requirements,  to  ignore  which  would  be  sheer 
affectation. 

The  general  arrangement  of  an  ordinary  English 
sideboard  is  reasonable  enough.  It  consists  of  a wide 
and  deep  shelf  fitted  with  one  or  two  drawers,  and 
resting  at  each  end  on  a cellaret  cupboard.  If  this 
piece  of  furniture  were  constructed  in  a plain  and 
straightforward  manner,  and  were  additionally  provided 
with  a few  narrow  shelves  at  the  rear  for  displaying 
the  old  china  vases  and  rare  porcelain,  of  which  almost 
every  house  contains  a few  examples,  what  a pic- 
turesque appearance  it  might  present  at  the  end  of  a 
room ! Instead  of  this,  fashion  once  more  stepped  in 
and  twisted  the  unfortunate  buffet  into  all  sorts  of  in- 
describable curves.  1 1 was  bowed  in  front  and  ‘ shaped  ’ 
at  the  back  : the  cupboard  doors  were  bent  inwards  ; 
the  drawer-fronts  were  bent  outwards  ; the  angles  were 
rounded  off ; tasteless  mouldings  were  glued  on  ; the 
whole  surface  glistened  with  varnish,  and  the  result 
was — eminently  uninteresting. 


XI. 


Dining-room  Sideboard , 

executed  from  a design  by  Charles  L.  Eastlake. 


Furniture  at  Knole. 


85 


To  fulfil  the  first  and  most  essential  principles  of 
good  design,  every  article  of  furniture  should,  at  the 
first  glance,  proclaim  its  real  purpose  ; but  the  second- 
rate  upholsterers  seem  to  think  it  betokens  elegance 
when  that  purpose  is  concealed.  Having  already 
touched  on  the  subject  of  wood-carving,  as  applied  to 
the  decoration  of  such  objects,  I will  only  add  that, 
whatever  the  faults  of  its  modern  treatment  may  be, 
they  are  rendered  doubly  objectionable  by  the  appli- 
cation of  varnish.  The  moment  a carved  or  sculptured 
surface  begins  to  shine , it  loses  interest.  But  machine- 
made  ornament,  invested  with  an  artificial  lustre,  is 
an  artistic  enormity  which  should  be  universally  dis- 
couraged. 

I know  no  better  examples  of  dining-room  chairs 
than  some  made  in  the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth 
century  which  still  exist  in  excellent  preservation  at 
Knole  (near  Sevenoaks),  the  seat  of  the  late  Earl  De 
La  Warr,  to  whose  courtesy  I am  indebted  for  per- 
mission to  make  several  of  the  sketches  which  illustrate 
these  pages.  If  any  of  my  readers  wish  to  see  furni- 
ture designed  upon  thoroughly  artistic  principles,  they 
should  visit  this  interesting  old  mansion,  where  they 
may  walk  through  room  after  room  and  gallery  after 
gallery  filled  with  choice  and  rich  specimens  of  ancient 


86 


The  Dining-Room . 


furniture,  most  of  which  has  remained  intact  since  the 
reign  of  James  I.*  I had  the  good  fortune  myself  to 
discover  a slip  of  paper  tucked  beneath  the  webbing 
of  a settee  there,  and  bearing  an  inscription  in  Old 


English  characters  which  fixed  the  date  of  some  of  this 
furniture  indubitably  at  1620.  The  sofas  and  chairs  of 
that  period  are  constructed  of  a light-coloured  close- 
grained  wood,  the  rails  and  legs  being  properly  pinned 


* Knole  House  is  now,  unfortunately,  closed  to  the  public. 


Furniture  at  Knole. 


87 


together  and  painted,  where  the  framework  is  visible, 
with  a red  lacquer  which  is  ornamented  with  a delicate 


foliated  pattern  in  gold.  The  stuff  with  which  they 
are  covered  was  originally  a rose-coloured  velvet, 


88 


The  Dining-Room. 


which  has  now  faded  into  a scarcely  less  beautiful 
silver-grey.  The  backs  and  seats  are  divided  into 


panels  by  a trimming  composed  of  silk  and  gold 
thread  woven  into  a pattern  of  excellent  design,  and 


A rmchair  at  Knole. 


89 


are  also  decorated  horizontally  with  a knotted  fringe  of 
the  same  material.  The  armchairs  of  the  same  set 
are  of  two  kinds — -one  constructed  with  columnar  legs 
like  the  smaller  chair ; the  others  framed  after  a more 
picturesque  fashion,  but  painted  in  the  same  style. 
The  side-rails  which  support  the  back  are  studded, 
over  the  velvet,  with  large  round  copper-gilt  nails 
punched  with  a geometrical  pattern,  while  a larger 
quatrefoil-headed  nail  marks  the  intersection  of  the 
framed  legs  below.  The  back  consists  of  three  rails, 
one  at  each  side  and  one  at  the  top,  the  lower  rail 
being,  evidently  for  comfort’s  sake,  omitted.  Between 
these  three  rails  a stout  can- 
vas bag  is  stretched,  stuffed 
like  the  seat- — which  retains 
its  elasticity  to  this  day — 
with  down  or  feathers,  but 
to  scarcely  a greater  thick- 
ness than  an  inch.  Thus, 
without  assuming  the  pad- 
ded lumpy  appearance  of  a 
modern  armchair,  the  back 
so  constructed  accommodates 
itself  at  once  to  the  shoulders  of  the  sitter,  and  forms 
a most  luxurious  support.  The  egg-shaped  finials  at 


90 


The  Dining-Room. 


each  angle  of  the  back  are  composed  of  wood  whipped 
over  with  thread  silk,  and  decorated  with  gold  braid 
and  gilt  nails. 

I give  a full  description  of  this  chair  because  I con- 
sider it  one  of  the  most  sumptuous  examples  of  its 
class  which  I have  ever  seen.  The  costliness  of  its 
material  and  mode  of  decoration  may  indeed  render 
it  unlikely  that  such  furniture  will  ever  be  revived 
for  ordinary  use  in  our  own  day.  But  the  general 
principle  of  the  design  need  involve  no  more  expense 
in  execution  than  the  best  specimens  of  modern  up- 
holstery. 

There  has  been  a slight  improvement  of  late  in  the 
design  of  modern  dining-room  chairs,  but  they  are  still 
very  far  from  what  they  ought  to  be  ; and  the  best 
are  rather  expensive.  Perhaps  the  most  satisfactory 
type  is  that  which  is  commonly  known  in  the  trade  as 
the  ‘Cromwell’  chair.  Its  form  is  evidently  copied 
from  examples  of  the  seventeenth  century.  The  seat  is 
square,  or  nearly  so,  in  plan  ; the  legs  are  partly  square 
and  partly  turned  ; the  back  slopes  slightly  outwards 
and  presents  a padded  frame,  stretched  between  two 
upright  rails,  to  the  shoulders  of  the  sitter.  Both  the 
seat  and  shoulder-pad  are  stuffed,  or  supposed  to  be 
stuffed,  with  horsehair,  and  are  covered  with  leather, 


Settee  in  Billiard  Room  at  Knole. 

Date , 1620. 


Question  of  Cost. 


91 


studded  round  the  edge  with  brass  nails,  Messrs. 
Jackson  and  Graham  have  recently  executed  some 
chairs  of  this  description  (with  armchairs  to  match) 
the  design  being  adapted  from  an  Old  English  model 
of  a simple  and  inexpensive  type. 

A feeling  is,  I trust,  being  gradually  awakened  in 
favour  of  ‘art  furniture.’  But  the  universal  obstacle 
to  its  popularity  up  to  the  present  time  has  been  the 
cost  which  it  entails  on  people  of  ordinary  means. 
And  this  is  a very  natural  obstacle.  It  would  be 
quixotic  to  expect  any  one  but  a wealthy  enthusiast  to 
pay  twice  as  much  as  his  neighbour  for  chairs  and 
tables  in  the  cause  of  art.  The  true  principles  of  good 
design  are  universally  applicable,  and,  if  they  are  worth 
anything,  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  all  sorts  and  con- 
ditions of  manufacture.  There  was  a time  when  this 
was  so  ; and,  indeed,  it  is  certain  that  they  lingered  in 
the  cottage  long  after  they  had  been  forgotten  in 
palaces. 

Every  article  of  manufacture  which  is  capable  of 
decorative  treatment  should  indicate,  by  its  general 
design,  the  purpose  to  which  it  will  be  applied,  and 
should  never  be  allowed  to  convey  a false  notion  of 
that  purpose.  Experience  has  shown  that  particular 
shapes  and  special  modes  of  decoration  are  best  suited 


92 


The  Dining-Room. 


to  certain  materials.  Therefore  the  character,  situation, 
and  extent  of  ornament  should  depend  on  the  nature 
of  the  material  employed,  as  well  as  on  the  use  of  the 
article  itself.  On  the  acceptance  of  these  two  leading 
principles — now  universally  recognised  in  the  field  of 
decorative  art — must  always  depend  the  chief  merit  of 
good  design.  To  the  partial,  and  often  direct,  viola- 
tion of  those  principles,  we  may  attribute  the  vulgarity 
and  bad  taste  of  most  modern  work. 

Let  us  take  a familiar  example  of  household  furni- 
ture by  way  of  illustration.  A coal-box,  or  scuttle,  is 
intended  to  contain  a very  useful,  but  dirty,  species  of 
fuel.  It  is  evident,  looking  to  the  weight  of  the  sub- 
stance which  it  is  destined  to  hold,  that  iron  or  brass 
must  be  the  best  and  most  suitable  material  of  which  a 
coal-box  could  be  made.  It  is  also  obvious  that,  if  it 
be  invested  with  any  ornamental  character  beyond 
that  which  may  be  afforded  by  its  general  form,  such 
ornament  should  be  of  the  simplest  description,  ex- 
ecuted in  colour  of  the  soberest  hues.  But  what  is  the 
usual  coal-box  of  our  day  ? Brass  has  been  almost 
entirely  discarded  in  its  manufacture,  and  though  iron 
is  retained,  it  is  lacquered  over  with  delicate  tints,  and 
patterns  of  flowers,  &c.,  utterly  unsuitable  in  such  a 
place.  Nor  is  this  all.  Of  late  years  photographs 


Fenders . 


93 


have  been  introduced  as  an  appropriate  decoration  for 
the  lid  and  sides.  Could  absurdity  of  design  be  carried 
farther  ? We  might,  with  as  much  artistic  propriety, 
make  papier-machd  flower-pots,  and  hang  our  chimney- 
pieces  with  point-lace. 

Almost  all  the  quondam  ‘ fashionable  ’ shapes  for 
fenders,  grates,  and  fire-irons,  were  selected  on  a prin- 
ciple which  utterly  ignored  the  material  of  which  they 
were  made.  The  old  type  of  fender  in  use  about  sixty 
years  ago  consisted  of  thin  iron  plates,  perforated  and 
framed  between  bars  of  brass  or  steel.  It  was  often 
graceful  in  design,  and  infinitely  better  art  than  the 
curvilinear  and  elaborate  monstrosities  which  are  pro- 
duced in  Birmingham  and  Sheffield  at  the  present 
time.  Moreover,  it  answered  the  purpose  of  protecting 
women’s  dress  from  contact  with  the  fire  much  more 
effectually  than  the  flat  fenders  in  cast  iron  and  ormolu. 

I am  glad  to  find  that  many  ironmongers  are  now 
reproducing  these  old  patterns  at  a reasonable  price. 
In  this  and  a hundred  other  cases  the  taste  of  the 
public  and  of  the  manufacturers  became  vitiated  from 
a false  notion  of  what  constitutes  beauty  of  form. 
Every  article  of  upholstery  which  has  a curved  outline, 
no  matter  of  what  kind  the  curve  may  be,  or  where  it 
may  be  applied,  was  considered  ‘ elegant.’  Complexity 


94 


The  Dining-Room . 


of  detail,  whether  in  a good  or  bad  style  of  ornament, 
was  approved  as  ‘ rich,’  and  with  these  two  conditions 
of  so-styled  elegance  and  richness,  the  uneducated  eye 
was  satisfied.  Recent  advance  in  taste  has  shown  that 
simplicity  of  form  is  not  only  the  best  for  practical 


reasons,  but  far  more  capable  of  artistic  treatment  than 
extravagant  and  cumbrous  shapes. 

The  absurd  fashion  which  regulates  the  arrangement 
of  modern  window-hangings  cannot  be  too  severely 
condemned,  on  account  both  of  its  ugliness  and  in- 
convenience. Curtains  were  originally  hung  across  a 


Window  Curtains. 


95 


window  or  door,  not  for  the  sake  of  ornament  alone, 
but  to  exclude  cold  and  draughts.  They  were  sus- 
pended by  little  rings,  which  slipped  easily  over  a stout 
metal  rod — perhaps  an  inch  or  an  inch  and  a half  in 
diameter.  Of  course,  between  such  a rod  (stretched 
across  the  top  of  the  window)  and  the  ceiling,  a small 
space  must  always  intervene ; and,  therefore,  to  prevent 
the  chance  of  wind  blowing  through  in  this  direction,  a 
boxing  of  wood  became  necessary,  in  front  of  which  a 
plain  valance  was  hung,  sometimes  cut  into  a vandyke- 
shaped  pattern  at  its  lower  edge,  but  generally  un- 
plaited. As  for  the  curtains  themselves,  when  not  in 
use  they  hung  straight  down  on  either  side,  of  a suffi- 
cient length  to  touch,  but  not  to  sweep  the  ground. 

Now,  observe  how  we  have  burlesqued  this  simple 
and  picturesque  contrivance  in  our  modern  houses. 
The  useful  and  convenient  little  rod  has  grown  into  a 
huge  lumbering  pole  as  thick  as  a man’s  arm,  but  not 
a whit  stronger  than  its  predecessor  ; for  the  pole  is 
not  only  hollow,  but  constructed  of  metal  far  too  thin  in 
proportion  to  its  diameter.  Then,  in  place  of  the  little 
finials  which  used  to  be  fixed  at  each  end  of  the  rod  to 
prevent  the  rings  from  slipping  off,  our  modern  uphol- 
sterer has  substituted  gigantic  fuchsias,  or  other  flowers, 
made  of  brass,  gilt  bronze,  and  even  china,  sprawling 


96 


The  Dining-Room. 


downwards  in  a design  of  execrable  taste.  Sometimes 
this  pole,  being  too  weak  for  actual  use,  is  fixed  up  simply 
for  ornament — or  rather  for  pretentious  show— while 
the  curtain  really  slides  on  an  iron  rod  behind  it.  In- 
stead of  the  wooden  boxing  and  valance,  a gilt  cornice, 
or  canopy,  is  introduced,  contemptible  in  design,  and 
worse  than  useless  in  such  a place  ; for  not  only  does  it 
afford,  from  the  nature  of  its  construction,  no  protection 
against  the  draught  behind,  but,  being  made  of  thin, 
sharp-  edged  metal,  it  is  liable  to  cut  and  fray  the  curtain 
which  it  crowns.  The  curtains  themselves  are  made 
immoderately  long,  in  order  that  they  may  be  looped 
up  in  clumsy  folds  over  two  large  and  eccentric-looking 
metal  hooks  on  either  side  of  the  window.  The  result 
of  this  needless  and  ugly  complication  is  that  in  a 
London  house  the  curtains  are  seldom  drawn  : dust 
gathers  thickly  in  their  folds,  the  stuff  is  prematurely 
worn  out,  and  comfort  as  well  as  artistic  effect  is  sac- 
rificed to  meet  a conventional  notion  of  ‘ elegance.’ 
While  on  the  subject  of  curtains,  it  may  be  as  well 
to  add  a few  words  regarding  the  employment  of 
fringe.  Fringe,  as  Pugin  justly  pointed  out,  was 
originally  nothing  more  than  the  threads  of  silk  or 
woollen  stuff,  knotted  together  at  a ragged  edge,  to 
prevent  it  from  unravelling  further.  By  degrees  they 


Fringe. 


97 


came  to  be  knotted  at  regular  intervals,  so  that  at 
length  this  contrivance  grew  into  a system  of  ornament, 
which  survived  the  necessity  of  its  original  adoption. 
But  long  after  the  use  of  detached  fringe,  it  continued  to 
be  made  of  threads  alone,  and  threads  of  the  same  quality 
as  the  stuff.  Now,  manufacturers  have  not  only  lost 
sight  of  the  original  motive  of  fringe,  but  they  make  it 
of  fantastically  turned  pieces  of  wood,  twisted  round  in- 
discriminately with  silk  and  woollen  thread  ; and  these 
are  often  attached  to  a valance  scarcely  deeper  than 
the  fringe  itself ! One  may  even  see  cord  fringe  sewn 
on  stools,  fire-screens,  &c.,  where  it  is  utterly  inap- 
propriate, and  where,  in  short,  no  one  but  a modern 
upholsterer  would  ever  think  of  putting  it. 

The  lace  trimmings  and  edgings  used  for  ‘ anti- 
macassars ’ and  simple  articles  of  household  use  are 
often  open  to  objection  on  account  of  the  flimsiness 
and  extravagance  of  their  design.  It  is  a great  pity 
that  ladies  who  devote  much  of  their  time  to  the  exe- 
cution of  the  wretched  patterns  sold  at  ‘ fancy-work 
shops  ’ do  not  exercise  a little  more  discrimination  in 
their  choice.  A little  pains,  together  with  a careful 
examination  of  old  specimens  to  be  found  at  the  South 
Kensington  Museum  and  elsewhere,  would  soon  enable 
them  to  reform  their  taste  in  this  respect,  and  to  in- 

H 


98 


The- Dining  Room . 


form  themselves  of  the  general  principles  on  which 
such  work  should  be  designed  and  carried  out.  The 
annexed  specimen  of  hand-made  lace  is  from  the  work 
of  a young  lady  who  has  given  some  attention  to  the 
subject,  and  evidently  with  much  profit.  It  will  be 


seen  that  the  lace  trimming  is  here  divided  into  com- 
partments which,  though  similar  in  general  design, 
display  some  variety  of  detail.  This  is  exactly  in 
accordance  with  the  spirit  of  old  and  sound  principles 
of  manufacture. 

In  the  early  part  of  this  century,  window-curtains 
were  only  made  of  silk  or  damask.  The  material 


Curtain  Stuffs . 


99 


known  as  ‘ rep  ’ was  next  introduced,  and  was  in  many 
respects  superior  to  what  had  been  used  before.  But 
the  Germans  have  invented  a still  better  stuff — a 
mixture  of  silk,  wool,  and  cotton — called  cotelan  in  the 
shops,  which  is  often  worked  in  diaper  patterns  of 
excellent  design.  It  is  one  of  the  most  artistic 
examples  of  modern  textile  fabric  now  manufactured. 
To  the  French  we  are  indebted  for  a heavy  ribbed 
material  decorated  with  broad  bands  or  stripes  of 
colour  running  transversely  to  its  length,  and  resem- 
bling the  pattern  of  a Roman  scarf.  This  stuff  has 
been  much  in  vogue  of  late  years,  particularly  among 
artists  and  people  of  good  independent  taste. 

Another  French  material,  called  ‘Algerine/  appeared 
for  a short  while  in  the  London  shops.  It  was  made 
chiefly  of  cotton,  and  was  also  designed  with  horizontal 
stripes  of  colour  on  an  unbleached  white  ground.  In 
effect,  it  was  all  that  could  be  wished,  and  it  had, 
moreover,  the  additional  advantage  of  being  washable. 
But,  of  course,  because  it  was  cheap,  and  about  the 
best  thing  of  the  kind  which  had  appeared  for  many 
years,  it  found  few  admirers  and  but  little  demand. 
Having  inquired  for  it  at  a well-known  establishment, 
I was  told  that  its  manufacture  had  been  discontinued, 
or,  at  all  events,  that  no  more  could  be  procured  from 


H 2 


IOO 


The  Dining-Room 


France/''  The  new  cretonne  now  used  for  bed  furni- 
ture, &c.,  is  a good  substitute  for  chintz,  in  so  far  as 
it  will  wash,  and  does  not  depend  for  effect  on  a high 
glaze.  Some  excellent  examples  of  this  material,  and 
printed  calicos  of  artistic  design,  have  been  produced 
by  W.  Morris  & Co.,  to  whom  the  public  are  much 
indebted  for  improved  taste  in  this  branch  of  manu- 
facture. 

There  is  also  a kind  of  damask  made  in  plain 
colour— either  green  or  crimson — enriched  with  stripes 


worked  in  various  patterns  with  gold-coloured  silk.  It 
is  not  so  expensive  as  cotelan , being  much  lighter  in 

* Since  this  was  written,  some  varieties  of  the  material  have  re- 
appeared in  the  West-end  shops. 


XIII. 


Embroidered  Portiere  Curtains , 

designed  by  C.  Heaton. 


Portiere  Curtains . 


IOI 


substance,  but  the  design  is  very  good.  In  this  case  the 
stripes  run  parallel  to  the  length  of  the  curtain,  and 
thus  give  greater  apparent  height  to  the  room  in  which 
they  are  hung,  Horizontal  stripes,  on  the  contrary, 
have  a tendency  to  make  a low  room  look  lower,  though 
it  must  be  confessed  that  the  folds  of  a curtain  are 
more  agreeably  defined  in  this  manner  than  when  the 
stripes  run  parallel  to  them,  and  thus  confuse  the  eye. 

Some  very  beautiful  specimens  of  portiere  curtains 
were  made  some  time  ago  from  the  respective  de- 
signs of  Mr.  A.  W.  Blomfield  and  of  Mr.  C.  Heaton. 
They  were  composed  of  velvet  and  other  stuffs, 
embroidered  by  hand  and  decorated  with  deep 
borders,  consisting  of  alternate  strips  of  velvet  and 
common  horse-girths.  It  is  a remarkable  fact  that 
horse-girths  (as  well  as  certain  kinds  of  coach-trim- 
mings) traditionally  preserve  the  spirit  of  some  very 
excellent  designs,  which  have  probably  varied  very 
little,  in  pattern  and  general  distribution  of  colour, 
during  the  past  century. 

Two  specimens  of  the  curtains  designed  by  Mr, 
Heaton  are  here  given  in  illustration.  One  of  them  is 
decorated  in  applique  work  with  a representation  of 
JE sop’s  fable,  ‘the  Fox  and  the  Stork.’ 

For  summer  curtains  there  is  scarcely  a better 


102 


The  Dining-Room. 


material  than  that  which  is  known  in  this  country  as 
‘ Swiss  lace.’  It  is  made  of  stout  thread-cotton,  and 
worked  in  two  or  three  small  but  well-defined  patterns. 
It  is  apt  to  shrink  a little  in  washing,  but  is  otherwise 
faultless  in  a practical  point  of  view  ; while  in  design 
it  is  infinitely  superior  to  the  ordinary  muslin  curtain, 
on  which  semi-naturalistic  foliage  and  nondescript 


ornament  is  allowed  to  meander  after  an  extravagant 
and  meaningless  fashion.  It  is  not  that  ‘nondescript’ 
ornament  must  necessarily  be  bad — it  is  not  that  semi- 
naturalistic  leaf-patterns  are  radically  wrong  in  prin- 
ciple— -but  simply  that  English  and  French  designers 
were  until  recently  unable  to  treat  these  elements  of 
decoration  in  a proper  and  artistic  spirit. 

Happily  a great  improvement  has  taken  place  within 


Recent  Improvements. 


103 


the  last  few  years  in  the  character  of  almost  every  kind 
of  textile  fabric  used  for  curtains  and  upholstery. 
Patterns,  often  of  great  artistic  excellence  and  based 
upon  a legitimate  adaptation  of  form  in  vegetable  life, 
are  to  be  seen  in  the  shop  windows  ; and  skilful  com- 
binations of  colour  in  secondary  and . tertiary  tints, 
which  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  procure  a few 
years  ago,  may  be  found  in  portieres  and  window- 
hangings  in  many  varieties  of  material,  and  produced 
at  a price  which  is  quite  within  reach  of  ordinary 
means.*  Speaking  generally,  one  may  say  that  this 
department  of  industrial  art  presents  a far  more  hope- 
ful prospect  than  any  other  for  the  advance  of  ‘ house- 
hold taste.’ 

* I have  supplied  several  designs  for  curtain  stuffs  to  Messrs.  Cowlishaw, 
Nicol  & Co.,  of  Manchester,  as  well  as  to  Messrs.  Jackson  & Graham,  of 
London.  Some  of  them  are  executed  in  material  of  very  moderate  cost. 


io4 


The  Floor  and  the  Wall. 


Chapter  IV. 

THE  FLOOR  AND  THE  WALE 


ODERN  manufacture  may  perhaps  be  said  to 
have  received  the  greatest  aid  from  science 
at  a period  precisely  when  the  arts  of  design 
had  sunk  into  their  lowest  degradation.  A twofold 
error  sprang  from  this  mesalliance.  In  the  first  place, 
bad  ornament  was  multiplied  into  vicious  elaboration  ; 
and  secondly,  the  eye  became  accustomed  to  appre- 
ciate and  afterwards  to  desire  a certain  quality  of 
finish  and  ignoble  neatness,  which,  while  it  is  an  almost 
inevitable  result  of  machinery  in  its  perfected  use,  must 
at  the  same  time  be  utterly  opposed  to  a free  and 
vigorous  style  of  decoration.  Every  lady  recognises 
the  superiority  of  hand-made  lace  and  other  textile 
fabrics  over  those  which  are  produced  by  artificial 
means.  The  same  criterion  of  excellence  may  be 
applied  to  almost  every  branch  of  art-manufacture. 
The  perfect  finish  and  accurate  uniformity  of  shape — • 
the  correct  and  even  balance  of  pattern-form  which 


Characteristics  of  Manufacture.  105 


distinguish  European  goods  from  those  of  Eastern 
nations,  and  English  goods  especially  from  those  of 
other  countries  in  Europe — indicate  degrees  not  only 
of  advanced  civilization,  but,  inversely,  of  decline  in 
taste. 

Our  table-glass  and  porcelain,  for  example,  have  long 
been  remarkable  for  pureness  of  material  and  sym- 
metry of  outline.  Old  Venetian  glass  and  Italian 
majolica-ware  were,  on  the  contrary,  seldom  quite 
symmetrical  in  shape,  or  entirely  free  from  natural 
defects.  They  depended  for  their  beauty  on  qualities 
which  cannot  be  tested  by  rule  and  compass,  or  be 
ensured  by  ordinary  care.  But  the  variety  of  their 
forms  was  endless,  and  every  form  had  a grace  and 
beauty  of  its  own.  The  lovely  colours  with  which 
they  were  invested  may  indeed,  in  some  instances, 
have  been  the  result  of  certain  chemical  combinations 
which  modern  science  has  failed  to  reproduce.  But 
they  owe  their  chief  charm  to  the  taste  with  which 
those  colours  were  opposed  to  each  other  -not  to  the 
evenness  and  equality  of  their  tone.  In  fact,  the  very 
irregularity  of  form  and  inequality  of  tint  which  distin- 
guish these  objects  of  ancient  art,  conduced  towards 
their  real  beauty ; for  they  were  the  evidence  of 
human  handiwork,  and  that  to  the  end  of  time  will 


io6 


The  Floor  and  the  IV all. 


always  be  more  interesting  than  the  result  of  mechan- 
ical precision.  Of  course,  division  of  labour  and 
perfection  of  machinery  have  had  their  attendant 
advantages,  and  it  cannot  be  denied  that  many  articles 
of  ancient  luxury  are  by  such  aid  now  placed  within 
reach  of  the  million.  But,  although  it  would  be  unde- 
sirable, and  indeed  impossible,  to  reject  in  manufacture 
the  appliances  of  modern  science,  we  should  be 
cautious  of  attaching  too  much  importance  in  decora- 
tive art  to  those  qualities  of  mere  elaboration  and 
finish  which  are  independent  of  thought  and  manual 
labour. 

The  textile  fabrics  of  Persia,  Turkey,  and  India 
have  long  been  famous  for  the  graceful  harmony  with 
which  their  colours  are  blended.  But,  beyond  a 
general  uniformity  of  purpose  which  is  preserved  in 
the  design,  the  whole  system  of  their  ornament  is 
absolutely  careless.  Examine  any  old  and  good 
specimen  of  an  Eastern  carpet,  and  you  will  probably 
find  a border  on  the  right  in  which  the  stripes  are 
twice  as  broad  as  those  on  the  left.  There  are  exactly 
thirteen  of  these  queer-looking  angular  flowers  at  this 
end  of  the  room  ; over  the  way  there  are  only  twelve. 
At  the  north  corner,  near  the  window,  that  zigzag  line 
ends  in  a little  circle ; at  the  south,  in  a square  ; at  the 


Oriental  Carpets . 


107 


east,  in  a dot ; at  the  west,  there  is  nothing  at  all.  This 
is  in  the  true  spirit  of  good  and  noble  design.  On  the 
Continent,  as  well  as  in  this  country,  Oriental  goods 
are  often  imitated ; but  the  imitation  is  a failure, 
because  the  English  and  French  designers  look  with 


disdain  on  the  irregularity  of  Eastern  work.  In  their 
eyes  nothing  can  be  quite  beautiful  of  which  the  two 
opposite  sides  are  not  precisely  alike.  Accordingly 
the  whole  carpet  is  planned,  line  for  line  and  spot  for 
spot,  with  studied  accuracy  throughout  The  result, 
no  doubt,  will  be  found  mathematically  correct  by  any- 


io8 


The  Floor  and  the  Wall. 


one  who  takes  the  trouble  to  measure  it,  but  the  vigour 
and  independence  of  the  original  are  utterly  lost  in  the 
copy. 

Choose,  then,  the  humblest  type  of  Turkey  carpet 
or  the  cheapest  hearthrug  from  Scinde,  and  be  sure 
they  will  afford  you  more  lasting  eye-pleasure  than  any 
English  imitation.  As  for  the  specimens  of  our  own 
peculiar  national  taste  in  textile  art— the  rose- wreaths 
— the  malachite  marble  patterns— the  crimson  moire 
antique  with  borders  of  shaded  vine-leaves — the 
thousand-and-one  pictorial  monstrosities  which  you  see 
displayed  in  the  windows  of  Oxford  Street  and 
Ludgate  Hill — they  are  only  fit  to  cover  the  floor  of 
Madame  Tussaud’s  Chamber  of  Horrors. 

It  is  curious  that  the  English,  who  take  pains  that 
the  patterns  of  their  carpets  shall  be  worked  out  with 
such  nice  accuracy,  should  be  quite  indifferent  to  the 
symmetry  of  their  general  outline.  Except  in  the 
dining-room  of  an  English  house,  one  rarely  sees 
such  a thing  as  a square — or  rather  a rectangular — 
carpet.  Two  sides  of  it  at  least  are  sure  to  be 
notched  and  chopped  about  in  order  that  they  may 
fit  into  the  various  recesses  caused  by  windows  and 
the  projection  of  the  chimney-breast.  This  is  essen- 
tially a modern  fashion,  and  a very  objectionable  one. 


IVaste  of  Material. 


109 


In  the  first  place,  much  of  the  material  is  cut  (as  the 
phrase  goes)  ‘ to  waste.’  Secondly,  a carpet  once  laid 
down  in  a room  will  never  suit  another  (although  it  is 
often  convenient  to  make  such  changes)  without  further 
alterations.  Thirdly,  the  practice  of  entirely  covering 
up  the  floor,  and  thus  leaving  no  evidence  of  its 
material,  is  contrary  to  the  first  principles  of  decorative 
art,  which  require  that  the  nature  of  construction,  so 
far  as  is  possible,  should  always  be  revealed,  or  at 
least  indicated,  by  the  ornament  which  it  bears.  No 
one  wants  a carpet  in  the  nooks  and  corners  of  a room ; 
and  it  is  pleasant  to  feel  that  there,  at  all  events,  the 
floor  can  assert  its  independence.  It  is  true  that  the 
colour  of  deal  boards,  especially  when  they  become  old 
and  dirty,  is  by  no  means  satisfactory,  but  a little  of 
the  staining-fiuid  now  in  common  use  will  meet  this 
difficulty  at  a merely  nominal  cost. 

The  floors  of  good  old  French  mansions  were  often 
inlaid  with  variously-coloured  wood  arranged  in  geo- 
metrical patterns.  This  branch  of  decorative  art, 
known  as  parquetry , has  been  of  late  years  revived  in 
England,  and  is  much  in  vogue  at  country  houses. 
Parquetry  floor-borders  are  now  supplied  at  a price 
which  is  scarcely  greater  per  superficial  foot  than  that 
paid  for  a good  Brussels  carpet.  With  such  a border 


I IO 


The  Floor  and  the  JVall, 


projecting  two  or  three  feet  from  the  wall  all  round, 
the  carpet  need  not  be  carried  into  the  recesses  and 
corners  of  a room,  but  may  be  left  square  at  the  sides. 
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  effect  of  this 
arrangement,  including  as  it  does  the  additional  grace 
of  inlaid  woodwork,  is  infinitely  more  artistic  and  in- 
teresting than  that  which  the  ordinary  system  presents. 

The  annexed  illustrations  are  from  specimens  of 
parquetry  floors  and  floor-borders,  manufactured  by 
Mr.  Arrowsmith  of  Bond  Street,  whose  name  has 
been  creditably  associated  with  the  revival  of  this  art. 

With  regard  to  the  style  of  the  carpet,  it  may  be 
assumed  that,  except  in  a few  rare  instances,  where  an 
European  influence  has  been  brought  to  bear  on  the 
manufacture  of  the  East,  all  Oriental  work  is  excellent. 
Care  should  be  taken,  however,  to  avoid  those  designs 
which  are  remarkable  for  over-brilliance  of  colour. 
They  are  apt  to  be  inharmonious  with  the  rest  of  the 
furniture,  and  rich  Oriental  dyes  frequently  have  a 
deleterious  effect  on  the  material  which  they  stain. 
The  crimson  used  in  Scinde  rugs,  for  instance,  is 
especially  destructive,  and  the  portions  dyed  with  this 
colour  wear  out  long  before  the  rest.  The  dull  Indian 
red  is  far  more  enduring,  and  is  also  more  likely  to 
blend  well  with  the  surrounding  tints. 


XIV 


Parquetry  Floor  Borders , 


Manufactured  by  A . J.  Arrowsmith. 


XV. 


Parquetry  Floor  Borders, 
Manufactured  by  A-  f-  Arrowsmith. 


Kidderminster  Carpets . 


1 1 1 


Turkey  carpets  are  hardly  dearer  than  the  best  pro- 
ductions of  this  country,  but  there  are  some  English 
carpets — those  known  as  Kidderminster  for  instance— 
of  excellent  patterns  and,  of  course,  much  cheaper  than 
any  which  can  be  imported  from  abroad.  There  is  no 


reason  why  true  principles  of  design  should  not  be 
found  in  the  humblest  object  of  household  use,  and,  so 
far  as  European  goods  are  concerned,  it  not  unfre- 
quently  happens  that  the  commonest  material  is  in- 
vested with  the  best  form  and  colour.  Carpets  are  no 
exception  to  this  rule.  In  London  shops  their  artistic 


I 12 


The  Floor  and  the  IV all. 


worth  is  at  present  a matter  of  mere  chance,  and  is 
certainly  independent  of  all  pecuniary  considerations. 
The  simplest  diapered  grounds  are  the  best,  and  it  is 
desirable  that  the  prevailing  tint  of  a carpet  should 


contrast  rather  than  repeat  that  of  the  wall-paper. 
Large  sprawling  patterns,  however  attractive  they  may 
be  in  colour,  should  be  avoided  as  utterly  destructive 
of  effect  to  the  furniture  which  is  placed  on  them,  and, 


Carpet  Patterns . 


ii3 

above  all,  every  description  of  shaded  ornament  should 
be  sternly  banished  from  our  floors. 

Next  to  the  mistakes  committed  in  the  design  of 
carpets,  there  are  few  artistic  solecisms  more  apparent 


than  those  which  the  paper-stainers  perpetrate  by  way 
of  decoration.  Concerning  taste,  as  the  old  Latin  adage 
informs  us,  there  is  no  disputing  ; and  if  people  will 
prefer  a bouquet  of  flowers  or  a group  of  spaniels 


1 


The  Floor  and  the  IVall. 


1 14 

worked  upon  their  hearthrug  to  the  conventional 
patterns  which  are  adopted  by  the  Indian  and  Turkish 
weavers,  it  is  difficult  to  convince  them  of  their  error. 
We  require  no  small  amount  of  art  instruction  and 
experience  to  see  why  the  direct  imitation  of  natural 
objects  is  wrong  in  ornamental  design.  The  quasi- 
fidelity  with  which  the  forms  of  a rose  or  a bunch  of 
ribbons,  or  a ruined  castle,  can  be  reproduced  on 
carpets,  crockery,  and  wall-papers  will  always  possess  a 
certain  kind  of  charm  for  the  uneducated  eye,  just  as 
the  mimicry  of  natural  sounds  in  music,  from  the  rolling 
of  thunder  to  the  cackling  of  poultry,  will  delight  a 
vulgar  ear.  Both  are  ingenious,  amusing,  attractive 
for  the  moment,  but  neither  lie  within  the  legitimate 
province  of  art. 

Now,  about  the  time  that  the  famous  ‘ Battle  of 
Prague  ’ became  a favourite  exercise  with  youthful 
pianists,  and  fathers  and  brothers  were  daily  bored 
with  the  musical  imitations  of  roar  of  cannon,  clashing 
of  swords,  trample  of  horses,  and  shrieks  of  the  dying 
— at  a period,  I say,  when  all  these  deplorable  con- 
sequences of  war  were  brought  before  us  in  a most 
emphatic  and  prae-Raphaelite  manner  on  Mr.  Broad- 
wood’s  well-known  instruments  by  young  ladies  of  an 
age  varying  from  ten  to  sixteen — just  at  this  epoch  the 


Household  Taste  thirty  years  ago.  1 15 


worst  style  of  art  which  this  country  has  ever  seen 
prevailed  throughout  the  whole  field  of  design.  Up- 
holstery was  in  bad  taste  ; glass  and  china  were  in  bad 
taste  ; cabinet-work  was  in  bad  taste.  But  of  all  the 
ugly  fashions  of  that  day,  by  far  the  most  contemptible 
was  that  of  paperhangings.  Now  and  then,  in  tearing 
down  the  paper  from  old  walls  where  it  has  been 
allowed  to  accumulate  (a  very  slovenly  and  unhealthy 
practice,  by  the  way),  the  workmen,  after  removing 
two  or  three  layers  of  paste,  &c.,  will  come  upon  a 
curious  specimen  of  mural  decoration,  which  embodies 
in  its  pattern  sometimes  a suggestion  of  landscape ; 
sometimes  a bit  of  ornamental  gardening  in  impossible 
perspective  ; sometimes  a group  of  foreign  birds,  re- 
peated at  regular  intervals  ; but  often  a curious  com- 
bination of  those  diverse  elements  of  design,  mixed  up 
with  huge  flowers  and  creeping  plants,  meandering 
over  the  whole  surface  of  the  wall. 

Such  were  the  eccentricities  which  the  last  genera- 
tion affected,  and  which  are,  I need  scarcely  add, 
all  widely  removed  from  true  principles  of  taste. 
Indeed,  common  sense  points  to  the  fact,  that  as  a 
wall  represents  the  flat  surface  of  a solid  material 
which  forms  part  of  the  construction  of  a house,  it 
should  be  decorated  after  a manner  which  will  belie 


The  Floor  and  the  Wall. 


1 16 

neither  its  flatness  nor  solidity.  For  this  reason  all 
shaded  ornament  and  patterns,  which  by  their  arrange- 
ment of  colour  give  an  appearance  of  relief,  should  be 
strictly  avoided.  Where  natural  forms  are  introduced, 
they  should  be  treated  in  a conventional  manner— i.e. 
drawn  in  outline,  and  filled  in  with  flat  colour,  which 
may  be  ‘ hatched  ’ over  with  lines  here  and  there  to 
express  form,  but  without  attempt  at  pictorial  grada- 
tion. No  doubt  many  excellent  examples  of  arabesque 
and  other  surface-decoration,  as  at  Pompeii  and  in  the 
Loggie  of  the  Vatican,  may  be  cited,  where  a certain 
degree  of  roundness  has  been  aimed  at  in  the  case  of 
animal  form  ; but  such  examples  excel  not  because  of 
their  style,  but  in  spite  of  it.  Moreover,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  these  paintings  were  the  actual  handi- 
work of  consummate  artists ; and  as  we  cannot  hope 
to  imitate,  by  machine-printed  paper,  the  refinement 
of  manual  skill,  it  is  better  that  we  should  limit  our 
designs  to  those  forms  which  need  no  such  delicacy  of 
treatment. 

In  the  Middle  Ages  it  was  customary  to  decorate  the 
walls  of  the  most  important  rooms  of  a public  building 
or  private  mansion  with  tapestry ; and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  a rich  and  picturesque  effect  was  thus 
obtained  which  no  other  means  could  produce.  But 


Stencilled  Decoration . 


1 17 

it  is  obvious  that  the  mere  expense  of  such  a practice, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  consideration  of  cleanliness 
(especially  in  town-houses,  where  dust  collects  with 
great  rapidity),  would  render  it  out  of  the  question 
for  modern  appliance.  In  later  times  stencil-painting 
was  the  first  step  towards  a simpler  style  of  mural 
ornament,  and  indeed  it  is  still  in  vogue  throughout 
Italy  and  other  parts  of  the  Continent.  It  consists,  as 
some  of  my  readers  may  be  aware,  of  applying  flatted 
colour  to  a wall  with  a brush  over  perforated  plates  of 
zinc  or  other  metal.  These  perforations  may  be  cut 
into  an  endless  variety  of  patterns  ; and  certainly  a 
plaster  surface  thus  decorated  has  many  advantages 
over  one  which  has  been  lined  with  paper,  particularly 
in  a warm  climate.  The  plates  too,  when  once  pre- 
pared for  a satisfactory  design,  may  be  used  again  at 
pleasure  elsewhere,  and  the  space  between  the  diapered 
patterns  thus  formed  may  be  varied  to  suit  the  size  of 
the  room.  Still,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  more 
recent  invention  of  paperhangings  supplies  a cheaper, 
readier,  and,  to  our  English  notions  of  comfort,  a more 
satisfactory  means  of  internal  decoration. 

There  has  been  a very  great  improvement  of  late  in 
this  branch  of  manufacture.  Pugin  led  the  way  by 
designing  some  excellent  examples  for  the  Houses  of 


1 18 


The  Floor  and  the  IVall. 


Parliament  and  elsewhere ; and  since  his  time  many 
architects  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  design  ap- 
propriate wall-papers  for  the  houses  which  they  have 
built.  By  degrees  manufacturers  took  the  matter 
up,  and  adopted  the  patterns  suggested  by  qualified 
artists,  and  the  result  is  that  good  and  well-designed 
papers  may  now  be  had  at  a very  reasonable  price. 
Of  course,  many  wretched  specimens  continue  to  be 
displayed,  for  the  selection  of  customers  whose  taste 
is  of  too  lofty  and  independent  a character  to  be 
influenced  by  any  guiding  principle ; but,  neverthe- 
less, good  papers  are  to  be  found  by  those  who 
choose  to  look  for  them.''5-  In  this,  as  in  every  branch 
of  art-manufacture,  it  is  for  the  shops  to  lead  the  way 
towards  reform.  The  British  public  are,  as  a body, 
utterly  incapable  of  distinguishing  good  from  bad  de- 
sign, and  have  not  time  to  enquire  into  principles. 
As  long  as  gaudy  and  extravagant  trash  is  displayed 
in  the  windows  of  our  West-end  thoroughfares,  so  long 
will  it  attract  ninety-nine  people  out  of  every  hundred 
to  buy.  But  let  customers  once  become  familiar  with 
the  sight  of  good  forms  and  judicious  combinations  of 

* Messrs.  Jeffrey  & Co.,  of  Essex  Road,  Islington,  and  Mr.  H.  Wool- 
lams,  of  High  Street,  Marylebone,  have  produced  some  excellent  paper- 
hangings  in  great  variety  of  design. 


Choice  of  Paper  hangings,  1 1 g 

colour,  and  we  may  one  day  aspire  to  the  formation  of 
a national  taste. 

But  to  return  to  my  subject : the  choice  of  a wall- 
paper should  be  guided  in  every  respect  by  the  desti- 
nation of  the  room  in  which  it  will  be  used.  The  most 
important  question  will  always  be  whether  it  is  to  form 
a decoration  in  itself,  or  whether  it  is  to  become  a mere 
background  for  pictures.  In  the  latter  case  the  paper 
can  hardly  be  too  subdued  in  tone.  Very  light  stone 
colour  or  green  (not  emerald),  and  silver-grey  will  be 
found  suitable  for  this  purpose,  and  two  shades  of  the 
same  colour  are  generally  sufficient  for  one  paper.  In 
drawing-rooms,  embossed  white  or  cream  colour,  with 
a very  small  diapered  pattern,  will  not  be  amiss,  where 
water-colour  drawings  are  hung.  As  a rule,  the  simplest 
patterns  are  the  best  for  every  situation  ; but  where 
the  eye  has  to  rest  upon  the  surface  of  the  wall  alone, 
a greater  play  of  line  in  the  ornament  may  become 
advisable.  It  is  obvious  that  delicate  tints  admit  of 
more  linear  complexity  than  those  which  are  rich  or 
dark.  Intricate  forms  should  be  accompanied  by  quiet 
colour,  and  variety  of  hue  should  be  chastened  by 
the  plainest  possible  outlines.  In  colour,  wall-papers 
should  relieve  without  violently  opposing  that  of  the 
furniture  and  hangings  by  which  they  are  surrounded. 


120 


The  Floor  and  the  IV all. 


There  should  be  one  dominant  hue  in  the  room,  to 
which  all  others  introduced  are  subordinate.  This 
will  admit  of  many  variations  of  shade,  passing  from 
green  to  blue,  or  Venetian  red  to  brown,  without  re- 
quiring absolute  uniformity  of  tint  throughout.  Some 
people  conceive  that  the  most  important  condition  of 
good  taste  has  been  fulfilled  if  every  bit  of  damask  in 
one  room  is  cut  from  the  same  piece,  and  every  article 
of  furniture  is  made  of  the  same  wood.  At  this  rate 
the  art  of  outfitting  would  be  reduced  to  a very  simple 
process.  The  real  secret  of  success  in  decorative 
colour  is,  however,  quite  as  much  dependent  on  subtle 
variations  and  delicate  contrast  as  on  similarity  of  tint ; 
nor  can  real  artistic  effect  be  expected  without  the  em- 
ployment of  both. 

Nothing  is  more  difficult  than  to  estimate  the  value 
and  intensity  of  colour  when  spread  over  a large 
surface  from  the  simple  inspection  of  a pattern-book. 
The  purchaser  will  frequently  find  that  a paper  which 
he  has  ordered  will  look  either  darker  or  lighter  when 
hung  than  it  appeared  in  the  piece.  For  this  reason  it 
is  advisable  to  suspend  several  lengths  of  the  paper 
side  by  side  in  the  room  for  which  it  is  intended,  and  it 
is  only  by  this  means  that  a notion  of  the  ultimate 
effect  can  be  arrived  at.  In  the  early  part  of  this  cen- 


High  Wainscoting. 


I 2 I 


tury  it  was  a common  practice  to  carry  wainscoting 
round  the  principal  rooms  of  a house  to  a height  of 
about  three  feet  from  the  floor,  where  it  was  crowned 
by  a little  wooden  moulding.  The  paper  was  then 
only  required  to  cover  the  upper  part  of  the  walls,  and 
the  effect  was  far  less  monotonous  than  now,  when  it 
is  carried  down  to  our  feet.  The  old  fashion  had  an 
additional  advantage  in  protecting  the  wall  from 
contact  with  chairs  and  careless  fingers,  which  gene- 
rally disfigure  delicately-tinted  paperhangings.  This 
picturesque  old  feature  of  high  wainscoting  has  long 
been  banished,  with  many  others,  from  modern  house- 
holds, but,  to  protect  walls  from  being  rubbed  by  fur- 
niture, narrow  strips  of  wood  may  be  nailed  down  to 
the  floor  within  an  inch  or  two  of  the  wall.  The  legs 
of  chairs  (and  consequently  their  back-rails)  are  thus 
kept  off  from  the  paper  behind  them,  and  a ‘ grazing- 
line ’ is  avoided. 

As  ‘ diaper  ’ designs  have  been  more  than  once 
referred  to  in  these  pages,  it  may  be  as  well  to  explain 
that  they  belong  to  that  class  of  patterns  which  are 
either  definitely  enclosed  by  bounding  lines,  or  at  least 
divided  into  compartments  of  a uniform  size  through- 
out. These  compartments  or  ‘ diapers  ’ are  often  of  a 
geometrical  form,  and  in  that  case  may  either  be  round  or 


122 


The  Floor  and  the  Wall. 


square,  diamond-shaped  or  quotref  'oiled  in  outline.  The 
best  are  those  in  which  segmental  curves  are  blended 
with  angular  forms.  For  ordinary  sized  rooms  they 
should  not  exceed  five  or  six  inches  across  in  any 
direction,  but  for  bedrooms,  &c.,  much  less  will  suffice. 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  nothing  dwarfs  the  size 
of  rooms  so  much  as  large-patterned  papers.  Without 
attempting  to  arrive  at  any  definite  rule  for  the  choice 
of  patterns,  we  may  safely  avoid  some  altogether,  and 
among  them  is  that  species  of  decoration  which  may 
be  included  under  the  head  of  ‘ scroll  ’ ornament.  It 
will  be  easily  recognised  from  its  resemblance  to  the 
so-called  carved  work  round  modern  drawing-room 
mirrors,  to  which  I have  already  alluded,  and  is  sure  to 
be  of  bad  style. 

The  leaves  of  certain  plants,  when  appropriately 
treated,  become  excellent  decorative  forms.  Of  these, 
ivy,  maple,  crowfoot,  oak,  and  fig-leaves  are  well 
adapted  for  the  purpose.  Where  two  shades  of  the 
same  colour  are  employed,  and  quietness  of  effect  is 
especially  desired,  the  overlaid  tint  should  be  but  very 
little  darker  than  the  ground ; and  if  drawings,  &c„, 
are  to  be  hung  upon  it,  the  pattern  should  be  hardly 
discernible  from  a little  distance. 

Pugin,  in  his  designs  for  mediaeval  paperhangings, 


Scale  : about  one-third  real  size. 


XVI. 


Wall  Paper  manufactured  by  Jeffrey  & Co. 

from  a design  by  Charles  L.  East  lake. 


Scale  : one-third  real  size. 


XVII. 


Wall  Paper  manufactured  by  Jeffrey  & Co. 


from  a design  by  Charles  L.  East  lake. 


Scale  : one-third  real  size. 


XVIII. 


Wall  Paper  manufactured  by  Jeffrey  & Co . 


from  a a c sign  by  B.  Bvnyon . 


N aturalistic  Patterns . 


123 


no  doubt  borrowed  largely  from  the  ancient  diaper 
patterns  employed  during  the  Middle  Ages  for  surface- 
decoration,  and  of  which,  perhaps,  the  Early  Italian 
school  of  painting  affords  the  best  examples.  Of  late 
years,  however,  there  has  been  a growing  distaste 
for  mediaeval  patterns,  and — as  in  curtain  stuffs — the 
present  tendency  of  design  is  in  the  direction  of  natural 
forms  chiefly  adapted  from  flowering  plants.  The  ac- 
companying plates  illustrate  designs  for  wall-papers 
manufactured  by  Messrs.  Jeffreys  & Co.,  one  partaking 
of  the  diapered  character,  and  the  other  two  based  on 
studies  of  ivy  and  the  ‘ solanum  ’ shrub. 

Paperhangings  should  in  no  case  be  allowed  to  cover 
the  whole  space  of  a wall  from  skirting  to  ceiling.  A 
‘ dado,’  or  plinth  space  of  plain  colour,  either  in  paper 
or  distemper,  should  rise  to  a height  01  three  or  four 
feet  from  the  floor.  This  may  be  separated  from  the 
diapered  paper  above  by  a light  wood  moulding  stained 
or  ebonized.  A second  space,  of  frieze,  left  just  below 
the  ceiling,  and  filled  with  arabesque  ornament  painted 
on  a distemper-ground,  is  always  effective,  but  of  course 
involves  some  additional  expense.  The  most  dreary 
method  of  decorating  the  wall  of  a sitting-room  is  to 
cover  it  all  over  with  an  unrelieved  pattern  of  mono- 
tonous design. 


124 


The  Floor  and  the  Wall. 


Gold,  when  judiciously  introduced,  may  be  a valu- 
able adjunct  in  the  design  of  paperhangings.  It  fre- 
quently, however,  doubles,  and  sometimes  trebles,  the 
price  of  a piece.  Of  the  cheaper  sort  very  good  de- 
signs may  now  be  had  at  from  threepence  to  sixpence 
per  yard.  But  for  a shilling  or  eighteenpence  a yard, 
papers  may  now  be  procured  which  are  not  only 
luxurious  in  effect,  but  of  high  artistic  excellence. 

Messrs.  Morris,  Marshall  and  Co.,  of  Queen  Square 
Bloomsbury,  have  produced  some  admirable  examples 
of  this  latter  class,  specimens  of  which,  as  well  as  of 
the  chaste  and  beautiful  stained  glass  manufactured 
by  the  same  firm,  have  been  used  in  the  decoration 
of  the  new  refreshment-rooms  at  South  Kensington 
Museum. 

Some  of  the  French  papers,  embossed  after  the 
manner  of  old  stamped  leather,  are  very  effective  if 
cut  up  into  oblong  pieces  about  two  feet  in  length  and 
enclosed  in  wood  panels  just  underneath  the  cornice, 
so  as  to  form  a kind  of  frieze  decoration  round  the 
room.  It  is  true  that  if  this  embossed  paper  be  re- 
garded as  a mere  imitation  of  leather,  its  use  is  hardly 
consistent  with  principles  illumined  by  what  Mr. 
Ruskin  has  called  the  Lamp  of  Truth.  But,  after 
all,  the  manufacture  of  paperhangings  is  essentially  a 


Scale  : about  one-eighth  real  size.  XIX 


Part  of  a Mural  Decoration  for  Frieze , executed  by  Heaton,  Butler , & Co. 

Designed  by  C.  Heaton . Subject — ‘ The  Fox  without  a Tail 1 


Embossed  Papers , 


125 


modern  art,  and  even  in  its  origin  typified  tapestry  or 
stencil  painting.  It  would  be  hypercritical  therefore 
to  prescribe  any  limits  to  its  adaptation  for  decorative 
purposes  beyond  those  which  are  necessarily  imposed 
by  the  nature  of  the  material  and  the  process  of  manu- 
facture. To  go  further  than  this  in  any  branch  of  art 
would  lead  to  a sort  of  aesthetic  Pharisaism. 


126 


The  Library. 


Chapter  V. 

THE  LIBRARY. 

F all  the  rooms  in  a modern  house,  that  which 
is  used  as  a library  or  study  is  the  one  least 
like  to  offend  a fastidious  taste  by  its  appoint- 
ments. Here  at  least  the  furniture— usually  of  oak 
- — is  strong  and  solid.  The  silly  knick-knacks  which 
too  frequently  crowd  a drawing-room  table,  cheffonier, 
or  mantelpiece  are  banished  from  this  retreat.  The 
ormolu  and  compo-gilt  decoration  which  prevails  up- 
stairs is  voted,  even  by  upholsterers,  out  of  place  on 
the  ground-floor;  and  those  stern  arbiters  of  taste 
even  go  so  far  as  to  recommend  a Turkey  carpet  or  a 
sober-pattern  ‘ Brussels 1 instead  of  the  tangled  maze 
of  flowers  and  ribbons  which  we  have  to  tread  on 
elsewhere.  Yet,  with  all  these  advantages,  our  library, 
especially  in  a modern-sized  London  house,  is  often 
dull  and  uninteresting.  The  bookshelves,  cupboards, 
writing-table,  and  other  articles  of  furniture  which  it 
contains  are  of  a uniform  and  stereotyped  appearance, 


Cabinet-work. 


127 


and  never  rise  beyond  the  level  of  intense  respectability. 
This  is  due  to  various  causes,  but  among  others  to  the 
foolish  practice  of  varnishing  new  oak  before  it  has 
acquired  the  rich  and  varied  tint  which  time  and  use 
alone  can  give  it.  Wood  treated  in  this  way  keeps 
clean,  it  is  true,  but  never  exhibits  that  full  beauty  of 
grain  which  adds  so  much  to  its  picturesqueness.  The 
best  plan  is  to  rub  the  natural  surface  of  the  wood  well 
over  with  a little  oil  from  time  to  time  and  so  leave  it. 
This  will  reveal  its  vein  without  varnish,  and  allow  it  in 
due  course  to  become  deeper  in  colour.  The  construc- 
tion of  the  bookshelves  themselves  would  appear  to 
be  simple  and  straightforward,  and  yet  it  is  astonishing 
how  many  practical  mistakes  are  blindly  perpetuated  by 
cabinet-makers  of  the  present  day,  who  have  widely 
departed  from  the  principles  of  old  joinery.  It  might 
be  tedious,  in  these  pages,  to  point  out  such  mistakes 
as  are  of  a purely  technical  nature.  But  there  are 
some  so  opposed  to  common  sense  that  they  call  for 
special  mention. 

For  instance,  mouldings  were  originally  employed 
to  decorate  surfaces  of  wood  or  stone,  which  sloped 
either  vertically  or  horizontally  from  one  plane  to 
another.  Thus,  the  mouldings  of  a door  represent 
the  bevelled  or  chamfered  edge  of  the  stout  framework 


128 


The  Library. 


which  holds  the  slighter  panels.  It  is  obvious,  there- 
fore, that  these  mouldings  ought  to  be  worked  in  the 
solid  wood,  and  form  part  of  the  framework  referred  to. 
Instead  of  this,  in  modern  cabinet  work  they  are 
detached  slips  of  wood,  glued  into  their  places  after  the 
door  has  been  actually  put  together.  To  such  an 
absurdity  is  the  system  carried,  that  these  applied 
mouldings  are  often  allowed  to  project  beyond  the 
surface  of  the  door-frame,  and  not  unfrequently  are 
repeated  in  the  centre  of  the  panel  itself.  The  same 
fault  may  be  found  with  the  cornice  which  crowns  the 
bookcase.  It  pretends  to  be  solid  framing,  whereas  in 
nine  cases  out  of  ten  it  could  be  pulled  to  pieces  by 
a child’s  hand.  The  hinges,  too,  of  cabinet  doors  are 
lamentably  weak,  and  the  reason  of  this  is,  that  such 
hinges  are  reduced  to  a minimum  in  size,  and  kept  out 
of  sight.  The  old  hinges  were  not  cramped  for  space, 
but  boldly  stretched  across  the  door-frame,  which  they 
thus  well  supported.  Moreover,  their  form  was  usually 
ornamental,  and  in  brass  or  iron  they  contrasted  well 
with  the  colour  of  the  wood  to  which  they  were  fixed. 
Luckily,  there  are  metal-workers  now  of  whom  such 
hinges  may  be  bought,  together  with  lock  escutcheons, 
keys,  ‘ closing  rings,’  and  all  the  proper  fittings  for  a 
cabinet  door.  They  are,  however,  expensive,  and  far 


Book-cases . 


129 


more  expensive  than  they  need  be  if  such  objects  were 
more  in  demand. 

It  is  usual  for  the  lower  shelves  alone  to  be  enclosed 
by  doors,  the  upper  ones  being  left  open  for  easy 
access  to  books.  There  are  several  ways  of  fixing 
these  shelves.  They  may  either  rest  upon  ledges, 
which  are  supported  in  their  turn  by  upright  slips  of 
wood  notched  at  regular  intervals,  or  they  may  slide 
into  grooves  sunk  in  the  frames  which  hold  them,  or 
they  may  be  sustained  by  little  brass  brackets  or 
‘ shelf-rings/  so  arranged  as  to  leave  no  projection 
which  can  interfere  with  books  at  the  corner.  The 
last  is  a modern  invention,  more  remarkable  for  its 
ingenuity  than  for  much  practical  advantage.  When 
grooves  are  sunk,  care  should  be  taken  to  increase  the 
thickness  of  the  side-pieces,  which  otherwise  become 
dangerously  weak.  The  shelves  themselves  should 
never  be  less  than  an  inch  in  thickness  for  a span  of 
four  feet.  A little  leather  valance  should  always  be 
nailed  against  their  outer  edges.  This  not  only  pro- 
tects the  books  from  dust,  but  when  the  leather  is 
scalloped  and  stamped  in  gilt  patterns,  it  adds  con- 
siderably to  the  general  effect. 

For  material,  oak  is  by  far  the  best  wood  to  use 
both  for  appearance  and  durability.  Unpolished 

K 


130 


The  Library . 


mahogany  acquires  a good  colour  with  age.  It  also 
looks  very  well  stained  black  and  covered  with  a thin 
varnish.  The  hinges,  escutcheons,  &c.,  should  then 
be  of  white  metal.  Stained  deal,  as  a cheap  substitute 
for  oak,  may  answer  in  places  where  it  is  not  liable  to 
be  rubbed  or  handled  ; but  for  library  wear  it  cannot 
be  recommended,  since  it  shows  every  scratch  on  its 
surface,  and  soon  becomes  shabby  with  use.  When, 
for  economy’s  sake,  deal  is  employed,  it  is  better  to 
paint  it  in  flatted  colour,  because  this  can  be  renewed 
from  time  to  time,  whereas  wood  once  stained  and 
varnished  must  remain  as  it  is.  Indian  red  and  bluish 
green  are  perhaps  the  best  general  tints  for  wood  when 
used  for  ordinary  domestic  fittings,  but  these  may  be 
effectively  relieved  by  patterns  and  borders  of  white  or 
yellow.  Sometimes  a mere  line  introduced  here  and 
there  to  define  the  construction,  with  an  angle  orna- 
ment (which  may  be  stencilled ) at  the  corners,  will  be 
sufficient.  In  all  chromatic  decoration,  I need  scarcely 
say  that  bright  and  violent  hues  en  masse  should  be 
avoided. 

With  regard  to  the  association  of  tints,  it  would  not 
be  difficult  to  quote  from  Chevreul,  and  others  who 
have  given  scientific  reasons  for  their  various  theories 
■ — who  teach  that  blue  is  best  suited  for  concave  sur- 


Chromatic  Decoration. 


131 

faces,  and  yellow  for  those  which  are  convex — that  the 
primary  colours  should  be  used  on  the  upper  portions 
of  objects,  and  the  secondary  and  tertiary  on  the 
lower/'"  But,  unfortunately,  most  of  these  precepts, 
however  ingeniously  they  may  be  based  on  science,  are 
continually  belied  by  Nature,  which  is,  after  all,  the 
best  and  truest  authority  on  this  subject.  It  has  indeed 
been  argued  that  all  who  consult  her  works  with  love 
and  attention,  will  in  time  appreciate  the  right  value  of 
decorative  colour,  and  that  those  who  have  learnt  in 
that  school  need  learn  in  no  other.  But  this  seems  to 
be  a conclusion  which  is  not  founded  on  practical  expe- 
rience. The  conditions  of  beauty  in  pictorial  art  are 
widely  remote  from  those  which  are  fulfilled  injudicious 
decoration.  An  accurate  knowledge  of  the  proportions 
of  the  human  form  is  doubtless  indispensable  to  the 
education  of  an  architect ; but  it  will  not  of  itself 
enable  him  to  determine  the  best  proportions  for  a 
building.  No  one  is  better  acquainted  with  the  subtle 
charms  of  Natures  colour  than  a good  landscape 
painter  ; but  what  landscape  painter — as  such  — could 

* The  question  whether,  after  all,  yellow  is,  and  whether  green  is  not, 
a primary  hue,  has  been  recently  raised  by  the  ingenious  theories  of 
Mr.  Wm.  Benson  ; and  the  new  light  which  he  has  thrown  on  the  subject 
of  colour  generally  may,  in  some  degrees,  explain  the  difficulties  hitherto 
felt  in  reconciling  scientific  data  with  principles  of  taste  in  chromatic 
decoration. 


132 


The  Library . 


be  trusted  to  design  a paper  for  his  drawing-room  wall  ? 
The  blue  sky  which  is  over  our  heads  and  the  green 
grass  which  springs  beneath  our  feet  would  not,  even 
if  we  could  match  the  delicacy  of  their  hues,  afford  us  a 
strict  and  perfect  precedent  for  the  colour  of  our  floors 
and  ceilings ; nor  are  the  fairest  flowers  which  bloom 
suitable  objects  to  be  copied  literally  for  surface  orna- 
ment. The  art  of  the  decorator  is  to  typify , not  to 
represent,  the  works  of  Nature,  and  it  is  just  the  dif- 
ference between  this  artistic  abstraction  and  pseudo- 
realism which  separates  good  and  noble  design  from 
that  which  is  commonplace  and  bad. 

There  is  usually  a kind  of  frieze  running  round  the 
top  of  a bookcase,  between  the  books  and  the  cornice 
above  them.  This  space  may  well  be  decorated  with 
painted  ornament  in  the  form  of  arabesques,  armorial 
bearings,  and  appropriate  texts.  Any  of  these  would 
be  far  more  pleasant  to  look  at  than  the  cold  and 
formally-moulded  panels  into  which  this  part  is  usually 
divided.  The  pilasters  also  (I  use  the'  generally  ac- 
cepted term),  which  separate  one  compartment  of  the 
bookcase  from  another,  might  be  effectively  treated  in 
the  same  manner. 

It  used  to  be  the  fashion  to  place  a plaster  urn  or 
bust  at  the  top  of  each  bookcase,  to  give  what  up- 


XX. 


Library  Bookcase , 

executed  by  Jackson  <Sr>  Graham  from  a design  by  Charles  L.  Eastlake. 


133 


Book-case  Fittings. 

holsterers  call  a ‘ finish  ’ to  the  room,  U rns  are,  how- 
ever, but  meaningless  things  in  these  clays  of  Christian 
burial ; and  busts  at  so  high  an  elevation,  especially  in 
a small  room,  convey  a very  distorted  notion  of  the 
features  which  they  represent.  Large  china  bowls 
and  vases  may,  however,  be  seen  to  advantage  in  such 
a place,  and  failing  them,  statuettes  may  be  recom- 
mended. Good  plaster  casts,  about  two  feet  high, 
copied  from  the  antique,  may  now  be  procured  for 
five  or  six  shillings  a-piece,  and  such  figures  as  the 
Gladiator,  the  Discobolos,  and  the  Antinous,  would 
probably  form  a much  better  ‘ finish  ’ for  the  top  of  a 
bookcase  than  the  gloomy  urn  which  was  once  in 
vogue. 

Unless  the  cases  are  intended  for  books  of  great 
value  or  for  those  rarely  referred  to,  it  is  hardly  ad- 
visable to  enclose  them  with  glass  doors  ; such  an 
expedient  often  involves  unnecessary  trouble,  and  may 
prevent  ready  access  to  books  when  every  moment  is 
of  value  to  the  reader.  Two  doors  may  be  opened 
at  the  same  time  and  come  in  contact  so  as  to  break 
the  glass,  &c.  After  all,  books  are  required  for  use, 
not  for  ornament,  and  if  handled  carefully,  will  last  for 
more  than  one  generation,  even  without  the  protection 
of  a glass  case. 


134 


The  Library . 


A library  table,  open  under  the  centre,  and  fitted  on 
either  side  with  a set  of  useful  little  drawers,  is,  of 
course,  indispensable  to  the  room.  This  piece  of  fur- 
niture, so  commonly  met  with  in  upholsterers’  shops, 
is  a singularly  unobjectionable  specimen  of  English 
manufacture.  It  has  some  of  the  inevitable  faults  of 
modern  joinery,  viz.,  adhesive  mouldings,  ‘ mitred  ’ 
joints,  &c.  ; but  taken  as  a whole  it  is  not  unpic- 
turesque.  Its  upper  surface  is  usually  covered  with 
leather,  glued  to  the  table-top  all  over,  within  an  inch 
or  so  of  its  edge.  The  colour  of  this  leather  should 
either  match  or  contrast  well  with  that  of  the  curtains 
and  carpets  in  the  room.  Green  is  incomparably  the 
best  suited  to  oak. 

There  is  no  better  kind  of  seat  for  a library  than 
the  ‘ Cromwell  ’ chair,  which  has  already  been  de- 
scribed, and  the  general  form  of  which  dates,  no  doubt, 
from  the  seventeenth  century,  although  it  has  since 
undergone  various  modifications  in  regard  to  detail. 
Old  examples  of  this  chair  are  still  to  be  met  with  in 
farmhouses  and  country  cottages,  and  their  framework, 
at  least,  can  be  copied  at  a trifling  cost  by  any  in- 
telligent country  carpenter. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  it  was  observed 
that  ‘ knick-knacks  ’ were  usually  banished  from  the 


‘ Bric-a-brac ! 


135 


library.  By  that  expression  I meant  to  include  that 
heterogeneous  assemblage  of  modern  rubbish  which, 
under  the  head  of  ‘ Dresden  china  ’ and  various  other 
names,  finds  its  way  into  the  drawing-room  or  boudoir. 
But  my  readers  must  not  therefore  suppose  that  I 
intended  to  discourage  the  collection  of  really  good 
specimens  of  art  manufacture.  The  smallest  example 
of  rare  old  porcelain,  of  ivory  carving,  of  ancient  metal- 
work, of  enamels,  of  Venetian  glass,  of  anything  which 
illustrates  good  design  and  skilful  workmanship,  should 
be  acquired  whenever  possible,  and  treasured  with  the 
greatest  care.  It  is  impossible  to  overrate  the  influence 
which  such  objects  may  have  in  educating  the  eye  to 
appreciate  what  really  constitutes  good  art.  An  Indian 
ginger-jar,  a Flemish  beer-jug,  a Japanese  fan,  may 
each  become  in  turn  a valuable  lesson  in  decorative 
form  and  colour. 

By  and  by  there  will  be  more  to  say  on  this  subject. 
Meanwhile  I would  suggest  to  those  who  possess  such 
things  that  they  should  associate  and  group  them 
together  as  much  as  possible.  A set  of  narrow  shelves 
ranged  at  the  back,  and  forming  part  of  the  dining- 
room sideboard,  would  be  admirable  for  this  purpose, 
and  would  certainly  form  a very  picturesque  feature 
in  the  room.  Failing  this  arrangement  (and  one  may 


136 


The  Library. 


imagine  certain  conventional  prejudices  being  brought 
to  bear  against  it),  perhaps  the  library  would  be  the  next 
best  repository  for  such  objects.  Few  men  care  for  a 
mirror  in  such  a room  ; but,  if  it  is  indispensable  to  the 
mantel-piece,  let  it  be  a long  low  strip  of  glass,  stretch- 
ing across  the  width  of  the  chimney-breast,  about 
eighteen  inches  in  height,  and  divided  into  panels. 
Over  this  may  be  raised  a capital  set  of  narrow  shelves 
— say  six  inches  wide  and  twelve  inches  apart — for 
specimens  of  old  china,  &c.  The  plates  should  be 
placed  upright  on  their  edges,  and  may  be  easily  pre- 
vented from  slipping  off  by  a shallow  groove  sunk  in 
the  thickness  of  each  shelf.  A little  museum  may 
thus  be  formed,  and  remain  a source  of  lasting  pleasure 
to  its  possessors,  seeing  that  ‘ a thing  of  beauty  is  a 
joy  for  ever.’ 

The  most  formidable  obstacle  which  lies  in  the  way 
of  any  attempt  to  reform  the  arts  of  design  in  this 
country,  is  perhaps  the  indifference  with  which  people 
of  even  reputed  taste  are  accustomed  to  regard  the 
products  of  common  industry.  There  is  many  a 
connoisseur  of  pictures  and  of  sculpture,  many  a 
virtuoso  now  haunting  auctions  and  curiosity  shops 
with  a view  to  gratify  his  particular  hobby,  who  would 
be  surprised  if  he  were  asked  to  pass  his  opinion  on 


XXI, 


Mantelpiece  Shelves , 

executed  by  Jackson  6°  Graham  from  a design  by  Charles  L.  Eastlake. 


Inconsistency  of  Modern  Taste . 


137 


the  merits  of  a door-knocker  or  set  of  fire-irons.  By 
such  people— and  they  represent  a very  numerous 
class — art  can  only  be  valued  as  an  end  in  itself,  and 
not  as  the  means  to  an  end.  The  sense  of  pleasure, 
which  in  civilised  life  we  derive  from  fair  forms  and 
colour,  is  to  a great  extent  instinctive  ; but  in  so  far  as 
it  is  the  result  of  education,  it  seems  absurd  to  limit 
its  range  of  enjoyment  to  this  or  that  field  of  human 
labour.  What  should  we  think  of  a musical  amateur 
who,  while  fully  able  to  appreciate  the  performance 
of  a Joachim,  could  listen  with  indifference  to  the 
machine-made  melodies  of  a grinding  organ,  or  hear 
with  approval  a pianoforte  played  out  of  time  and 
tune  ? Yet  this  is  exactly  what  people  do  who  praise 
the  works  of  Leighton  and  Millais  at  the  Royal 
Academy  Exhibition,  and  go  straightway  off  to  the 
shops  to  buy  and  fill  their  houses  with  articles  of 
manufacture  which  are  distinguished  not  only  by  an 
absence  of  real  beauty,  but  by  the  presence  of  much 
definite  ugliness. 

Even  where  a tolerable  taste  for  upholstery  exists, 
it  does  not  descend  to  details.  We  have  come  to 
take  the  form  and  fashion  of  some  minor  objects  of 
ordinary  use  upon  trust,  or  rather  we  have  ceased  to 
associate  them  with  the  interests  of  art  altogether. 


138 


The  Library . 


This  state  of  things,  no  doubt,  is  due  to  a popular 
conviction  that  in  the  case  of  certain  practical  ap- 
pliances it  would  be  impossible  to  unite  convenience 
with  anything  like  artistic  design  ; that  any  attempt  to 
do  so  would  be  equally  fatal  to  both,  and  that  the 
carpenter  and  metal-worker  must  know,  better  than  we 
can  teach  them,  the  conditions  and  requirements  of 
their  trades.*  But  all  this  is  surely  erroneous.  So 
far  from  good  design  being  under  any  circumstances 
incompatible  with  strong  and  sturdy  service,  it  is  only 
in  bad  design  that  use  is  not  kept  in  view  as  the  first 
and  guiding  principle  in  manufacture.  The  artizans’ 
work  of  a former  age  is  interesting  chiefly  because  it 
is  pre-eminently  practical  work.  Our  own  mechanics’ 
work  becomes  mean  chiefly  when  its  ultimate  object  is 
lost  sight  of  in  the  endeavour  to  get  things  up  cheaply, 
or  give  them  an  appearance  which  belies  their  purpose. 

This  is  especially  the  case  with  modern  ironmongery 
and  common  metal  work.  Let  us  take  the  familiar 
instance  of  an  ordinary  house  door,  and  note  how  the 
hinges  are  kept  carefully  out  of  sight,  as  if  they  were 
something  to  be  ashamed  of.  It  is  almost  impossible 

* I allude  here,  of  course,  to  modern  handicraft.  There  was  a time 
when  every  workman  was  to  some  extent  an  artist,  and  might  be  safely 
trusted  with  the  details  of  any  design  which  he  was  called  upon  to 
execute. 


Door-bolts  and  Hinges . 


139 


to  construct  such  hinges  as  these  which  shall  be  of 
sufficient  strength  to  support  a door  of  any  important 
weight.  Hence  the  not  unfrequent  expense  and  dis- 
comfort occasioned  by  doors  drooping  at  the  end 
furthest  from  the  hinge.  The  carpenter  is  called  in, 
perhaps  to  shift  the  lock  ‘ catch/  or  to  shave  the  lower 
edge  of  the  door.  This,  of  course,  must  leave  a cor- 
responding gap  above.  In  course  of  time  the  hinge  is 
partially  torn  from  its  screw  holes,  and  a further  outlay 
required.  Now  the  old  hinges  were  not  ‘ half  butts/ 
as  our  ordinary  ones  are  called,  but  stout  straps  of  iron, 
which,  more  or  less  decorated,  stretched  across  the  sur- 
face of  the  door  on  either  side,  and  being  bolted 
through  the  thickness,  gave  it  ample  support.  Very 
beautiful  examples  of  this  hinge  may  still  be  seen  on 
old  church  doors,  and  even  in  modern  farm-buildings  the 
type  is  still  preserved,  though  in  a ruder  way.  The 
ancient  locks  too,  instead  of  being  concealed  and  let 
into  the  door  by  cutting  away,  and  thus  weakening  the 
lock  rail  as  in  the  modern  fashion,  were  boldly  attached 
to  its  outer  surface,  and  were  often,  as  well  as  the  keys 
which  belonged  to  them,  objects  of  real  art  in  their 
way.  The  bolts  and  ‘ spindle’  handles  of  the  ordinary 
modern  door  are  always  getting  out  of  order,  besides 
being  generally  ill-designed.  Bolts  should  not  be  let 


140 


The  Library. 


into  the  thickness  of  a door,  but  appear  in  their  proper 
place  on  its  surface.  Some  of  the  ‘ art  metal-workers  ’ 
are  giving  their  attention  to  the  manufacture  of  ‘ door 
furniture/  which  without  being  Gothic  or  ecclesiastical 
in  appearance,  is  treated  after  an  artistic  fashion.  The 


annexed  cuts  represent  brass  ‘ finger  plates/  manu- 
factured by  Messrs.  Benham  & Froud.  They  are  of 
sheet  metal,  pierced  and  engraved  in  patterns. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  branch  of  English  trade  more 
prolific  in  design  than  that  of  the  furnishing  iron- 
monger. The  variety  of  patterns  which  Birmingham 
and  other  manufacturing  districts  supply  in  the  way  of 


Modern  Ironmongery.  14 1 

stoves,  fenders,  fire-irons,  gas  pendants,  moderator 
lamps,  coal-scuttles,  umbrella-stands,  &c.,  &c.,  is  truly 
astonishing.  In  a large  establishment  for  the  sale  of 
such  goods  the  eye  is  positively  bewildered  by  a mul- 
titude of  objects,  most  of  them  extravagant  in  style, 
and  possessing  that  ephemeral  kind  of  attractiveness 
which  is  the  result  of  polish  and  lacquer.  One  may 
see  people  in  such  shops  perplexed  and  wearied  with 
inspecting  one  article  after  another,  as  the  shopman 
drones  out  his  oft-repeated  remarks  that  this  is  ‘ ele- 
gant,’ that  ‘very  handsome,’  the  other  ‘just  the  thing 
for  a drawing-room,’  and  so  forth. 

Although  the  style  of  drawing-room  fenders,  as  I have 
mentioned,  is  improving,  those  intended  for  the  library 
and  dining-room  are  often  coarse  and  clumsy  in  de- 
sign. Manufacturers  will  persist  in  decorating  them 
with  a species  of  cast-iron  ornament,  which  looks  like 
a bad  imitation  of  rococo  carved  work.  Almost  all 
cast-iron  ornament  (excepting  the  delicate  patterns  in 
very  low  relief,  such  as  one  sometimes  sees  on  an  old 
Sussex  stove)  is  hopelessly  ugly.  The  crisp  leafy 
decoration,  and  vigorous  scrolls  of  ancient  iron-work, 
were  produced  by  the  hammer  and  pliers.  Bolts, 
straps,  nails,  and  rivets,  the  proper  and  legitimate 
means  of  connecting  the  several  parts,  were  never  con- 


142 


The  Library. 


cealed,  but  were  introduced  and  enriched  in  such  a 
manner  as  not  only  to  serve  a practical  purpose,  but  to 
become  decorative  features  in  themselves. 


By  way  of  contrast  to  the  unworkmanlike  spirit  of 
ordinary  manufacture,  I give  two  sketches  of  fenders 
for  a dining-room  and  library  designed  by  Mr.  A.  W. 
Blomfield.  They  are  exceedingly  simple  in  construc- 
tion, and  fully  answer  the  purpose  for  which  (as  its 


Fenders . 143 


very  name  signifies)  a fender  is  intended,  namely,  to 
protect  dresses,  &c.,  from  the  chance  of  becoming 
ignited  by  close  contact  with  the  fire — -an  accident, 


unfortunately,  of  too  frequent  occurrence  while  the 
dangerous  and  ungraceful  crinoline  was  in  fashion. 

The  next  illustration  is  that  of  a charcoal  brazier,  in 
the  possession  of  Lord  Mount  Edgcumbe  at  Cothele. 
It  is  of  modern  Spanish  manufacture,  and  was  purchased 
at  the  International  Exhibition  of  1862.  When  we 
compare  such  work  as  this  with  the  tawdry  decoration 


144 


The  Library . 


and  unpicturesque  forms  which  objects  of  similar  use 
in  England  are  allowed  to  assume,  it  is  impossible  to 
help  regretting  that  the  old  traditions  of  design  in  our 
own  metal  work,  based  as  they  were  upon  propriety 
and  convenience  of  form,  have  been  of  late  years  so 


much  neglected.  This  Spanish  brazier  is  worthy  of 
the  sixteenth  century,  and  is  probably  identical  in 
general  form  with  the  ‘ chafing-dishes  ’ of  that  period. 
It  is  admirably  adapted  for  its  purpose,  and  the 
manufacturer  has  kept  that  steadily  in  view,  as  well  as 
the  nature  of  the  material  with  which  he  has  had  to 
deal — an  essential  condition  of  all  good  design. 


Character  of  Old  Metal-work. 


145 


I remember  seeing  in  the  Cathedral  of  Orvieto  an 
iron  gate  of  exquisite  workmanship,  which,  being  very 
heavy,  required  the  support  of  what  is  called  a stay- 
bar,  or  rod  running  in  a diagonal  direction  from  the 
hinge-post  to  the  top  rail.  A similar  contrivance  may 
be  seen  in  our  own  wooden  field-gates.  Well,  the  old 
Italian  smith,  though  quite  an  artist  in  his  way,  sensibly 
bore  in  mind  the  real  purpose  of  his  stay-bar,  and  in- 
stead of  twisting  a serpent  or  a mermaid  about  it,  as  a 
modern  designer  would  have  been  likely  to  do,  he  kept 
his  rod  stout  and  round,  except  just  at  one  point,  where, 
in  order  to  express  precisely  the  sort  of  work  it  had  to 
do,  he  fashioned  the  iron  into  the  quaint  likeness  of  a 
human  hand  nervously  clutching  at  and  holding  up  the 
gate  below.  Now,  if  we  compare  the  apt  ingenuity  of 
this  notion  with  the  stupid  wreaths  and  arrow-heads 
and  lictors’  fasces  which  one  sees  introduced  in  the 
design  of  our  iron  railings,  we  shall,  I think,  see  one 
reason  why  the  spirit  of  old  handicraft  was  superior  to 
the  pedantry  and  weakness  of  modern  workmanship. 

Among  familiar  objects  of  household  use,  I do  not 
know  a more  contemptible  instance  of  perverted  taste 
than  the  ordinary  tea  or  coffee-urn  of  an  English  break- 
fast-table. It  is  generally  a debased  copy  from  some 
antique  base,  the  original  being  executed  in  marble  or 

L 


The  Library . 


146 

earthenware,  and  therefore  quite  unfit  for  reproduction 
in  metal.  In  order  to  add  to  its  attractions,  the  lid 
and  handles  are  probably  decorated  a la  Pompadour , 
and,  to  complete  the  absurdity,  a thoroughly  modern 
tap  is  inserted  in  the  bowl.  What  is,  after  all,  the 
use  of  a breakfast  urn  ? If  it  is  to  contain  hot  water, 
a good  swing-kettle  with  a spirit-lamp  underneath  is 
far  more  useful  ; if  it  is  intended  to  hold  tea  or 
coffee,  surely  a tea  or  coffee-pot  is  a better  and  simpler 
vessel  for  the  purpose.  The  same  sort  of  pseudo- 
classicism may  be  noticed  in  the  design  of  ordinary 
gaseliers  and  moderator  lamps.  The  urn  type  not 
unfrequently  reappears  in  them,  combined  with  ex- 
traordinary versions  of  the  inevitable  acanthus-leaf,  as 
if  in  the  whole  range  of  vegetable  life  this  was  the  only 
kind  of  foliage  worth  imitating.  There  is  a lumpy 
unmetallic  look  about  the  ornament,  which  no  amount 
of  elaboration  can  relieve.  The  reason  of  this  is 
that  it  has  been  either  cast  in  separate  pieces  and 
then  chased  up,  or  (in  the  case  of  brass)  stamped  out 
of  the  thinnest  possible  metal  (often  not  thicker  than 
a piece  of  paper),  and  then  brazed  together  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  look  like  a solid  mass.  Now,  there  can 
be  no  objection  to  a moderate  thinness  of  substance  in 
the  execution  of  metallic  ornament.  Indeed  it  is,  as 


Character  of  Old  Metal-work . 147 

I have  said,  one  of  the  legitimate  conditions  to  be  ob- 
served in  the  artistic  treatment  of  this  material  ; but 


then,  one  ought  to  be  able  to  perceive  at  once  that  it  is 
thin,  and  the  ornamental  portions  should  be  designed 


L 2 


148 


The  Library . 


consistently  with  that  fact.  To  invest  metal-work 
with  forms  which  might  be  as  well  executed  in  wood 
or  stone,  is  to  lose  sight  of  the  first  principle  of  good 
design. 

Gas  fittings  are  of  comparatively  recent  origin,  and 
belong  to  those  requirements  of  modern  life  with  which 
our  forefathers  managed  to  dispense.  There  is,  how- 


ever, no  reason  why  such  subjects  should  be  of  the 
commonplace  and  stereotyped  forms  usually  adopted 
in  ordinary  dwelling-houses.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  it  necessary  that  they  should  assume  the  ecclesiastical 
shapes  generally  found  in  the  art  metal-workers  cata- 
logue. The  annexed  woodcuts  illustrate  a ‘ Sconce  ’ 
light  and  three  different  kinds  of  gas-bracket  adapted 


Gas-brackets . 


149 


for  domestic  use,  and  manufactured  by  Messrs.  Benham 
and  Froud,  who  have  lately  turned  their  attention  to 
this  special  department  of  their  art. 

Specimens  of  work  executed  by  the 
same  firm  are  represented  on  the  last 
pages  of  this  chapter,  viz.  two  chim- 
neypiece  spill-vases,  of  brass,  decor- 
ated with  engraved  and  pierced  orna- 
ment. The  bell-lever  on  page  155  is 
also  made  by  the  same  firm. 

Public  taste  is  often  very  perverse 
and  inconsistent  as  to  the  choice 
and  appliance  of  material  and  ornament.  For  in- 
stance, there  was,  not  many  years  ago,  a great  demand 

for  bronze  candlesticks, 
whereas  brass  is  a far 
more  brilliant  material 
for  the  purpose,  and  is 
capable  of  being  treated 
with  greater  richness  of 
form  and  surface-decora- 
tion. But  on  fire-stoves  and  grates,  where  one  would 
think  lustre  and  delicacy  out  of  place,  the  manufac- 
turers continue  to  lavish  gilding  and  polished  steel  to 
such  an  extent,  that  one  is  almost  surprised  at  the 


The  Lib r ary. 


150 


housemaid’s  daring  to  light  a fire  upstairs  at  all. 
Of  course  the  fire-irons  are  made  to  match,  and  it 
is  a positive  fact  that  in  some  houses  each  drawing- 
room fireplace  has  two  pokers — a humble  one  for 
actual  use,  and  the  other,  of  burnished  steel,  kept 
simply  to  look  at ! It  is  needless  to  say,  that  while 
such  absurd  practices  as  these  continue,  we  can  hardly 
hope  for  a healthy  and  vigorous  development  of  what 
may  be  called  household  art.  If  fire-irons  are  used 
at  all,  they  should  be  made  of  a material  which  justi- 
fies their  real  purpose.  The  upper  portions  may  be 
of  polished  steel,  though  even  this  seems  a needless  re- 
finement ; but  the  rest  should  be  of  iron,  and  as  simple 
as  possible  in  design.  ‘ Berlin  black’  is  the  best  sort 
of  lacquer  for  stoves  and  fenders,  if  in  summer-time 
they  are  required  to  look  fresh  and  new.  ‘ Blacklead  ’ 
is  a modern  abomination,  which  should  be  very  spar- 
ingly used.  With  regard  to  ornament,  it  should  be 
borne  in  mind  that  incised  patterns,  however  rudely 
executed,  are  much  more  effective  than  heavy  mould- 
ings. The  last  we  feel  almost  instinctively  to  be  out 
of  place  in  solid  metal-work.  Of  course,  in  the  design 
of  small  objects  executed  in  brass  and  the  more  pre- 
cious metals,  the  case  is  different,  for  they  are  seen 
nearer  the  eye,  and  are  for  the  most  part  made  by 


Grates  and  Fire-irons . 


151 

hand  from  thin  plates  of  the  material  used ; but  a com- 
plexity of  cast  mouldings  is  the  most  uninteresting 
mode  of  decoration  which  could  be  devised  for  grates 
and  fenders. 


Italian  ironwork  of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  cen- 
turies was  often  decorated  with  incised  and  punctured 
patterns.  The  town  of  Siena  abounds  in  instances  of 
this  mode  of  decoration,  which  may  be  still  seen  on  the 
rings,  bolts,  and  torch-brackets  of  ordinary  domestic 
use.  The  well-known  examples  in  the  streets  of 
Florence  are  later  in  date  and  more  florid  in  execution, 


152 


The  Library. 


though  still  very  beautiful.  But  the  glories  of  ancient 
iron  and  bronze- work  are  not  confined  to  Italy.  In 
Nuremberg,  during  the  early  Renaissance  period,  this 
art  was  practised  by  men  who,  like  Peter  Vischer, 
have  left  lasting  monuments  of  their  skill  in  the  shape 
of  fountains,  shrines,  &c.  Indeed,  much  may  be  learnt 
at  home  if  we  examine  with  attention  the  treasures  of 
metallic  art  which  such  churches  as  our  own  West- 
minster Abbey,  and  St.  Georges  Chapel,  Windsor, 
contain — to  say  nothing  of  humbler  specimens — locks, 
hinges,  grilles,  &c.,  which  may  be  met  with  in  almost 
every  old  town  of  England. 

As  an  example  of  the  ingenuity  and  spirit  with 
which  the  design  of  ancient  metal-work  was  formerly 
treated  in  the  manufacture  of  common  articles  of  house- 
hold use,  I give  an  illustration  of  a curious  iron  candle- 
stick in  the  possession  of  Professor  Brewer.  It  was 
purchased  in  Switzerland,  and  was  probably  made  in 
that  country.  In  mode  of  construction  it  is  most  work- 
manlike, while  the  details  display  great  fertility  of  in- 
vention. The  ornamental  portions  are  composed  of 
small  bars  of  iron  beaten  out  flat  at  one  end,  and  drawn 
to  a point  at  the  other.  The  pointed  ends  are  twisted 
into  a spiral  form,  and  the  flat  ends  are  split  into  two 
straps  shaped  like  volutes,  the  whole  being  put  together 


Candlesticks . 


153 


with  iron  pins.  This  mode  of  treating  ironwork  is 
exceedingly  suggestive,  and  so  simple  in  character  that 
it  might  be  easily  adopted  by  any  village  blacksmith. 
The  candlestick  stands  about  eighteen  inches  high.  Its 
date  can  hardly  be  identified,  but  it  is  probably  not 
later  than  the  seventeenth  century.  At  that  period, 
no  doubt,  it  answered  its  purpose  very  well ; and 
although  the  reproduction  of  such  an  article  now,  in  its 
original  form,  cannot  be  recommended  from  a practical 
point  of  view,  there  are  in  modern  use  many  objects 
of  decorative  metal-work,  which  might  be  successfully 
treated  with  the  same  spirit  of  design,  if  ever  a time 
should  arrive  when  the  British  workman  becomes  less 
of  a machine  and  more  of  an  artist,  in  the  exercise  of 
his  handicraft. 

It  is,  in  fact,  with  the  products  of  modern  manufac- 
ture that  we  have  now  chiefly  to  deal  ; and  here  I can- 
not help  expressing  regret  that,  owing  to  the  apathy 
of  the  public,  an  excellent  step  towards  reform  in  this 
department  of  art  has  fallen  so  short  of  what  was 
expected  from  it  some  few  years  ago. 

Messrs.  Hardman  and  Messrs.  Hart  were,  I believe, 
among  the  first  who  endeavoured  to  revive  the  prin- 
ciples of  good  design  in  ecclesiastical  metal-work  and 
ironmongery — an  example  which  has  since  been 


i54 


The  Library. 


followed  by  Messrs.  Benham  and  Froud,  and  other 
manufacturers,  who  have  identified  themselves  with  the 
sprdalite  of  domestic  metal-work.  The  goods  thus  pro- 
duced are  infinitely  superior  to  what  is  sold  in  the 
ordinary  way  of  trade.  From  the  most  elaborate  church- 
furniture  down  to  the  simplest  article  of  domestic  use, 
the  work  is  solid  and  well  executed.  Instead  of  the 
vulgar  cast-iron  fenders  and  stove  fittings  which  are 
usually  supplied  for  the  domestic  hearth,  we  have  metal 


which  has  been  wrought  or  punched  into  its  legitimate 
form.  The  brass  candlesticks  and  corona  lamps,  the 
‘ closing-rings  ’ and  finger-plates,  many  of  them  treated 
with  great  elegance  of  design,  are  stoutly  made  and 
duly  polished  by  machinery  ; whereas  the  meretricious 
sheen  which  we  see  on  ordinary  ware  is  the  result  of 
nothing  but  a coloured  lacquer,  which  conceals  the 
natural  hue  of  the  brass  beneath  it. 


Mediceval  Metal-work. 


*55 


It  may  be  wondered  why,  with  establishments  of 
this  kind  in  London,  the  British  public  go  on  buying 
such  trashy  articles  as  are  usually  offered  at  the  general 
ironmongers’ — the  sprawling  chandeliers,  the  photo- 
graphic coal-boxes,  and  Louis  Quinze  clocks  in  ormolu, 
which  once  passed  muster  as  ‘ tasteful.’  But  here  a 
practical  question  presents  itself.  It  is  a choice  not 
only  between  good  or  bad  taste,  but  between  bad  taste 
which  is  cheap  and  good  taste  which  is  certainly  some- 
what dear.  The  manufacturers  state  they  require  a 
larger  demand  before  they  can  lower  their  prices.  The 
public  say  they  must  have  more  reasonable  prices 
before  they  can  afford  to  buy. 

Meanwhile,  an  art  from  which  much  was  expected 
at  its  late  revival  is  not  encouraged  to  the  extent  which 
it  deserves.  The  examples  which  are 
produced  for  ‘ stock  ’ year  by  year  rarely 
improve  in  design.  People  have  come 
to  regard  this  modern  dinanderie  as  some- 
thing only  fit  for  churches,  or  to  suit  the 
taste  of  young  ladies  whose  ecclesiastical 
sentiment  takes  an  aesthetic  form.  But, 
in  point  of  fact,  it  ought  to  find  its  way 
into  every  household,  and  replace  the  absurdities  which 
we  have  so  long  tolerated. 


The  Drawing-room . 


156 


Chapter  VI. 

THE  DRA  WING-ROOM. 

N the  field  of  taste,  whether  social  or  sesthetical, 
it  is  always  much  easier  to  point  out  paths 
which  should  be  avoided  than  to  indicate 
the  road  which  leads  to  excellence.  And  although, 
while  endeavouring  to  define  the  errors  of  bad  art  in 
its  application  to  manufacture,  it  is  easy  to  explain 
those  principles  which  should  guide  the  reader  in  ap- 
preciating good  and  sound  design,  there  is  some  diffi- 
culty in  illustrating  such  principles  by  familiar  example. 
Thus,  with  regard  to  furniture,  it  was  useless  to  di- 
rect attention  to  any  one  particular  style  of  modern 
workmanship,  while  all  styles  were  equally  open  to  ob- 
jection. The  time,  however,  has  at  length  come  when 
more  than  one  upholsterer  has  taken  up  the  subject  in 
an  artistic  spirit,  and,  instead  of  entrusting  the  design 
of  his  chairs  and  tables  to  the  caprice  of  ignorant 
mechanics,  whose  notions  of  beauty  are  generally  based 
on  conventional  ugliness,  in  remodelling  his  own  taste 


False  notions  of  Elegance. 


157 


by  the  study  of  ancient  examples,  or  seeking  the  as- 
sistance of  those  who  have  received  an  art-education. 

Meanwhile  there  will  be  a large  majority  of  the 
public  who  cannot  afford  to  buy  furniture  of  the  best 
class,  but  who  are  obliged  to  take  whatever  articles 
may  be  ‘in  fashion’  at  ordinary  shops.  Now  there 
are  degrees  of  excellence  in  all  things,  and  as  it  is 
just  possible  some  of  these  articles  may  be  less  ob- 
jectionable than  the  rest,  I venture  to  offer  a few  hints 
which  may  guide  the  inexperienced  purchaser  in 
choosing. 

In  the  first  place,  never  attach  the  least  importance 
to  any  recommendation  which  (at  such  establishments) 
the  shopman  may  make  on  the  score  of  taste.  If  he 
says  that  one  form  of  chair  is  stronger  than  another 
form,  or  that  the  covering  of  one  sofa  will  wear  better 
than  that  which  is  used  for  another,  you  may  believe 
him,  because  on  that  point  he  can  judge,  and  it  is  to 
his  interest  that  you  should  be  correctly  informed  so 
far.  But  on  the  subject  of  taste  his  opinion  is  not 
likely  to  be  worth  more,  but  rather  less,  than  that  of 
his  customers,  for  the  plain  reason  that  the  nature  of 
his  occupation  can  have  left  him  little  time  to  form  a 
taste  at  all.  He  neither  made  the  furniture  in  his  shop 
nor  superintended  its  design.  His  business  is  simply 


The  Drawivg-room . 


158 

to  sell  it,  and  it  will  generally  be  found  that  his  notions 
of  beauty  are  kept  subservient  to  this  object.  In 
other  words,  he  will  praise  each  article  in  turn,  exactly 
as  he  considers  your  attention  is  attracted  to  it  with  a 
view  to  purchase.  If  he  has  any  guiding  principles  of 
selection,  they  are  chiefly  based  on  two  considera- 
tions— viz.  the  relative  price  of  his  goods,  and  the 
social  position  or  wealth  of  those  customers  in  whose 
eyes  they  find  favour. 

The  public  are  frequently  misled  by  terms  of  appro- 
bation now  commonly  used  by  shopmen  in  a sense 
widely  remote  from  their  original  significance.  Thus, 
the  word  ‘ handsome  ’ has  come  to  mean  something 
which  is  generally  showy,  often  ponderous,  and  almost 
always  encumbered  with  superfluous  ornament ; the 
word  ‘ elegant’  is  applied  to  any  object  which  is  curved 
in  form  (no  matter  in  what  direction,  or  with  what 
effect).  If  it  succeeds  in  conveying  a false  idea  of  its 
purpose,  and  possesses  the  additional  advantage  of 
being  unlike  anything  that  we  have  ever  seen  before, 
it  is  not  only  ‘elegant’  but  ‘unique.’  If  an  article 
is  of  simple  and  good  design,  answering  its  purpose 
without  ostentatious  display  of  ornament,  and  pretend- 
ing to  be  neither  more  nor  less  than  it  is,  the  ordinary 
furniture  salesmen  only  call  it  ‘ neat.’  I will  not  go 


Sofa  at  Knole . 


159 


so  far  as  to  recommend  every  ‘ neat  ’ article  of  house- 
hold use  which  may  be  displayed  for  sale,  but  I 
strongly  advise  my  readers  to  refrain  from  buying 
any  article  of  art-manufacture  which  is  ‘ handsome,’ 

‘ elegant,’  or  ‘ unique,’  in  commercial  slang  : it  is  sure 
to  be  bad  art. 

The  best  and  most  picturesque  furniture  of  all  ages 
has  been  simple  in  general  form.  It  may  have  been 
enriched  by  complex  details  of  carved-work  or  inlay, 
but  its  main  outlay  was  always  chaste  and  sober  in 
design,  never  running  into  extravagant  contour  or  un- 
necessary curves.  Anyone  who  will  take  the  trouble 
to  examine  the  few  specimens  of  Egyptian  furniture 
which  are  to  be  seen  in  the  British  Museum,  the 
illustrations  of  ancient  Greek  and  Roman  art  which 
have  been  published,  or  the  mediaeval  examples  which 
still  exist  in  many  an  old  sacristy  abroad,  and  in  most 
of  our  English  country  mansions,  cannot  fail  to  be 
struck  with  two  qualities  which  distinguish  this  early 
handiwork  from  our  own,  viz.  solidity  and  simplicity  of 
construction. 

The  sofa  at  Knole,  which  dates  from  the  same  period 
as  the  chair  which  I have  already  described,  is  an  ex- 
ample of  thoroughly  good  design  in  its  class.  In  the 
first  place,  its  general  shape  is  rectangular,  clearly  indi- 


i6o 


The  Drawing-room. 


eating  the  construction  of  its  wooden  framework,  the 
joints  of  which  are  properly  ‘ tenoned  ’ and  pinned 
together  in  such  a manner  as  to  ensure  its  constant 
stability.  The  back  is  formed  like  that  of  the  chair, 
with  a horizontal  rail  only  at  its  upper  edge,  but  receives 
additional  strength  from  the  second  rail,  which  is 
introduced  at  the  back  of  the  seat.  By  means  of  an 
iron  rack  attached  to  each  end,  the  sides  can  be  raised 
or  lowered  to  any  angle,  thus  enabling  the  sofa  to  be 
used  as  a couch  or  a settee,  at  pleasure.  These  move- 
able  sides,  like  the  back,  are  stuffed  with  feathers, 
while  the  seat  itself  is  provided  with  two  ample 
cushions  of  the  same  material.  A more  luxurious 
form  of  couch — to  say  nothing  of  the  richness  and  ele- 
gance of  its  external  covering — could  hardly  have  been 
devised,  and  yet  there  is  not  a single  curve  in  its  outline. 
After  250  years  of  use,  this  sofa  is  still  comfortable , 
and,  with  the  exception  that  the  velvet  and  trimmings 
are  necessarily  faded  with  age,  remains  in  excellent 
preservation.  It  was  introduced  by  Mr.  Marcus  Stone 
in  his  very  clever  picture  of  the  ‘ Stolen  Keys,’  which 
some  of  my  readers  may  remember  at  the  Royal 
Academy  Exhibition.  Can  we  suppose  that  in  the 
year  of  Grace  2100  any  English  artist  of  taste  will  be 
found  willing  to  paint  the  ‘ elegant  ’ fauteuils  with 


XXIII. 


/ //  '/V 


Ancient  Sofa , 

in  the  Long  Gallery,  Knole. 


Drawing-room  Chairs. 


161 


which  some  English  ladies  still  furnish  their  drawing- 
rooms ? And  if  such  a painter  is  forthcoming,  where 
will  he  find  such  an  object  to  depict  ? Possibly  in 
some  ‘Chamber  of  Horrors’  which  may  be  devised 
at  the  South  Kensington  Museum  to  illustrate  the 
progress  of  bad  taste  in  this  century,  but  rarely  in  any 
private  house.  It  is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that  fifty 
years  hence  most  of  our  early  ‘ Victorian  ’ upholstery 
will  have  fallen  into  useless  lumber,  only  fit  to  be  burnt 
for  firewood. 

There  is  a notion  very  prevalent  among  people  who 
have  given  themselves  but  little  trouble  to  think  at  all 
on  the  matter,  that  to  ensure  grace  in  furniture,  it  must 
be  made  in  a flimsy  and  fragile  manner.  Thus  we 
constantly  hear  the  expression  ‘ light  and  elegant  ’ ap- 
plied to  a set  of  drawing-room  chairs  which  look  as  if 
they  must  sink  beneath  the  weight  of  the  first  middle- 
aged  gentleman  who  used  them.  Now,  lightness  and 
elegance  are  agreeable  qualities  in  their  way,  and, 
under  certain  conditions  of  design,  should  be  aimed 
at.  For  instance,  the  treatment  of  mere  surface  orna- 
ment, such  as  painted  arabesques,  &c,,  or  of  details 
purely  decorative  and  useless,  as  the  filagree  gold  of  a 
lady’s  earring,  may  well  be  of  this  character ; but  ob- 
jects intended  for  real  and  daily  service,  such  as  a table 


M 


The  Drawing-room. 


162 


which  has  to  bear  the  weight  of  heavy  books  or  dishes, 
or  a sofa  on  which  we  may  recline  at  full  length,  ought 
not  to  look  light  and  elegant,  but  strong  and  comely  ; 
for  comeliness,  whether  in  nature  or  art,  is  by  no  means 
incompatible  with  strength.  The  Roman  gladiator 
had  a grace  of  his  own,  but  it  was  not  the  grace  of 
Antinous.  Our  modern  furniture  is  essentially  effemi- 
nate in  form.  How  often  do  we  see  in  fashionable 
drawing-rooms  a type  of  couch  which  seems  to  be  com- 
posed of  nothing  but  cushions  ! It  is  really  supported 
by  a framework  of  wood  or  iron,  but  this  internal 
structure  is  carefully  concealed  by  the  stuffing  and 
material  with  which  the  whole  is  covered.  I do  not 
wish  to  be  ungallant  in  my  remarks,  but  I fear  there  is 
a large  class  of  young  ladies  who  look  upon  this  sort  of 
furniture  as  ‘elegant/  Now,  if  elegance  means  nothing 
more  than  a milliner’s  idea  of  the  beautiful,  which 
changes  every  season— so  that  a bonnet  which  is  pro- 
nounced ‘lovely’  in  1877  becomes  a ‘ fright’  in  1878 — - 
then  no  doubt  this  sofa,  as  well  as  a score  of  other 
articles  of  modern  manufacture  which  I could  mention, 
is  elegant  indeed.  But,  if  elegance  has  anything  in 
common  with  real  beauty— beauty  which  can  be  esti- 
mated by  a fixed  and  lasting  standard— then  I venture 
to  submit  that  this  eccentric  combination  of  bad  car- 


Sofas . 


163 

pentry  and  bloated  pillows  is  very  ^elegant,  and,  in 
fact,  a piece  of  ugliness  which  we  ought  not  to  tolerate 
in  our  houses. 

Most  of  us,  who  know  anything  of  country  life,  have 
seen  the  common  wooden  settle  which  forms  so  com- 
fortable and  snug-looking  a seat  by  rustic  hearths.  No 
artist  who  ever  studied  the  interior  of  a cottage  would 
hesitate  to  introduce  so  picturesque  an  object  in  his 
sketch.  But  imagine  such  a sofa  as  I have  described, 
in  a view  of  the  most  magnificent  and  chastely-decorated 
chamber  in  Europe,  and  it  would  at  once  appear  com- 
monplace and  uninteresting.  Perhaps  my  readers  may 
feel  inclined  to  urge  that  a great  deal  of  the  interest 
with  which  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  old  rustic 
furniture  is  due  to  its  age  and  dilapidation.  It  maybe 
so ; but  can  we  expect  or  believe  that  a modern  chair 
or  couch,  as  they  were  lately  manufactured,  will  ever, 
by  increasing  years,  attain  the  dignified  appearance  of 
Tudor  or  Jacobean  furniture  ? The  truth  is  that  such 
household  gods  become  dingy  under  our  very  eyes, 
and  the  very  best  of  them  will  not  survive  the  present 
generation. 

Now  it  is  by  no  means  advisable  that  we  should  fit 
up  our  drawing-rooms  with  cottage  settles,  or  adopt 
any  sort  of  furniture  which  is  not  perfectly  consistent 


M 2 


164 


The  Drawing-room. 


with  ordinary  notions,  of  comfort  and  convenience.  If 
our  social  habits  differ  from  those  of  our  forefathers, 
the  fittings  of  our  rooms  must  follow  suit.  But,  in 
point  of  fact,  there  is  a great  deal  of  ignorant  prejudice 
on  these  points.  We  all  know,  for  instance,  that  the 
old  low-seated  chair,  with  its  high  padded  back  (com- 
monly called  Elizabethan),  is  considered  awkward  and 
uncomfortable,  simply  because  its  proportions  are 
strange  to  us.  We  know,  too,  that  the  ‘occasional’ 
chair  of  modern  drawing-rooms,  with  a moulded  bar, 
and  perhaps  a knot  of  carving,  which  chafes  our 
shoulder  blades  as  we  lean  back  upon  it,  is  looked  on 
as  an  article  of  refined  luxury.  As  to  the  comparative 
merit  of  their  respective  designs,  from  an  artistic  point 
of  view,  there  can  be  but  little  question  ; but  if  any  of 
my  readers  have  any  doubt  which  is  the  more  comfort- 
able, I would  strongly  advise  them  to  try  each,  after  a 
fatiguing  walk.  Perhaps  they  will  find  that  the  art  of 
chair-making  has  not  improved  to  such  an  extent  as 
they  imagine  since  the  days  of  good  Queen  Bess.  But, 
however  much  opinion  may  vary  on  this  point,  one 
thing  remains  certain — viz.,  that  beauty  of  form  may 
be  perfectly  compatible  with  strength  of  material,  and 
that  good  design  can  accommodate  itself  to  the  most 
fastidious  notions  of  convenience. 


Elizabethan  Chairs , 


165 

The  annexed  woodcuts,  representing  drawing-room 
chairs  manufactured  by  Messrs.  Jackson  and  Graham, 
show  how  easily  a few  incised  patterns  and  turned 


mouldings  may  be  substituted  for  the  lumpy  carving 
and  ‘ shaped  ’ legs  usually  found  in  such  furniture. 

A familiar  and  apparently  very  obvious  distinction 
has  been  made,  from  time  immemorial,  between  the 


The  Drawing-room . 


1 66 

useful  and  the  ornamental,  as  if  the  abstract  qualities 
represented  by  these  words  were  completely  inde- 
pendent of  each  other.  It  would,  however,  be  a short- 
sighted philosophy  which  failed  to  recognise,  even  in  a 
moral  sense,  many  points  of  contact  between  the  two. 


If  that  which  pleases  the  eye — if  that  which  charms 
the  ear — if  that  which  appeals  to  the  more  imaginative 
faculties  of  the  human  mind  have  no  direct  and 
practical  result  for  our  benefit,  then  poets,  painters, 
and  musicians  have,  indeed,  lived  and  wrought  for 


XXIV. 


Drawing-Room  Sofa , 

executed  by  Jackson  & Graham  from  a design  by  Charles  L.  Eastlake. 


f V 


Use  and  Beauty. 


167 

us  in  vain.  And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  unable 
to  perceive,  even  in  the  common  concerns  and  practi- 
cal details  of  daily  toil — in  the  merchant’s  calling,  in 
the  blacksmith’s  forge,  and  in  the  chemist’s  laboratory 
— the  romantic  side  of  life’s  modern  aspect,  it  must  be 
but  a weakly  order  of  sentiment  with  which  we  are 
inspired  by  songs  and  books  and  pictures. 

In  the  sphere  of  what  is  called  industrial  art,  use 
and  beauty  are,  in  theory  at  least,  closely  associated  : 
for  not  only  has  the  humblest  article  of  manufacture, 
when  honestly  designed,  a picturesque  interest  of  its 
own,  but  no  decorative  feature  can  legitimately  claim 
our  admiration  without  revealing  by  its  very  nature 
the  purpose  of  the  object  which  it  adorns.  Yet,  among 
half-educated  minds,  nothing  is  more  common  than  to 
retain  two  distinct  and  utterly  opposed  ideals  of  beauty 
— one  of  a poetic  and  sentimental  kind,  which  leads 
people  to  prefer  certain  conditions  of  form  and  colour 
in  pictorial  representations  of  ‘ still  life’;  and  the  other 
of  a conventional  and  worldly  kind,  through  which  we 
not  only  tolerate,  but  approve,  the  dubious  ‘ elegancies  ’ 
of  fashionable  upholstery.  Let  us  suppose,  for  ex- 
ample, a young  lady,  of  average  taste  and  intelligence, 
suddenly  called  upon  to  sketch  some  familiar  article 
of  household  use  for  her  drawing-master.  She  would 


1 68 


The  Drawing-room 


surely  rather  choose  the  housemaid’s  bucket  or  an 
Italian  oil-flask  for  a subject,  than  her  own  work-table  ; 
and  she  would  be  right.  Yet,  if  she  were  asked  to  say 
candidly  which  she  considered  the  prettiest  of  the  three, 
her  decision  would  probably  be  in  favour  of  the  work- 
table— and  she  would  be  wrong.  For  if  there  be  any 
true  principles  of  design  at  all,  no  article  of  manufac- 


ture can  be  rightly  called  ‘ pretty  ’ in  which  those  prin- 
ciples are  violated.  Buckets  and  oil-flasks,  we  all 
know,  are  plain  articles  of  honest  handicraft,  pretending 
to  be  neither  more  nor  less  than  what  they  are.  If 
we  examine  one  of  the  former,  we  shall  find  it  con- 
structed of  oak,  or  some  other  tough  wood,  cut  into 
narrow  strips  or  staves,  from  three  to  four  inches  wide, 
and  about  half  an  inch  thick.  These  staves  are  arranged 
concentrically,  edge  to  edge,  and  gradually  diminish  in 


The  House-bucket . 


169 


width  downwards,  because  the  bucket,  for  convenience 
of  use  as  well  as  of  manufacture,  is  made  smaller  at  its 
lower  end.  They  are  held  together  by  strong  bands 
of  hoop-iron,  which  are  slipped  over  the  lower  and 
smaller  diameter  of  the  bucket,  and  driven  back  as  far 
as  they  will  go  towards  the  larger  diameter.  This 
makes  a tighter  cincture  than  it  would  be  possible  to 
ensure  by  any  other  means.  The  staves  have  previously 
been  grooved  on  their  inner  side  to  receive  the  bottom 
of  the  bucket,  which  is  a circular  and  generally  solid 
disc  of  wood.  In  order  to  save  the  latter  from  wear, 
it  is  inserted  an  inch  or  so  higher  than  the  bottom 
edge  of  the  staves ; and  because  buckets  have  fre- 
quently to  be  set  down  in  sloppy  places,  three  of  the 
staves  are  allowed  to  project  a trifle  longer  than  the 
rest,  so  that  in  washing  a floor  or  pavement  the  water 
may  flow  underneath  the  bottom  of  the  bucket.  The 
bucket-staves  are  rounded  at  their  upper  end,  in  order 
that  there  maybe  no  sharp  edge  to  injure  the  fingers. 
The  handle  is  a bow  of  wrought  iron  twisted  into  a 
hook  at  each  end,  and  thus  attached  to  iron  staple-rings 
which  are  nailed  at  opposite  sides  of  the  Tucket.  The 
handle  is  expressly  hammered  wider  and  convex  in 
section  just  at  its  centre,  in  order  that  a hand  may 
grasp  it  with  ease. 


The  Drawing-room. 


170 


Now,  the  cooper  who  made  this  bucket  had  no  more 
notion  of  high  art  than  of  the  Binomial  Theorem.  He 
merely  adopted  a type  which  has  been  in  use,  perhaps 
for  centuries,  and  is  at  once  the  most  convenient  and 
comely  in  form  which  could  have  been  invented  for 
the  purpose.  Luckily,  buckets  are  common  articles 
of  English  manufacture,  costing  so  little  that  it  is  not 
worth  while  to  cheapen  them  further  by  inferior  work- 
manship. They  are,  moreover,  used  for  purposes 
too  homely  to  need  ‘ elegance  ’ of  contour.  The  con- 
sequence is,  that  they  are  simply  sound  in  design  and 
construction. 

Now  let  us  look  at  the  Florence  flask,  and  note  how 
admirably  both  its  shape  and  material  are  fitted  for 
their  purpose.  Glass  is  an  extremely 
ductile  substance,  capable  of  being 
blown  and  twisted  into  an  endless 
variety  of  forms.  But  this  bottle  is 
intended  to  contain  olive-oil,  an  article 
of  common  consumption  in  every 
Italian  household.  It  must,  therefore, 
be  cheaply  and  lightly  made,  but 
strongly  enough  to  be  handled  freely, 
and  hung  up  when  not  in  use  on  the 
nearest  nail  of  a kitchen-wall.  The  oval  outline,  there- 


A Florence  Oil-flask , 171 

fore,  which  the  flask  assumes  at  its  lower  and  more 
bulky  end,  is  precisely  the  strongest  which  could 
have  been  invented  for  the  material.  It  is  the  very 
form  which  Nature  adopts  for  the  purpose  of  holding 
a denser  fluid  in  a more  fragile  vessel.  But  even 
eggs  require  to  be  packed  carefully  in  straw  for  market; 
moreover  they  will  not  stand  on  end,  nor  are  we  able 
to  pour  out  their  contents  without  breaking  the  shell 
So  the  Tuscan  bottle-makers  ingeniously  set  to  work 
to  meet  those  requirements  for  their  flask.  They 
pull  out  its  upper  end  into  a long  narrow  neck,  which 
serves  both  as  a duct  and  a handle.  They  twist  a cord 
of  dried  grass  in  rings  round  the  bulbous  part  of  the 
bottle,  and  make  them  fast  by  three  or  four  broad 
straps  of  the  same  material  stretching  longitudinally 
from  top  to  bottom  so  as  to  form  a complete  and  effec- 
tive suit  of  straw  armour.  Finally,  they  continue  the 
spiral  cord  downwards  and  outwards  at  the  foot  of  the 
bottle,  so  as  to  form  a little  base  for  it  to  stand  on,  and 
they  finish  the  cord  upwards  in  a long  twisted  loop, 
which  is  just  the  thing  to  hang  it  up  by.  Thus,  it  will 
be  seen  that  besides  being  an  exceedingly  picturesque 
object  (for  in  the  whole  range  of  common  ware  it  would 
be  difficult  to  find  a prettier  one),  this  Florence  flask  is 
constructed  on  as  sound  and  practical  principles  as  the 
strictest  utilitarian  could  wish. 


172 


The  Drawing-room . 


But  the  modern  English  work-table,  or  any  similar 
article  of  manufacture  designed  for  fashionable  house- 
holds, is  sure  to  belie  its  purpose  in  some  way.  It 
will  probably  have  doors  which  look  like  drawers,  or 
drawers  which  assume  an  appearance  of  doors.  It  will 
shroud  up  part  of  its  wooden  framing  with  silken  plaits 
fringed  with  straight  bands  of  gimp,  and  decorated  at 
each  angle  with  lumpy  little  tassels.  It  will  be  made 
of  deal  and  veneered  with  walnut  and  mahogany.  It 
will  be  ‘ enriched  ’ with  fictitious  carving,  and  plastered 
over  with  delusive  varnish. 

Real  art  has  no  recourse  to  such  tricks  as  these.  It 
can  accommodate  itself  to  the  simplest  and  most  practical 
shapes  which  the  carpenter  or  potter  has  invented,  as 
well  as  to  the  most  delicate  and  subtle  forms  of  refined 
manufacture.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  height  of  dig- 
nity which  it  can  reach  ; there  is  no  level  of  usefulness 
to  which  it  will  not  stoop.  You  may  have  a good 
school  of  design  for  the  art-workman  : you  may  have 
a bad  school  of  design  for  the  art-workman ; but  you 
can  have  no  grand  school,  for  both  the  blacksmith  and 
the  goldsmith  are  bound  by  aesthetic  laws  of  equal  im- 
portance, and  the  same  spirit  which  guides  the  chisel 
must  direct  the  lathe. 

In  order  to  rightly  estimate  the  artistic  value  and 


Appropriateness  of  Ornament , 


173 


fitness  of  that  superfluous  detail  which  is  called  orna- 
ment, we  should  first  ask  ourselves  whether  it  indicates 
by  its  general  character  the  material  which  it  enriches, 
or  of  which  it  is  itself  composed.  If  it  does  not,  we 
may  fairly  question  the  fitness  of  such  ornament ; but 
if  it  suggests  the  idea  of  a different  material,  we  may 
be  sure  it  is  bad.  To  a certain  extent  this  principle 
is  admitted  by  people  of  ordinary  taste.  No  house- 
holder would  think  of  allowing  the  panels  of  his 
cabinet  to  be  painted  like  an  Indian  shawl,  however 
beautiful  the  pattern  on  it  might  be.  Nor  would  he 
tolerate  a tablecloth  of  which  the  ornament  was  dis- 
posed in  the  form  of  door-panels.  But  his  dislike  to 
such  examples  of  misapplied  design  would  arise  from 
no  deep-seated  convictions  on  the  subject ; he  would 
simply  object  to  see  a mode  of  decoration  adopted 
for  which  he  remembered  no  precedent.  Show  the 
same  man  a pink  landscape  at  the  bottom  of  a washing- 
basin  or  a piece  of  bed  furniture  printed  in  imitation  of 
carved  scroll-work,  and,  just  because  he  has  been  ac- 
customed to  see  such  things  all  his  life,  they  seem  right 
and  proper  in  his  eyes.  Yet  it  is  not  a whit  worse  to 
give  wood  the  appearance  of  textile  fabric  than  to  let 
chintz  be  stained  and  shaded  like  solid  wood  ; nor  is 
our  supposititious  tablecloth  at  all  inferior  in  design  to 


*74 


The  Drawing-room . 


the  pictorial  absurdities  which,  not  many  years  ago,  we 
embodied  in  our  crockery. 

There  is  a general  impression  prevalent  among 
people  who  are  interested  in  the  subject  of  art  manu- 
facture, that  well-designed  furniture  must  necessarily 
be  expensive.  The  upholsterers  themselves  were  once 
inclined  to  foster  this  notion,  and  whenever  they  brought 
out  a new  type  of  chair  or  cabinet  which  had  any 
pretence  to  originality  or  excellence  of  form,  they 
were  sure  to  charge  highly  for  it,  because  it  was  a 
novelty. 

Now  it  may,  indeed,  happen  that  what  are  called 
‘ fancy  ’ articles,  being  made  with  a view  to  attract  the 
notice  of  individual  customers,  cost  more  than  those 
intended  for  general  sale,  because  the  former  are  manu- 
factured in  small  quantities  at  a time,  whereas  the 
latter  are  produced  in  wholesale  lots.  But  it  is  hard 
that  the  public  should  have  to  pay  for  a commercial 
mistake  due  to  the  apathy  of  tradesmen.  Good  ar- 
tistic furniture  ought  really  to  be  quite  as  cheap  as 
that  which  is  ugly.  Every  wretched  knot  of  carving, 
every  twist  in  the  outline  of  a modern  sofa,  every  bead 
and  hollow  executed  in  the  turner’s  wheel  has  been 
the  result  of  design  in  some  form  or  another.  The 
draughtsman  and  mechanic  must  be  paid,  whatever  the 


A Drawing-room  Arm-chair . 


175 


nature  of  their  tastes  may  be  ; and  no  doubt  as  much 
thought,  labour,  and  expense  of  material  are  bestowed 
on  modern  upholstery  as  would  be  necessary  to  ensure 
(under  proper  supervision)  the  highest  qualities  of 
which  the  cabinetmaker’s  art  is  capable. 


The  drawing-room  chairs  of  which  illustrations  are 
here  given  were  made  from  my  design  at  a price 
which  certainly  did  not  exceed  what  would  have  been 
charged  for  such  articles  at  any  respectable  shop.  I 
can  at  least  testify  to  the  excellence  of  their  manufac- 
ture. They  were  constructed  of  oak,  covered  with 
velvet,  and  trimmed  with  silk  fringe. 


176 


The  Drawing-room . 


The  truth  is  that  even  bad  ornament  is  costly;  and 
as  there  is  a great  deal  of  bad  ornament  in  modern 
work,  it  is  far  better,  while  the  present  state  of  things 
continues,  to  choose  the  very  plainest  and  simplest 
forms  of  domestic  furniture  procurable.  These  will, 
at  least,  be  in  better  taste  than  the  elaborate  deformi- 
ties by  which  they  are  surrounded.  That  they  are 


not  always  cheaper  may  be  judged  from  the  following 
anecdote  : Some  years  ago,  a gentleman  observed  at 
one  of  the  furnishing  warehouses  a light  cane-seated 
chair  of  a very  ordinary  description,  but  the  design  of 
which,  with  the  exception  of  a certain  bit  of  ornamental 
carving,  pleased  him.  He  inquired  the  price,  and  was 
told,  thirty  shillings. 


Round  Tables. 


177 


‘ And  what  would  it  cost  if  that  ornament  were 
omitted  ? ’ he  asked. 

‘ Thirty-five  shillings,’  was  the  answer. 

Here  we  have  a crown  extra  charged  for  the  superior 
intelligence  required  from  a British  workman — simply 
to  omit  a portion  of  his  labour.  This  affords  some  clue 
to  the  extraordinary  stagnation  of  art-impulses  which, 
until  lately,  existed  in  this  branch  of  manufacture.  A 
certain  shape  was  fixed  upon — no  one  knew  why — for 
the  rail  or  leg  of  a chair,  and,  once  executed,  was 
multiplied  indefinitely — whether  by  hand  or  by  ma- 
chinery it  matters  little.  It  was  made,  as  it  were,  by 
rote , and  doubtless  contracted  for  at  per  gross.  It 
would  be  absurd  to  expect  furniture  made  in  this  way 
to  possess  any  great  refinement  of  design.  But  in 
general  form,  at  least,  it  might  be  picturesque  and 
sturdy,  and  these  were  just  the  qualities  overlooked 
by  modern  cabinetmakers  and  joiners  in  their  work, 
which — unless  competent  supervision  be  exercised — is 
generally  frail  and  uninteresting. 

I suppose  that  ever  since  the  days  of  King  Arthur, 
round  tables  have  been  in  favour  with  knights  and 
ladies.  But  the  round  table  of  mediaeval  carpentry 
was  not  the  rickety,  ill-contrived  article  which  is  manu- 
factured now.  The  present  system  of  balancing,  by 

N 


1 78  The  Drawing-room. 

means  of  pins  and  screws,  a circular  framework  of  wood 
on  a hollow  boxed-up  cylinder,  is  manifestly  wrong  in 
principle,  for,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  tables  made  on 
this  plan  become  unsteady  and  out  of  order  after  a few 
years’  wear.  To  obviate  this  evil  the  central  leg  or 


stem  should  be  made  solid \ with  a base  heavy  and  sub- 
stantial enough  to  keep  the  table  steady  by  its  mere 
weight.  Four  struts  should  then  be  introduced,  stretch- 
ing diagonally  from  the  side  of  the  stem  to  ‘ ledges,’ 
screwed  on  the  under  surface  of  the  circular  top,  which 
may  be  a simple  disc  of  wood,  about  an  inch  in  thick- 
ness ; by  this  means  the  unsightly  and  expensive 


Inlaid  Decoration . 


179 

mode  of  framing  the  table-top  round  its  outer  edge  is 
rendered  unnecessary,  and  that  inconvenient  tripod, 
which  is  always  in  the  way  of  one’s  feet,  may  be 
avoided,  while  the  whole  table  can  be  taken  to  pieces, 
when  occasion  requires,  just  as  readily  as  those  in 
ordinary  use. 

On  the  last  page  is  a sketch  of  an  old  German  table 
well  adapted  for  cards  or  chess  in  a modern  drawing- 
room. It  may  look  inconvenient,  but  it  really  is  not 
so,  for  the  top  considerably  overhangs  the  framework 
below,  and  thus  gives  ample  room  to  sitters. 

The  natural  grain  of  such  woods  as  oak,  rosewood, 
walnut,  &c.,  is  in  itself  an  ornamental  feature,  if  it  be 
not  obscured  and  clogged  by  artificial  varnish.  But 
where  an  effect  of  greater  richness  is  aimed  at,  two 
legitimate  modes  of  decoration  are  available  for  wood, 
viz,  carving  and  marquetry  or  inlaid  work.  For 
cabinets,  coffers,  sideboards,  and  other  repositories  of 
household  goods,  the  wood-carver’s  art  has  been 
successfully  employed  in  the  best  ages  of  design  ; but 
it  should  be  sparingly  used  for  chairs,  tables,  couches, 
and  in  all  situations  where  a knotted  lump  of  wood  is 
likely  to  prove  inconvenient  to  the  touch.  It  is  a pity 
that  marquetry  should  have  fallen  into  such  disuse,  for 
it  is  a very  effective  and  not  necessarily  expensive  mode 


i8o 


The  Drawing-room . 


of  ornament.  It  consists  of  inlaying  the  surface  of  one 
wood  with  small  pieces  of  another,  differing  from  it  in 
vein  or  colour.  These  pieces  may  either  be  grouped 


in  geometrical  pattern,  or  arranged  so  as  to  represent 
natural  objects  conventionally.  The  tarsia , or  old 
Italian  marquetry,  was  used  for  both  purposes,  and, 


Marquetry. 


1 8 1 


owing  to  the  minute  size  of  the  inlaid  pieces,  was 
equally  adapted  for  either.  The  sketch  above  is 
from  an  early  Italian  casket  in  the  South  Kensington 
Museum.  The  lower  portion  is  of  carved  ivory,  the 
lid  being  composed  of  ebony  and  ivory  inlaid.  It  is 
probably  of  fourteenth-century  manufacture.  A some- 
what similar  specimen  is  given  in  M.  Viollet  le  Due’s 
‘ Dictionnaire  du  Mobilier  Frangais.’  But  during  the 
best  and  early  period  of  the  art,  figures  and  animals, 
whenever  thus  portrayed,  were  treated  in  a formal  and 
purely  decorative  manner.  Some  excellent  examples 
of  this  sort  occur  in  the  cathedral  stalls  at  Orvieto,  in 
Italy.  Two  other  kinds  of  inlay  are  well  known  in 
England — viz.,  that  which  prevailed  on  the  Continent 
during  the  last  century,  and  modern  Indian  work. 
Many  specimens  of  the  former  are  to  be  met  with  at 
the  curiosity  shops,  and  indeed  are  still  reproduced  and 
imported  in  large  quantities  from  Holland.  In  this 
the  inlaid  pieces  are  larger,  and  frequently  stained  irf 
imitation  of  fruit  and  flowers.  The  Indian  Mosaics, 
being  excessively  minute,  are  well  adapted  for  small 
objects,  and  frequently  form  the  decoration  of  ivory 
caskets,  workboxes,  and  even  fans. 

The  small  demand  for  marquetry  at  the  present  time 
has,  of  course,  limited  its  production,  and  thus  increased 


The  Drawing-room. 


182 

its  cost  in  this  country.  But,  even  if  it  should  ever 
become  popular,  there  will  always  remain  a large  pro- 
portion of  household  articles,  especially  in  the  upper 
storeys  of  an  English  house,  where  its  use  would  be 
considered  extravagant.  Indeed,  it  is  quite  possible 
for  furniture  to  be  well  designed,  independently  of  this 
or  any  other  mode  of  surface  decoration  ; and  it  cannot 
be  too  frequently  urged  that  simplicity  of  general  form 
is  one  of  the  first  conditions  of  artistic  excellence  in 
manufacture.  Many  upholsterers  now  sell  bed-room 
wardrobes,  toilet-tables,  &c.,  which  (I  suppose,  from 
their  extreme  plainness  of  construction)  are  called 
mediceval.  They  are  executed  in  oak  and  stained  deal, 
and  are  certainly  a great  improvement  on  the  old  de- 
signs in  mahogany.  But,  instead  of  being  cheaper,  as 
would  be  the  case  if  they  were  made  by  the  hundred 
and  supplied  to  the  ‘ general  public,’  they  are  often  dearer 
than  their  more  ornate  and  pretentious  predecessors. 
The  taste,  no  doubt,  requires  to  be  popularised  to 
render  it  profitable  to  trade  ; but  whether  it  will  ever 
become  popular  while  people  can  buy  more  showy 
articles  at  a less  price,  may  be  questioned. 


XXV. 


Drazving-Room  Chejfonier , 

executed  by  Jackson  6°  Graham  from  a design  by  Charles  L.  Eastlake. 


$ 


Mantel-piece  Mirrors . 


183 


Chapter  VII. 

WALL-FURNITURE. 

VI NG  already  considered  the  subject  of 
paper-hangings,  I will  now  offer  a few  hints 
on  what  may  be  called  the  wall- furniture  of 
rooms  in  general,  and  of  the  drawing-room  in  particular. 
In  most  houses  the  chief  example  of  this  class  is  the 
mantel-piece  mirror.  Custom  and  convenience  have 
long  since  determined  its  position,  and,  considering  the 
nature  of  our  social  habits  in  this  country,  and  the  im- 
portance which  we  attach  to  a fireside  in  almost  every 
apartment,  one  can  scarcely  doubt  that,  if  a glass  is  to  be 
fixed  anywhere  on  the  internal  walls  of  a modern  house, 
this  is  the  place  for  it.  Unfortunately,  however,  while 
it  gives  apparent  size  and  real  brightness  to  a room,  it 
is  a feature  which,  as  ordinarily  designed,  is  in  itself 
eminently  uninteresting.  The  mere  fact  that  it  pre- 
sents to  the  eye  a reflection  of  every  object  in  front  of 
its  plane  is  of  course  not  sufficient  to  make  it  decora- 


184 


IV : zll-Furniture . 


tive.  Accordingly  we  find  it  enclosed  in  a gilt  frame, 
or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  a wooden  frame  plastered 
over  with  composition  to  imitate  carving  of  a most 
extravagant  kind,  and  then  gilded — a bad  style  of 
work,  even  if  the  design  were  tolerable.  But  it  is 
usually  in  the  worst  taste.  Now  old  frames  made  in 
the  last  and  previous  centuries,  whatever  their  style  may 
have  been,  had  at  least  this  advantage,  that  they  were 
moulded  and  carved  out  of  solid  wood,  and  the  differ- 
ence between  them  and  those  of  modern  manufacture 
is  scarcely  less  than  the  difference  between  well- 
modelled  statuettes  and  the  common  plaster-casts  which 
are  sold  by  an  itinerant  image-man.  We  should  be 
ashamed  to  place  the  latter  on  our  mantel-pieces.  Why 
are  we  to  tolerate  in  one  class  of  decorative  art  the 
vulgarities  which  we  despise  in  another  ? If  real 
carved  work  cannot  be  afforded,  it  is  far  better  to  let 
such  mirrors  be  fitted  in  plain  solid  frames  of  wood, 
say  three  or  four  inches  in  width,  enriched  with  delicate 
mouldings  or  incised  ornament.  If  executed  in  oak, 
they  may  be  left  of  their  natural  colour  : if  in  the 
commoner  kind  of  wood,  they  can  be  ebonised  (i.e. 
stained  black),  and  further  decorated  with  gold  in  in- 
cised surface  patterns  or  delicate  mouldings.  This 
ought  to  be  a less  expensive,  as  it  certainly  would  be 


Framed  Pictures.  185 

a more  effective,  process  than  that  of  gilding  the  entire 
surface. 

But  we  have  other  examples  of  wall-furniture  to 
consider.  The  practice  of  hanging  up  oil  and  water- 
colour paintings,  engravings,  and  photographs  in  our 
sitting-rooms,  is  one  which  I need  scarcely  say  con- 
tributes greatly  to  that  appearance  of  comfort  which  is 
the  especial  characteristic  of  an  English  house.  And 
it  can  do  more  than  this.  Independently  of  the  intrinsic 
value  which  such  works  of  art  may  possess,  they  be- 
come collectively  an  admirable  means  of  legitimate 
decoration.  Assuming,  then,  that  the  prints  and  pic- 
tures we  wish  to  hang  are  of  some  artistic  interest,  the 
question  arises  how  we  can  dispose  them  on  our  walls 
to  the  best  advantage.  Success  in  this  respect  will 
mainly  depend  on  two  points,  viz.,  their  judicious  as- 
sociation, and  the  design  of  frames.  The  first  step 
should  be  to  classify.  Oil-paintings  should,  if  possible,  * 
be  kept  in  a room  by  themselves.  The  force  of  their 
colour  is  always  greater  than  that  which  can  be  attained 
by  other  ‘vehicles,’  and  will  therefore,  in  juxtaposition 
with  water-colour  drawings,  make  the  latter  look  poor 
and  feeble  in  effect.  It  is  an  old  English  custom  to 
hang  family  portraits  in  the  dining-room,  and  it  seems 
a reasonable  custom.  Generally  large  in  size,  and 


Wall- Furniture. 


1 86 

enclosed  in  massive  frames,  they  appear  well  suited  to 
an  apartment  which  experience  has  led  us  to  furnish  in  a 
more  solid  and  substantial  manner  than  any  other  in  the 
house.  Besides,  the  Dining-room  is  especially  devoted 
to  hospitality  and  family  gatherings,  and  it  is  pleasant 
on  such  occasions  to  be  surrounded  by  mementos  of 
those  who  once,  perhaps,  formed  members  of  a social 
circle  which  they  have  long  ceased  to  join.  But  where 
such  portraits  are  few  in  number,  there  can  be  no  ob- 
jection to  add  to  this  group  such  other  oil  pictures  as 
may  be  in  the  house,  unless  they  are  sufficiently 
numerous  to  fill  another  room  by  themselves. 

Of  course,  by  filling  a room  I do  not  mean  crowding 
its  walls  almost  from  the  wainscot  to  the  ceiling — a 
practice  which,  so  long  as  there  is  a convenient  space 
elsewhere,  is  much  to  be  avoided.  In  annual  public 
exhibitions,  the  enormous  number  of  works  sent  for 
display  frequently  renders  it  necessary  to  hang  them 
three  or  four  deep  on  the  walls  ; but  in  the  rooms  of 
an  ordinary  private  house  there  is  no  necessity  for 
such  an  arrangement.  To  see  pictures  with  anything 
like  comfort  or  attention,  they  should  be  disposed  in 
one  row  only,  and  that  opposite  the  eye,  or  on  an 
average  about  5 feet  6 inches  from  the  floor  to  the 
centre  of  the  canvas.  (I  refer  now  to  ordinary- sized 


Sconce-Mirrors. 


187 


pictures  ; of  course,  full-length  portraits  of  life-size  and 
other  large  works  require  to  be  hung  higher.)  A row 
thus  formed  will  make  a sort  of  coloured  zone  around 
the  room,  and  though  the  frames  themselves  may  vary 


in  shape  and  dimensions,  they  can  generally  be  grouped 
with  something  like  symmetry  of  position,  the  larger 
ones  being  kept  in  the  centre,  and  the  smaller  ones 
being  ranged  on  either  side  in  corresponding  places 
along  the  line. 


IV all- Furniture. 


1 88 

It  is,  however,  by  no  means  necessary  to  good  effect 
that  the  drawings  or  paintings  thus  arranged  should 
come  into  close  contact.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  often 
a much  better  plan  to  separate  them,  especially  in  a 
drawing-room,  by  such  small  objects  as  sconces,  small 
ornamental  mirrors,  or  little  wooden  brackets,  support- 
ing statuettes,  vases,  &c.  There  is  a very  pretty  form 
of  mirror,  probably  Venetian  in  its  origin,  which  has 
lately  been  manufactured  at  a trifling  cost,  and  may  be 
used  for  this  purpose.  The  general  form  of  the  frame 
is  that  of  a lozenge  intersected  by  a quatrefoil.  It  is 
made  of  wood,  covered  with  coloured  velvet,  and 
studded  at  its  edges  with  nails,  which  may  be  either 
gilt  or  silvered. 

Small  wooden  brackets,  in  great  variety  of  shape, 
can  of  course  be  bought  at  any  ordinary  upholsterer’s, 
but  as  a rule  they  are  weak  in  construction  and  of  very 
inferior  design.  The  pierced  open-work  with  which 
their  lower  portions  are  usually  decorated  would  be  a 
perfectly  legitimate  means  of  ornamentation  for  such 
objects,  if  properly  introduced  ; but  in  this,  as  in  all 
cases  where  wood-work  is  thus  treated,  the  pattern 
should  be  represented  by  the  portion  cut  away,  and 
not  by  that  which  is  left.  The  following  example, 
though  of  a very  simple  shape,  will  suffice  to  illustrate 


JVooden  Brackets . 


189 


my  meaning.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  the 
so  called  ‘ ornamental  ’ leather-work  which  a few  years 
ago  was  so  in  vogue  with  young  ladies,  who  used  it  for 


the  construction  of  brackets,  baskets,  picture-frames, 
&c.,  was — like  potichomanie,  diaphanie,  and  other 
modern  drawing-room  pursuits — -utterly  opposed  to 
sound  principles  of  taste.  Pieces  of  leather  cut  into 


IV all-Furniture . 


190 

the  shape  of  leaves  and  flowers,  glued  together  and 
varnished,  represent  at  best  but  a wretched  parody  of 
the  carvers  art.  The  characteristic  beauty  of  oriental 
china  and  of  painted  windows  can  never  be  even 
suggested  by  bits  of  coloured  paper  gummed  to  the 
surface  of  glass.  Such  work  as  this  may  be  the  rage 
for  a few  seasons,  but  sooner  or  later  must  fall,  as  it 
deserves  to  fall,  into  universal  contempt. 

The  art  of  picture-hanging  requires  much  nicety  and 
no  little  patience,  for  it  is  difficult  to  measure  distances 
between  the  centres  of  frames  along  a wall.  One 
method  of  getting  over  the  difficulty  is  to  have  an  iron 
or  brass  rod  fixed  at  the  top  of  the  wall,  just  under  the 
ceiling,  and  fitted  with  sliding  rings,  to  which  the 
pictures  may  be  attached  by  wire  or  cord.  But  this 
plan  involves  some  expense,  and  it  is  hardly  worth 
while  to  adopt  it  for  ordinary  use.  Picture-rings  are 
generally  fixed  at  the  back  of  the  frame,  and  some 
inches  below  its  upper  edge ; this  throws  the  picture 
forward  at  the  top,  which  some  people  consider  an 
advantage.  But  this  inclination,  though  sometimes 
desirable  in  the  highest  row  of  a crowded  gallery, 
is  useless  when  every  picture  is  hung  ‘ on  the  line.’ 
Moreover,  a light  frame  thus  suspended  is  never  steady, 
but  liable  to  rock  with  the  slightest  motion.  A better 


Picture- Hanging. 


1 9 1 

plan  is  to  screw  the  rings  on  the  upper  edge  of  the 
frame,  which  will  then  lie  flat  against  the  wall.  When 
nails  are  used  for  picture-hanging,  they  should  be 
driven  into  the  wall  just  under  the  bottom  line  of  the 
cornice,  and,  for  obvious  reasons,  never  lower  down  on 
the  wall,  where  it  can  possibly  be  avoided.  As,  how- 
ever, internal  walls,  or  those  which  separate  room  from 
room,  or  rooms  from  passages,  are  often  merely  framed 
partitions,  filled  in  with  lath  and  plaster,  it  is  not  always 
easy  to  find  a holdfast  for  the  nail ; but,  by  gently  tapping 
the  wall  with  a hammer,  it  is  easy  to  find  where  the  solid 
wood — or,  as  the  carpenters  call  it,  the  ‘ stud  ’ — occurs, 
and  there  the  nail  will  hold  fast  enough. 

A framed  picture,  however  small,  should  never  be 
suspended  from  one  nail.  This  may  seem  a trifle ; 
but,  for  the  sake  of  appearance  as  well  as  of  safety, 
it  is  better  to  depend  on  two  points  of  support.  The 
triangular  space  enclosed  by  a picture-cord  stretched 
between  three  points  must  always  be  inharmonious 
with  the  horizontal  and  vertical  lines  of  a room. 

If  it  is  desirable,  as  I have  said,  to  hang  oil  pictures 
by  themselves,  it  is  doubly  advisable  to  separate  water- 
colour drawings  and  photographs  or  engravings.  Each 
may  be  beautiful  in  their  way,  but  to  place  them 
together  is  to  destroy  the  effect  of  both.  The  print 


192 


Wall-Furniture . 


will  look  cold  and  harsh  by  the  side  of  the  water-colour 
sketch ; the  sketch  will  seem  unreal  and  gaudy  by  the 
side  of  the  photograph.  Keep  them  all  apart — if  not 
in  separate  rooms,  at  least  on  separate  walls.  Never 
hang  glazed  drawings,  where  it  can  be  avoided,  oppo- 
site a window.  The  sheen  of  the  glass  reflects  the 
daylight,  and  destroys  the  effect  of  the  picture  behind 
it.  Take  care  that  your  picture-cord  either  matches  or 
harmonises  with  the  colour  of  the  wall-paper  behind  it. 
Sometimes  wire,  which  is  almost  invisible  at  a little 
distance,  is  used  instead  of  cord.  The  real  advantage 
of  wire  is  that  it  does  not  harbour  dust,  but  it  is  not  so 
easily  adjusted  or  altered  in  its  length  as  cord.* 

Thus  much  for  the  hanging  of  pictures.  On  the 
subject  of  frames  themselves,  much  might  be  said.  I 
have  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  only  proper  means 
of  arriving  at  correct  form  in  objects  of  decorative 
art  is  to  bear  in  mind  the  practical  purpose  to  which 
such  objects  will  be  applied.  Now  the  use  of  a 
picture-frame  is  obvious.  It  has  to  give  additional 
strength  to  the  light  ‘ strainer  ’ of  wood  over  which 
paper  or  canvas  is  stretched.  It  may  also  have  to 
hold  glass  securely  over  the  picture.  Lastly,  it  has 

* There  is  a recent  invention  called  1 wire-cord/  in  which  both  ma- 
terials are  incorporated. 


XXVI. 


Picture  Frame  Mouldings y 

designed  by  E.  J.  Tarver. 


Picture-Frames. 


193 


on  its  outer  face  to  form  a border  which,  while  or- 
namental in  itself,  shall  tend,  by  dividing  the  picture 
from  surrounding  objects,  to  confine  the  eye  of  the 
spectator  within  its  limits.  These  conditions  seem 
simple  enough,  but  how  frequently  are  they  violated 
in  modern  work ! The  outer  frame,  instead  of  being 
made  of  oak  or  some  other  tough  wood,  is  too 
frequently  constructed  of  deal  strips  lightly  glued 
together.  In  place  of  carving,  the  wood  is  overlaid 
with  a species  of  composition  moulded  into  wretched 
forms,  which  pass  for  ornament  as  soon  as  they  are 
gilded.  These  are  so  brittle  that,  instead  of  protect- 
ing the  picture,  they  have  to  be  handled  more  care- 
fully than  the  glass  itself,  and  are  liable  to  chip  at  the 
slightest  blow.  Finally,  instead  of  confining  attention 
to  the  picture,  this  sort  of  frame  distracts  the  eye  by 
its  fussiness.  Now,  gilding  on  a picture-frame  is  not 
only  justifiable  by  way  of  ornament,  but  is  much  to  be 
recommended  as  a foil  or  neutral  ground  for  enhancing 
the  value  of  colour;  but  it  ought  to  be  laid  directly 
on  the  wood,  without  any  intervening  composition  ; 
and  if  any  ornament  in  relief  is  attempted,  it  should 
be  carved  in  the  solid  material.  The  effect  of  oak- 
grain  seen  through  leaf-gold  is  exceedingly  good,  and 
the  appearance  of  texture  thus  produced  is  infinitely 


o 


i94 


JV all- Furniture. 


more  interesting  than  the  smooth  monotony  of  gilt 
‘ compo.’ 

This,  however,  is  a point  which  the  ordinary  and 
uneducated  professional  decorator  will  generally  dispute. 
When  I look  into  the  windows  of  some  establishments 
devoted  to  decorative  art,  and  see  the  monstrosities 
which  are  daily  offered  to  the  public  in  the  name  of 
taste— the  fat  gilt  cupids,  the  coarse  and  clumsy  mould- 
ings, the  heavy  plaster  cornices,  and  the  lifeless  types 
of  leaves  and  flowers  which  pass  for  ornament  in  the 
nineteenth  century— I cannot  help  thinking  how  much 
we  might  learn  from  those  nations  whose  art  it  has 
long  been  our  custom  to  despise — -from  the  half- 
civilised  craftsmen  of  Japan,  and  the  rude  barbarians 
of  Feejee. 

It  is  a practice  with  many  artists  of  the  rising  English 
school  to  design  their  own  frames  for  the  pictures 
which  they  exhibit,  and  some  excellent  specimens  may 
now  and  then  be  seen  on  the  walls  of  the  Royal  Aca- 
demy,* and  at  the  Old  Water-Colour  Society’s  Rooms. 
Coloured  sketches  which  are  surrounded  by  a wide 
margin  of  white  paper  will  look  well  in  plain,  ungilded 
oak  frames.  When,  for  economy’s  sake,  deal  is  used, 

* Those  enclosing  the  pictures  of  Mr.  F.  Leighton,  R.A.,  and,  I believe, 
designed  by  the  artist  himself,  may  be  mentioned  as  good  examples. 


Prints  and  Photographs. 


195 


it  may  be  painted,  and  parcel-gilt  black  frames  are 
often  very  effective.  I have  seen  some  painted  white, 
which  are  suitable  for  engravings.  Indeed,  both  for 
engravings  and  photographs,  gilt  frames  seem  to 
be  out  of  place.  Wherever  paint  is  used,  it  should 


be  well  flatted,  so  as  not  to  shine.  Heavy  mould- 
ings, except  for  a large  frame,  are  to  be  avoided. 
Whenever  they  are  introduced,  they  should  slope  back 
from  the  surface  of  the  picture  towards  the  wall  behind, 
and  not  forward,  so  as  to  throw  a shadow  on  the  pic- 
ture. As  a rule,  for  water-colour  drawings  of  an  ordi- 
nary size,  a plain  frame,  with  a few  delicate  mouldings 
or  a mere  chamfered  edge,  will  be  all-sufficient.  If  en- 


o 2 


JV all-Furniture. 


196 

richment  is  desired,  it  is  better  and  less  expensive  to 
incise  ornament  than  to  carve  it  in  relief,  and  it  will  be 
found  more  effective  to  stop  the  mouldings  or  chamfer- 
ing a few  inches  short  of  the  end  on  each  side.  This 
will  leave  an  angle  block  at  each  corner,  forming  good 
points  for  incised  decoration. 

Some  years  ago  a new  type  of  light  oaken  frame, 
commonly  called  cruciform , was  introduced,  and  for  a 
time  became  very  popular ; but  one  is  apt  to  become 
wearied  of  a form  that  is  seen  everywhere,  without  the 
least  variety  of  proportion  ; and  there  is  a poor,  wiry 
look  about  the  thinnest  of  the  cruciform  frames  which 
is  unsatisfactory.  If  artists  of  note  would  steadily  refuse 
to  adopt  the  commonplace  inventiorts  of  the  ordinary 
frame-maker,  and,  taking  a few  hints  from  old  examples, 
would  get  their  own  designs  executed,  there  might  be 
some  hope  of  reform  in  this  direction. 

Frames  made  for  engravings  can  scarcely  be  too 
simple  in  design,  and  when  two  or  three  prints  of  the 
same  size  and  general  character  have  to  be  hung  in 
one  room,  it  is  well  to  group  them  side  by  side  in  one 
long  frame  divided  into  compartments  by  a light  fillet  or 
beading.  On  the  following  page  is  the  sketch  of  a frame 
arranged  on  this  principle.  The  best  woodcuts  of  the 
present  day  are  perhaps  the  most  desirable  examples 


Compartmental  Frames. 


197 


of  modem  art  which  can  be  possessed  at  a trifling  cost. 
Chromo-lithographs  are,  of  course,  much  more  attrac- 
tive to  the  public,  and  are  popularly  supposed  to  be  a 
cheap  and  easy  method  of  encouraging  pictorial  taste ; 
but,  with  a few  rare  exceptions,  they  do  more  harm 
than  good  in  this  respect.  In  the  representation  of 
purely  decorative  art,  where  the  beauty  of  design 


depends  chiefly  upon  grace  of  outline,  and  upon  asso- 
ciation, rather  than  gradation  or  blending  of  tints, 
chromo-lithography  may  do  good  service  ; but  in  the 
field  of  landscape  art,  for  which  this  invention  has  been 
chiefly  employed,  it  is  in  a two-fold  way  worse  than  use- 
less. In  the  first  place  it  accustoms  the  eye  to  easily- 
rendered  and  therefore  tricky  effects  of  colour  which 
falsify  rather  than  illustrate  nature.  Secondly,  it  en- 
courages a flimsy  style  of  water-colour  painting  which 


198 


Wall-Furniture . 


no  true  artist  would  adopt  but  with  a view  of  render- 
ing his  picture  easy  to  be  thus  imitated.  A draughts- 
man’s handiwork  in  the  delineation  of  form  and  in  the 
distribution  of  light  and  shade  may,  indeed,  under 
certain  conditions,  be  reproduced  by  mechanical  means, 
but  the  subtle  delicacies  of  colour  in  good  pictorial  art 
are  utterly  unapproachable  in  a print  which  attempts 
to  render,  with  a few  super-imposed  tints,  the  dexterity 
and  refinement  of  manual  skill.  Original  works  of  art, 
whether  in  oil  or  water-colours,  are  only  within  reach 
of  the  wealthy.  But  photographs  and  good  wood- 
engravings  are  procurable  at  a moderate  cost,  and  are 
far  more  serviceable  than  chromo-lithography  in  the 
development  of  household  taste. 


False  Notions  of  ‘ Consistency  / 


!99 


Chapter  VIII. 

THE  BED-ROOM \ 

HE  modern  development  of  art  is  full  of 
strange  inconsistencies,  and  they  are  nowhere 
more  apparent  than  in  the  connection  of 
design  with  manufacture.  Many  people  who  are  fully 
alive  to  the  inartistic  character  of  the  furniture  with 
which  they  surround  themselves,  and  who  would  gladly 
hail  a reform  in  upholstery,  are  deterred  from  helping  to 
forward  that  movement  by  a fear  that,  if  they  did  so, 
their  chairs  and  tables  would  not  be  what  is  called  ‘ in 
keeping 5 with  the  house  which  they  inhabit  This 
plea,  however,  for  tolerating  the  present  state  of  things, 
is  worthless.  It  would  be  hard,  indeed,  if,  because  the 
builders  and  land-owners  compel  us  to  live  in  square 
ugly  boxes  of  inferior  brickwork,  plastered  over  with  a 
delusive  mask  of  perishable  stucco,  we  were  on  that 
account  compelled  to  purchase  furniture  as  mean,  as 
fragile,  or  as  pretentious  as  our  ordinary  town  dwellings 
have  become.  And  if  we  are  to  defer  the  considera- 


200 


The  Bed-room. 


tion  of  household  taste  until  we  have  remodelled  our 
national  architecture,  we  may  wait  for  ever.  Of  late 
years  there  has,  indeed,  been  much  improvement  in 
the  design  of  our  churches  and  some  other  public 
buildings,  but  the  general  aspect  of  London  streets  and 
suburban  residences  remains  hopelessly  uninteresting, 
and  is  likely  to  continue  so  while  they  lie  at  the  mercy 
of  speculating  builders,  and  a system  of  tenure  which 
gives  the  landlord  but  a temporary  interest  in  the 
stability  of  his  houses. 

If  the  style  of  our  architecture  were  definitely  Italian, 
it  would  naturally  become  a question  whether  we  should 
be  justified  in  fitting  up  our  homes  with  any  class  of 
furniture  but  that  which  prevailed  during  the  Renais- 
sance period.  But  while  May-fair  remains  what  it  is, 
a dull  labyrinth  of  bricks  and  mortar,  it  can  afford  no 
possible  standard  of  uniformity  for  the  design  of  the 
sofas  and  sideboards  within  its  walls. 

Yet  the  very  people  who  believed  in  this  undesirable 
consistency  of  ugliness,  did  not  hesitate  to  furnish 
several  rooms  of  a modern  house,  each  after  its  own 
particular  fashion,  and  no  considerations  of  beauty  or 
convenience  were  allowed  to  interfere  with  conven- 
tional notions  of  propriety.  The  consequence  was 
that  furniture  in  the  last  generation  generally  reminded 


False  Notions  of  ‘ Consistency. 


201 


us  less  of  its  use  than  of  trades  connected  with  it.  The 
great  solemn  dining-room,  with  its  heavy  sarcopha- 
gus-like sideboards  and  funereal  window-curtains,  was 
eminently  suggestive  of  the  undertaker’s  calling.  Up- 
stairs, the  ormolu  decoration,  the  veneered  walnut 
tables,  the  florescent  carpet  and  sofa-cover  recalled  to 
our  memory  the  upholstering  youth  who  so  confidently 
expressed  his  opinion  on  their  merits.  And  a storey 
higher,  somehow,  in  the  midst  of  lace  bed-curtains, 
muslin  toilet  covers,  pink  calico,  and  cheval  glasses, 
one  might  fancy  oneself  in  a milliner’s  shop. 

Now  all  these  rooms  ought  indeed  to  be  furnished 
characteristically  of  their  purpose,  but  by  no  means  in 
various  styles.  The  wardrobe  must,  of  necessity,  be 
different  in  shape  from  the  cabinet,  the  bed  from  the 
sofa,  the  wash-stand  from  the  sideboard ; but  the 
general  principle  of  design  in  all  these  objects  should 
be  the  same.  The  chair  which  can  be  pointed  out  as 
a ‘ bed-room  chair,’  and  the  carpet  which  may  be  de- 
scribed particularly  as  a ‘ drawing-room  carpet,’  are 
sure  (under  the  ordinary  system  of  design,  at  all 
events)  to  be  in  bad  taste. 

As  a rule,  our  modern  bed-rooms  are  too  fussy  in 
their  fitting  up.  People  continually  associate  the  words 
‘ luxurious  and  comfortable  ’ as  if  they  were  synony- 


202 


The  Bed-room . 


mous.  In  reality  they  suggest  two  distinct  aims  which 
should  not  be  confounded.  Glaring  chintzes,  elaborate 
wall-papers,  French  polish,  and  rich  draperies  on  every 
side,  may  represent  considerable  expense  and  a certain 
order  of  luxury,  but  assuredly  not  comfort. 

Now,  one  of  the  points  on  which  it  is  necessary  to 
insist  is  this,  that  excellence  of  design  may  be,  and, 
indeed,  frequently  is,  quite  independent  of  cost.  I 
might  go  further,  and  say  with  truth  that  the  style  of 
inferior  design  is  sure  to  deteriorate  in  proportion  to  its 
richness.  Some  of  the  worse  specimens  of  decorative 
art  that  one  sees  exposed  for  sale  are  expensive 
articles  of  luxury.  Some  of  the  most  appropriately 
formed,  and  therefore  most  artistic,  objects  of  household 
use  are  to  be  bought  for  a trifling  sum.  Take  the  com- 
mon bed-room  wash-hand-stand,  for  instance,  I mean 
such  a one  as  will  be  found  in  the  upper  bed-rooms 
of  a moderately-sized  house.  It  is  made  of  deal  or 
birch  wood,  and  usually  painted,  it  must  be  con- 
fessed, after  rather  a ridiculous  fashion — viz.,  in  imita- 
tion of  oak  or  bird’s-eye  maple.  But  its  shape  is  a 
reasonable  shape,  and  could  hardly  be  improved.  It 
is  fitted  with  two  shelves,  the  upper  one  cut  to  receive 
the  basin,  and  the  lower  one  ‘ boxed  ’ to  receive  a 
drawer.  It  has  a splash-board  to  protect  the  wall 


The  Wash-hand-stand. 


203 


against  which  it  is  placed.  It  is  supported  on  four 
legs  turned  and  shaped  after  a fashion  infinitely  su- 
perior to  that  of  an  ordinary  dining-table.  It  is  not, 
indeed,  an  example  of  high  art  in  manufacture,  but  it  is 
an  instance  of  honest  workmanship,  and  until  we  get 
honest  work,  we  can  have  no  artistic  furniture.  Now 
observe,  the  form  of  this  cheap  and  common  wash- 
stand  is  good,  because  it  happens  to  be  traditional. 
The  pattern  has  probably  varied  little  ever  since  such 
articles  were  first  used  in  England.  It  has  never  been 
worth  while  to  alter  the  shape  of  a piece  of  furniture 
only  used  in  second-rate  bed-rooms,  and  which  costs, 
say,  from  40s.  to  50s.  But  with  articles  of  luxury  it  is 
different.  Your  ‘superior  Spanish  mahogany  wash- 
stand,  with  carved  standards  and  marble  top  on  castors,’ 
may  be  of  more  valuable  material  than  its  humbler 
prototype,  but  in  regard  to  design  it  is  often  not  nearly 
so  good.  The  marble  top  and  sides,  instead  of  being 
left  plain,  are  ‘ shaped  ’ into  senseless  curves.  The 
four  corner  legs  are  often  banished  as  too  obvious  and 
ordinary  a means  of  support,  and  an  attempt  is  made 
to  balance  the  wash-stand  on  two  mis-shapen  lumps  of 
wood  called  ‘ standards  ; ’ but  as  these  would  certainly 
be  insecure  in  themselves,  they  are  allowed  to  expand 
each  into  minor  legs  or  claws  towards  the  floor. 


204 


The  Bed-room. 


Finally,  the  whole  of  the  wood-work  (probably  ve- 
neered) is  covered  with  French  polish,  which  looks 
smart  enough  when  first  applied,  but  which  gradually 
grows  shabby  and  shabbier  with  every  drop  of  water 
spilt  upon  it.  The  price  of  this  ‘ superior  ’ article  is 
from  six  to  eight  guineas. 

It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  such  an  enormous 
disparity  of  cost  between  the  third-floor  and  the 
second-floor  wash-stands  can  be  accounted  for  simply 
by  a difference  in  the  intrinsic  value  of  their  respective 
materials.  The  truth  is  that  a vast  amount  of  money 
is  continually  being  wasted  on  bad  art  in  the  way  of 
carving,  &c.,  which  passes  for  elegance  with  the 
million,  but  which  all  who  are  familiar  with  the  con- 
ditions of  good  design  must  regard  with  contempt. 
This  mistake  is  not  confined  to  bed-room  floors.  The 
kitchen  dresser,  regarded  from  an  artistic  point  of  view, 
is  really  more  reasonable  in  form  and  more  picturesque 
than  the  dining-room  sideboard  ; the  servants’  coal-box 
than  the  illuminated  scuttle  in  my  lady’s  boudoir  ; and 
so  on  throughout  the  house.  It  is  not,  of  course,  the 
use  of  rich  material  alone,  or  the  elaboration  of  orna- 
ment, but  the  misapplication  of  both,  which  leads  to 
error  in  art-manufacture.  It  would  be  extremely 
absurd  to  use  gold  or  silver  in  making  a coal-box,  yet 


Bed-room  Furniture.  205 

these  metals,  even  in  such  a situation,  would  be  as 
capable  of  artistic  treatment  as  iron  or  copper.  It 
would  be  the  height  of  extravagance  to  construct  a 
sideboard  of  cedar  or  sandal-wood,  yet  such  materials 


could  be  well  adapted  to  the  purpose.  But  papier- 
mache  ornaments  on  a scuttle,  or  a buffet  overladen 
with  vicious  carving  and  artificial  sheen,  have  to  an- 
swer a worse  charge  than  that  of  mere  extravagance. 
In  the  one  case  material,  and  in  the  other  decoration, 
is  utterly  misapplied. 


206 


The  Bed-room . 


The  woodcut  on  the  preceding  page  illustrates  a 
wash-hand-stand  executed  by  Messrs.  Jackson  and 
Graham.  It  is  of  very  simple  construction,  the  only 
ornament  introduced  in  it  being  a few  easily-worked 
mouldings  and  a little  inlay  of  coloured  woods.  It  is 
intended  to  be  made  of  oak,  or  ebonised  mahogany, 
and  fitted  with  a marble  top. 

A room  intended  for  repose  ought  to  contain  nothing 
which  can  fatigue  the  eye  by  complexity.  How  many 
an  unfortunate  invalid  has  lain  helpless  on  his  bed, 
condemned  to  puzzle  out  the  pattern  of  the  hangings 
over  his  head,  or  stare  at  a wall  which  he  feels  instinc- 
tively obliged  to  map  out  into  grass  plots,  gravel  paths, 
and  summer-houses,  like  an  involuntary  landscape 
gardener  ? Time  was  when  a huge  ‘four-poster  ’ was 
considered  indispensable  to  every  sleeping  apartment, 
and  night-capped  gentlemen  drew  around  their  drowsy 
heads  ponderous  curtains,  which  bade  fair  to  stifle  them 
before  the  morning.  Let  us  consider  the  gloom,  the 
unwholesomeness,  the  absurdity  of  such  a custom, 
viewed  by  our  modern  notions  of  health  and  comfort, 
and  remember  whatever  the  upholsterers  tell  us,  that 
the  fashion  of  our  furniture,  too,  includes  many  follies 
at  which  posterity  will  smile. 

To  the  four-poster  succeeded  the  wooden  canopied 


Modem  Bedsteads. 


207 


bedstead,  or,  as  it  is  called  in  the  shops,  the  ‘ half- 
tester,’  and  the  French  bedstead,  of  which  the  head 
and  footpiece  were  in  shape  and  size  alike,  and  over 
which  two  curtains  fell,  sometimes  from  a pole  fixed  at 
the  side,  and  sometimes  from  a small  circular  canopy 
attached  to  the  ceiling.  These  forms  are  still  in  use, 
though  iron  and  brass  are  fast  displacing  mahogany  and 
rosewood,  as  materials  in  their  manufacture.  For 
obvious  reasons,  and  especially  in  large  towns,  this  is  a 
change  for  the  better,  though  it  is  to  be  regretted  that 
we  lose  the  natural  beauty  of  those  woods,  which  fre- 
quently compensated  for  much  bad  design. 

The  design  of  iron  bedsteads  is  generally  very  poor, 
especially  where  anything  in  the  shape  of  decoration 
is  introduced.  For  instance,  it  is  usual  to  conceal  the 
joint  which  occurs  where  the  tie  rods  intersect  each 
other  with  a small  boss.  A circular  rosette  would  be  ob- 
viously the  most  appropriate  feature  to  introduce  at  this 
joint,  whether  in  wrought  or  cast  metal.  But,  instead  of 
this,  the  iron-bedstead  maker  ( eleganticz  gratia , as  the 
grammarians  say),  insists  on  inventing  a lumpy  bit  of 
ornament,  which,  possibly  intended  to  represent  a clus- 
ter of  leaves,  more  closely  resembles  a friendly  group 
of  garden  slugs,  and  this  excrescence  is  repeated  not 
only  a dozen  times  in  one  bedstead,  but  in  some  thou- 


208 


The  Bed-room. 


sands  of  the  same  pattern.  The  framework  for  the 
canopy  overhead  is  generally  far  too  weak  for  its  pur- 
pose, and  often  vibrates  with  the  least  movement, 
causing  infinite  annoyance  to  invalids  and  nervous 
people.  In  old  days  the  outside  corners  of  this  canopy 
were  frequently  suspended  from  the  ceiling  ; and  this 
plan  is  still  advisable  when  the  supporting  brackets  are 
found  to  be  ricketty.  But  if  they  were  of  stout  iron 
and  properly  constructed  they  would  need  no  such 
support. 

In  the  decoration  of  iron  bedsteads,  and  indeed  all 
articles  of  domestic  use  executed  in  the  same  material, 
the  paint  should  not  be  allowed  to  shine.  Venetian 
red,  chocolate,  and  sage  green  will  perhaps  be  the  best 
colours  to  adopt  for  this  purpose. 

Some  of  the  ordinary  modern  brass  bedsteads  are 
of  superior  manufacture,  stronger  and  better  designed 
than  those  of  iron.  In  selecting  them,  however,  it  will 
be  well  to  choose  those  which  are  composed  of  simple 
bars  and  rods.  I refer,  of  course,  to  those  kept  for 
general  sale.  At  the  art  furniture  shops,  cleverly 
designed  brass  bedsteads  are  occasionally  to  be  met 
with,  but  they  are,  as  a rule,  very  expensive. 

Many  people  now-a-days  prefer,  on  sanitary  grounds, 
to  sleep,  through  the  winter  as  well  as  the  summer,  in 


209 


Bed-h  angings. 

beds  without  hangings  of  any  kind.  It  is  difficult  to 
conceive,  however,  that  in  a well-ventilated  apartment, 
a canopy  and  head  curtains  can  be  at  all  prejudicial  to 
health,  and  it  is  certain  that  they  may  be  made  to  con- 
tribute not  a little  to  the  picturesqueness  of  a modern 
bed-room. 

The  question  of  their  material  should,  of  course, 
depend  on  the  general  aspect  of  the  room,  the  nature 
of  the  carpet,  wall-paper,  &c.  When  the  colour  of  the 
latter  is  decided  in  tone,  white  dimity  curtains  will 
by  contrast  have  an  excellent  effect,  particularly  if 
the  dominant  colour  which  surrounds  them  is  repeated 
in  the  form  of  braid  or  other  trimming  at  their  edges. 
But  white  curtains  rapidly  soil  in  London,  and  except 
in  houses  where  they  can  be  continually  replaced,  it 
will  be  better  to  let  the  bedroom  paper  be  light,  and 
have  the  curtains  made  of  Cretonne , chintz,  or  printed 
cotton,  which  materials  are  now  manufactured  in  pat- 
terns of  very  good  design.  They  should  never  be 
made  longer  than  is  necessary  for  actual  use.  If  they 
hang  within  two  or  three  inches  of  the  floor  it  will 
be  quite  near  enough.  When  of  greater  length  they 
trail  upon  the  carpet  and  get  soiled  at  their  edges,  or 
when  drawn  back  they  have  to  be  looped  up  and  pulled 
over  the  cord  which  confines  them  to  their  place.  This 

p 


210 


The  Bed-room. 


is  a most  ugly  and  foolish  fashion.  Curtains,  whether 
for  a window  or  a bed,  should  be  simply  tied  back  when 
not  in  use  (as  in  Plate  XXVIII.)  The  disposing 
them  in  heavy  and  artificial  folds,  such  as  one  sees 
depicted  sometimes  at  one  corner  of  a theatrical  drop- 
scene  or  behind  the  ‘ portrait  of  a gentleman  ’ at  the 
Royal  Academy,  is  one  out  of  many  instances  which 
might  be  quoted  to  illustrate  the  perversion  of  modern 
taste  in  such  matters. 

The  canopy  may  be  either  disposed  in  plaits  or 
decorated  with  fringe,  but  where  plaits  are  used  the 
fringe  should  be  omitted,  as  it  is  apt  to  get  tangled  and 
pull  the  plaits  out  of  shape.  Box  plaits  are  the  best  to 
use,  and  should  never  be  less  than  four  or  five  inches 
in  width,  at  intervals  of  about  eight  or  ten.  They 
should  be  pressed  down  as  flat  as  possible,  and,  when 
necessary,  may  be  kept  in  shape  by  a stitch  on  either 
side. 

Our  English  notions  of  cleanliness  would  scarcely 
permit  us  to  tolerate  any  kind  of  coverlet  for  a bed 
which  could  not  be  periodically  washed.  Hence  the 
modern  counterpane,  in  some  form  or  another,  is  likely 
to  remain  in  permanent  use  for  our  beds,  though  it 
must  be  confessed  that  both  in  design  and  material  it 
has  greatly  degenerated  from  the  quality  of  those  made 


XXVII. 


Iron  Bedstead , with  Canopy , 

designed  by  Charles  L.  E as t lake. 


Vl  \-A\ \\i\l v 


Bed-coverlets  mid  Carpets. 


21  I 


some  five-and-twenty  years  ago.  From  an  artistic 
point  of  view  the  counterpanes  now  manufactured  for 
servants’  bed-rooms,  in  which  coloured  thread  is  intro- 
duced for  the  knotted  pattern  on  a grey  or  white 
ground,  are  very  suggestive  in  colour ; but  I fear  that 
smy  approach  to  this  style  of  coverlet  would  be  con- 
sidered objectionable  in  ‘ best  ’ bed-rooms.* 

The  striped  ‘ Austrian  ’ blankets  which  have  been 
lately  offered  for  sale  in  London  shops  indicate  a 
certain  tendency  towards  the  picturesque  in  design,  but 
unfortunately  the  colours  hitherto  used  for  them  are, 
like  most  modern  dyes,  far  too  crude  and  violent  in 
contrast  to  satisfy  artistic  taste. 

Carpets  are  now  so  universally  used  to  cover  every 
portion  of  the  floors  throughout  an  English  house,  that 
few  people  find  themselves  comfortable  without  one, 
yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  old  custom  of  laying 
down  a bed-side  rug,  and  leaving  the  rest  of  the  floor 
bare,  was,  especially  in  London  houses,  where  dust 
accumulates  so  insidiously  and  rapidly,  a healthier  and 
more  cleanly,  as  well  as  a more  picturesque,  fashion 
that  that  now  in  vogue. 

* Messrs.  Wanklyn,  O’Hanlon  and  Co.,  of  Manchester,  have  lately 
produced  some  counterpanes  from  my  design  at  a very  reasonable 
price. 


p 2 


212 


The  Bed-room. 


Bed-room  chairs  of  modern  manufacture  are,  as  a 
rule,  of  simpler,  and  therefore  of  better  design,  than 
those  made  for  the  drawing-room.  Some  very  fair 
examples  have  of  late  been  executed  for  this  purpose, 
but  perhaps  the  best  which  can  be  found  ready-made 
are  the  rush-bottomed  ‘ nursery  chairs,’  of  which  the 
woodwork  is  stained  black,  with  low  seats  and  high 
backs.  They  are  still  to  be  bought  in  the  East  of 
London,  and  traditionally  retain  in  their  general  shape 
the  spirit  of  an  earlier  and  better  style  of  work  than  is 
common  in  more  luxurious  furniture. 

As  a lady’s  taste  is  generally  allowed  to  reign  su- 
preme in  regard  to  the  furniture  of  bed-rooms,  I must 
protest  humbly  but  emphatically  against  the  practice 
which  exists  of  encircling  toilet-tables  with  a sort  of 
muslin  petticoat,  generally  stiffened  by  a crinoline  of 
pink  or  blue  calico.  Something  of  the  same  kind  may 
be  occasionally  seen  twisted  round  the  frame  of  the 
toilet-glass.  They  just  represent  a milliner’s  notion  of 
the  ‘ pretty,’  and  nothing  more.  Drapery  of  this  kind 
neither  is  wanted  nor  ought  to  be  introduced  in  such 
places.  In  London,  especially,  where  dust  and  blacks 
collect  whenever  the  bed-room  window  is  open,  it  should 
be  avoided.  A toilet  table  with  a marble  top,  and  a 
few  convenient  little  drawers,  is  a cleaner  and  infinitely 


Toilet-tables . 


213 


preferable  contrivance,  and,  though  more  costly  at  first, 
saves  something  in  the  weekly  washing  bill. 


The  above  woodcut,  representing  a toilet  table 
executed  by  Messrs.  Jackson  and  Graham,  will  show 


214 


The  Bed-room. 


how  a little  alteration  in  the  details  of  mouldings  and 
carving  may  give  a picturesque  character  to  such 
articles  of  furniture  without  departing  from  the  general 
form  which  custom  and  convenience  have  prescribed. 
The  best  and  most  convenient  chests  of  drawers  for 
bedroom  use  are  those  which  are  made  of  solid  wood 
(not  veneered)  and  which  are  rectangular  in  shape,  not 
bulging  out  in  front.  Even  those  executed  in  maho- 
gany for  ordinary  sale  might  be  improved  by  being 
stained  black  and  fitted  with  white  metal  drawer-rings 
and  lock  escutcheons.  But  here  again  a slight  modi- 
fication of  the  conventional  type  will  make  all  the 
difference  in  the  design,  as  may  be  noticed  in  examin- 
ing the  specimens  exhibited  at  any  art  furniture  esta- 
blishment. 

For  practical  purposes  drawers  are  generally  far  too 
deep.  Everyone  knows  the  inconvenience  of  being 
obliged  to  delve  down  below  innumerable  strata  of 
clothes  to  find  a coat  or  waistcoat  which  is  wanted  in 
a hurry.  A depth  of  five  or  six  inches  is  quite  suffi- 
cient for  a single  drawer  of  ordinary  use,  and  by  the 
additional  height  thus  gained  in  the  whole  chest, 
another  drawer  may  be  added  to  the  set.  It  is  also 
desirable  that  the  sides  of  the  chest  (i.e.  the  framework 
which  supports  the  drawers)  should  project  a little 


Bed-room  Drawers.  2 1 5 

beyond  their  fronts.  This  will  be  found  to  give  a 
greater  look  of  stability  to  the  whole,  and  it  also  affords 


an  opportunity  to  introduce  a little  decoration  in  the 
way  of  mouldings  or  carved-work  to  relieve  the  rigid 


2l6 


The  Bed-room. 


box-shaped  appearance  which  characterises  this  piece 
of  furniture  as  it  is  usually  constructed.* 

With  a little  alteration  in  design  the  modern  hang- 
ing-press could  be  made  a very  picturesque,  as  it  cer- 
tainly is  a most  serviceable,  article  of  domestic  use. 
But  here  again  the  ordinary  upholsterer  condemns  us 
to  adopt  his  own  notions  of  elegance  by  rounding  off 
corners  which  in  a legitimately  constructive  sense  can 
only  be  angular — shaping  panels  into  extravagant 
curves,  gluing  on  strips  of  paltry  and  meaningless 
scroll-work,  and  surmounting  the  press  with  a heavy 
and  uninteresting  cornice.  Now  the  cost  involved  by 
this  mode  of  decoration  and  by  lacquering  the  whole 
woodwork  with  French  polish,  would  be  sufficient  to 
pay  for  a soundly-made  oak  or  mahogany  wardrobe, 
which  by  the  general  proportions  of  its  form,  and  a 
few  judiciously  introduced  mouldings,  might  become  a 
really  artistic  feature.  The  following  woodcut  repre- 
sents a wardrobe  combining  a hanging-press  with 
drawers.  It  is  executed  by  Messrs.  Jackson  and 
Graham,  who  have  also  a double-winged  wardrobe  of 
larger  size  but  in  the  same  style  of  workmanship.  In 

* The  design  represented  on  the  preceding  page  is  for  a chest  of 
drawers  which  may  occasionally  be  used  for  a toilet  table  in  a small 
dressing-room.  It  is  of  course  not  intended  for  ladies’  use. 


The  Hanging-press. 


217 


this  instance  as  in  many  others,  improved  taste  can  only 
be  effected  by  the  dictates  of  common  sense,  and  it 


should  be  always  borne  in  mind  that  increase  of  cost, 
while  it  may  help  to  enrich  furniture,  can  never  invest 
it  with  the  true  spirit  of  good  design. 


2l8 


Crockery. 


Chapter  IX. 

CROCKERY. 


ROM  the  earliest  periods  of  civilisation  down 
to  the  present  time  there  is,  perhaps,  no 
branch  of  manufacture  which  has  undergone 
such  vicissitudes  of  taste  and  excellence  of  workman- 
ship as  that  of  pottery.  In  ancient  Greece,  within  the 
space  of  a few  centuries,  it  not  only  grew  from  a species 
of  rude  handicraft  into  a refined  and  graceful  art,  but 
declined  again  so  emphatically  in  style  and  quality  that 
the  purest  Greek  vases  in  Pliny’s  time  had  become  of 
immense  value,  and  were  frequently  exhumed  from  the 
tombs  with  the  same  kind  of  zeal  which  inspires  a 
modern  antiquary. 

In  the  Middle  Ages,  Italy  produced,  under  the 
general  name  of  majolica , some  of  the  most  beautiful 
specimens  of  the  ceramic  art  which  the  world  has  seen ; 
but  the  excellence  of  that  ware  was  continually  varying, 
sometimes  with  the  local  materials  at  hand,  sometimes 
with  the  chemical  knowledge,  and  sometimes  with  the 


Oriental  Ware . 


219 


patronage  of  the  day.  In  later  times,  the  design  of 
our  own  English  pottery  has  been  subject  to  like  in- 
fluences. The  qualities  which  distinguish  old  Chelsea, 
Derby,  Worcester,  and  Plymouth  china  are  well  known 
to  connoisseurs.  But  they  are  qualities  which,  whether 
good  or  bad,  are  characteristic  of  their  age,  and  are  not 
likely  to  be  reproduced  in  our  own  time. 

For  many  years  past  the  manufacture  of  Oriental 
ware  has  been  steadily  deteriorating,  and  this  fact  is  in 
a great  measure  due  to  the  increased  facilities  of  our 
intercourse  with  India,  and  to  the  bad  influence  of 
modern  European  taste  on  native  art.  Ignorant  people, 
who  sneer  at  what  they  consider  to  be  the  artificial 
value  set  on  quaint  pieces  of  old  crockery,  little  know 
what  artistic  merit  is  frequently  embodied  in  their 
designs,  or  by  what  exquisite  details  of  pattern  they 
excel  the  inventions  of  the  nineteenth  century.  I 
believe  the  time  will  come  when  some  of  those  rare 
examples  of  ancient  work  will  be  worth  their  weight  in 
gold,  and  will  be  sought  after  not  so  much  to  fill  the 
cabinet  of  the  antiquary  or  adorn  the  studio  of  the 
painter,  but  to  serve  as  models  for  future  imitation, 
when  we  shall  have  learnt  that  the  principles  of  good 
design  are  not  confined  to  mere  objects  of  luxury,  but 
are  applicable  to  every  sort  and  condition  of  manu- 


220 


Crockery . 


facture.  Does  not  Nature  herself  teach  this  great 
truth  ? Many  of  the  tender  plants  which  we  cultivate 
in  a greenhouse  must  have  grown  wild  somewhere. 
They  may  surpass  the  flowers  of  our  English  hedge- 
rows in  fulness  of  leaf  or  delicacy  of  hue,  but  the 
humblest  daisy  or  buttercup  which  springs  on  meadow 
land  is  as  much  a work  of  High  Art,  as  perfect  of  its 
kind,  and  certainly  fulfils  the  same  eternal  laws  of  floral 
growth  as  they  obey. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  all  this  is  lost  sight 
of  in  the  system  of  modern  English  design.  At  the 
china-shops  especially,  we  shall  find  that  almost  every 
article  of  humble  use  or  modest  price  is  fashioned  in  a 
coarse  and  clumsy  way — not  because  greater  elegance 
of  form  would  involve  more  labour — but  because  it  is 
considered  superfluous  to  aim  at  simple  grace  at  all 
for  objects  which  are  not  refined  in  quality  of  material 
and  mode  of  manufacture.  Now,  perfection  of  quality 
and  excessive  accuracy  in  workmanship  may  add  to 
the  luxe , but  never  to  the  spirit  of  true  art.  On 
the  contrary,  there  may  be  a sickly  kind  of  high 
finish  and  an  ignoble  symmetry  in  design  which  will 
detract  from  its  merit  if  it  be  good,  and  render  it  con- 
temptible if  it  be  poor.  I have  before  me  at  the 
present  moment  two  specimens  of  foreign  pottery — 


Moorish  Pottery 


221 


one  a preserve  jar  of  Indian  manufacture,  the  other  an 
Algerine  or  Moorish  plate.  I doubt  whether  the  most 
skilful  craftsman  in  Staffordshire  or  at  Sevres  could 
devise  any  object  more  thoroughly  artistic  in  design,  or 
better  adapted  for  their  respective  purposes  ; and  yet 
they  are  roughly-executed  pieces  of  native  ware,  pro- 
duced at  a price  doubtless  not  greater  than  that  which 
we  pay  for  the  commonest  mugs  and  platters  at  a 
village  fair.  I bought  them  of  a London  curiosity 
dealer  for  some  few  shillings  a-piece.  I suppose  they 
could  not  have  been  made  here  for  as  many  guineas. 

The  plate,  or  rather  circular  dish  (for  it  is  deep  and 
capacious),  is  made  of  a coarse  clay  covered  with  an 
opaque  glaze.  In  the  centre,  or  hollow  portion,  is 
painted  on  a white  ground,  and  in  various  colours,  a 
very  remarkable  pattern.  The  idea  seems  to  have 
been  taken  from  a ship,  for  there  are  masts  and  sails, 
and  pennants  flying,  and  port-holes,  and  a patch  of 
bluish-green  below,  which  I suppose  must  be  accepted 
as  typical  of  water.  But  in  such  haste  has  the  artist 
been  to  make  his  dish  gay  with  colour  and  a pleasant 
flow  of  lines,  that  no  one  can  say  which  is  the  bow  and 
which  the  stern  of  his  vessel — whether  we  are  looking 
at  her  athwart  or  alongships — where  the  sea  ends  and 
the  ship  s side  begins  ; and,  finally,  what  relation  the 


222 


Crockery. 


improbable  hulk  bears  to  the  impossible  rigging.  The 
whole  thing  is,  pictorially  considered,  absolute  non- 
sense, and  yet,  as  a bit  of  decorative  painting,  excellent. 
The  design,  such  as  it  is,  has  been  sketched  in,  evi- 
dently by  hand,  rapidly  but  with  great  spirit ; the  out- 


line has  been  first  made  in  brown  colour,  and  the 
spaces  thus  marked  out  are  filled  in  sometimes  with 
flat  and  sometimes  with  accidentally  gradated  tints  of 
blue,  violet,  green,  and  yellow.  The  picture,  if  we 
may  so  call  it,  is  then  enclosed  in  a sort  of  scallop- 
pattern  border,  and  the  outside  rim  of  the  dish  is 


An  Indian  Preserve  Jar. 


223 


further  decorated  with  a sort  of  rough-and-ready  tri- 
angular patchwork  of  green,  white,  and  yellow,  arranged 
alternately. 

The  Indian  preserve  jar  is  somewhat  more  refined 
in  regard  both  to  material  and  style  of  decoration. 
The  ground  colour  here  is  that  beautiful  hue  which  one 


might  call  green  when  opposed  to  blue,  and  blue  when 
opposed  to  green.  On  this  a floriated  pattern  is  drawn 
in  black  outline,  and  so  profusely  distributed  that 
scarcely  a quarter  of  an  inch  square  is  left  uncovered 
by  it.  There  are  stalks  and  leaves,  tendrils,  buds,  and 
flowers — none  of  a strictly  botanical  character,  yet  all 
sufficiently  suggestive  of  nature  to  be  graceful.  The 
stalks  and  leaves  are  of  vegetable  green,  the  tendrils 


224 


Crockery . 


are  white,  the  buds  alternately  yellow  and  rose  pink, 
and  the  flowers  of  a delicate  carnation  gradated  into 
light  grey.  All  this  ornament  is  executed  in  enamelled 
colour,  slightly  relieved,  but  unshaded  and  conven- 
tional in  character  ; and  on  the  ground  thus  formed  are 
introduced  at  opposite  sides  of  the  circular  jar  four 
lemon-coloured  discs,  about  three  inches  in  diameter, 
decorated  with  Indian  characters  in  light  red,  and  out- 
lined like  the  rest  of  the  ornament  in  black.  The  base 
of  the  jar  is  bordered  with  yellow  leaves,  lapping  over 
each  other.  The  effect  of  the  whole  is  excellent  ; and 
although,  I fear,  it  would  violate  some  scientific  theories 
of  chromatic  harmony,  one  may  well  dispense  with 
theories  in  so  admirable  a result. 

Now,  if  a French  or  British  modern  porcelain  pain- 
ter had  taken  a ship  or  a fair  flowering  plant  for  his 
model,  he  would  have  gone  to  work  in  a much  more 
knowing  way.  We  should  have  seen  a sloop  or  cutter 
— drawn  in  unexceptionable  perspective — scudding  with 
reefed  topsails  before  the  wind,  or  firing  a salute  to  the 
port-admiral ; all  the  tackle  would  have  been  correctly 
indicated  ; and  there  would  have  been  a mountainous 
coast-line,  or  a setting  sun,  or  a group  of  clouds  by  way 
of  background.  In  like  manner,  the  flower-painting 
would  have  been  naturalistic,  with  shaded  leaves  and 


English  Crockery . 


225 


picturesque  entanglement  of  stems,  and,  perhaps,  a 
bunch  or  so  of  ribbon  to  tie  them  up  with.  And  the 
European  designer  would  have  flattered  himself  on  his 
enlightened  skill,  and  felt  inwardly  grateful  that  he  had 
received  what  is  called  an  art-education,  instead  of 
remaining  in  barbaric  ignorance,  like  the  poor  Bengalese 
or  Algerine  potters.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  his  work 
would  have  been — nay,  is — inferior  to  their  work,  and 
will  remain  so  until  our  schools  of  design  form  a new 
standard  of  taste,  and  become  more  emphatic  in  their 
teaching. 

Private  energy  has,  however,  done  much  towards  a 
reform  in  ceramic  art.  The  name  of  Wedgwood  in  the 
last  century,  and  that  of  Minton  in  our  own  time,  are 
well  known  as  those  of  men  who  have  worked  with  a 
definite  purpose  to  that  end  ; and  if  their  efforts  have 
not  resulted  in  a permanent  revolution  of  public  taste, 
we  may  at  least  be  grateful  to  them  for  much  of 
the  improvement  which  has  taken  place  during  the 
last  fifty  years  in  the  design  of  English  crockery. 

Excellent  specimens  of  Minton’s  ware  are  to  be 
found  at  the  establishments  of  their  London  agents. 
Among  these  examples,  the  larger  objects,  such  as 
vases,  flower-dishes  and  figure  pieces  in  imitation  of 
majolica,  are  the  most  tasteful  and  effective  in  form 

Q 


226 


Crockery. 


and  colour.  Some  of  the  table-china  is  tolerable  in 
what  may  be  called  the  motive  of  its  design,  but  as 
a rule  our  dinner  and  tea  services  are  marred  by 
an  over-neatness  in  the  execution  of  their  patterns, 
and  by  a tendency  towards  mere  prettiness  in  the 
tints  employed  to  enrich  them.*  Half  the  interest 
of  Oriental,  and  indeed  of  all  old  china,  depends  on 
the  artistic  freedom  with  which  it  was  decorated  by 
actual  handiwork  ; and  though  in  this  branch  of  manu- 
facture, as  in  many  others,  mechanical  aid  has  sup- 
planted manual  labour,  there  can  be  no  reason  why 
arabesques  and  other  surface  ornament  should  be 
printed  with  that  mathematical  precision  of  line  which 
represents  the  opposite  edges  of  a leaf  as  they  never 
are  in  nature — absolutely  identical  in  contour. 

The  quality  of  colour  applied  in  the  decoration  of 
modern  china  is  generally  bad.  Your  pinks,  mauves, 
magentas,  and  other  hues  of  the  same  kind,  however 
charming  they  may  appear  in  the  eyes  of  a court- 
milliner,  are  ignoble  and  offensive  to  the  taste  of  a 
real  artist,  and  are  rendered  more  so  in  our  porcelain 
by  the  fact  of  their  being  laid  on  in  perfectly  flat  and 

* The  thick  and  highly  lustrous  glaze  which  covers  almost  all  modern 
crockery  is  much  to  be  deplored.  The  worst  instance  of  its  use  may  be 
noticed  in  what  is  called  ‘ Irish  porcelain  7 — a detestable  ware  of  recent 
invention,  which  glistens  like  wet  barley-sugar. 


China  Gilding . 


227 


even  tints.  It  has  been  truly  said  that  all  noble 
colour,  whether  in  pictorial  or  decorative  art,  will 
be  found  gradated , and  on  this  point  Nature  herself 
may  be  quoted  as  a supreme  authority. 

The  practice  of  gilding  china,  as  it  is  at  present 
carried  out,  is  a most  objectionable  one.  It  may  be 
fairly  questioned  whether  the  application  of  gilding 
at  all,  looking  to  the  nature  of  the  material  and  the 
conditions  of  its  manufacture,  is  satisfactory.  But  the 
fashion  of  gilding  the  edges  of  cups  and  plates,  and 
touching  up,  as  it  were,  the  relieved  ornament  on  lids 
and  handles  with  streaks  of  gold,  is  a monstrous  piece 
of  vulgarity. 

I have  often  wondered  how  it  happens  that  some  of 
the  most  beautiful  modern  dinner-services  we  see  are 
so  frequently  spoilt  by  the  clumsy  and  utterly  incon- 
gruous shape  of  the  handles  with  which  the  vegetable 
dishes,  soup  tureens,  &c.,  are  crowned.  It  seems,  how- 
ever, that,  in  accordance  with  the  true  spirit  of  modern 
British  manufacture,  the  designer  of  the  mould  in  which 
these  vessels  are  shaped  knows  nothing  of  the  surface 
pattern  which  they  are  subsequently  to  receive.  The 
consequence  is  that,  as  the  mould  represents  an  ex- 
pensive item  in  the  manufacture,  and  has  often,  when 
once  executed,  to  serve  for  a dozen  different  patterns, 


228 


Crockery . 


the  pattern  designer  has  to  take  the  shape  of  his  dishes 
just  as  he  finds  it,  however  ugly  it  may  be.  Surely 
grace  of  form  is  too  important  an  element  of  beauty  to 
be  thus  neglected ! If  it  is  desirable  for  economy’s 
sake  that  one  mould  should  suffice  for  many  surface 
patterns,  then  it  is  all  the  more  necessary  that  that  form 
should  be  in  every  respect  a graceful  one.  A simple 
ring  or  round  knob  would  be  an  infinitely  better  handle 
for  dish-covers,  &c.,  than  the  twisted  stalks,  gilt  acorns, 
sea-shells,  and  other  silly  inventions  which  we  find  so 
constantly  repeated  on  them,  and  which,  while  they  are 
contemptible  in  a poor  design,  are  destructive  to  the 
effect  of  a good  one. 

There  has  been  a great  improvement  of  late  years 
in  the  design  of  ordinary  water-jugs.  I bought  a very 
good  one  for  four  shillings  some  time  ago  in  the  Strand, 
under  the  trade  name  of  'antique.’  It  is  introduced 
in  the  sketch  of  bed-room  drawers,  p.  215.  The  lower 
portion  was  bulbous  ; the  neck  straight  but  not  narrow, 
and  covered  with  a metal  top  ; the  handle  long  and  of 
a simple  loop  form.  The  material  was  a cream- 
coloured  stone  ware.  Round  the  bowl  and  neck  were 
scarlet  bands  enriched  with  round  and  diamond-shaped 
lozenges  placed  alternately.  These  lozenges  contained 
quatrefoil  panels  of  enamelled  colour  (dark  blue  and 


Modern  Pottery. 


229 


rose-pink).  My  jug  was  about  eight  inches  high,  but 
I believe  the  same  pattern  might  have  been  had  in 
various  sizes.  I say  ‘ might  have  been  had,’  for  I fear 
a good  design  rarely  keeps  its  place  in  the  market.  So 
long  as  it  is  new  it  sells  well  enough,  but  next  season 
it  is  thrust  aside  to  make  room  for  some  fresh  novelty. 
All  that  the  British  public  seems  to  care  for  is  to 
get  the  ‘ last  thing  out  ’ : taste  is  a secondary  con- 
sideration. No  doubt  some  of  my  readers  may  have 
noticed  in  the  shop-windows  a little  flower-vase  of 
‘ biscuit,’  or  Parian  ware,  in  the  shape  of  a human 
hand  modelled,  au  naturel , holding  a narrow  cup. 
A more  commonplace  and  silly  notion  of  a vase  can 
scarcely  be  imagined,  and  yet  so  delighted  were  the 
public  with  this  new  conceit  that  it  sold  everywhere  by 
hundreds.  In  one  establishment  alone  twelve  men 
were  constantly  employed  in  producing  relays  of  this 
article.  I suppose  by  this  time  everybody  has  dis- 
covered that  his  neighbour  has  bought  it,  and  all  pro- 
nounce it  commonplace. 

The  manufacture  of  modern  pottery  in  England  in- 
cludes no  better  example  of  good  design  applied  to 
cheap  and  useful  objects  than  the  red  ‘delf’  ware, 
originally  produced,  I believe,  by  Wedgwood,  but  now 
adopted  by  most  of  the  leading  firms  for  a variety  of 


230 


Crockery . 


articles  to  which  this  material  is  especially  suited.  It 
is  to  be  had  in  all  shades  of  colour,  from  a pale  ochreous 
hue  to  a deep  Indian  red.  Almost  all  these  tints  are 
very  beautiful  in  themselves,  but  their  effect  is  some- 
times marred  by  the  use  of  enamelled  colour  applied  in 
too  violent  a contrast.  The  unglazed  ware  is  used  for 
water-bottles,  butter-coolers,  &c.,  its  porous  nature 
being  admirably  adapted  for  such  purposes.  It  is,  how- 
ever, much  to  be  regretted  that  after  a period  of  about 
twelve  months  these  vessels  begin  to  fail  in  their 
object.  The  water  exudes  only  from  their  lower  sur- 
face, and  they  seem  to  be  no  longer  porous  elsewhere. 
I have  tried  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  this,  and  am  told 
that  the  clay,  from  constant  exposure  to  the  air  and 
touch,  becomes  hardened  or  clogged  with  dust.  It  is 
said  that  placing  them  in  a hot  oven,  and  washing 
them  with  fine  sand,  will  restore  their  porous  quality ; 
but  I am  inclined  to  think  that  the  imperfection  is 
gradually  produced  by  the  water  itself,  which  probably 
leaves  a deposit  of  lime  in  passing  through  to  the  sur- 
face. They  are,  however,  sufficiently  cheap  to  be  re- 
placed from  time  to  time  in  most  households,  and  are 
certainly  very  elegant  and  picturesque  specimens  of 
industrial  art.  The  most  ordinary  form  of  delf  water- 
bottle  is  bulbous  at  its  lower  end,  with  a narrow  neck, 


Water  Bottles . 


231 


the  upper  part  of  which,  being  most  exposed  to  the 
touch,  is  very  properly  glazed.  Both  the  neck  and  the 
body  of  the  jug  are  frequently  decorated  with  enamelled 
colour  arranged  in  geometrical  patterns  of  a Greek  or 
mediaeval  character.  Some  of  the  water-bottles  take 
the  form  of  small  antique  vases,  and  these  are,  for  the 


most  part,  made  of  plain  clay.  Very  beautiful  examples 
of  this  class,  in  ‘ orange  porous  ’ delf,  may  now  be 
bought  for  a few  shillings  a-piece.  The  same  material 
is  frequently  used  for  tea-pots,  hot  water-jugs,  &c.,  the 
ware,  either  red  or  stone  colour,  being  in  these  cases 
covered  internally  with  a glaze.  The  tea-service  illus- 
trated on  this  page,  and  manufactured  by  Messrs.  Cope- 
land, of  Bond  Street,  is  a fair  example  of  this  class.  A 


232 


Crockery. 


few  years  ago  some  mustard-pots  and  salt-cellars  of  ex- 
cellent design  were  produced  in  this  material.  They 
were  generally  decorated  with  bands  of  enamelled 
colour,  and  silver  mounted.  Infinitely  more  tasteful 
than  the  ordinary  class  of  articles  which  deck  the 
dinner-table,  they  were  offered  for  sale  at  a price  within 
reach  of  the  most  economical  household  (I  believe 
about  5s.  6d.  the  pair).  In  spite  of  these  recommenda- 
tions, they  met  with  very  few  purchasers,  and  though 
still  kept  in  stock  at  certain  shops,  they  are  rarely  asked 
for.  In  this  and  a hundred  other  instances  it  is  the 
public  taste  which  is  at  fault,  and  manufacturers  can 
hardly  be  blamed  for  discontinuing  to  bring  out  works 
of  sound  art  which  are  caviare  to  the  multitude. 

Even  when  a good  design  does  by  any  chance  get 
into  vogue,  it  is  only  in  demand  for  a limited  time,  and 
makes  way  for  the  last  novelty  which  has  tickled  the 
fancy  of  a fashionable  few.  Not  long  ago  there  was  a 
run  upon  toilet  services  of  white  stone  ware,  decorated 
with  a simple  monochrome  border — viz.,  either  the 
guillocke  (wave)  pattern,  or  some  variation  of  the 
Greek  fret  (familiarly  known  as  the  ‘key’).  Now 
either  of  these  patterns  is  excellent  of  its  kind,  and 
well  adapted  to  the  purpose.  But  they  were  gra- 
dually displaced  by  a new  conceit.  Some  designer, 


Hand  Basins  and  Ewers . 


233 


with  more  ingenuity  than  good  taste,  hit  upon  the 
notion  that  pink  and  mauve  ribbons,  twisted  backwards 
and  forwards  in  a series  of  symmetrical  loops,  would 
form  a fitting  ornament  for  the  neck  of  an  ewer,  and 
the  edge  of  a washing  basin.  The  notion  was  an 
absurd  one,  but  it  became  popular,  and  the  probabi- 
lity is  that  not  one  housewife  out  of  ten  cared  to  con- 
sider what  possible  connection  there  could  be  between 
cap-ribbons  and  a bed-room  jug/''  Indeed,  there  is  no 
branch  of  art-manufacture  exposed  to  greater  dangers, 
in  point  of  taste,  than  that  of  ceramic  design.  Nor  is 
it  by  any  means  easy  to  lay  down  specific  rules  for  the 
guidance  of  even  a general  taste  which  is  inexperienced 
in  this  department  of  art.  The  tendency  of  the  un- 
educated eye  is,  in  most  cases,  to  admire  the  smart  and 
showy  but  effeminate  hues  of  the  day  rather  than  the 
subtle  and  refined  combinations  of  colour  which  dis- 
tinguish ancient  pottery  and  porcelain.  Extravagance 
of  form  is  preferred  to  a sober  grace  of  contour,  and 
neatness  of  execution  to  the  spirit  of  artistic  design. 
The  ‘ pretty,’  in  short,  is  too  frequently  held  in  higher 
estimation  than  the  beautiful,  and  nothing  but  ex- 

* The  forms  of  swans  and  bulrushes,  sea-weed  and  ivy,  have  since  been 
pressed  into  this  special  service,  whether  by  the  caprice  of  the  manu- 
facturer or  the  bad  taste  of  the  public,  I will  not  venture  to  say.  In 
either  case  the  result  is  melancholy  to  contemplate. 


234 


Crockery . 


perience,  based  on  a frequent  inspection  of  good  ex- 
amples, with  a general  knowledge  of,  and  reverence 
for,  the  principles  of  sound  art,  will  teach  people  to 
value  the  importance  of  this  distinction. 

To  a reasoning  mind,  however,  which  recognises  the 
necessity  of  discriminating  between  pictorial  and  decor- 
ative art,  it  will  be  obvious  that  if  their  respective  con- 
ditions are  ever  to  be  maintained  inviolate,  they  must 
be  so  in  this  particular  field.  The  representation  of  per- 
spective, of  aerial  effect,  and  of  chiaroscuro  would  be 
impossible  on  surfaces  which,  independently  of  the  con- 
sideration of  texture,  are  liable  to  every  variety  of  con- 
tour. The  Greeks  understood  this  principle  so  well 
that  they  contented  themselves,  as  we  find  on  all  an- 
tique vessels,  with  representing  the  human  figure  and 
other  objects  on  one  flat  colour,  red  (and  sometimes 
white)  on  a black  ground,  or  vice  versa.  The  folds  of 
drapery,  the  action  of  limbs,  &c.,  were  expressed  by 
lines.  There  was  no  shading,  or  pictorial  effect. 
The  design  was  simply  decorative,  and  depended 
for  its  beauty  on  exquisite  drawing,  correct  symmetry 
of  general  form,  and  refinement  of  execution.  The 
principles  of  design  in  Greek  pottery  have  been  from 
time  to  time  revived  and  applied  to  modern  manufac- 
ture with  more  or  less  success,  but  the  great  expense 
attending  the  reproduction  of  antique  designs  has 


XXVIII. 


Greek  Toilet  Ware , 

manufactured  by  Messrs.  Copeland. 


Greek  Pottery , 


235 


hitherto  formed  the  chief  obstacle  to  such  revivals. 
A few  leading  firms  have,  however,  lately  endeavoured 
to  overcome  this  difficulty ; and  it  is  satisfactory  to 
know  that  at  their  establishments  many  articles  of 
household  use,  as,  for  instance,  bed-room  jugs  and 
basins,  toilet-ware,  &c.,  can  now  be  procured  in  this 
class  of  ware  at  a cost  which  does  not  exceed  the 
average  price  of  such  articles- — at  least  when  they  are 
the  best  of  their  kind. 

The  ewers  retain  the  form  prevalent  for  ordinary 
use,  which  is  hardly  worthy  of  their  surface  decora- 
tion, but  the  toilet-ware,  of  which  a few  specimens  are 
given  in  Plate  XXIX.,  is  also  excellent  in  general 
form,  and  reflects  great  credit  on  its  manufacturers,  in 
regard  both  to  material  and  workmanship.  If  we 
compare  such  objects  as  these  with  the  showy  but 
commonplace  crockery  which  we  find  decorated  with 
ribbons  and  bunches  of  flowers,  it  is  impossible  to 
avoid  the  conclusion  that  strictly  pictorial  representa- 
tions of  nature  are  quite  unsuitable  to  the  true  con- 
ditions of  design  in  ceramic  art ; and  we  find  this 
principle  realised  not  only  in  the  Classic  age,  but  in  all 
the  best  periods  of  manufacture  which  have  succeeded 
it.  The  early  Italian  majolica,  though  differing  widely 
in  sentiment  of  design  and  quality  of  material  from 


236 


Crockery. 


antique  pottery,  embodies  no  realisms  in  its  ornament. 
Portraits  (so-called)  are  indeed  introduced  in  the 
‘ marriage-plates  * of  that  period,  but  they  are  little 
more  than  conventional  representations ; and  I ques- 
tion whether  they  would  ever  have  been  recognised 
without  the  addition  of  a label  or  other  device  on 
which  the  name  of  the  fair  bride  ‘ Elena  diva,’  or 
‘ Bella  Marta,’  was  usually  inscribed. 

To  this  early  period  of  Italian  majolica  (about  the 
first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century)  I would  especially 
draw  attention,  as  realising  in  its  manufacture  some  of 
the  highest  artistic  qualities  which  can  be  associated  in 
ceramic  manufacture- — viz.,  beauty  and  vigour  of  form, 
thorough  harmony  of  colour,  and  propriety  of  ornament. 
Some  exquisite  specimens  maybe  seen  at  the  Kensing- 
ton Museum,  and  cannot  be  too  carefully  examined  by 
those  who  desire  a standard  of  excellence  in  the  art 
which  is  there  so  ably  illustrated.^ 

The  ancient  wares  of  Gubbio,  of  Urbino,  and  Faenza, 
are  especially  famous.  From  the  name  of  the  latter 

* Mr.  W.  S.  Coleman,  in  his  figure-subject  designs  for  modern  ware, 
manufactured  by  Messrs.  Minton  & Co.  at  their  art-pottery  works,  has 
realised  much  of  the  true  spirit  of  old  majolica.  Those  specimens  which 
are  painted  by  the  artist’s  own  hand  are  of  course  expensive  ; but  dinner 
services  and  articles  of  ordinary  household  use  have  been  executed  under 
his  superintendence,  at  a more  moderate  price,  for  general  sale. 


Majolica, 


237 


place  the  French  word  faience  is  derived,  but  was  sub- 
sequently applied  to  a very  different  species  of  manu- 
facture. The  term  Raphaelesque  is  sometimes  given 
indiscriminately  to  the  majolica  of  Raphael’s  own  time 
and  to  that  which  was  produced  years  after  his  death, 
but  which  was  painted  in  imitation  of  his  pictorial 
works.  However  interesting  the  latter  may  be  by 
reason  of  its  connection  with  the  inventions  of  so  great 
an  artist,  it  can  hardly  be  recommended  as  a model 
for  modern  imitation.  The  colour  was  generally  ex- 
cellent, the  drawing  bold  and  masterlike ; the  tra- 
ditional shapes  of  the  majolica  vessels  were  in  most 
cases  preserved,  and  thus  lent  an  additional  charm  to 
the  effect  But  such  surface-decoration  is,  after  all,  an 
incomplete  picture,  and  must  appear  to  anyone  ac- 
quainted with  the  original  works  in  the  light  of  a rude 
and  clumsy  copy. 

Some  of  the  purest  majolica  of  Raphael’s  time  is 
enriched  with  the  delicate  and  elegant  arabesque,  in 
which  we  trace  the  spirit  of  that  decorative  ornament 
which  graces  the  Loggie  of  the  Vatican.  Even  the 
rudest  specimens  of  this  ware  are  admirable  in  their 
scheme  of  colour  and  in  motive  of  ornament.  The 
ground  is  generally  white — not  the  crude  white  of 
modern  porcelain,  but  a mellow  creamy  hue  well  adapted 


238 


Crockery . 


to  relieve  the  colours  laid  over  it ; these  are  generally 
raw  sienna  and  Indian  yellows,  scored  with  lines  of 
reddish  brown  ; of  blues  there  are  several  shades,  light 
indigo  being  most  chiefly,  and  turquoise  most  sparingly 
used  : light  copper  green  and  Indian  red  complete  the 
list  of  tints.  The  ornament  is  swiftly  but  spiritedly 
drawn  in  a series  of  fantastically-conceived  figures, 
which  terminate  in  light  tendril-shaped  lines  and  buds 
of  colour.  Where  the  human  figure  is  introduced,  it  is 
sketched  roughly,  but  with  evident  knowledge.  The 
general  form  of  dishes,  plates,  salt-cellars,  and  other 
specimens  of  this  ware  is  well  accentuated,  but  not 
rigidly  symmetrical  in  outline.  There  is  no  compass 
accuracy  about  them  ; nor  is  the  material  of  which  they 
are  composed  uniformly  faultless.  In  some  parts  the 
glaze  may  be  a little  thinner  than  in  others,  and  here 
and  there  we  may  perchance  light  upon  an  air-hole. 
The  colour  on  the  right  side  of  a platter  may  be  less 
forcible  than  it  is  on  the  left.  But  all  these  are  defects 
of  little  moment  in  the  eyes  of  an  artist  who  recognises 
the  dexterity  and  cunning  of  the  hands  that  moulded 
the  clay  and  decorated  its  surface.*  At  present  the 

* Among  the  French  specimens  of  ceramic  art  in  the  International  Ex- 
hibition of  1872  the  faience  of  T.  Deck,  and  the  Manufacture  de  Gien , 
from  Loiret,  by  Geoffroy  & Cie,  may  be  mentioned  as  admirable  in  de- 
sign and  workmanship.  Most  of  them  are  hand-painted,  but  a few  small 


Stone  Ware . 


239 


price  of  artistic  labour  obliges  us  to  rely  upon  machine- 
printing for  the  decoration  of  our  cheaper  crockery, 
and  therefore  the  treatment  of  the  original  design 
becomes  of  the  highest  importance.  In  the  manufac- 
ture of  stone  ware  the  Belgians  have  set  us  a good 
example  by  their  reproduction  of  old  Gres-de-Flandres 
moulded  from  good  old  models  and  often  excellent  in 
colour.  It  is  one  of  the  most  satisfactory  instances 
which  I know  of  improved  taste  in  industrial  art,  and 
might  with  advantage  be  imitated  in  this  country,  where 
we  possess  great  executive  skill  with  but  little  concep- 
tional  taste.*  In  designing  and  executing  the  cheaper 
kinds  of  hard  porcelain,  the  French  far  surpass  us. 
Some  very  good  toilet-services,  bed-room  candlesticks, 
and  chimney-piece  match-boxes  were  imported  some 
years  ago,  and  I believe  are  still  brought  from  France, 
although  they  are  sometimes  stamped  with  British 

examples,  either  partially  or  wholly  printed,  show  how  successfully  me- 
chanical aid  may  be  applied  in  the  reproduction  of  majolica  and  old 
Rouen  ware.  A depot  for  the  Gien  pottery  has  recently  been  opened  by 
M.  Oppenheim,  at  21  Park  Side,  Albert  Gate. 

* The  grey  and  buff  stone-ware  recently  produced  by  Doulton  & Co. 
of  Lambeth,  affords  evidence  of  improved  taste  in  British  pottery.  The 
quality  of  the  ware  (hitherto  chiefly  employed  for  beer  jugs  and  such  small 
articles)  is  excellent,  and  some  of  the  designs  are  good  in  general  form, 
though  capable  of  much  improvement  in  the  style  of  surface  decoration. 
To  secure  this,  the  manufacturers  could  hardly  do  better  than  copy 
the  beautiful  specimens  of  old  Gres-de-Flandres  which  may  be  procured 
at  a trifling  cost  from  some  of  our  curiosity  dealers. 


240 


Crockery . 


trade-marks.  These  articles  are  made  of  a thin  white 
porcelain,  the  surface  of  which  is  decorated  with  figures, 
&c.,  printed  in  a fine  brown  outline,  and  then  filled  in 
by  hand  (before  the  second  firing)  with  flat  colour. 
These  figure-groups  are  generally  of  a quasi-classical 
character : dancing  nymphs,  gladiatorial  fights  and 
chariot  races,  are  the  favourite  subjects.  Sometimes  a 
single  head  appears  as  a medallion  on  the  side  of  a 
little  vase.  The  drawing  is  usually  very  fair  in  execu- 
tion. There  is  no  shading,  the  folds  of  drapery,  &c., 
being  expressed  by  outline  only.  The  colours  are  well 
selected,  and,  considering  the  very  low  price  at  which 
it  is  offered  for  sale,  this  toilet  ware  is  a great  improve- 
ment on  anything  of  the  kind  which  has  been  produced 
for  ordinary  sale  during  the  last  twenty  years.  It 
appears  to  be  supplied  in  London  at  the  toy  and  fancy 
warehouses  rather  than  by  regular  dealers  in  china. 
Some  specimens  bear  the  letters  ‘ B.  Co.’  on  a sort 
of  trade  mark.  This  china  is  probably  manufactured 
at  Limoges,  where  many  such  articles  are  produced 
in  porcelain  at  a price  with  which  our  manufacturers 
cannot  hope  to  compete.  But  in  the  manufacture  of 
earthenware,  regarding  both  cheapness  and  quality, 
England  still  stands  unrivalled. 


Table  Glass , 


241 


Chapter  X. 

TABLE  GLASS . 

EXT  to  a good  display  of  china  on  the  table 
or  sideboard,  there  is  nothing  which  lends 
greater  grace  to  the  appointments  of  a dining- 
room than  delicate  and  well-designed  glass.  North  of 
the  Tweed,  it  is  not  unusual  to  regard  ‘crystal’  as  the 
all-important  feature  of  domestic  feasts  ; and  certainly 
most  London  housewives  who  can  afford  the  luxury 
are  as  careful  of  the  appearance  of  their  decanters  and 
wine-glasses  as  the  glittering  plate  which  lies  beside 
them.  The  same  national  peculiarity  which  makes 
us  fastidious  to  secure  spotless  purity  in  our  table-linen 
and  a mirror-like  smoothness  for  our  French-polished 
wood,  leads  us  also  to  require  that  every  article  of  glass 
which  we  use  shall  be  absolutely  free  from  flaws  or 
blemishes  of  every  kind.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see  that  a 
demand  for  this  sort  of  perfection,  although  it  may  tend 
to  make  admirable  housemaids  and  laundresses,  does 
not  do  much  to  promote  the  interests  of  art.  I suppose 


R 


242 


Table  Glass . 


there  are  no  houses  in  the  world  kept  so  scrupulously 
clean  and  neat  internally  as  a well-appointed  English 
house  ; no  carriages  so  luxurious  and  well  finished  in 
manufacture  as  ours  ; no  boots  so  well  blacked  as 
British  boots— and  yet  our  dwellings  are  uninterest- 
ing, our  best  equipages  unpicturesque,  and  our  dress 
is  as  ugly  as  that  of  the  rest  of  Christendom. 

Much  the  same  might  have  been  said  up  to  within 
the  last  few  years,  and,  indeed,  may  to  a great  extent 
still  be  said,  of  our  ordinary  table  glass.  Most  house- 
holders can  recollect  a time  when  the  great  test  of 
excellence  in  such  articles  depended  on  the  question 
whether  they  were  ‘ cut  ’ or  not.  If  they  were  cut  at  all 
they  wrere  considered  good  ; if  they  were  cut  elaborately 
they  were  ‘ elegant ; ’ if  they  were  only  blown  they 
were  worthless.  It  did  so  happen  that  at  that  time, 
bad  as  the  cut  glass  was,  the  blown  glass  was  rather 
worse  ; but  this  may  be  chiefly  attributed  to  the  fact 
that  the  latter  was  blown  into  a mould,  which  was 
frequently  shaped  so  as  to  imitate  the  effect  of  cutting. 
Our  manufacturers  seem  quite  to  have  forgotten  that 
the  most  beautiful  table  glass  which  has  ever  been 
produced — viz.,  that  of  Venice  in  the  fifteenth  century 
—was  not  ‘ cut,’  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  at 
all. 


Blown  and  Cvit  Glass . 


243 


Those  of  my  readers  who  have  seen  specimens  of 
this  exquisite  and  ancient  art  in  public  or  private 
museums  must  be  quite  aware  how  much  it  differs  from 
the  heavy  and  inelegant  vessels  from  which  our  grand- 
fathers drank  their  port  and  sherry. 

The  author  of  4 Modern  Painters/  in  one  of  those 
long  but  interesting  digressions  with  which  his  volumes 
abound,  once  took  occasion,  while  commenting  on  the 
degraded  state  of  modern  art-manufacture,  to  ridicule 
the  national  pride  with  which  we  English  are  accus- 
tomed to  regard  the  characteristics  of  our  modern 
table  glass.  ‘ We  ought  rather/  adds  Mr.  Ruskin,  ‘ to 
be  ashamed  of  it.’ 

This  opinion,  startling  as  it  may  sound  in  the  ears 
of  those  who  are  accustomed  to  back  British  goods 
generally  against  the  world,  is  nevertheless  founded  on 
principles  of  science  as  well  as  of  art.  The  process  of 
manufacture  which  every  raw  material  undergoes  before 
it  is  converted  into  objects  of  practical  utility,  and,  con- 
sequently, the  form  which  such  objects  finally  assume, 
ought  to  depend  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  on  the  natural 
properties  of  the  material  itself.  Whenever  this  prin- 
ciple is  lost  sight  of,  the  result  appears  either  in  the 
light  of  a technical  defect  or  an  aesthetic  error.  For 
instance,  we  know  that,  inasmuch  as  the  strength  of  iron 


R 2 


244 


Table  Glass . 


depends  on  the  density  and  tenacity  of  its  fibre,  the 
repeated  processes  of  heating  and  hammering  must  be 
the  best  means  of  securing  that  strength  ; whereas  cast- 
iron,  which  takes  its  artificial  form  while  in  a state  of 
fusion,  though  cheaper  in  its  cost  of  production,  is 
much  weaker  than  that  which  is  wrought.  Again,  as  a 
matter  of  taste,  wrought-iron  ornament,  such  as  that,  for 
example,  which  decorates  the  pump  of  Quentin  Matsys 
at  Antwerp,  is  infinitely  more  artistic  than  the  clumsy 
cast-iron  railings  which  too  often  surround  our  public 
buildings.  In  one  case  the  design  has  been  suggested 
by  the  natural  capabilities  of  the  material ; in  the  other 
the  nature  of  the  material  has  been  perverted  for  the 
sake  of  a specious  and  inappropriate  method  of  treat- 
ment. 

The  same  distinction,  and  with  a like  reason,  may  be 
drawn  between  ancient  and  modern  table  glass.  The 
former  was  generally  blown,  the  natural  ductility  of  the 
material  being  such  that  while  in  a state  of  partial 
fusion  it  could  be  stamped,  twisted,  and  fashioned  into 
shapes  which  varied  with  the  individual  taste  and  skill 
of  the  workman.  The  consequence  was  that  in  Venice, 
during  the  fifteenth  and  two  following  centuries,  this 
branch  of  art-industry  rose  to  a pitch  of  excellence 
which  obtained  for  it  a world-wide  reputation.  It  would 


Old  Venetian  Glass , 


245 


be  impossible  to  enumerate  here  all  the  peculiar  varieties 
of  design  included  in  this  ingenious  and  beautiful  art. 
Under  the  general  head  of  ‘filagree’  glass,  the  com- 
binations of  form  and  colour  (including  that  of  the 
well-known  latticinio ) were  countless.  Then  there 
were  the  millefiori , in  which  slices  of  rod-glass  ap- 
peared embedded  in  a colourless  or  differently-coloured 
ground  of  the  same  material  ; the  schmelze , or  mock 
agate  ; the  awenturino , with  its  rich  golden  lustre 
which  has  been  basely  imitated  in  modern  toilet-trinkets  ; 
the  ‘ crackle  ’ and  ‘ opal  ’ glass  in  which  light  is  refracted 
with  exquisite  effect,  and  many  other  kinds  which  were 
further  enriched  by  the  distinct  processes  of  enamelling 
and  engraving.  Up  to  this  time  the  early  traditions 
of  the  art  had  been  preserved,  or  perhaps  revived 
from  the  time  of  the  Romans,  when  glass  was  blown 
in  moulds,  stamped,  turned  on  a wheel  and  engraved, 
rudely  enough  sometimes,  but  often  with  great  artistic 
care.  The  celebrated  Portland  vase,  for  instance,  was 
probably  made  of  two  layers  of  glass,  of  which  the 
upper  surface  was  cut  away  in  cameo-fashion,  to 
form  a background  for  the  bas-relief  with  which  it  is 
decorated.  But  work  of  so  laborious  and  costly  a 
character  as  this  must,  of  course,  be  regarded  as  ex- 
ceptional. The  ordinary  table  glass  made  in  Venice 


246 


Table  Glass. 


and  exported  to  every  country  in  Europe  during  the 
early  part  of  the  ‘ Renaissance/  was  for  the  most  part 
blown  only,  and  depended  for  its  form  on  the  taste  and 
manipulation  of  artisans,  whose  fancy  was  as  fertile  as 
their  fingers  were  apt,  and  who  required  no  school  of 
design  to  teach  them  the  shape  of  a flask  or  beaker. 

Unfortunately  for  the  interests  of  Art,  a taste  grew 
up  in  the  eighteenth  century  for  the  imitation  of  crystal. 
Now,  without  entering  into  scientific  details,  it  is  suffi- 
cient to  remember  that  glass  is  formed  by  the  combina- 
tion of  silica  (sand  or  flint)  with  an  alkali,  or  with  oxide 
of  lead.  These,  on  the  application  of  heat,  fuse  into 
colourless  transparent  liquids,  and  finally  cool  into  hard 
brittle  solids,  having  an  amorphous  or  non-crystalline 
character.  It  is  true  that  under  rare  conditions,  similar 
to  those  which  result,  for  instance,  in  the  production  of 
what  is  called  Reaumur’s  porcelain,  the  formation  of 
crystals  may  be  determined  by  the  application  of  heat 
lower  than  that  necessary  to  effect  the  perfect  fusion  of 
the  glass.  But  then  that  material,  which  is  opaque  in 
substance,  has  become  actually  devitrified,  and  can 
hardly  be  called  glass  at  all.  Any  attempt,  therefore, 
to  give  ordinary  glass,  such  as  is  manufactured  for 
drinking  vessels,  &c.,  the  appearance  of  cut  crystal,  is 
to  treat  it  in  a manner  foreign  to  its  real  nature.  Our 


Imitation  of  Crystal  247 

manufacturers  not  only  aimed  at  this,  but,  by  the  em- 
ployment of  minium  (red  lead)  in  large  quantities,  they 
endeavoured  to  invest  their  table  glass  with  a peculiar 
brightness  which  it  is  almost  impossible  to  attain  with- 
out that  ingredient.  In  this  way,  however,  they  lost 
two  important  qualities  of  the  old  material,  viz.,  light- 
ness and  ductility.  It  cooled  during  manufacture  much 
more  rapidly  than  before,  leaving  little  or  no  time  for 
that  delicate  hand-work  which  we  recognise  in  the 
graceful  forms  and  fantastic  ornament  of  Venetian 
glass ; but  these  defects  have  until  lately  been  almost 
regarded  in  the  light  of  advantages. 

In  the  manufacture  of  table  glass,  some  fifty  years 
ago,  great  angularity  of  form,  lumpy  ornament,  deep 
incisions,  and  solidity  of  material  were  the  chief  cha- 
racteristics of  its  design.  Now  all  these  are  directly 
opposed  to  the  natural  properties  of  glass,  which,  in  a 
state  of  fusion,  is  capable  of  being  blown  and  twisted 
into  the  most  light  and  elegant  forms,  fragile  certainly 
in  appearance,  but  capable  of  lasting  for  ages  if  handled 
with  ordinary  care.  Old  Venetian  glass  was  of  this 
kind ; and,  elaborately  decorated  as  many  of  its  examples 
are,  the  lightness  of  their  weight  is  extraordinary. 
Combined  with  this  lightness  we  find  a peculiar  elas- 
ticity of  material  which  renders  the  glass  hardly  less 


248 


Table  Glass. 


brittle  on  the  whole  than  the  more  solid-looking  ex- 
amples of  our  own  time. 

Now  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  what  constitutes  the 
material  beauty  of  glass.  If  it  is  to  be  perfectly  colour- 
less and  clear  as  water,  but  heavy  withal,  then  modern 
English  glass  is  the  best  that  has  been  produced.  But 
to  the  eye  of  an  artist  the  delicate  gradations  of  natural 
colour,  the  slight  imperfections  and  streakiness  of  old 
glass,  render  it  infinitely  more  attractive  than  a purity 
of  texture  which  has  nothing  but  its  clearness  to  re- 
commend it,  and  which  can  only  be  acquired  by  a 
sacrifice  of  more  precious  qualities.  For  the  simple 
transmission  of  light  through  the  best  piece  of  Hint 
glass  that  could  be  manufactured  is  of  small  value  com- 
pared with  the  mellow  and  often  jewel-like  effect  pro- 
duced in  the  design  of  a Venetian  beaker.  In  addition 
to  this  it  must  be  remembered  that  table  glass,  to  be 
made  spotless  in  substance,  must  also  be  made  heavy. 
It  is  the  red  lead  employed  in  its  manufacture  which 
gives  our  glass  its  weight  as  well  as  its  spotless  lustre. 
Under  these  conditions  of  material,  our  manufacturers 
had  recourse  to  moulding,  pressing,  cutting,  and  en- 
graving— modes  of  decoration  which,  as  they  were 
once  practised,  reduced  the  workman  to  a mere 
machine,  and  left  him  to  think  of  nothing  but  making 


Character  of  Old  Table  Glass . 


2 49 


his  tumblers  accurately  round  and  his  goblets  perfectly 
symmetrical. 

One  of  the  conditions  of  aesthetic  taste  seems  to  be 
that  in  civilised  life  it  shall  revolve  in  cycles ; and 
whether  or  not  we  may  attribute  the  change  to  a 
certain  impetus  which  our  art  manufacturers  received 
through  the  Great  Exhibition  of  1851,  it  is  certain  that 
after  that  date  a great  modification  took  place  in  the 
design  of  English  table  glass.  People  began  to  dis- 
cover that  the  round  bulbous  form  of  decanter  was  a 
more  pleasant  object  to  look  at  than  the  rigid  outline  of 
a pseudo-crystal  pint-pot  carved  and  chopped  about 
into  unmeaning  grooves  and  planes.  The  reversed 
and  truncated  cone,  which  served  our  grandfathers 
as  a model  for  wine-glasses,  gradually  disappeared  be- 
fore the  lily  and  crocus-shaped  bowls,  from  which  we 
now  sip  our  sherry  and  Bordeaux.  Champagne  had 
formerly  been  drunk  from  tall  and  narrow  glasses, 
which  required  to  be  tossed  aloft  before  they  could 
be  emptied.  It  is  now  a broad  and  shallow  tazza 
which  sparkles  with  the  vintage  of  Epernay.  For 
some  years  past  the  forms  of  our  goblets  and  water- 
bottles  have  been  gradually  improving  ; many  artistic 
varieties  of  the  material  have  appeared,  and  the  style 
of  decoration  employed,  especially  with  engraved  glass, 


250 


Table  Glass 


is  very  superior  to  what  it  used  to  be.  Some  English 
manufacturers  have  even  endeavoured  to  reproduce  the 
most  familiar  types  of  old  Venetian  glass.  But  these 
imitations  have  hitherto  been  carried  out  in  the  letter 
rather  than  in  the  spirit  of  ancient  work.  There  has 
been  a too  evident  striving  after  perfect  accuracy  of 
form,  and  that  ignoble  neatness  of  execution  which  is 
fatal  to  the  vigour  of  good  design.  If  the  workman  is 
directing  his  energies  to  make  a round  dish  mathemati- 
cally correct  in  outline,  or  the  opposite  profiles  of  a 
jug  match  each  other  with  absolute  precision,  he  cannot 
be  expected  to  work  with  the  free  hand  of  an  artist. 
So  our  table  glass  was  very  bright,  very  accurately 
shaped,  often  very  nicely  engraved ; but,  on  the  other 
hand,  very  heavy,  seldom  otherwise  than  formal  in 
contour,  and  generally  unpicturesque. 

In  short,  we  have  gradually  given  up  the  vigour  of 
design,  gradation  of  tone,  brilliance  of  colour,  as  well 
as  the  lightness  and  elasticity  of  old  glass,  simply  for  the 
sake  of  getting  two  sides  of  a decanter  exactly  alike, 
and  being  able  to  see  each  other  clearly  through  the 
centre  ! 

In  the  days  of  the  Venetian  Republic,  its  glass  was 
exported  to  every  country  in  Europe.  Its  manufacturers 
were  artists  who  vied  with  each  other  in  the  beauty  of 


Salviati  s Mosaic-work . 


251 


form  and  the  fertility  of  invention  which  their  designs 
expressed.  Not  many  years  ago  this  national  art  had 
degenerated  into  a trade  which  produced  little  more 
than  glass  beads  and  apothecaries’  bottles.  It  has, 
however,  been  revived  through  the  exertions  of  Dr. 
Salviati,  himself  a Venetian,  but  whose  name  is  well 
known  in  this  country  in  connection  with  the  enamel 
mosaics  which  are  now  extensively  used  for  architec- 
tural decoration.  He  succeeded  in  directing  towards 
a worthy  object  the  intelligence  and  ability  of  the 
Venetian  artisans  and  the  glass  manufacturers  of 
Murano.  Many  of  these  men  were  struggling  in  a 
state  of  poverty,  for  the  work  on  which  they  had  for 
many  years  past  been  employed  was  of  the  humblest 
description,  and  for  this  work  they  received  the  humblest 
wages. 

The  demand  of  the  last  two  generations  for  the  pro- 
duce of  their  ancient  handicraft  had  been  so  unimportant 
that  these  honest  folks  were  reduced  to  earn  a livelihood 
by  plying  the  meanest  and  worse-paid  branches  of  their 
trade.  One  of  them,  an  ingenious  native  artisan,  first 
suggested  the  possibility  of  reproducing  the  almost  for- 
gotten manufacture  of  enamel  mosaics.  Aided  by  this 
man’s  practical  experience,  Dr.  Salviati,  who  himself 
possessed  the  zeal  and  taste  of  an  able  connoisseur, 


252 


Table  Glass. 


undertook  a series  of  experiments,  which  resulted  in  the 
establishment  of  his  well-known  factory  at  Venice. 

The  mosaic  decorations  of  St.  Pauls,  of  the  Wolsey 
Chapel  at  Windsor,  as  well  as  those  executed  for  the 
Albert  Memorial  and  for  the  altar-piece  at  Westminster 
Abbey,  have  since  proved  that  the  revival  of  so  venerable 
and  splendid  an  art  is  well  appreciated  in  this  country. 
But  Dr.  Salviati  has  done  more  for  V enice.  Encouraged 
by  the  advice  of  some  English  artist  friends,  he  re- 
established there  a manufactory  of  table  glass,  which, 
in  quality  of  material,  excellence  of  design,  and  spirit  of 
workmanship,  soon  promised  to  rival  anything  of  the 
kind  which  had  been  produced.  Indeed,  there  seems 
little  reason  why  it  should  fall  short  of  former  excellence. 
In  England,  the  great  difficulty  of  bringing  about  such 
a revival  would  probably  be  the  want  of  skill  in  the 
art-workman.  But  at  Murano  these  poor  glass-blowers 
appear  to  inherit  as  a kind  of  birth-right  the  technical 
skill  in  a trade  which  made  their  forefathers  famous. 

Better  wages,  a more  interesting  occupation  than 
they  formerly  enjoyed,  and,  perhaps,  a feeling  of 
national  pride  which  the  independence  of  Italy 
awakened,  combined  to  encourage  their  efforts.  Dr. 
Salviati  did  his  best  to  procure  good  designs  and  old 
examples  for  the  men  to  copy.  A large  depot  for  the 


XXIX. 


I 


Specimens  of  Modern  Venetian  Table  Glass , 

manufactured  by  Salviati  6°  Co . 


Salviati's  Mosaic-work . 


253 


table  glass,  under  the  management  of  an  English 
company,  aided  by  the  zealous  exertions  and  valuable 
advice  of  Mr.  A.  H.  Layard,  was  opened  in  St.  James’s 
Street,  and  rapidly  became  popular  with  English  cus- 
tomers. Here  may  be  seen,  in  rich  variety  of  form 
and  colour,  water-bottles,  claret  jugs,  tumblers,  wine 
and  liqueur  glasses,  salt-cellars,  preserve  jars,  flower- 
stands,  tazze,  vases,  &c.,  &c.,  many  of  them  very 
beautiful  in  design,  and  all  possessing  qualities  of  ma- 
terial which  we  seek  in  vain  among  our  native  ware. 
They  have  not,  indeed,  the  cold  accuracy  of  form  and 
spotless  sheen  of  an  ordinary  dessert  service,  but  they 
are  far  more  picturesque  in  appearance,  wonderfully 
light  in  weight,  and  cheap  enough  to  bear  competition 
with  any  table  glass  which  has  pretensions  to  artistic 
merit.  Some  of  the  goblets  are  highly  decorated 
below  the  bowl  with  bosses  of  coloured  glass,  conven- 
tionally-shaped flowers,  and  that  peculiar  kind  of 
pinched-up  ornament  to  which  the  Italians  give  the 
technical  name  morise.  The  term  ritorto  is  applied  to 
a delicately-striped  glass,  which  is  frequently  made  into 
lily-shaped  bowls  and  dishes. 

Another  very  beautiful  kind  of  ware  is  produced  by 
joining  two  thin  films  of  glass  in  such  a manner  as  to 
leave  air-bubbles  distributed  in  a sort  of  diapered 


254 


Table  Glass. 


pattern  over  its  surface  This  is  called  ‘ bubble 
filagree/  and  is  much  prized  on  account  of  the  delicacy 
required  in  its  manufacture. 

The  old  Dutch  type  of  water-bottle,  with  its  round 
capacious  bowl  of  thin  glass,  strengthened  at  inter- 
vals with  little  twisted  ribs  of  the  same  material,  was 
manufactured  in  ancient  Venice  also,  and  frequently 
decorated  with  colour.  It  is  now  produced  at  the 
price  of  a common  wine  decanter.  In  like  manner  the 
sturdy  green  hock  glasses  which  we  once  imported 
from  Holland  have  been  imitated  and  improved  on  by 
Salviati ; for  whereas  their  broad-ribbed  stems  were 
not  unfrequently  cast  or  blown  into  a mould,  those 
exported  from  Venice  have  stems  composed  of  an 
actual  cord  of  glass  wound  spirally  round,  and  so 
spreading  outwards  to  form  a foot.  When  avventurino 
decoration  is  introduced  in  this  type  of  stem  its  ap- 
pearance is  very  beautiful.  The  principal  colours  used 
are  bottle-green,  turchino , ruby,  amber,  olive,  and 
acquamarina— a very  pretty  sea-blue  tint,  which  is 
peculiarly  characteristic  of  this  glass.  Some  of  the 
smaller  tumblers  are  quite  plain,  with  a delicate  edging 
of  colour  round  the  brim.  The  beakers,  which  hold  a 
half-pint  or  more,  are  sometimes  laced  round  with  the 
thinnest  possible  thread  of  coloured  glass,  and  then,  in 


Modern  Venetian  Specimens , 


255 


order  to  give  the  hand  a firmer  grasp,  the  lower  end  of 
the  tumbler  is  enriched  with  bosses  of  the  same  hue.  I 
must  not  omit  to  mention  the  opal  glass,  which  transmits 
a rich  and  lovely  iridescent  light,  exactly  like  the 
precious  stone  from  which  it  is  named.* 

Of  course  the  smooth  perfections  and  stereotyped 
neatness  of  ordinary  English  goods  are  neither  aimed 
at  nor  found  in  this  ware.  But  if  fair  colour,  free 
grace  of  form,  and  artistic  quality  of  material,  consti- 
tute excellence  in  such  manufacture,  this  is  the  best 
modern  table  glass  which  has  been  produced. 

Technical  enigmas  in  connection  with  colour  and 
the  new  conditions  of  form  had  to  be  solved,  and  even 
the  most  experienced  workmen  required  some  little 
time  before  their  heads  and  hands  became  accustomed 
to  the  novel  character  and  the  delicacy  of  the  work 
before  them.  At  first,  as  might  have  been  expected, 
the  specimens  forwarded  to  England  were  somewhat 
crude  in  conception  and  a little  clumsy  in  form.  But 
as  fresh  consignments  arrived,  a marked  improvement 

* It  is  to  be  trusted  that  the  characteristic  charms  of  this  glass  will 
not  suffer  by  connection  with  the  British  market.  I regret  to  find  that 
there  is  a demand  for  those  specimens  which  include  the  greatest  variety 
of  colour.  I have  seen  some  goblets,  for  instance,  in  which,  the  bowl, 
the  stem,  and  the  foot  are  all  of  different  hues.  This  is  a great  mistake. 
The  best  examples  are  those  in  which  the  main  body  of  the  glass  is  plain, 
and  relieved  by  a single  colour  in  the  ornamental  portions. 


256 


Table  Glass. 


was  noticeable,  and  by  degrees  the  Venetian  glass  of 
the  nineteenth  century  approached  in  vigour  of  design 
and  in  the  spirit  of  its  execution,  those  beautiful 
examples  which,  after  a lapse  of  nearly  three  centuries, 
still  command  our  admiration.  In  this  country  the 
lovers  of  art-manufacture  have  reason  to  be  well  satis- 
fied with  the  result,  and,  indeed,  there  is  only  one  class 
of  persons  whom  it  is  likely  to  displease.  For  many 
years  past  the  examples  of  old  Venetian  glass  which 
came  to  the  market  through  public  auction,  or  which 
still  lingered  on  the  shelves  of  old  curiosity  shops, 
have  fetched  a very  high  price ; nor  can  we  wonder  at 
this  when  we  remember  that  such  fragile  objects  are 
liable  to  injury  and  breakage  whenever  they  change 
hands,  and  that  ever)*  year  must  diminish  their  num- 
ber. In  addition  to  this  fact,  there  was,  until  lately, 
no  prospect  of  the  manufacture  being  revived,  and 
that  naturally  enhanced  their  worth.  But  now,  when 
almost  every  characteristic  of  the  old  work  can  be 
reproduced  with  a fidelity  which  surprises  even  the 
experienced  connoisseur,  and  at  about  a tenth  part  of 
what  it  used  to  cost  in  price,  the  commercial  value  of 
the  original  ware  must  to  some  extent  depreciate. 

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  for  this  modest  but  in- 
teresting- effort  at  reform  in  the  manufacture  of  table 

o 


Old  Examples  Imitated. 


257 


glass,  that  it  marks  an  important  era  in  the  history 
of  industrial  art.  In  no  other  direction  that  can  be 
named —neither  in  the  design  of  cabinet-work,  ceramic 
ware,  or  jewellery — have  we  modems  realised  so 
nearly  the  tastes  and  excellences  of  a by-gone  age  ; 
and  it  will  be  a curious  coincidence  if,  after  years  of 
humiliation  and  bondage,  Venice  should  be  enabled  to 
revive  one  of  the  sources  of  her  ancient  wealth  in  the 
same  epoch  which  has  restored  her  to  political  and 
national  freedom. 


s 


258 


Dress  and  Jewellery , 


Chapter  XL 

DRESS  AND  JEWELLERY, 

MONG  the  various  influences  to  which  we 
may  attribute  the  decline  of  artistic  taste  and 
of  art-manufacture  during  the  present  cen- 
tury, the  ugliness  of  modern  dress  stands  pre-eminently 
forward.  On  the  painter  and  sculptor  its  effect  is 
lamentable,  compelling  them,  as  it  necessarily  does, 
either  totally  to  forego  all  representation  of  the  age  in 
which  they  live — a state  of  things  which  has  never  ex- 
isted and  could  never  exist  in  any  healthy  condition  of 
art — or  to  undertake  a difficult  and  thankless  task,  the 
result  of  which  if  well  executed  is  barely  interesting, 
and  if  indifferently  executed  is  ludicrous. 

The  subject,  although  rarely  considered  in  its  aes- 
thetic relations,  has  met  with  some  degree  of  popular 
attention,  and  indeed  may  be  described  as  one  of  those 
questions  of  social  reform  which  are,  from  time  to  time, 
brought  before  the  public,  discussed  with  more  or  less 
ability,  and  having  afforded  ample  scope  for  ingenious 


Ugliness  of  Modern  Dress. 


259 


suggesti°ns,  are  again  allowed  to  drop  into  oblivion. 
It  is  the  fate  of  our  national  costume — or  rather  of 
European  costume  (for  it  contains  but  little  element 
of  nationality) — to  be  treated  in  this  manner.  Male 
attire  in  this  country  is  not  only  unbecoming,  but  fre- 
quently inconvenient  to  the  wearer,  and  in  some 
respects  unhealthy. 

It  is,  however,  much  more  easy  to  censure  the  follies 
of  modern  dress  than  to  propose  a remedy  for  them,  or 
even  to  assign  a cause  for  their  existence.  Take,  for 
example,  the  recently  abandoned  but  once  favourite 
article  of  ladies’  attire — crinoline.  Under  the  names 
of  hoop  and  farthingale,  it  was  twice  in  vogue  in  this 
country  before  it  was  revived  for  a third  time  in  1857. 
We  have  abundant  proof  that  it  was  both  ridiculed  and 
seriously  condemned  by  our  ancestors.  Yet  neither 
satire  nor  sermons  seem  to  have  affected  its  use.  All 
that  we  know  is  the  fact  that  women  wore  it  as  long 
as  it  pleased  them,  and  left  it  off  when  it  ceased  to  do 
so.  But  the  old  hoop,  it  will  be  urged,  seemed  appro- 
priate to  the  custom  which  accompanied  it;  it  went 
well  with  patches,  high-heeled  shoes,  and  powdered 
hair.  Besides,  it  was  a more  honest  and  less  compli- 
cated affair  than  the  modern  one,  and,  not  requiring  so 
much  stuff  to  cover  it,  involved  less  danger  to  be  appre- 


26o 


Dress  and  Jewellery , 


hended  from  fire.  But  is  it  probable  that  these  reasons, 
or  any  similar  reasons,  ensured  a popularity  for  the 
hoop  or  farthingale  which  the  crinoline  could  not  com- 
mand ? Is  it  not  a fact  that,  in  spite  of  many  petty 
inconveniences  which  it  occasioned — in  spite  of  its 
being  utterly  unsuitable  to  the  rest  of  a lady’s  toilette 
— in  spite  of  the  charges  of  indelicacy  and  extravagance 
which  have  been  so  frequently  brought  against  it — in 
spite  of  the  terrible  and  untimely  deaths  which  ensued 
from  its  use,  this  wretched  invention  continued  in  full 
favour  with  women  for  a full  decade  of  years  in  the 
nineteenth  century  ? 

Take  another  instance — the  modern  gentleman’s 
hat,  of  which  the  beaver  prototype  was  introduced  here 
about  the  time  of  the  French  Revolution.  Could  any- 
thing more  ugly,  more  incommodious,  more  unhealthy, 
more  generally  objectionable,  be  devised  as  a covering 
for  the  head  ? Yet,  so  far  from  its  use  being  discon- 
tinued, as  was  thought  probable  during  the  year  of  the 
first  Great  Exhibition,  no  part  of  a man’s  dress  appears 
to  be  further  removed  from  all  chance  of  improvement 
than  this.  No  one  who  values  his  position  in  society 
—no  one  who  cares  for  the  public  recognition  of  his 
friends — would  venture  to  wear  any  substitute  for  it  in 
the  streets  of  London.  Men  go  on  enduring  this  evil 


Revival  of  Beards, 


261 


with  aching  brows — just  as  women  have  endured  and 
will  again  endure  similar  martyrdom— simply  for  the 
sake  of  appearances,  and  because,  as  civilised  life  is 
now  constituted,  singularity  of  dress  would  be  con- 
sidered, in  most  cases,  a vulgar  affectation. 

Hopeless  as  reform  seems  to  be,  in  certain  details  of 
modern  costume,  it  is  satisfactory  to  think  that  some 
slight  improvements  in  dress  have  been  made  during 
the  latter  half  of  the  present  century.  If  the  Exhibi- 
tion of  1851  had  not  the  effect  of  exterminating  the 
‘ chimney-pot,’  it  brought  over  thousands  of  foreigners 
who  had  long  eschewed  the  use  of  the  razor.  English- 
men began  to  ask  themselves  whether  the  prejudice 
against  beards,  which  had  existed  in  the  days  of  the 
‘ great  unwashed  ’ — our  forefathers— should  be  allowed 
to  extend  to  our  own  time,  when  every  gentleman 
takes  his  morning  bath.  Was  it  not  absurd  that  we 
should  continue  day  by  day,  with  no  little  pains  and 
inconvenience,  to  rasp  our  faces  for  the  purpose  of 
removing  an  appendage  which  Nature  had  given  us 
for  use  if  not  for  ornament  ? The  ‘ beard  movement  ’ 
rapidly  became  popular — the  newspapers  took  up  the 
cause,  and  said  what  they  could  in  its  favour.  In  the 
course  of  a few  years,  a clean-shaved  man  became  the 
exception  in  a crowd.  Thenceforth  the  hideous  and 


262 


Dress  and  Jewellery. 


uncomfortable  Vater-morder — the  stand-up  collars, 
which  had  for  more  than  a quarter  of  a century  pre- 
vented us  from  freely  turning  our  head  to  the  right  or 
left,  were  banished  from  young  England’s  wardrobe. 
Even  the  thick  silk  handkerchief,  which  succeeded  to 
the  stock,  gave  place  at  last  to  that  light  and  comfort- 
able tie  or  scarf  which  is  now  almost  universally  used 
with  a turn-down  collar. 

A few  recent  changes  in  men’s  dress  may  be  noted, 
which,  without  being  what  might  be  desirable  in  an 
artistic  sense,  are  at  least  calculated  to  promote  con- 
venience. Wellington  boots  were,  after  all,  only  a 
modification  of  the  old  ‘ Hessian  ’ type,  which,  however 
convenient  when  pantaloons  were  worn,  became  un- 
necessary under  the  folds  of  the  modern  trouser. 
Accordingly  the  ankle-boot  was  adopted.  At  first  it 
was  fastened  with  buttons,  and  this  led  to  the  invention 
of  the  button-hook — an  article  which  was  perpetually 
being  mislaid,  and  which  generally  tore  out  more 
buttons  than  it  helped  to  fasten.  But  the  later  manu- 
facture of  ‘ Balmorals  ’ for  country  wear,  and  the  ‘ side 
spring  ’ for  ordinary  use,  left  nothing  to  be  desired  in 
this  respect. 

Some  of  us  recollect  the  old  coat-collar  which  used 
to  rise  from  the  shoulders  of  the  wearer  in  a padded 


Changes  of  Fashion. 


263 


roll  until  it  touched  the  back  of  his  head.  That  un- 
gainly feature  has  long  since  resumed  its  proper  place 
and  proportions.  The  waistcoat  now  terminates  not 
as  formerly  across  the  widest  part  of  the  chest,  but  at 
the  waist.  Even  sleeves  and  trousers,  the  most  uncom- 
promising details  of  a man’s  attire,  have  of  late  been 
allowed  to  partake  in  general  outline  of  the  shape  of 
the  limbs  which  they  enclose.  The  morning  coat, 
though  not,  perhaps,  as  picturesque  as  it  was  a hundred 
years  ago,  is  infinitely  better  than  that  which  was  in 
vogue  in  the  early  part  of  this  century. 

Still  there  is  great  room  for  improvement.  We  want 
a style  of  dress  which  shall  be  at  once  picturesque  and 
comfortable.  It  must  be  fitted  for  the  ordinary  voca- 
tions of  life.  It  must  be  of  a material  which  will  not 
get  spotted  or  spoil  in  a shower.  It  must  be  of  a kind 
which  either  a tall  or  a short  man  may  wear  without 
making  him  look  conspicuous.  The  knickerbocker 
suit,  for  example,  fulfils  all  these  conditions  admirably, 
and  has  been  adopted  for  ordinary  wear  in  many 
country  gentlemen’s  houses.  With  some  slight  altera- 
tions in  point  of  material,  &c.,  it  might  be  used  very 
well  in  towns,  and  those  who  have  had  to  walk  in 
trousers  through  London  mud  would  soon  learn  to 
appreciate  the  change. 


264 


Dress  and  Jewellery. 


Above  all,  our  evening  dress  needs  radical  reform. 
How  it  happens  that  black  cloth  has  come  to  be  asso- 
ciated with  occasions  of  public  and  private  festivity  in 
common  with  occasions  of  public  and  private  mourn- 
ing is  a riddle  which  we  must  leave  posterity  to  solve. 
But  it  is  certain  that  in  the  existing  state  of  society, 
Englishmen  wear  the  same  dress  at  an  evening  party 
and  at  a funeral.  Nor  is  this  all,  for  many  a host  who 
entertains  his  friends  at  dinner  has  a butler  behind  his 
chair  who  is  dressed  precisely  like  himself.  To  add 
to  this  confusion,  the  clergyman  who  rises  to  say  grace 
might,  until  recently,  have  been  mistaken  for  either. 
A few  years  ago  it  was  whispered  that  a certain  Royal 
personage  of  our  own  time  contemplated  the  suggestion 
of  a complete  change  in  evening  dress.  It  is  only 
through  the  agency  of  such  an  example  that  we  could 
ever  hope  to  escape  from  the  conventional  ugliness  of 
a modern  tail-coat ; and  looking  at  the  subject  from  a 
common-sense,  as  well  as  an  artistic  point  of  view,  we 
must  admit  that  attention  might  be  turned  to  this 
matter  with  great  benefit  to  the  public. 

With  regard  to  ladies’  costume  in  England  at  the 
present  time,  undeniably  though  it  has  improved  within 
the  last  five  and  twenty  years,  all  criticism  on  the 
subject  is  impossible,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the 


Ladies  Costume. 


265 


rapid  changes  of  fashion  make  it  useless  to  approve  or 
condemn  details  of  form  and  colour  in  dress  which  may 
be  modified  or  actually  banished  from  the  wardrobe 
while  these  pages  are  being  printed.  There  is,  how- 
ever, one  branch  of  art-manufacture  which,  although 
closely  associated  with  women’s  attire,  is  not  subject  to 
such  constant  variation  in  design,  and  on  which  I shall 
venture  to  offer  a few  remarks. 

The  word  ‘jewellery,’  in  its  generally  accepted  and 
modern  sense,  is  understood  to  mean  ornaments  worn 
for  personal  adornment  only ; but  there  was  a time 
when  gems  and  precious  stones  were  employed  in  the 
decoration  of  almost  all  articles  which,  on  account  of 
their  refined  use,  artistic  workmanship,  or  sacred  value, 
seemed  worthy  of  such  luxurious  enrichment.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  our  forefathers,  even  at  a time 
when  the  habits  of  social  life  were  rude  and  simple, 
delighted  in  the  appearance  and  possession  of  such 
articles  far  more  than  we  do  at  the  present  time. 
While  rushes  strewed  upon  the  floor  formed  a sufficient 
carpet  for  even  gentle  ladies’  feet ; while  the  gallant 
knight’s  rough-and-ready  toilet  consisted  in  his  plunging 
his  head  at  daybreak  into  a bucket  of  cold  water;  while 
linen  was  coarse  in  manufacture,  and  food  was  prepared 
in  such  a manner  as  our  modern  cooks  would  call 


266 


Dress  and  Jewellery . 


barbarous  ; while,  in  short,  most  of  the  refinements  and 
delicacies  which  we  have  been  accustomed  by  civili- 
sation to  regard  almost  in  the  light  of  necessaries,  were 
still  unknown,  the  goldsmith’s  and  the  jeweller’s  art 
was  lavished  upon  many  an  object  of  household  use  on 
which  even  the  most  luxurious  of  modern  Europeans 
would  consider  it  the  height  of  extravagance  to  employ 
it  now.  Not  only  the  ecclesiastical  furniture  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  but  many  of  the  domestic  utensils  of 
private  life,  were  elaborated  and  enriched  after  a fashion 
which  we  should  now  only  think  suitable  for  a monarch’s 
state  crown,  or  at  least  for  some  splendid  article  of 
vertu  intended  perhaps  to  be  put  under  a glass  case 
and  looked  at  with  respect,  but  never  used. 

Now  there  are  two  points  of  view  from  which  we 
may  regard  the  possession  of  plate  and  jewellery.  We 
may  admire  them  for  their  intrinsic  value,  on  account 
of  the  high  price  we  paid  for  them,  and  the  amount  in 
sovereigns  which  they  would  fetch  if  sold  again,  or  we 
may  admire  them  for  certain  rare  qualities  of  beauty, 
whether  expressed  in  the  nature  of  the  material  itself, 
or  in  the  excellence  of  design  and  workmanship  to 
which  it  has  been  subjected  in  manufacture.  It  is,  I 
fear,  chiefly  to  the  former  source  that  the  general 
admiration  of  the  goldsmith’s  and  jeweller’s  art  may  in 


The  Koh-i-noor. 


267 


modern  days  be  traced.  If  the  multitudes  who  at  the 
Great  Exhibition  of  1851  flocked  to  gaze  with  profound 
reverence  at  the  Koh-i-noor  had  suddenly  been  told 
that  the  researches  of  science  had  proved  it  to  be  a 
piece  of  cut  glass,  valued  at,  say  ten  shillings,  who 
would  have  stopped  to  waste  his  attention  on  so 
insignificant  an  object  ? Yet  it  was  only  at  a certain 
hour  in  the  day  that  this  precious  gem  differed  in 
outward  appearance  from  a piece  of  glass.  It  is  well 
known  that  the  diamond,  when  subjected  to  a high 
temperature,  may  be  reduced  to  the  state  of  graphite. 
Let  us  suppose  for  an  instant  that  anyone  had  dis- 
covered the  secret  of  reversing  that  operation,  how 
long  would  these  gems  remain  fashionable  ornaments  ? 
Not  a single  season.  They  would  be  at  once  and  for 
ever  banished  from  the  heads  and  necks  and  stomachers 
of  every  court  belle  in  Christendom.  As  it  is,  the 
imitation  of  diamonds  is  carried  to  such  perfection  in 
France  that  none  but  the  most  practised  eye  can 
distinguish  the  real  jewel  from  its  counterfeit.  After 
this  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  diamond  is 
valued  solely  for  its  intrinsic  beauty.  The  truth  is  we 
value  it  because  it  represents  so  much  wealth. 

For  this  reason  the  scientific  cutting  of  precious 
stones,  simply  to  ensure  lustre  by  a certain  refraction  of 


268 


Dress  and  Jewellery. 


light,  and  then  only  under  certain  conditions,  would 
seem  but  a questionable  advantage,  especially  when  we 
remember  that  the  shape  thus  obtained,  at  probably  a 
great  sacrifice  of  material,  can  always  be  assumed  by 
the  false  gem  with  nearly  as  effective  a result.  To 
have  and  to  hold  as  one’s  own  property  one  of  the 
largest  diamonds  ever  discovered,  is  no  doubt  a magni- 
ficent possession  ; but  in  a purely  artistic  sense  I prefer 
the  original  Koh-i-noor,  worn  on  the  arm  of  Runjeet 
Sing  as  he  sat  ‘ cross-legged  in  his  golden  chair,  dressed 
in  simple  white,  with  a single  string  of  huge  pearls 
round  his  waist,’  to  the  Koh-i-noor  cut  and  pared  down 
to  mathematical  symmetry  by  English  lapidaries,  with 
a loss  of  one-third  of  its  weight. 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  possessors  of  diamonds 
in  any  quantity  are,  as  a rule,  not  very  likely  to  be 
influenced  by  suggestions  which  arise  from  the  con- 
sideration of  artistic  taste  ; yet  I cannot  refrain  from 
pointing  out  what  appears  to  me  a great  mistake  made 
by  ladies  who  insist  on  wearing  a profusion  of  these 
gems  clustered  together  either  in  the  shape  of  what  is 
called  a tiara,  or  on  any  other  part  of  their  dress.  The 
true  beauty  of  a diamond  is  best  seen  when  it  shines 
like  a star  from  a dark  ground  on  which,  as  in  the 
firmament  itself,  it  may  have  companions,  but  never 


Diamonds. 


269 


in  close  association.  A mass  of  diamonds  grouped 
together  in  the  form  of  a coronet,  or,  as  we  too  fre- 
quently see  them,  in  the  ill-adopted  form  of  a wreath 
of  leaves  and  flowers,  may  produce  a fitful  blaze  of 
light ; but  so  will  tinsel  or  any  other  mean  material 
used  for  a similar  purpose.  Such  an  effect  as  this  is 
surely  but  a paltry  one  to  aim  at,  and  when  it  is 
obtained  can  only  dazzle  the  eye  and  distract  it  from 
those  charms  which  are  popularly  supposed  to  be 
enhanced  by  this  mode  of  decoration.  The  subtle 
beauties  of  a fair  womans  complexion,  the  modest 
lustre  of  an  expressive  eye,  the  delicate  texture  of  soft 
wavy  hair — are  not  these  well  nigh  extinguished  in  the 
profuse  glitter  of  surrounding  brilliants  ? Diamonds 
of  any  important  size  should  be  quite  isolated,  or  if 
small  should  be  arranged  in  small,  distinct  and  geo- 
metrical groups  on  the  ornament  which  they  are 
intended  to  enrich. 

It  is  lamentable  to  think  how  little  real  art  is  now 
displayed  in  the  manufacture  of  jewellery,  notwith- 
standing the  enormous  sums  which  are  annually  paid 
for  it  by  private  purchasers.  Some  time  ago  I visited 
the  establishment  of  one  of  the  leading  West  End 
firms,  who  very  politely  displayed  their  principal 
treasures  for  my  inspection.  I saw  many  articles  of 


270 


Dress  and  Jewellery. 


immense  value,  but  I am  sorry  to  say  very  few  which 
reached  anything  like  a high  standard  of  taste  in 
design.  The  workmanship  seemed  excellent : the 
gems  were  matched  and  cut  and  set  with  extraordinary 
precision  and  regularity,  but  the  far  more  important 
qualities,  which  are  indicative  of  the  artist’s  hand — 
grace  of  form  and  composition  — were  generally 
wanting. 

It  would  be  unfair  indeed  to  ascribe  the  dearth  of 
good  specimens  to  the  indifference  of  manufacturers 
alone.  It  is  a well-known  fact  that  chaste  and  well- 
designed  objects  of  jewellery — such  as  those,  for 
instance,  which  have  been  reproduced  from  antique 
examples — will  not  sell  in  the  English  market.  There 
is  a demand  for  rare  and  expensive  gems,  and  a cease- 
less demand  for  showy  designs,  provided  they  are 
novel ; but  for  that  exquisite  school  of  the  goldsmith’s 
art  which  Castellani  laboured  to  revive  in  Rome,  there 
is  little  popular  appreciation  in  this  country.  At  the 
shop  which  I have  already  mentioned  I was  shown 
a necklace  of  large  single  diamonds,  the  fancy  of  a 
particular  customer,  and  valued  at  20,000 /.  For  a 
hundredth  part  of  that  sum  a rich  and  beautiful  work 
of  art  might  have  been  produced  and  applied  to  the 
same  purpose.  But  so  long  as  people  prefer  the 


Expensive  Jewellery. 


271 

display  of  mere  wealth  to  the  encouragement  of  true 
principles  in  manufacture,  we  shall  look  vainly  for  im- 
provement in  the  design  of  expensive  jewellery. 

I say  expressly  of  expensive  jewellery,  for  that 
which  is  of  moderate  price  and  exposed  in  ordinary 
shop  windows  is  often  in  far  better  taste.  The  best 
designs  are  either  directly  copied  or  partially  imitated 
from  modern  Roman  work,  the  design  of  which  is 
chiefly  based  on  antique  examples.  They  may  be 
easily  distinguished  by  the  solid  geometrical  form 
which  they  assume,  the  groundwork  of  the  gold  being 
generally  plain  and  unburnished,  relieved  by  a delicate 
enrichment  of  the  same  material  overlaid  in  thin  corded 
lines.  Bracelets,  brooches,  necklaces  (with  pendants  in 
the  form  of  the  ancient  bulla),  earrings,  armlets,  &c.,  of 
this  kind  may  be  bought  in  many  of  the  shops  at  the 
West  End  of  London.  The  International  Exhibition 
of  1872  contained  some  excellent  examples  of  this  class 
produced  by  British  jewellers. 

But  if  we  wish  to  find  specimens  of  really  artistic 
jewellery,  we  must  seek  them  in  the  museums,  for  they 
are  not  the  productions  of  the  present  age  ; or  if  of 
the  present  age,  certainly  not  of  this  country.  At 
South  Kensington  alone  there  are  countless  treasures 
from  which,  if  they  were  properly  studied,  might  be 


272 


Dress  and  Jewellery . 


formed  a standard  of  taste  far  higher  than  that  of  our 
own  day.  It  is  not  only  from  the  much  prized  cinque- 
cento  work  of  France  and  Italy— beautiful  as  most  of  it 
is — that  we  may  learn  a lesson.  Even  the  rudely-made 
peasant  trinkets  of  Russia,  the  unskilled  manufactures 
of  central  India,  the  quaint  and  early  devices  of 
Rhenish  Byzantine  artists  are  all  infinitely  superior  to 
what  we  have  made  or  invented  in  the  way  of  jewellery 
during  our  boasted  nineteenth  century.* 

In  the  east  cloister  of  the  South  Court  at  the  Ken- 
sington Museum  were,  not  long  ago,  some  cases  of 
Oriental  jewellery  lent  by  Sir  R.  N.  Hamilton,  and 
well  worth  inspection.  Those  specimens  are  for  the 
most  part  of  Bhopal  and  Indore  work,  remarkable  not 
only  for  extreme  simplicity,  but  for  an  elegance  and 
appropriateness  of  design  which  our  jewellers  would 
do  well  to  imitate.  Amongst  others  was  a throat  or- 
nament or  flat  necklace,  composed  of  little  tablets  of 
gold  about  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long  and  three- 
eighths  broad,  divided  transversely  into  three  panels, 
each  containing  a ruby.  These  panels  alternate  with 

* Some  of  the  Algerine  trinkets,  lately  sold  in  London,  of  white  metal, 
decorated  with  beads  in  imitation  of  coral  and  turquoise,  are  really  admir- 
able in  design  and  worthy  of  the  best  periods  of  ancient  art-manufacture. 
They  are  hand-made  specimens  of  native  work.  If  our  jewellers  would 
only  reproduce  them,  using  silver  and  real  stones  for  their  material,  they 
would  be  doing  good  service  in  the  cause  of  household  taste. 


Oriental  yewellery 


273 


a double  row  of  four  seed  pearls,  disposed  so  as  to 
occupy  about  the  same  space  as  the  adjoining  orna- 
ment throughout  the  length  of  the  necklace  (about 
seven  inches),  except  that  at  each  extremity  of  the 


band  the  panels,  instead  of  being  oblong,  are  trefoil 
shaped.  To  these  extremities  are  attached  a small 
silken  cord  of  crimson  colour,  whipped  round  with  gold 
thread,  which  serves  to  fasten  this  ornament  round 
the  neck  of  the  wearer. 

In  the  same  case  was  a kind  of  fillet  for  the  head, 

T 


274 


Dress  and  yewellery . 


composed  of  small  uncut  rubies  and  other  precious 
stones  inclosed  in  hexagonal  and  plain  oval  settings, 
and  alternating  with  seed  pearls  in  several  rows.  The 
last  row  is  decorated  with  little  pendants,  each  of  which 
terminates  with  a tiny  emerald.  Another  ingenious 
and  pretty  ornament,  also  intended  to  be  worn  in  the 
hair,  was  one  composed  of  seven  gold  pendants,  six  set 
with  emeralds  and  rubies,  and  one  with  pearl  clusters, 
attached  by  seven  gold  chains  to  a chased  link.  The 


pendants  all  differ  slightly  in  form — some  are  quatre- 
foil,  some  are  hexagons,  some  are  heart-shaped  ; and  it 
is  to  be  observed  that  in  this  Indian  work  generally, 
when  gems  are  introduced  in  the  design,  they  are  either 
left  completely  uncut  (as  when  they  are  used  for  pen- 
dants without  setting),  or  they  are  only  just  trimmed 
sufficiently  to  make  them  handy  for  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  to  be  held.  The  notion  of  grinding  and 
paring  gems  down  to  a uniform  size  for  a necklace  or 
bracelet  is  a thoroughly  modern  and  European  one, 


Specimens  of  Indian  Work . 


275 


and  helps  to  render  our  jewellery  formal  and  uninterest- 
ing. In  old  and  Oriental  work  we  find  the  collet  or 
rim  which  is  to  hold  the  jewel  accommodated  to  the 
shape  of  the  latter.  Gems  which  are  intended  to  be 
placed  in  a row,  or  to  balance  each  other  in  design,  are 
matched  pretty  nearly  in  size,  but  never  with  scrupulous 
accuracy.  The  result  is,  that  the  collets  all  vary  a 
little  in  outline  ; and  this,  so  far  from  interfering  with 
the  general  effect,  seems  to  me  to  add  greatly  to  its 
interest,  for  such  irregularity  is  a direct  evidence  of 
manual  work,  whereas  fashionable  jewellery  of  our  own 
day  looks  as  if  it  had  been  made,  and  indeed  is  to  a 
great  extent  made,  by  machinery.  Why  our  lapidaries 
should  be  obliged  to  waste  time,  and  labour,  and 
precious  material,  in  order  to  make  two  little  stones 
precisely  like  each  other,  is  a mystery  which  the 
genius  of  modern  taste  can  alone  explain. 

Among  other  objects  in  the  same  collection  was  a set 
of  eleven  little  golden  tablets,  measuring  about  an  inch 
and  a quarter  across,  and  about  one-sixteenth  of  an  inch 
thick.  They  are  of  octagonal  and  oval  shapes,  chased 
into  grotesque  groups  of  men  and  animals,  and  sur- 
rounded by  a delicate  leaf  border.  The  interstices 
between  the  figures  are  cut  away,  and  this  open  work 
thus  formed  appears  relieved  upon  a ground  of 


T 2 


276  Dress  and  Jewellery. 

emerald-green  foil  or  enamel.  Minute  as  the  details 

of  this  design  are,  they  are 
executed  with  great  spirit 
and  knowledge  of  drawing. 
It  is  a peculiarity  of  all  good 
conventional  ornament,  whe- 
ther in  low  relief  or  in  su- 
perficial decoration,  that  the 
space  which  it  occupies  is 
generally  found  to  balance  in  equal  proportions  the 
space  of  the  ground  on  which  it  is  relieved.  This 
condition  has  been  admirably  observed  in  the  work  to 
which  I refer.  The  tablets  appear  to  have  formed 
links  or  compartments  in  a necklace  or  waistband. 

Very  different  in  style,  but  designed  with  great 
nawetd  and  picturesque  effect,  were  the  examples  of 
Russian  jewellery  lately  exhibited  in  the  South  Court 
at  Kensington.  The  date  to  which  they  are  ascribed 
is  that  of  the  seventeenth  century,  but  they  have  all 
the  character  of  much  earlier  work  when  compared  with 
the  taste  which  prevailed  in  more  civilised  parts  of 
Europe  during  that  period.  These  specimens  consist 
of  earrings,  neckchains,  pectoral  crosses,  devotional 
tablets,  &c.,  simple  in  general  form,  and  boldly  but 
artistically  treated.  Twisted  gold  and  silver  wire  is 


Russian  Peasant  yewellery . 


277 


frequently  introduced  as  a decorative  feature.  One  of 
the  crosses  is  of  silver  gilt,  ornamented  with  green 
enamel  in  a foliated  cloisonnd  pattern.  In  the  centre  is 


a garnet,  and  at  each  end  of  the  cross  is  a turquoise. 
Another  good  example  of  this  class  is  a small  spherical 
pendant  of  silver-gilt  filagree  work,  about  an  inch  in 
diameter,  set  with  turquoises  and  garnets.  In  this 


278 


Dress  and  Jewellery . 


Russian  jewellery,  as  in  the  Indian  work,  the  setting  of 
the  precious  stones  continually  varies  with  their  shape, 
and  is  no  doubt  what  London  modern  jewellers  would 
call  rude  and  clumsy.  French  art  of  the  same  period, 
and  even  of  a much  earlier  date,  is,  on  the  contrary, 
elegant  and  minute  in  its  finish.  A charming  necklace 
of  gold  filagree  work,  ornamented  with  rosettes  in  white 
enamel,  and  set  with  emeralds  and  rubies,  may  be  seen 
in  one  of  the  flat  cases  of  this  court.  It  appears  to  have 
been  purchased  by  the  Kensington  authorities  for  nine 
guineas.  It  would  have  been  cheap  at  double  that 
sum.  Close  by  this  jewel  was  a pendant  of  enamelled 
gold,  set  with  emeralds  and  sapphires.*  In  its  centre 
is  a little  onyx  cameo  representing  a profile  bust  of  the 
youthful  Hercules  in  relief,  and  probably  copied  from 
the  antique.  The  design  of  the  goldsmith  s work  is 
presumed  to  be  Italian,  and  of  the  sixteenth  century — 
perhaps  rather  too  late  in  it  for  purity  of  mere  decora- 
tive form,  but  the  skill  and  execution  of  the  work  are 
admirable.  An  exquisite  example  of  Rhenish-Byzan- 
tine  design  (from  the  Soltykoff  collection)  appears  in 
the  adjoining  case.  It  is  a crucifix  of  cedar  wood 

* The  position  of  some  of  these  specimens  may  have  been  changed 
since  this  was  written,  but  those  which  belong  to  the  permanent  collection 
could  no  doubt  be  easily  found  and  identified. 


XXX 


Locket  and  Necklace  executed  by  Howell  & James , 

from  a design  by  Sir  Digby  Wyatt. 


Cinque-Cento  ^Jewellery. 


279 


coated  with  thin  plate  of  beaten  gold.  This  is  decorated 
with  delicate  cords  of  gold-twist  laid  on  in  a relieved 
pattern,  and  plaques  of  enamel  occur  at  each  extremity 
of  the  cross.  The  figure,  of  walrus  ivory,  seems 


hardly  equal  to  the  rest  in  merit  of  design.  The  above, 
of  course,  are  only  a very  few  out  of  a host  of  ob- 
jects at  Kensington  the  description  of  which  might 
serve  to  illustrate  principles  essential  to  this  depart- 
ment of  ‘ household  taste.’  Mr.  Beresford  Hope’s 


28o 


Dress  and  Jewellery. 


collection  alone  (or  rather  that  portion  of  it  which  is 
lent  to  the  Museum  for  exhibition)  contains  treasures 
of  art  in  connection  with  manufacture  which  no  one 
can  examine  without  profit,  but  which  it  would  be 
impossible  to  enumerate  here. 

Among  the  specimens  of  modern  work,  a silver 
bracelet  damascened  in  gold  with  a niello  ground, 
manufactured  by  Mons.  J.  Roucon,  of  Paris,  and  the 
very  successful  copies  of  ancient  Irish  brooches, 
executed  by  two  Dublin  firms,  Messrs.  West  and 
Messrs.  Waterhouse,  are  well  worth  notice.  They  at 
least  show  us  that  there  is  no  lack  of  mechanical  skill 
or  ingenuity  in  this  branch  of  industrial  art  at  the 
present  day.  The  real  deficiency  lies  in  the  want  of 
appreciation  on  the  part  of  the  public.  As  soon  as 
this  appreciation  is  felt  and  good  designs  are  in  com- 
mon request,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  they  will 
be  supplied. 

On  Plates  XXX.  and  XXXI.  are  engraved 
specimens  of  modern  jewellery  executed  by  Messrs. 
Howell  and  James  for  the  International  Exhibition  of 
1872.  The  first  is  a locket  forming  part  of  a handsome 
parure  designed  by  the  late  Sir  Digby  Wyatt.  It  is 
executed  in  gold,  modelled  in  low  relief,  and  set  with 
pearls  and  diamonds.  The  locket,  earring,  and 


V>)1 


XXXI. 


Locket , Ear-ring , and  Bracelet  executed  by  Howell  & James , 

from  a design  by  Charles  L.  Eastlake. 


Specimens  of  Modern  Jewellery, 


26 1 


bracelet  on  Plate  XXXI.  are  from  my  own  design, 
and  consist  of  cameos  held  in  a gold  setting  enriched 
with  jewels,  seed  pearls,  and  enamelled  work. 

I cannot  conclude  this  chapter  without  calling  the 
readers  attention  to  the  inestimable  advantages  and 
opportunity  for  improvement  of  national  style  in  this 
and  almost  every  other  branch  of  manufacture,  which 
this  country  possesses  in  the  South  Kensington  Mu- 
seum. However  much  opinions  may  differ  as  to  the 
system  of  instruction  in  design  hitherto  adopted  in 
that  Department,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  truly 
magnificent  collection  of  objects  assembled  there,  and 
the  facility  afforded  to  students  who  may  desire  to 
inspect  and  study  them,  reflect  the  highest  credit  upon 
the  authorities  entrusted  with  its  care.  By  such  means, 
the  art-workman,  his  employer,  and  the  public  whose 
encouragement  and  patronage  are  necessary  to  both, 
may  learn  that  which  alone  can  rescue  English  manu- 
facture from  its  recent  degradation,  viz. ; — the  formation 
of  a sound  taste. 


282 


Plate  and  Cutlery. 


Chapter  XII. 

PLATE  AND  CUTLERY. 

WELL-APPOINTED  dinner-table  is  one 
of  the  triumphs  of  an  English  housewife’s 
domestic  care.  That  the  cloth  shall  be  of 
fine  and  snow-white  damask ; that  the  decanters  and 
wine-glasses  shall  be  delicate  in  form  and  of  purest 
quality  ; that  the  silver  shall  look  as  bright  and  spotless 
as  when  it  first  came  wrapped  in  tissue-paper  from  the 
silversmith’s ; that  the  dpergne  shall  be  filled  with 
choicest  flowers  — these  are  points  which  she  will 
consider  of  as  much  importance  as  the  dainty  skill  of 
the  cook’s  art  itself.  Indeed,  the  general  effect  of  a 
rich  dinner  service,  or  of  a well-arranged  buffet,  con- 
tributes a more  picturesque  element  than  is  apparent 
elsewhere,  to  the  appointment  of  a modern  household. 
But  if  we  examine  in  detail  the  various  articles  which, 
under  the  general  name  of  ‘ plate,’  form  this  display, 
we  shall  find  that  they  depend  for  their  attraction  on 


Modern  Plate. 


283 

richness  of  material  rather  than  on  sound  principles  of 
design. 

A sense  of  mere  prettiness  in  decorative  art  belongs 
in  some  sort  to  our  very  earliest  instincts.  A mere 
baby  will  crow  with  pleasure  at  the  sight  of  a gold 
watch  or  any  glittering  object,  and  try  to  clutch  it 
with  eager  hands.  In  childhood  the  most  elaborate 
and  richly  painted  toys  are  preferred  to  those  of  a 
simpler  kind  ; and,  indeed,  to  a maturer  but  still 
natural  taste  the  brilliant  colour  and  complex  form  of 
manufactured  objects  are  generally  agreeable,  without 
reference  to  the  purpose  for  which  such  objects  were 
designed. 

The  use  of  colour — applied  by  the  process  known 
as  enamelling,  and  once  so  valuable  an  enrichment  of 
metal  work — has  been  long  out  of  vogue  in  the  manu- 
facture of  plate.  The  same  may  be  said  to  a great 
extent  of  damascened,  niello , and  engraved  ornament. 
A base  imitation  of  the  old  repoussd  work  lent  a vulgar 
kind  of  richness  to  silver  teapots  and  cream-jugs 
designed  in  the  once  all-prevalent  but  objectionable 
taste  of  the  Louis  XV.  period  ; but  a large  proportion 
of  modern  plate  is  stamped  in  patterns  which  have 
no  more  artistic  quality  than  the  ornaments  of  a 
wedding-cake.  Take,  for  instance,  the  ordinary  ‘fiddle 


284 


Plate  and  Cutlery. 


pattern  ’ fork  ; can  anything  be  more  senseless  than 
the  way  in  which  modifications  of  that  form  are  deco- 
rated— now  with  a raised  moulding  at  its  edge,  now 
with  an  outline  of  beads,  now  with  what  is  called  a 
‘ shell,’  but  what  is  really  a bad  copy  of  the  Greek 
honeysuckle  ornament,  at  the  end  of  its  handle,  now 
with  a rococo  scroll  or  a representation  of  natural 
flowers  in  low  relief  on  its  surface  ? All  these  patterns 
are  dignified  by  fine  names,  such  as  the  ‘ Albert,’  the 
‘ Brunswick,’  the  ‘ Rose,’  the  ‘ Lily.’  They  are  repro- 
duced over  and  over  again  at  Birmingham  and  else- 
where. People  buy  them  because  there  is  nothing 
else  of  the  kind  to  be  had  ; but  there  is  no  more  art 
in  their  design  than  there  is  in  that  of  a modern  bed- 
post. Compare  them  with  the  charming  examples  of 
antique  silver  which  may  still  be  seen  in  the  windows 
of  a curiosity  shop,  and  observe  how  much  we  have 
retrograded  in  this  department  of  manufacture.* 

Now  I am  not  going  to  recommend  the  re-introduc- 
tion of  what  were  called  ‘ Apostle  ’ spoons  for  ordinary 
use.  The  chased  figure  of  a saint  or  of  a ship  in 

* Since  these  lines  were  written  Messrs.  John  Yates  & Son  of  Pritchett 
Street,  Birmingham,  have  commissioned  me  to  prepare  a series  of  designs 
for  plated  goods  intended  for  ordinary  table  use.  Some  of  these  articles 
are  now  in  course  of  manufacture,  and  I hope  in  a future  edition  of  this 
book  to  engrave  some  specimens  of  the  work. 


Modern  Plate. 


285 


full  sail  (a  favourite  termination  for  the  fork  or  spoon 
handle  of  olden  days)  may  not  be  the  most  convenient 
thing  for  the  fair  fingers  of  a lady  to  hold  at  dinner  ; 
and  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  bowls  were  wider 
and  more  capacious  than  we  require  for  that  infini- 
tesimal portion  of  soup  which 
is  served  out  to  each  guest  at 
a modern  banquet.  I merely 
mean  that  the  spirit  with  which 
this  old  plate  was  designed 
is  extinct  in  our  modern  silver. 

It  would  be  quite  possible  to 
fashion  graceful  spoons  and 
forks  which  should  also  suit 
the  most  fastidious  notions  of 
convenience.  A modern  fork 
looks  top-heavy  because  it  has 
four  prongs.  Three  prongs  were 
once  considered  sufficient,  and 
with  three  alone  the  fork  would 
gain  in  lightness  and  appear- 
ance. Again,  the  stem  of  the 
old  spoon  was  a delicate  rod, 
sometimes  twisted  and  sometimes  square  in  section. 
It  is  now  flat  and  heavy,  requiring  nearly  twice  as 


286 


Plate  and  Cutlery. 


much  metal  in  its  manufacture,  and  therefore  materially 
increasing  the  cost  of  silver  plate.  It  may  indeed  be 
desirable,  for  the  sake  of  convenience  in  handling,  to 
keep  the  upper  end  of  the  stem  flat,  but  in  other 
respects  the  old  shape  seems  preferable,  and  is  cer- 
tainly less  expensive.  In  fact,  all  old  plate  of  the 
best  period  was  infinitely  lighter  in  weight  than  our 
own.  Its  chief  value  consisted  in  its  design ; whereas 
that  of  the  present  day  can  but  be  estimated  in  ounces. 
It  is  perhaps  for  this  reason  that  modern  silversmiths 
prefer  to  load  their  plate  with  heavy  raised  ornament, 
instead  of  adopting  the  delicate  incised  patterns  once 
in  vogue. 

In  the  whole  range  of  art-manufacture  there  are  no 
more  deplorable  examples  of  taste  than  the  silver  side- 
dishes,  soup-tureens,  cruet-stands,  salvers,  and  candle- 
sticks of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  most  extra- 
vagant forms  are  enriched  with  ornament,  which  is 
either  a caricature  of  Renaissance  detail,  or  simply 
feeble  representations  of  natural  form. 

I have  an  illustrated  catalogue  of  electro-plated 
goods  before  me  at  the  present  moment,  in  which  a 
fish-slice  is  shown  decorated  with  an  engraved  land- 
scape, surrounded  by  acanthus  scrolls.  Further  on  I 
find  a rose,  a tulip,  and  an  apple  respectively  doing 


Electro-plated  A rticles. 


287 


duty  as  the  handle  of  a tea-pot  lid,  and  an  egg-stand 
designed  in  imitation  of  a wicker-basket.  As  for  the 
butter-cooler,  it  is,  of  course,  surmounted  by  that 
inevitable  cow  which  fashion  has  consecrated  for  our 
breakfast  tables,  in  order,  I presume,  that  we  may 
never  forget  the  source  and  origin  of  one  of  the  most 
useful  articles  of  daily  food. 

It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  offer  suggestions  which 
should  guide  an  ordinary  taste  in  the  choice  of  such 
objects  as  these.  Perhaps  the  soundest  advice  to  give 
would  be  that  which  is  based  on  common  sense.  In 
an  age  of  debased  design  at  least,  the  simplest  style 
will  be  the  best.  Choose  a pure  outlined  form  rather 
than  that  which  is  defined  by  a dozen  varying  curves. 
Round  silver  dishes  and  salvers  are  preferable  to 
those  of  an  oval  or  square  shape  for  many  reasons, 
and  especially  on  account  of  the  mode  in  which  such 
articles  are  manufactured.  Richly  moulded  edges  are, 
for  a like  reason,  inappropriate  ; moreover,  in  precious 
metal  they  necessarily  increase  the  cost,  and  in  plated 
goods  they  are  liable  to  be  rubbed  and  look  shabby. 
Vessels  of  silver  should  be  composed  of  thin  plate, 
and  the  best  means  of  decorating  them  is  either  by 
piercing  the  metal  with  open-work  ornament,  by 
engraving  conventional  (i.e.,  non-naturalistic)  surface- 


288 


Plate  and  Cutlery , 


patterns,  or  by  repoussd  decoration,  which  consists  in 
beating  out  the  silver  from  inside  into  bosses  and 
arabesques.  The  latter  mode,  if  well  executed,  is  of 
course  the  most  expensive.  All  articles  of  plate 
which  represent  in  miniature  objects  of  a different 
material — as  barrels,  tubs,  and  baskets— should  be 
avoided.  There  was  a time  when  it  was  thought 
tasteful  to  let  every  knick-knack  for  the  table  assume 
an  appearance  which  utterly  belied  its  real  purpose. 
Some  of  my  readers  may  remember  the  little  gilt 
Cupid  wheeling  a barrow  full  of  salt,  which  once 
appeared  in  many  an  English  dining-room,  and  I have 
often  been  surprised  that  no  ingenious  Sheffield 
designer  has  yet  adapted  the  Martyrs’  Memorial  for 
a pepper-castor. 

The  substitution  of  electro-plate  for  real  silver  is 
now  so  common  in  households  where  the  latter  would 
be  regarded  as  a superfluous  luxury,  that  the  sternest 
advocate  of  true  principles  in  art-manufacture  would 
scarcely  require  an  apology  for  its  use.  The  fact  is, 
that  even  in  the  best  ages  of  design  some  such 
expedient  has  been  practised,  and  therefore  has  long 
since  ceased  to  be  a deception.  In  the  case  of  a 
dinner  service,  there  is  sufficient  excuse  for  its  adop- 
tion in  the  fact  that  steel  forks  and  pewter  spoons  are 


Electro-plated  A rticles. 


289 


not  pleasant  things  to  eat  with.  If  a coating  of  silver 
meets  that  objection,  surely  it  is  desirable  to  use  it. 
We  must  remember  that  in  this,  as  in  other  depart- 
ments of  ‘ household  taste/  the  intrinsic  value  of  the 
material  is  of  minor  importance  to  the  mode  in  which  it 
is  fashioned  ; and  so  far  as  the  interests  of  art  are  con- 
cerned it  is  better  to  possess  a copper  gilt  flagon  of  a good 
design  than  a modern  ‘ trophy  cup  ’ of  twice  its  weight 
in  gold.  If  the  pieces  of  ‘presentation  plate’  which  we 
are  invited  to  inspect  at  silversmiths’  before  they  are 
sent  off  to  their  worthy  possessors  were  only  entrusted 
to  competent  designers,  we  might  hope  for  something 
better  than  the  everlasting  palm-trees,  camels  and 
equestrian  groups  which  are  now  allowed  to  symbolise 
both  the  taste  and  the  gratitude  of  a generous  public. 
In  such  objects  as  those  to  which  I refer,  the  art- 
workman  does  little  more  than  model  more  or  less 
correctly  after  nature.  This,  as  I have  already  endea- 
voured to  show,  is  imitation,  but  not  design  in  the 
artistic  sense  of  the  word.  Both  Benvenuto  Cellini 
and  Holbein  were  admirable  draughtsmen  ; both  were 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  proportions  of  the 
human  figure  ; but,  though  they  lived  in  an  age  when 
decorative  art  had  lost  its  early  simplicity,  neither  of 
them  forgot  its  conditions  so  far  as  to  let  a naturalistic 


u 


Plate  and  Cutlery. 


290 


treatment  of  animal  form  predominate  in  their  designs 
for  plate. 

To  return,  however,  to  the  more 
ordinary  articles  of  table  use,  there 
seems  but  little  from  a practical 
point  of  view  that  could  be  suggested 
by  way  of  improvement  for  modern 
cutlery.  Yet  the  shape  of  an  English 
dinner-knife,  with  its  flat  bone  handle 
and  straight  round-topped  blade,  is 
one  of  the  most  uninteresting  that 
could  be  devised  for  the  purpose. 
The  old-fashioned  knife-handle  was 
gently  curved,  so  that  it  might 
be  grasped  with  more  convenience, 
as  in  the  annexed  example  (of 
damascened  steel)  from  the  South 
Kensington  Museum,  and  it  is  a 
remarkable  evidence  of  the  inappro- 
priateness of  modern  manufacture 
that  while  we  have  bent  the  stems 
of  our  spoons  which  are  intended  to 
be  held  lightly  between  the  fingers, 
we  have  reduced  the  outline  of  the  knife-handle,  which 
requires  a firmer  hold,  to  a simple  parallelogram. 


Knife-handles . 


291 

Again,  as  regards  material,  a white  bone  handle  looks 
well  enough  while  new  and  clean,  but  the  yellowish 
colour  which  it  acquires  by  constant  use  is  not  pleasant. 
It  might  be  difficult  and  expensive  to  revive  the  manu- 
facture of  ‘ shagreen  ’ for  knife  handles  ; but  if  made  of 
bone,  there  seems  no  reason  why  they  should  not  be 
stained,  as  was  once  the  fashion.  Dark  wooden  handles, 
studded  with  flat  steel  ornaments,  were  much  used,  I 
believe,  in  the  last  century,  and  certainly  surpassed 
those  of  our  own  day  in  design.  The  old  system  of 
pinning  the  steel  shank  of  the  knife  through  the  side 
of  its  handle  has  been  renewed  of  late  years- — and  with 
good  reason,  for  in  no  other  way  can  the  two  be 
properly  secured  together.  A very  slight  curve  in  the 
length  of  the  blade  might  be  introduced  with  advantage, 
and  this,  for  practical  reasons,  should  be  on  the  upper 
rather  than  on  the  lower  edge.  Foreign  table-knives 
often  have  an  angular  end  to  the  blade.  The  principal 
objection  to  this  form  lies  in  the  danger  which  might 
ensue  if  a knife  accidentally  fell  with  its  point  down- 
wards. It  was  perhaps  on  this  account  that  the  blades 
of  some  old-fashioned  table-knives  terminated  with  a 
round  wafer-shaped  top,  like  the  butter-knife  which  may 
still  be  seen  in  use.  A more  probable  reason,  however, 
for  that  particular  form  lies  in  the  fact  that,  down 


u 2 


292 


Plate  and  Cutlery , 


to  the  period  of  the  last  century,  the  table-knife  was 
sometimes  allowed  to  do  duty  for  a spoon.  Happily, 
that  inelegant  custom  is  extinct  in  our  own  day. 

In  the  accompanying  woodcut 
are  given  specimens  of  a small 
knife  and  fork,  with  carved 
wooden  handles,  from  the  South 
Kensington  Museum.  The  style 
of  execution  is  somewhat  rude, 
but  the  nature  and  general  pro- 
portions of  the  design  are  ad- 
mirably adapted  for  the  purpose. 
The  illustration  is  about  one- 
third  less  than  the  real  size. 

Mother-of-pearl  handled  knives 
and  forks  for  dessert  may  now 
be  bought  at  a very  reasonable 
price,  and  are  far  more  agreeable 
to  the  touch,  as  well  as  in  ap- 
pearance, than  those  made  en- 
tirely of  silver  or  plated  metal, 
which  are  generally  of  very  poor 
design.  Mother-of-pearl,  more- 
over, does  not  discolour  with 
age,  like  bone  or  ivory. 


Table  Plate. 


293 


A slight  improvement  may  be  noticed  in  the  recent 
design  of  some  small  articles  of  table  service,  as  mustard- 
pots,  salt-cellars,  and  cruet-stands,  but  as  a rule  they 
are  far  inferior,  both  as  regards  taste  and  execution,  to 
those  which  were  manufactured  not  only  at  the  best 
time,  but  early  in  the  last  century.  Indeed,  if  I might 
venture  to  offer  any  direct  advice  of  the  kind  which 
one  constantly  sees  associated  with  catchpenny  adver- 
tisements, and  addressed  to  ‘ persons  about  to  furnish,’ 
I should  suggest  their  buying  plate,  not  at  the  mag- 
nificent emporium  of  Messrs.  So-and-so — where  the 
eye  is  perplexed  by  a hundred  and  fifty  pretentious 
vulgarities — but  rather  at  some  of  the  old  jewellery- 
shops  in  Hanway  Street  or  Wardour  Street,  in  which 
articles  of  old  silver  are  still  sold,  far  better  in  design, 
and  at  a cost  rarely  exceeding  that  which  is  paid  for 
modern  plate  of  the  same  intrinsic  value.  Some  of  the 
mediaeval  metal-workers  have,  it  is  true,  attempted  to 
revive  the  ancient  taste  and  dignity  of  the  silversmith’s 
art ; but  while  they  charge  for  their  goods  a price  which 
is  at  least  double  that  of  the  ordinary  trade,  we  can 
hardly  expect  them  to  be  patronised  by  the  public 
at  large.  A good  simple  design  ought  not  to  involve 
more  labour  in  execution  than  a bad  elaborate  design, 
supposing  both  to  be  equally  well  executed  ; and  the 


Plate  and  littery. 


294 

execution  of  ordinary  ware  is  at  least  good  enough 
for  all  practical  purposes. 

The  future  success  of  art-manufacture  in  England 
must,  of  course,  depend  in  a great  measure  on  the  taste 
of  the  public  for  whom  it  is  supplied ; but  it  is  difficult 
to  see  how  that  taste  is  to  be  thoroughly  and  popularly 
reformed  until  manufacturers  begin  to  educate  it,  by  the 
production  and  display  of  goods  which  will  bear  the 
test  of  sound  criticism.  Museums  and  exhibitions  of 
art  treasures  are  useful  in  familiarising  the  eye  with 
the  appearance  of  objects  which  illustrate  excellence  of 
ancient  skill.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  such 
objects  are  usually  articles  of  luxury,  which  at  any 
period  would  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  means, 
and  which  in  many  instances  were  applied  to  some 
purpose  that  has  long  since  fallen  into  disuse.  In 
examining  them,  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  our  fore- 
fathers were  not  all  people  of  unlimited  wealth,  who 
could  afford  jewelled  caskets,  costly  embroidery,  richly 
carved  cabinet-work  and  plate,  which  would  fetch  ten 
times  its  weight  in  gold  and  silver. 

In  those  early  days  there  were,  as  now,  households 
in  which  economy  was  an  object.  Pots  and  pans, 
wooden  trenchers  and  three-legged  stools  — articles, 
in  short,  far  more  humble  in  make  and  material  than 


Taste  in  Common  Objects. 


295 


those  which  increased  commercial  prosperity  has  given 
to  our  present  homes — were  then  required,  produced, 
and  sold  at  a moderate  price.  But  it  was  not  because 
they  were  cheap  that  they  were  necessarily  ugly  or  ill- 
fashioned.  That  contemptible  kind  of  workmanship 
which  is  at  once  slovenly  and  tasteless  because  it  may 
be  showy  and  cheap  was  not  then  in  demand.  The 
rich,  indeed,  spent  more  money,  both  on  dress  and 
objects  of  general  luxury,  than  at  the  present  day  ; 
but  such  furniture  as  befitted  the  habits  of  ordinary 
citizens  and  country  gentlefolks  of  that  date  was 
found  in  the  homes  of  the  middle  classes  more  than 
two  hundred  years  ago ; and  wherever  it  existed,  we 
may  be  sure  it  was  deftly  and  honestly  made.  Those 
examples  of  ancient  handicraft  which  have  reached  our 
own  time  may  well  put  to  shame  the  efforts  of  modern 
smiths  and  cabinet-makers  who  work  like  machines, 
while  their  ancestors  worked  like  artists  and  practical 
men. 

It  would  be  absurd,  however,  to  suppose  that 
English  capacity  has  deteriorated  in  the  same  pro- 
portion as  English  taste.  Our  artisans  have  as  much 
intelligence  as  ever  ; it  only  wants  proper  direction 
and  employment.  At  present  both  master  and  man 
are  so  accustomed,  from  their  youth  up,  to  false 


296 


Plate  and  Cutlery . 


principles  of  design  and  execution,  that  it  requires 
some  stern  teaching  and  no  little  patience  to  lead  them 
back  to  their  proper  groove  of  work.  Meanwhile,  the 
public  must  do  their  part.  If  they  will  insist  on  the 
perpetuation  of  pretentious  shams — if  they  will  prefer 
a cheap  and  tawdry  effect  to  legitimate  and  straight- 
forward manufacture — no  reform  can  possibly  be 
expected.  But  if  they  encourage  that  sound  and 
healthy  taste  which  alone  is  found  allied  with  con- 
scientious labour,  whether  in  the  workshop  or  the 
factory,  then  we  may  hope  to  see  revived  the  ancient 
glory  of  those  industrial  arts  which,  while  they  derive 
a certain  interest  from  tradition,  should  owe  their 
highest  perfection  to  civilised  skill. 


INDE  X. 


ALG 

Algerine  stuff  for  curtains,  99 
American  cloth,  a substitute  for 
leather,  91 

Anachronisms  in  design  of  furni- 
ture, 74 

Apostle  spoons,  284 
Architecture,  Street  (Chapter 

I.), 

Architecture,  absence  of  national 
taste  in,  20 

— , Horace  Walpole’s  taste  for  Go- 
thic, 36 

— , pseudo-classic,  adoption  of,  21 
— , causes  which  led  to  revival  of 
Gothic,  38 
— , Victorian,  33 
— , Elizabethan,  35 
Arm-chair,  old  example  of,  at  Knole, 
88 

— , design  for  a modern,  175 
Arrowsmith’s  Parquetry  floors, 
no 

Art,  vitiated  taste  in  pictorial,  2 
— , character  of  national,  5 

— in  common  objects,  293 

— manufacture,  future  prospects  of, 
294 

— workmanship,  inferiority  of  mo- 
dern, 295 

Artisans,  ability  of  English,  295 


BOT 

Artistic  furniture,  modern  deficiency 
of,  46 

Barry’s  design  for  the  Houses  of 
Parliament,  38 
Basins  and  ewers,  233 
Beard,  revival  of  the,  261 
Bed-curtains,  209 

Bed-room,  the  (Chapter  VIII.),  199 
Bed-room  chairs,  212 

— drawers,  214 

— furniture,  205 
Bedstead,  the,  207 
Bell-levers,  155 

Benham  & Froud,  modern  metal 
work  by,  149 

Beresford  Hope,  Mr.,  his  collection 
of  jewellery,  279 

Berlin-black,  for  stoves,  &c.,  1 50 
Bhopal  jewellery,  272 
Birmingham  ironmongery,  140 
Black-lead,  150 

Blankets,  striped  Austrian,  2 1 1 
Blomfield,  A.  W.,  designs  for  fenders 
by,  142 

Blown  and  cut  glass,  244 
Bolts,  door,  139 

Book-case,  arrangement  of  a,  1 29, 1 32 
Boots,  changes  of  shape  in,  262 
| Bottles,  Dutch,  254 


298 


Index. 


BOT 

Bottles,  porous  ‘red  body/  for  water, 
230 

Brackets  for  a drawing-room  wall, 
188 

Brazier,  example  of  a modern 
Spanish,  144 
Breakfast  urns,  145 
Bric-a-brac,  135 

Buckets,  wooden,  how  made,  168 
Building  Act,  inefficiency  of  the,  28 

Cabinet-work,  style  of  modern,  66 
— mistakes  in  the  design  of,  127 
Candlestick,  old  Swiss,  152 
Candlesticks,  modern  brass,  154 
Carpets,  oriental,  106 
— , waste  of  material  in  modern,  108 
— , Kidderminster,  1 1 1 
— , conventional  patterns  in,  1 1 2 
Cartwright,  artistic  work  of  the,  61 
Carving  in  furniture,  vicious  treat- 
ment of,  58,  67 

Casket,  inlaid,  example  of  an,  180 
Castellani’s  revival  of  antique  jewel- 
lery, 270 

Cast-iron,  use'of,  46 

Cellini,  Benvenuto,  his  designs,  289 

Chairs,  Windsor,  60 

— , hall,  67 

— , dining-room,  85 

— , bed-room,  212 

— , drawing-room,  164,  175 

Chimney-piece,  shelves  over  a,  136 

China,  Oriental,  219 

— , Minton’s,  225 

— , colour  applied  in  decoration  of, 
226 

— , dinner  services,  227 
— , Copeland’s,  231 
— , modern  Limoges,  240 


CUR 

Chromo-lithographs,  197 
Chromatic  decoration,  131 
Cinque-cento  jewellery,  specimen 
of,  279 

Coal  box,  unsuitable  design  of  the 
modern,  92 

Coats,  changes  in  shape  of,  265 
Coleman,  W.  S.,  his  designs  for 
modern  majolica,  236 
Collars,  262 

Colours  suitable  for  wall  papers,  1 19 

— in  decoration  of  woodwork,  127 

— used  in  old  majolica,  237 
Colour,  theories  concerning,  131 
— , use  of  enamelled,  283 

— , in  carpets,  injudicious  use  of, 
1 12 

— applied  in  decoration  of  China, 
226 

Common  objects,  taste  in,  295 
Consistency,  false  notions  of,  200 
Conventionalities  of  upholstery,  72 
Copeland’s  china,  231 
Cost  of  furniture,  91 
Costume,  modern,  259 
Cothele,  Devon,  old  mansion  at,  67 
Cotelan,  material  for  curtains,  99 
1 Counter  ’ influences,  1 1 
Counterpanes,  210 
Cowlishaw,  Nicol,  & Co.  {note),  103 
Creepers  and  ivy,  training  of,  42 
Cretonne,  a material  for  curtains,  100 
Crockery  (Chapter  IX.),  218 
Cromwell  chair,  the,  90,  134 
Cross,  pectoral,  old  example  of  a, 
2 77 

Curtains,  window,  95 
— , varieties  of  materials  for,  99 
— , Portiere,  101 
— , Swiss  lace,  102 


Index. 


299 


CUR 

Curtain  poles,  95 

— fringe,  96 

Curves,  intemperate  use  of,  in  de- 
sign, 55 
Cutlery,  290 

Dado,  decoration  of  a,  123 
Damask  curtains,  100 
Deal,  stained,  a substitute  for  oak, 
130 

Deceits,  structural,  29 
Decoration,  naturalistic,  a mistake, 
68 

— , unsuitable  style  of,  92 
— , inlaid,  179 
— , stencilled,  for  walls,  117 
Decorator,  the  true  work  of  a,  1 32 
Decorators,  uneducated  taste  of,  194 
Demand  and  supply  of  furniture,  62 
Design,  principles  of,  in  furniture, 68 
— , conditions  of,  47 
Design  of  wall  papers,  119 
Dessert  knives  and  forks,  292 
Diamonds,  extravagant  cost  of,  269 
— , setting  of,  268 
Diaper  patterns  for  wall  papers,  12 1 
Dining-room  (Chapter  III.),  71 
Dining-room  chairs,  90 
Dining-room  table,  as  ordinarily 
made,  74 

— of  the  Jacobean  period,  77 

— , suggestions  for  the  design  of  a, 

79 

— , old  German  examples  of,  81 
Dinner  services  in  China,  227 
Dish,  Algerine,  221 
Door-knockers,  old  and  modern,  44 
— , examples  of,  from  Wurzburg,  45 
Door  mats  and  rugs,  49 
Door  bolts  and  hinges,  139 


FIR 

Doors,  glass,  for  book-cases,  133 
Drawers,  bed- room,  214 
Drawing-room,  the  (Chapter  VI.), 
156 

Drawing-room  chairs,  ordinary  cha- 
racter of,  1 61,  177 
Dress  and  Jewellery  (Chapter 
XI.),  258 

Dress,  national,  259 
— , evening,  want  of  reform  in,  264 
— , ladies’,  changes  of  fashion  in,  264 
Dutch  bottles,  254 

Ecclesiastical  sentiment  (so-called), 

39 

Electro-plate,  a substitute  for  silver, 
288 

Elegance,  false  notions  of,  158 
Enamelled  plate,  283 
Encaustic  tiles,  Messrs.  Maw  & 
Co.’s,  50 

— for  mural  decorations,  52 
Engravings,  frames  for,  196 
Entrance  Hall  (Chapter  II.),  41 
— , mural  decoration  of,  53 
— , furniture  of  the,  63 
Evening  dress,  reform  wanted  in, 
264 

Exhibition  of  1851,  effect  of,  on 
manufacture,  61 

— , its  influence  on  design  of  glass, 
249 

Faience  ware,  why  so  called,  237 
Fashion,  capricious  changes  in,  12 
— , effect  of,  7 
Fenders,  93,  142 

— , unsuitable  design  of  modern,  93 
Finger-plates,  140 
Fire-irons,  150 


300 


Index. 


FIT 

Fittings,  incongruous  character  of 
modern,  74 

Floor  and  the  Wall,  the  (Chap- 
ter IV.),  104 

Floor-cloth,  use  of,  for  halls,  &c.,  51 
Floors,  modes  of  decorating,  109 
— , parquetry,  109 
Florence  oil-flask,  a good  example 
of  design,  170 

Fork,  varieties  of  the  modern,  284 
F orm,  varieties  of,  in  Venetian  glass, 
253 

Frames  for  pictures,  184,  1 92-1 95 
Francia  the  painter,  designs  in 
jewellery  by,  5 

French-polishing,  objectionable 
practice  of,  83 
French  porcelain,  239 
Frieze,  decoration  of,  in  rooms,  123, 
132 

Fringe,  for  curtains,  &c.,  design  of, 
96 

Furniture,  extravagant  curves  in,  55 
— , conventional  proprieties  of,  73 
— , faded,  83 
— , cost  of  modern,  91 


Gas-brackets,  149 
Gaseliers,  146 

Gentility,  a shopman’s  notion  of,  10 
Geoffroy  and  Cie.,  modern  majolica 
by,  238 

Georgian  era,  brick  mansions  of 
the,  26 

— , iron  railings  of  the,  26 
Gien  ware,  modern,  238  note 
Gilding,  practice  of,  in  decoration 
of  porcelain,  227 
Glass  doors  for  book-cases,  133 


HOP 

Glass,  cut  and  blown,  242 
— , old  Venetian,  245 
— , its  mode  of  manufacture,  245 
— , ingredients  of,  246 
— , table,  its  former  characteristics, 
242,  247 

Gold,  use  of,  in  design  of  wallpapers, 
124 

Gothic,  adaptability  of,  39 
— , causes  which  led  to  revival  of,  37 
— , Horace  Walpole’s  taste  for,  36 

— art,  decline  of,  35 

Graining  wood,  objectionable  prac- 
tice of,  43 

Grates  and  fire-irons,  149 
Greek  pottery,  design  of,  234 

Hall,  The  Entrance  (Chapter 

II.),  41 

— pavements  in  tiles,  &c.,  50 

— table,  design  for  a,  64 

— chairs,  63-67 
Hanging-press,  216 
Hand-basins  and  ewers,  232 
1 Harlequin’  fittings,  74 
Harmony  and  contrast  in  wall 

papers,  119 
Hat,  the  modern,  260 
Heaton,  Butler,  and  Bayne,  decora- 
tive painting  by,  53 
Heaton,  C.,  designs  for  curtains  by, 
101 

Hearth-rugs,  Scinde,  108 
Hearths,  rustic,  49 
Hinges,  old  and  modern,  128 
— , proper  place  for,  on  a door,  139 
Holbein,  his  designs  for  plate,  289 
Hope,  Beresford,  Mr.,  his  collection 
of  jewellery,  279 


Index. 


301 


HOU 

House-bucket,  construction  of  a,  168 
Houses  of  Parliament,  38 
Houses,  modern,  29 
Household  taste  thirty  years  ago, 
1 IS 

Imitation  as  distinguished  from  de- 
sign, 290 

Indian  preserve-jar,  223 

— jewellery,  272 
Industrial  art,  297 
Inlaid  decoration,  179 
Introduction,  i 
Ironmongery,  Birmingham,  treat- 
ment of,  140 

Ironwork  in  construction,  dangerous 
use  of,  31 

— candlestick,  example  of  an  old 
Swiss,  152 

— bedstead,  the,  as  ordinarily  made, 
207 

Italian  architecture,  34 
Italian  diapers  adapted  for  wall 
papers,  123 
- — majolica,  236 
Ivy  and  creepers,  training  of,  42 

Jackson  and  Graham,  furniture 
manufactured  by,  62  note , 213, 
216 

Jar,  Indian  preserve,  223 
Jeffrey  & Co.,  paper-hangings  by, 
1 18  note , 123 
Jewellery,  use  of,  265 
— , modern,  want  of  taste  in,  269 
— , antique,  271 
— , Indian,  272 

— , specimen  of  Cinque-cento,  279 
Joinery,  inferiority  of  modern,  64 
Jugs,  water,  228 


MAJ 

Kensington  Museum,  ancient  speci- 
mens of  jewellery  at,  271 
Kidderminster  carpets,  1 1 1 
Knickerbocker  suit,  the,  263 
Knick-knacks,  collection  of,  135 
Knife-blades,  291 
Knife-handles,  290 
Knockers,  metal,  for  doors,  44 
Knole,  ancient  furniture  at,  85 
— , ancient  sofa  at,  159 
Koh-i-noor,  the,  267 

Lace  trimmings,  97 
— , Swiss,  a material  for  window 
curtains,  102 

Ladies’  dress,  changes  in  fashion 
of,  259 

Lady,  toilet  of  a modern,  264 
Lamps,  moderator,  146 
Layard,  A.  H.,  253 
Leasehold,  present  system  of,  25 
Leaves  of  plants,  types  of  ornament 
adapted  from,  122 
Library,  the  (Chapter  V.),  126 
Limoges,  modern  ware  of,  240 
Locks,  ancient  treatment  of,  139 
London  street  architecture,  19 
— , increase  in  size  of,  24 
Looms,  superiority  of  Oriental,  107 
Louis  Quatorze  period,  taste  of  the, 
55 

Louis  Quinze  period,  taste  of  the, 
in  plate,  283 

Machinery,  advantages  of  manual 
work  over,  104 

Mahogany,  use  of  in  cabinet-work, 
130 

Majolica,  218,  237 


302 


Index, 


MAJ 

Majolica,  modern,  designs  by  W.  S. 

Coleman  for,  236 
Mantelpiece  shelves,  136 
— mirrors,  183 

Manual  work,  advantage  of,  over 
machinery,  104 

Manufacture,  degeneracy  of  mo- 
dern, 3 

— , possibility  of  reform  in,  296 
Marquetry,  181 
Mats,  door,  49 

Matsys,  Quentin,  his  pump  at  Ant- 
werp, 47 

Maw  & Co.’s  encaustic  tiles,  50 
Mechanic’s  work,  why  now  uninte- 
resting, 138 

Metal  work,  decline  of  taste  in,  145 
— , modern,  by  Benham  & Froud, 
154 

— , character  of  old,  15 1 
Middle  Ages,  toilet  in  the,  265 
Minton’s  china,  5,  225 
Mirror,  the  mantelpiece,  183 
Mirrors,  small  sconce,  188 
Moderator  lamps,  146 
Modern  houses,  inferior  construc- 
tion of,  32 

— , furniture,  shabbiness  of,  83 
Morris,  Marshall,  & Co.,  124 
Moorish  pottery,  221 
Mosaic  decorations  by  Salviati,  251 
Mouldings,  old  wooden,  59 
— , treatment  of,  in  cabinet  work, 
127 

Mural  decoration,  53 
Murano,  glass  manufacturers  of, 
252 

Museum,  S.  Kensington,  old  jewel- 
lery at,  272 
Mustard  pots,  293 


PLA 

National  art,  5 

— dress,  259 

Naturalistic  forms  in  textile  art,  68 

— in  surface  decoration,  116,  123 
Nature  the  best  authority  in  use  of 

colour,  1 31 

Necklace,  Indian,  272 
Novelties,  demand  for,  13 

Oak,  use  of,  in  cabinet-work,  129 
Oil  a substitute  for  varnish,  127 

— flask,  the  Florence,  170 
Oppenheim’s  depot  for  4 Gien  ’ 

ware,  239  note 
Oriental  carpets,  108 

— looms,  107 

— china,  225 

Ornament,  character  of,  in  design, 
173 

— , variety  of,  in  plate,  289 

Palace  of  Westminster,  38 
Panels,  treatment  of,  in  woodwork, 
128 

Paper-hangings,  118 
Paris,  old  and  modern,  17 
Parquetry  floors,  109 
Pavements,  encaustic  tile,  50 
Pectoral  cross,  old  example  of,  277 
Pendent  ornaments  for  the  head, 
274 

— , gold  enamelled,  273 
Persian  carpets,  106 
Pictorial  art,  vitiated  taste  in,  2 
Picture-frames,  192 
Pictures,  classification  of,  185 
— , method  of  hanging,  190,  192 
Plate,  characteristics  of  design  in, 
287 


Index. 


303 


PLA 

Plate  and  Cutlery  (Chapter 
XII.),  282 

Plate-glass,  immoderate  use  of,  31 
Plates,  ‘marriage,’  old  Italian,  236 
Polishing  woodwork,  83 
Porcelain,  modern,  225 
Portland  vase,  the,  245 
Portraits,  family,  185 
Pottery,  Moorish,  221 
— , Greek,  principles  of  design  in, 
234 

Practical  advantages  of  old  manu- 
facture, 1 21 

Presentation  plate,  ordinary  design 
of,  289 

Prints  and  photographs,  195 
Pseudo-Gothic  designs,  21 
Pugin,  influence  of,  21,  37,  39 
Pugin’s  design  for  wall  papers,  117 

Queen  Anne  style,  revival  of  the,  40 
Quentin  Matsys,  his  pump  at  Ant- 
werp, 48 

Raphaelesque  ware,  237 
‘ Rep,’  a material  for  curtains,  99 
Repousse  work,  283,  288 
Rods  for  window  curtains,  96 
Roman  jewellery,  revival  of  ancient, 
271 

Round  tables,  177 
Russian  jewellery,  old,  276 

Salvers,  silver,  287 
Salt-cellars,  232 

Salviati’s  Venetian  table-glass,  252 
— mosaic  decoration,  251 
Scinde  hearth-rugs,  108 
Sconce  mirrors,  188 


TAR 

Sconce  light,  148 

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  influence  of  his 
writings  on  the  revival  of  Gothic 
art,  36 

Settles,  Old  English,  163 
Shagreen  knife  handles,  291 
Shelves  in  book-cases,  129 
— , use  of,  over  mantelpiece,  1 36 
Shop-fronts,  design  of,  23,  30 
Shopmen,  recommendations  of,  157 
Sideboard,  dining-room,  84 
Siena,  example  of  ancient  ironwork 
at,  151 

Silk  and  damask  curtains,  98 
Silver  plate,  283 
Sofa  at  Knole,  159 
Spanish  brazier,  example  of  a mo- 
dern, 144 
‘ Spill  ’ vases,  154 
Spoons,  silver,  285 
Staining  fluids,  a substitute  for 
grainer’s  work,  43 
Stencilled  decoration  for  walls,  117 
Stoves,  Sussex,  46  note 
Street  Architecture  (Chapter 
I.),  16 

Structural  deceits,  29 
Stucco,  introduction  of,  27 
Styles,  medley  of,  74 
Swiss  lace  for  curtains,  102 
— candlestick,  old,  152 

Table  Glass  (Chapter  X.),  241 
Tables,  drawing-room,  178 
— , dining-room,  77 
— , library,  134 
— , telescope,  74 
Tapestry,  ancient  use  of,  116 
Tarsia,  Italian  inlay  so-called,  180 


304 


Index. 


TAS 

Taste,  acquirement  of  modern,  8 
— , want  of  instruction  in,  9 
— , principles  of,  1 5 
— , inconsistency  of  modern,  137 
Tea  service,  231 

Textile  art,  characteristics  of,  106 
Tiara  of  diamonds,  268 
Toilet  table,  213 

Trimmings  of  ancient  furniture  at 
Knole,  88 

Turned  work  in  furniture,  59 

Upholstery,  modern,  55 
— , conventionalities  of  modern,  73 
Urns,  breakfast,  146 
Use  and  beauty,  association  of,  in 
design,  167 

Varnishing  wood,  a mistake,  127 
Veneering,  practice  of,  57 
Venetian  glass,  244,  255 
— , ordinary  imitation  of,  250 
— , varieties  of  form  in,  245 
— , characteristic  qualities  of,  247 
Venus  of  Milo,  the,  7 
Victorian  architecture,  33 
Virtuoso,  inconsistency  of  the,  in 
matters  of  taste,  136 


YAT 

Wainscotings,  former  use  of,  121 
Wall  Furniture  (Chapter  VII.), 
183 

Wall  papers,  suitable  colours  for 
119 

Walls  of  entrance  hall,  best  colours 
for,  53 

Wardour  Street  antiquities,  64 
Wardrobe,  the,  201 
Washstand,  shape  of  the  ordinary, 
202 

— , design  for  a,  205 
Water-jugs,  228 
Wedgwood,  225 
— , reform  in  ceramic  art  by,  5 
Windsor  chairs,  60 
Window  curtains,  94 
Wood  veneers  in  furniture,  57 
— , objectionable  practice  of  grain- 
ing, 42 

Wood-carving,  modern,  58 
Wood- work,  colour  of  old,  66 
Woollams,  paper-hangings  manu- 
factured by,  1 1 8 note 
Work-table,  an  ordinary,  172 
Wren,  genius  of,  35 


Yates  & Son,  table  plate  manufac- 
tured by,  at  Birmingham,  284 


LONDON  : PRINTED  BY 

SPOTTISWOODE  AND  CO.,  NEW-STREET  SQUARE 


AND  PARLIAMENT  STREET 


■ . 


«■! 


■yt'friffl: 


