COPYRIGHT  DEPOSIT. 


. 


***7 


. 


HOME  OP  THE  RADFORD  PUBLICATIONS,  CHICAGO,  ILLINOIS 

penter  and  Builder”  and  the  -Cement  World  ” 


Radford’s 


Cyclopedia  of 

Construction 


Carpentry,  Building 

and 

Architecture 


A  General  Reference  Work  on 

MODERN  BUILDING  MATERIALS  AND  METHODS  AND  THEIR  PRACTICAL  AP 
PLICATION  TO  ALL  FORMS  OF  CONSTRUCTION  IN  WOOD,  STONE,  BRICK, 
STEEL,  AND  CONCRETE;  INCLUDING  ALSO  SUCH  ALLIED  BRANCHES 
OF  THE  STRUCTURAL  FIELD  AS  HEATING  AND  VENTILATING, 
PLUMBING,  ELECTRIC  WIRING,  PAINTING,  CONTRACTS,  SPECI¬ 
FICATIONS,  ESTIMATING,  STRUCTURAL  DRAFTING.  ETC. 

Based  on  the  Practical  Experience  of  a 

LARGE  STAFF  OF  EXPERTS  IN  ACTUAL  CONSTRUCTION  WORK 


Illustrated 


TWELVE  VOLUMES 


THE  RADFORD  ARCHITECTURAL  COMPANY 

CHICAGO,  ILL. 


Copyright,  1915 

BY 

THE  RADFORD  ARCHITECTURAL  COMPANY 


AUG  -2  19(5 


©CI.A401D56 

K^O  f 


Radford’s 

Cyclopedia  of  Construction 


Prepared  under  the  Supervision  of 

WILLIAM  A.  RADFORD 

Editor-in-Chief 

President  of  the  Radford  Architectural  Company,  Chicago,  Ill. 
Editor-in-Chief  of  the  “American  Carpenter  and 
Builder”  and  the  “  Cement  World” 


ALFRED  SIDNEY  JOHNSON,  A.  M.f  Ph.  D. 

Editor  in  Charge 

Author  of  “The  Materials  and  Manufacture  of  Concrete,”  etc. 
Formerly  Editor  of  “Current  History.”  Associate 
Editor  of  Numerous  Standard  Works 
of  Reference 


Partial  List  of  Authors  and  Collaborators 

JOHN  P.  BROOKS,  M.  S. 

Associate  Professor  of  Civil  Engineering,  and  Acting  Head  of 
Department  of  Civil  Engineering,  University  of  Illinois 


FRANK  O.  DUFOUR,  C.  E. 

Assistant  Professor  of  Structural  Engineering,  University  of  Illin- 
nois 

Author  of  “Bridge  Engineering,”  “Roof  Trusses,”  etc. 


DAVID  P.  MORETON,  B.  S. 

Associate  Professor  of  Electrical  Engineering,  Armour  Institute 
of  Technology 


ALFRED  G.  KING 

Consulting  Engineer  on  Heating  and  Ventilating 
Author  of  “Practical  Steam  and  Hot- Water  Heating  and  Ventila¬ 
tion.”  “Steam  and  Hot-Water  Heating  Charts,”  “Practical 
Heating  Illustrated,”  etc. 

ERVIN  KENISON,  S.  B. 

Assistant  Professor  of  Mechanical  Drawing  and  Descriptive 
Geometry,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
Author  of  a  Practical  Textbook  of  Mechanical  Drawing 


AUTHORS  AND  COLLABORATORS— (Continued) 

LOSING  H.  PROVINE,  B.  S. 

Instructor  in  Architectural  Engineering,  Department  of  Archi¬ 
tecture,  University  of  Illinois 


THOMAS  TAIT,  C.  E. 

Consulting  Heating,  Ventilating,  and  Sanitary  Engineer 
Member  American  Society  of  Inspectors  of  Plumbing  and  Sanitary 
Engineers 

Member  American  Society  of  Heating  and  Ventilating  Engineers 


BICHARD  T.  DANA 

Consulting  Engineer 

Chief  Engineer,  Construction  Service  Company,  New  York,  N.  Y. 
Joint  Author  with  Halbert  P.  Gillette  of  “Cost-Analysis  Engi¬ 
neering” 

Member  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers 
Member  American  Institute  of  Mechanical  Engineers 


WILLIAM  A.  RADFORD 

President,  The  Radford  Architectural  Company,  Chicago,  Ill. 
Editor-in-Chlef,  “American  Carpenter  and  Builder”  and  “Cement 
World” 

Author  of  “Practical  Carpentry,”  “The  Steel  Square,”  etc. 


GEORGE  W.  ASHBY 

Architect 

Vice-President,  The  Radford  Architectural  Company,  Chicago,  Ill. 
CHARLES  W.  RADFORD 

Treasurer,  The  Radford  Architectural  Company,  Chicago,  Ill. 


CHARLES  D.  WARNER 

Editor  “Cement  World”  and  “Dealers  Record.” 


BERNARD  L.  JOHNSON,  B.  S. 

Editor  “American  Carpenter  and  Builder”  and  “Woodworkers  Re¬ 
view” 

Formerly  Mechanical  Engineer,  Fitz-Hugh  Luther  Locomotive  & 
Car  Company,  Chicago,  III. 


E.  L.  HATFIELD 

General  Manager,  Cement  World  Company,  Chicago,  Ill. 


IRA  S.  GRIFFITH,  A.  B. 

Supervisor  of  Manual  Training,  Oak  Park,  Ill. 

Member  Editorial  Board,  Western  Drawing  and  Manual  Training 
Association  & 

Formerly  Professor  of  Mathematics,  Eureka  College 
Author  of  “Essentials  of  Woodworking” 


AUTHORS  AND  COLLABORATORS— (Concluded) 

CHARLES  EDWARD  PAUL,  S.  B. 

Associate  Professor  of  Mechanics,  Armour  Institute  of  Technology 
Member  American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers 
Member  American  Society  for  Testing  Materials 

EDWIN  O.  GREIFENIIAGEN,  B.  S.,  C.  E. 

Office  Engineer,  Bridge  and  Building  Department,  Chicago,  Mil¬ 
waukee  &  St.  Paul  Railway 

ALFRED  W.  WOODS 

Architect 

Inventor  of  “Wood’s  Key  to  the  Steel  Square” 

Joint  Author  of  “The  Steel  Square  and  Its  Uses” 


WILLIAM  REUTHER 

Expert  on  Modern  Building  Methods 


T.  B.  KIDNER 

Director  of  Manual  Training  and  Household  Science,  Department 
of  Education,  Province  of  New  Brunswick 
Fellow  of  the  British  Institute  of  Carpentry 


P.  W.  RATHBUN,  B.  S. 

Consulting  Engineer 

Member  American  Society  of  Heating  and  Ventilating  Engineers 


EDWARD  HURST  BROWN 

Editor  “Painters’  Magazine” 


CHARLES  P.  RAWSON 

Chief  Draftsman,  The  Radford  Architectural  Company,  Chicago,  Ill. 


I.  P.  HICKS 

Architect  and  Contractor 


Bibliography  of  Construction 

BEING  A  SELECTED  LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORKS  COVERING  VARIOUS  POR¬ 
TIONS  OF  THE  GENERAL  FIELD  OF  CONSTRUCTION 

In  addition  to  the  vast  store  of  up-to-date  practical  information 
never  before  published,  the  editors  have  embodied  in  the  Cyclopedia 
of  Construction  the  cream  of  the  world’s  best  literature  in  this  field, 
giving  in  condensed  form  the  substance  of  everything  essential  in 
the  experience  of  the  past  to  enable  the  worker  of  the  present  to  meet 
every  problem  likely  to  be  met  with  under  the  conditions  of  ordinary 
practice. 

For  the  sake,  however,  of  those  who  may  be  interested  in  pur¬ 
suing  further  study  along  various  special  lines,  we  furnish  a  list  of 
important  works  that  have  appeared  covering  different  portions  of 
the  field. 

In  this  connection,  the  editors  wish  to  express  their  thanks  to 
American  manufacturers  and  dealers  in  the  machinery  and  materials 
of  construction,  as  well  as  to  proprietors  and  patentees  of  various 
special  mechanical  devices  and  processes,  for  valuable  data,  illus¬ 
trations  and  suggestions. 


Authorities  on  Construction 

MANSFIELD  MEEBIMAN,  C.  E.,  Ph.  D. 

Professor  of  Civil  Engineering,  Lehigh  University 
Author  of  Mechanics  of  Materials;”  “Retaining  Walls  and  Ma¬ 
sonry  Dams;  “Elements  of  Sanitary  Engineering;”  “A 
textbook  on  Roofs  and  Bridges,”  etc.  ° 

HALBEET  P.  GILLETTE 

Washington  State  Railroad  Commission 
Author  of  Handbook  of  Cost  Data  for  Contractors  and  Engineer  ” 

JOHN  C.  TEAUTWINE 

Author  of  “The  Civil  Engineer’s  Pocketbook” 

FEEDEE1CK  W.  TAYLOE,  M.  E.,  and  SANFOED  E.  THOMPSON 
S.  B.,  C.  E.  ' 

Authors  of  “A  Treatise  on  Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced” 
FEEDEBICK  E.  TUBNEAUBE,  C.  E.,  Dr.  Eng. 

P®,®1*  °.f  College  of  Engineering,  University  of  Wisconsin 
Joint  Author  of  “Principles  of  Reinforced  Concrete  Construction  •" 
theory  and  Practice  of  Modern  Framed  Structures, ”  etc  ’ 

EDWAED  GODFEEY 

Structural  Engineer  for  Robert  W.  Hunt  &  Co 
A u thoi’i  I —“Concrete! ”&1  Engineerins”  (Book  '  I-“Tables  Book 

A.  PEESCOTT  FOLWELL 

Author  n}IH2lc,pal  JournaI  and  Engineer” 

Authoi  of  Sewerage;”  “Water-Supply  Engineering,”  etc. 


AUTHORITIES  ON  CONSTRUCTION 


IEA  O.  BAKER,  C.  E. 

Professor  of  Civil  Engineering,  University  of  Illinois 
Author  of  “A  Treatise  on  Masonry  Construction;”  ‘‘Roads  and 
Pavements,”  etc. 

FRANK  E.  KIDDER,  C.  E.,  Ph.  D. 

Author  of  “Architect’s  and  Builder’s  Pocketbook  ;”  “Building  Con¬ 
struction  and  Superintendence,”  etc. 

CHARLES  EVAN  FOWLER,  C.  E. 

President,  Pacific  Northwestern  Society  of  Engineers 
Author  of  “Ordinary  Foundations” 

FRED  T.  HODGSON,  ARCHITECT 

Author  of  “Modern  Carpentry ;”  “Builder  and  Contractor’s  Guide, 
etc.  ' 


HENRY  R.  TOWNE 

Author  of  “Locks  and  Builders’  Hardware” 


HENRY  N.  OGDEN,  C.  E. 

Assistant  Professor  of  Civil  Engineering,  Cornell  University 

Author  of  “Sewer  Construction” 

CHARLES  E.  GREENE,  A.  M.,  C.  E. 

Late  Professor  of  Civil  Engineering,  University  of  Michigan 

Author  of  “Trusses  and  Arches,”  “Structural  Mechanics,”  etc. 

WILLIAM  H.  BIRKMIRE,  C.  E. 

Author  of  “Planning  and  Construction  of  High  Office  Buildings*” 
“Architectural  Iron  and  Steel,  and  Its  Application  in  the 
Construction  of  Buildings;”  “Compound  Riveted  Girders*” 
"Skeleton  Construction  in  Buildings,”  etc. 

FRANK  W.  SKINNER 

Lecturer  on  Field  Engineering,  Cornell  University 

Author  of  “Types  and  Details  of  Bridge  Construction” 

JAMES  J.  LAWLER 

Author  of  “Modern  Plumbing,  Steam  and  Hot-Water  Heating” 

WILLIAM  H.  BURR,  C.  E. 

Professor  of  Civil  Engineering,  Columbia  University,  New  York 

Author  of  “Elasticity  and  Resistance  of  the  Materials  of  Engineer¬ 
ing;”  Joint  Author  of  “The  Design  and  Construction  of 
Metallic  Bridges” 

HOMER  A.  REID 

Assistant  Engineer,  Bureau  of  Buildings,  New  York  City 

Author  of  "Concrete  and  Reinforced  Concrete  Construction” 

J.  B.  JOHNSON,  C.  E. 

.  Author  of  “Materials  of  Construction  ;”  “Engineering  Contracts  and 
Specifications;”  Joint  Author  of  “Theory  and  Practice  in  the 
Designing  of  Modern  Framed  Structures” 


AUTHORITIES  ON  CONSTRUCTION 


W.  E.  WAKE 

Formerly  Professor  of  Architecture,  Columbia  University,  New  York 
Author  of  “Shades  and  Shadows;”  “Modern  Perspective,”  etc. 

JOHN  CASSAN  WAIT,  M.  C.  E.,  LL.  B. 

Formerly  Assistant  Professor  of  Engineering,  Harvard  University 
Author  of  “Engineering  and  Architectural  Jurisprudence;”  “The 
Law  of  Contracts,”  etc. 

T.  M.  CLARK 

Author  of  “Building  Superintendence ;”  “Architect,  Builder,  and 
Owner  before  the  Law,”  etc. 

CLARENCE  A.  MARTIN 

Director  of  College  of  Architecture,  Cornell  University 
Author  of  “Details  of  Building  Construction” 

CHARLES  H.  SNOW 

Dean  of  School  of  Applied  Science,  New  York  University 
Author  of  “The  Principal  Species  of  Wood,  Their  Characteristic 
Properties” 

GAETANO  LANZA,  S.  B.,  C.  E. 

Head  of  Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering  and  Applied 
Mechanics,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
Author  of  “Applied  Mechanics” 

A.  W.  BUEL  AND  C.  S.  HILL 

Authors  of  “Reinforced  Concrete” 


NEWTON  HARRISON,  E.  E. 

Author  of  “Electric  Wiring,  Diagrams  and  Switchboards” 

EVERETT  U.  CROSBY  and  HENRY  A.  EISKE 

Authors  of  “Handbook  of  Fire  Protection  for  Improved  Risk” 

GEORGE  E.  THACKRAY,  C.  E. 

Structural  Engineer,  Cambria  Steel  Co. 

Author  of  “Handbook  of  Information  Relating  to  Structural  Steel” 

ALPHA  PIERCE  JAMISON,  M.  E. 

Assistant  Professor  of  Mechanical  Drawing,  Purdue  University 
Author  of  “Elements  of  Mechanical  Drawing  ;”  “Advanced  Mechan¬ 
ical  Drawing,”  etc. 

RUSSELL  STURGIS 

Author  of  “A  Dictionary  of  Architecture  and  Building ;”  “How 
to  Judge  Architecture,”  etc. 

A.  D.  E.  HAMLIN,  A.  M. 

Professor  of  the  History  of  Architecture,  Columbia  University, 
New  York 

Author  of  “A  Textbook  of  the  History  of  Architecture” 

ROLLA  C.  CARPENTER,  M.  S.,  C.  E.,  M.  M.  E. 

Professor  of  Experimental  Engineering,  Cornell  University 
Author  of  “Heating  and  Ventilating  Buildings” 


AUTHORITIES  ON  CONSTRUCTION 


I.  J.  COSGROVE 

Author  of  “Principles  and  Practice  of  Plumbing” 

WILLIAM  PAUL  GERHARD,  C.  E. 

Author  of  “A  Guide  to  Sanitary  House-Inspection “Sanitation  of 
Public  Buildings,”  etc. 

FRANK  0.  DUFOUR,  C.  E. 

Assistant  Professor  of  Structural  Engineering,  University  of  Illi¬ 
nois 

Author  of  “Bridge  Engineering — Itoof  Trusses” 

H.  H.  CAMPBELL 

Author  of  “Manufacture  and  Properties  of  Structural  Steel” 

IRA  S.  GRIFFITH,  A.  B. 

Supervisor  of  Manual  Training,  Oak  Park,  Ill. 

Author  of  “Essentials  of  Woodworking.” 

WILLIAM  J.  BALDWIN 

Author  of  “Steam  Heating  for  Buildings” 

CLIFFORD  DYER  HOLLEY,  M.  S.,  Ph.  D.,  anti  E.  F.  LADD,  B.  S. 

Authors  of  “Analysis  of  Mixed  Paints,  Color  Pigments,  and  Var¬ 
nishes” 

JAMES  H.  MONCKTON 

Author  of  “Stair-Building” 

HARMON  HOWARD  RICE 

Author  of  “Concrete-Block  Manufacture :  Processes  and  Machines” 

H.  G.  RICHEY 

Superintendent  of  Construction,  U.  S.  Public  Buildings 
Author  of  “A  Handbook  for  Superintendents  of  Construction,  Archi¬ 
tects,  Builders,  and  Building  Inspectors ;”  “The  Building 
Mechanic’s  Ready  Reference” 

J.  A.  L.  WADDELL,  C.  E.,  D.  Sc.,  LL.  D. 

Author  of  “De  Pontibus ;”  “Specifications  and  Contracts,”  etc. 

R.  M.  STARBUCK 

Author  of  “Modern  Plumbing  Illustrated” 

SYDNEY  F.  WALKER,  M.  I.  E.  E. 

Author  of  “Electric  Lighting  and  Heating” 

ernest  McCullough,  c.  e. 

Author  of  “The  Business  of  Contracting;”  “Reinforced  Concrete,’ 
etc. 

GEORGE  D.  ARMSTRONG 

Author  of  “Cyclopedia  of  Painting” 


/ 


v  • 


........ 


■ 


iyw. 


■  i.  4  ?  i  *  T  MMg 

Mw«  rtjjjgp 


iy»<ww> 


w 


. 


?x  S 


:,.  '.V  I'  ':-*"  •:<-  '  +  " 


jpL  i 


DRAFTING  TABLE  IN  THE  OFFICE  OF  A  WORKING  ARCHITECT. 

Note  case  for  reference  books  at  right,  and  for  current  magazines  and  catalogues  at  left. 


Preface 


THE  Building  Industry,  in  its  various  branches,  is  more 
closely  identified  than  any  other  with  the  marvelous 
engineering  progress  of  the  present  day  and  the  untold 
possibilities  of  the  future.  To  put  all  classes  of  workers  in 
familiar  touch  with  modern  methods  of  construction  and  the 
latest  advances  in  this  great  field,  and  to  bring  to  them  in  a 
form  easily  available  for  practical  use  the  best  fruits  of  the 
highest  technical  training  and  achievement,  is  the  service 
which  the  Cyclopedia  oe  Construction  aims  to  render. 

The  work  is  pre-eminently  a  product  of  practical  experi¬ 
ence,  designed  for  practical  workers.  It  is  based  on  the  idea 
that  even  in  the  larger  problems  of  engineering  construction, 
it  is  not  now  necessary  for  the  ordinary  worker  in  concrete, 
or  steel,  or  any  other  form  of  material,  to  attempt  the 
impracticable  task  of  exploring  all  the  highways  and  byways 
where  the  trained  engineer  or  technical  expert  finds  himself 
at  home.  The  theories  have  been  worked  out;  the  tests  and 
calculations  have  been  made ;  observations  have  been  recorded 
in  thousands  of  instances  of  actual  construction;  and  the 
results  thus  accumulated  form  a  vast  treasure  of  labor-saving 
information  which  is  now  available  in  the  shape  of  practical 
working  rules,  tables,  instructions,  etc.,  covering  every  phase 
of  every  construction  problem  likely  to  be  met  with  in 
ordinary  experience.  This  is  perhaps  most  apparent  in  the 
sections  on  Cement  and  Concrete  Construction ,  Plain  and 
Reinforced.  To  this  subject,  on  account  of  its  supreme  impor¬ 
tance  as  a  structural  factor  of  the  present  day,  three  entire 
volumes  are  devoted,  embodying  the  cream  of  all  the  valuable 
information  which  engineers  have  gathered  up  to  date.  Much 
of  this  practical  information  now  presented  in  this  Cyclopedia, 
has  never  before  been  published  in  any  form.  By  its  use. 


PREFACE 


anyone  is  enabled  to  take  advantage  of  the  vast  labors  of 
others,  and  to  bring  to  bear  on  any  problem  confronting  him 
the  results  of  the  widest  experience  and  the  highest  skill. 

The  keynote  of  the  Cyclopedia  is  found  in  the  emphasis 
constantly  laid  on  the  practical  as  distinguished  from  the 
theoretical  form  of  treatment,  in  its  total  avoidance  of  the 
complicated  formulas  of  higher  mathematics,  and  in  its  reduc¬ 
tion  of  all  technical  subjects  to  terms  of  the  simplest  and 
clearest  English.  Throughout  the  pages  devoted  to  Steel 
Construction,  for  example,  the  mathematics  of  the  subject 
have  been  eliminated  to  such  an  extent  that  the  reader  will 
not  find  a  single  instance  where  even  a  square  root  sign  has 
been  used. 

In  addition  to  the  larger  problems  of  engineering  and 
building  construction,  one  entire  volume,  as  well  as  many 
chapters  scattered  through  the  work,  is  devoted  to  those 
smaller  constructions  that  are  of  special  interest  to  the 
teacher  or  student  of  manual  training  or  the  home  shop 
worker  of  a  mechanical  turn  of  mind. 

Inasmuch  as  a  wider  knowledge  and  a  more  intelligent 
grasp  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  construction  and 
design  will  tend  to  greater  efficiency  on  the  part  of  working¬ 
men,  and  to  greater  economy  in  production,  the  purpose  of 
the  Cyclopedia  of  Construction  is  one  which  will  appeal 
strongly,  not  only  to  the  men  themselves,  but  also  to  the 
architectural  and  engineering  fraternity  as  a  whole. 

The  authors  of  the  various  sections  are  all  men  of  wide 
experience  whose  recognized  standing  is  a  guarantee  of 
reliability  and  practical  thoroughness. 


Tabl  e  of  Contents 


Mechanical  Drafting . Page  1 

The  Draftsman’s  Outfit — Instruments  and  Materials — Testing 
Instruments — Use  of  Instruments — Drawing  to  Seale — Pencil¬ 
ing  and  Inking — -Geometrical  Constructions — Approximations — 
Projection  (Orthographic,  Oblique,  Isometric,  etc.) — Planes  of 
Projection — Ground  Line — Quadrants — Plans  and  Elevations — 
Direction  of  Oblique  Lines;  Slope — Profile  Plane — Auxiliary 
Planes  of  Projection — Intersection  and  Development — Noii- 
Developable  Figures — Intersection  of  Planes — Of  Plane  and 
Curved  Surface — Of  Plane  and  Cylinder — Of  Solids — Visibility 
of  Lines  of  Intersection — Development  of  Prism,  Pyramid, 
etc. — Intersection  of  Cylinder  and  Prism — Of  Curved  Surfaces 
— Approximate  Developments — Problems  in  Drafting  for  Con¬ 
struction  (Finding  Miters,  Developing  Mouldings,  etc.) — Picto¬ 
rial  Drawing — Perspective  Projection — Isometric  Drawing — 
Non-Isometric  Lines — Isometrics  of  Cylinders,  Cones,  etc. — 
Oblique  Projection. 

Working  Drawings . Page  145 

Qualifications  of  the  Draftsman — Detail  Drawings — Assembly 
Drawings — Preliminary  Sketches — Requirements  of  Good  Draw¬ 
ings — Explanatory  Notes — Conventional  Lines — Shade  Lines — 
Blue-Prints— Tracing— Dimensioning — Extension  Lines  —  Over- 
All  Dimensions — Finished  Surfaces — Sections — Cross-Hatching 
— Conventional  Representations  of  Materials — Lettering  of 
Drawings — Spacing — Drawings  for  Building  Construction — 
Working  Plans  (Basement,  First  Floor,  etc.)— Structural 
Drafting— Solid  and  Built-Up  Members — Rivets  and  Bolts — 
Reading  Drawings. 

Architectural  Drafting  ....  Page  187 

General  Requirements — Negotiating  with  Owner — Scale  of 
Drawings — Changes  in  Plans — Preliminary  Sketches — Per¬ 
spective  Sketches — Competition  Drawings — Working  Drawings 
(General  and  Detail) — Scale  and  Full-Sized  Drawings — The 
Plan — Layout  of  Rooms,  etc. — The  Elevation — Use  of  the 
Orders — Characteristics  of  Types  of  Buildings  (Residence, 
Library,  Schooihouse,  Office  Building,  Warehouse,  etc.)  — 
Colonial  Architecture — General  Composition — Treatment  of 
Elevations — Location  of  Openings — Scale  Details — The  Section 
— Full-Sizing — Reproducing  Drawings  (Blue-Printing,  White- 
Printing,  Hectograph  Process,  etc.)- — Tracing  Cloth — Architec¬ 
tural  Forms — Conventional  Symbols  (Drain  and  Sewer  Pipe, 
Lighting,  Heating,  etc.) — Sizes  of  Furniture — Materials  of 
Construction — Shades  and  Shadows — Direction  of  Light — 
Shadows  of  Points,  Lines,  etc. — Details  of  Construction — 
Cornice — Floors— Lath  and  Plaster — Flashing  and  Counter- 
Flashing — Doors — Porches — Fireplaces — Stairs — Windows,  etc. 

Sketching;  Pen  and  Ink  Rendering;  Wash 

Drawing . Page  298 

Principles  of  Sketching — Pencils  and  Paper — Method — Laying 
Out  a  Drawing — Rendering  (in  Pencil,  in  Ink,  in  Water-Color) 

— Wash  Drawings. 

Orders  of  Architecture;  Architectural 

Lettering . Page  317 

Tuscan,  Doric.  Ionic,  Corinthian,  and  Composite  Orders — 
Entablature,  Column,  Pedestal — Architrave,  Frieze,  Cornice — 
Column  Details — Units  of  Measurement — Classic  Mouldings — 
Forms  and  Proportions  of  Letters — Spacing — Titles  and 
Inscriptions — Types  of  Letters  for  Various  Uses. 

Index . Page  343 


PLATE  1 — Mechanical  Drafting. 


Mechanical  Drafting 


INTRODUCTION 

1.  Mechanical  drafting  or  drawing  is  the 
process  of  representing  on  paper,  by  means  of 
one  or  more  figures,  the  shape  and  size  of  an 
object,  and  the  relation  of  its  different  parts 
one  to  another.  It  is  the  medium  of  communica¬ 
tion  between  the  designer  or  architect  and  the 
mechanic  or  builder,  and,  as  such,  has  very  great 
practical  value.  The  engineer  plans  a  bridge, 
the  architect  a  building;  their  ideas  are  repre¬ 
sented  on  paper  by  suitable  mechanical  draw¬ 
ings  of  the  structures;  and  these  drawings  are 
turned  over  to  the  contractor  or  builder  to  show 
the  shape,  dimensions,  and  details  required. 

A  knowledge  of  mechanical  drafting  is  indis¬ 
pensable  to  the  engineer,  the  architect,  the 
contractor,  the  inventor,  the  carpenter,  the 
machinist,  and,  in  short,  to  everyone  whose  work 
lies  along  these  or  similar  lines. 

Mechanical  drafting,  as  the  name  implies,  is 
done  chiefly  by  the  use  of  instruments.  Free¬ 
hand  drawing,  however,  is  frequently  used  in 
connection  with  mechanical,  especially  in  pre¬ 
liminary  sketching  and  in  ornamental  work. 

1 


2 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING 


THE  DRAFTSMAN’S  OUTFIT 

2.  For  a  beginner  to  do  good  work,  reliable 
tools  are  necessary.  It  is  worth  while  to  pay  a 
little  more  money  at  the  outset  in  order  to  have 
an  equipment  which  will  give  satisfactory 
service.  Perhaps  nothing  is  more  disheartening 
to  a  beginner  than  to  have  his  best  efforts  meet 
with  little  success,  on  account  of  poor  instru¬ 
ments.  For  mechanical  drafting,  the  articles  in 
most  common  use  constituting  the  draftsman’s 
outfit  are  the  following: 

Set  of  instruments. 

Drawing  board. 

Thumb-tacks. 

T-square. 

Triangles. 

Irregular  curves. 

Scales. 

Pricker. 

Erasers. 

Pencils. 

Ink. 

Paper  and  tracing  cloth. 

Sandpaper  or  fine  file. 

Small  oil-stone. 


Besides  these,  there  are  many  others  which 
are  used  at  times,  especially  by  the  professional 
draftsman— such  as  the  protractor,  erasing 
shield,  burnisher,  proportional  dividers,  section 
liner,  beam  compasses,  steel  straight-edge, 
pantograph,  brushes,  etc. 

3.  The  set  of  drawing  instruments  is  the  item 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


3 


Fig.  3.  Compass. 


Fig.  4.  Lengthening  Bax. 


Fig.  5.  Compass  Pen. 


Fig.  8.  Bow  Pencil  or  Small  Compass. 


Fig.  9.  Bow  Pen. 


Fig.  10.  Ruling  Pen. 

(Cuts  by  courtesy  of  T.  Alteneder  &  Co.) 


4 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


of  greatest  cost,  and  should  be  selected  very 
carefully.  A  good  set  purchased  from  some 
reliable  house,  will,  with  proper  care,  do  good 
service  for  years.  These  sets  are  sold  in  various 
ways — some  being  put  up  in  a  leather  case  with 
a  stiff  cover;  others,  adapted  especially  for  car¬ 
rying  in  the  pocket,  being  in  a  case  with  a  limp 
cover  and  folding  flaps.  The  various  pieces  may 
also  be  bought  separately,  if  desired. 

4.  Figs.  1  and  2  show  a  set  of  instruments  in 
two  kinds  of  cases,  Fig.  2  being  the  folding 
pocket  style.  In  Figs.  3  to  10  the  different 
instruments  are  shown  separately. 

5.  Fig.  3  is  the  compass.  One  leg  carries 
lead,  the  other  a  needle-point.  Each  leg  is 
jointed,  and  the  lower  half  of  one  leg  is  detach¬ 
able  at  the  joint.  This  is  to  provide  for  inserting 
the  compass  pen  or  the  lengthening  bar. 

6.  The  lengthening  bar,  Fig.  4,  is  to  enable 
the  draftsman  to  draw  pencil  or  ink  circles 
larger  than  can  be  drawn  with  the  ordinary 
compass.  When  the  pencil  leg  is  detached  from 
the  compass,  the  lengthener  is  inserted  in  its 
place,  and  the  pencil  leg  or  the  compass  pen 
fastened  in  its  end. 

7.  The  compass  pen,  Fig.  5,  is  for  inking 
circles  or  circular  arcs,  and  is  inserted  in  the 
compass  in  place  of  the  pencil  leg. 

8.  The  hair-spring  dividers  are  shown  in 
Fig.  6;  and  the  small  dividers  or  bow  spacers  in 
Fig.  7. 

9.  The  bow  pencil  or  small  compass  and  the 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


5 


bow  pen  are  shown  in  Figs.  8  and  9  respectively. 

10.  The  ruling  pen,  Fig.  10,  is  specially  de¬ 
signed  for  ruling  straight  lines,  the  ordinary 
writing  pen  being  wholly  unsuitable. 

11.  The  beam  compass  is  shown  in  Fig.  11. 
This  instrument  is  for  accurately  laying  off  dis- 


Fig.  11.  Beam  Compasses. 


tances,  and  for  drawing  circles  which  are  beyond 
the  capacity  of  the  ordinary  dividers  or  com¬ 
passes.  It  consists  essentially  of  the  beam  (not 
shown  in  the  drawing),  a  thin  straight  bar  of 
hardwood,  and  two  pieces  which  slide  along  the 
bar  and  which  may  be  clamped  to  it  at  any  de¬ 
sired  distance  apart.  These  sliding  attachments 
are  called  channels,  and  carry  one  the  needle¬ 
point,  and  the  other  the  pencil  or  pen  as 


6  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

desired.  As  shown  at  the  right,  there  is  a 
micrometer  screw  for  obtaining  great  precision 
in  setting  the  compass  for  any  given  distance  or 
radius. 


12.  The  protractor  is  shown  in  Fig.  12.  This 
instrument,  while  not  in  such  constant  use  as 
some  of  the  others,  is  nevertheless  necessary  at 


times.  It  is  made  of  various  substances,  such 
as  metal,  celluloid,  cardboard,  etc.,  and  is  used 
for  laying  out  angles  which  cannot  be  obtained 
with  the  triangles  and  which  cannot  be  easily 
constructed  geometrically.  The  graduations 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


7 


represent  degrees  or  subdivisions;  and  the 
center  of  the  graduated  circle  is  marked  by  a 
scratch  or  small  notch  on  the  line  through  the 
two  zero  points.  A  line  drawn  from  the  center 
of  the  circle  through  any  point  of  division — as, 
for  example,  through  70— will  make  an  angle  of 
70  degrees  with  the  zero  line  of  the  protractor. 
Other  angles  may  be  drawn  in  a  similar  way. 


WORKING 

& _ Ol 

Fig.  13.  Drawing  Board  and  T-Square. 

13.  The  drawing  board,  shown  in  Fig.  13,  is 
used  to  supply  a  smooth,  even  surface  on  which 
to  fasten  the  drawing  paper.  It  should  be  made 
of  straight-grained,  well-seasoned  soft  wood; 
and  the  cleats  at  the  ends  of  the  board  should 
have  straight  edges.  Some  cheap  drawing 
boards  have  a  strip  of  brass  or  steel  screwed  on 
at  one  end;  these,  however,  are  likely  to  warp, 
and  are  not  to  be  recommended.  The  board 
should  not  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  sun  or 
near  heating  apparatus. 

14.  Thumb-tacks  are  short  tacks  with  large 
flat  or  almost  flat  heads,  especially  used  for 
fastening  the  paper  to  the  drawing  board.  They 
may  be  pressed  into  the  soft  wood  of  the  board 


8 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


with  the  thumb.  Unless  the  paper  is  of  com¬ 
paratively  large  size,  four  tacks — one  through 
each  corner — will  be  sufficient  to  keep  the  paper 
in  place.  Small-sized  copper  tacks  may  be  used 
if  preferred,  as  the  heads  of  these  offer  less  ob¬ 
struction  to  the  motion  of  the  triangles  and 
other  implements. 

15.  The  T-square,  shown  with  the  drawing 
board  in  Fig.  .13,  consists  of  a  blade  and  a  head. 


Fig.  14.  Triangles. 


The  blade  may  be  permanently  fastened  to  the 
head,  or  the  head  may  be  provided  with  a  clamp 
so  as  to  be  adjustable. 

For  a  right-handed  draftsman  using  the  T- 
square  against  the  left-hand  side  of  the  board, 
the  upper  edge  of  the  blade  is  the  working  edge, 
as  shown  in  Fig.  13.  A  good  T-square  should 
have  a  perfectly  straight  working  edge,  a 
straight  working  edge  also  for  the  head,  and  no 
motion  between  head  and  blade.  The  most 
accurate  T-squares  are  made  of  steel,  but  very 
satisfactory  ones  are  made  of  wood — some  with 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  9 

plain  edges,  and  others  with  edges  of  ebonv  or 
celluloid. 

T-squares  are  made  in  various  sizes,  and 
numbered  according  to  the  length  of  the  blade  in 
inches.  When  not  in  use,  the  T-squares  should 


Fig.  15.  Irregular  or  French  Curves. 


be  hung  up,  using  the  hole  in  the  end  of  the 
blade  and  should  be  kept  out  of  the  sunlight, 
and  away  from  radiators  or  steam  pipes. 

16.  Of  the  triangles,  shown  in  Fig.  14, 
probably  the  best  for  all-round  work  are  those 
made  of  celluloid,  as  these  are  fairly  accurate, 
light,  and  more  or  less  transparent.  It  is  per¬ 
haps  hardly  necessary  to  state  that  celluloid  is 


10  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

highly  combustible,  and  must  therefore  be  kept 
away  from  fire. 

Triangles  are  made  in  different  sizes,  and 
numbered  according  to  the  lengths  of  the  edges. 
A  10-inch  45-degree  triangle  is  one  with  each  of 
the  perpendicular  edges  10  inches  long;  a  12-inch 
30-degree  60-degree  triangle  has  the  long  per¬ 
pendicular  edge  12  inches  long;  and  so  on  for 
other  sizes. 

For  general  work,  one  should  have  at  least 
four  triangles — one  large  and  one  small  45- 
degree,  10  or  12  inches,  and  5  or  6  inches,  re¬ 
spectively;  and  two  30-degree  60-degree 
triangles — one  large  and  one  small.  To  prevent 
warping,  triangles,  when  not  in  use,  should  be 
hung  up  out  of  the  sun’s  rays. 

17.  Irregular  or  French  curves  of  various 
shapes  are  shown  in  Fig.  15,  and  are  used  for 
drawing-in  smoothly  curved  lines  which  are  not 
arcs  of  circles. 

18.  Scales.  First  of  all,  scales  are  not  used 
for  ruling  lines.  All  straight  lines  should  be 
drawn  either  with  the  T-square  or  with  a 
triangle.  Scales  are  made  in  different  shapes 
and  lengths,  the  most  common,  perhaps,  being 
the  12-inch  length  triangular  or  the  flat  with 
beveled  edges. 

Scales  are  also  distinguished  as  Architect’s 
and  Engineer’s  scales.  On  the  latter,  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  say  that  the  inch  is  divided  into 
tenths  or  multiples  of  ten,  and  is  used  chiefly  in 
scientific,  machine,  and  engineering  work. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


11 


The  Architect’s  scale  is  shown  in  Fig.  16. 
By  reference  to  the  figure,  it  will  he  seen  that 
the  scale  is  triangular,  and  therefore  has  six 
faces  for  division.  On  one  side  of  one  face  the 
scale  is  marked  off  into  inches  and  divided  in 
the  usual  way.  On  the  other  faces  are  ten  dif¬ 
ferent  scales,  marked  at  the  ends  %,  y2,  %,  etc. 


Fig.  16.  Architect’s  Scale. 


These  numbers  mean  that  the  scale  so  marked 
is  the  scale  %  inch  to  the  foot,  y2  inch  to  the 
foot,  and  so  on. 

Let  the  scale  of  y2  inch=l  foot  be  taken  as  an 
example.  By  actually  examining  a  scale,  the 
draftsman  will  see  that  the  space  at  the  end 
marked  y2,  which  is  actually  one-half  an  inch 
in  length,  is  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts,  so 
that  if  one-half  inch  be  taken  to  represent  one 
foot,  then  each  smallest  space  will  stand  for  one 
inch.  The  other  spaces  at  the  right  of  the 
divided  one  are  half-inches,  and  so  will  each 
represent  one  foot. 

The  use  of  the  scale  in  making  actual  draw¬ 
ings  will  be  explained  later. 

19.  The  pricker  is  a  fine  needle-point  fast¬ 
ened  in  a  convenient  handle,  and  is  used  for 
accurately  noting  the  position  of  a  given  point. 

20.  Erasers  are  frequently  needed  by  the 


12 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


draftsman  for  making  changes  or  correcting 
errors  in  the  drawing.  They  are  of  two  kinds — 
for  pencil  and  for  ink.  For  erasing  ink  lines, 
a  sand-rubber  eraser  or  a  steel  eraser  may  be 
used.  The  steel  eraser  is  a  special  knife  sharp¬ 
ened  to  a  keen  edge.  With  this  knife,  most  of 
the  ink  may  be  removed,  then  the  remainder 
rubbed  off  with  the  sand  or  pencil  rubber. 

21.  Pencils.  Special  pencils  are  required  for 
drawing,  the  ordinary  kind  being  as  a  general 
thing  entirely  unsuitable.  Drawing  pencils  are 
marked  at  one  end  with  a  number  or  with  one  or 
more  letters,  to  show  the  degree  of  hardness. 
The  hardness  of  the  lead  varies  from  7  or  8H, 
very  hard,  to  one  or  more  B’s,  very  soft. 

22.  Drawing  ink  is  made  in  two  forms — the 
liquid,  ready  for  use;  and  the  dry,  in  stick 
form.  If  the  latter  is  used,  it  is  prepared  by 
grinding  with  a  little  water  in  a  stone  saucer 
until  the  water  containing  the  dissolving  ink  is 
perfectly  black  and  of  the  desired  thickness. 
The  bottled  inks  are  made  in  black  and  in  colors. 
Some  of  these  inks  are  made  waterproof,  not 
being  affected  by  moisture.  For  general  work, 
the  bottled  ink  is  recommended  for  satisfactory 
results  and  economy  of  time. 

23.  Paper.  The  kind  of  paper  varies  with 
the  sort  of  work  to  be  done.  Drawings  from 
which  blue-prints  are  to  be  taken  are  commonly 
made  on  a  cheap  brown  detail  or  duplex  paper, 
or  on  thin,  tough  white  bond.  For  nicely  fin¬ 
ished  drawings,  cold-pressed  and  hot-pressed 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


13 


papers  are  excellent,  the  latter  being  especially 
adapted  for  ink  work. 

Another  paper  which  is  very  satisfactory  for 
ink  drawing  is  the  normal,  which  has  a  hard, 
smooth  surface.  For  the  highest  grade  of  inked 
drawings,  as  for  the  Patent  Office,  for  book 
work,  etc.,  bristol  board  is  preferred.  This  is  a 
cardboard  made  of  two  or  more  layers;  has  a 
very  hard,  smooth  surface;  and  gives  very 
sharply  defined  and  clean-cut  lines. 

24.  Tracing  cloth  is  used  when  drawings  are 
to  be  reproduced  in  blue-prints  for  shop  or  field 
use.  One  side  of  the  tracing  cloth  has  a  dull 
finish,  the  other  side  being  shiny.  Ink  may  be 
used  on  either  side  of  the  cloth.  Erasers  may  be 
used  as  on  drawing  paper,  except  that  the  ink 
eraser  or  sand  rubber  should  be  used  very  care¬ 
fully  so  as  not  to  wear  a  hole  through  the  cloth. 
Water  ruins  the  surface  for  drawing. 

Testing  of  Instruments 

25.  Testing  the  T-Square.  Place  on  the 
board  a  sheet  of  drawing  paper  at  least  as  long 
as  the  blade  of  the  T-square,  and,  with  a  sharp, 
hard  pencil,  draw  a  line  across  the  paper  close 
against  the  upper  or  working  side  of  the  blade, 
Fig.  17.  Then,  without  changing  the  position  of 
the  T-square  turn  the  paper  end  for  end;  place 
the  line  to  coincide  as  nearly  as  possible  with  the 
same  edge  of  the  T-square;  and  draw  a  line 
again.  If  the  second  line  falls  exactly  upon  the 
first,  the  edge  of  the  T-square  is  straight;  but  if 


14 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


the  lines  do  not  exactly  coincide,  the  edge  is  not 
true,  and  should  be  made  so  with  a  plane  or 
sandpaper. 

If  the  edge  of  the  T-square  has  been  found 
straight,  the  working  edge  of  the  drawing  board 
(the  edge  against  which  the  head  of  the  T-square 
slides),  may  be  tested  by  applying  to  it  the 
tested  edge  of  the  T-square. 

26.  Testing  the  Triangles.  A  common  fault 
with  triangles,  especially  the  larger  ones,  is  a 


Fig.  17.  Testing  the  T-Square.  Fig.  18.  Testing  the  Triangle. 


lack  of  accuracy  in  the  right  angle;  that  is,  one 
side  is  not  exactly  square  or  at  right  angles  with 
the  other  side. 

To  test  for  squareness  of  the  right  angle'; 
(see  Fig.  18),  place  one  side  of  the  triangle 
against  the  tested  edge  of  the  T-square  as  shown 
at  A,  and,  with  a  very  sharp,  hard  pencil,  draw 
a  line  against  the  vertical  edge  of  the  triangle. 
Next  turn  the  triangle  over,  face-down,  in  the 
position  shown  at  B,  and  draw  against  the  ver¬ 
tical  edge  a  second  line  to  coincide  if  possible 
with  the  first  one.  If  the  two  exactly  coincide, 
the  right  angle  is  true.  Both  the  60-degree  30- 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  15 . 

degree  and  the  45-degree  triangles  should  he 
tested  in  this  way. ... 

To  test  the  45-degree  angles,  if  the  90-degree 
angle  is  found  to  be  true,  draw  a  45-degree  line 
with  one  of  the  short  sides  against  the  T-square; 
then  turn  the  triangle  over,  and  place  the  other 
short  side  against  the  T-square.  If,  in  this  posi¬ 
tion,  a  second  45-degree  line  can  be  drawn 
exactly  coinciding  with  the  first,  the  angle  is 
exactly  45  degrees. 

The  60-degree  and  30-degree  angles  can  be 
tested  after  the  right  angle  has  been  found  cor¬ 
rect,  by  first  drawing  a  T-square  line  on  the 
paper,  then  drawing  with  the  triangle  against 
the  T-square  two  60-degree  lines  so  as  to  form 
a  triangle  having  the  T-square  line  as  a  base. 
Next  test  with  the  dividers  the  relative  lengths 
of  the  three  sides.  If  they  are  exactly  equal, 
the  60-degree  and  30-degree  angles  are  both 
correct. . 

HOW  TO  USE  THE  INSTBUMENTS 

27.  Drawing  Board,  T-Square,  and  Triangles. 

Tack  a  sheet  of  drawing  paper  on  the  board  by 
a  thumb-tack  at  each  corner,  and  let  the  T- 
square  rest  on  the  paper,  with  the  head  against 
the  left  edge  of  the  drawing  board.  If  the 
draftsman  is  left-handed,  he  should  use  the  T- 
square  against  the  right  edge  of  the  board.  If 
now  a  line  be  drawn  on  the  paper  against  the 
blade  of  the  T-square  (Pig.  19),  then  the  T- 
square  slid  along  the  edge  of  the  board,  and 


16 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


other  lines  drawn  in  the  same  way,  these  lines 
will  be  parallel  to  one  another. 

In  making  drawings,  the  drawing  board 
should  either  lie  flat  on  the  table  or  desk,  or  be 
raised  slightly  at  the  back,  giving  a  forward 
inclination. 

The  pencil  should  always  be  drawn,  not 
pushed. 

Only  the  upper  or  working  edge  of  the  T- 
square  is  used  in  drawing. 


Fig.  19.  Drawing  Parallel  Fig.  20.  Drawing  Angles  of 
Lines  with  T-Square.  15  and  75  Degrees. 


28.  For  drawing  vertical  or  inclined  lines, 

the  triangles  are  used.  When  one  of  the  shorter 
sides  of  a  triangle  is  placed  against  the  edge  of 
the  T-square,  a  vertical  line  may  be  drawn 
against  one  of  the  other  sides,  and  a  slanting 
line  against  the  third  side.  This  slanting  line 
will  be  at  45  degrees  for  the  45-degree  triangle, 
and  at  30  or  60  degrees  for  the  other  triangle 
according  to  the  side  of  the  triangle  which  is 
placed  against  the  T-square. 

Lines  making  with  the  edge  of  the  T-square 
angles  of  15  degrees  or  75  degrees,  may  be 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  17 

drawn  by  combining  the  45-degree  and  the  30- 
degree  60-degree  triangles,  as  shown  in  Fig.  20. 

Inclined  lines  which  are  not  at  an  even  angle, 
may  be  drawn  parallel  to  any  desired  direction 
as  follows: 


Fig.  21.  Drawing  Parallel  Lines  in  Any  Desired  Direction. 


In  Fig.  21,  AB  is  an  inclined  line,  and  other 
lines  are  to  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB  and  above 
it.  Place  one  triangle,  as  C,  with  one  edge  coin¬ 
ciding  with  line  AB ;  and  place  another  triangle, 
as  D,  against  another  edge  of  C  as  shown.  Now, 
if  triangle  0  slides  along  triangle  D  into  the 
dotted  positions,  lines  drawn  against  the  upper 
edge  of  C  will  be  parallel  to  AB;  thus  EF  and 
GH  are  parallel  to  AB. 

29.  To  Draw  Lines  Perpendicular  to  a  Given 
Inclined  Line.  In  Fig.  22,  AB  is  the  given  in¬ 
clined  line.  Place  a  triangle,  as  C,  with  its  long¬ 
est  edge  coinciding  with  the  line  AB;  and  place 
another  triangle,  as  D,  in  contact  with  the  lower 
left-hand  edge,  as  shown.  Next  revolve  the  tri¬ 
angle  C  around,  as  shown  by  the  arrows,  into  the 


18 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


position  EFG;  then  the  long  edge  in  the  posi¬ 
tion  EF  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  AB.  Other 
lines  perpendicular  to  AB  may  be  drawn 
by  holding  triangle  D  fast,  keeping  EG  against 
the  edge  of  D,  and  sliding  triangle  EFG  along 
the  edge,  when  lines  drawn  against  the  different 
positions  of  EF  will  all  be  perpendicular  to  AB. 


Fig.  22.  Drawing  Lines  Perpendicular  to  a  Given  Inclined  Line. 

30.  In  connection  with  the  T-square,  it  will 
be  well  for  the  beginner  to  remember  the  fol¬ 
lowing  Don’ts: 

Don’t  change  T-squares  while  making  a 
drawing.  If  this  must  unavoidably  be  done  at 
any  time,  see  first  if  lines  can  be  drawn  with 
the  second  T-square  which  shall  exactly  coincide 
with  the  first.  If  not,  unless  the  square  has  an 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  19 

adjustable  bead,  the  paper  must  be  taken  off 
the  board,  and  then  readjusted  to  agree  with 
the  second  T-square. 

Don’t  use  the  T-square  for  a  thumb-tack 
hammer. 

Don’t  use  the  working  edge  of  the  T-square 
as  a  straight-edge  for  trimming  drawings. 

31.  In  laying  out  the  border  line  for  a  draw¬ 
ing,  if  the  trimmed  sheet  is  to  be  only  a  little 
smaller  than  the  size  of  the  paper,  the  center 
should  first  be  found  by  means  of  the  diagonals, 
and  the  border  line  laid  from  the  center.  If, 
however,  there  is  ample  paper,  the  border  line 
may  be  drawn  at  once  without  finding  the 
center. 

32.  Pencils.  For  line  drawing,  the  pencils 
should  be  sharpened  to  a  chisel  edge,  with  cor¬ 
ners  rounded.  It  is  an  excellent  idea  to  have 
the  pencil  most  used  sharpened  at  both  ends, 
one  with  a  chisel  edge,  and  the  other  with  a  fine 
conical  point.  The  latter  point  is  used  for 
making  letters,  numbers,  marking  points,  etc. 
The  compass  lead  may  be  sharpened  to  a  chisel 
edge  or  conical  point,  although  here  the  chisel 
edge  is  more  satisfactory. 

33.  The  Architect’s  Scale.  Often,  in  actual 
practice,  it  becomes  necessary  to  make  a  draw¬ 
ing  either  larger  or  smaller  than  the  actual 
object.  This  is  called  drawing  to  scale.  If,  for 
example,  the  drawing  is  to  be  made  one  twenty- 
fourth  actual  size,  then  each  dimension  will  be 
one  twenty-fourth  of  the  real  size.  To  avoid 


20 


MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 


the  necessity  of  dividing  each  dimension  by  24 
when  making  the  drawing,  the  one  twenty- 
fourth  size  scale  is  used.  For  one  twenty-fourth 
size,  one  foot  would  he  drawn  as  one-half  inch; 
and  one  inch  as  one-twelfth  of  one-half  inch,  or 
one  twenty-fourth  inch.  A  scale  of  one  twenty- 
fourth  size  is  therefore  spoken  of  as  a  scale  of 
one-half  inch  to  the  foot,  or,  using  the  signs, 
1/2"  =  1'. 

In  Fig.  23  is  shown  one  end  of  an  Architect’s 
triangular  scale,  in  which  the  upper  edge  is 
divided  to  the  scale  of  y2"  =  l'.  This  would 


Fig.  23.  Portion  of  Architect’s  Triangular  Scale. 

be  used  in  making  a  drawing  on  the  scale  of 

=  1'.  The  smallest  spaces  represent  inches, 
and  the  longer  undivided  space  between  0  and  1 
represents  one  foot.  No  mental  calculation, 
then,  is  necessary  with  this  scale,  as  the  required 
dimensions  are  laid  off  directly.  For  example, 
a  length  of  1  foot  7  inches  would  be  laid  off  as 
shown  in  the  figure. 

The  beginner  should  become  familiar  with 
the  use  of  the  scale,  by  actually  laying  off  vari¬ 
ous  dimensions  in  feet  and  inches,  using  the 
different  scales  in  turn. 

34.  The  Compass.  Before  using  the  com- 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  21 

pass  (Fig.  3),  see  that  the  lead  and  the  needle¬ 
point  project  the  same  distance.  In  drawing 
circles,  the  compass  should  be  held  with  the 
thumb  and  first  twTo  fingers  at  the  extreme  top, 
with  the  needle-point  pressed  on  the  paper  only 
enough  to  hold  it  in  place.  When  drawing  large 
circles,  the  legs  should  be  bent  at  the  joints  so 
that  the  lower  part  of  each  leg  is  vertical  or 
nearly  so. 

35.  The  Lengthening  Bar.  The  compass 
just  described  may  be  used  for  circles  up  to  6 
or  7  inches  radius;  but  above  this  distance,  the 
lengthening  bar  (Fig.  4)  should  be  used,  which 
will  enable  one  readily  to  draw  circles  up  to  9 
inches  radius. 

For  larger  circles,  the  beam  compass  (Fig. 
11)  should  be  used. 

To  attach  the  lengthening  bar,  loosen  the 
screw  which  fastens  the  pencil  leg,  remove  the 
leg,  insert  the  lengthener,  put  the  pencil  leg  in 
the  other  end  of  the  lengthening  bar,  and  tighten 
up  both  screws. 

36.  The  Hair-Spring  Dividers.  The  hair¬ 
spring  dividers  (Fig.  6)  are  used  for  laying  off 
or  transferring  exact  distances.  This  some¬ 
times  takes  the  form  of  dividing  a  given  line, 
straight  or  curved,  into  a  certain  number  of 
equal  spaces,  and  it  is  in  this  kind  of  work  that 
the  hair-spring  in  the  leg  is  especially  useful. 
The  screw  in  the  leg  is  for  fine  adjustment,  for, 
with  any  setting  of  the  dividers,  a  slight  turn 
of  the  screw  changes  the  distance  between  the 


22 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


needle-points  by  a  very  small  amount.  Setting 
up  the  screw  increases  the  space,  while  turning 
the  screw  out  lessens  the  distance  between  the 
points. 

37.  The  small  dividers  or  bow  spacers  (Fig. 

7) ,  are  very  useful  for  short  distances  where 
the  large  dividers  would  be  awkward  to  handle. 

38.  The  bow  pencil  or  small  compass  (Fig. 

8)  is  very  convenient  for  circles  or  arcs  of  1  inch 


or  less  in  radius.  If  a  number  of  small  circles 
of  the  same  size  are  to  be  drawn,  the  setting  is 
much  less  likely  to  be  accidentally  changed  than 
with  the  large  compass. 

39.  The  bow  pen  (Fig.  9)  is  indispensable 
where  very  small  circles  are  to  be  inked,  and  is 
preferable  for  circles  up  to  1  inch  or  1^4  inches 
radius. 

40.  The  Irregular  or  French  Curves.  Sup¬ 
pose  that  the  points  0,  1,  2,  etc.,  to  10,  Fig.  24, 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  23 

are  to  be  connected  with  a  smooth  curve.  First 
sketch  a  freehand  curve  through  the  points. 
Next  take  one  of  the  irregular  curves,  and  find 
a  part  of  the  edge  which  will  coincide  with  the 
sketched  curve  for  as  long  a  distance  as  possible. 
Beginning  at  point  0,  suppose  that  the  edge  can 
be  fitted  nearly  to  the  point  5,  as  shown  in  the 
dotted  position  A.  The  curve  may  then  be 
drawn  against  the  edge  in  this  position  as  far 
as  the  lengths  are  exactly  coincident.  The  curve 
is  then  shifted  to  another  position,  as  B,  so  that 
a  further  portion  5,  6,  7,  of  the  sketched  curve 
coincides  with  a  part  of  the  irregular  curve, 
and  also  so  that  the  curve  in  position  B  runs 
back  and  coincides  with  a  part  of  what  is 
already  lined  in. 

Special  attention  should  be  paid  to  this  latter 
statement,  for,  to  insure  a  smooth,  continuous 
curve,  it  is  essential  that  when  each  new  portion 
of  the  curve  is  drawn,  the  curved  edge  must 
also  coincide  with  a  part  of  what  is  already 
drawn.  The  remainder  of  the  curve  through 
points  7,  8,  9,  and  10,  may  be  drawn  in  a  similar 
manner,  either  by  the  further  use  of  the  same 
irregular  curve  or  by  the  aid  of  a  different  one. 

41.  Inking.  In  practical  work,  drawings 
very  often  have  to  be  made  in  ink.  This  may 
be  done  in  two  ways.  The  pencil  drawing  may 
be  lined  in  with  ink,  as  in  drawings  for  the 
Patent  Office  or  for  book  work;  or  an  ink  draw¬ 
ing  may  be  made  on  tracing  cloth  tacked  on  the 


24 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


board  over  the  pencil  drawing.  In  either  case, 
certain  general  rules  apply. 

42.  To  ink  with  the  ruling  pen,  place  a  small 
quantity  of  ink  between  the  points  or  nibs  of 
the  pen,  using  either  a  quill  or  a  common  writing 
pen.  Care  should  be  taken  that  no  ink  remains 
on  the  outside  of  the  ruling  pen,  otherwise  a 
blot  is  likely  to  result.  In  inking  straight  lines, 
the  thumb-screw  for  regulating  the  width  of 
line  is  always  held  away  from  the  straight  edge 
which  guides  the  pen.  Both  nibs  should  rest 
equally  on  the  paper,  and  the  pen  should  be 
inclined  slightly  in  the  direction  of  its  motion. 
The  pen  should  always  be  drawn  along,  never 
pushed.  In  other  words,  the  pen  should  always 
follow  the  hand. 

For  right-handed  draftsmen,  all  horizontal 
lines  are  ruled  from  left  to  right;  vertical  lines 
which  are  drawn  against  the  left  side  of  the 
triangle  are  drawn  up,  and  vertical  lines  ruled 
against  the  right  side  of  the  triangle  are  drawn 
down.  The  point  of  the  pen  must  never  quite 
touch  the  guiding  straight  edge,  and  this  will 
not  happen  if  the  pen  is  not  inclined  either 
toward  or  away  from  the  draftsman.  The  pen 
should  be  pressed  against  the  straight-edge  with 
only  enough  force  to  keep  it  in  place;  and  no 
great  pressure  should  be  made  on  the  paper. 

The  pen  is  to  be  held  by  the  thumb  and  the 
first  two  fingers,  and  grasped  somewhere  be¬ 
tween  the  thumb-screw  and  the  end  of  the 
handle?  according  to  the  convenience  of  the 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  25 

draftsman.  To  insure  a  line  of  even  width 
throughout,  the  pen  must  have  no  motion  except 
along  the  paper  in  the  direction  of  the  line  being 
drawn. 

An  exception  to  this  latter  statement  must 
be  made  for  inking  lines  with  the  irregular 
curve;  for  then,  besides  holding  the  pen  nearly 
vertical,  it  must  be  turned  slightly  in  the  fingers 
when  passing  around  a  sharp  curve,  so  that  the 
points  may  remain  in  the  same  position  relative 
to  the  curved  edge,  and  the  inked  line  thereby 
retain  the  same  width. 

When  inking  fine  lines,  care  must  be  taken 
to  clean  the  pen  frequently,  as,  with  a  fine  line, 
there  is  a  tendency  for  the  ink  to  cake  on  the 
end  of  the  pen.  It  is  very  convenient  when 
inking,  to  have  at  hand  a  small  glass  of  water, 
into  which  the  pen  mQv  be  dipped  when  it  is 
to  be  cleaned. 

There  are  three  features  of  a  good  ink  draw¬ 
ing — first,  ink  lines  which  exactly  cover  the 
original  pencil  lines;  second,  lines  similar  in 
character  showing  uniformity  in  width;  and 
third,  lines  smooth  and  clean-cut  in  appearance, 
instead  of  broken  and  fuzz}^ 

43.  To  ink  with  the  compass,  it  is  necessary, 
for  the  best  results,  to  have  the  legs  of  the 
instrument  bent  so  that  each  is  perpendicular 
to  the  paper.  When  it  becomes  necessary  to 
use  the  lengthening  bar,  one  hand  should  grasp 
it  lightly  near  the  end  so  as  to  steady  the  pen 
as  the  circle  is  drawn. 


26 


EXERCISES  IN  USE  OF  T-SQUARE,  TRIANGLES,  AND  SCALES. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  27 

44.  To  Sharpen  the  Pen.  Unless  the  pens 
are  in  good  condition,  satisfactory  work  is  diffi¬ 
cult  or  impossible  to  obtain.  Every  draftsman 
should  be  able  to  keep  his  pens  in  good  condi¬ 
tion,  and  with  care  and  practice  he  will  be  able 
to  do  this.  After  considerable  use,  the  proper 
elliptical  shape  of  the  pen  points  will  wear  off, 
and  the  pen  will  no  longer  work  well.  The 
draftsman  should  then  take  the  oil-stone,  and, 
after  screwing  the  points  of  the  pen  close 
together,  draw  it  with  a  rocking  motion  to  and 
fro  on  the  stone,  keeping  the  pen  in  a  plane 
perpendicular  to  the  face  of  the  stone.  This 
process — which,  of  course,  still  further  dulls  the 
pen — is  to  restore  the  points  to  the  original 
shape.  After  the  proper  elliptical  shape  has 
been  produced,  the  pen  should  then  be  held  at 
only  a  slight  inclination  with  the  surface  of  the 
stone,  and  then  rubbed,  first  on  one  side  and 
then  on  the  other,  until  the  points  are  suffi¬ 
ciently  sharp.  Through  all  the  process,  the 
points  should  be  kept  screwed  tightly  together. 
No  grinding  is  to  be  done  on  the  inside  of 
the  pen. 

PENCILING  AND  INKING 

Exercises  for  Practice  in  Using  the  T-Square, 
Triangles,  and  Scales 
PLATE  2 

45.  Plate  2  is  to  be  laid  out  10  inches  by  14 
inches,  outside  dimensions,  with  a  border  line 
9  inches  by  13  inches. 


28  MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 

The  paper  used  should  be  a  good  drawing 
paper,  preferably  a  high-grade  hot-  or  cold- 
pressed  paper.  The  6H  pencil,  sharpened  with 
a  chisel  edge,  should  be  used  for  drawing  the 
lines;  and  a  5H  or  6H  with  round  point,  for 
marking  divisions  from  the  scale.  There  are 
to  be  six  figures,  as  shown. 

Figs.  A  and  B  are  squares,  each  3  inches  on 
a  side,  and  located  on  the  paper  as  shown  in 
the  plate. 

Fig.  A  is  for  practice  with  the  T-square  and 
triangles  on  horizontal  and  vertical  lines.  In 
this  figure,  the  left-hand  and  upper  sides  of  the 
square  are  divided  into  %-inch  equal  spaces. 
This  is  done  by  placing  the  scale  on  the  line 
to  be  divided,  taking  a  sharp,  round-pointed 
pencil,  and  marking  off  the  desired  number  of 
spaces  without  moving  the  scale. 

The  lines  are  then  drawn  through  the  points 
of  division — one  set  against  the  edge  of  the 
T-square,  and  the  vertical  lines  against  the  edge 
of  a  triangle  placed  against  the  working  edge 
of  the  T-square. 

Fig.  B  is  for  practice  with  the  45-degree  tri¬ 
angle  in  two  directions.  The  left-hand  and 
lower  sides  of  the  square  are  divided  into  %-inch 
equal  spaces,  using  the  scale  as  in  Fig.  A.  From 
these  points  of  division,  lines  are  drawn  with 
the  45-degree  triangle,  upward  and  toward  the 
right.  After  these  lines  are  drawn,  another  set 
of  lines  are  drawn  from  the  points  on  the  left- 
hand  side,  and  also  from  the  points  where  the 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


29 


first  set  of  lines  cut  the  upper  side  of  the  square. 
If  the  work  is  accurately  done,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  two  sets  of  45-degree  lines  cut  each 
other  at  the  bottom  and  right-hand  sides  exactly 
on  the  edges  of  the  square. 

In  Fig.  C,  the  30-degree-60-degree  triangle 
is  the  one  used.  The  figure  is  not  an  exact 
square,  being  a  little  greater  in  width  than 
height;  so  draw  first  the  left-hand  side,  making 
it  3  inches  long;  then  draw  the  top  and  bottom 
edges  a  little  more  than  3  inches,  say  3!/g  inches. 
The  left-hand  side  of  the  figure  is  then  divided 
with  the  scale  into  14-inch  spaces;  and  from 
these  points,  30-degree  lines  are  drawn,  slanting 
upward  and  toward  the  right.  Counting  down 
from  the  top,  take  the  point  where  the  seventh 
30-degree  line  cuts  the  upper  edge;  and  from 
this  point,  draw  a  vertical  line  downward  to 
form  the  right-hand  side  of  the  figure.  Next, 
turn  the  triangle  in  the  other  direction;  and 
from  the  points  along  the  top  edge,  and  also 
from  the  points  on  the  left  side,  draw  30-degree 
lines,  slanting  downward  and  toward  the  right. 
From  the  points  where  these  lines  cut  the  bot¬ 
tom  edge,  the  rest  of  the  lines  of  the  first  set 
may  be  drawn.  Accurate  work  will  be  mani¬ 
fested  by  a  series  of  intersections  falling  exactly 
on  the  right-hand  edge  of  the  figure. 

The  purpose  of  Fig.  D  is  to  illustrate  the 
use  of  the  30-degree-60-degree  triangle,  and  inci¬ 
dentally  to  show  the  construction  of  the  sym¬ 
metrical  six-sided  figure  called  the  hexagon. 


30 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


First  draw  with  the  T-square  the  base  line 
1%  inches  long,  %  inch  above  the  lower  border, 
and  place  the  left-hand  end  V/2  inches  from  the 
left  border  line.  Next  draw  from  the  ends  of 
this  line  60-degree  lines  as  shown,  and  measure 
very  carefully  on  each  the  same  length  as  the 
base,  1%  inches.  Then,  from  these  last-found 
points,  draw  two  other  60-degree  lines  upward, 
and  mark  off  again  the  same  length.  These  two 
points  should  lie  at  the  same  distance  above 
the  base  line,  and  may  be  joined  by  drawing  a 
line  with  the  T-square,  thus  forming  the  top  of 
the  figure. 

Next  draw  the  diagonal  lines  of  the  hexagon, 
connecting  the  opposite  corners.  Now  divide 
one  of  these  diagonals,  as  g-h,  into  six  equal 
spaces,  using  the  scale.  (This  diagonal  should 
measure  exactly  twice  the  length  of  one  of  the 
sides — that  is,  3%  inches.) 

Drawing  from  these  points  of  division  hori¬ 
zontal  lines  and  60-degree  lines  to  the  next 
diagonals,  and  connecting  the  ends,  there  will 
be  constructed  two  other  hexagons  like  the  first, 
but  smaller. 

Thus  far,  if  the  work  is  accurate,  all  of  the 
lines  are  either  T-square  lines  or  60-degree  lines. 
Now,  with  the  scale,  find  the  middle  point  of 
each  side  of  the  outside  hexagon,  and  connect 
these  points.  The  lines  joining  these  points 
should  be  either  30-degree  lines  or  verticals. 
Do  the  same  thing  for  the  two  inner  hexagons, 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  31 

testing  in  the  same  way  the  inclined  lines  to 
see  if  they  are  at  30  degrees. 

Fig.  E  is  for  an  exercise  in  drawing  parallels 
and  perpendiculars  by  means  of  the  triangles, 
without  the  aid  of  the  T-square. 

First  fix  the  position  of  the  point  x,  4% 
inches  from  the  left  border  line,  and  2 y2  inches 
above  the  lower  border;  and  locate  point  z  on 
the  same  T-square  line  as  the  base  of  Fig.  D, 
and  1  inch  to  the  right  of  X;  and  join  x  and  z. 
Starting  at  point  z,  mark  off  on  line  zx,  without 
moving  the  scale,  the  following  distances  in 
order:  y2  inch,  %  inch,  %  inch,  %  inch,  %  inch, 
and  y2  inch.  Then  draw  as  a  base  line  a 
T-square  line  through  z,  and  set  off  in  the  same 
way  the  distances  %  inch,  y2  inch,  *4  inch, 
y2  inch,  y2  inch,  14  inch,  y±  inch,  y2  inch,  and 
y±  inch;  and  through  this  last  point,  draw  a  line 
parallel  to  zx,  as  shown  in  Fig.  21.  This  line 
will  be  the  right-hand  boundary  of  the  figure; 
and  a  line  drawn  through  x  at  right  angles  to 
line  xz,  by  the  method  of  Fig.  22,  will  be  the 
upper  boundary  of  the  figure.  Now,  by  sliding 
one  triangle  along  another,  draw  lines  parallel 
to  the  upper  boundary  of  the  figure  from  the 
points  on  line  xz,  and  also  from  the  points  on 
the  base  line.  Draw  also  parallel  to  xz  another 
set  of  lines  from  the  points  on  the  base  line. 

For  Fig.  F,  locate  the  point  c  as  shown,  and 
make  the  base  line  cd  1%  inches  long,  making 
the  short  dashes  each  about  y8  inch  long.  Then, 
from  c  and  d,  draw  45-degree  lines  upward,  and 


32 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


make  each  one  the  same  length,  1%  inches, 
drawing  them  full  lines.  Next  draw  the  dotted 
verticals;  then  the  second  pair  of  45-degree 
lines;  then  the  horizontal  at  the  top  of  the 
figure.  This  produces  the  regular  eight-sided 
figure  cdefghij,  or  regular  octagon.  Draw  the 
verticals  ch  and  dg,  and  the  T-square  lines  fi 
and  ej,  making  them  dash  lines.  The  intersec¬ 
tions  of  these  lines  give  the  four  corners  of  a 
square  kmoq. 

Next,  using  the  45-degree  triangle,  draw  eh, 
di,  gj,  and  fc,  making  the  parts  solid  and  dotted 
as  shown  in  the  figure.  These  lines  will  inter¬ 
sect  in  the  corners  of  a  second  square  lnpr. 
Now  connect  the  points  k,  1,  m,  etc.,  forming  a 
regular  octagon.  Finally  join  1  with  q  and 
o,  m  with  r  and  p,  n  with  k  and  q,  o  with  r, 
and  p  with  k,  thus  completing  an  eight-pointed 
star. 

Inking.  The  sheet  is  to  be  inked— Fig.  A, 
with  lines  of  medium  thickness;  B  with  heavy 
lines;  and  C  with  fine  lines;  while  D,  E,  and  F 
are  to  he  drawn  with  medium-weight  lines.  In 
Fig.  F  the  dotted  pencil  lines  are  to  be  erased, 
not  appearing  at  all  on  the  finished  ink  draw¬ 
ing.  Make  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same  dif¬ 
ference  in  weight  of  line  between  A  and  B  as 
between  B  and  C.  For  this  first  sheet,  ink  one 
figure  at  a  time.  Remember  that  ink  lines  must 
not  be  rubbed  with  the  triangle  or  T-square 
until  they  are  perfectly  dry. 


■ 


FKEEHAND  PEKSPECTIVE  DEAWING  OF  A  SUMMEK  BUNGALOW, 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  33 

GEOMETRICAL  PROBLEMS 

46.  There  are  certain  problems  of  geomet¬ 
rical  construction  which  it  is  essential  that  the 
intelligent  draftsman  should  know.  We  shall 
now  present  some  of  the  more  common  of  these 
problems. 

PROBLEM  1 

To  Bisect  a  Given  Straight  Line 

Let  AB,  Fig.  25,  be  the  given  line.  With  B 
as  a  center,  and  a  radius  greater  than  one-half 


Fig.  25.  Bisecting  a  Given  Fig.  26.  Bisecting  a  Given 

Straight  Line.  Angle. 

the  length  of  the  line,  describe  an  arc  above 
AB,  and  another  below;  and  with  the  same 
radius,  and  A  as  a  center,  draw  two  other  arcs 
above  and  below  AB,  cutting  the  first  two  arcs 
at  the  points  1  and  2.  A  straight  line  joining 
1  with  2  will  divide  AB  in  two  equal  parts, 
bisecting  it  at  point  C. 

NOTE  1— A  circular  arc  would  be  bisected  in  the  same 
way. 

NOTE  2 — The  intersecting  arcs  will  cross  nearly  at 


34 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


right  angles,  and  accuracy  thereby  become  easier  to 
obtain  if  the  radius  used  is  taken  (by  eye)  between 
two-thirds  and  three-quarters  the  length  of  AB. 

PROBLEM  2 


To  Bisect  a  Given  Angle 

In  Fig.  26,  let  AB  and  BC  form  the  given 
angle  at  B.  With  B  as  center,  and  any  radius, 


Erecting  a  Perpendicular  to  a 
Given  Line  at  a  Given 
Point  in  the  Line. 


strike  an  arc  cutting  AB  and  BC  in  points  1  and 
2.  With  point  1  as  center,  and  any  radius 
greater  than  one-half  the  distance  from  1  to  2, 
strike  an  arc;  and  with  the  point  2  as  center, 
and  the  same  radius,  draw  another  arc,  cutting 
the  one  just  drawn,  in  point  3.  A  line  joining 
point  B  with  point  3  is  the  bisecting  line 
required. 

NOTE — To  test  the  exactness  of  the  work,  take  the 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  35 

dividers,  set  one  point  at  4,  open  to  point  1,  then  see  if 
this  span  is  the  same  as  that  from  4  to  2. 

PROBLEM  3 

To  Draw  a  Perpendicular  to  a  Given  Line  from 
a  Given  Point  Outside 

Let  AB,  Fig.  27,  be  the  given  line,  and  c  the 
given  point.  With  the  point  c  as  a  center,  and 
any  sufficiently  large  radius,  describe  an  arc 
cutting  the  given  line  in  two  points,  as  1  and 
2.  Then,  with  1  as  center,  and  any  convenient 
radius,  strike  an  arc  (preferably  on  the  other 
side  of  the  line  from  point  c);  and  with  center 
2,  and  the  same  radius,  strike  another  arc,  inter¬ 
secting  the  first  one  in  point  3.  Connect  the 
point  3  with  point  c,  and  this  will  be  the  per¬ 
pendicular  required. 

PROBLEM  4 

To  Erect  a  Perpendicular  to  a  Given  Line  at  a 
Given  Point  on  the  Line 

FIRST  CASE — When  the  given  point  is 
not  very  near  either  end  of  the  line. 

Let  AB,  Fig.  28,  represent  the  given  line, 
and  c  the  given  point.  With  c  as  center,  and 
any  radius,  strike  an  arc  cutting  AB  in  points 
1  and  2;  then,  with  1  and  2  as  centers,  and  any 
suitable  radius,  strike  arcs  intersecting  at  3.  A 
line  drawn  from  3  to  c  will  be  the  desired  per¬ 
pendicular. 

SECOND  CASE — When  the  point  on  the 
given  line  is  at  or  near  one  end. 


36 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


Let  A.B,  Fig.  29,  be  the  given  line,  and  c  the 
given  point.  With  point  c  as  center,  and  any 
radius,  draw  an  arc  cutting  AB  at  point  1;  then, 
with  1  as  a  center,  and  the  same  radius,  strike 
an  arc  cutting  the  first  one  at  point  2;  and  with 
2  as  center,  and  the  same  radius,  draw  a  third 
arc,  cutting  the  first  arc  again  at  point  3.  Now, 
with  2  and  3  in  turn  as  centers,  and  any  con¬ 
venient  radius,  strike  two  arcs  intersecting  at 
point  4.  A  line  joining  4  and  c  is  the  required 
perpendicular. 

PROBLEM  5 

To  Draw  a  Line  Parallel  to  a  Given  Line  and 
at  a  Definite  Distance  Away 

In  Fig.  30,  let  AB  be  the  given  line,  and  one 
inch  the  required  distance  away  for  the  desired 


Fig.  30.  Drawing  a  Line  Para-  Fig.  31.  Dividing  a  Straight 
lei  to  a  Given  Line  at  a  Line  into  a  Desired  Number 

Definite  Distance  Away.  of  Equal  Parts. 

line.  With  any  two  points  on  the  line  AB,  as 
1  and  2,  and  the  distance  one  inch  as  radius, 
describe  two  arcs,  as  C  and  D;  and  with  the 
edge  of  the  triangle,  draw  a  line  EF  just  touch- 
ing  or  just  tangent  to  these  two  arcs,  and  this 
will  be  the  required  line. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  37 

NOTE — The  greater  the  distance  of  one  line  from  the 
other,  the  less  accurate  is  this  construction.  For  a  con¬ 
siderable  distance  between  the  two  lines,  an  accurate 
construction  would  be  to  erect  perpendiculars  at  points 
1  and  2  by  the  method  of  Problem  5,  mark  points  on  these 
perpendiculars  at  the  required  distance  from  AB,  and 
draw  the  required  line  through  these  points. 

PEOBLEM  6 

To  Divide  a  Given  Straight  Line  into  Any 
Desired  Number  of  Equal  Parts 

Let  AB,  Fig.  31,  be  the  given  line  to  be 
divided  into,  say,  five  equal  parts.  This  con¬ 
struction  is,  of  course,  in  case  the  division  can¬ 
not  be  exactly  made  with  the  scale.  From  either 
end  of  the  line,  as  A,  draw  a  straight  line  AX 
of  indefinite  length,  at  any  convenient  angle; 
and  lay  off  on  AX,  beginning  at  A,  any  five 
equal  spaces,  A-l,  1-2,  2-3,  3-4,  and  4-5.  '  Join 
point  5  with  B;  and  from  points  4,  3,  2,  and  1, 
draw  by  means  of  the  triangles  (Article  28) 
parallels  to  5-B,  intersecting  AB  in  points  F, 
E,  D,  and  C,  and  these  points  will  divide  AB 
into  five  equal  spaces. 

PROBLEM  7 

To  Construct  One  Angle  Equal  to  Another 

In  Fig.  32,  let  the  angle  ABC  be  the  given 
one,  and  let  it  be  required  to  construct  on  DE 
as  one  side  an  angle  equal  to  ABC.  With  B 
as  center,  and  any  radius,  describe  an  arc  cut- 


38 


MECHANICAL  DEAFT1NU 


ting  AB  and  BO  at  points  1  and  2;  and  with  D 
as  center,  and  the  same  radius,  strike  a  second 
arc  P  meeting  DE  at  point  3.  Then  take  2  as 


Tig.  32.  Constructing  One  Angle  Equal  to  Another. 

center,  and  draw  a  short  arc  through  point  1; 
and  with  this  radius,  and  3  as  center,  draw  a 
short  arc  intersecting  arc  3F  at  4.  Then  a  line 
connecting  4  and  D  will  form  with  the  line  DE 
an  angle  equal  to  ABC. 


PROBLEM  8 


To  Draw  a  Circle  through  Three  Points  Not 
in  the  Same  Straight  Line 


In  Fig.  33,  a,  b,  and  c  are  the  given  points. 
Connect  a  with  b,  and  b  with  c;  and  then,  by 


Pig.  33.  Describing  a  Circle 
through  Three  Given  Points. 


Fig.  34.  Inscribing  a  Circle  ir 
a  Triangle. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  39 


the  method  of  Problem  1,  bisect  each  line.  These 
bisectors  D  and  E  intersect  at  a  point  1,  which 
is  equally  distant  from  a,  b,  and  c.  Hence  this 
point  is  the  center  of  a  circle  which  will  pass 
through  the  three  points. 

NOTE — As  three  points  not  in  the  same  straight  line 
may  always  be  connected  to  form  a  triangle,  it  follows 
that  this  construction  may  be  used  for  drawing  a  circle 
through  the  three  corners  of  a  triangle,  or  as  it  is  called, 
circumscribing  a  circle  about  a  triangle. 


PROBLEM  9 


To  Inscribe  a  Circle  in  a  Given  Triangle 


Let  ABC,  Pig.  34,  be  the  given  triangle.  By 
the  method  of  Problem  2,  bisect  any  two  of  the 
angles  of  the  triangle,  as  the  angle  at  A  and 
the  one  at  B;  the  bisecting  lines  will  intersect 


E— - -  p.^ 

36.  Constructing  a  Regular 

Fig.  35.  Constructing  a  Trian-  Hexagon  of  which  One 

gle  of  which  Sides  are  Given.  Side  is  Given. 


each  other  at  point  1.  This  point  is  equally 
distant  from  all  three  sides  of  the  triangle; 
hence,  with  1  as  center,  the  required  circle  D 
is  drawn  just  tangent  to  the  sides  of  the  tri¬ 
angle,  and  is  the  required  inscribed  circle. 


40  MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 

PROBLEM  10 

To  Construct  a  Triangle,  Having  Given  the 
Lengths  of  the  Sides 

In  Pig.  35,  let  AB,  CD,  and  EF  be  the  lengths 
of  the  sides.  Draw  line  1-2,  and  make  it  equal 
to  AB.  Then,  with  point  1  as  center,  and  a 
radius  equal  to  one  of  the  other  sides,  as  CD, 
strike  an  arc;  and  with  point  2  as  center,  and 
a  radius  equal  to  the  remaining  side,  EF,  draw 
another  arc,  intersecting  the  first  one  at  point 
3.  J oin  3  with  1  and  2,  and  the  triangle  is  com¬ 
pleted. 

PROBLEM  11 

To  Construct  a  Regular  Hexagon,  Having  Given 
One  Side 

In  Fig.  36,  AF  is  the  given  side.  With  points 
A  and  F  as  centers,  and  a  radius  each  time  equal 
to  length  AF,  strike  arcs  intersecting  in  point 
o;  and  with  o  as  center,  and  the  same  radius, 
draw  a  circle  through  A  and  F.  Then,  with  A 
as  center,  and  the  same  radius,  draw  a  short  arc 
cutting  the  circle  at  B;  then,  with  center  B, 
radius  unchanged,  cut  the  circle  again  at  C; 
repeat  this  process,  beginning  with  F,  obtain¬ 
ing  points  E  and  D.  Draw  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE, 
and  EF ,  and  the  hexagon  is  constructed. 

NOTE  1— A  polygon  of  any  number  of  sides  which 
has  all  of  its  corners  in  the  circumference  of  an  enclosing 
circle,  is  said  to  be  inscribed  in  the  circle. 

NOTE  2 — The  length  of  the  radius  of  a  circle  may  be 
spaced  around  the  circumference  exactly  six  times. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

PROBLEM  12 


41 


To  Construct  an  Ellipse,  Having  Given  Two 
Axes  at  Right  Angles  (or  the 
Rectangular  Axes) 

Let  AB  and  CD,  Fig.  37,  be  the  axes,  each 
line  bisecting  the  other.  The  point  o  will  be 
the  center  of  the  ellipse.  The  longer  axis  AB 
is  the  major  axis;  the  shorter  one  CD,  the  minor 
axis.  With  center  0,  and  radius  equal  to  Ao, 
describe  an  arc  cutting  AB  in  points  x  and  y. 
These  points  are  termed  the  foci  of  the  ellipse. 

The  construction  to  be  given  depends  upon 
the  interesting  property  of  the  ellipse,  that,  no 


Fig.  37.  Constructing  an  Ellipse,  Having  Given  the  Rectangular 
Axes. 

matter  what  point  on  the  curve  be  taken,  the 
sum  of  its  distances  from  the  foci  is  always  the 
same,  and  is  equal  to  the  length  of  the  major 
axis.  Hence,  to  find  points  on  the  curve,  mark 
off  on  AB,  between  z  and  y,  any  number  of 
points,  as  1,  2,  3,  4,  etc.  Then,  with  x  and  y 
as  centers,  and  radius  equal  to  A-l,  strike  four 
short  arcs,  two  above  and  two  below  AB;  and 
with  the  same  centers,  and  radius  equal  to  1-B, 
describe  four  other  arcs,  cutting  the  first  four 
at  E,  E',  F ,  and  F'.  Eepeat  this  process  for  the 


43  MECHANICAL  DBAFTING 

other  points  marked  on  AB,  taking  next  A-2 
as  length  of  first  radii,  and  2-B  as  that  of  the 
second,  obtaining  four  more  points;  and  so  on 
for  the  remaining  points.  The  curve  should  be 
first  sketched  freehand  through  the  points 
found,  then  drawn  in  smoothly  with  the  irregu¬ 
lar  curve. 

PROBLEM  13 

To  Construct  an  Ellipse  with  a  Trammel, 
Having  Given  the  Rectangular  Axes. 

In  Fig.  38,  AB  and  CD  are  the  axes  of  the 
desired  ellipse.  The  trammel  K  may  be  a  strip 
of  stiff  paper  or  thin  cardboard.  On  one  of 
the  straight  edges  of  the  trammel,  mark  off  the 
length  EP  equal  to  Ao;  and  from  E,  mark  off 


Fig.  38.  Constructing  an  Ellipse  with  a  Trammel. 

EG  equal  to  Co.  Now  take  the  trammel,  place 
it  so  that  point  G  will  be  on  the  major  axis  AB, 
and  point  F  on  the  minor  axis  CD;  then  point 
E  will  be  at  one  point  of  the  required  curve, 
and  the  point  may  be  marked  on  the  paper  with 
a  sharp-pointed  pencil  or  a  fine  needle-point. 
Then,  by  placing  the  trammel  in  other  positions, 
with  G  on  AB,  and  F  on  CD,  point  E  will  indi¬ 
cate  other  points  on  the  required  ellipse. 


MECHANICAL  DKAFTING  43 

Approximations 

47.  Often,  in  practical  work,  an  approxima¬ 
tion  will  answer  the  purpose  as  well  as  an  exact 
geometrical  construction. 

For  example,  let  it  be  required  to  find  a 
stiaight  line  equal  in  length  to  a  given  curved 
line. 


In  Fig.  39,  let  AB  be  the  given  curved  line. 
It  is  required  to  find  on  CD  a  length  equal  to 


AB.  Taking  the  dividers,  and  starting  at  A, 
lay  off  any  number  of  'short,  equal  spaces  A-l, 
1~2,  2-3,  etc.,  up  to  X.  (The  distance  from  the 
point  X  to  B  should  be  less  than  one  of  the  equal 
spaces.)  Then,  with  the  same  setting  of  the 
dividers,  begin  at  C,  and  lay  off  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  equal  spaces  as  far  as  X Measure  in 
the  dividers  the  distance  XB,  and  lay  it  off  from 
X'  to  B'.  Then  the  length  CB'  is  practically 
equal  to  AB.  The  curve,  which  may  or  may 
not  be  the  arc  of  a  circle,  is  said  to  be  rectified 
along  CD. 

NOTE — Should  the  distance  XB  be  too  short  to  take 
accurately  with  the  dividers,  the  distance  5-B  may  be 
divided  into  two  spaces,  and  these  laid  off  from  5'. 


FIG.  A.  it  FIG.  C,  FIG.  D. 


44 


PLATE  3 — Mechanical  Drafting. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


45 


Again,  suppose  the  circumference  of  a  circle 
is  to  be  divided  into  perhaps  eleven  equal  parts. 
This  is  most  readily  and  accurately  done  by 
trial,  using  the  hair-spring  dividers.  Assume 
first  some  radius,  lay  this  around  the  circum¬ 
ference;  and  if  the  setting  is  not  found  exact 
the  first  time,  adjust  slightly  by  means  of  the 
hair-spring  screw,  space  again  around  the  cir¬ 
cumference,  and  proceed  in  this  way  until  the 
exact  spacing  is  found. 

Exercises  in  the  Use  of  the  Compass  and  the 
Irregular  Curves 

PLATE  3 

48.  Plate  3  is  laid  out  11  inches  by  15 
inches,  with  a  border  line  10  inches  by  14  inches. 
All  of  the  figures  are  to  be  accurately  penciled; 
then  all  are  to  be  inked.  Pigs.  A  and  D  are  for 
practice  with  the  irregular  curves;  and  Pigs.  B, 
C,  and  E  for  practice  with  the  compass.  The 
figures  are  located  as  shown  on  the  plate.  Por 
Pigs.  A  and  D,  the  irregular  curve  should  be 
used  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of 
Article  40. 

Penciling.  Fig.  A  represents  one  turn  each 
of  two  equal  spirals.  This  particular  kind  of  a 
spiral  is  called  the  Spiral  of  Archimedes.  Make 
first  the  outside  circle  3 inches  in  diameter, 
and  divide  the  circumference  into  any  number 
of  equal  parts,  as  twelve  in  the  figure;  and  draw 
the  diameters.  Divide  any  radius,  as  OL,  into 
the  same  number  of  equal  parts.  Then,  with  0 


46 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


as  center,  and  radius  0-1,  strike  an  arc  cutting 
the  first  radius  at  the  left  in  point  a;  then,  with 
the  same  center  0,  and  radii  0-2,  0-3,  0-4,  etc., 
to  0-11,  strike  arcs  cutting  respectively  radii 
ON,  OP,  OQ,  etc.,  to  OX,  thus  determining  the 
various  points  of  the  curve,  o — b — f — k — 12. 
The  other  spiral,  o — n — s — y,  is  constructed  in 
a  similar  way. 

In  Fig.  D  the  diameter  of  the  circle  is  31/2 
inches,  and  the  short  diameter  of  the  ellipse  is 
2%  inches.  The  points  on  the  ellipse  may  be 
found  either  by  the  method  of  Problem  12, 
above,  or  by  the  use  of  a  trammel  (Problem  13) ; 
and  then  these  points  are  joined  with  the  irregu¬ 
lar  curve. 

Fig.  B  is  for  practice  in  drawing  lines  of 
different  kinds  with  the  compass. 

In  penciling,  make  the  lines  of  uniform 
width.  The  square  is  3^  inches  on  a  side.  The 
points  0  and  O'  are  the  centers  for  the  circles 
and  arcs.  To  locate  point  0,  bisect  the  angle 
between  the  diagonal  and  the  upper  side  of  the 
square,  by  the  line  Mx,  and  point  0  is  the  inter¬ 
section  of  this  bisector  with  the  other  diagonal. 
Point  0'  may  then  be  located  on  the  other  side 
of  the  diagonal  MN.  The  circles  A  and  A',  tan¬ 
gent  to  the  sides  of  the  square  and  to  the  diag¬ 
onal  MN,  are  next  drawn.  Then,  from  point  1, 
mark  off  on  the  bisector  Mx  14-inch  spaces, 
three  to  the  left,  and  six  to  the  right.  With 
center  0,  and  radius  0-2,  draw  the  circle  next 
inside  of  A,  and,  before  changing  the  setting  of 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  47 

the  compass,  draw  the  corresponding  circle  from 
center  O'.  In  this  same  way,  draw  all  the  other 
circles  and  arcs,  using  each  center  0  and  O' 
before  changing  the  setting.  Make  the  circles 
and  arcs  dotted,  dot-and-dash,  or  full,  as  shown 
in  the  figure. 

The  so-called  dotted  lines  through  points  5 
and  6  are  really  composed  of  short  dashes  a 
little  less  than  i/g  inch  in  length.  Care  should 
be  taken  to  make  these  dashes  uniform  in  length. 
Similarly,  the  short  and  long  dashes  of  the  cir¬ 
cles  through  2  and  3  should  be  drawn  with  care, 
to  insure  a  pleasing  and  uniform  appearance. 

Fig.  C  is  intended  for  practice  in  the  accu¬ 
rate  use  of  the  large  and  small  compasses,  and 
also  in  the  accurate  use  of  the  scale.  The  rect¬ 
angle  in  which  the  design  appears  is  laid  out 
as  accurately  as  possible  5  inches  by  iy2  inches. 
It  is  then  divided  into  l^-inch  squares;  and 
on  the  exactness  of  the  spacing  depends  largely 
the  accuracy  of  the  final  result. 

An  experienced  draftsman  could  set  the  scale 
along  the  side  of  the  rectangle,  and  mark  off 
accurately  the  l^-inch  divisions  without  mov¬ 
ing  the  scale.  The  beginner,  however,  can  obtain 
greater  accuracy  by  using  the  hair-spring 
dividers. 

First  set  the  dividers  or  the  scale  to  1% 
inches,  and  test  the  exactness  of  the  setting  by 
spacing  along  the  scale  several  times,  noticing 
whether,  at  the  last  position,  the  point  of  the 
dividers  exactly  coincides  with  the  proper  divi- 


48 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


sion  of  the  scale.  The  dividers  with  this  setting 
should  then  be  used  to  space  off  on  two  adjoin¬ 
ing  sides  of  the  rectangle.  Through  these  points 
of  division,  the  lines  forming  the  small  squares 
are  drawn  with  the  triangle  and  T-square.  The 
centers  of  the  circles  and  arcs  are  at  the  corners 
of  the  small  squares,  as  shown  in  the  drawing. 
The  smallest  radius  is  %  inch,  and  the  radii 
increase  by  *4  inch,  so  that  the  largest  radius  is 
1%  inches.  For  accuracy  it  is  essential  that 
all  arcs  or  circles  of  the  same  radius  be  drawn 
with  one  setting  of  the  compass. 

For  the  penciling,  draw  first  all  the  arcs, 
then  the  straight  lines.  Of  course,  in  the  pencil 
work,  it  is  needless  to  attempt  to  stop  the  arcs 
exactly  at  the  straight  lines,  as  this  can  be  done 
when  the  drawing  is  inked. 

In  Fig.  E,  the  outside  square  is  3y2  inches 
on  a  side.  With  the  corners  of  the  square  as 
centers,  draw  the  arcs  A,  B,  C,  and  D,  and 
through  the  points  of  intersection,  1,  2,  3,  and 
4,  draw  with  triangle  and  T-square  the  smaller 
square.  Draw  the  diagonals  of  the  larger 
square;  and  with  the  intersection  of  the  diag¬ 
onals  as  center,  draw  the  circle  through  1,  2, 
3,  and  4. 

Next,  with  the  corners  of  the  smaller  square 
as  centers,  draw  the  arcs  1-4,  4-3,  3-2,  and  2-1; 
and  lastly,  draw  the  smallest  circle  as  in  the 
figure,  tangent  to  these  four  arcs. 

Inking.  The  border  line  should  be  of  the 
same  weight  as  the  heavy  lines  of  Fig.  B.  Make 


X 

1 


V,. 


St  '/. 


'*  > 
r  & 


<■  A  .f.i  m  v®  /  Ii 


*•  *  v  /$  1^1  Ilk ;,//?^  •*•  if*  •  ?i ; 

%  ^  jf£  /V  mvJz&fe  i  /III %mr\> 


.  * 

"V  / 

„  V-.  _ _ 

*  *v,  <v  :.  jg^.^s  '■‘•••''•'^SH\\ tJ'' / //////«/  »M/ 

Sf^v&\  s v Jp-Sf&xb  MiHMii iimi/ii/i'i 

?&VV\  •- 


linMMM\miUiun 
inniiiMbui  A\%\n' 


>  ^.5r4'  si* 


■fc* 


Ail 


ilhiuimmi  iiiiiiiiiiiinm 

iiiiihimnnm  miiiiinuuuii 


L/,^Ss  .  ..  4^v 

^  J=)  I  ~’r  E  ,j/r  *****  ■*-*  •  ~  V^C*" 

afeijl  r  *'•*«*  ■  .  S-S&WzrS 

* &?=  lv(  •  . . .  W  - s 


% 


4  S' 


rs 

•  =  :  *  :  1  .— . 


-  :  vK^ 

*  *  •  ^  -'*.V.£ 


.  v 


I  1  1 


*V- 


\  Ui 


v. 


* 


J  M 


>  »  ^—=  J=  i  .'.^Iw.  , 

. . ?H  I  ;«•■■'■■■ 

uii/iimutint  iimii/oiuiiiii  /  Q-1  kvi  S  .  .  , 


Hi 


‘"v/m* *//#/* 
-  v/"/  m 


*  .;..*•  ^  :<  vv  v 
*-  x\  /«■ 

2.  '.  •  *L«,  '  £j* 


V,  ,  . ,  /  • 

(T 

v  •, 


•?;  *  * 4 

. / 


->  •  c  /J  *  .-v_  . '  ,  '/«•_-»  •••<_ 

/  *•"  "' v 

■-  /  =C; :  pnimiwiiHlIi  ,cv 

/  rv  ?=•,:  %  r  *  °- 


-  1  —  X*  ^ - 1 _ ,\  .  v^} 


B  7r?”i  ^UH 1 ,w '  ^wjn  m  1  n  * 

*  I*  ’•  #11  •»» ii n< m iir* »•»««••  *111*  •» 


'  “  ^  .  %.  5^' 

:.^ps  >fY' 

•  1  ^  1 


A  FINE  EXAMPLE  OF  PEN-AND-INK  KENDEKING, 


. 


M 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  49 

all  the  full  lines  on  the  sheet  of  medium  width, 
except  as  shown  in  the  drawing  for  Fig.  B;  and 
make  all  construction  lines  fine,  short-dash  lines 
like  those  of  Fig.  B.  In  Fig.  B,  the  diagonals 
need  not  be  inked.  In  Fig.  C,  do  not  show  the 
construction  squares  in  the  finished  drawing. 
In  Fig.  D,  show  the  axes  of  the  ellipse  as  con¬ 
struction  lines.  In  Fig.  E,  the  diagonals  and 
the  smaller  square  should  not  be  inked. 
PROJECTION 

49.  The  term  projection  as  used  in  mechan¬ 
ical  drafting,  may  be  explained  as  follows: 

Assume  any  object,  as  a  cube,  and  a  plane 
above  it  and  parallel  to  the  upper  face,  as  in 


Fig.  40.  Illustrating  Principles  Fig.  41.  Illustrating  Planes  of 
of  Projection.  Projection. 

Fig.  40.  Now,  if  parallel  lines  be  drawn  from 
the  corners  of  the  cube,  and  perpendicular  to 
the  plane,  these  perpendiculars  will  meet  the 
plane  in  the  points  I,  2,  3,  and  4;  and  lines  join- 
ing  these  points  will  give  the  four-sided  figure 
1-2-3-4,  which  is  called  the  projection  of  the 
cube  upon  the  plane.  The  projection,  then,  of 
the  cube  made  in  this  way,  is  simply  a  square 
equal  in  size  to  one  of  the  faces  of  the  cube. 


50 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


There  are  various  kinds  of  projection,  as 
orthographic  or  orthogonal,  oblique,  isometric, 
axonometric,  etc.;  but  the  first  is  of  most  prac¬ 
tical  value,  and  will  receive  the  principal  con¬ 
sideration.  Where  the  simple  term  “ projec¬ 
tion”  is  used,  orthographic  will  be  understood. 

Orthographic  Projection 

While  projections  may  be  made  on  any 
planes,  those  most  commonly  used  are  one 
vertical  and  the  other  horizontal  in  position, 
being  thus  at  right  angles.  The  line  of  inter¬ 
section  of  the  two  planes  is  called  the  ground 
line,  or  GL.  These  planes  are  known  as  planes 
of  projection  or  co-ordinate  planes,  and  for 
brevity  may  be  referred  to  as  V  and  H.  The 
position  of  the  planes  is  as  in  Fig.  41. 

In  this  figure,  let  A  represent  a  square  placed 
parallel  to  the  V  plane,  and  with  two  of  its  sides 


Fig.  42.  Projections  of  a  Square  in  Third  Angle. 

perpendicular  to  the  H  plane.  Then  the  pro¬ 
jection  on  the  V  plane,  a  square  equal  to  A,  is 
shown  at  Av,  while  the  projection  of  A  on  the 
H  plane  is  merely  one  line,  Ah. 


MECHANICAL  DBAFTING  51 

It  will  be  seen  that  four  angles  are  formed 
by  the  intersection  of  the  two  planes.  These 
angles,  or  quadrants,  are  distinguished  as  first, 
second,  third,  and  fourth,  as  indicated  by  the 
numbers,  and  are  always  in  this  same  order. 
For  practical  purposes,  drawings  are  made  as 
if  the  object  were  in  either  the  1st  or  the  3d 
angle. 

50.  Fig.  42  shows  a  square  A  in  the  3d  angle, 
placed  parallel  to  V,  and  two  edges  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  H.  It  is  projected  up  to  H,  giving  A'1 
for  the  H  projection;  and  forward  to  V,  giving 
Av  as  the  V  projection. 

51.  Plans  and  Elevations.  In  practical  work, 
the  term  plan  is  used  instead  of  II  projection; 
and  an  H  projection  or  plan,  unless  otherwise 
expressly  stated,  is  always  a  view  of  the  top 
or  upper  side  of  any  object;  hence  a  plan  may 
often  be  spoken  of  as  a  top  view. 

Similarly,  elevation  is  the  usual  term  for  V 
projection,  and  means  a  view  of  the  front  side 
of  an  object,  or  sometimes  a  view  of  the  right 
or  left  side.  In  actual  drawing,  the  H  plane  is 
taken  as  the  plane  of  the  paper  as  it  lies  on  the 
drawing  board;  and  the  V  plane,  as  an  imag¬ 
inary  plane  vertical  in  position  and  directly  in 
front  of  the  draftsman. 

It  must  be  noted  that  when  the  plan  and  the 
elevation  of  any  object  are  both  made  on  the 
same  sheet  of  paper,  one  can  be  neither  to  the 
right  nor  left  of  the  other;  but  one  must  be 
drawn  on  the  paper  vertically  over  the  other. 


52  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

The  drawings  of  Figs.  40,  41,  and  42  are  pic¬ 
torial,  and  not  actual  projections. 

52.  Actual  Projections.  In  Fig.  43,  a 
T-square  line  GL  may  represent  the  V  plane  as 
seen  from  above;  and  the  whole  surface  of  the 
paper,  the  H  plane.  Then  any  object  in  the 
first  or  the  fourth  angle  would  be  projected  on 
II  on  the  near  side  of  GL;  and  any  object  in 
either  the  second  or  third  angle  would  be  pro¬ 
jected  on  the  further  side  of  GL. 

The  actual  plan  and  elevation  of  the  square 


Fig.  43.  Illustrating  Principles  Fig.  44.  Projections  of  Cube  in 
of  Projection.  Third  Angle. 


shown  pictorially  in  the  preceding  figure  may 
now  he  made.  A  straight  line  Ah  parallel  to 
the  Y  plane  and  on  the  further  side  of  V,  will 
be  the  H  projection  or  plan  of  the  square;  and 
the  square,  in  its  full  size  below  GL,  will  repre¬ 
sent  the  projection  on  V. 

Suppose  that  the  plan  of  a  cube  placed  in 
the  third  angle  is  to  be  made;  and  let  the  cube 
be  placed  with  the  top  and  bottom  level,  and 
the  side  faces  perpendicular  to  V.  Then,  in 
Fig.  44,  the  plan  will  be  shown  as  at  Ah,  equal 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  53 , 


to  one  side  of  the  cube;  and  the  distance  between 
Ah  and  GL  is  the  distance  that  the  cube  is  behind 
the  vertical  plane. 

Next,  for  the  elevation  or  front  view  of  the 
cube,  the  paper  must  be  considered  as  the  V 
plane,  and  the  GL  as  H  seen  edgewise.  Then, 
as  the  cube  is  below  the  H  plane,  its  projection 
on  V  will  be  below  H  as  seen  edgewise — that 
is,  below  GL.  This  elevation  of  the  cube  will 
be  a  square  A*,  vertically  below  A\  The  cor¬ 
ners  of  the  cube  may  be  numbered,  calling  the 
four  upper  corners  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  the  four  lower 
ones  5,  6,  7,  8.  The  two  projections  A'  and  Ah 
are  squares  of  equal  size,  which  is  evidently  as 


Elle^v, 

* 

Plan  * 


Fig.  45. 


□  O  ©  ®  o  □ 


Elevations  and  Plans  of  Simple  Objects— First  Angle. 


it  should  be,  since  each  face  of  the  cube  is  of 
the  same  size,  and  each  view  is  taken  at  right 
angles  with  the  face. 

53.  The  Co-ordinate  Planes  Seen  Edgewise. 

The  GL  sometimes  represents  H,  seen  edgewise, 
and  sometimes  V  seen  edgewise.  When  con¬ 
sidering  a  plan  or  top  view,  GL  is  V  seen  edge¬ 
wise;  but  when  regarding  an  elevation,  GL  is 
H  seen  edgewise. 

Examples.  In  Fig.  45,  six  simple  objects 
are  shown,  all  in  the  first  angle.  Beading  from 


54 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


left  to  right  these  are :  Square  prism;  round  bar 
or  cylinder;  the  same  with  a  square  hole  from 
one  end  to  the  other;  the  same  cylinder  again, 
but  with  a  small  block  placed  on  the  upper  end; 
a  circular  cone  standing  on  H;  and  a  short  joist 
with  a  tenon  on  the  front  end. 

Fig.  46  shows  the  elevation  and  plan  of  a 
common  hexagonal  nut.  The  double  dotted  lines 


Il 

:□[ 

Ij 

A 

H 

S  b 

II 

i! 

c 

ll 

1) 

Li 

Elevation 


Fig.  46.  Hexagonal  Nut. 


of  the  elevation,  and  the  two  inner  circles  of 
the  plan,  indicate  that  the  nut  is  threaded. 

Notice  that  the  thickness  or  height  of  the 
nut  is  shown  on  the  elevation;  while  the  true 
distance  between  the  parallel  faces  is  given  only 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING  55 

in  the  plan.  Each  side  of  the  nut  is  shown  in 
its  real  width  on  the  plan;  but  on  the  elevation, 
of  the  three  front  sides  A,  B,  and  C,  B  alone  is 
shown  in  the  full  width,  A  and  C  appearing 
very  much  narrower.  This  illustrates  several 
very  important  principles  of  projection,  which 
may  be  stated  thus: 

54.  (a)  If  any  flat  surface  is  parallel  to  II 
or  Y,  it  will  be  drawn  on  that  plane  in  its  real 
size  and  shape;  but  if  a  surface  is  oblique  to 
H  or  V,  its  projection  or  view  on  that  plane  is 
less  than  the  true  size,  and  does  not  show  the 
exact  shape. 

Observe  that  although  the  face  A,  for  exam- 
pie,  is  oblique  to  the  V  plane,  it  does  not  follow 
that  all  its  dimensions  are  oblique.  The  height 
of  the  face  A  is  not  affected  by  the  inclination 
of  the  surface  with  the  vertical,  and  hence  is 
shown  in  its  true  length  in  the  elevation. 

55.  (b)  If  any  edge  of  a  solid,  or  any  single 
line,  is  parallel  to  either  H  or  V,  it  will  be  shown 
on  that  plane  in  its  true  length. 

These  principles  are  still  further  illustrated 
in  Figs.  47,  48,  and  49.  Fig.  47  shows  a  square 
prism  placed  with  its  length  vertical.  Notice 
the  numbering  of  the  top  and  bottom.  Why 
are  some  of  the  faces  in  elevation  shown  in  their 
true  size?  Only  one  dotted  edge  appears.  (A 
dotted  edge  in  any  projection  is  understood  to 
mean  an  edge  which  is  not  visible  in  that  view.) 

56.  In  Fig.  48,  a  regular  hexagonal  pyramid 
is  given  standing  on  its  base,  and  with  its  axis 


56 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


ab  perpendicular  to  H.  This  solid  has  six 
sloping  surfaces  and  one  base.  Of  these  seven 
faces,  the  base  alone  appears  in  its  true  size. 


z 


Fig.  47.  Elevation  and  Plan  of  Fig.  48.  Regular  Hexagonal 
Square  Prism  with  Length  Pyramid  with  Axis  Per- 

Vertical.  pendicular  to  H. 

Two  of  the  inclined  edges,  a-1  and  a-4,  are 
shown  in  their  true  lengths  in  elevation  at  av-lT 
and  av-4v,  since  the  lines  in  space  are  parallel  to 
the  vertical  plane. 

57.  Fig.  49  is  precisely  the  same  object  as 
in  Fig.  48,  but  placed  in  a  different  position. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  57 

In  this  position,  the  base  is  parallel  to  V,  the 
axis,  a-b  perpendicular  to  H,  and  the  apex 
away  from  the  draftsman.  Note  the  dotted 
lines  in  the  elevation,  the  only  visible  part  of 
the  solid  in  elevation  being  the  base.  The  edges 
a-1  and  a-4  are  now  parallel  to  the  horizontal; 
hence  their  true  lengths  are  ah-l'1  and  ah-4h.  The 
base  1-2-3-4-5-6  is  parallel  to  V ;  hence  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  H;  and  its  II  projection  is  the  straight 
line  1-2  . . .  4  .  The  base  in  the  preceding  figure 
is  perpendicular  to  V,  and  its  V  projection  is 
the  straight  line  lr-2\  .  ,4V. 

The  statement  of  the  principle  involved  is 
as  follows: 

58.  If  a  surface  is  perpendicular  to  H  or  V, 
it  will  be  seen  edgewise  in  that  view,  hence  will 
appear  simply  as  one  line. 

59.  In  these  three  figures  on  the  prism  and 
pyramid,  it  may  readily  be  seen  that  it  would 
be  impracticable  to  draw  first  the  view  showing 
the  side  faces.  For  example,  in  Fig.  47,  the 
widths  of  the  surfaces  in  elevation  are  not 
known  until  the  plan  is  drawn.  Hence,  to  draw 
a  prism,  or  pyramid,  or  other  object  of  a  similar 
character,  draw  the  base  or  the  end  view  first. 

This  direction  applies  with  equal  force  in 
other  cases  of  a  more  practical  nature — for 
example,  the  slope  of  a  roof  Is  shown  at  its 
true  angle  in  an  end  view. 

60.  Direction  of  Oblique  Lines;  Slope.  A 
line  may  be  parallel  to  one  plane  and  oblique 


58 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


to  the  other,  or  it  may  be  oblique  to  both  planes. 
This  latter  position  will  be  meant  when  a  line 
is  referred  to  simply  as  an  oblique  line.  The 
term  slope  refers  to  the  direction  of  a  line 
oblique  to  one  or  both  of  the  co-ordinate  planes. 
In  this  treatise  the  word  backward,  when 


allel  to  V. 

applied  to  the  slope  of  a  line,  means  away  from 
the  draftsman;  and  forward  means  toward  the 
draftsman. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


59 


Thus,  if  a  line  is  said  fo  slope  upward,  back¬ 
ward,  and  to  the  left,  the  upper  end  of  the  line 
must  be  away  from  the  draftsman  and  toward 
his  left.  In  the  same  manner,  a  line  sloping 
downward,  backward,  and  to  the  right,  has  its 
lower  end  away  from  the  draftsman  and  toward 
his  right.  If  a  line  slopes  simply  forward  and 
to  the  left,  for  example,  then  neither  end  is 
lower  than  the  other,  and  the  line  is  in  a  hori¬ 
zontal  position,  with  its  left-hand  end  toward 
the  draftsman. 

As  illustrations  of  slope  of  lines,  a-1  in  Fig. 
48  slopes  downward  and  toward  the  left;  a-4, 
downward  and  toward  the  right;  a-2,  down¬ 
ward,  backward,  and  toward  the  left;  a-6,  down¬ 
ward,  forward,  and  toward  the  left;  a-3, 
downward,  backward,  and  toward  the  right; 
and  a-5,  downward,  forward,  and  to  the  right. 

61.  Projection  of  Oblique  Lines.  A  right 
circular  cone  is  shown  in  Fig.  50.  The  vertex 
is  a;  and  a-b,  a-c,  a-d,  a-e,  and  a-k  are  various 
elements  of  the  cone.  On  reflection,  it  will  be 
seen  that  all  of  these  lines  have  the  same  actual 
length  in  space.  These  lines  are  also  all  equally 
inclined  to  the  horizontal  plane,  and  therefore 
the  H  projections  are  all  of  the  same  length. 
Next,  referring  to  the  elevation,  av-bv  shows  the 
actual  length  of  a-b;  av-cv,  av-dv,  and  av-ev  show 
gradually  decreasing  lengths,  av-ev  being  the 
shortest  of  all. 

This  difference  in  length  corresponds  to  the 
fact  shown  in  the  plan,  that  a-e  makes  the 


60 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


greatest  angle  with  the  Y  plane.  That  is,  the 
greater  the  angle  that  a  line  makes  with  a  plane 
of  projection,  the  less  will  be  the  length  of  its 
projection  on  that  plane. 

Observe  also  that  ah-ch  and  ah-kh  make  the 
same  angle  with  V ;  therefore  the  lines  in  space 
must  make  equal  angles  with  V;  and  their  V 
projections,  being  coincident,  are  of  the  same 
length.  Hence  lines  of  equal  length  which  have 
the  same  inclination  with  V,  are  projected  on 
V  in  equal  lengths. 

From  the  above,  it  follows  that,  for  a  line 
of  definite  length,  the  length  of  its  projection 
on  any  plane  is  determined  wholly  by  the  angle 
the  line  makes  with  the  plane.  If  the  line  makes 
the  greatest  possible  angle  with  the  plane  (90 
degrees),  then  the  projection  on  the  plane  has 
no  length,  but  is  simply  a  point. 

62.  Eevolution  of  a  Figure  around  Some 
Line  as  an  Axis.  In  Fig.  51,  consider  first  the 
rectangle  abed,  placed  horizontally,  and  having 
its  long  edges  perpendicular  to  V.  Then  ahbhchdh 
is  the  true  size  and  shape  of  the  figure.  The 
rectangle  is  perpendicular  to  V,  and  therefore 
(Article  58)  is  shown  on  V  as  a  single  line  avcv. 
Now  let  the  rectangle  revolve  up  like  a  trap 
door,  on  ahbh  as  an  axis.  Then  points  d  and  e 
will  revolve  in  arcs  of  circles  having  points  a 
and  b  respectively  as  centers.  These  circles 
will  be  perpendicular  to  the  axis  ab,  and 
hence  parallel  to  V,  so  that  a  circle  drawn 
on  Y,  with  center  at  av,  and  with  radius 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


61 


av-cv,  will  be  the  projection  of  the  circles  de¬ 
scribed  by  points  c  and  d  in  space. 

As  the  rectangle  turns  about  axis  a-b,  it 
remains  always  perpendicular  to  V,  and  its  pro¬ 
jection  on  Y  will  remain  a  straight  line.  Then, 
when  the  rectangle  has  swung  up  through  45 
degrees,  for  instance,  its  V  projection  will  be 
a  line  avbvcv2dv2,  making  45  degrees  with  the 


Fig.  61.  Fig.  52. 

Illustrating  Revolution  of  a  Rectangle  around  an  Axis. 


horizontal;  and  its  plan  or  H  projection,  show¬ 
ing  less  than  the  real  width,  will  be  abbbch2dh2. 

The  other  oblique  positions  are  found  in  the 
same  way— the  elevation  first,  then  the  plan. 
Finally,  when  the  rectangle  is  revolved  through 


62 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


90  degrees  into  a  vertical  position,  the  H  pro¬ 
jection  becomes  merely  the  one  line  ahbhc\d\. 

In  Fig.  52,  the  rectangle  abed  is  placed  in 
a  vertical  position  and  parallel  to  V.  It  is  then 
revolved  like  a  door  on  its  hinges  about  a-b  as 
an  axis,  the  successive  positions  appearing  in 
plan  at  ahbhch!dhi,  ahbhch2dh2,  etc.,  until  the  sup¬ 
posed  door  is  wide  open  in  the  position  ahbhch4dh4. 
The  corresponding  elevations  avbvcvidvi,  etc.,  are 


then  constructed  by  projecting  directly  from 
the  plan. 

63.  Suppose  that  it  is  required  to  draw  a  tri¬ 
angular  prism  standing  on  one  end,  and  with 
one  edge  of  the  base  at  right  angles  with  the 
V  plane,  Fig.  53.  According  to  the  preceding 
directions,  the  base  is  drawn  first,  placed  in  a 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  63 

horizontal  position,  and  with  the  right-hand  side 
perpendicular  to  V.  The  elevation  may  then 
be  drawn  as  before  explained. 

Now  let  the  object  be  revolved  around  the 
edge  e-f  of  the  base  as  an  axis.  In  revolving 
in  this  way,  it  is  evident  that  every  point  of 
the  prism  will  move,  except  the  edge  e-f,  which 
is  the  axis.  A  little  thought  will  show  that  each 
corner  that  moves  will  move  in  a  circle.  For 
example,  the  corner  d  of  the  base  will  revolve 
in  the  arc  of  a  circle  the  center  of  which  is  at 
point  g,  the  radius  of  the  circle  being  therefore 
d-g.  The  line  d-g  is  perpendicular  to  e-f,  and 
must  so  remain  as  it  revolves.  This  means  that 
the  line  d-g,  parallel  to  the  Y  plane  at  first,  will 
remain  parallel;  and  the  circle  described  by 
point  d  in  space  will  be  parallel  to  Y,  and  will  be 
projected  on  V  in  its  true  size.  The  arc  dvjvkv 
then  represents  the  circle  described  by  the 
motion  of  point  d;  and  on  H,  this  circle  appears 
as  the  straight  line  dhjLkh,  parallel  to  V. 

In  the  same  way,  the  other  corners,  a,  b,  and 
c,  will  each  travel  in  a  circle  parallel  to  Y.  Then, 
if  the  prism  be  revolved  through  an  angle  of  45 
degrees,  each  line  of  the  elevation  will  simply 
revolve  through  this  angle,  with  no  change  in 
length;  and  the  resulting  V  projection  will  be 
the  rectangle  fvd\&\b\,  exactly  the  same  size 
and  shape  as  avbvfvdv,  but  inclined  at  45  degrees 
with  the  horizontal.  This  rectangle  will  be  the 
new  Y  projection  of  the  prism;  and,  remember¬ 
ing  that  each  point  in  revolving  moves  in  a  circle 


64 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


parallel  to  V,  the  new  H  projection  may  be 
found  by  dropping  perpendiculars  from  dv1?  ah, 
and  bh-ch,  to  meet  parallels  drawn  from 
dh,  ah,  bh,  and  ch,  thus  determining  the  points 
d\,  a\,  bhi,  and  c\.  These  points,  when  joined 
in  the  proper  order,  give  the  new  plan  as  shown 
by  the  dash  lines  in  the  figure. 

64.  The  principles  of  such  revolution  may  be 
explained  as  follows: 

(a)  If  any  object,  no  matter  how  complex,  be  revolved 
about  an  axis  perpendicular  to  V,  the  V  projection  will 
remain  unchanged  in  shape  and  size,  but  will  revolve  to 
different  positions  with  respect  to  the  horizontal. 

(b)  The  H  projection,  on  the  other  hand,  changing 
shape  and  size,  will  be  found  directly  below  (or  above) 
the  new  V  projection,  and  each  point  will  be  at  the  same 
distance  from  V  as  before  revolving. 

A  similar  statement  will  apply  with  merely 
an  interchange  of  V  for  H,  and  H  for  Y,  in  case 
an  object  be  revolved  about  a  vertical  axis. 

Pig.  54  shows  the  same  prism  as  in  Pig.  53; 
but  in  this  figure,  the  new  position  has  been 
moved  a  little  to  the  right  so  as  to  clear  the  first 
position.  Placing  in  this  way  takes  more  space, 
but  is  clearer,  and  should  always  be  used  if  the 
figure  to  be  revolved  is  complicated.  Notice 
that  in  the  plan  of  the  second  position,  the  upper 
end  and  the  two  upper  sides  are  visible,  while 
the  lower  end  and  the  under  side  are  invisible. 

65.  Third  Plane  of  Projection  or  Profile 
Plane.  Many  times,  the  two  views  of  an  object 
as  plan  and  elevation,  are  sufficient  to  describe 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


65 


the  object  completely;  but  in  other  cases  a  third 
view  is  required  to  give  a  satisfactory  idea  of  the 
object  in  question.  Sometimes,  in  addition,  a 
sectional  view  may  be  necessary  to  show  fully 
every  detail. 


The  third  view  usually  taken  is  in  a  direction 
perpendicular  to  that  of  the  plan  and  the  eleva- 


Fig.  54.  Drawing  Triangular  Prism  of  Fig.  53  in  Another 
Position. 


tion.  That  is,  for  a  rectangular  object — as  a 
cube  or  a  square  prism— there  may  be  the  top 
view  or  plan;  the  front  view  or  elevation,  and 
the  third,  a  profile  view  or  end  view.  The  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  profile  view  in  comparison  with  the 


66 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


other  two,  is  shown  in  Mg.  55,  in  which  are  rep¬ 
resented  the  plan,  elevation,  and  end  or  profile 
view  of  the  outlines  of  a  cabin.  The  end  view  is 
taken  looking  in  the  direction  of  the  arrow. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  breadth  of  the 
end  view  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  plan,  while 
the  height  is  equal  to  that  of  the  elevation. 


A 


Ptkcr let  oa 
■  hi  D  VIIW 

Fig.  55.  Showing  Direction  of  Profile  View  as  Compared 
with  Plan  and  Ele  ration. 

On  comparing  the  three  projections,  it  will 
be  seen  that  the  length  is  shown  in  plan  and 
elevation,  the  width  in  plan  and  profile,  the 
height  in  elevation  and  profile,  and  the  slope  of 
the  roof  in  profile  only.  In  making  the  three 
views,  the  profile  or  end  view,  in  accordance 
with  Article  59,  should  be  drawn  first. 

66.  Third- Angle  Projection.  Three  views  of 
a  rectangular  block,  with  parts  of  the  top  and 
bottom  cut  away,  are  shown  in  Fig.  56.  In  this 
figure,  as  in  the  preceding  one,  the  arrangement 
customary  in  many  drafting  offices  has  been 
followed — of  placing  the  plan  above,  the  eleva- 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


67 


tion  beneath,  and  the  end  or  profile  view  at  one 
side.  Where  this  custom  is  adopted,  the  view  of 
the  right-hand  end  is  placed  either  at  the  right 
of  the  elevation,  or  of  the  plan;  a  view  of  the 
left-hand  end  is  placed  at  the  left;  and  so  on. 
This  is  known  as  third-angle  projection.  Thus, 
in  the  figure,  the  end  view  is  a  view  of  the  right- 
hand  end  of  the  block. 

This  figure  is  an  example  of  a  case  where  the 
plan  and  elevation  do  not  make  the  meaning  of 
the  drawing  sufficiently  clear  and  do  not  make 


PL  AM 


Fig.  56.  Plan,  Elevation,  and  End  View  of  Bectangular  Block 
with  Parts  of  Top  and  Bottom  Cut  Away. 

the  shape  of  the  object  apparent;  hence  the  end 
view  is  required.  The  end  view  bears  the  letters 
Ap,  Bp,  etc.  The  small  p  at  the  upper  right-hand 


68 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


of  the  letter  stands  for  profile,  in  the  same  way 
that  a  small  v  on  the  elevation  means  vertical, 
and  a  small  h  in  plan  means  horizontal. 

The  end  view  gives  at  once  a  much  clearer 
idea  of  the  object  than  either  plan  or  elevation. 
What  is  marked  Av  on  the  elevation,  and  Ab  on 
the  plan,  in  the  profile  view  at  Ap  is  shown  to  be 
a  slot.  By  reference  to  Ah,  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  slot  does  not  extend  the  entire  length  of  the 
block,  and  is  rounded  at  the  end.  The  vertical 
dotted  line  ev-fv  represents  the  left-hand  end  of 
the  slot  A.  In  comparison  with  A,  Bp  repre¬ 
sents  a  narrower  slot  of  less  depth,  and  one 
which  extends  the  whole  length  of  the  piece. 
This  latter  statement  accounts  for  the  fact  that 
Bp  is  left  open  at  the  top,  while  Ap  is  closed. 
The  part  lettered  Ch  and  Cv  is  found  on  the  pro¬ 
file  view  to  be  a  rounded  projection  appearing 
at  Cp. 

Assuming,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  that 
the  plan  and  elevation  are  drawn,  and  that  the 
end  view  is  to  be  constructed  from  them,  it 
would  be  done  as  follows:  Draw  first  a  center 
line  G-H  on  the  plan;  then,  at  any  convenient 
distance  to  the  right  of  the  elevation,  draw  a 
vertical  line  J-K  for  the  center  line  of  the  end 
view.  Since  vertical  heights  will  correspond  on 
the  end  view  with  those  of  the  elevation,  a  T- 
square  line  through  lower  edge  of  D  will  give 
the  level  of  base  of  the  required  view;  and  a 
second  T-square  line  through  the  lower  edge  of 
Cv  will  locate  the  flat  part  of  the  top  of  the  block. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


69 


Next,  the  width  of  the  end  view  must  be  the 
same  as  that  of  the  plan;  hence  the  distance 
from  the  center  line  G-H  to  point  1  is  taken,  and 
laid  off  on  the  end  view  from  J-K  along  the  line 
L-M  to  the  left,  giving  point  1;  and  point  8  is 
located  in  the  same  way  to  the  right  of  J-K. 
Vertical  lines  drawn  through  1  and  8  will  give 
the  general  outline  of  the  end  view.  Then, 
measuring  for  the  remaining  points,  and  laying 
off  from  the  center  line  each  time,  points  2,  3,  4, 
5,  etc.  are  located,  those  on  the  near  side  of  G-H 
being  measured  to  the  left  of  J-K,  and  those  on 
the  further  side  to  the  right. 

Next  the  depths  of  the  slots  as  shown  on  the 
elevation  are  projected  over  with  the  T-square 
to  the  end  view,  and  Ap  and  B"  completed. 
Having  located  on  the  end  view  point  6  as  a 
center,  the  half-circle  0”  is  drawn  with  the 
radius  6-7,  taken  from  the  plan.  The  upper  edge 
of  the  shallow  groove  DT  is  projected  across  to 
J-K,  becoming  the  highest  point  of  the  curve. 
The  radius  of  the  curve  being  given,  its  center 
is  found  on  J-K,  and  the  curve  drawn-in  as  the 
arc  of  a  circle,  thus  completing  the  end  view. 

67.  Let  it  be  required  to  draw  a  wooden  chest 
of  given  length,  breadth,  and  depth,  and  to  show 
the  cover  opened  through  150  degrees.  Evi¬ 
dently  this  is  a  case  which  requires  the  end 
view  to  be  drawn  first.  This  end  view  is  first 
drawn  from  the  given  dimensions  at  A,  Fig.  57, 
showing  the  cover  opened  at  the  given  angle. 
The  ends  of  the  chest  are  supposed  to  be  nailed 


70 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


to  the  bottom  and  sides,  which  are  represented 
in  view  A  by  the  dotted  lines. 

The  front  elevation,  B,  is  taken  looking  at  A 
in  the  direction  of  the  arrow.  This  elevation 
will  show  the  length  and  height  of  the  chest, 
and  will  show  the  cover  in  its  real  length,  but 
narrower  than  its  true  width.  The  different 
heights  are  projected  over  with  the  T-square 
from  A  to  B.  In  a  view  of  A  in  the  direction  of 


Fig.  57.  Profile  and  Projections  of  Chest  with  Cover  Open. 

the  arrows,  1-2,  the  extreme  left-hand  edge  of 
the  cover,  will  not  be  seen;  hence  this  is  drawn 
with  the  dotted  line  1-2  in  view  B.  The  plan,  C, 
shows  the  length  and  width  of  the  chest,  the 
extreme  width  of  the  chest  and  cover  together 
being  equal  to  the  distance  e-f  of  the  end  view  A. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


71 


In  this  view  also,  the  cover  appears  in  less 
than  its  real  width.  Note  carefully  that  the 
cover  1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8  is  shown  less  in  width  in 
elevation  than  in  plan.  This  is  simply  because 
the  cover  is  more  nearly  horizontal  than  ver¬ 
tical;  hence,  in  looking  from  above,  the  cover 
appears  more  nearly  flat-wise,  and  therefore 
nearly  in  its  real  width;  while,  viewed  from  the 
front,  the  cover  is  seen  more  nearly  edgewise, 
and  thus  shows  narrower. 

This  affords  an  exercise  in  reading  a  drawing 
— that  is,  in  obtaining  from  the  various  views  an 
exact  understanding  of  the  different  parts  of  the 
object  represented,  and  also  of  the  object  as  a 
whole.  This  figure,  and  also  Figs.  51  to  55, 
illustrate  an  important  principle. 

68.  This  principle  may  be  stated  as  follows: 

The  size  of  the  projection  of  any  given  surface  on  a 
plane  is  determined  by  the  angle  which  the  surface  makes 
with  the  plane  of  projection.  If  the  surface  is  actually 
parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  drawing,  then  it  will  appear 
in  its  true  size;  if  the  surface  is  perpendicular  to  the 
plane,  it  will  be  seen  edgewise  simply  as  a  line. 

69.  Suppose  that  a  square  prism  is  to  be 
drawn  standing  on  one  corner,  and  in  an  oblique 
position  so  that  its  long  edges  are  inclined  at 
30  degrees  with  the  horizontal,  and  that  the 
prism  inclines  upward  to  the  right  and  away 
from  the  draftsman.  To  draw  the  object  in  this 
oblique  position,  in  which  none  of  the  faces  and 
none  of  the  edges  will  be  parallel  to  either  plane, 


72 


Fig.  58.  Drawing  a  Prism  in  an  Oblique  Position. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


73 


requires  first  the  construction  of  two  simpler 
positions. 

The  prism  is  first  placed  with  its  base  on  H, 
and  its  faces  at  any  convenient  angle  with  V,  as 
60  degrees  and  30  degrees.  This  position  is 
shown  at  A,  Fig.  58.  Next,  let  the  prism  be  re¬ 
volved  about  an  axis  perpendicular  to  V  through 
the  right-hand  corner  of  the  base.  This  axis  is 
lettered  lh-eh  on  the  drawing.  The  prism  is 
revolved  until  its  axis  or  its  long  edges  make 
30  degrees  with  H. 

In  this  kind  of  a  revolution,  the  Y  projection 
does  not  change  shape  or  size,  and  will  make 
with  the  ground-line  the  same  angle  that  the 
prism  makes  wTith  II  (Article  64).  Hence  the 
elevation  can  be  transferred  from  A  to  the  30- 
degree  position  at  B,  with  point  1  on  H. 

The  plan  may  then  be  constructed  as  in 
Article  63,  Fig.  53,  each  point  of  the  plan  falling 
vertically  below  its  corresponding  elevation,  and 
in  a  T-square  line  to  the  right  of  the  same  point 
in  the  plan  of  A.  The  edges  of  the  prism  now 
make  the  required  angle  of  30  degrees  with  the 
horizontal,  and  one  corner  is  on  H;  but  the  final 
inclination  has  yet  to  be  given. 

In  order  that  the  prism  shall  have  the  in¬ 
clination  specified,  it  must  be  turned  from  the 
position  of  B  so  that  the  upper  end  will  be  away 
from  the  draftsman,  and  the  lower  end  toward 
him.  This  may  be  done  by  considering  the 
prism  to  revolve  about  a  vertical  axis  through 
point  1.  Each  point  of  the  prism  will  then  move 


U  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

in  a  horizontal  circle  through  whatever  angle  is 
desired.  In  this  case,  let  the  prism  revolve 
about  the  vertical  axis  through  60  degrees;  then 
point  dh  will  move  to  dh,  in  the  arc  of  a  circle, 
and  lh-db  will  be  the  new  H  projection  of  the 
edge  1-d. 

In  the  same  way,  every  other  edge  will  re¬ 
volve  through  an  angle  of  60  degrees,  and  will 
have  its  length  unchanged.  The  new  or  revolved 
plan  will  therefore  be  of  the  same  shape  and 
size  as  before  this  second  revolution.  For  the 
sake  of  clearness,  this  revolution  is  not  made 
upon  Fig.  B;  but,  instead,  the  plan  is  drawn  in 
Fig.  0  as  it  would  appear  after  the  revolution. 
The  lowest  corner  1  may  be  taken  in  any  con¬ 
venient  position,  and  lh-dhi  is  drawn  at  once  at 
60  degrees  equal  in  length  to  lh-dh  of  Fig.  B. 

The  plan  of  C  is  constructed  equal  to  that  of 
B  by  a  method  of  rectangular  co-ordinates,  or 
offsets.  In  the  plan  of  B,  perpendiculars  are 
drawn  from  each  corner  to  the  front  edge  4-k. 
These  perpendiculars  intersect  the  edge,  or  the 
edge  produced,  in  points  such  as  f,  g,  m,  etc. 
Then,  through  d\,  Fig.  C,  a  perpendicular  is 
drawn  to  l-d\,  and  d\-f  is  made  equal  to  dh-f; 
and  through  f,  a  60-degree  line  will  represent 
the  position  of  the  edge  4b-k.  The  distance  f-k 
of  B,  laid  off  from  f  of  0,  will  give  corner  k  in 
Fig.  C.  Then  in  C,  lay  off  from  f  the  distances 
f-g,  f-m,  f-n,  etc.;  and  at  these  points,  erect  per¬ 
pendiculars  to  4h-k  (these  perpendiculars  are  30- 
degree  lines),  and  make  these  perpendiculars 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


75 


equal  respectively  to  those  of  B.  In  this  way 
the  remaining  corners  of  the  prism  are  located, 
and  the  plan  completed. 

The  elevation  may  now  be  constructed  from 
the  plan,  if  it  is  remembered  that  in  the  revolu¬ 
tion  around  a  vertical  axis  the  heights  of  points 
remain  unchanged.  Hence,  if  the  corners  in  the 
plan  are  projected  vertically  up  and  to  the  same 
heights  as  in  the  elevation  of  B,  the  desired 
points  of  the  elevation  will  be  determined. 
Notice  which  end  of  the  prism  is  visible  in  plan, 
and  which  in  elevation.  In  following  out  the 
figure  as  drawn,  care  should  be  taken  to  imagine 
the  shape  and  position  of  the  object  in  space  as 
described  by  its  projections. 

70.  The  projections  of  a  cylinder  or  cone 
may  be  drawn  in  any  oblique  position  by  a 
process  similar  to  the  one  just  considered. 

Let  it  be  required  to  construct  the  plan  and 
elevation  of  a  right  circular  cylinder  in  the  first 
angle,  placed  with  its  axis  at  an  angle  of  45  de¬ 
grees  with  the  vertical  plane,  its  V  projection 
inclined  at  30  degrees  with  H;  and  let  the 
cylinder  slope  downward,  forward,  and  to  the 
right.  First,  note  with  which  co-ordinate  plane 
the  axis  is  to  make  the  given  angle.  In  this  case, 
the  given  angle  is  45  degrees  with  V.  Then 
draw  the  cylinder  in  the  first  position  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  V,  as  in  A,  Fig.  59.  Divide  the  base 
into  any  number  of  equal  parts,  as  in  the  figure, 
and  project  these  points  to  the  plan. 

Now,  if  a  vertical  axis,  as  X,  be  taken 


76 


Fig.  59.  Drawing  Projections  of  a  Right  Circular  Cylinder  in  Oblique  Position. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


77 


through  any  convenient  point,  as  5  on  the  back 
end,  the  cylinder  may  be  revolved  until  it  makes 
the  required  angle  of  45  degrees  with  V.  In  this 
revolution,  the  cylinder  will  remain  parallel  to 
H,  and  its  plan  will  be  unchanged  in  size  and 
shape;  hence,  in  B,  the  plan  of  A  is  placed  at 
45  degrees  with  Y,  sloping  forward  and  to  the 
right. 

Since,  in  the  revolution  about  the  vertical 
axis  X,  each  point  has  moved  in  a  horizontal 
plane,  it  follows  that  the  heights  of  points  above 
the  H  plane  have  not  been  altered.  Therefore, 
from  the  points  of  division  on  the  ends  of  the 
cylinder  in  the  plan,  project  for  the  elevation 
to  the  same  level  as  the  corresponding  points  in 
elevation  A. 

The  construction  is  shown  for  the  points  3 
and  7  on  one  end,  and  for  d  and  e  on  the  other. 
This  construction  will  give  a  series  of  points  on 
each  end  of  the  cylinder.  These  points  should 
be  joined  by  the  use  of  the  irregular  curve,  pro¬ 
ducing  the  two  ellipses  in  the  elevation. 

For  the  last  position,  C,  the  cylinder  must 
be  revolved  from  the  position  of  B  without 
changing  the  angle  of  45  degrees  with  V,  until 
the  final  oblique  position  is  reached.  As  the 
angle  with  Y  must  not  be  changed,  this  second 
revolution  must  be  made  about  an  axis  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  V.  The  axis  Y  may  be  imagined  to 
pass  through  any  convenient  point,  as  the  ex¬ 
treme  left-hand  point  of  Fig.  B.  In  this  revo¬ 
lution  (Article  64),  the  elevation  does  not 


78  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

change  shape  or  size,  but  simply  its  position. 
Hence,  in  Fig.  C,  the  elevation  of  B  is  drawn  at 
the  specified  angle  of  30  degrees  with  H,  points 
32,  72,  d2,  and  e2  corresponding  to  the  points  31; 
7i,  di,  and  ej  of  Fig.  B. 

The  plan  may  now  be  obtained  by  project¬ 
ing  to  meet  T-square  lines  from  the  plan  of  B. 


Pig.  60.  Drawing  Plan  and  Elevation  of  Triangular  Prism. 


71.  Auxiliary  Planes  of  Projection.  It  has 

been  shown  in  previous  figures  that  often  an  end 
view  must  be  made  before  constructing  other 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


79 


views.  Many  times  this  end  view  may  be  made 
on  H  or  V.  Sometimes,  however,  it  may  be 
necessary  or  convenient  to  take  an  end  view  in 
a  direction  at  right  angles  with  neither  V  nor  H. 

72.  Let  it  be  required  to  draw  the  plan  and 
elevation  of  a  triangular  prism  as  represented 
in  Fig.  60. 

Let  the  ends  of  the  prism  be  equilateral 
triangles  5  inches  on  a  side.  The  axis  of  the 
prism  is  to  be  11  inches  long,  inclined  at  30  de¬ 
grees  with  Y,  backward  and  toward  the  right; 
the  lowest  edge  of  the  prism  is  to  be  on  H;  and 
one  face  is  to  make  45  degrees  with  H.  In  this 
position,  it  is  evident  that  a  top  view  will  not 
show  the  end  at  all,  and  a  view  taken  in  the 
usual  direction  for  elevations  will  show  the  end, 
but  not  in  its  true  size.  If,  however,  a  view  be 
taken  in  the  direction  of  the  arrow — that  is, 
parallel  to  the  direction  of  the  axis — this  view 
will  be  at  right  angles  to  the  end  of  the  prism, 
and  the  end  will  show  in  its  real  size  and  posi¬ 
tion.  To  take  a  view  in  this  direction  is 
equivalent  to  projecting  the  prism  on  a  new  Y 
plane  parallel  to  the  end  of  the  prism,  or — which 
is  the  same  thing — perpendicular  to  the  axis. 

Hence,  to  make  the  construction,  draw  a  line 
as  Gi-Li  in  any  convenient  position  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  the  direction  of  the  axis.  This  may  be 
considered  to  represent  the  H  plane  seen  edge¬ 
wise  when  looking  in  the  direction  of  the  arrow. 
Then,  with  any  point  on  H  for  the  lowest  corner, 
as  1',  the  end  view  of  the  prism  is  drawn  showing 


80  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

the  true  size  and  slope,  and  one  under  face  at 
45  degrees  with  H.  The  width  of  the  face  1-3-4-5 
will  appear  in  plan  equal  to  the  distance  a-1'; 
and  the  width  of  face  1-2-6-5  equal  to  distance 
l'-b,  while  the  width  of  the  upper  face  2-S-4-6 
will  equal  the  length  a-b. 

With  these  widths  and  the  given  length  of 
the  prism,  the  plan  might  now  be  constructed 
without  any  further  reference  to  the  end  view. 
It  is,  however,  more  convenient  and  more  drafts¬ 
man-like,  to  draw  at  any  convenient  distance 
from  Gill!,  and  parallel  to  it,  a  line  4-6  as  one 
end;  to  project  at  right  angles  to  GJjj,  a  to  4,  5' 
to  5,  and  b  to  6;  then  to  draw  from  these  points 
the  edges  11  inches  long  and  at  right  angles  to 
the  end  4-5-6,  and  finally  draw  the  other  end 
3-1-2. 

For  the  elevation,  1-5  is  drawn  on  the  H 
plane  as  the  lowest  edge,  and  directly  above  1-5 
in  the  plan.  The  height  of  3-4  above  H  is  seen 
in  the  end  view  as  3'-a,  and  the  height  of  2-6  as 
2'-b;  hence,  in  elevation,  these  edges  will  appear 
at  these  respective  heights  above  the  plane  of 
1-5.  The  distance  3-c  is  therefore  made  equal 
to  3'-a,  and  2-d  equal  to  2'-b.  In  this  elevation, 
the  end  1-2-3,  nearer  the  draftsman,  is  visible. 

73.  Summary  of  Important  Principles.  The 
important  principles  above  brought  out,  may  be 
summarized  as  follows: 

(a)  An  elevation  always  shows  differences  in  height 
(if  any  difference  in  height  exists)  between  different 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


61 


objects,  or  differences  in  height  between  different  parts 
of  the  same  object. 

(b)  A  plan  or  top  view  means  the  same  thing  no 
matter  whether  the  drawing  is  in  the  first  or  third  angle; 
similarly,  an  elevation  or  front  view  is  the  same  figure 
for  either  first  or  third  angle. 

(c)  For  any  given  object,  upper  edges  or  surfaces  are 
visible  in  plan,  and  edges  or  faces  on  the  front  are  visible 
in  elevation. 

(d)  A  line  perpendicular  to  a  plane  of  projection 
appears  on  that  plane  simply  as  a  point. 

(e)  A  line  is  shown  in  its  true  length  in  any  view, 
only  when  the  line  is  parallel  to  the  plane  on  which  the 
view  is  drawn. 

(f)  A  plane  surface  is  shown  in  its  true  size,  only 
when  it  is  parallel  to  a  plane  of  projection. 

(g)  A  surface  perpendicular  to  a  plane  of  projection 
is  seen  edgewise  on  that  plane,  and  appears  as  a  single 
line. 

(h)  When  one  line  is  revolved  about  another  line  as 
axis,  each  point  in  the  first  line  moves  in  a  circle  whose 
center  is  on  the  axis,  and  the  plane  of  the  circle  is  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  axis. 

(i)  The  length  of  a  given  line,  or  the  size  of  a  given 
surface,  as  seen  in  projection,  is  determined  wholly  by 
the  angle  which  the  line  or  surface  makes  with  the  plane 
of  projection;  the  greater  the  angle  made  with  the  plane, 
the  less  the  size  of  the  projection. 

74.  It  will  be  found  that  the  exercises  given 
below  will,  if  worked  out,  afford  helpful  practice 
in  applying  the  principles  of  projection. 

Exercises  in  Projection 

Exercise  1 — Place  in  First  Angle.  Draw  the 
plan  and  elevation  of  a  square  prism,  with  its 


82 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


edges  vertical,  and  with  two  of  its  faces  at  30 
degrees  with  the  vertical  plane.  The  base  of 
the  prism  is  2  inches  square,  and  the  length  is 
4  inches.  Show  a  circular  hole  1  inch  in  diam¬ 
eter  bored  through  from  one  end  to  the  other. 

NOTE — Two  positions  are  possible,  for  the  face  at 
30  degrees  with  V  may  be  inclined  either  to  the  left  or 
to  the  right. 

Exercise  2 — Third  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  elevation  of  a  prism  of  the  same  shape  and 
size  as  in  Exercise  1;  but  place  the  prism  per¬ 
pendicular  to  Y,  and  make  two  faces  incline  at 
60  degrees  with  H.  Show  the  hole  in  the  prism 
as  before. 

Exercise  3 — Third  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  elevation  of  a  right  circular  cone  with  the 
base  horizontal  and  the  vertex  down.  The  base 
is  3  inches  in  diameter,  and  the  altitude  is  4 
inches.  Locate  the  base  y2  inch  below  the  H 
plane,  and  the  center  of  the  base  1%  inches 
from  V. 

Exercise  4 — First  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  elevation  of  a  regular  hexagonal  pyramid 
standing  on  its  base.  Make  the  left-hand  front 
edge  of  the  base  at  an  angle  of  45  degrees  with 
V.  Each  side  of  the  base  is  to  be  iy2  inches 
long,  and  the  altitude  of  the  pyramid  is  to  be 
4  inches. 

Exercise  5 — First  Angle.  Draw  the  plan  and 
elevation  of  a  rectangle  placed  parallel  to  V, 
with  its  long  sides  perpendicular  to  H.  Make 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  83 

the  rectangle  4  inches  by  2y2  inches.  Cut  off 
the  upper  right  comer  by  a  45-degree  line  drawn 
through  the  middle  of  the  top  side.  Now  revolve 
the  rectangle  forward  about  its  left-hand  side  as 
an  axis,  through  180  degrees,  and  show  the 
respective  projections  at  the  30,  60,  90, 120, 150, 
and  180-degree  positions. 

Exercise  6 — Third  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  the  elevation  of  a  pile  of  three  blocks  placed 
as  follows :  each  one  of  the  three  blocks  lies  on 
its  widest  face;  all  of  the  blocks  have  their  cor¬ 
responding  edges  parallel;  the  lowest  block  is 
on  the  H  plane;  the  next  higher  one  is  placed 
in  the  center  of  the  top  of  the  lowest  one;  and 
the  top  block  is  in  the  center  of  the  second.  All 
three  blocks  are  rectangular,  and  all  have  their 
long  edges  inclined  at  60  degrees  with  V,  back¬ 
ward  and  toward  the  left.  The  bottom  block 
is  5  inches  by  2%  inches  by  %  inch;  the  middle 
one  is  4  inches  by  2 y2  inches  by  y2  inch;  and  the 
top  one  is  3  inches  by  2 y2  inches  by  %  inch. 

Exercise  7 — Construct  a  profile  view  of  the 
blocks  in  Exercise  6,  looking  from  the  right. 

Exercise  8 — First  Angle.  Construct  the 
plan  and  elevation  of  a  rectangular  prism  4 
inches  by  2  inches  by  iy2  inches.  The  long 
edges  are  parallel  to  both  H  and  V.  Place  the 
prism  so  that  the  lower  back  face  makes  30  de¬ 
grees  with  H. 

Suggestion — The  end  or  profile  view  must 
be  drawn  first. 


84 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


NOTE — Two  solutions  are  possible,  since  the  lower 
back  face  may  be  taken  either  as  the  wide  or  the  nar¬ 
row  one. 

Exercise  9 — Third  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  elevation  of  a  right  triangular  pyramid, 
placed  with  its  axis  parallel  to  both  V  and  H, 
with  the  apex  at  the  left  of  the  base.  Locate  the 
axis  of  the  pyramid  3  inches  from  H,  and  2% 
inches  from  V.  The  axis  is  to  be  4  inches  long, 
and  the  base  is  to  be  an  equilateral  triangle  2 
inches  on  a  side.  Let  the  lower  front  edge  of  the 
base  incline  at  45  degrees  with  the  horizontal 
plane. 

Exercise  10 — First  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  elevation  of  a  regular  hexagonal  pyramid, 
with  its  axis  parallel  to  both  V  and  H,  and  with 
its  apex  at  the  right  of  the  base.  Place  the 
lowest  corner  of  the  base  on  the  H  plane,  and 
make  the  lowest  front  edge  of  the  base  at  an 
angle  of  15  degrees  with  H.  The  axis  of  the 
pyramid  is  5  inches  long,  and  each  edge  of  the 
base  is  iy2  inches. 

Exercise  11 — First  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  elevation  of  a  rectangular  prism  5  inches  by 
2  inches  by  1%  inches,  when  the  long  edges  are 
horizontal  and  are  placed  at  an  angle  of  45  de~ 
grees  with  Y,  backward  and  to  the  left.  Make 
the  lower  front  face  one  of  the  wide  ones,  and 
let  it  make  an  angle  of  30  degrees  with  H. 

Suggestion— An  end  view  must  first  be 
drawn. 

Exercise  12 — First  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


85 


and  elevation  of  a  right  circular  cylinder  of  2 
inches  diameter  and  5  inches  length.  The  cyl¬ 
inder  is  placed  in  a  horizontal  position,  making 
45  degrees  with  V,  backward  and  to  the  right. 

Exercise  13— Third  Angle.  Make  three 
drawings  of  a  regular  hexagonal  pyramid  of 
which  the  altitude  is  4  inches,  and  the  edge  of 
the  base  l1/^  inches.  In  the  first  figure,  make 
the  plan  and  elevation  showing  the  base  hori¬ 
zontal,  and  the  apex  above  the  base;  and  place 
the  left-hand  front  edge  of  the  base  at  45  degrees 
with  V.  In  the  second  figure,  show  the  projec¬ 
tions  after  the  pyramid  has  been  revolved 
through  45  degrees  about  an  axis  perpendicular 
to  V,  so  that  the  axis  of  the  pyramid  slopes 
downward  and  to  the  left.  In  the  third  figure, 
revolve  the  plan  of  the  preceding  figure  through 
30  degrees  clockwise,  and  construct  the  cor¬ 
responding  elevation. 

Exercise  14— First  Angle.  Draw  the  plan 
and  elevation  of  a  right  circular  cone  in  three 
positions.  The  diameter  of  the  base  is  3  inches, 
and  the  altitude  is  4  inches.  In  the  first  posi¬ 
tion,  draw  the  plan  and  elevation  with  the  cone 
standing  on  the  apex,  and  with  the  base 
horizontal.  In  the  second  position,  draw  the 
plan  and  elevation  after  the  cone  has  been  re¬ 
volved  through  60  degrees  about  an  axis  per¬ 
pendicular  to  Y,  so  that  the  axis  of  the  cone 
slopes  downward  and  to  the  right.  For  the  third 
position,  revolve  the  plan  of  the  second  position 
counter-clockwise  through  45  degrees  about  a 


86  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

vertical  axis,  and  construct  the  corresponding 
elevation. 

INTERSECTION  AND  DEVELOPMENT. 

75.  Intersection.  When  two  surfaces  meet 
at  an  angle  so  that  if  either  one  were  extended 
it  would  actually  cut  the  other  surface,  the  line 
of  meeting  is  called  the  intersection  of  the  two 
surfaces. 

The  line  of  intersection  may  be  straight  or 
curved,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  surface. 

Planes,  as  the  simplest  kind  of  surfaces,  will 
be  considered  first. 

76.  Development.  By  the  term  development 

is  meant  a  figure  showing  the  true  size  and 
shape  of  the  surface  of  any  given  solid,  when 
the  surface  has  been  rolled  or  spread  out  on  a 
plane.  A  true  development  is  obtained  when  all 
of  the  surface  is  made  to  coincide  with  a  plane, 
without  overlapping  or  folding.  Such  a  de¬ 
velopment,  when  cut  out  of  paper  or  thin  sheet 
metal,  and  properly  bent  or  rolled  up,  will 
reproduce  the  original  solid. 

Some  surfaces  are  truly  developable,  and 
others  are  not.  Among  the  former  are  all  sur¬ 
faces  composed  of  planes,  as  those  of  prisms  and 
pyramids,  all  cylindrical,  and  all  conical  sur¬ 
faces.  The  most  familiar  solid  which  has  a  non- 
developable  surface  is  the  sphere. 

Intersection  of  Planes 

77.  The  intersection  of  two  planes  is  evi¬ 
dently  always  a  straight  line.  Familiar 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


87 


examples  of  this  kind  of  intersection  are  to  be 
found  on  every  hand.  The  edge  of  a  box  is  the 
line  of  intersection  of  two  adjoining  sides,  which 
are  planes;  the  ridgepole  of  a  pitch  roof  is  the 
line  of  intersection  of  the  two  sides  of  the  roof; 
and  so  on  in  great  number. 

78.  In  Pig.  61,  a  triangular  pyramid  stands 
on  its  base,  and  several  lines  of  intersection  are 
shown.  The  slanting  edges  of  the  pyramid  are 
the  lines  of  intersection  of  the  sloping  faces. 


Pig.  61.  Triangular  Pyramid  Intersected  by  a  Plane. 

Let  X  represent  a  plane  seen  edgewise* 
Then  X  is  parallel  to  the  H  plane,  and  perpen- 


88  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

dicular  to  V.  This  plane  cutting  the  pyramid 
will  intersect  all  of  the  inclined  faces,  giving 
thereby  three  lines  of  intersection.  The  plane 
X,  seen  edgewise  in  elevation,  cuts  the  slanting 


Square  Pyramid  Cut 
Obliquely  by  a 
Plane. 


edges  in  points  a,  b,  and  c;  and  these  points  are 
found  in  plan  directly  below  on  the  correspond¬ 
ing  edges. 

As  the  plane  cuts  edge  0-1  at  a,  and  0-3  at  c, 
it  will  cut  the  face  013  in  the  line  joining  a  and 
c;  and,  by  joining  point  b  with  a  and  c,  the  other 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


89 


two  lines  are  determined,  and  the  whole  inter¬ 
section  abc  completed. 

Two  features  of  the  intersection  should  be 
noted: 

First,  it  is  a  triangle.  This  must  always  be 
the  case  when  the  pyramid  is  triangular  and 
the  intersecting  plan  cuts  all  three  edges,  even  if 
the  plane  should  not  be  parallel  to  the  base. 

Second,  the  sides  of  the  triangle  abc  are  re¬ 
spectively  parallel  to  the  edges  of  the  base  of  the 
pyramid.  This  parallel  relation  is  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  plane  X  in  this  case  is  parallel  to 
the  base. 

79.  It  may  be  proved  by  geometry  that  if  any 
prism,  pyramid,  cylinder,  or  cone  is  cut  by  a 
plane  parallel  to  the  base,  the  intersection  is 
always  a  figure  like  the  base  in  shape,  and 
parallel  to  it  in  position. 

80.  Fig.  62  shows  the  same  pyramid  with 
the  part  above  plane  X  removed,  showing  in 
plan  the  actual  surface  cut  by  the  plane. 

81.  Fig.  63  is  a  square  pyramid  standing  on 
its  base,  and  cut  by  a  plane  X.  The  plane  X  in 
this  figure  is  oblique  to  H,  but  the  intersection 
abed  is  found  by  the  same  process  as  before. 
Notice  here,  that  while  the  intersection  has  as 
many  sides  as  the  base,  it  is  not  parallel  to  it. 

82.  Fig.  64  shows  a  square  pyramid  in  the 
first  angle,  intersected  in  a  similar  way  by  a 
plane  X;  it  shows  also  the  development  of  the 
pyramid. 

Let  us  see  how  to  construct  the  development. 


90 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


Each  sloping  face  of  the  pyramid  is  an  isosceles 
triangle,  and  the  base  is  a  square;  so  the  develop¬ 
ment  will  consist  of  four  equal  triangles  and  a 
square,  joined  together  and  shown  in  their  true 
sizes.  The  pyramid  may  be  considered  to  be 
placed  with  its  vertex  at  o',  the  edge  o-a  at  O'-a', 
and  the  face  oab  in  contact  with  the  plane  of  the 
paper.  Then  the  triangle  oab  must  be  shown 
in  its  true  size  at  o'a'b'. 


o* 


Fig.  64.  Square  Pyramid  in  First  Angle,  Intersected  by  a  Plane. 
Development  of  Pyramid  Shown  at  Eight. 


It  is  then  necessary  to  find  the  true  length 
of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  oab.  The  H  projec¬ 
tion  o-bh  does  not  show  the  true  length  of  the 
line;  neither  does  the  V  projection  ov-bv.  Let 
the  pyramid  be  revolved  about  its  axis  through 
45  degrees,  so  that  o-bh  will  move  to  o-b\.  Then 
the  line  o-b  will  be  parallel  to  V;  and  its  pro¬ 
jection  on  V,  when  found,  will  show  the  true 
length  of  the  line.  In  revolving,  the  apex  0  will 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


91 


not  move,  and  the  point  b  will  stay  on  H;  hence 
bh  will  be  projected  from  b\  to  the  plane  of  the 
base  or  the  GL,  and  ov-bv!  will  be  the  true 
length  of  the  line  o-b. 

All  of  the  sloping  edges  of  the  pyramid  are 
evidently  of  the  same  length,  and  the  edges  of 
the  base  are  shown  in  plan  in  their  true  lengths; 
so  the  development  may  be  constructed,  laying 
down  first  the  true  size  of  the  triangle  oab,  join¬ 
ing  to  the  edge  o'-b'  the  next  face  obc,  and  then 
in  turn  the  other  two  faces. 

The  square,  representing  the  base,  may  be 
constructed  on  any  short  side,  as  at  c'-d'.  The 
most  expeditious  construction  is  to  take  a  radius 
equal  to  ov-bvi,  strike  an  arc  through  a'  from 
center  o',  and  on  this  arc,  with  the  dividers  or 
compasses,  step  off  the  length  ah-bh  four  times, 
obtaining  b',  c',  d',  and  a".  These  points  are 
then  connected  and  joined  with  o'. 

The  lines  on  the  development  showing  the 
intersection  of  the  plane  X  are  next  found.  The 
point  1,  for  example,  will  appear  in  development 
on  the  line  o'-a'  at  its  real  distance  from  o'. 
This  real  distance  from  o  may  be  found  in  ele¬ 
vation  by  drawing  a  horizontal  line  from  lv  to 
cut  ov-b\  in  point  Vl9  thus  determining  ov-lV!  as 
the  real  distance.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  if 
the  pyramid  be  revolved  about  its  axis  until  o-ah 
takes  the  position  o-b\,  the  V  projection  will 
then  coincide  with  ov-bVi,  and  the  point  1  will 
appear  on  ov-bV!  at  the  same  height  as  before 
revolution.  The  length  oY-V1  is  then  laid  off 


92 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


from  o',  giving  1'.  The  real  length  from  o  to  2 
is  similarly  found  by  a  horizontal  line  from  2V 
to  2\.  The  lengths  0-4  and  0-3  are  respectively 
equal  to  those  of  0-1  and  0-2.  The  points  1',  2', 
3',  4',  and  1"  are  then  located  and  joined,  thus 
completing  the  required  development. 

In  connection  with  the  construction  for 
finding  the  true  length  of  the  line  o-b,  it  should 
be  remarked  that  it  is  not  really  necessary  to 
think  of  the  entire  pyramid  as  revolving,  for  the 
same  result  is  reached  if  the  line  alone  be  re¬ 
volved  about  a  vertical  axis  through  o. 


by  Plane  Perpendicular  to  H.  Corner  Cut  Off. 

83.  A  square  pyramid  like  that  of  Fig.  63,  is 
shown  again  in  Fig.  65,  but  intersected  by  a 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  93 

plane  Y  perpendicular  to  H.  Plane  Y  is  there¬ 
fore  seen  edgewise  in  plan.  The  points  of  inter¬ 
section  a,  b,  and  c  are  projected  to  the  elevation 
and  connected,  thus  determining  the  lines  a-b 
and  b-c.  The  plane  in  this  position  cuts  two 
edges  of  the  base  and  one  sloping  edge. 

In  Pig.  66,  the  same  pyramid  is  shown  again, 
but  with  the  corner  cut  off.  This  gives  rather 
a  clearer  idea  of  the  intersection,  or  section,  as 
it  is  called,  cut  by  the  plane  Y. 


x 


Fig.  67.  Elevation,  Plan,  and  End  View  of  Regular  Pentagonal 
Pyramid. 

84.  A  regular  pentagonal  pyramid,  with  ele¬ 
vation,  plan,  and  end  view,  is  given  in  Pig.  67. 


94  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

The  pyramid  has  its  axis  parallel  to  both  V  and 
H;  hence  its  base  is  seen  edgewise  in  both  plan 
and  elevation.  The  pyramid  is  placed  in  the 
first  angle,  and  the  end  view  is  drawn  first.  In 
this  view  the  base  is  drawn  in  its  full  size.  From 
the  end  view,  the  front  elevation  and  the  plan 
are  constructed,  the  elevation  being  a  view  in 
the  direction  of  the  arrow. 

The  construction  of  the  elevation  of  the 
pyramid  should  be  apparent  from  the  figure, 
and  the  plan  is  drawn  by  the  principles  of 
Article  66,  which  may  be  again  referred  to  here. 
As  the  plan  is  a  top  view,  the  width  of  the  base 
will  be  the  same  as  on  the  end  view.  Hence  the 
process  is  to  project  in  the  end  view  the  corners 
of  the  base  upon  any  horizontal  line,  as  A-B, 
and  transfer  this  line  with  its  points  of  division 
to  the  position  A'-B',  directly  below  the  base  in 
the  elevation.  The  apex  oh  may  then  be  located 
and  joined  with  the  comers  of  the  base  lb2b3h4b5‘“. 

Let  X  be  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  base 
of  the  pyramid.  Then  the  plane  in  this  position 
will  intersect  the  three  faces  0-1-5,  0-1-2,  0-2-3, 
and  also  the  base  of  the  solid. 

The  plane  cuts  the  edges  in  the  points 
marked  a,  b,  c,  and  d.  These  points  may  be 
found  in  elevation  at  the  same  height,  by  the  use 
of  the  T-square.  Point  a,  on  the  edge  of  the 
base,  is  located  at  aT,  point  b  on  0T-1T,  and  point  d 
on  the  base  at  dT. 

To  locate  cT,  however,  it  is  first  necessary  to 
find  ch  in  plan,  then  project  for  CT.  The  points  in 


MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 


95 


the  end  view  are  projected  to  A-B  at  points  a u 
bx,  Ci,  and  dx;  and  these  points  are  then  spaced 
off  in  the  plan  at  ah,  b2,  c2,  and  dh.  The  points 
bh  and  ch  are  then  found  by  T-square  lines  on 
0-1  and  0-2  respectively.  The  section  is  lined 
in  considering  the  part  of  the  pyramid  to  the 
right  of  plane  X  as  removed. 

Intersection  of  a  Plane  with  a  Curved  Surface 

85.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  intersection 
of  a  plane  with  a  pyramid  or  prism  is  found  by 
connecting  points  in  which  the  plane  cuts  the 
edges  of  the  solid.  In  the  case  of  a  solid  with 
a  curved  surface,  as  a  cone  or  cylinder,  the  only 
edges  are  the  base  edges.  There  may,  however, 
be  straight  or  curved  lines  drawn  on  the  surface, 
and  the  intersection  of  the  plane  with  these  lines 
be  found,  thereby  locating  points  on  the  re¬ 
quired  curved  intersection. 

86.  In  Fig.  68  is  shown  a  right  circular  cone 
standing  on  its  base,  and  intersected  by  a  plane 
X,  which  is  at  right  angles  with  V.  The  base 
may  be  divided  into  any  number  of  parts — in 
this  case  twelve — and  the  elements  of  the  cone 
drawn,  as  0-1,  0-2,  0-3,  etc.  These  elements  are 
cut  by  the  plane  in  points  showing  in  elevation 
as  a,  b,  c,  etc.,  and  these  points  are  then  pro¬ 
jected  to  corresponding  elements  in  plan. 

The  points  d  and  m  are  located  in  the  plan  as 
follows:  Pass  a  plane  Z  through  the  points  d 
and  m,  and  parallel  to  the  base  of  the  cone. 
Then  Z  will  cut  the  cone  in  a  circle  whose  diam- 


96 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


eter  is  x-y;  and  this  circle,  lying  on  the  surface 
of  the  cone,  will  evidently  pass  through  the 
points  d  and  m.  The  circle  x-y  is  drawn  in  plan, 
and,  by  its  intersection  with  the  elements  0-4 
and  0-10,  fixes  the  position  of  the  points  d  and 
m.  A  smooth  curve  drawn  in  plan  through  the 
points  a,  b,  c,  d,  etc.,  is  the  projection  of  the  re¬ 
quired  intersection.  The  section  is  an  ellipse, 
and  its  real  size  and  shape  are  not  shown  in 
plan. 

We  shall  now  proceed  to  the  development  of 


Tig.  68.  Right  Circular  Cone  Cut  by  Plane  at  Right  Angles  with  V. 
Development  Shown  at  Right. 


the  cone  and  the  section  cut  by  plane  X.  The 
cone  may  be  supposed  to  be  placed  with  its 
vertex  at  O',  and  the  element  0-1  at  O'-l';  the 
cone  is  then  rolled  until  all  of  the  curved  surface 
has  come  into  contact  with  the  paper.  As  the 
cone  rolls  on  the  plane,  the  various  elements 
will  take  positions  such  as  o'-2',  0'-3', — 0'-6'  to 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


97 


O'-l",  and  the  edge  of  the  base  will  develop  into 
the  curve  passing  through  the  points  V ,  2',  3', — 
1".  As  all  of  the  elements  of  the  cone  are  the 
same  length,  the  points  1',  2',  3',  etc.,  will  all  be 
at  the  same  distance  from  O';  that  is,  they  will 
lie  on  the  arc  of  a  circle  struck  from  0'  as  center. 
The  radius  of  the  circle  is  the  true  length  of  any 
element  of  the  cone,  as  shown  by  0-1  in  eleva¬ 
tion.  The  positions  of  the  points  2',  3',  etc.,  are 
found  by  taking  in  the  dividers  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  any  two  consecutive  points  of  the  base  as 
seen  on  H,  and  laying  this  off  from  T  twelve 
times.  Lines  joining  these  points  with  0'  will 
represent  the  positions  of  the  elements  in 
development. 

As  regards  the  development  of  the  section 
cut  by  plane  X,  the  different  points  of  the  curve 
may  be  found  on  the  elements  by  laying  off  from 
0'  the  true  distance  from  the  points  of  intersec¬ 
tion  to  the  vertex  0.  The  distance  0-a  in  ele¬ 
vation  is  a  true  length,  since  0-1  is  parallel  to  V 
(Article  73,  e).  The  point  a'  is  then  located  at 
once.  The  true  distance  of  the  other  points  from 
the  apex  may  be  found  by  projecting  hori¬ 
zontally  from  the  points  in  elevation  to  0-1,  on 
which  line  their  true  distances  from  0  are  shown. 
These  distances  are  then  laid  off  from  0'  on  tho 
respective  elements;  and  a  smooth  curve  drawn 
through  the  points  will  be  the  section  curve 
required. 

Attention  is  called  to  the  fact  that  the  length 
of  the  developed  base  1',  2',  3', — 6' — 1"  is  not 


98  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

exact,  since,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  impossible 
with  the  dividers  to  measure  exactly  the  length 
of  a  curve;  and  in  the  second  place,  because  it  is 
likewise  impossible  to  apply  exactly  with  the 
dividers  any  given  distance  along  a  curve.  It 
should  be  said,  however,  that  by  taking  points 
sufficiently  close  together  a  very  good  approx¬ 
imation  indeed  can  be  obtained. 

87.  Fig.  69  shows  an  example  of  a  cone  stand¬ 
ing  on  its  base  and  intersected  by  a  plane  Y 
perpendicular  to  H. 

Elements  of  the  cone  are  drawn  as  before, 
except  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  draw  any  on  the 


Fig.  69.  Fig.  70. 

Cone  Intersected  by  Plane  Perpendicular  to  H. 

further  side  of  the  cone.  In  plan,  the  elements 
are  seen  to  intersect  plane  Y  in  points  a,  b,  c,  d, 
and  e,  which  are  then  projected  to  the  elevation 
onto  the  corresponding  elements.  It  will  be 
noticed  that  in  elevation  the  points  a  and  b  are 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


99 


quite  a  considerable  distance  apart;  so  two  more 
elements  are  drawn  in  plan,  one  between  0-2  and 
0-3,  and  one  between  0-5  and  0-6.  These  ele¬ 
ments  determine  two  more  points  on  the  curve. 
The  highest  point  c  cannot  be  found  in  elevation 
by  direct  projection,  but  is  located  by  a  special 
construction. 

A  circle  with  center  0  is  drawn  on  the  plan 
passing  through  c.  Considering  this  circle  as 
lying  on  the  surface  of  the  cone,  it  will  intersect 
all  of  the  elements,  and  will  lie  in  a  plane 
parallel  to  the  base.  For  convenience,  the  points 
in  which  the  circle  intersects  the  two  outside 
elements,  0-1  and  0-7,  are  used,  and  projected 
to  0-1  and  0-7  in  elevation;  then  the  plane  Z  is 
the  plane  containing  the  circle,  and  c  in  eleva¬ 
tion  is  where  Z  cuts  element  0-4.  This  section 
curve  is  shown  in  its  true  size  and  shape  in  ele¬ 
vation,  and  is  known  as  a  hyperbola,  this  name 
being  given  to  the  curve  cut  from  any  cone  by  a 
plane  parallel  to  the  axis. 

88.  In  Fig.  70  are  shown  the  same  cone  and 
the  same  cutting  plane  Y ;  but  the  curve  is  found 
without  the  use  of  any  but  the  two  outside  or 
contour  elements  0-1  and  0-7.  The  highest  point 
c  is  first  determined  as  in  Fig.  68.  Other  planes 
between  Z  and  the  base  are  then  taken.  Let 
W  be  one  such  plane.  Plane  W  cuts  a  circle 
from  the  cone,  the  diameter  of  which  is  x-y.  A 
circle  with  this  diameter  may  then  be  drawn 
in  plan,  intersecting  plane  Y  in  points  b  and  d. 
These  points  are  in  plane  W,  and  hence  are 


100 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


located  in  elevation  by  projecting  from  the  plan 
to  plane  W.  Points  on  U  and  on  as  many  other 
planes  as  may  be  chosen,  are  obtained  in  the 
same  way. 


Fig.  71.  Cone  Cut  by  Plane  Parallel  to  One  Element,  Giving  Curve 
Known  as  Parabola. 

Very  often  this  method  of  construction  is 
better  than  that  of  Fig.  68,  on  the  score  of  accu¬ 
racy.  By  referring  to  Fig.  68,  it  will  be  seen 
that,  owing  to  the  steep  inclination  of  elements 
0-3  and  0-5,  when  b  and  d  are  projected  from 
the  plan,  their  exact  position  on  0-3  and  0-5  is 
a  matter  of  some  uncertainty. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  101 

89.  Auxiliary  Planes.  Planes  sueh  as  Z,  W, 
and  U,  in  the  last  three  figures,  introduced  to 
work  out  or  facilitate  some  part  of  the  solution, 
are  called  auxiliary  planes. 

90.  Still  another  form  of  curve  results  when, 
as  in  Fig.  71,  the  cutting  plane  is  taken  parallel 
to  one  element.  The  plane  X,  perpendicular 
to  Y,  is  parallel  to  the  element  0-1.  The  plan 
of  the  intersection  is  found  by  the  method  of 
Fig.  70.  The  curve  in  this  case  is  a  parabola, 
in  accordance  with  the  definition  of  geometry, 
that  “the  curve  cut  from  a  cone  by  a  plane 
which  is  parallel  to  one  and  only  one  element 
is  called  a  parabola.” 

The  true  size  of  the  section  may  be  found 
by  a  simple  construction.  The  curve  is  evi¬ 
dently  symmetrical  with  respect  to  a  line  d-z, 
which  is  the  axis  of  the  curve  and  is  represented 
in  its  true  length  in  elevation.  If,  now,  a  view 
of  the  curve  be  taken  in  the  direction  of  the 
arrow,  the  true  size  and  shape  will  appear.  The 
actual  distance  between  points  c  and  e,  for 
example — that  is,  the  true  width  of  the  curve 
at  that  part— is  shown  in  plan  as  the  length 
c-e.  The  true  widths  b-f  and  a-g  are  similarly 
shown.  It  will  be  seen,  then,  that  while  in  plan 
the  true  width  of  the  curve  at  any  part  is  shown, 
the  real  distances  along  the  axis  d-z  are  not 
there  shown.  For  example,  the  distance  from 
d  to  line  c-e  is  not  a  true  length.  But  these  dis¬ 
tances  along  the  axis  are  shown  true  length  in 
elevation,  from  d  to  c-e,  d  to  b-f,  etc. 


102  MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 

Hence,  to  show  the  true  size  of  the  curve  as 
seen  in  the  direction  of  the  arrow,  all  that  is 
necessary  is  to  combine  the  true  lengths  of  the 
elevation  with  the  true  widths  of  the  plan. 
Therefore,  at  any  convenient  distance,  draw 
m-n  parallel  to  d -z;  project  with  the  triangles 
from  c,  e,  b,  f,  etc.,  at  right  angles  to  m-n;  and 
make  the  widths  Cp-e^  bp-fi,  and  ap-gp,  equal 
respectively  to  c-e,  b-f,  and  a-g,  half  of  each  on 
either  side  of  the  axis  m-n. 

Intersection  of  a  Plane  with  a  Cylinder 

91.  A  right  circular  cylinder  standing  on  its 
base  and  cut  by  a  plane  X  perpendicular  to  V, 
is  drawn  in  Fig.  72.  The  development  of  the 


TOP 


Tig.  72.  Eight  Cylinder  Cut  by  Plane  Perpendicular  to  V. 
Development  of  Cylinder  Shown  at  Eight. 


cylinder  is  also  shown.  As  in  the  case  of  the 
plane  cutting  the  cone,  elements  of  the  cylinder 
are  drawn,  and  the  points  noted  in  which  the 
plane  cuts  the  elements.  The  base  is  here 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  103 

divided  into  twelve  equal  parts,  and  twelve  ele¬ 
ments  drawn.  The  plan  of  the  intersection  will 
coincide  with  the  plan  of  the  cylinder,  since 
the  whole  convex  surface  is  projected  in  the 
circle. 

Development  of  the  Cylinder  and  of  the 
Curve  of  Intersection.  Let  the  cylinder  be 
placed  with  point  1  of  the  base  at  point  1',  and 
element  A  at  A',  on  the  plane  of  the  paper. 
Now  imagine  the  cylinder  rolled  on  the  paper 
until  the  entire  curved  surface  has  come  into 
contact  with  the  paper,  and  element  A  is  again 
on  the  paper  at  A",  parallel  to  A'.  The  distance 
between  A'  and  A"  is  therefore  the  shortest  dis¬ 
tance  around  the  cylinder  as  measured  around 
the  base. 

As  the  cylinder  rolls  from  A'  to  A",  the  base 
remains  always  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the 
elements,  and  hence  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
of  the  paper.  Therefore,  as  the  cylinder  is 
developed,  the  edge  of  the  base  rolls  out  in  the 
straight  line  drawn  from  T  perpendicular  to 
A'  and  extending  to  A".  The  approximate  dis¬ 
tance  around  the  base  is  laid  off  in  the  develop¬ 
ment,  by  taking  the  chord  of  one  of  the  equal 
divisions  of  the  base,  and  spacing  it  twelve  times 
along  T-l",  locating  the  points  2',  3',. .  .6'. .  .1". 
Lines  drawn  through  these  points  at  right 
angles  to  the  developed  base,  will  be  the  devel¬ 
oped  positions  of  the  numbered  elements.  The 
lengths  of  the  elements  are  taken  directly  from 
the  elevation,  since  the  true  lengths  are  there 


104  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

shown;  and  a  straight  line  through  the  upper 
ends  of  the  elements  will  he  the  development 
of  the  top  of  the  cylinder.  The  development  of 
the  curved  surface  of  the  cylinder  is  therefore 
the  rectangle  as  shown. 

The  development  of  the  section  curve  is 
obtained  by  locating  the  points  a,  b,  c,  etc.,  in 
the  development  on  their  respective  elements, 
and  at  the  true  distance  from  the  foot  of  the 
element.  These  distances  are  all  shown  in  the 
elevation,  and  consequently  may  be  transferred 
at  once  to  the  development;  and  a  smooth  curve 
drawn  through  a',  b', . . .  e' . . .  n' . . .  a"  will  be  the 
developed  curve. 

Intersection  of  Solids 

92.  Points  on  the  intersection  of  solids — 
that  is,  on  the  intersection  of  their  surfaces — 
are  the  points  in  which  lines  of  either  surface 
intersect  the  other. 

93.  Visibility  of  the  Lines  of  Intersection. 

The  intersection  of  two  solids,  viewed  from  any 
given  direction,  is  in  general  partly  visible  and 
partly  invisible.  The  rule  for  visibility  is  that 
visible  parts  of  the  intersection  must  always 
be  the  intersection  of  visible  parts  of  each  sur¬ 
face.  Thus  the  intersection  of  the  upper  parts 
of  two  surfaces  would  be  visible  in  plan;  while 
the  intersection  of  the  upper  side  of  one  with 
the  under  side  of  the  other  would  not  be  visible. 

94.  Intersection  of  Solids  Bounded  by  Plane 
Surfaces.  When  one  solid  of  this  class — as,  for 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


105 


example,  a  pyramid — intersects  another  pyra¬ 
mid  or  prism,  the  intersection  will  consist  of 
one  or  two  figures  bounded  by  straight  lines. 
Points  on  such  an  intersection  may  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  finding  where  the  edges  of  either  solid 
intersect  or  pass  into  the  faces  of  the  other. 

95.  A  square  prism  standing  on  its  base,  is 
intersected  by  a  triangular  prism  with  its  axis 
parallel  to  both  V  and  H,  Fig.  73.  The  end 
view  at  the  right  shows  the  left-hand  end  of  the 
horizontal  prism.  The  points  in  which  the 
edges  of  the  triangular  prism  intersect  the  faces 
of  the  other  prism,  will  be  shown  at  once  in 
plan,  since  in  plan  the  surfaces  of  the  square 
prism  are  seen  edgewise.  The  edge  3-4  inter¬ 
sects  the  face  adef  at  a  point  seen  in  plan  as 
mh,  and  the  V  projection  mT  is  found  in  eleva¬ 
tion  on  3y-4v. 

Similarly,  edge  2-6  cuts  the  same  side  adef 
at  point  n.  Then  the  line  m-n  is  the  intersection 
of  one  side  2-3-4-6  of  the  triangular  prism  with 
the  side  of  the  square  prism.  In  elevation,  m-n 
will  be  a  visible  line  (Article  93). 

The  next  edge,  1-5,  evidently  does  not  inter¬ 
sect  the  face  adef,  but  cuts  the  adjoining  side 
abgf.  The  face  1-2-6-5  must  then  cut  both  faces 
of  the  other  prism  in  a  broken  line,  running 
from  point  n  to  the  point  in  which  the  face 
1-2-6-5  cuts  the  edge  a-f,  and  continuing  from 
this  point  to  point  q  on  the  face  abgf.  The  point 
where  the  plane  1-2-6-5  cuts  the  edge  a-f  is  found 
in  the  end  view.  In  the  end  view,  a  part  of 


106 


Fig.  73.  Square  Prism  Intersected  lay  a  Triangular  Prism.  Development  of  Prisms  Shown  at  Fight  (A  and  B) . 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


107 


the  edge  a-f  is  shown  as  the  T-square  line  ap-x. 
The  plane  1-2-6-5  is  seen  edgewise  in  line  1P-2P, 
and  cuts  ap-x  at  point  o. 

The  point  o  on  edge  a-f  is  at  a  distance  ap-op 
higher  than  the  edge  1-5;  hence  the  length 
ap-op  is  laid  off  in  elevation  above  1-5,  locating 
o\  The  intersection  of  face  1-2-6-5  is  the  broken 
line  n-o-q.  In  a  similar  way,  the  under  side 
1-3-4-5  breaks  around  the  edge  a-f,  the  point  r 
also  being  located  from  the  end  view.  The 
figure  mnoqrm  is  the  intersection  of  the  tri¬ 
angular  prism  with  the  left-hand  sides  of  the 
vertical  prism. 

By  the  same  method,  the  intersection  on  the 
two  right-hand  faces  is  found  to  be  the  figure 
stuvw.  The  visibility  of  the  intersection  and 
of  the  edges  of  the  solids,  should  be  studied  until 
perfectly  understood. 

Development  of  the  Prism.  The  square 
prism  is  shown  developed  at  A,  Fig.  73  (the 
ends  are  not  shown  in  the  development).  The 
four  sides  of  the  prism  are  equal  rectangles 
whose  length  is  shown  in  elevation,  and  width 
in  plan.  Beginning  with  face  abgf,  the  devel¬ 
oped  faces  of  the  prism  will  appear  as  the  four 
equal  rectangles  shown  in  the  figure. 

Location  of  the  Intersection  on  the  Develop¬ 
ment.  Beginning  with  face  abgf,  the  points  r 
and  o,  which  fall  on  the  edge  a-f,  are  located  at 
the  same  distance  from  a  as  in  elevation.  The 
point  q  is  at  a  perpendicular  distance  fh-qh  from 
the  edge  a-f,  and  at  a  distance  above  a-b  equal 


108 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


to  the  height  xv-qv  as  shown  in  elevation.  The 
point  q'  is  then  located  by  means  of  these  two 
distances,  and  then  joined  with  o'  and  r'. 

Next  consider  the  intersection  tuvw  on  the 
face  bckg.  Points  t  and  w  are  located  at  once 
on  the  edge  c'-k'  at  t'  and  w';  and  u  and  v  are 
determined  in  position  at  u'  and  v'  in  the  same 
way  as  for  point  q. 

It  is  essential  to  note  that  the  distance  of 
u'  and  v'  from  the  edge  c'-k'  must  be  taken  from 
the  plan,  and  not  from  the  elevation.  The 
figure  t'u'v'w'  is  the  developed  intersection  on 
this  face. 

For  the  next  face,  cdek,  the  points  t'  and 
w'  are  already  found,  and  s'  may  be  determined 
as  already  explained.  On  the  face  dafe,  the 
intersection  develops  as  shown  at  o"n'm'r". 

Development  of  the  Triangular  Prism.  The 
triangular  prism  is  developed  at  B,  in  the  same 
figure.  The  method  is  similar  to  the  preceding 
one,  the  distances  of  the  points  from  the  end 
of  the  prism  being  measured  in  either  the  plan 
or  the  elevation,  and  the  distance  from  the  long 
edges  measured  on  the  end  view  of  the  prism. 
The  corresponding  points  have  been  lettered 
the  same  in  both  developments. 

96.  Intersection  of  a  Prism  with  a  Pyramid. 
In  Pig.  74  is  shown  a  rectangular  prism  inter¬ 
secting  a  square  pyramid.  The  pyramid  stands 
on  its  base,  and  the  prism  has  its  edges  but  not 
its  faces  parallel  to  the  H  plane. 

In  this  case,  none  of  the  sides  of  either  solid 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  109 

are  seen  edgewise  in  either  plan  or  elevation; 
hence  another  view  is  necessary.  This  view, 
drawn  at  X,  is  taken  in  the  direction  of  the  * 
arrow  so  as  to  show  the  prism  endwise;  for  in 
this  position  the  faces  of  the  prism  are  seen 
edgewise  as  straight  lines,  and  the  intersection 
may  be  determined  in  part  as  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  case. 

In  the  projection  X,  the  base  of  the  pyramid 
is  at  right  angles  to  the  direction  of  the  view 
that  is  perpendicular  to  the  edges  of  the  prism, 
and  the  height  of  the  pyramid  is  the  same  as 
in  elevation. 

In  this  example,  the  edges  of  the  pyramid 
and  prism  have  been  lettered  with  capitals,  and 
the  points  when  found  have  been  numbered. 
The  plan  will  be  adopted  of  beginning  at  some 
point,  and  tracing  the  intersection  around  in  the 
same  direction  until  completed. 

Starting  with  the  edge  A  of  the  pyramid, 
it  is  found  in  view  X  to  intersect  face  FE  of 
the  prism  at  point  1,  and  lh  and  lv  are  located. 
Next,  B  cuts  the  same  face  FE  in  point  2,  and 
1  and  2  are  joined  in  plan  and  elevation,  the  line 
1-2  being  visible  in  plan  and  invisible  in  eleva¬ 
tion.  The  next  edge  of  the  pyramid,  C,  does 
not  cut  the  face  FE.  There  must,  however,  be 
an  intersection  of  FE  with  the  side  BC  of  the 
pyramid,  since  FE  cuts  the  edge  B  at  2. 

Let  it  be  imagined  for  a  moment  that  face 
FE  is  extended  in  width  so  that  C  cuts  it  at 
m,  then  a  line  joining  2  and  m  would  be  the 


Fig.  74.  Rectangular  Prism  Intersecting  a  Square  Pyramid. 


110 


) 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


111 


intersection  of  FE  with  side  BO  of  the  pyramid. 
The  imagined  widening  of  FE  would  not  alter 
the  direction  of  the  intersection,  but  only  the 
length,  so  the  portion  2-3  of  2-m  is  the  actual 
intersection  wanted. 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  point  3  is  where 
edge  E  intersects  the  face  BC  of  the  pyramid. 
The  intersection  is  continued  on  BC  by  the 
intersection  of  face  EJ  of  the  prism,  running 
from  3  to  where  J  cuts  the  face  BC.  This  point 
on  J  is  found  in  this  way:  If  a  plane  parallel 
to  the  base  be  passed  through  J,  it  will  cut  the 
pyramid  in  a  square  parallel  to  the  base  (Arti¬ 
cle  79);  and  one  corner  of  the  parallel  square 
is  shown  in  view  X  as  n'  on  C';  and  line  S  on 
face  BC,  and  parallel  to  the  edge  of  the  base,  is 
one  side  of  the  square.  The  edge  J  intersects 
line  S  (see  view  X),  and,  as  line  S  is  on  face 
BC  of  the  pyramid,  this  point  (4)  is  where  J 
cuts  the  face  of  the  pyramid.  Point  4  is  then 
connected  with  3. 

Similarly,  by  the  use  of  line  T,  edge  Gr  is 
found  to  pierce  the  face  BC  at  point  5,  which 
is  the  next  point  of  the  intersection.  The 
remainder  of  the  intersection  is  found  in  the 
same  way.  The  visibility  in  plan  and  elevation 
is  determined  as  previously  explained  (Article 
93). 

In  projecting  the  points  from  the  plan  to 
the  elevation  onto  the  edges  B  and  D,  it  is  diffi¬ 
cult  to  determine  the  exact  V  projections,  owing 
to  the  steep  slope  of  B  and  D.  The  position  of 


112 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


the  points  in  elevation,  however,  may  be  tested 
by  observing  that  in  view  X  the  perpendicular 
distance  of  any  point  from  the  base  is  simply 
the  height  of  the  point,  and  the  height  of  the 
point  in  elevation  should  be  the  same. 


97.  Intersection  of  a  Cylinder  with  a  Prism. 

Fig.  75  represents  the  intersection  of  a  circular 
cylinder  and  an  irregular  four-sided  prism. 
The  two  are  placed  in  the  first  angle,  the  prism 


/ 


ILLUSTRATING  THE  ELEMENTS  OF  PERSPECTIVE. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


113 


standing  on  its  base  and  the  axis  of  the  cylinder 
parallel  to  both  V  and  H. 

The  intersection  in  this  case  will  consist  of 
three  curved  lines,  one  on  face  AB,  one  on  BC, 
and  the  third  on  CD.  The  cylinder  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  piercing  the  prism,  and  points  will 
be  found  in  which  lines  on  the  cylinder  intersect 
the  faces  of  the  prism. 

As  the  cylinder,  strictly  speaking,  has  no 
edges  parallel  to  its  length,  lines  or  elements 
may  be  drawn  on  the  cylinder  by  the  aid  of  the 
half  end  view  shown  at  the  right.  This  half 
end  view  is  sufficient  because  the  intersection 
on  the  upper  half  of  the  cylinder  will  be  per¬ 
fectly  symmetrical  with  that  on  the  lower  half. 
The  semicircle  is  now  divided  into  some  num¬ 
ber  of  equal  parts,  say  six,  by  the  points  E,  F, 
G,  etc.,  to  M;  and  these  points,  when  projected 
over  to  the  plan  in  T-square  lines,  become  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  cylinder.  These  elements  are  at 
different  distances  above  the  center  of  the  cylin¬ 
der,  as  shown  in  the  end  view.  Element  F  is 
at  a  height  F-s  above  the  horizontal  center  plane 
of  the  cylinder;  element  G,  at  a  height  G-t; 
and  so  on.  The  elements  may  then  be  drawn 
in  elevation  by  making  them  at  their  respective 
heights  above  the  center.  These  elements  are 
all  on  the  upper  half  of  the  cylinder,  but  a  cor¬ 
responding  set  should  be  drawn  on  the  lower 
half,  by  spacing  similarly  below  the  center  line. 

It  is  now  a  simple  matter  to  find  in  the  plan 
the  points  where  the  elements  of  the  cylinder 


114  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

cut  the  prism,  then  to  project  to  the  elevation 
and  obtain  the  required  curve.  This  construc¬ 
tion  is  similar  to  that  of  Fig.  73.  When  pro¬ 
jecting  the  points  of  intersection  from  the  plan, 
as  for  example  the  point  where  F  intersects  the 
face  AB  of  the  prism,  the  point  on  the  under 
side  of  the  cylinder,  on  F\,  should  also  be 
located  at  the  same  time. 

It  is  always  important,  in  such  an  inter¬ 
section,  to  find  the  points  in  which  the  cylinder 
cuts  the  edges  of  the  prism — in  this  case  B  and 
C;  and  if  the  elements  L  and  G-  did  not  happen 
to  pass  through  B  and  C,  additional  elements 
would  have  to  be  drawn  through  B  and  C,  in 
order  to  determine  their  exact  points  of  inter¬ 
section  with  the  cylinder. 

Notice  carefully  the  visible  part  of  the  inter¬ 
section,  which  is  in  accordance  with  Article  93. 

98.  Intersection  of  Two  Curved  Surfaces. 
In  Fig.  76,  a  cone  standing  on  its  base  is  shown 
intersecting  a  cylinder  with  its  axis  parallel  to 
both  V  and  H.  At  the  left,  A  is  the  profile  view 
of  the  cone  and  cylinder,  showing  the  right- 
hand  end  of  the  latter.  This  view  A  shows  the 
relative  position  of  the  cone  and  cylinder,  and 
would  be  drawn  first  if  the  figures  were  to  be 
drawn  from  given  data. 

The  distance  X-y,  for  example,  is  the  dis¬ 
tance  that  the  axis  of  the  cylinder  is  in  front 
of  the  axis  of  the  cone  as  shown  in  plan. 

From  the  position  of  the  solids  as  shown  in 
this  view,  it  may  be  seen  that  the  intersection 


115 


.fig.  76.  Cone  Intersecting  a  Cylinder.  Developments  of  Cylinder  and  Curve  of  Intersection  Also  Shown. 


116  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

will  consist  of  a  single  closed  curve.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  the  cylinder  were  smaller  and  shown  in 
end  view  entirely  within  the  cone,  then  there 
would  be  two  separate  curves. 

As  the  cylinder  is  shown  endwise  in  this 
profile  view,  the  method  of  solution  will  be  to 
draw  lines  or  elements  on  the  cone,  and  find  in 
the  profile  view  where  they  intersect  the  cylin¬ 
der.  These  points  of  intersection  may  then  be 
transferred  to  the  plan  and  the  elevation. 

A  number  of  elements  of  the  cone  are  drawn 
in  view  A,  as  o-a,  o-b,  o-c,  o-d,  and  o-f,  o-a  and 
o-f  being  the  extreme  left-hand  and  right-hand 
elements  which  have  any  contact  with  the  cylin¬ 
der.  These  elements  are  next  drawn  in  plan 
by  laying  off  the  distances  dp-ap,  dp-bp,  dp-cp,  etc., 
from  oh  along  the  line  X-Y.  Through  these 
points  on  X-Y,  lines  drawn  perpendicular  to 
X-Y  locate  points  fh,  f\,  ch,  c\,  b\  and  b\,  and 
the  elements  are  then  drawn  through  these 
points  and  o\ 

The  elements  may  now  be  drawn  in  eleva¬ 
tion.  The  intersection  in  this  case  will  be  ex¬ 
actly  symmetrical  in  plan  and  elevation  with 
respect  to  the  line  o-a.  This  is  because  each 
element  in  view  A,  except  o-a,  represents  two 
elements  equally  spaced  on  either  side  of  o-a — 
as  o-c  and  o-c„  o-b  and  0-b,;  and  so  on. 

The  points  of  intersection  on  the  right-hand 
half  are  numbered  from  1  to  9  inclusive.  Points 
1  and  9  are  projected  with  the  T-square  from 
view  A  to  element  o-a  in  elevation;  points  4 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING  117 

and  6,  to  element  o-d  and  also  to  element  o-di 
in  elevation,  thus  locating  points  on  both  halves 
at  the  same  time;  and  other  points  are  found  in 
the  same  way. 

With  the  exception  of  points  1  and  9,  the 
points  are  then  projected  directly  to  the  plan 
onto  the  corresponding  elements  of  the  cone. 
Points  1  and  9  are  transferred  directly  from 
the  end  view  to  the  plan,  their  horizontal  dis¬ 
tances  from  the  axis  op-dp  being  laid  off  in  plan 
from  oh  along  X-Y. 

Points  m  and  n,  where  the  curve  in  plan 
touches  the  outside  element  of  the  cylinder, 
might  be  found  the  same  way  as  the  other 
points.  That,  however,  would  require  in  view 
A  an  element  drawn  very  close  to  o-f ;  so  another 
construction  is  used.  In  view  A,  the  center 
plane  S  of  the  cylinder  will  contain  both  outside 
elements  K  and  L,  and  will  cut  from  the  cone  a 
circle  S  of  radius  r-t.  This  circle  S  is  then 
drawn  in  the  plan,  and  its  intersection  with  K 
gives  the  points  m  and  n  required.  This  latter 
construction  might  be  used,  if  desired,  in  find¬ 
ing  the  entire  intersection. 

Development  of  the  Cylinder.  Beginning 
with  the  element  L,  which  passes  through  point 
10,  and  placing  10  at  10i,  the  outline  of  the 
cylinder  is  developed  as  a  rectangle,  as  in  Fig. 
72,  except  that,  instead  of  making  a  new  divi¬ 
sion  of  the  base  into  equal  parts,  the  points 
already  found  are  used.  Thus  the  points  9,  8, 
7,  6,  etc.,  are  taken  from  the  end  view,  and 


118  MECHANICAL  DEAFTING 

spaced  off  at  91?  8lt  71(  etc.,  in  the  development. 
The  arc  between  1  and  10,  Fig.  A,  is  divided 
into  three  equal  spaces.  The  right-hand  end  of 
the  cylinder  is  made  the  lower  side  of  the 
development. 

Development  of  the  Curve  of  Intersection. 

The  points  of  the  intersection  are  located  sym¬ 
metrically  on  either  side  of  X-Y;  so  X-Y  is 
drawn  on  the  development  at  X'-Y',  at  the  same 
distance  from  the  end  of  the  cylinder  as  in  plan. 

Beginning  with  point  1  on  X'-Y',  the  dis¬ 
tances  from  X-Y  of  the  other  points,  8,  7,  6,  etc., 
are  measured  in  the  plan;  and  then,  in  the 
development,  these  distances  are  laid  off  on  the 
corresponding  elements,  both  above  and  below 
X'-Y',  thus  obtaining  at  once  both  halves  of  the 
developed  intersection. 

Approximate  Developments 

99.  Of  curved  surfaces,  it  may  be  said  in 
general  that  only  those  can  be  truly  developed 
which  contain  straight  lines  on  their  surfaces, 
and  which,  in  addition,  when  brought  into  con¬ 
tact  with  a  plane,  will  touch  in  only  one 
straight  line. 

100.  It  is  possible,  however,  to  construct  for 
non-developable  surfaces  one  or  more  figures 
which  will  have  nearly  the  same  total  area  as  the 
given  surface,  and  which,  when  properly  joined 
and  bent  or  curved,  may  be  made  to  assume 
nearly  the  shape  of  the  original  surface.  Such  a 
figure  is  called  an  approximate  development. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  119 

Essential  Principles  of  Intersection  and 
Development 

101.  When  a  plane  cuts  one  or  more  lines, 
an  edgewise  view  of  the  plane  will  determine 
the  various  points  of  intersection. 

102.  If  a  cone,  cylinder,  pyramid,  or  prism 
be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base,  the  section 
will  always  be  a  figure  parallel  to  the  base  and 
similar  to  it  in  shape. 

103.  The  intersection  of  a  plane  with  a 
curved  surface  is  determined  by  means  of  the 
points  in  which  the  plane  cuts  lines  on  the  sur¬ 
face.  These  lines  may  be  either  straight  or 
curved,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  surface. 

104.  The  intersection  of  two  surfaces  is 
determined  by  means  of  the  points  in  which 
lines  on  either  surface  intersect  the  other. 

105.  For  the  intersection  of  two  surfaces, 
the  points  are  first  found  in  the  projection  which 
shows  an  end  view  of  one  of  the  solids.  Two 
such  end  views  may  be  necessary. 

106.  A  development  shows  the  true  length  of 
any  line,  straight  or  curved,  which  lies  on  the 
given  surface. 

107.  A  right  circular  cone  develops  into  a 
sector  of  a  circle,  in  which  the  radius  is  equal 
to  the  length  of  an  element  of  the  cone. 

108.  A  right  circular  cylinder  with  both  ends 
parallel  will  develop  into  a  rectangle,  whose 
length  is  that  of  the  cylinder  and  breadth  is 
equal  to  the  circumference  of  the  base. 


120  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

PRACTICAL  PROBLEMS 

109.  We  shall  now  make  some  applications 
of  the  principles  of  intersection  and  develop¬ 
ment  to  the  solution  of  practical  problems. 

PROBLEM  1 

Given  Cross-Section  of  Gutter,  and  Pitch  of 
Roof,  to  Find  Cross-Section  of  Rake 
Moulding  which  will  Miter 
with  Gutter 

Let  the  cross-section  of  the  gutter  be  as 
shown  in  AT,  Fig.  76 A,  and  let  the  slope  of  the 
roof  be  30  degrees.  The  angle  of  miter,  as  given 
in  the  plan,  is  45  degrees.  Lines  drawn  from 
av,  bv,  cv,  and  dT,  parallel  to  the  pitch  of  the 
roof,  will  represent  edges  of  the  raking  mould¬ 
ing,  these  same  edges  being  shown  in  plan 
parallel  to  the  V  plane,  which  may  here  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  end  wall  of  the  house. 

To  find  the  cross-section  of  the  moulding  is 
an  application  of  the  principles  just  studied. 
A  plane  cutting  the  moulding  at  right  angles 
to  its  length  will  show  the  true  cross-section 
required. 

As  the  edges  of  the  moulding  are  parallel 
to  Y,  the  cross-section  plane  will  be  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  V,  and  will  be  seen  edgewise  on  V. 
It  may  be  taken  at  any  convenient  distance  from 
the  gutter,  as  in  the  position  X-Y.  This  plane 
will  intersect  the  edges  drawn  from  a,  b,  etc., 
in  the  points  n,  m,  p,  and  t.  Since  the  surface 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING  121 

between  p  and  t  is  curved,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  make  use  of  lines  drawn  on  the  curved  sur¬ 
face,  starting  from  points  such  as  1,  2,  and  3 


Fig.  76A.  Finding  Cross-Section  of  Moulding  to  Miter  with  Gutter. 

on  the  curved  outline  of  the  gutter.  The  plane 
X-Y  cuts  these  lines  at  the  points  q,  r,  and  s. 
The  plan  of  the  section  cut  by  plane  X-Y  is 


122 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


not  the  true  size  and  shape,  since  plane  X-Y 
is  not  parallel  to  H  (Article  54). 

If  plane  Z  represents  the  plane  of  the  end 
of  the  house,  then  the  edge  of  the  moulding 
drawn  through  d  is  in  this  plane;  and  the  other 
points  of  the  cross-section,  m,  p,  q,  etc.,  stand 
out  from  this  plane  the  distances  which  are 
shown  in  plan  from  mh  to  Z,  from  qh  to  Z,  etc. 
Hence,  if  plane  X-Y  be  revolved  about  an  axis 
in  plane  Z,  the  distances  from  Z,  as  mh-5,  nh-6, 
qh-7,  and  so  on,  will  revolve  at  right  angles  to 
X-Y;  and  when  the  plane  of  the  section  coin¬ 
cides  with  Z,  the  distances  will  show  on  V  in 
their  true  lengths  at  mT-m',  n7-n',  etc.  This 
process  worked  out  for  each  point  will  give 
n',  m',  p'. . .  ,tT  as  points  on  the  outline  of  the 
section  as  seen  lying  on  Y,  and  hence  shown  in 
its  true  size  and  shape.  The  back  edge  n'-s7 
may  be  drawn  at  any  convenient  angle.  The 
figure  n',  m'. .  .r'. .  .t7  is  therefore  the  required 
cross-section. 

If,  in  a  problem  like  this  one,  the  miter  is 
at  the  usual  angle  of  45  degrees,  there  is  a  very 
short  construction  as  follows:  Let  the  horizon¬ 
tals  c7-ll,  17-12,  2V-13,  and  3T-14  be  drawn.  The 
line  1T-12,  for  example,  is  equal  to  lh-151‘;  and, 
as  the  miter  is  45  degrees,  lh-15h  is  equal  to 
dh-15h;  that  is,  1T-12  is  equal  to  dh-15\  Hence, 
if  the  distance  lv-12  is  taken  and  laid  off  from 
qT  at  right  angles  to  X-Y,  the  point  q'  on  the 
true  size  will  be  determined. 

In  the  same  way,  it  may  be  seen  that  bT-10 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


123 


is  equal  to  mv-m';  2V-13  to  r^r7,  and  so  on.  Hence 
the  short  construction  for  finding  the  true 
cross-section  is  to  draw  the  horizontals  bv-10. . . 
lv-12. .  .3V-14,  and  lay  off  these  distances  from 
X-Y  as  shown. 

PROBLEM  2 

To  Construct  the  Development  of  a  Sheet-Metal 
Moulding 

Pig.  76B  shows  a  moulding  mitered  at  both 
ends.  The  elevation  is  given  complete,  and  the 


Fig.  76B.  Moulding  Mitered  at  Both  Ends. 

plan  shows  the  miter  at  the  left  end.  The  sur¬ 
face  of  the  moulding  is  partly  curved,  and  partly 


124 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


plane.  To  make  the  development,  proceed 
according  to  the  principles  of  the  development 
of  a  cylinder,  under  Article  91. 

Since  the  moulding  is  symmetrical  at  both 
ends,  a  center  line  X-Y,  from  which  to  take 
measurements,  is  drawn  in  elevation.  The  given 
moulding  miters  with  two  others  at  right  angles 
to  it  on  miter  planes  at  45  degrees;  hence  the 
three  mouldings  are  alike  in  cross-section.  The 


Fig.  76C.  Development  of  a  Sheet-Metal  Moulding. 

curved  outline  at  either  end  of  the  given  mould¬ 
ing  must  represent  the  true  shape  or  end  view 
of  the  other  moulding,  as  each  other  moulding 
is  perpendicular  to  the  given  one.  The  curved 
outline  at  either  end  is  then  also  the  true  cross- 
section  of  the  given  moulding,  and  the  width 
of  the  developed  moulding  will  be  equal  to  the 
length  of  the  line  a,  b, . . .  e, .  . .  k. 

The  development  is  drawn  in  Pig.  76C,  where 
X'-Y'  represents  the  position  of  X-Y,  and  the 
width  1'. . .  .9'  is  equal  to  the  length  a,  b, .  .  .e 
. .  *  kt  The  lines  c-c,  d-d,  e-e,  and  h-h  are  lines 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


125 


drawn  on  the  curved  surrace  in  order  to  get  the 
development. 

The  distances  a-b,  b-c,  c-d,  d-e,  and  so  on, 
to  the  point  k,  are  then  laid  oft  along  X'-Y', 
giving  the  points  T,  2',. .  .5',. .  .9';  and  through 
these  points,  lines  are  drawn  indefinite  in 
length  and  perpendicular  to  X'-Y'.  On  these 
lines,  the  half-lengths  1-a,  2-b,  etc.,  taken  from 
Fig.  76B,  are  laid  off,  locating  the  points  a'a ', 
b'b',  c'c',  up  to  k'k'.  These  points,  when  joined, 
give  the  ends  of  the  required  development. 

PICTORIAL  DRAWING 

110.  Graphical  representations  which  give 
more  or  less  of  a  picture  effect,  are  sometimes 
very  useful  adjuncts  to  practical  drafting. 

To  the  untrained  eye,  such  a  drawing — of  a 
building,  for  example — conveys  a  much  clearer 
idea  than  plans  and  elevations.  The  same  would 
be  true  of  any  other  complicated  structure. 
These  pictorial  drawings  are  of  various  kinds, 
as  perspective,  oblique  projection,  and  isometric 
drawing.  Of  these  three  kinds,  the  first  alone 
is  the  true  picture  drawing  showing  the  actual 
appearance  of  any  object  as  seen  by  the  nat¬ 
ural  eye. 

.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  principles  of 
perspective,  while  not  difficult,  are  harder  to 
acquire  than  those  of  oblique  projection  or 
isometric  drawing,  and  the  process  of  construct¬ 
ing  an  accurate  perspective  drawing  is  longer 
and  more  tedious. 


126 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


It  is  also  true  that  in  many  cases  the  some¬ 
what  distorted  isometric  or  oblique  projections 
will  supply  to  the  mind  all  the  pictorial  assist¬ 
ance  that  is  necessary.  The  present  section  of 
this  treatise  will  deal  principally  with  isometric 
drawing  and  oblique  projection. 


111.  For  the  sake  of  comparison,  the  same 
cabin  Ms  been  shown  in  Figs.  77,  78,  and  79,  in 
the  three  different  ways,  Fig.  77  being  a  per¬ 
spective  view;  Fig.  78,  an  isometric  drawing; 
and  Fig.  79,  an  oblique  projection.  In  all  three 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


127 


views,  the  vertical  edges  of  the  cabin  are  drawn 
as  vertical  lines,  and  therefore  parallel. 

In  Figs.  78  and  79,  all  the  other  lines  and 
edges  which  are  actually  parallel  in  space  are 
drawn  as  parallel  lines;  but  in  the  perspective 
of  Fig.  77,  the  other  lines  which  are  really 
parallel  in  space  are  drawn  as  converging 
lines — as,  for  example,  the  edges  of  the  roof  and 
the  ridge,  the  top  of  the  doorway,  etc. 


Fig.  81.  Simple  Isometric  Eep-  Fig.  82.  Illustrating  Direction 
resentation  of  a  Cube.  of  View  for  Isometric 

Drawing  of  Cube  in 
Fig.  81. 

Isometric  Drawing 

112.  The  principles  of  isometric  drawing  are 
best  illustrated  by  reference,  first,  to  a  simple 
rectangular  object  as  a  cube  or  square  prism. 
In  such  a  solid  there  are  three  sets  or  systems 
of  parallel  edges;  and  in  the  simplest  isometric 
drawing,  these  edges  are  drawn  in  three  fixed 


128 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


directions,  respectively  parallel  to  what  are 
called  the  isometric  axes.  These  three  axes  are 
shown  in  Fig.  80,  B  vertical,  and  A  and  C  at 
30  degrees  with  the  horizontal. 

In  any  isometric  drawing,  lines  parallel  to 
the  isometric  axes  are  drawn  in  their  true 
lengths. 

113.  The  simplest  isometric  representation 
of  a  cube  is  shown  in  Fig.  81,  except  that  ordi- 


Fig.  84.  Isometric  Drawing  of 
Post  and  Sill,  Showing 
Mortise  and  Tenon. 


Fig.  83.  Isometric  of  a  Joist. 


narily  the  dotted  edges  are  omitted.  All  of  the 
edges  in  this  figure  are  full-length,  and  are 
either  vertical  or  at  30  degrees  with  a  hori¬ 
zontal.  The  drawing  represents  the  cube  in  the 
position  of  Fig.  82,  with  the  view  taken  in  the 
direction  of  the  diagonal  of  the  cube,  as  indi¬ 
cated  by  the  arrow.  That  that  is  the  direction 


ILLUSTRATING  VANISHING  POINT  AND  NECESSITY  OF  DRAWING  OBJECTS  IN  PROPORTION. 
Two  men  of  same  actual  height,  but  oue  iu  background  appears  much  the  taller. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


129 


of  the  view,  is  shown  in  Fig.  81,  from  the  fact 
that  the  lower  back  corner  of  the  cube  is  directly 
behind  the  upper  front  corner  a. 

The  isometric  view  may  be  taken  through 
either  corner  a  or  c,  but  always  in  the  direction 
of  a  diagonal  of  the  cube.  Note  that  while  the 
edges  are  shown  in  their  true  lengths,  the  angles 
are  not  shown  in  their  true  size. 

Isometric  drawing  is  especially  appropriate 
for  showing  framing,  mortises,  tenons,  etc. 

114.  A  simple  isometric  is  given  in  Fig.  83, 
where  a  piece  of  joist  is  shown  ready  for  halving 
together  with  two  other  pieces. 

115.  The  isometric  of  a  post  and  sill,  show¬ 
ing  a  mortise  and  tenon,  is  drawn  in  Fig.  84. 

116.  To  Draw  an  Isometric  from  a  Given 
Plan  and  Elevation.  Let  Av  and  Ah,  Fig.  85,  be 


/ 

/ 

Fig.  85.  Drawing  an  Isometric  of  a  Miter  Eox  from  Given  Plan 
and  Elevation. 

the  elevation  and  plan  of  a  wooden  miter  box, 
and  let  0  be  chosen  for  the  lowest  corner  of  the 


130 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


isometric.  Then  the  horizontal  edges  of  the  box 
will  be  30-degree  lines  in  isometric;  the  vertical 
edges,  vertical  lines;  and  the  real  lengths  will 
be  shown  (compare  Figs.  81  and  82).  Then, 
from  O'  draw  a  30-degree  line  to  the  right,  equal 
to  the  length;  one  to  the  left,  equal  to  the  width; 
and  one  vertical,  equal  to  the  given  height. 

The  rest  of  the  box  may  then  be  drawn, 
showing  the  thickness  of  the  bottom  and  sides. 
The  45-degree  saw-cut  c-d,  as  shown  in  plan,  is 
transferred  to  the  isometric  by  simply  laying 
off  from  f'  and  e'  respectively  the  distances  f-c 
and  e-d,  and  joining  c'  and  d'  across  the  top  of 
the  box.  The  vertical  cut  showing  on  the  sides 
of  the  box  is  then  drawn  in. 

117.  Simple  rectangular  objects,  as  those  of 
Figs.  83,  84,  and  85,  can  usually  be  drawn  at 
once  from  given  dimensions  without  reference 
to  plan  or  elevation.  In  more  complicated  cases, 
however,  the  plan  and  elevation  are  generally 
desirable,  and  often  they  are  necessary. 

118.  Non-Isometric  Lines.  Non-isometric 
lines  are  those  which  cannot  be  shown  parallel 
to  the  isometric  axes.  This  classification  em¬ 
braces  oblique  straight  lines  and  also  curves. 

An  oblique  line  may  be  located  in  isometric 
drawing,  by  fixing  the  position  of  the  ends  of 
the  line  by  co-ordinates;  and  the  isometric  of 
a  curve  is  made  by  locating  a  sufficient  number 
of  its  points  in  isometric  by  means  of  co-ordi¬ 
nates,  and  then  drawing  a  smooth  curve  through 
these  points. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


131 


119.  Fig.  86  shows  plan  and  elevation  of  a 
prismatic  block  with  two  faces  cut  off  obliquely. 

To  construct  the  isometric,  let  d  be  taken  as 
the  lowest  corner  of  the  isometric,  and  located 
at  d'.  The  base  may  readily  be  drawn  with  the 
edges  as  30-degree  lines.  The  lines  b-c  and  a-f 
are  oblique,  and  cannot  be  drawn  in  isometric 


at  the  same  angle.  Point  c  may  be  located  at 
once,  since  d-c  is  a  vertical  line.  Point  b 
is  located  in  projection  by  means  of  the 
horizontal  distance  dv-bi,  and  the  vertical  height 
bx-b\ 

These  lines  will  show  parallel  to  the  isomet¬ 
ric  axes,  and  may  be  laid  off  in  their  true 
lengths.  Hence,  from  d1,  lay  off  d1-^,  equal 
to  dv-bx,  and  erect  the  vertical  line  b2-bx,  equal 
to  bi-bv,  thus  locating  point  b1. 

The  point  a1  is  determined  in  a  similar  way 


132 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING 


by  means  of  the  co-ordinates  d1^,  equal  to 
dv-ai,  and  a2-ax  equal  to  ai-aL  The  left-hand 
side  may  then  be  completed.  Next  the  30-degree 
edges  from  a1,  b1,  c1,  and  d1  are  made  equal  to 
the  thickness,  and  the  edges  of  the  back  then 
drawn  in  and  the  isometric  completed. 


dv 


Fig.  87.  Drawing  a  Wedge-Shaped  Block  in  Isometric. 

120.  To  draw  a  wedge-shaped  block  in  iso¬ 
metric,  refer  to  Fig.  87.  The  base  is  drawn  in 
isometric  as  before,  and  the  vertical  edges  may 
be  drawn  immediately,  obtaining  points  bl,  el, 
etc.  The  point  c1  is  located  in  isometric  by 
means  of  three  co-ordinates  or  distances,  taken 
from  the  projection.  First,  the  horizontal  dis¬ 
tance  ah-n,  laid  off  at  a^n1;  second,  another  hori¬ 
zontal  distance  ch-n  drawn  at  n’-c2 ;  and  third, 
the  vertical  height  c^c',  laid  off  at  c2-c\  The 
point  c1  is  thus  fixed  in  position  by  the  three 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING  133 

co-ordinates  parallel  to  the  isometric  axes.  The 
rest  of  the  figure  may  then  be  easily  finished. 

121.  Isometric  of  Curved  Lines.  Points  in 
the  isometric  of  circles  or  other  curved  lines, 
are  also  determined  by  means  of  co-ordinates 
parallel  to  the  isometric  axes. 

122.  A  cube  having  one  circle  traced  on  the 
top  and  another  on  the  front,  is  given  in  Pig. 
88.  Taking  0  at  O',  the  isometric  of  the  cube 


rig.  88.  Illustrating  Isometric  of  Curved  Lines. 


is  drawn.  The  circles  will  then  be  constructed 
in  the  top  and  the  left  front  side. 

Taking  first  the  smaller  circle  in  the  top, 
divide  it  into  any  number  of  equal  parts,  as 
eight  in  the  figure.  The  points  might  be  located 
by  means  of  co-ordinates  from  the  front  edge 
a-b  of  the  square;  but  it  is  better  to  refer  them 


134  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

to  the  horizontal  center  line  of  the  circle  (8-1), 
which,  when  produced,  is  the  diameter  m-n  of 
the  square.  Next  draw  the  other  diameter  of 
the  square  passing  through  4-5.  The  two  diam¬ 
eters  are  drawn  in  the  isometric,  and  points  1 
and  8  are  located  on  m^n1  by  laying  off  d1-!1 
and  d1^1  equal  to  the  radius,  and  points  4'  and 
5'  are  then  found  on  the  other  diameter  at  the 
same  distance  from  the  center  d1. 

In  the  plan,  lines  2-3  and  6-7  are  parallel  to 
the  diameter  4-5,  and  will  be  shown  parallel  to 
41-51  in  isometric.  From  the  center  d1,  mark 
off  on  m1-!!1  the  distances  d1-©1  and  d1-!1,  equal 
respectively  to  d-e  and  d-f;  draw  2'-3r  and  6'-7'; 
and  lay  off  both  ways  from  e1  the  distance  e-2, 
thus  fixing  2'  and  3'.  The  same  distance  is  laid 
off  from  f1,  locating  6'  and  7'. 

The  ellipse,  which  is  the  isometric  of  the 
circle,  is  then  drawn  through  the  points.  The 
axes  of  the  ellipse  will  lie  on  the  diagonals  of 
the  isometric  square. 

The  larger  circle  in  the  vertical  face  of  the 
cube  is  similarly  constructed,  using  the  hori¬ 
zontal  diameter  p-r  and  the  ordinates  as  shown 
in  the  figure.  The  axes  of  this  ellipse  will  like¬ 
wise  lie  on  the  diagonals  of  the  face  of  the 
cube. 

123.  Isometric  of  a  Vertical  Cylinder.  The 

plan  of  the  cylinder  is  shown  at  A,  Fig.  89.  The 
first  step  is  to  circumscribe  a  square  about  the 
circle,  with  the  sides  respectively  parallel  and 
perpendicular  to  a  T-square  line.  As  this  is  a 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  135 

plan  of  the  cylinder,  the  sides  of  the  square  will 
be  30-degree  lines  in  isometric. 

Let  0  be  placed  at  O',  and  the  isometric 
square  drawn.  The  circle  of  the  base  is  then 
drawn  as  in  the  preceding  case.  Prom  each 
point  in  the  base,  vertical  lines  are  drawn  equal 
to  the  desired  length  of  the  cylinder,  thus  locat¬ 
ing  points  on  the  circle  of  the  upper  end.  The 


Fig.  89.  Drawing  Isometric  of  a  Vertical  Cylinder. 

two  vertical  lines  on  the  outside  will  be  tan¬ 
gent  to  the  bases,  and  will  form  part  of  the 
outline. 

124.  Isometric  of  a  Cone.  Let  it  be  required 
to  draw  a  right  circular  cone  with  its  axis  hori¬ 
zontal.  If  the  axis  is  horizontal,  the  base  will 
be  vertical.  Hence,  draw  an  elevation  of  the 
base  at  A,  Pig.  90,  and  circumscribe  a  square. 
Let  0  be  placed  at  O'  and  taken  as  the  lowest 
comer  of  the  isometric.  As  A  is  an  elevation, 
two  sides  of  the  square  are  vertical  lines,  and 
must  be  so  drawn  in  the  isometric.  The  iso- 


136 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


metric  circle  is  then  drawn  as  before,  using  the 
diameters  of  the  square  and  the  given  co-ordi¬ 
nates. 

A  line  drawn  from  the  center  of  the  base  at 
30  degrees  to  the  left,  will  represent  the  axis, 


Tig.  90.  Drawing  a  Cone  in  Isometric. 

which  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  base. 
On  this  axis  the  desired  altitude  of  the  cone  is 
laid  off,  locating  the  apex  b'.  Lines  drawn  from 
b'  tangent  to  the  base,  complete  the  view  of  the 
cone. 

NOTE — Although  only  eight  points  have  been  used 
for  the  circles  in  the  given  figure,  for  larger  figures  or 
for  more  accurate  results  more  points  would  be  necessary. 

125.  The  isometric  of  a  wooden  bracket  is 
shown  at  B  in  Fig.  91.  At  A  are  drawn  two 
views— the  front  elevation,  and  the  left  side 
elevation  giving  the  thickness.  The  isometric 
is  constructed  as  shown  in  the  figure. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  137 

Oblique  Projection 

126.  Oblique  projection  differs  from  isomet¬ 
ric  drawing  in  that  one  face  of  an  object  is 
usually  represented  in  its  true  size  and  shape 
as  if  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  drawing,  while 
the  edges  perpendicular  to  this  face  are  drawn 
at  any  convenient  angle,  as  30, 45,  or  60  degrees, 
either  to  the  right  or  left. 

In  Fig.  92  are  shown  the  three  angles  of 
inclination  for  the  case  of  a  cube. 

Cavalier  or  cabinet  projection  is  the  term 


Fig.  91.  Drawing  the  Isometric  of  a  Wooden  Bracket. 


applied  to  oblique  projection  when  the  45-degree 
inclination  is  used. 

The  lines  in  oblique  projection  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  isometric  axes,  are  as  shown  in  Fig. 
93,  one  vertical,  one  horizontal,  and  one  oblique 
(in  this  figure  45  degrees).  Any  line  or  edge 
which  can  be  drawn  in  oblique  projection  paral- 


138  MECHANICAL  DBAFTING 

lei  to  the  45-degree  line,  will  be  shown  in  its 
true  length. 


d 


Fig.  93.  Lines  in  Oblique  Pro¬ 
jection  Corresponding  to 
Isometric  Axes. 


jection  of  a  Cube. 


This  system  of  representation  is  perhaps  a 
trifle  simpler  than  isometric,  since  not  only  all 
lines  parallel  to  o-a  or  o-b  are  shown  in  their 
true  lengths,  but  also  all  lines  parallel  to  the 
plane  of  o-a  and  o-b. 

On  account  of  this  property,  an  oblique  pro¬ 
jection  is  often  more  easily  made  than  an  iso¬ 
metric— as,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  circles 
or  curves  which  lie  in  a  plane  parallel  to  the 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


139 


plane  of  the  drawing.  Lines  which  are  neither 
parallel  nor  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
front  face  of  the  object,  must  be  located  by 
means  of  properly  chosen  co-ordinates,  as  in  the 
case  of  isometric. 


Fig.  95.  Square  Post  Partly 
Out  Away  on  Front 
and  Sides. 


127.  Two  pieces  of  joist  with  the  ends  cut 
for  halving  together,  are  shown  in  Fig.  94.  All 
of  the  edges  are  either  parallel  or  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  of  the  front  face,  and  are  therefore 
shown  true  length. 

128.  Fig.  95  showrs  a  square  post,  with  parts 
cut  away  on  the  front  and  side. 

129.  A  short  piece  of  moulding  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  oblique  projection  in  Fig.  96.  The 
curves  of  both  the  front  end  and  the  back  end, 
are  shown  in  their  true  size  and  shape.  From 


140  MECHANICAL  DEAETING 

such  a  drawing,  a  plan  and  elevation  might 
readily  be  constructed. 

130.  An  arch  with  a  skew  face  is  shown  in 
plan  and  elevation  in  Fig.  97.  This  case  will 
illustrate  the  use  of  co-ordinates  in  the  con¬ 
struction  of  the  oblique  projection.  As  the  front 
face  of  the  arch  which  is  projected  in  the  line 


Fig.  97.  Arch  with  Skew  Face. 

&h-zb  is  not  horizontal,  it  will  not  be  shown  true 
size  in  the  oblique  projection,  and  the  various 
points  must  be  determined  by  co-ordinates. 
First  draw  through  zh  a  horizontal  line,  and 
produce  a"bb  to  meet  it  at  oh,  and  take  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  oh  at  o'  for  the  oblique  projection.  Then 
o'z'  represents  ohzh. 

Next,  a'  is  located  on  the  45-degree  line 
through  o',  at  a  distance  equal  to  oha".  The  line 
joining  a'  with  z'  is  the  base  line  of  the  face  of 
the  arch. 

To  locate  the  front  faces  of  the  arch  stones, 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  141 

proceed  as  follows:  Point  c'  may  be  found 
immediately  by  making  the  vertical  line  a'-c' 
equal  to  avcv,  and  a  vertical  through  z'  of  the 
same  length  will  give  one  corner  of  the  left- 
hand  stone.  It  is  desirable  to  locate  the  remain¬ 
ing  corners  with  reference  to  the  center  line 
through  1',  since  the  points  are  symmetrically 
located  on  either  side. 

The  next  point  d,  together  with  the  sym¬ 
metrical  point  on  the  left  side  of  the  arch,  is 
at  a  distance  from  the  center  line  equal  to  1-2. 
This  distance  is  in  the  plane  of  ohzh,  and  so  will 
be  laid  off  in  its  true  length  at  l'-2'.  Next,  the 
point  d  is  at  the  perpendicular  distance  2h-dh 
from  the  vertical  plane  of  ohzh,  and  this  distance 
will  appear  as  the  45-degree  line  through  2', 
locating  a  point  m'  on  the  base  line  of  the  front 
face  of  the  arch.  The  point  d'  is  then  found  in 
a  vertical  line  through  m'  at  a  height  equal 
to  mvd\ 

Next  in  turn,  e'  is  located  by  the  vertical  line 
through  d';  and  f'  found  by  the  co-ordinates 
lh-3h,  3h-nh,  and  nv-fT. 

The  rest  of  the  corners  are  located  similarly. 

Since  parallel  lines  must  show  parallel  in 
oblique  projection,  the  lines  p'-r7,  e'-f',  s'-t', 
c'-d',  u'-x',  and  a'-z'  should  all  be  parallel.  The 
long  edges  of  the  stones  are  drawn  back  at  45 
degrees,  their  lengths  being  taken  directly  from 
the  plan. 

As  the  back  end  of  the  arch  is  in  a  plane  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  length,  it  follows  that  if  it 


142 


MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 


were  all  drawn  in,  it  would  be  of  the  exact  size 
and  shape  of  the  given  elevation. 

In  fact,  a  more  direct  method  of  construction 
for  the  oblique  view  would  be  to  construct  the 
back  end  first,  true  size  and  shape;  then,  from 
each  point,  draw  lines  forward  at  45  degrees, 
with  lengths  equal  to  the  lengths  in  plan.  This 
short  construction,  of  course,  would  not  be  ap¬ 
plicable  if  the  back  face  had  any  other  direction. 

131.  The  reader  should  work  out  the  follow¬ 
ing  exercises  for  himself. 

Exercises  for  Practice 

(a)  Draw  an  isometric  view  of  a  circular 
cylinder  2  inches  in  diameter  and  4  inches  long, 
placed  with  the  axis  horizontal.  Show  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  cylinder  running  backward  and  to 
the  right.  Show  a  square  hole  %  inch  in 
diameter  cut  through  the  center  of  the  cylinder 
from  end  to  end. 

(b)  Draw  the  isometric  of  a  regular  hex¬ 
agonal  pyramid  when  the  base  is  in  a  vertical 
plane.  Take  for  the  lowest  corner  of  the 
isometric,  point  0  as  indicated  in  the  elevation, 
Pig.  98.  Make  each  edge  of  the  base  l1/^  inches 
long,  and  the  altitude  of  the  pyramid  4  inches. 

(c)  Make  the  isometric  of  the  stairs  shown 
in  Fig.  99,  taking  0  as  the  lowest  corner  of  the 
isometric.  Scale,  y2  in.=l  ft. 

(d)  Make  the  isometric  of  the  moulding 
shown  in  cross-section  in  Pig.  100,  taking  0  as 
the  lowest  corner*  Make  the  length  of  the 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


143 


agonal  Pyramid  with 
Base  Vertical. 


K - 3’  - M 


Fig.  99.  Stairway. 


Fig.  100.  Cross-Section  of  Moulding. 


144  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

moulding  8  inches.  This  may  be  drawn  half¬ 
size,  if  desired.  Before  drawing  the  isometric, 


the  section  must  be  drawn  from  the  given 
directions. 

(e)  Draw  in  oblique  projection  a  right  cir¬ 
cular  cone  standing  on  its  base.  The  diameter 


of  the  base  is  2  inches,  and  altitude  is  4  inches. 

(f)  Make  the  oblique  projection  of  the 
frustum  of  a  cone,  which  is  shown  in  elevation 


■ 


AN  EXAMPLE  OF  PARALLEL  PERSPECTIVE. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


145 


in  Fig.  101.  Tlie  axis  of  the  frustum  is  3 ]/2 
inches  long. 

(g)  Draw  the  oblique  projection  of  a 
wooden  box,  of  which  an  end  view  is  shown  in 
Fig.  102.  The  length  is  12  inches.  The  box, 
including  the  cover,  is  made  of  %-inch  stock, 
with  the  ends  nailed  onto  the  sides,  and  the  bot¬ 
tom  nailed  to  the  ends  and  sides.  Make  the 
drawing  one-quarter  size. 

(h)  Draw  in  oblique  projection  the  metal 
bathtub  shown  in  Fig.  103,  disregarding  the 
thickness  of  the  metal.  Show  the  length  hori¬ 
zontal,  and  the  width  at  45  degrees.  Scale  1 
inch=l  ft. 

PRACTICAL  DRAFTING 

The  Draftsman’s  Qualifications 

132.  Before  taking  up  the  subject  of  work¬ 
ing  drawings,  a  few  words  may  be  said  concern¬ 
ing  the  draftsman  himself. 

There  are  draftsmen  good,  bad,  and  indif¬ 
ferent.  There  is  the  man  who  apparently  has 
no  concern  about  his  employer’s  interests,  yet 
perhaps  wonders  why  his  salary  does  not  in¬ 
crease.  Another  type  is  the  man  who,  although 
able  to  make  mechanically  an  excellent  draw¬ 
ing,  is  nevertheless  but  little  better  than  an 
animated  drafting  machine.  He  can  make  a 
drawing  when  he  has  explicit  directions  to  fol¬ 
low;  but  alas  for  the  drawing  when  there  is  to  be 
a  little  brain  supplied! 

Last  and  best  is  the  real  draftsman — the  one 


146  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

who  is  alive  and  alert,  and  whose  hands  and 
brain  work  in  conjunction.  He  is  well-grounded 
in  the  theoretical  principles  of  his  work;  he  is 
the  man  who  knows  the  “why.”  He  must  be 
painstaking  and  ready  to  learn.  Sloppy  and 
careless  work  is  inexcusable  in  a  draftsman. 
As  has  been  said  by  a  leading  architect  of  the 
young  man  just  entering  the  profession,  “He 
must  be  prepared  to  draw  heavily  on  his  common 
sense.”  He  must  learn  to  use  his  time  with  dis¬ 
crimination.  In  many  cases,  time  spent  in 
securing  great  accuracy  or  fine  finish  in  a 
drawing  is  time  wasted. 

The  position  of  draftsman,  if  successfully 
filled,  may  often  be  the  stepping-stone  to  some¬ 
thing  better.  The  one  who  is  best  serving  his 
employer’s  interests,  and  thereby  fostering  his 
own,  will  not  be  content  to  do  or  know  only  what 
is  absolutely  required.  He  will  broaden  his 
mind  and  increase  his  own  value  by  acquiring 
some  knowledge  of  related  lines  of  work.  He 
will,  in  short,  be  prepared  so  that  when  a 
vacancy  occurs  higher  up,  he  will  be  just  the 
one  to  receive  the  promotion. 

133.  Employer’s  Point  of  View.  The  man 
who  makes  his  business  a  success  necessarily 
looks  at  the  commercial  value  of  the  draftsman’s 
work,  and  very  soon  learns  who  is  making  good, 
and  who  may  be  relied  on.  In  these  times  of 
strenuous  competition,  the  margin  of  profit  is 
often  narrow;  consequently  the  employer  will 
advance  those  who  make  his  success  possible, 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


147 


and  dispense  with  the  services  of  those  who  have 
no  interest  beyond  their  own  salaries 

WORKING  DRAWINGS 

134.  A  working  drawing  is  one  which  is  de¬ 
signed  for  actual  use  in  the  shop  or  field.  It  is 
the  drawing  which  goes  out  from  the  drafting 
room,  and  which  conveys  to  the  mechanic  or 
builder  instructions  as  to  the  machine,  bridge, 
building,  or  other  construction  which  is  to  be 
made.  It  must  contain  all  the  different  views 
and  dimensions  necessary  to  enable  the  work¬ 
man  to  go  ahead  and  construct  the  thing 
required. 

In  order  that  the  drawings  may  be  readily 
understood  by  the  mechanics,  they  must  be  made 
in  accordance  with  customary  drafting  practice. 

135.  Detail  Drawings;  Assembly  Drawings. 
For  objects  of  more  or  less  complicated  struct¬ 
ure — as  buildings  or  machines — two  kinds  of 
drawings  are  necessary:  the  detail  drawings, 
showing  different  parts  separately;  and  the 
assembly  drawings,  showing  the  object  as  a 
whole. 

If  drawings  are  required  of  some  object 
which  is  already  constructed,  in  order  that  dup¬ 
licates  may  be  made,  then  preliminary  drawings 
or  sketches  are  first  made.  Dimensions  and 
measurements  are  made  directly  from  the 
object,  and  placed  on  the  preliminary  drawings 
or  sketches.  It  is  especially  important  that 
these  sketches  shall  contain  all  necessary  views 


148  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

and  dimensions,  as  the  object  in  question  may 
be  miles  away  from  the  drafting  room,  and  the 
sketches  are  the  draftsman’s  sole  guide  when 
making  the  final  drawings. 

For  making  these  sketches,  the  draftsman 
should  have  a  pad  or  notebook  of  cross-section 
paper,  one  or  two  triangles,  a  compass,  a  two- 
foot  rule,  and  a  pair  of  calipers. 

When  an  object  is  to  be  made  for  the  first 
time,  the  design  is  first  prepared  by  the  engineer 
or  designer  from  a  consideration  of  the  neces¬ 
sary  relations  between  the  different  parts  and 
the  requisite  properties  of  the  same.  The  head 
draftsman  may  then  take  the  design,  and  work 
up  the  necessary  details  to  a  point  where  the 
drawings  can  be  finished  by  the  other  draftsmen. 

136.  An  important  requirement  which  should 
be  kept  in  view  in  making  working  drawings  is 
clearness.  The  drawing  should  have  but  one 
meaning.  To  this  end,  enough  views  must  be 
given,  so  that  for  the  object  represented  no  un¬ 
certainty  shall  exist  as  to  its  shape  and 
proportions. 

These  different  views  should  be  placed  near 
enough  together,  so  that  they  may  be  readily 
compared,  but  not  so  close  that  there  will  be  any 
tendency  to  confusion.  When  certain  necessary 
information  cannot  be  conveyed  by  the  drawing 
alone,  explanatory  notes  must  be  given  on  the 
same  or  another  sheet. 

137.  Kinds  of  Lines.  Drawings  are  easier 
to  read,  and  the  meaning  is  made  clearer,  by  the 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


149 


use  of  several  kinds  of  lines,  differing  according 
to  the  purpose  for  which  the  line  is  to  be  used. 
The  conventional  types  of  lines  for  various  pur¬ 
poses  are  shown  in  Fig.  104.  The  full  line  and 
the  dotted  line  should  be  of  the  same  width;  the 
center  line,  dimension  line,  and  construction  line 
should  all  be  of  the  same  width,  and  narrower 

Full.  L  /a/e  - - - 

Dotted  L/ne  — - —  — . 

Center  L/aje - 

D/me  ns /on  L/ne -  - - 

Extension  L/ne - 

Shade  Line  — — — ■—  ■ 

Construction  L/ne - 

Fig.  104.  Conventional  Lines  Used  for  Various  Purposes  in 
Mechanical  Drafting. 

than  the  first  two;  the  extension  line  should  be 
fine,  and  the  shade  line  heavy. 

For  the  broken  lines,  there  is  no  standard 
length  for  the  long  or  short  dashes;  but  for  a 
neat  and  properly  made  drawing,  the  short 
dashes  of  the  so-called  dotted  line  should  be  of 
equal  length;  and  similarly,  for  all  the  broken 
lines,  the  like  dashes  when  repeated  should  be  of 
uniform  length. 

Many  draftsmen  are  careless  about  their 
dash  and  dotted  lines,  with  the  result  that  their 
drawings  are  very  likely  to  have  a  slovenly 
appearance. 


150  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

138.  Shade  Lines.  These  are  heavy  lines,  as 
shown  in  Pig.  104,  applied  to  certain  parts  of 
the  drawing.  They  are  used  principally  for  the 
sake  of  imparting  character  and  relief  to  the 
figures.  Shade  lines  are  not  essential,  and  in 
some  drafting  offices  are  dispensed  with  almost 
altogether.  They  do,  however,  give  to  a  draw¬ 


a 

a 

PLAN 

1 — 1 

rn 

1 

£  LEV  AT/  ON 

nn 

PLAN 

m 

XJJ 

ee  £  VAT /ON 
Fig.  106. 


Fig.  105. 


Illustrating  Use  of  Shade  Lines. 


ing  a  certain  finish  which  would  otherwise  be 
lacking,  and  in  some  cases  materially  assist  in 
making  clear  the  object  represented. 

How  Shade  Lines  are  Used.  Theoretically, 
shade  lines  are  the  lines  or  edges  which  separate 
light  from  dark  surfaces;  practically  they  are 
applied  to  certain  lines  of  the  drawing  according 
to  a  conventional  system.  Shade  lines  are  ap¬ 
plied  only  to  lines  which  represent  edges  of  an 
object;  and,  in  the  system  most  generally 
adopted,  the  right-hand  and  lower  edges  in  both 
plan  and  elevation  are  the  shaded  lines. 

Examples  of  Shade  Lines.  In  Pig.  105  is 
shown  a  stick  with  rectangular  pieces  projecting 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


151 


up  from  the  surface.  The  right-hand  and  lower 
edges  of  the  stick  are  shaded  in  both  views ;  and 
in  the  plan,  the  right-hand  and  lower  edges  of 
the  two  uprights  are  also  shaded;  while  in  the 
elevation,  only  the  right-hand  edges  are  made 
shade  lines. 


i - ! 


Fig.  107.  Fig.  108. 

Illustrating  Shading  of  Circles. 

Pig.  106  represents  the  same  stick  with  holes 
instead  of  uprights.  Notice,  in  the  plan,  the 
change  in  the  position  of  the  shaded  edge.  This 
is  in  strict  conformity  with  the  rule,  since  the 
upper  and  left-hand  edges  of  the  opening  are 
the  lower  and  right-hand  edges  of  that  portion 
of  the  object.  It  is  in  cases  like  these  that  shade 
lines  have  practical  value  in  assisting  to  make 
clear  the  actual  meaning  of  the  drawing. 

Shading  of  Circles.  The  shade  line  of  a  circle 


152 


MECHANICAL  DKAETING 


always  begins  and  ends  on  a  45-degree  line,  as 
shown  in  Fig.  107  and  108,  the  45-degree  line  in 
this  position  marking  the  division  between  what 
may  be  called  the  lower  and  right-hand  edge 
and  the  upper  and  left-hand  edge.  The  shade 
line  begins  at  the  extremities  of  the  45-degree 
diameter,  with  the  same  width  as  the  unshaded 
part,  and  gradually  increases  in  width.  This 
smooth  and  pleasing  effect  is  produced  by 
drawing  the  other  45-degree  line,  a-b,  shifting 
the  center  c  slightly  to  c',  and,  with  the  same 
radius,  drawing  over  the  part  to  be  shaded. 

The  excess  width  of  a  shade  line  over  the 
ordinary  line  is  generally  placed  on  the  outside 
of  the  area  inclosed  by  the  figure.  Exceptions 
occur  when  the  placing  of  the  shade  line  in  this 
position  would  unduly  distort  the  figure  or  tend 
to  produce  a  jagged  effect. 

139.  Blue-Prints.  The  form  in  which  a 
working  drawing  goes  out  from  the  office  to  the 
shop,  or  field,  or  wherever  the  actual  construc¬ 
tion  is  to  be  made,  is  the  blue-print.  The  steps 
which  lead  up  to  the  final  form  of  blue-print  are : 
first,  pencil  drawing;  second,  tracing;  and  third, 
the  blue-print.  Sometimes  the  second  step  is 
omitted,  as  will  be  explained  later. 

Assuming  that  the  preliminary  sketches  are 
made,  a  scale  at  which  the  drawings  are  to  be 
made  is  then  chosen.  The  particular  scale  to  be 
used  is  determined  by  various  considerations. 
The  drawing  should  be  on  a  scale  large  enough 
so  that  the  different  views  and  dimensions  may 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


153 


be  clearly  read;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
should  not  be  unnecessarily  large  and  unwieldy. 
Various  scales  are  used  in  engineering  and 
machine  work.  Sometimes  certain  parts  or 
pieces  are  drawn  greater  than  full  size.  In  this 
country,  common  architectural  practice  is  to 
make  drawings  at  a  scale  of  *4  in.=l  ft.,  with 
details  at  %  in.=l  ft.,  and  also  details  at  full 
size. 

The  scale  decided  upon,  the  center  lines  of 
the  various  views  are  laid  out,  the  outlines 
blocked  in,  and  then  the  details  supplied. 
Where  the  different  views  are  on  the  same  sheet, 
the  constructions  of  each  should  be  carried  on  at 
the  same  time. 

The  pencil  drawing  may  be  made  on  brown 
duplex  paper,  on  thin  white  bond,  or  on  tracing 
cloth.  No  matter  which  kind  is  used,  the  lines 
should  be  bold  and  distinct;  and  to  this  end,  the 
pencil  used  should  be  not  harder  than  3H,  and  in 
some  cases  softer. 

The  Tracing.  If  the  penciling  is  done  on  the 
duplex  paper,  a  tracing  is  next  made.  This  is 
done  in  ink  on  the  tracing  cloth,  which  for  this 
purpose  is  tacked  on  the  board  over  the  draw¬ 
ing.  Some  draftsmen  prefer  to  ink  on  the  dull 
side  of  the  tracing  cloth;  and  some,  on  the  side 
with  the  glossy  finish.  In  either  case,  the  sur¬ 
face  should  first  be  rubbed  over  with  powdered 
chalk,  in  order  to  remove  all  grease  from  the 
surface.  The  chalk  must  then  be  brushed  off, 
and  the  surface  is  then  ready  for  the  ink.  In 


154 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


case  the  pencil  drawing  is  made  on  the  bond 
paper  or  on  the  tracing  cloth,  it  may  be  inked 
directly,  and  no  separate  tracing  is  required. 

A  common  fault  with  beginners  is  to  make 
the  lines  on  a  tracing  too  fine.  In  order  to 
secure  a  good  blue-print  the  lines  on  the  tracing 
must  be  fairly  heavy.  This  is  also  true  of  letters 
and  numbers. 

The  Blue-Print.  The  blue-print,  which  re¬ 
produces  the  original  drawing  with  white  lines 
on  a  blue  ground,  is  obtained  from  the  inked 
tracing  or  inked  drawing,  and  is  made  on  a  sheet 
of  specially  prepared  white  paper  which  may  be 
bought  ready  for  use.  One  side  of  the  paper  is 
rendered  sensitive  to  the  light  by  means  of  a 
chemical  coating. 

To  make  the  print,  the  tracing  or  inked 
drawing  is  placed  face  up  on  the  sensitized  side 
of  the  prepared  paper;  the  two  are  put  in  a 
printing  frame,  and  exposed  to  the  sunlight  or 
a  powerful  electric  light.  The  light  acts  on  the 
prepared  surface,  changing  it  to  a  permanent 
blue  color  except  where  the  surface  is  covered 
by  the  inked  lines.  The  time  needed  for  the  ex¬ 
posure  will  vary  according  to  the  intensity  of 
the  light  and  the  speed  of  the  paper — from  less 
than  a  minute  to  half  an  hour  or  more. 

After  exposure,  the  print  is  taken  from  the 
frame,  and  placed  in  a  tank  of  running  water, 
which  dissolves  and  washes  away  the  parts  of 
the  coating  that  were  protected  by  the  inked 
lines  above,  but  which  has  no  effect  on  the  parts 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING 


155 


that  have  been  acted  upon  and  fixed  by  the 
action  of  the  light.  The  sheet  is  next  taken  from 
the  tank,  hung  up  to  dry,  and  is  then  ready  for 
use. 

140.  Dimensioning.  Dimensions  are  usually 
placed  on  a  drawing  so  as  to  read  from  the  bot¬ 
tom  and  from  the  right  hand.  Clearness  is  of 
great  importance  in  dimensioning;  and  on  this 
account,  if  for  no  other  reason,  the  figures 
should  be  plainly  made  and  heavy  enough  so  as 
to  stand  out  somewhat  from  the  drawing.  There 


Fig.  109.  Correct  and  Incorrect 
Methods  of  Indicating 
Dimensions. 


*-34:'-* 

POOR 

GOOD 

Fig.  110.  Good  and  Bad  Meth¬ 
ods  of  Indicating  Frac¬ 
tional  Dimensions. 


must  be  no  confused  tangle  of  dimensions; 
dimension  lines  should  not  needlessly  cross,  and 
the  dimensions  must  be  separated  enough  so  as 
to  be  clearly  read.  Arrow-heads  are  used  at  the 
ends  of  the  dimension  lines  (with  one  or  two  ex¬ 
ceptions),  to  show  exactly  between  what  two 
points  or  lines  the  given  dimension  applies.. 

Dimensions  are  expressed  on  a  drawing  in 
inches,  or  in  feet  and  inches,  depending  upon  the 
distance  and  also  on  the  choice  of  the  draftsman. 
In  some  drafting  rooms,  dimensions  up  to  two 
feet  are  expressed  as  inches;  and  above  that,  in 
feet  and  inches.  In  others,  any  distance  over 
twelve  inches  is  indicated  in  feet  and  inches. 


156 


MECHANICAL  DBAFTING 


Where  the  dimension  is  stated  in  feet  and 
inches,  a  short  dash  should  always  be  placed  be¬ 
tween  the  feet  and  the  inches,  that  no  mistake 
may  be  made  in  reading  it.  Fig.  109  shows  the 
upper  dimension  correct,  written  with  the  dash; 
and  the  lower  one  wrong,  without  it.  The  dash 


* - 9  - » 

*-3  — ^ 

<5 - 4* - » 

Tig.  111.  Illustrating  Use  of 
Extension  Lines. 


Fig.  112.  Use  of  Extension  Lines 
in  Dimensioning  a  Circle. 

line  between  the  arrows  is  the  dimension  line. 

Fig.  110  illustrates  a  good  and  a  bad  way  of 
showing  a  fractional  dimension.  The  line  of  the 
fraction  should  always  be  parallel  to  the  dimen¬ 
sion  line,  never  inclined. 

Extension  Lines.  In  Fig.  Ill,  the  short-dash 
lines  extending  above  the  figure  at  either  end 
are  extension  lines.  Extension  lines  are  used 


MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 


157 


for  the  extension  of  lines  between  which  a 
dimension  is  to  be  placed,  so  that  the  dimension 
may  be  given  outside  of  the  figure.  In  this  way, 
confusion  is  often  avoided.  Extension  lines  are 
also  often  used  in  dimensioning  a  circle  or  cir¬ 
cular  piece,  as  shown  in  Fig.  112.  Fig.  112  also 
shows  the  circle  dimensioned  inside. 

Where  a  whole  circle  is  drawn,  the  diameter 
should  always  be  given,  rather  than  the  radius; 


Fig.  114. 


Fig.  115. 


Methods  of  Dimensioning  Arcs  of  Circles. 


and  the  dimension  line  should  pass  through  the 
center. 

If,  as  in  Fig.  113,  the  diameter  of  a  rounded 
piece,  as  a  cylinder,  is  given  elsewhere  than  on 
the  end  view,  the  dimension  figure  should  be 
followed  by  D  or  Dia.  (for  “Diameter”). 

Where  an  arc  of  a  circle  is  given,  indicate 
the  radius  instead  of  the  diameter,  as  shown  in 
Figs.  114  and  115.  Where  there  is  sufficient 
room,  the  center  of  the  arc  should  be  enclosed  in 
a  small  freehand  circle,  and  the  dimension 
placed  between  the  center  and  the  arc  as  in  Fig. 
115;  otherwise  the  length  of  radius  should  be 
given  as  in  Fig.  114,  followed  by  the  letter  R  to 
denote  “Radius.” 


158 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


When  an  arc  is  given,  use  only  one  arrow¬ 
head. 

When  a  number  of  holes  are  equally  spaced 
around  a  circle,  give  the  diameter  of  circle  pass¬ 
ing  through  centers,  as  in  Fig.  116.  If  the  holes 
are  all  of  equal  size,  it  is  sufficient  to  give  the 
diameter  of  one  or  two. 


Fig.  118.  Half-Inch  Bolt,  with 
Dimensions. 


Besides  the  necessary  dimensions  of  all  the 
different  parts  of  the  object  represented,  the 
extreme  outside  dimensions  should  usually  be 
given.  These  are  known  as  over-all  dimensions, 
and  should  be  given  so  that  the  workman  will 
not  be  obliged  to  add  the  several  dimensions  in 
order  to  obtain  the  required  size.  If  a  very  long 
piece  is  to  be  shown,  it  may  be  represented  as 
broken  in  two,  and  therefore  drawn  less  in 


MECHANICAL  DEAFTING  159 

length  than  would  otherwise  be  necessary,  the 
dimension  being  given  as  if  the  whole  length 
were  shown  (see  Pig.  117). 

Distribution  of  Dimensions.  Where  there 
are  several  views  of  an  object  on  one  sheet,  the 
appearance  will  he  improved  and  the  drawing 
will  be  easier  to  read,  if  the  dimensions  are  dis¬ 
tributed  among  the  different  views.  In  any 
case,  however,  where  there  would  be  likelihood 
of  error,  the  same  dimension  should  be  placed 
on  more  than  one  view. 

Dimensioning  of  Bolts.  For  a  bolt,  one 
view — showing  the  length — is  all  that  is  re¬ 
quired.  Fig.  118  shows  a  half-inch  bolt  with 
all  the  necessary  dimensions.  In  addition  to 
the  diameter  of  the  bolt,  the  thickness  of  the 
head,  and  the  length  under  the  head,  there 
should  also  be  given  the  length  of  either  the 
threaded  or  the  unthreaded  portion.  The  num¬ 
ber  of  threads  per  inch  should  also  be  briefly 
given — as  10th,  12th,  etc.,  as  the  case  may  be. 
For  a  bolt  with  a  hexagonal  or  an  octagonal 
head,  the  short  diagonal  is  given.  If  the  head 
of  the  bolt  were  round,  D  would  be  substituted 
for  HEX;  if  square,  SQ  would  be  used,  etc. 

141.  Finished  Surfaces.  When  metal  sur¬ 
faces  are  to  receive  a  smooth  finish  in  the  shop, 
the  edge  view  of  the  surface  is  marked  on  the 
drawing  with  an  italic  F,  as  shown  in  Fig.  119. 
If  all  of  the  surfaces  are  to  be  finished,  a  note 
is  made,  “F  all  over.” 

142.  Duplication  of  Parts.  If  two  or  more 


160 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


parts  or  pieces  are  to  be  made  exactly  alike, 
as  bolts,  pins,  rods,  etc.,  one  figure  is  drawn  and 


Pig.  119.  Method  of  Indicating  Finish  for  Metal  Surfaces. 

dimensioned,  and  a  note  added:  “Make  2  (or 
8,  or  10,  etc.)  of  this,”  specifying  the  desired 
number. 


Sections 


143.  It  is  often  convenient,  and  sometimes 
necessary,  to  take  a  plane  cutting  through  the 
object,  remove  one  portion,  and  show  the  cut 
surface,  or  section.  This  may  be  necessary  in 
order  to  give  a  clear  idea  of  interior  or  hidden 
parts,  whether  the  object  be  a  small  piece,  or 
an  office  building,  or  a  masonry  structure.  It 
may  sometimes  be  inconvenient  to  show  the 
external  shape  of  an  object  by  an  end  view; 
and  in  such  a  case  a  section,  placed  as  in  Fig. 
120,  may  be  shown  instead.  The  shape  and 
proportions  of  a  fluted  column  may  also  be  well 
shown  in  section,  as  in  Fig.  121. 

144.  Cross-Hatching.  When  sections  are 
made  on  a  working  drawing,  it  is  customary  to 
distinguish  between  the  various  materials  rep- 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


161 


resented,  especially  in  the  case  of  metals,  by 
a  system  of  one  or  more  sets  of  parallel  lines 
covering  the  sectioned  surface.  The  surface 
treated  in  this  way  is  said  to  be  cross-hatched. 
In  the  matter  of  cross-hatching,  there  is  no  uni¬ 
versally  accepted  standard  for  all  substances; 
and  indeed,  in  some  drafting  rooms,  the  kind 
of  hatching  is  arbitrarily  chosen. 

When,  on  a  working  drawing,  different  ma¬ 
terials  are  shown  in  section,  they  should  be  dis- 


Hatching  Sections  of  Ad-  Fig.  121.  Section  of  a  Fluted 
joining  Parts.  Column. 

tinguished  by  cross-hatching;  and  somewhere 
on  the  sheet,  there  should  be  placed  small  blocks 
of  the  kinds  of  cross-hatching  used,  giving  the 
names  of  the  materials  which  they  are  intended 
to  represent.  When,  in  section,  two  adjoining 
parts  are  shown,  the  cross-hatching  on  the  two 
parts  should  run  in  different  directions,  as  in 
Fig.  122. 

Fig.  123  shows  blocks  of  cross-hatching  as 


169  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

used  for  some  of  the  common  substances  with 
which  the  draftsman  has  to  deal. 

On  architectural  working  drawings,  stone 
and  terra-cotta  are  represented  in  section,  and 
also  in  plan  and  elevation,  as  shown  in  Fig.  124. 


p 

Wk 

’mm.  'mm. 

CAST  /RON 

WRO  t  iron 

COPPER  BRASS 

CAST  S  TEEL 


L.  EA  O  BRICK  MASONS  Y 


TERRA  COTTA  CONCRETE  WOOD  WO  Ob 

OR  EIRE  BRICK  W/RC  REINFORCE'  L0N6/TUD *  CROSS 

MENT.  ,nal  SECTION  SECTION 

Fig.  123.  Conventional  Representations  of  Common  Materials  of 
Construction. 

If,  in  architectural  drawings,  colors  are  used, 
they  may  be  chosen  as  follows: 


Brick  . Light  red. 

Concrete  . Payne's  gray,  mottled. 

Glass  . New  blue. 

Old  work . Gray  or  black. 

Slate . Indigo. 

Steel  and  iron . Prussian  blue. 

Stone  . Raw  umber  or  Payne’s  gray. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


163 


Terra-cotta  . Burnt  umber. 

Wood  . Yellow  ocher. 

LETTERING  OF  DRAWINGS 

145.  The  lettering  on  a  working  drawing, 
while  not  the  most  important  feature,  neverthe¬ 
less  demands  some  attention.  The  appearance 
of  an  otherwise  good  drawing  may  be  quite 
spoiled  by  poor  or  inappropriate  lettering.  The 
letter  for  practical  use  must  first  be  legible,  and 
it  must  admit  of  being  rapidly  and  easily  made. 


T.C. 

*  .  ‘ 

5  TONE  TERRACOTTA 

Fig.  124.  Conventional  Representations  of  Stone  and  Terra- 
Cotta  on  Architectural  Drawings. 

A  very  considerable  difference  exists  between 
the  styles  of  letters  used  in  engineering  and 
machine  drawing  practice,  and  those  used  in 
architects’  offices. 

Figs.  125  to  128  inclusive  are  examples  of 
good,  plain  letters  for  engineering  and  machine 
drawing.  This  style  of  letter  is  known  in 
machine  drawing  as  the  Gothic.  The  inclined 
letters  are  especially  suitable  for  notes  on  the 
drawings. 

For  architectural  working  drawings,  a  style 
of  letter  is  used  which  is  derived  more  or  less 
directly  from  the  Roman  capitals.  This  style 
of  letter,  of  which  examples  are  shown  in  Figs. 


ABCDEFGHIJ 

KLMNOPQR 

STUVWXYZ 

1234567890 

Fig.  125. 

abcdefghijklmn 
opq  rstuvwxyz 

Fig.  126. 

ABCDBrGH 
/JKLMNOBQ 
BS  TU  VWXYZ 
/234567390 

Fig.  127. 

obcc/efgh/jk/mn 
opqrs  tuvwjcyz 

Examples  of  Good,  Plain  LmenPIuitable  for  Engineering  and 
Machine  Drawings. 

164 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


165 


129  and  130,  admits  of  a  freer  and  easier  treat¬ 
ment  than  do  those  usually  found  on  machine 
drawings. 

Spacing.  Whatever  the  style  of  letter  used, 
the  general  effect  will  be  marred  or  improved 
according  as  the  spacing  is  bad  or  good.  For 
the  correct  spacing,  no  hard  and  fast  rule  can 

ABCDEFGHIJKLMN 
OPQRJ'TU  V  WXY  Z 

Fig.  129. 

aabcdefghijklmno 


pqnstuvwxyz 


Fig.  130. 

Form  of  Letter  Suitable  for  Architectural  Working  Drawings. 


be  given;  but  it  may  be  said  in  a  general  way, 
that  the  letters  should  be  so  placed  that  the 
area  of  the  spaces  between  them  should  be  about 
equal. 

The  amount  of  time  that  can  be  devoted  to 
lettering  a  working  drawing,  is  in  general  com¬ 
paratively  small;  so  the  bulk  of  the  lettering 
is  done  freehand,  except  on  important  titles  for 
particular  work,  where  some  instrumental  con¬ 
struction  may  be  used.  A  careful  study  of  the 
letters  given  in  the  figures,  coupled  with  pains¬ 
taking  practice,  will  put  the  beginner  on  the 


166 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


road  to  facility  in  making  the  various  letter 
forms. 

Working  Drawings  for  Building  Construction 

146.  These,  as  already  stated,  are  usually 
drawn  to  the  scale  of  *4  in.  =  1  ft.,  with  details 
at  %  in.  =  1  ft.,  or  full  size. 

The  number  of  drawings  required  for  the 
building  of  a  house  necessarily  varies  somewhat 


DOUBLE  SW/NG  DOO& 


LAUND&V  TUBS 

Fig.  131.  Conventional  Method  of  Representing  Some  Common 
Details  of  Construction  on  Working  Drawings. 

according  to  its  character.  There  should  be, 
however,  plans  of  each  floor,  including  the  roof 
and  the  basement  or  foundation  plan.  There 
should  be  also  as  many  elevations  and  sections 
as  may  be  necessary  fully  to  explain  the  con¬ 
struction.  Plans  of  the  different  floors,  showing 
the  framing,  may  also  be  required. 

Por  particular  details,  such  as  cornices,  win- 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


167 


dow  casings,  balusters,  mouldings,  etc.,  it  is  good 
practice  to  draw  the  details  at  full  size.  Iso¬ 
metric  and  perspective  are  also  often  very 
helpful  in  the  case  of  complicated  details. 

Conventional  Representations.  In  Fig.  131 
is  shown  the  usual  manner  of  representing  on 
a  working  drawing  some  familiar  details. 

147.  Working  Plans  for  a  Residence.  In 
Figs.  132  to  139  inclusive,  are  shown  the  work¬ 
ing  plans  for  a  two-family  house. 

Fig.  132  is  the  basement  or  cellar  plan. 
Notice  the  over-all  dimensions,  and  the  dimen¬ 
sion  lines  drawn  as  faint  full  lines.  It  is 
often  the  custom  on  tracings  for  blue-prints  to 
draw  construction  or  dimension  lines  with  a 
narrow,  full,  red  line.  The  red  line  prints  much 
fainter  than  the  black.  Observe  also  the  use 
of  the  conventional  representations  for  the 
stonework,  the  windows,  and  the  single-swing 
doors. 

In  the  first  and  second  floor  plans,  Figs.  133 
and  134,  the  arrangement  of  the  rooms  is  the 
same.  The  door  between  the  dining  room  and 
pantry  is  one  of  the  double-swing  kind,  as  indi¬ 
cated  on  the  drawing.  The  stairs  up  to  the 
third  floor  are  above  the  ones  down  to  the  first. 
Notice  that  here  confusion  is  avoided  by  the 
irregular  break  in  the  stairs,  and  by  the  use  of 
the  arrows  with  the  words  “Up”  and  “Down.” 
Observe  that  the  center  lines  of  the  windows 
are  located  from  the  walls  of  the  house. 

In  Figs.  136  to  139  inclusive  are  shown  four 


168 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  132.  Example  of  Working  Drawing— Basement  Plan  for  a  Residence. 

The  scale  indicated  applies,  of  course,  only  to  the  original-sized  drawing,  not  to  the  reduced 

reproduction  here  given. 


MECHANICAL  DBAFTING  169 


Fig.  133.  First-Floor  Working  Plan  for  a  Residence. 


Dalccvny 


170 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  134.  Second-Floor  Working  Plan  for  a  Residence. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


171 


Fig.  135.  Third-Floor  Working  Plan  for  a  Residence, 


m 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  136.  Front  Elevation  for  a  Residence. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


173 


i^ig.  137.  Left  Side  Elevation  for  a  Residence. 


174 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  138.  Bight  Side  Elevation  for  a  Besidence. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


175 


Fig.  139.  Rear  Elevation  for  a  Residence. 


176 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


elevations.  Care  should  be  taken  to  compare 
the  different  views  to  see  that  Fig.  137  is  the 
left  side  elevation,  and  Fig.  138  the  elevation 
of  the  right  side.  The  elevations  are  to  show 
the  distances  between  floors,  arrangement  of 
windows  and  sizes  of  glass,  and  in  general  the 
exterior  finish,  as  shingles,  siding,  etc. 

For  these  drawings  a  separate  roof  plan  was 
not  required. 

STRUCTURAL  DRAFTING 

148.  By  structural  drafting  is  meant  the 
drafting  of  the  iron  and  steel  framework  which 
enters  so  largely  into  the  construction  of  the 
steel  bridge  and  the  modern  office  or  commer¬ 
cial  building. 


^  r^-  THICKNESS 


Fig.  140.  Steel  Angles  with  Even  and  Uneven  Legs. 


It  is  impracticable  within  the  limits  of  the 
present  work  to  enter  into  any  extended  dis¬ 
cussion  of  the  theoretical  and  practical  ques¬ 
tions  which  arise  in  connection  with  this 
subject;  and  it  is  therefore  the  intention  to 


ILLUSTKATING  EVIL  EFFECT  OF  DISKEGAKDING  BUILDING  LINE. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


177 


present  only  the  elementary  principles  and 
fundamentals,  with  examples  from  actual  prac¬ 
tice.  Equipped  with  this  understanding  of  the 
essentials,  the  draftsman  should  be  able  to 


I-BEAM 

Fig.  141. 


E  PLAN  G  A 


CHANNEL 

Fig.  142. 


WCdy 


Z-BAR 


sPLANGE  J 

(z 


PL.A'TEL 
Fig.  144. 


Fig.  143. 

Representations  of  Steel  Shapes. 

readily  fall  into  line  with  the  practice  in  any 
particular  drafting  room. 

The  various  pieces  which  are  used  in  steel 
building  construction  are  largely  of  certain 


178  MECHANICAL  DKAFTING 


standard  shapes  and  sizes  which  are  rolled  in 
the  mills.  Types  of  the  usual  elementary  forms 
are  shown  in  Figs.  140  to  144.  These  views  show 
the  pieces  endwise,  thus  representing  the  actual 
shape.  The  angles,  Fig.  140,  with  even  and  un¬ 
even  legs,  are  made  in  various  standard  sizes, 
and  are  listed  in  the  handbooks  issued  by  the 
various  steel  companies. 


rv— , ,  ,n. 


-M-  Tip' 

JL  JL  J8L 


Fig.  145. 


Fig.  146. 


Fig.  147. 


Fig.  148.  Fig.  149.  Fig.  150. 

Forms  of  Eiveted  Columns. 


Solid  and  Built-Up  Members.  The  beams, 
girders,  and  columns  may  be  of  one  piece,  or 
composed  of  some  of  the  elementary  parts 
riveted  together.  Thus  a  beam  or  girder  may 
be  of  the  I-beam  style,  Fig.  141,  in  one  solid 
piece;  or  it  may  be  formed  as  in  Fig.  146,  of  a 
plate  and  four  angles  riveted  together. 

Angles  (Fig.  140),  channels  (Fig.  142), 
Z-bars  (Fig.  143),  and  plates  (Fig.  144),  are 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


179, 


the  elementary  parts  most  used  in  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  built-up  girders  and  columns.  The 
I-beam  is  commonly  used  as  a  beam  or  girder, 
while  the  uprights  or  columns  are  usually  of 
the  built-up  variety. 

Figs.  145  to  152  show  in  section  some  of 
the  common  forms  of  riveted  columns.  These 


LJ 

)  ( 

L.  4 

n 

)  ( 

r  4 

Fig.  151. 

Fig.  152. 

Forms  of  Eiveted  Columns. 

columns,  as  shown  in  the  figures,  are  variously 
made  up  of  angles,  plates,  channels,  Z-bars,  and 
lacing  or  lattice-work.  The  light  lines  of  Figs. 
145  and  148  indicate  lattice-work  or  lacing  (see 
Figs.  153  and  154) ;  and  the  heavy  lines  of  the 
other  figures  are  plates.  Fig.  145,  for  example, 


is  the  section  of  a  column  composed  of  four 
angles  latticed  together.  Fig.  147  represents 
a  column  formed  of  four  angles  riveted  to  a 
middle  plate  and  reinforced  by  two  other  plates 
at  the  top  and  the  bottom.  In  these  figures, 


180 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


the  narrow  spaces  left  between  the  members 
which  are  riveted  together  are  for  the  sake  of 
showing  the  arrangement  more  clearly,  and  of 
course  do  not  mean  that  such  spaces  exist  on 
the  actual  column. 

Rivets  and  Bolts.  In  fastening  the  various 
steel  shapes  together,  rivets  or  bolts  are  used. 
When  bolts  are  employed,  they  are  generally 
square-headed,  with  V  threads,  and  are  repre¬ 
sented  in  the  customary  manner  (see  “Dimen¬ 
sioning  of  Bolts,’ ’  under  Article  140). 

Rivets  are  very  largely  used  for  fastening 
together  the  different  members  of  a  built-up 
beam  or  column,  and  for  making  connections 
with  other  beams.  The  hole  for  the  rivet  is 
made  from  1/32  inch  to  1/16  inch  larger  than  the 
rivet.  Rivets  are  driven  hot,  the  metal  being 
forced  to  fill  the  slightly  larger  hole.  Riveting 
is  done  in  two  ways,  by  hand  and  by  machine. 


Fig.  155.  Machine-Driven  Fig.  156.  Hand-Driven  Rivet. 
Rivet. 


Fig.  155  shows  a  machine-driven  rivet;  and 
Fig.  156,  one  driven  by  hand.  As  far  as  practi¬ 
cable,  riveting  is  done  in  the  shop,  and  this  is 
known  as  shop  riveting;  some  riveting,  how¬ 
ever,  must  necessarily  be  done  at  the  place  of 
construction,  and  this  is  known  as  field  riveting. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING  181 

On  the  drawing,  the  rivets  to  be  shop-driven 
are  shown  in  position  with  the  heads  drawn; 
v/hile  for  those  to  be  riveted  in  the  field,  only 
the  holes  are  shown,  blacked  in.  This  distinc¬ 
tion  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  157,  which  is  taken 
from  a  working  drawing  of  one  end  of  a  bridge 
strut.  This  strut  is  composed  of  four  angles 


rig.  157.  Illustrating  Method  of  Indicating  Shop  and  Field 
Rivets. 


laced  together,  like  the  column  shown  in  section 
in  Fig.  145,  two  angles  at  the  top,  and  two  at 
the  bottom.  The  blank  circles  at  the  ends  of 
the  lacing  bars,  and  those  at  the  ends  of  the 
angles,  are  the  heads  of  the  shop-driven  rivets, 
while  the  black  holes  are  for  the  rivets  which 
are  to  be  driven  in  the  field.  These  latter  rivets 
are  those  by  which  the  strut  is  to  be  fastened  in 
position. 

Besides  the  general  distinction  between 
shop-driven  and  field-driven  rivets,  other  differ- 


I 


182 


Fig.  158.  Fig.  159. 

Conventional  Methods  of  Indicating  Kinds  of  Heads  for  Rivets— Standard  of  American  Bridge  Company. 


MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 


183 


ences  are  made  in  the  drawing  to  denote  the 
kind  of  rivet-head.  The  conventional  manner 
of  indicating  the  kind  of  head  to  be  made  on  a 
rivet  is  shown  in  Figs.  158  and  159,  which  are 
according  to  the  standard  of  the  American 
Bridge  Company. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  distinguishing 
feature  for  field  riveting  is  the  small  blackened 


Fig.  160.  Rivet-Holes,  Shown 
Black  for  Field  Riveting. 


FLANGES  NOT  SEEN 

Fig.  162.  Method  of  Indicating 
Flanges. 

K - 30  -3  -  CES  =•  12  - H 

\  °  n  ^°  °  °  °  °\ 

Fig.  161.  Method  of  Indicating  Equal  Spacing  of  Rivets. 

circle,  while  all  of  the  different  heads  for  the 
shop  rivets  are  left  light.  A  small  inner  circle 
invariably  stands  for  at  least  one  countersunk 
head.  On  the  side  or  end  view  of  a  structural 
shape,  if  the  rivet  is  to  be  driven  in  the  field, 
the  rivet-hole  is  shown  black,  as  in  Fig.  160. 

When  a  line  of  rivets  is  to  be  located  with 
equal  spaces  between,  it  is  better  to  express 
the  spacing  as  in  Fig.  161,  rather  than  to  repeat 


Fig.  163.  Details  of  Vertical  Post  for  Steel  Bridge. 


MECHANICAL  DKAFIING 


185 


many  times  the  same  dimension.  In  case  the 
total  distance  does  not  divide  evenly  by  the 
number  of  spaces,  the  total  distance  may  be 
given,  and  also  the  number  of  equal  spaces 
required. 

When  the  side  view  of  an  angle  or  channel 
is  shown,  the  flange  is  represented  by  two  paral¬ 
lel  lines — both  full,  if  the  flange  is  on  the  near 
side;  and  one  or  more  dotted,  if  the  back  of 
the  shape  is  shown  (see  Fig.  162).  A  similar 
practice  obtains  if  the  other  shapes  are  shown. 

Details  of  a  Vertical  Post.  Fig.  163,  from  a 
drawing  of  the  Pittsburg  Bridge  Company,  is 
the  plan  and  elevation  of  a  vertical  post  for  a 
steel  bridge.  The  post  is  made  up  of  four 
angles  laced  together.  The  angles  are  fastened 
together  at  the  ends  by  tie-plates,  which,  like 
the  lacing  bars,  pass  between  the  angles  and  are 
riveted  to  them.  On  the  plan  (the  upper 
figure),  the  number  (4)  of  angles  used  is  given, 
together  with  the  size,  3  in.  by  2y2  in.  by  ^4  in.; 
the  symbol  for  angles  is  used,  instead  of  the 
written  word;  and  the  total  length  of  the  angles 
is  given.  The  hole  for  the  3-inch  pin  is  located 
from  each  end  of  the  pin-plates;  and  its  distance 
from  the  further  end  of  the  angles  is  also 
shown. 

The  expression  “50  Alt.  Spaces  ©  6"  = 
25'-0",”  lettered  just  above  the  elevation,  means 
that  fifty  alternate  spaces  between  rivets,  each 
space  equal  to  six  inches,  amounts  to  a  total 
distance  of  twenty-five  feet  between  the  first 


186  MECHANICAL  DRAFTING 

and  last  rivets  of  the  series.  The  term  alternate 
spaces  means  that  each  6-inch  space  is  the  dis¬ 
tance  that  any  rivet  in  one  row  is  in  advance 
of  the  nearest  rivet  in  the  other  row.  The 
distance,  therefore,  between  any  two  consecu¬ 
tive  rivets  in  the  same  row  is  12  inches.  Notice 
that  the  lacing  bars  are  indicated  merely  by 
the  center  lines,  and  that  the  length  as  given 
is  from  center  to  center. 

This  drawing  illustrates  actual  drafting- 
room  practice,  such  as  the  customary  method 
of  representing  the  angles,  the  manner  of 
locating  the  rivet  centers,  the  giving  of  the  over¬ 
all  length  of  the  angles,  and  also  the  distinction 
between  the  shop-  and  the  field-driven  rivets. 
According  to  the  drawing,  all  of  the  rivets  are 
to  have  full  heads,  both  sides  (see  Figs.  158 
and  159). 


BUNGALOW  DESIGN  RENDERED  IN  PEN  AND  INK 


Architectural  Drafting 


It  would  be  a  commonplace  to  insist  on  the 
advantage  to  all  property  owners  and  to  all 
classes  of  workers  engaged  in  building  construc¬ 
tion,  of  a  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  archi¬ 
tectural  design.  It  is  equally  important  that 
they  should  know  how  to  read  and  interpret 
intelligently  the  working  drawings  that  are  the 
guides  to  the  details  of  actual  construction,  and, 
if  need  be,  to  make  these  drawings  themselves. 

GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

The  first  impression  given  by  a  set  of  draw¬ 
ings  applies  as  well  in  Architecture  as  in  any 
other  line  of  work.  So  often  we  hear  it  said, 
“It  certainly  makes  a  good  impression.”  Apply¬ 
ing  this  same  principle  to  architecture,  let  us 
consider  a  few  general  requirements  in  order 
to  finish  a  set  of  plans  in  ^he  best  manner,  and 
also  have  them  appeal  to  a  person  not  familiar 
with  architectural  work. 

The  drawings  should  be  complete  in  every 
respect.  They  should  be  fully  dimensioned 
with  plain  figures;  all  material  plainly  marked 
by  arrows;  each  room  named,  for  the  sake  of 
reference;  and  the  various  parts  of  the  work 

187 


183 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


carefully  explained  by  explanatory  notes.  Make 
these  notes  clear,  concise,  and  with  no  mistaking 
the  part  to  which  they  refer.  While  the  title 
of  each  page  may  be  lettered  in  a  more  elaborate 
letter,  make  all  explanatory  notes  plainly  let¬ 
tered.  Drawings  in  general  have  but  few  notes 
of  explanation.  Make  it  a  rule  to  explain  fully 
all  the  questionable  portions  of  a  building. 
This  applies  to  the  plans,  as  well  as  the  eleva¬ 
tions,  sections,  and  details.  In  the  arrange¬ 
ment  of  notes,  if  there  are  those  that  do  not 
refer  to  any  particular  portion  of  the  drawing, 
place  these  notes  over  the  sheet,  to  make  it 
well  balanced.  Do  not  try  to  crowd  them  into 
one  corner  of  the  sheet  or  along  one  edge.  Place 
them  where  they  will  make  the  drawing  as  a 
whole  look  the  best. 

Architectural  drawings  should  have  some 
character  to  them;  the  lines  should  be  firm  and 
straight,  making  them  a  full,  even  thickness. 
Very  often  good  drawings  are  spoiled  by  the 
lines  being  very  poor  and  also  too  faint.  Use 
a  good,  heavy  line,  and  make  it  look  as  if  it 
was  there  for  a  purpose. 

One  way  in  which  a  drawing  can  be  made 
attractive  and  “ snappy,”  as  you  will  hear  archi¬ 
tects  say,  is  to  overrun  all  corners  and  inter¬ 
sections  of  lines,  slightly.  In  mechanical  draft¬ 
ing  other  than  the  work  of  the  architects,  it  is 
always  required  to  stop  the  lines  at  the  corners, 
making  the  drawing  exact  and  very  mechan¬ 
ical  in  appearance.  The  architect,  however,  is 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


189 


Tig.  1.  Part  Plan,  Showing  Method  of  Overrunning  Comers. 


190  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

allowed  some  liberties  in  his  work.  He  will 
resort  to  methods,  to  improve  the  looks  of  his 
drawings,  which  would  not  be  permissible  in 
other  work. 

Referring  to  Fig.  1,  it  will  be  seen  that  the 
corners  and  intersections  are  emphasized  by  the 
overrunning  of  the  lines.  This  does  not  mean 
long  lines  past  the  corners,  but  just  enough  to 
show  a  sharp  intersection.  A  little  practice  will 
soon  enable  a  draftsman  to  do  this  work  skil¬ 
fully,  and  once  this  method  is  adopted  it  will 
be  used  on  all  future  work,  as  there  is  no  com¬ 
parison  in  the  general  attractive  appearance  of 
two  drawings,  in  one  of  which  this  method  is 
used,  and  in  the  other  the  strict  mechanical 
method  is  adhered  to.  The  actual  time  con¬ 
sumed  in  getting  out  a  drawing  is  less  with  the 
method  described  than  with  the  true  mechan¬ 
ical  drawing,  in  which  it  is  necessary  to  start 
and  stop  at  exactly  a  certain  point.  In  mechan¬ 
ical  drawing,  it  is  frequently  necessary,  after 
two  lines  at  an  angle  have  been  drawn,  to  go 
over  the  first  line  in  order  to  continue  it  a  short 
distance  to  the  exact  corner. 

Very  often,  a  few  minutes  spent  on  careful 
lettering,  indicating  materials,  and  an  additional 
explanatory  note,  will  be  the  winning  feature 
of  a  set  of  drawings. 

Too  much  emphasis  cannot  be  placed  upon 
always  being  on  time,  whether  in  office  work 
or  in  getting  out  drawings.  When  a  time  is 
set  for  the  completion  of  any  drawing,  or  a  time 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


191 


of  meeting  arranged,  have  your  work  ready  at 
that  time,  and  keep  your  appointment  exactly 
as  arranged.  Before  setting  a  time  of  comple¬ 
tion,  be  sure  you  are  giving  yourself  time  to 
do  the  work  completely,  and  then  see  to  it  that 
your  work  is  ready  at  that  time. 

The  architect’s  services  usually  consist  in 
preparing  the  necessary  studies  or  preliminary 
sketches,  working  drawings,  specifications,  and 
large-scale  and  full-size  details,  together  with 
a  general  supervision  of  the  work.  For  this 
service,  there  is  usually  a  price  based  upon  a 
minimum  percentage  of  the  completed  work. 
This  percentage  varies  in  different  States  and 
localities,  from  3 y2  to  7  per  cent.  As  the  work 
progresses,  or  different  sets  of  drawings  are 
completed,  payments  are  made.  If  we  consider 
the  architect  receiving  five  per  cent  commission, 
one-fifth  the  entire  fee  is  due  upon  the  com¬ 
pletion  of  the  preliminary  sketches,  two-fifths 
upon  the  completion  of  the  working  drawings 
and  specifications,  the  balance  being  paid  as  the 
work  progresses.  This  percentage  is  based  on 
the  total  cost  of  the  buildings.  These  prices  are 
those  adopted  by  the  Chicago  Architects’  Busi¬ 
ness  Association.  Should  work  on  the  drawings 
be  abandoned,  a  charge  should  be  made  for 
services  for  the  amount  of  work  done. 

This  will  give  an  idea  as  to  the  general 
prices  charged,  and  the  usual  times  of  payment. 
It  does  not  pay  to  do  work  at  a  small  percent¬ 
age,  for  the  work  on  the  drawings  and  specifi- 


192  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

cations  will  necessarily  have  to  be  inferior  and 
incomplete. 

The  scales  at  which  drawings  are  usually 
made  are  %  in.,  y±  in.,  y2  in.,  %  in.,  %  in.,  iy2 
in.,  and  3  in.,  to  the  foot.  These  are  convenient 
for  all  parties  concerned.  We  see  that  by  using 
the  first  three  scales  we  can  use  the  regular 
divisions  on  a  rule,  without  having  an  architect’s 
scale.  The  last  scales  are  also  convenient  for 
the  same  reason.  Take,  for  instance,  a  detail 
drawn  at  3-inch  scale;  then  we  see  that  y±  inch 
equals  one  inch,  and  an  ordinary  rule  can  be 
used  to  advantage.  On  the  actual  construction 
work,  the  foreman  always  uses  his  two-foot  rule 
for  scaling  the  drawings;  and  if  the  above  scales 
are  used,  they  are  easily  read  from  an  ordinary 
rule. 

A  complete  set  of  drawings  should  include  a 
survey,  or  City  Engineer’s  plan,  of  the  lot,  on 
which  the  outline  of  the  building  is  marked;  a 
foundation  plan;  a  plan  for  each  floor;  a  roof 
plan;  an  elevation  of  each  side  of  the  house; 
all  necessary  %-inch  scale  detail  sections;  all 
necessary  elevations  of  interior  finish;  large- 
scale  details  of  the  window-frames  and  sash  and 
interior  trim;  and  any  other  details  of  unusual 
construction.  After  the  contract  is  let,  then 
get  out  full-sized  details. 

Should  any  changes  be  necessary  after  the 
drawings  are  completed,  secure  the  owner’s 
written  order  for  such  changes.  If  everything 


c 


% 

o 

PS 

E 


m 
xn  % 

g  g 

PS  XS1 

P  H 
H  Q 


C 

H 

E 


£ 

C 


w  P 

>  s 


H 

PS 

O 

u 

w 

p 


£ 

<s 

o 


PS 


K 

E- 


<J 


z 

w 


PS 

0 


o 

fc 

<1 


PS 

o 

p 


V  i 

>.  ■  '■  . 


' 

' 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  193 

is  in  writing,  there  can  be  no  cause  for  dispute, 
especially  in  the  matter  of  changes. 

METHOD  OF  GETTING  OUT  DRAWINGS 

The  prospective  client,  by  appointment  or 
otherwise,  meets  the  architect  in  his  office.  The 
general  scheme  is  talked  over,  and  the  various 
subjects  are  discussed,  such  as  the  lot,  location, 
size,  etc.;  the  amount  to  be  put  into  the  build¬ 
ing,  or  the  cost;  the  time  of  beginning  and 
completion;  the  owner’s  general  idea  of  the 
requirements;  and  the  architect’s  fee.  A  time 
is  set  for  the  getting-out  of  the  preliminary 
sketches.  All  of  this  information  is  arranged, 
and  entered  in  a  book  for  future  reference. 

At  the  appointed  time,  the  client  appears 
again,  and  the  preliminary  sketches  are  talked 
over,  changed,  and  revised,  and  any  new  infor¬ 
mation  is  noted.  After  another  visit  or  two 
by  the  client,  the  sketches  are  accepted.  The 
working  drawings  are  begun,  usually  made  at 
%-ineh  or  1,4-inch  scale.  These  drawings  are 
carefully  inspected  by  the  head  draftsman,  num¬ 
bered,  dated,  and  signed. 

These  drawings  are  then  reproduced  by  some 
method — usually  blue-printed — bound,  and  sent 
to  the  contractors  for  bids  or  proposals  on  the 
work.  After  the  contract  has  been  let,  the  full- 
sized  drawings  are  made. 


194  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

AECHITECTUEAL  DEAWINGS 

Architectural  drawings  may  be  classified  as 
follows : 


_  .  fSketches 

Preliminary  Perspective  sketches 

Drawings  [competition  Drawings 


Working 

Drawings 


General 

Detail 


Scale  Details 
Full-Size  Details 


Preliminary  Drawings 

Preliminary  drawings  are  small  studies  of 
the  proposed  new  work,  freehand  or  otherwise, 
at  a  small  scale,  finished  in  an  attractive  man¬ 
ner.  There  are  three  classes  of  preliminary 
drawings — namely,  Sketches,  Perspectives,  and 
Competitive  Sketches. 

Preliminary  Sketches.  In  architectural  work, 
no  matter  whether  you  are  an  architect  dealing 
with  an  owner  or  client,  or  a  draftsman  getting 
out  working  drawings,  it  is  always  better  to 
make  a  preliminary  sketch  of  the  arrangement, 
detail,  etc.,  as  it  saves  time  and  much  erasing 
and  changing  on  the  scale  drawings.  By  pre¬ 
liminary  sketches  we  mean  the  sketching  free¬ 
hand  on  paper  to  show  exactly  just  how  you 
will  draw  it  with  the  T-square  and  triangles. 

Let  us  consider  the  architect  dealing  with  a 
client.  The  first  thing  is  an  arrangement  of  the 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  195 

rooms,  or  the  plan  is  first  studied.  For  this 
work,  tracing  paper  will  be  found  very  easy  to 
work  with  and  very  convenient.  The  use  of  a 
sheet  of  co-ordinate  paper  under  the  tracing 
paper  will  be  found  very  convenient.  The 
squares  on  the  co-ordinate  paper  will  serve  as  a 
guide  in  drawing  straight  lines;  and  also  the 
squares  as  ruled  on  this  paper  can  be  used  as 
a  scale — one  square  representing  one  unit,  as  a 
foot  or  an  inch. 

Very  often  the  owner  of  the  proposed  new 
building  will  have  some  scheme  or  arrangement 
of  rooms  that  he  would  like;  therefore,  try  to 
have  him  give  you  a  rough  sketch  of  such 
arrangement;  even  a  drawing  with  single  lines 
for  walls,  and  cross-lines  indicating  windows, 
will  be  very  helpful.  A  drawing  as  shown  in 
Fig.  2  is  just  what  you  want  from  your  client. 

Having  received  either  this  sketch  or  a  list 
of  the  requirements,  you  are  ready  to  start  your 
preliminary  sketches.  Spread  down  the  co-ordi¬ 
nate  paper,  and  over  this  lay  a  sheet  of  tracing 
paper.  These  may  be  held  down  with  thumb¬ 
tacks  or  weights  of  some  sort  placed  on  opposite 
ends.  Assume  each  square  of  the  paper  to 
represent  some  unit,  as  one  inch,  or  one  foot,  or 
ten  feet;  and  lay  out  first  the  property  lines. 
Then  commence  on  the  building  proper.  Make 
no  attempt  at  trying  to  make  exact  lines;  let 
these  sketches  be  more  of  freehand  drawing. 
Mark  off  the  approximate  sizes  of  rooms  by 
rectangles,  and  try  the  various  arrangements, 


196 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  197 

endeavoring  to  secure  an  ideal  arrangement. 
Make  no  attempt  at  trying  to  show  double  lines 
for  wall  lines;  let  it  be  a  free  and  easy  sketch 
of  single  lines. 

Don’t  be  satisfied  with  one  arrangement  of 
the  given  requirements.  Over  this  first  sketch 
lay  another  sheet  of  tracing  paper.  Perhaps 
you  can  use  some  parts  of  the  first  sketch,  and 
revise  other  parts.  Study  your  problem,  and 
be  fully  acquainted  with  the  requirements. 
After  completing  this  second  arrangement,  try 
to  imagine  difficulties  that  this  arrangement 
would  present,  and  how  they  might  be  remedied. 
Make  another  sketch;  don’t  be  satisfied  until  you 
have  made  half  a  dozen  different  sketches. 
After  having  considered  all  the  possible  arrange¬ 
ments  of  the  requirements,  then  take  the 
sketches,  spread  them  all  out  before  you,  and 
see  if  you  have  solved  the  problem. 

Now  commence  with  a  clean  sheet  of  tracing 
paper  over  the  co-ordinate  paper,  and  make  fin¬ 
ished  sketches;  that  is,  lay  out  the  wall  lines 
carefully,  put  in  the  windows  and  doors,  letter 
the  rooms,  and  get  these  drawings  into  shape  to 
submit  them  to  the  client.  Make  them  so  that 
he  will  understand  clearly  the  arrangement  you 
have  sketched. 

For  filling  in  the  walls  to  indicate  the  walls 
and  the  windows,  it  will  help  the  appearance 
to  color  the  walls  on  the  back  side  of  the  paper 
with  the  pencil.  This  gives  a  subdued  color  to 


198  AKCHITECTURAL  DKAFTING 

the  walls,  and  increases  the  clearness  of  the  plan 
or  drawing. 

Prepare  small  sketches  of  possible  treatment 
of  the  elevations,  and  submit  these  also  with 
the  plan.  These  will  now  do  for  you  to  submit 
to  your  client  (see  Fig.  3).  Be  very  sure  that 
you  have  studied  the  problem  thoroughly,  and 
be  prepared  to  answer  all  questions  your  client 
will  probably  ask.  The  client  will  very  soon 
form  an  opinion  of  your  ability  by  the  way 
you  handle  his  work. 

When  these  first  preliminary  sketches  are 
ready,  notify  your  client,  unless  you  have  had  a 
previous  time  of  meeting  set.  If  this  be  the 
case,  then  be  sure  to  have  your  work  ready  for 
him  at  the  appointed  time.  Remember,  your 
client  is  a  busy  business  man,  a  man  who  is 
always  used  to  keeping  his  appointments,  and 
expects  everyone  to  keep  theirs. 

After  these  first  sketches  have  been  sub¬ 
mitted,  and  carefully  gone  over,  make  an  ap¬ 
pointment  for  the  next  meeting,  at  which  time 
you  will  have  the  final  preliminary  sketches 
ready.  There  will  always  be  changes  and  addi¬ 
tions  on  these  sketches;  and  the  fewer  times 
the  client  has  to  be  consulted,  the  better  im¬ 
pression  you  will  make.  Therefore,  after  this 
first  meeting,  understand  thoroughly  your 
client’s  objections  and  changes,  ask  questions 
to  make  sure  you  do  understand,  and  go  back 
to  your  office  determined  to  make  the  revisions 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


199 


Fig.  3.  First  Sketch  Ready  to  Submit  to  Owner. 

Original  drawn  at  scale  of  =  l'-O",  all  freehand  and  drawn  on 
co-ordinate  paper. 


200  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

and  that  the  next  sketches  submitted  will  be 
approved. 

For  the  next  sketches,  it  is  very  often  more 
satisfactory  to  use  the  T-square  and  triangles, 
and  a  scale,  and  make  small,  sketchy  drawings. 
Tack  down  your  tracing  paper,  and  lay  out  to 
a  small  scale  the  general  arrangement  (Fig.  4). 
Every  little  detail  need  not  be  attempted  on 
these  sketches;  but  make  them  straight-line 
drawings,  using  more  care  in  the  finishing  of 
such  drawings.  Make  all  plans  necessary,  show¬ 
ing  the  arrangement  on  all  floors;  also  an  eleva¬ 
tion.  Make  them  attractive,  and  letter  com¬ 
pletely. 

The  next  meeting  with  your  client  should  be 
the  last  one  so  far  as  the  sketches  are  concerned. 
Have  him  look  over  all  your  sketches  closely; 
go  over  them  with  him,  pointing  out  the  changes, 
telling  him  the  advantages  to  be  gained  by  this 
or  that  arrangement,  and  convince  him  that  you 
know  your  business.  He  will  finally  see  things 
your  way,  and  he  will  tell  you  to  go  ahead  with 
the  work.  If  you  see  he  is  satisfied  with  the 
arrangement  as  shown  him  on  the  sketches, 
secure  if  possible  his  initials  of  approval  (in 
ink)  on  each  sheet.  Don’t  ask  him  to  “sign 
these  sketches,”  as  if  you  were  an  owner  and 
he  a  lease-holder.  If  there  is  anything  a  busi¬ 
ness  man  hesitates  to  do,  it  is  to  sign  his  name 
to  a  paper  of  any  kind.  Use  a  little  tact,  tell 
him  that  you  want  him  to  be  perfectly  satisfied; 
and  in  order  for  him  to  be  sure  he  is  going  to 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


201 


202 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


get  the  arrangement  that  suited  him,  he  can 
0.  K.  the  sketches  that  he  approves,  and  thereby 
have  a  check  on  the  working  drawings  so  that 
they  will  be  sure  to  be  what  he  wants.  On  the 
other  hand,  you  are  protecting  yourself  by  this 
signature.  Very  often  your  client  may  forget 
that  he  ordered  this  or  that  change  in  your 
sketches;  he  might  in  some  cases  refuse  to  pay 
you  your  agreed  commission,  because  you  did 
not  do  this  or  that  thing  which  he  ordered.  If 
you  have  his  signature  on  the  sketches,  and 
you  have  followed  these  sketches  exactly,  you 
will  not  fear  the  outcome  should  the  case  go  to 
law  for  settlement. 

The  same  general  method  of  procedure  will 
apply  if  you  are  a  draftsman  getting  out  scale 
details.  Get  out  freehand  sketches  on  tracing 
paper,  several  of  them;  decide  which  is  the  best 
method  before  making  the  regular  scale  details. 
If  you  are  a  new  man  in  an  office,  submit  your 
best  sketch  for  the  construction  to  the  head 
draftsman,  and  let  him  see  that  you  are  studying 
your  work,  endeavoring  to  get  the  best  method. 
Learn  to  make  your  sketches  clear  and  well 
executed.  This  comes  only  by  practice  in 
sketching. 

Much  time  and  money  can  be  saved  on  the 
cost  of  getting  out  the  drawings  if  only  you 
learn  to  make  these  sketches  well  and  complete, 
so  that  when  you  are  ready  to  make  the  final 
drawings,  you  can  start  and  know  definitely  just 
what  they  will  include. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  203 

It  will  be  found  very  convenient  to  use  a 
soft  pencil.  Never  use  a  hard  pencil  on  your 
drawings,  no  matter  whether  they  are  the 
sketches  or  scale  drawings. 

It  is  very  necessary  for  a  draftsman  to  know 
how  to  make  preliminary  sketches.  Very  often 
a  new  draftsman’s  ability  along  architectural 
lines  is  tested  by  these  preliminary  sketches, 
their  make-up,  the  method  of  getting  them  out, 
and  the  time  taken  to  get  them  ready.  If  a  firm 
finds  out  that  you  can  make  attractive  and  yet 
practical  preliminary  sketches,  you  will  soon 
find  out  that  you  will  not  be  required  to  serve 
your  time  at  tracing  drawings  or  details,  as  most 
draftsmen  have  to  do  upon  entering  a  new  office. 

Perspective  Sketches.  A  perspective  is  a 
representation  of  a  building  or  object  as  it  ap¬ 
pears  from  a  fixed  point.  These  sketches  are  usu¬ 
ally  drawn  at  a  small  scale,  either  freehand  or 
mechanically.  The  lines  should  be  lightly  drawn 
or  sketched,  as  strong  lines  will  be  objection¬ 
able  in  the  rendering  or  coloring  of  the  drawing. 
The  rendering  may  be  in  pencil,  ink,  water- 
color,  or  sometimes  in  crayon,  and  prepared 
upon  almost  any  kind  of  paper  (see  Fig.  5). 

Competition  Drawings.  These  are  more  or 
less  preliminary  sketches.  As  a  general  thing 
it  is  only  occasionally  that  a  firm  enters  a  com¬ 
petition;  but  if  it  should,  let  the  draftsman  show 
that  he  knows  how  to  prepare  such  drawings. 
By  competition  drawings,  we  mean  drawings 
that  are  submitted  in  a  competition.  The  firms 


204 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


may  be  invited  to  submit  competition  designs, 
in  which  case  it  is  called  a  closed  competition; 
or  the  requirements  may  be  published  in  some 


Fig.  5.  A  Freehand  Perspective  Sketch. 

architectural  paper,  and  anyone  may  submit 
drawings,  in  which  case  it  is  called  an  open 
competition.  The  drawings  submitted  for  the 
open  competition  are  more  of  the  nature  of 
sketches  than  in  the  closed  competition.  Usu¬ 
ally,  in  the  closed  competition,  each  firm  invited 
to  submit  drawings  will  be  paid  for  their  work 
even  though  unsuccessful  in  being  the  winner. 
There  is  generally  a  sum  paid  for  such  drawings. 
Thus,  in  a  closed  competition,  an  architect  is 
paid  for  his  time  and  can  afford  to  get  out  a 
better  class  of  drawings.  These  are  usually 
drawn  on  regular  drawing  paper,  carefully  laid 
out  to  scale,  and  all  inked  in.  The  sheet  is  then 
water-colored  and  made  as  attractive  as  possible 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  205 

in  this  manner.  In  other  words,  these  drawings 
are  laid  out  as  carefully,  except  at  a  much 
smaller  scale,  as  working  drawings;  only  the 
important  dimensions  are  put  on. 

In  the  open  competition,  the  work  is  usually 
done  on  tracing  paper.  The  plans  are  laid  out 
at  a  small  scale,  made  very  sketchy,  and  the 
pencil  is  allowed  much  freedom  in  the  lines. 
With  this  sort  of  drawing,  it  is  necessary  to 
study  the  requirements,  make  sketches,  and 
decide  for  yourself  which  answers  the  require¬ 
ments  the  best.  There  will  be  no  client  to  criti¬ 
cise  your  work,  but  you  will  have  to  do  this  for 
yourself  and  submit  your  sketches  as  final 
sketches  to  the  client.  The  first-floor  plan  is 
laid  out,  and  the  surrounding  premises  are  also 
laid  out.  Trees  and  shrubbery  also  are  put  on; 
and  walks,  drives,  and  gardens  are  shown.  Since 
this  is  on  tracing  paper,  very  little  water-color 
is  used.  Use  the  pencil  to  show  everything, 
and  upon  your  ability  to  use  your  pencil — and 
a  soft  one,  too — will  depend  much  of  the  success 
of  your  drawings.  After  these  sketches  have 
been  made,  they  are  lettered  and  titled  attrac¬ 
tively,  and  then  mounted  on  cardboard.  This 
mounting  is  usually  done  by  pasting  the  corners 
only,  and  not  attempting  to  paste  the  whole 
drawing.  Ordinarily,  a  border  of  some  sort  is 
placed  around  the  card,  and  any  other  finishing 
touches  that  will  make  the  drawing  attract 
attention  are  added.  Thus  we  see  that  competi- 


206  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

tion  drawings  are  only  preliminary  sketches 
finished  a  little  better  than  for  the  ordinary  class 
of  work. 

Should  you  be  successful  in  the  competition, 
the  method  of  getting  out  the  working  drawings, 
scale  details,  and  other  drawings,  is  the  same 
as  for  any  other  work. 

The  chances  are  that  you  will  rarely  have  a 
chance  to  get  out  competition  drawings;  but 
should  the  opportunity  come,  grasp  it,  and  do 
your  best. 

Working  Drawings 

By  working  drawings  we  mean  drawings 
complete  in  every  respect,  with  dimensions, 
sizes  of  rooms,  etc.  In  other  words,  they  are 
the  drawings  giving  all  the  necessary  informa¬ 
tion  to  completely  build  the  structure  as  drawn. 
This  division  of  drawings  may  be  divided  into 
general  and  detail  drawings,  the  latter  being 
subdivided  into  scale  and  full-size. 

The  architect  who  is  mindful  of  his  client’s 
welfare  will  furnish  a  complete  set  of  drawings. 
The  clearest,  simplest,  and  most  exact  working 
drawing  is  the  best.  Some  architects  feel  that 
working  drawings  do  not  require  the  best  work. 
The  making  of  good,  clear,  complete  drawings 
cannot  be  emphasized  too  strongly. 

The  Plan.  In  the  plan  we  see  an  arrange¬ 
ment  of  the  rooms  for  the  different  floors  that 
approaches  the  ideal  as  nearly  as  possible.  The 
plan  should  present  the  conveniences  of  arrange- 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


207 


ment.  In  the  following  description  we  shall 
consider  the  plan  of  a  residence,  as  it  will  clearly 
set  forth  the  logical  arrangement  of  parts.  The 
description,  as  noted,  will  be  limited  to  residence 
work,  since  this  class  of  building  is  likely  to 
afford  a  student  his  first  opportunity  for  inde¬ 
pendent,  original  work. 

The  same  reasoning  could  be  extended  and 
applied  to  any  class  of  building.  Usually  the 
first-floor  plan  is  worked  out  first,  as  it  is  the 
most  important,  since  the  greater  part  of  the 
day  is  spent  in  this  portion  of  the  house.  The 
upper  floors,  being  used  almost  entirely  for  bed¬ 
rooms  or  minor  rooms,  can  be  worked  out  to 
conform  to  the  outline  of  the  first-floor  plan. 
The  basement  usually  is  devoted  to  the  heating 
apparatus  and  its  accessories,  the  laundry,  store¬ 
rooms,  and  such.  Therefore,  the  first-floor  plan 
will  govern  the  outline  of  the  basement  walls; 
and  the  basement  rooms  will  be  arranged  inside 
the  basement  walls,  as  determined  by  the  first- 
floor  plan. 

In  residence  work  we  see  two  classifica¬ 
tions — the  city  house  and  the  country  house. 
The  city  house  gets  its  sunlight  from  the  front 
and  rear,  being  usually  built  in  between  adjacent 
houses  where  there  is  no  chance  of  sunlight  from 
the  sides.  A  country  house  gets  its  light  from 
all  four  sides;  that  is,  it  is  built  in  a  part  of 
town  where  the  lots  are  of  sufficient  width  to 
give  plenty  of  light  and  air.  The  city  house 


208  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

usually  has  a  lot  20  to  30  feet  wide,  and  it  is 
a  question  of  the  best  arrangement  for  light  as 
well  as  comfort.  The  country  house  usually 
has  a  lot  50  to  60  feet  wide;  and  it  is  not  un¬ 
common  to  see  a  house  built  on  two  lots,  giving 
all  the  more  room. 

Let  us,  therefore,  consider  the  first-floor  plan. 
Upon  entering  a  residence,  we  usually  step  into 
a  vestibule.  This  room,  while  small  and  inferior, 
yet  is  one  of  the  most  important  rooms  in  the 
house.  The  vestibule  should  be  well  lighted, 
which  can  be  done  by  means  of  glass  in  the 
front  door,  by  side  lights  along  the  sides  of  the 
door,  by  a  transom,  and  by  glass  in  the  door 
leading  into  the  living  room.  The  vestibule 
should  be  provided  if  possible  with  a  closet  (it 
need  not  be  large),  in  which  a  person’s  every¬ 
day  hats  and  wraps  may  be  kept,  also  all  rub¬ 
bers  and  umbrellas.  It  is  very  evident  that 
this  will  be  the  first  need  upon  entering  a  home — 
a  place  to  dispose  of  one’s  coat,  hat,  etc.,  before 
entering  the  home  proper.  It  is  all  the  more 
urgent  in  a  mild,  rainy  climate.  In  case  a  closet 
cannot  be  provided,  there  should  be  a  seat  with 
a  hinged  cover,  and  a  stand  for  umbrellas,  with 
the  usual  furniture  for  holding  the  coats  and 
hats.  This  room,  as  already  said,  need  not  be 
large,  as  usually  not  more  than  two  people  are 
ever  in  the  room  at  the  same  time.  In  some 
residences  there  is  no  vestibule,  but  it  is  almost 
a  necessity  in  the  best  class  of  work. 


. 

* 


DESIGN  FOE  A  CARRIAGE  SHELTER. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


209 


From  the  vestibule,  we  now  come  to  the 
reception  room.  This  room  is  usually  large,  with 
but  little  furniture.  The  main  stairway  leads 
up  from  one  side  of  this  room  and  is  made  quite 
ornamental.  The  other  side  is  usually  open, 
or  separated  by  columns  or  grill-work  from  the 
living  room.  At  one  end  of  the  reception  room, 
one  frequently  sees  a  fireplace,  more  or  less 
elaborate. 

Turning  now  to  the  living  room,  let  us  study 
the  requirements  of  this  room.  Here  is  the 
room  the  family  will  spend  most  of  the  time  in. 
Often  one  end  is  set  apart  for  a  nook  or  library. 
There  should  be  a  large  open  room  with  a  fire¬ 
place  of  brick  or  stone  or  tile  or  other  suitable 
material,  ornamental  or  plain,  or  the  mantel  may 
be  of  wood. 

Provide  plenty  of  windows,  especially  on  the 
sunny  side  of  the  house.  Nothing  will  dispel 
gloomy  feelings  or  worry  quicker  than  plenty 
of  sunlight  and  fresh  air.  For  the  nook,  if  there 
is  one,  build  in  shelves  for  books,  put  in  a  seat 
with  a  hinged  cover,  also  a  fireplace.  In  this 
room,  the  quiet  hours  of  the  day  are  spent; 
therefore  make  it  comfortable  and  convenient. 
A  very  convenient  arrangement  is  to  place  a 
seat  on  one  side,  with  bookshelves  on  the  other; 
also  a  few  shelves  at  one  end  or  above  the  seat, 
for  current  books  or  periodicals.  Provide  a 
plate-rail  around  this  nook,  for  the  placing  of 
china,  ornaments,  or  bric-a-brac. 

Opening  from  the  living  room  we  usually 


210 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


find  the  dining  room,  separated  by  sliding  doom 
This  room  should  be  more  or  less  private,  but 
by  means  of  double  doors  it  may  be  thrown 
open  when  desired.  In  the  dining  room,  build 
in  a  sideboard,  and  provide  a  small  shelf  or  two 
for  pretty  china,  vases,  or  ornaments.  Back  of 
these  shelves  a  mirror  is  usually  set.  A  French 
beveled-plate  mirror  is  used  in  the  best  work. 
There  should  be  the  “  counter,  ”  or  the  main 
shelf,  projecting  from  two  to  six  inches  beyond 
the  shelves  and  drawers  below.  Below  the 
counter,  provide  a  long  drawer  that  will  take 
a  table-cloth  as  folded  when  laundered.  A 
drawer  for  silver  is  also  directly  under  the 
counter.  Below  this,  there  may  be  either 
drawers  for  other  table  linen,  or  shelves  enclosed 
by  glass  doors  for  displaying  china  or  cut  glass. 
This  sideboard  should  be  made  an  attractive 
feature  of  the  room.  There  might  also  be  an¬ 
other  case  of  shelves  and  drawers  for  additional 
table  linen  and  dishes.  There  should  be  a  plate- 
rail  around  the  room,  on  which  to  hang  cups  or 
to  place  china  or  ornaments.  This  room  should 
have,  if  possible,  an  east  exposure,  since  the 
first  meal  of  the  day  should  be  served  in  a  bright, 
cheery  atmosphere. 

It  will  be  necessary  to  have  a  serving  pantry 
between  the  dining  room  and  kitchen.  There 
should  be  double-acting  doors.  This  greatly 
facilitates  the  carrying  of  dishes  from  one  room 
to  another.  In  this  pantry  should  be  a  wide 
shelf  or  counter  which  will  be  used  in  the  prep- 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


211 


aration  of  the  meal.  Above  are  shelves  with 
sliding  doors,  and  below  are  drawers  for  differ¬ 
ent  articles  of  food.  Provide  always  plenty  of 
drawers  and  shelf  room.  In  a  small  room, 
sliding  doors  will  be  found  much  more  con¬ 
venient  than  swing  doors,  as  they  are  much  more 
easily  handled  and  take  up  much  less  room  in 
opening  and  closing.  If  possible,  there  should 
be  built  in  this  room  a  refrigerator.  If  not  here, 
place  it  in  the  kitchen.  This  refrigerator  should 
be  provided  with  an  outside  door  through  which 
the  ice  may  be  replenished  from  the  outside, 
thereby  doing  away  with  the  ice  man  coming  in 
at  all  hours  and  in  bad  weather  tracking  mud 
into  the  house. 

The  kitchen,  while  in  the  rear  of  the  house, 
requires  careful  thought.  The  housekeeper 
usually  spends  the  greater  part  of  the  morning 
here;  therefore  give  this  room,  if  possible,  an 
east  exposure.  Make  the  windows  low  enough 
so  that  a  person  sitting  can  see  out.  For  the 
kitchen  table  and  sink,  have  a  window  near. 
This  will  not  only  be  an  aid  to  better  light,  but 
will  give  the  housekeeper  a  chance  to  see  out 
through  the  window.  Place  a  sink  as  near  the 
pantry  and  dining  room  as  possible;  also,  as 
mentioned  above,  so  as  to  be  near  outside  light. 
In  the  kitchen  will  be  found  a  cooking  range  or 
gas  stove,  or  both.  Place  these,  if  possible, 
where  they  will  get  a  cross-draft;  in  other 
words,  place  them  between  a  door  and  a  window, 
or  between  windows,  so  that  the  odor  during 


212  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

the  preparation  of  a  meal  will  be  carried  away. 
Of  course  there  is  necessary  a  flue  for  the  range, 
and  there  should  also  be  one  for  the  gas  stove 
to  carry  off  the  odors  of  the  gas  and  the  ovens. 
The  kitchen  table  should  be  convenient  to  the 
stoves.  There  should  be  built-in  shelves  and 
cupboards  for  the  kitchen-ware  and  the  pots  and 
kettles.  Either  in  the  serving  pantry  of  some¬ 
where  in  the  kitchen,  provide  a  tilting  bin  for 
the  flour.  This  can  be  very  easily  done  by 
making  the  bin  pivoted  at  the  outside  corners,  to 
allow  the  bin  to  tilt  out.  Hooks  or  pivots  for 
swinging  a  barrel  of  sugar  would  also  be  a  great 
convenience.  Ho  not  make  the  kitchen  large; 
make  it  small,  compact,  and  convenient,  to  save 
the  housekeeper  all  unnecessary  steps.  There 
will  also  be  necessary  rear  staii’s,  one  to  the 
basement  and  one  to  the  attic.  These  stairs 
should  be  about  3  feet  6  inches  wide,  as  boxes, 
furniture,  etc.,  are  all  taken  up  or  down  these 
stairs;  so  do  not  make  them  too  small. 

Having  decided  upon  a  satisfactory  arrange¬ 
ment  of  the  lower  floor,  we  now  consider  the 
upper  floors.  These  are  devoted  to  the  bed¬ 
rooms  and  other  rooms  where  more  privacy  is 
desired,  such  as  the  sewing  room,  the  study,  or 
the  nursery.  As  has  been  said,  the  first-floor 
plan  determines  the  outline  of  the  second-floor 
plan.  The  number  of  bedrooms  is  determined  by 
the  size  of  the  family.  There  will  be  required 
also  a  guest  room  and  a  servant’s  room. 

As  to  the  requirements  of  a  bedroom,  make 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


213 


ample-sized  rooms.  The  usual  articles  of  furni¬ 
ture  will  be  the  bed,  a  dresser,  a  chiffonier,  a 
small  table,  and  sometimes  a  writing  desk  or 
an  additional  table  of  some  sort.  Provide  plenty 
of  closet  room,  with  a  window,  if  possible,  in  it. 
In  the  closet  should  be  a  number  of  shelves,  a 
hook  strip  around  the  three  sides.  The  closet 
should  be  finished,  so  far  as  plaster  and  inside 
finish  are  concerned,  as  well  as  the  other  rooms. 
The  question  of  closets  is  important;  therefore, 
consider  them  an  essential  part  of  every  house. 

On  the  second  floor  provide  a  bathroom  con¬ 
venient  to  all  rooms,  yet  far  enough  away  from 
the  main  hall  to  be  private.  The  bathroom  is 
usually  crowded  into  any  remaining  space  that 
may  be  left  after  bedrooms  have  been  consid- 


ic 


i 


Fig.  6.  Layout  of  a  Very  Small  Bathroom. 


ered.  This,  however,  is  not  a  satisfactory  way 
of  doing,  since  the  bathroom  should  be  as  con¬ 
venient  in  arrangement  as  any  other  room.  In 
the  bathroom  the  usual  necessary  fixtures  are 
a  bathtub,  a  lavatory  or  wash-bowl,  and  a  water- 
closet.  In  more  expensive  homes  a  foot-bath 
and  a  sitz  bath  are  provided;  sometimes  a 
shower  bath  also.  There  should  be  ample  room 
for  the  placing  of  these  fixtures,  with  plenty  of 


214 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


room  around  them.  In  Fig.  6  is  shown  the 
smallest  room  that  can  accommodate  the  neces¬ 
sary  fixtures.  While  this  will  serve  in  the 
cheapest  houses,  yet  the  arrangements  shown  in 
Figs.  7  and  8  are  much  better. 

Should  more  fixtures  be  added,  the  room 


Tig.  7. 


Fig.  8. 


Two  Plans  of  Commodious  Bathrooms. 


should  also  be  made  larger  to  accommodate 
them.  There  will  also  be  required  a  medicine 
chest,  usually  built  into  the  wall  directly  above 
the  lavatory,  or  these  can  be  bought  at  furniture 
stores,  ready  to  hang  on  the  wall.  There  should 
always  be  a  mirror  in  the  door  of  this  chest. 
Provide  a  built-in  closet  with  swing  doors  for 
the  upper  half  and  drawers  for  the  lower  half. 
The  finish  of  this  room,  as  well  as  the  shape  of 
the  mouldings,  should  be  such  that  the  dust  will 
not  easily  settle  on  them,  and  that  they  may  be 
frequently  washed  to  remove  any  accumulation 
of  dust. 

In  most  homes,  the  two  main  floors  are  all 
that  are  required  for  living  rooms.  The  attic 
is  usually  low,  and  can  be  fitted  up  with  store- 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


215 


rooms.  The  construction  of  the  roof  should  be 
such  that  soot  and  dirt  cannot  come  through. 
This  is  ordinarily  accomplished  by  using  build¬ 
ing  paper  under  the  shingles  or  roof  covering. 
There  should  be  an  attic  stairs,  convenient  and 
easy  of  ascent. 

For  the  basement,  the  furnace  will  require  a 
part  of  the  space,  together  with  a  coal  room. 
This  coal  room  should  be  built  dust-tight,  and 
have  a  window  convenient  to  a  driveway  for 
the  unloading  of  coal.  The  size  of  coal  room  for 
different  classes  of  coal,  is  indicated  below  under 
the  heading  “ Dimensions.’ ’  There  should  be  a 
laundry  with  laundry  tubs,  or  a  room  where  the 
family  washing  may  be  done.  The  remaining 
space  in  the  basement  may  be  divided  to  suit 
the  owner’s  wishes;  sometimes  a  work-room,  a 
store-room,  a  drying  room,  a  shop,  may  be  placed 
here. 

It  is  very  essential  to  have  a  concrete  floor 
over  the  entire  basement.  This  will  do  away 
with  a  great  deal  of  dirt  and  dust  that  otherwise 
would  be  carried  from  the  basement  all  over  the 
house.  There  should  be  an  outside  entrance, 
as  well  as  an  entrance  from  the  kitchen  or 
serving  room. 

Thus  we  see  the  usual  requirements  for  the 
different  rooms  of  the  house.  The  essential 
rooms  have  been  considered.  In  addition  to 
these,  if  the  price  will  warrant  it,  there  may  be 
other  rooms  and  conveniences,  such  as  a  den 
or  study,  additional  store-rooms,  an  extra  guest 


216 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


room,  a  nursery,  a  pantry  off  the  kitchen  for 
storing  the  supplies  of  the  kitchen.  A  clothes- 
chute  would  be  very  convenient  also.  This  chute 
is  a  vertical  shaft  connecting  the  bathroom  with 
the  laundry  in  the  basement.  There  is  a  door 
into  this  chute  at  the  bathroom,  and  one  on  the 
first  floor.  It  should  be  lined  with  wood,  with 
the  pieces  placed  vertically  to  offer  no  obstruc¬ 
tions  to  the  passage  of  clothes.  The  purpose  is 
evident,  being  a  means  of  conveying  the  soiled 
linen  from  the  second  and  first  floors  to  the  base¬ 
ment,  and  thereby  saving  carrying  them  from 
all  over  the  house  in  a  basket  to  the  basement. 

In  summing  up  this  portion  of  the  work,  let 
the  draftsman  put  in  all  conveniences  in  the  way 
of  cupboards,  shelves,  and  drawers  wherever 
there  is  a  space,  corner,  or  portion  of  a  wall.  In 
this  way  you  make  a  favorable  impression  upon 
the  housekeeper,  and  if  this  is  done,  the  “  battle 
is  more  than  half  won.” 

Fig.  9  is  a  first-floor  plan,  showing  the 
arrangement,  the  dimensions,  and  all  necessary 
information  to  give  the  builder  a  complete 
understanding  of  the  work. 

The  Elevation.  Having  considered  briefly 
the  general  methods  used  in  the  drawing  of 
architectural  plans,  we  shall  now  consider  the 
elevations.  By  elevations  we  mean  the  different 
“ views”  of  the  building.  These  should  show 
exactly  the  appearance  of  the  building  when 
completed. 

Use  of  the  Orders.  It  will  be  assumed  that 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  217 

the  reader  is  familiar  with  the  Orders  of  Archi¬ 
tecture  (see  below  under  heading  “Orders  of 
Architecture”),  and  that  he  knows  the  names 
of  the  various  parts  of  an  Order. 

From  a  study  of  the  Orders,  we  see  that  each 
one  has  three  main  divisions,  the  entablature, 
the  column,  and  the  pedestal.  These  are  in  turn 
divided  into  parts,  the  entablature  consisting  of 
the  cornice,  the  frieze,  and  the  architrave;  the 
column  has  a  capital,  a  shaft,  and  a  base  or 
plinth;  and  the  pedestal,  a  cap,  a  die,  and  a  base. 
Generally  speaking,  an  elevation — especially  the 
principal  one — shows  these  component  parts  of 
an  Order.  They  may  not  be  classically  correct  in 
proportions,  but  the  parts  are  more  or  less 
prominent,  and  should  be  used  as  a  basis  for 
design  of  all  classes  of  work. 

Let  us  take  a  residence  for  an  example. 
Study  an  elevation  of  a  good  type  of  this  class 
of  building.  We  see  that  the  basement  wall  up 
to  the  first-floor  line  corresponds  to  the  pedestal 
of  the  column,  a  strong,  massive  part  to  support 
the  building  above.  This  pedestal  is  usually 
capped  by  a  projecting  course  we  call  a  water- 
table — that  is,  a  board  or  strip  projecting  from 
the  face  of  a  wall  to  turn  the  water  from  the 
side  of  the  building  away  from  the  foundation. 
This  corresponds  to  the  base  or  plinth  of  the 
column.  Above  the  water-table,  the  part  of  the 
house  extending  to  above  the  top  story  windows 
corresponds  to  the  shaft  of  the  colmnn.  Very 
often  this  column  effect  is  emphasized  by  means 


218  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  9.  First-Floor  Plan  of  a  Eesldence  at  Champaign,  Ill. 

The  scale  reproduced  is  valid  only  as  referring  to  the  original-sized 

drawing, 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


219 


of  corner  boards  at  the  corners  of  the  building. 
At  the  head  of  the  top  windows,  or  in  that  vicin¬ 
ity,  we  see  a  horizontal  board  or  moulding,  mark¬ 
ing  the  division  between  the  column  and  the  en¬ 
tablature.  Sometimes  this  entablature  is  divided 
by  another  moulded  course,  indicating  the 
frieze  and  the  architrave.  There  is  always  a  cor¬ 
nice  of  some  sort,  very  often  corresponding  to 
the  cornice  of  the  Order;  this  may  vary  from  the 
true  profile  to  a  small  projection,  such  as  a  few 
projecting  courses  of  brick. 

In  the  modern  office  building  we  see  the  lower 
stories  marked  by  a  projecting  stone  course; 
below  this,  the  walls  are  of  stone,  and  usually 
present  a  solid,  substantial  base  upon  which  rests 
the  upper  part  of  the  building.  The  column  is  in¬ 
dicated  either  by  pilasters  or  column-like  projec¬ 
tions  from  the  main  face  of  the  building,  or  by  a 
three-quarter  column  fastened  to  the  building. 
The  upper  stories,  depending  upon  the  height  of 
the  building,  are  placed  in  the  entablature. 

It  is  worth  while  to  study  this  feature  in  all 
classes  of  building,  in  order  to  design  intelli¬ 
gently. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  Orders  of  Architecture 
are  really  the  basis  for  all  our  designs.  This  same 
applies  to  any  type  of  building,  being  more 
marked  in  some  classes  of  buildings  than  others. 
The  Colonial  residence  or  Colonial  Architecture 
adheres  strictly  to  this  basis  of  ornament.  If  de¬ 
tached  or  free  columns  are  used  for  porch  con¬ 
struction,  then  we  see  the  component  parts  of 


220 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


the  Order  carried  out  exactly.  Therefore,  in  any 
building,  use  the  Order  to  start  the  general  ele¬ 
vations,  and  elaborate  or  suit  the  elevation  to  the 
class  of  building. 

Characteristics  of  Types  of  Buildings 

Let  us  now  consider  the  general  types  of 
buildings  for  different  purposes.  The  residence, 
for  instance,  usually  has  the  appearance  of  a 
quiet,  restful  place.  The  types  of  doors,  win¬ 
dows,  and  roof  lines  are  in  general  similar,  there 
being  large  windows  and  plenty  of  them.  Resi¬ 
dences  thus  constitute  a  class  marked  by  well- 
known  and  easily  distinguishable  general  char¬ 
acteristics. 

Consider  a  library.  We  see  here  a  closer  ad¬ 
herence  to  the  Orders  than  in  many  other  types 
of  structure.  Usually  there  is  a  jhllared  entrance 
of  some  form  or  other;  the  windows  are  all  large 
and  dignified.  The  roof  is  covered  with  tile  or 
some  other  more  expensive  covering.  In  general, 
libraries  are  a  dignified  class  of  buildings,  easily 
distinguished  as  such,  and  usually  quite  costly. 

In  schoolhouses  we  see  a  class  of  buildings 
with  large  areas  devoted  to  windows,  not  usually 
of  very  great  height,  and  with  a  tower  of  some 
outline.  There  may  be  large,  blank  walls,  which 
make  this  class  of  buildings  all  the  more  distinct. 

The  office  building  generally  has  numerous 
windows,  not  usually  grouped  but  placed  one 
above  the  other,  and  is  rather  plain  in  treatment 
except  at  the  cornice. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


221 


The  warehouse  forms  another  excellent  ex¬ 
ample  of  the  exterior  indicating  the  purpose  of 
the  building.  In  this  type,  we  see  small  windows, 
some  barred,  with  heavy  doors,  showing  it  to  be 
a  building  of  great  strength  and  fire-resistance. 

Thus  endeavor,  in  designing  any  building,  to 
make  it  indicative  of  the  purpose  for  which  it  is 
designed.  Study  carefully  from  examples  or 
from  pictures  these  characteristics,  and  apply 
these  principles  to  designs  you  may  submit. 

General  Composition  of  a  Building  or  Treat¬ 
ment  of  Elevations.  A  few  words  about  the  gen¬ 
eral  composition  or  elevation  of  a  building  might 
be  said.  There  are  a  few  principles  involved 
that  will  be  an  aid  in  deciding  upon  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  elevation. 


Fig.  10.  Illustrating  Method  of  Treating  Elevations. 

In  A,  vertical  lines  are  emphasized,  adding  to  the  appearance  of 
height;  in  B,  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  horizontal  lines, 
adding  to  breadth  and  length  of  structure. 

The  adjoining  buildings  will  sometimes  have 
a  certain  influence  upon  the  treatment  of  the 
elevation.  Should  the  new  building  be  placed 
between  two  buildings  taller  and  larger  in  every 
way,  then  some  means  to  increase  the  general 
height  must  he  used.  Should  there  he  plenty  of 
room  and  the  buildings  on  either  side  be  far 


222  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

enough  away  so  that  they  will  not  be  seen  or  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  general  view  of  the  new  building, 
then  the  design  may  be  anything  in  keeping  with 
good  design.  If  the  present  buildings  are  large 
and  massive,  covering  a  good  deal  of  ground, 
then  we  shall  treat  the  new  elevation  correspond¬ 
ingly.  In  Fig.  10  are  shown  the  results,  on  the 
same  building,  of  different  treatments  of  eleva¬ 
tion.  In  A  we  see  vertical  lines  emphasized,  as 
they  tend  to  increase  the  height.  Such  a  treat¬ 
ment  of  the  elevation  should  be  used  if  the  loca¬ 
tion  were  between  two  taller  buildings.  In  B  on 
the  other  hand,  the  horizontal  lines  are  empha¬ 
sized.  There  is  the  sill  course  or  water-table  at 


A  B 


Fig.  11.  Two  Typical  Methods  of  Treating  Windows. 

the  first-floor  line;  then  a  belt  course  about  the 
second-floor  line,  and  a  course  at  the  attic  line. 
These  tend  to  lengthen  the  general  appearance, 
and  would  be  in  keeping  as  mentioned  above  for 
the  third  condition.  In  A,  we  see  that  the  cor¬ 
nice  is  made  smaller;  while  in  B,  the  eaves  are 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


223 


given  a  greater  projection,  thereby  giving  an¬ 
other  horizontal  line.  A  and  B  are  exactly  the 
same  size  in  plan  and  also  in  height  to  the  eave 
line;  yet  there  is  no  mistaking  which  appears  the 
taller. 

This  is  the  fundamental  principle  in  the  de¬ 
sign  of  an  elevation.  Having  then  this  start  for 
the  elevation,  carry  out  the  same  principle  in  the 
windows,  either  grouping  them  and  keeping 
them  low,  for  the  design  B;  or  else  use  single 
windows  with  a  pier  or  wall  space  between.  Very 
often,  if  the  ceilings  are  high  enough,  windows 
may  have  a  transom  bar  and  transom,  thereby 
increasing  the  height.  In  the  treatment  around 
the  windows,  for  B,  we  shall  use  merely  a  cap  of 
some  kind  with  no  vertical  lines ;  while  for  A  we 
shall  make  use  of  an  outside  trim  with  a  cap. 
See  Fig.  11. 

In  all  our  designs,  it  has  been  attempted  to 
emphasize  either  the  vertical  lines  or  the  hori¬ 
zontal  lines.  This  is  but  one — the  most  impor¬ 
tant  one,  however — of  the  points  to  consider  as 
to  the  general  character  of  the  elevation.  The 
purpose  of  the  elevation  is  to  give  an  effect  that 
will  be  pleasing  to  the  eye,  and  at  the  same  time 
fulfil  the  requirements  of  the  plan  as  to  the  ar¬ 
rangement  of  windows  and  story  heights;  and 
very  often  it  will  make  the  property  more  valu¬ 
able.  For,  consider  two  residences  offered  for 
sale  at  the  same  price,  with  the  same  surround¬ 
ings.  One  has  been  built  with  no  idea  as  to  design 
or  relation  to  the  surrounding  buildings;  the 


224 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


other  has  been  treated  to  correspond  with  the 
existing  conditions,  has  been  made  attractive  by 
the  arrangement  and  style  of  windows,  and  the 
cornice  has  been  designed  to  give  a  certain  ef¬ 
fect  to  the  other  parts  of  the  design.  There  is  no 
question  which  would  be  the  best  investment. 
Work,  then,  with  this  end  in  view,  as  if  it  were 
your  own  builidng,  and  you  wanted  it  to  be  the 
very  best  for  the  money. 

In  drawing  the  elevations,  usually  each  side 
of  the  house  is  shown  on  the  drawings.  The  front 
elevation  is  made  the  most  complete.  The  owner 
wants  to  see  how  his  building  will  look  when 
completed;  therefore  show  the  materials.  If  the 
walls  are  shingled,  indicate  by  lines  that  there 
are  to  be  shingles — not  by  covering  the  entire 
front  with  perfectly  regular,  mechanical  lines 
representing  the  shingles,  but  with  patches  here 
and  there  over  the  entire  front.  Indicate  by  ar¬ 
rows  and  lines,  similar  to  dimension  lines,  where 
the  shingles  are  to  be  used.  Indicate  the  brick 
of  the  foundation  above  grade  the  same  way. 
Show  the  type  of  windows  you  expect  to  use; 
show  the  correct  profile  or  outline  of  the  cornice; 
the  general  design  of  the  front  door  and  the 
porch  and  steps;  indicate  the  glass  in  the  door, 
whether  double  strength,  plate,  or  beveled-plate 
glass.  In  short,  make  this  front  elevation  com¬ 
plete,  so  that  an  owner  can  see  just  the  materials 
used,  where  used,  and  just  how  the  building  will 
look  from  the  front.  Very  often  the  stairs  are 
dotted  on  this  elevation  to  show  just  how  they  go 


¥  X  ^ 

S' % 

<r  vs  cu 

^  2:  o 

i  p  fe 

2^  £  ^  ^ 

\  ~ 

S  <-u  t-  o 

S  2  -  > 

ef  C  ^  -V 

u_  SI  — ^  i— 

■“  11  §  In 


3 

I 

H 

A 


s 

05 

o 

£ 

i 

£ 

o 

tj 

w 

S 

o 

05 

W 

o 

05 

<5 

£ 

<5 

05 

O 

fo 

£ 

o 

l— I 

ui 

H 

A 


■ 


~  -  ' 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


225 


up  to  the  next  floor  above;  but  this  is  not  to  be 
recommended,  as  it  detracts  from  the  general  ap¬ 
pearance  of  the  elevation,  and  there  are  other 
and  better  methods  of  indicating  stairs,  as  ex¬ 
plained  later. 

Very  often  there  will  be  a  small  section  of  the 
house  on  the  same  sheet  with  the  front  elevation. 


Fig.  12.  Front  Elevation  of  a  Residence  at  Champaign,  Ill. 

Outline  emphasized. 


This  is  used  to  give  the  heights  of  the  floor-lines, 
the  window  lines,  and  the  cornice  lines,  and  not 
for  showing  of  details.  This  is  not  objectionable, 
as  the  section  is  a  separate  drawing  entirely  from 
the  elevation,  and  will  give  a  means  of  showing 


226 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


the  above  data  without  marking  them  directly  on 
the  elevation. 

Too  much  emphasis  cannot  be  laid  upon  the 
method  of  finishing  the  front  elevation.  A  little 
time  and  careful  work  spent  on  this  drawing  will 
very  often  confirm  a  favorable  impression  on  the 
owner.  The  style  of  letter  used  and  the  arrange¬ 
ment  on  the  sheet  should  all  tend  to  make  the 
drawing  attractive. 

As  a  final  touch,  it  will  be  found  very  desir¬ 
able,  after  the  elevation  is  complete,  to  outline 
the  building  with  a  heavy  line,  thus  emphasizing 
the  general  outline  of  the  building,  while  the 
other  lines  are  all  uniform  but  lighter  (see  Fig. 
12). 

The  side  and  rear  elevations  should  also  be 
complete  in  that  they  should  show  the  exact  ma¬ 
terials  used  and  the  exact  size  and  spacing  of  the 
openings;  but  they  need  not  be  so  carefully 
drawn  nor  so  carefully  lettered  as  the  front  ele¬ 
vation,  since  they  are  more  or  less  a  secondary 
consideration. 

The  location  of  openings  should  be  studied 

with  the  idea  of  the  general  effect  on  the  eleva¬ 
tion,  as  well  as  on  the  necessary  arrangement  for 
the  rooms.  In  other  words,  do  not  locate  all  open¬ 
ings  on  the  plans  definitely  without  studying  the 
elevations  also.  Be  sure  that  the  openings  are 
correctly  located  on  the  elevations  so  that  the 
plans  and  elevations  will  agree,  and  not  merely 
put  on  the  elevations  where  they  look  the  best 
without  any  reference  to  the  plans. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


227 


To  sum  up,  make  the  elevations  true  pictures 
of  the  building  when  completed;  indicate  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  all  materials;  study  the  design,  making  it 
typical  of  the  class  of  building  in  hand,  and  make 
it  complete  in  every  respect. 

Scale  Details 

The  Section.  Having  completed  the  plans 
and  elevations,  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  large- 
scale  sections  through  different  parts  of  the 
building.  A  section  should  be  shown  through 
every  portion  of  the  building  that  is  of  different 
construction  from  others.  These  sections  are 
usually  of  a  larger  scale  than  the  plans  and  ele¬ 
vations. 

In  Fig.  13  we  see  the  method  of  drawing  and 
finishing  these  details.  A  scale  very  convenient 
for  use  is  three-quarters  of  an  inch  equals  one 
foot  (or,  as  it  is  often  called,  a  “three-quarter- 
inch”  scale).  The  purpose  of  these  sections  is  to 
show  exactly  how  the  building  is  to  be  put  up — 
the  method  of  supporting  the  cornice  on  the 
plate;  the  roof  sheathing  and  covering;  the  con¬ 
struction  of  the  gutter,  with  all  materials  named; 
the  ceiling  joists  and  method  of  support  on  the 
outside  wall;  the  lath  and  plaster;  the  wall 
sheathing  and  siding  or  shingles;  the  picture 
mould;  the  detail  of  the  inside  window  trim;  the 
base  around  the  room;  the  second-floor  construc¬ 
tion,  showing  size  of  joists  and  method  of  sup¬ 
port  on  the  wall;  the  composition  of  the  floor, 
whether  double  or  single,  or  any  paper  between 


228 


3E.CTIOM  THtfU.  3TAII? 
70f?ntK  JfALt  I  »'« »*<3 


229 


230  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

the  floors;  the  lath  and  plaster  of  the  ceiling  be¬ 
low;  the  details  of  the  window  construction,  trim 
and  stool  or  inside  sill;  the  base  around  the  room; 
the  method  of  supporting  the  frame  wall  upon 
the  basement  wall;  the  water-table;  the  thick¬ 
ness  of  the  basement  wall;  the  level  of  the  ground 
on  the  outside;  the  basement  floor  inside;  and 
the  footing. 

Use  plenty  of  dimension  lines  and  explana¬ 
tory  notes.  In  dimensioning  story  heights,  al¬ 
ways  give  from  finished  floor-line  to  finished 
floor-line,  or  from  floor  to  ceiling;  never  dimen¬ 
sion  the  thickness  of  the  floor  construction.  In 
other  words,  referring  to  Fig.  13,  we  shall  get 
into  trouble  by  trying  to  specify  exactly  the 
thickness  over  all.  This  should  be  left  without 
a  dimension,  by  showing  the  plaster,  noting  the 
size  of  joists,  and  showing  the  floor,  whether  one 
or  two  thicknesses,  let  it  come  what  it  will.  The 
thickness  of  the  plaster  will  vary  slightly;  a  2- 
inch  by  10-inch  joist  is  not  10  inches  deep; 
neither  is  a  floor  of  two  thicknesses  2  inches 
thick.  Thus  we  see  it  is  rather  an  uncertain  di¬ 
mension. 

A  sheet  is  usually  devoted  to  these  details. 
Sometimes  as  many  as  half  a  dozen  different  sec¬ 
tions  are  drawn  for  a  residence,  each  showing 
differences  in  construction. 

Be  very  careful  to  note  on  the  plans  just 
where  each  section  is  taken,  and  put  correspond¬ 
ing  letters  on  the  title  for  the  section.  The  use 
of  notes  and  plenty  of  them  cannot  be  urged  too 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


231 


strongly.  The  small  working  drawings  are  very 
unreliable  as  to  details;  and  consequently  the 
more  details,  the  better  the  contractor  will  un¬ 
derstand  just  exactly  what  he  is  to  furnish,  and 
will  therefore  be  able  to  figure  the  more  closely. 
These  details,  well  executed,  will  prevent  many 
disputes  between  contractor  and  architect,  and 
between  architect  and  owner,  as  well  as  save  the 
“ extra”  bills  from  the  contractor  which  are  sure 
to  arise  from  incomplete  drawings. 

Cross-hatch  or  cross-section  all  sections  or 
materials  that  are  cut  in  two,  using  some  stand¬ 
ard  symbol,  as  elsewhere  indicated,  on  the  draw¬ 
ings.  This  makes  a  much  better  looking  draw¬ 
ing,  and  makes  it  much  easier  to  interpret. 

To  indicate  further  the  general  treatment  of 
the  interior  finish,  the  rooms  having  anything  in 
the  way  of  a  paneled  wainscot,  beamed  ceiling, 
or  finish  around  a  fireplace,  also  the  sideboard, 
cupboards,  and  pantry  fittings,  should  all  be 
shown.  The  best  and  perhaps  the  most  com¬ 
mon  method  is  to  draw  at  one-quarter-inch  scale 
the  different  elevations  of  the  rooms,  showing 
exactly  the  height,  width,  and  any  features  of 
unusual  arrangement.  Should  opposite  sides 
of  a  room  or  any  sides  be  similar,  after  putting 
the  title  on  one  drawing,  note  under  it:  “Oppo¬ 
site,  north,  south,  etc.,  sides  similar.’ ’  There 
is  usually  one  sheet  of  just  such  drawings  as 
this  to  accompany  the  regular  set  of  drawings. 
Since  plans  are  usually  submitted  to  competitive 
contractors,  there  is  not  the  chance  of  one  pro- 


232 


Details  of  Dining  Room, 


233 


z 

o 

o 

t* 

u 

Z 

z 

S 


a 

.a 


<J 


+3 

ctJ 

o 

o 

a 

o 

'd 

•H 

w 

a 

« 


ej 

«M 

O 

w 

54 


rt 

+-> 

a> 


H 


•d 

d 

o 


& 

Pi 

5 

O 


io 

rl 

fab 

•H 

Pm 


234 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  235 

posal  or  bid  being  lower  than  another  because 
certain  things  were  overlooked  or  purposely 
omitted. 

In  Fig.  14  we  see  drawings  of  elevations  and 
sections  of  various  portions  of  a  living  room  and 
dining  room,  giving  all  necessary  information. 

Fig.  15  illustrates  completely  the  drawings 
necessary  to  show  a  pantry  and  butler’s  pantry. 

Full-Sizing.  After  the  contract  has  been 
awarded,  the  general  working  drawings  will 
have  to  be  supplemented  by  drawings  of  differ¬ 
ent  portions  of  the  work  at  a  large  scale.  Usu¬ 
ally  these  are  drawn  at  actual  or  full  size.  In 
order  to  have  your  profiles  and  outlines  made 
just  as  you  intended,  this  method  of  drawing 
all  parts  of  construction  at  the  actual  size  is 
imperative. 

Take  an  example.  You  wish  the  plate-rail 
in  the  dining  room  made  just  so.  Then  you  will 
have  to  draw  this  part  of  the  work  the  actual 
size.  If  you  do  not  do  this,  the  contractor  will 
put  in  a  plate-rail  of  a  stock  pattern;  that  is, 
he  wTill  select  some  pattern  that  he  can  buy  from 
a  planing  mill,  and  will  use  this.  It  is  the 
cheapest  way  to  do,  for  him;  therefore  you  can¬ 
not  blame  him  for  saving  anything  he  can,  if 
the  exact  style  is  not  definitely  shown. 

In  full-sizing,  it  will  be  well  for  the  drafts¬ 
man  to  be  familiar  with  the  usual  method  of 
doing  things,  making  his  details  practical  as  well 
as  indicating  the  profile.  The  cornice  should  be 
shown;  the  interior  finish;  the  method  of  mak- 


236  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

ing  the  window-frames;  all  unusual  woodwork; 
the  construction  of  the  beams  for  a  beamed  ceil¬ 
ing;  all  sheet-metal  work,  such  as  gutters, 
cornices,  etc.;  all  stonework,  such  as  water- 
tables,  window-sills,  and  door-step;  all  plaster 
work,  such  as  ornamental  cornices,  and  method 
of  supporting  under  unusual  conditions.  You 
will  hear  it  asked:  “  Why  is  it  necessary  to  spend 
all  this  time  detailing,  when  the  contractor  or 
the  planing  mill  have  their  own  way  of  doing 
these  things?”  There  is  just  the  point.  They 
certainly  have  a  way  of  doing  things;  but  nat¬ 
urally  their  way  is  the  cheapest  way;  therefore, 
give  them  details  of  how  you  want  this  work 
done,  and  see  that  it  is  done  your  way.  Dimen¬ 
sions  on  full-size  details  are  unnecessary. 

Fig.  16  is  a  reproduction  of  a  sheet  of  full- 
size  details. 

A  word  might  be  said  as  to  the  method  of 
getting  out  these  details.  The  drawing  is  first 
made  on  detail  paper,  a  heavy  yellow  paper.  A 
soft  pencil  should  be  used,  as  it  makes  the  lines 
more  distinct  and  is  easily  changed  or  erased. 
After  the  drawing  is  completed  on  this  paper, 
then  use  a  cheap,  thin  paper,  and  trace  through, 
using  a  broad,  heavy  line  and  colored  crayon  for 
cross-sectioning  the  sections  of  the  work.  Yel¬ 
low  is  generally  used  for  wood,  red  for  brick, 
green  for  stone,  blue  for  iron  or  steel,  and  brown 
for  terra-cotta.  A  second  tracing  is  also  made. 
Thus  we  have  three  copies  of  each  detail — one 
for  filing  in  the  office  for  future  reference,  and 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


237 


238  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

two  for  the  contractor.  One  of  the  copies  made 
on  tracing  paper  is  usually  kept  in  the  office, 
since  it  can  be  folded  up  to  a  convenient  size  and 
filed,  the  original  and  one  copy  on  thin  paper 
going  to  the  contractor. 

REPRODUCING  DRAWINGS 

The  question  of  the  method  of  reproducing 
drawings  is  an  important  one  as  to  cost  and 
time  consumed.  New  methods  are  being  adver¬ 
tised  on  the  market  every  day. 

Blue-Printing.  The  blue-print  process  is  the 
commonest,  and  generally  speaking  the  cheap¬ 
est.  There  is  a  chemically  prepared  paper  which 
is  sensitive  to  the  light.  The  paper  is  treated 
with  a  solution  of  citrate  of  iron,  ammonia,  and 
red  prussiate  of  potash,  and  is  placed  in  a  dark 
room  to  dry.  The  drawing  has  previously  been 
prepared  on  tracing  cloth  or  paper.  When  the 
blue-print  paper  is  dry,  place  the  drawing,  face 
down,  on  a  sheet  of  glass,  usually  held  in  a 
wooden  frame;  over  this,  lay  the  blue-print 
paper,  with  the  sensitive  side  down;  over  this, 
place  a  layer  or  two  of  soft  cloth  similar  to 
Canton  flannel,  and  over  this  place  a  board 
backing. 

Turn  the  frame  over  now,  and  expose  to  the 
sunlight  for  a  few  minutes,  depending  upon  the 
intensity  of  the  sunlight.  After  exposure, 
remove  the  blue-print  paper,  which  has  turned 
to  a  dark  bronze  color,  and  place  it  in  a  tank  of 
water.  Gradually  the  print  comes  out  in  white 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  239 

lines,  leaving  the  background  blue.  These  white 
lines  were  directly  under  the  ink  lines  of  your 
drawing,  and  the  sun  therefore  could  not  attack 
that  portion  of  the  paper.  Hence  the  water 
washed  off  the  blue-print  solution,  leaving  the 
white  paper. 

A  little  experience  will  soon  teach  how  long 
to  expose  in  different  kinds  of  weather.  Prints 
may  be  made  on  cloudy  days,  and  have  some¬ 
times  been  made  even  during  a  mist.  The  expos¬ 
ure,  of  course,  must  be  much  longer  on  such 
days.  The  prints  from  such  exposures  are  not 
so  clear,  distinct,  and  “ sharp-cut’ ’  as  those  made 
on  bright  days.  When  possible,  avoid  making 
blue-prints  on  dark  days,  if  you  expect  the  best 
results. 

Paper  for  blue-printing  can  be  procured 
ready  to  use,  from  dealers  all  over  the  country, 
at  a  nominal  cost.  This  is  machine-prepared, 
and  is  more  satisfactory  than  home-made. 

Blue-prints  are  hard  on  the  eyes,  and,  having 
a  blue  background,  cannot  be  dimensioned, 
noted,  or  to  any  great  extent  changed.  Should 
small  alterations  be  necessary  on  the  blue-print, 
use  a  solution  of  common  soda  and  water  with 
a  pen.  This  is  not  very  satisfactory,  but  in  cases 
where  changes  are  necessary  it  will  do. 

White-Printing.  From  working  drawings, 
white  prints  can  be  made.  This  kind  of  print 
is  just  the  reverse  of  the  blue-print.  Here  we 
have  blue  lines  on  a  white  background.  In  order 
to  make  white  prints,  a  negative  first  has  to  be 


240  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

made  from  the  drawing.  The  paper  used  for  the 
negatives  is  specially  prepared  and  exposed  and 
washed  in  the  same  way  as  blue-prints.  When 
washed  and  dry,  it  is  a  real  negative,  on  which 
all  pencil  lines  are  white  and  the  background  is 
black  so  as  to  exclude  the  sun — all  the  reverse 
of  the  drawing.  This  negative  is  then  used  by 
placing  it  over  regular  blue-print  paper.  The 
sun  passes  through  the  white  lines,  and  is 
excluded  from  the  rest  by  the  black  background. 
Upon  washing  the  blue-print  paper,  the  lines 
having  been  exposed  to  the  sun  are  changed  to 
blue;  and  the  background,  not  having  the  sun  on 
it,  is  washed  off,  leaving  the  white  paper. 

This  process  makes  a  much  better  looking 
drawing  than  a  blue-print,  and  is  not  so  hard  on 
the  eyes.  The  cost  is  a  little  higher,  on  account 
of  the  negative;  but  after  the  negative  is  made, 
the  cost  is  the  same  as  for  blue-prints. 

Aligraphy.  Another  process,  knowTn  as 
Aligraphy,  has  been  patented.  By  it,  drawings 
can  be  reproduced  on  linen  or  paper,  and  the 
lines  are  practically  as  black  as  the  original. 
They  closely  resemble  etchings.  For  very  fine 
work,  this  process  makes  splendid  reproduc¬ 
tions;  but  it  is  more  expensive  than  any  of  the 
processes  above  mentioned. 

Hectograph  Process.  Another  common 
method  of  reproducing  drawings  is  the  hecto¬ 
graph  process.  This  consists  in  making  the 
drawings  with  suitable  aniline  inks,  and  then 
placing  them  face-down  on  a  gelatine  pad.  After 


•  t 


/ 


1  k  I 

' 


VARIETY  OF  ELEMENTS. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  241 

being  in  contact  for  about  two  minutes,  they  are 
removed,  and  blank  paper  is  brought  in  contact 
with  the  pad,  being  in  turn  removed.  It  will  be 
found  to  give  a  complete  drawing  similar  to  the 
original  in  scale,  color,  etc.  Upwards  of  thirty- 
five  copies  may  be  taken  off,  depending  upon 
the  intensity  of  the  original. 

The  pad  may  be  made  as  follows:  1  part  of 
white  glue  to  5  parts  by  weight  of  glycerine. 
Soak  the  glue  over  night,  in  just  enough  water 
to  cover  it.  Bring  to  the  boiling  point  slowly, 
without  burning;  then  add  the  glycerine,  and 
thoroughly  mix.  Pour  into  a  shallow  pan; 
remove  all  air-bubbles  from  the  surface  with  a 
stiff  card;  and  allow  to  cool.  Before  using  each 
time,  wash  thoroughly  with  a  sponge  and  allow 
to  dry  partially  before  applying  the  drawing; 
also  wash  well  immediately  after  using,  to 
remove  all  traces  of  ink. 

The  proportions  may  be  varied  slightly  for 
different  climates.  A  cold  climate  will  require 
more  glycerine,  and  a  warm  climate  more  glue. 
The  pad  should  be  stiff  enough  to  resist  pressure 
from  the  fingers  when  firmly  pressed  upon  it. 

Other  additional  ingredients  are  sometimes 
used.  Perhaps  they  have  their  advantages;  but 
the  mixture  as  described  has  been  used  very  suc¬ 
cessfully.  Often,  in  very  hot  weather,  after  a 
pad  is  made,  it  may  seem  too  soft  to  work  well. 
In  such  a  case,  placing  the  pan  on  a  cake  of  ice 
will  harden  the  mixture  and  make  it  satisfac¬ 
tory. 


242 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


A  cheaper  pad  may  be  made  by  using  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  a  special  clay  and  glycerine.  While  not 
giving  so  many  prints  as  the  glue  pad,  it  can 
be  used  more  economically  for  large  drawings. 
Hectograph  pencils  may  be  had  in  many  colors, 
which  are  used  for  making  full-size  details. 
These  drawings  are  copied  in  the  same  way  as 
the  regular  pen-and-ink  drawings. 

The  hectograph  process  is  gradually  gaining 
in  favor,  and  in  some  localities  it  is  used  exten¬ 
sively.  It  has  several  features  to  commend  it: 

(1)  All  materials  can  be  represented  in  appropriate 
colors. 

(2)  Copies  are  very  cheap,  and  can  be  made  on  paper 
or  prepared  cloth. 

(3)  The  draftsman  finds  it  convenient  when  making 
revisions,  as  parts  of  the  drawing  can  be  cut  out  and  a 
correct  portion  inserted.  No  matter  how  badly  the 
drawing  is  cut  and  patched,  the  prints  are  perfect. 

(4)  In  assembling  different  drawings  on  a  sheet,  they 
may  be  shifted  at  will,  and  a  better  arrangement  secured. 

(5)  When  a  sheet  is  composed  of  small  drawings,  the 
draftsman  may  work  over  the  small  drawings  more  com¬ 
fortably  than  if  compelled  to  work  on  a  large  sheet. 

The  hectograph  process,  however,  has  some 
drawbacks,  which  may  be  indicated  as  follows: 

(1)  Small  details  cannot  be  shown  so  clearly,  as  the 
lines  must  be  quite  heavy  if  a  number  of  prints  are 
required. 

(2)  The  drawings  fade  more  or  less  if  exposed  to  a 
bright  light,  but  they  are  permanent  enough  for  most 
work. 

(3)  Some  draftsmen  do  not  like  to  use  the  inks,  as 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


243 


they  are  sticky  and  soil  the  fingers.  This,  however,  should 
apply  only  to  the  inexperienced. 

Hectograph  inks  may  be  purchased  of  dealers 
everywhere,  in  all  colors.  Below  are  suggested 
colors  for  various  sections  of  materials : 

Purple — For  lines  in  general,  outlines,  profiles,  etc.; 
also  for  sections  of  plaster,  and  concrete. 

Red — For  dimension  lines,  and  for  sections  of  brick¬ 
work. 

Blue — For  iron,  steel,  flashing,  etc.,  in  section. 

Brown — For  sections  of  terra-cotta. 

Green — For  sections  of  stone  or  marble. 

Yellow — For  wood. 

For  the  blue-print  process,  the  drawing  to  be 
reproduced  is  preferably  done  on  tracing  cloth, 
on  the  rough  side,  in  black  ink.  Erasures  may 
be  made  on  this,  and  the  work  corrected;  but 
the  finished  drawing  has  to  be  complete  in  every 
respect,  as  every  line  is  reproduced  just  as 
drawn. 

For  the  hectograph  process,  we  shall  need  to 
make  the  lines  much  heavier,  and  may  use 
colored  inks.  Mistakes  cannot  be  erased,  but 
are  cut  out,  and  a  new  piece  of  paper  placed  over 
the  hole,  and  the  drawing  continued. 

Tracing  cloth  makes  the  most  satisfactory 
material  all  around  for  the  original  drawing.  It 
is  translucent  or  semi-transparent,  will  make 
good  prints  by  almost  any  process,  and  is  much 
more  desirable  than  paper  for  filing  away  and 
for  constant  use  in  the  drafting  room. 

The  use  of  colored  inks  is  not  to  be  recom- 


244  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

mended.  They  make  the  tracing  look  very 
pretty,  but  they  print  very  poorly,  some  shades 
of  green  being  hardly  visible  on  the  blue-print. 
Red  reproduces  very  faintly,  and  when  this  color 
is  used  for  dimension  lines  they  should  be  heavy. 
Black  is  the  most  serviceable  color  to  use.  In 
steel  detailing,  the  entire  drawing  is  done  in 
black — even  dimension  lines. 

ARCHITECTURAL  FORMS 

Having  considered  the  general  method  in  the 
drawing  of  architectural  plans,  we  shall  now 
consider  some  of  the  general  forms  employed  to 
represent  different  parts  of  the  work. 

Conventional  Forms  and  Symbols.  First 
there  must  be  some  adopted  form  for  represent¬ 
ing  materials.  It  will  be  found  throughout  the 
country,  that  each  architectural  firm  has  its  own 
architectural  forms  and  symbols.  This  is  rather 
confusing,  since  it  requires  a  draftsman  chang¬ 
ing  offices,  or  Building  Departments  checking 
plans,  to  become  familiar  with  the  symbols  as 
used  by  each  office. 

In  Plate  A  are  given  some  general  forms  for 
representing  materials. 

Fig.  1  represents  brick.  A  section  of  a  brick 
wall  should  be  sectioned  as  shown,  by  parallel 
lines  at  45  degrees,  slanting  down  to  the  left.  It 
might  be  well  to  repeat  here  what  has  been  said 
about  the  use  of  colored  inks  for  drawing. 
Except  for  dimension  lines,  avoid  the  use  of 
colors.  The  materials  may  be  indicated  as  shown 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


245 


F!Q.  J. 


BQICK 


BUBBLE.  5T0NF 


F/G.  2.  . 


CUT  STONE 


CONCRETE 


TERRA  COTTA 


F/G  .  3 


WOODEN  PARTITION  - 
LATHED  AND  PLASTERED 

FIG.  G. 

TILE  PARTITION- 
PLASTERED. 

FIG.  7 

BR/CK  WALL-  FURRED, 
LATHED  AND  PLASTERED. 

F/G.  6. 


SOLID  PLASTER  PART¬ 
ITION  ~  PLASTERED. 


F/G.  9. 


Plate  A.  Conventional  Symbols  for  Representing  Materials  on  Ar¬ 
chitectural  Drawings, 


246 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


by  varying  the  texture  of  the  line  and  also  by 
different  forms  of  dotting. 

Fig.  2 — We  use  alternating  lines — solid  and 
dashes — at  45  degrees  to  represent  rubble  stone 
such  as  is  found  in  most  basements. 

Fig.  3 — We  use  solid  lines  running  at  45 
degrees  to  each  other  and  in  opposite  directions, 
to  represent  cut-stone  work  such  as  sills  for 
windows  and  doors,  chimney  caps,  and  any  kind 
of  finished  or  dressed  stone. 

Fig.  4  represents  concrete.  This  symbol  is 
composed  of  small,  wavy  lines,  with  occasional 
triangular  shapes  to  represent  the  stone.  This 
symbol  may  be  used  to  represent  the  concrete 
such  as  would  be  used  in  a  solid  wall  or 
reinforced  concrete  for  floors  and  other  similar 
constructions. 

Fig.  5  illustrates  the  method  of  showing 
terra-cotta.  This  is  the  same  as  for  brick,  with 
the  lines  running  in  the  opposite  direction. 

For  representing  an  interior  partition  of  a 
frame  building,  the  method  shown  in  Fig.  6  is 
perhaps  the  most  satisfactory.  Plaster  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  parallel  lines  to  opposite  sides  of  the 
wall. 

Very  often,  in  fireproof  buildings,  partitions 
are  built  of  hollow  tile  and  plastered  on  both 
sides.  Fig.  7  illustrates  the  method  of  indicating 
such  a  partition. 

Where  a  brick  wall  is  furred  on  the  inside  and 
then  plastered,  we  use  the  ordinary  symbol  for 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  247 

the  brick  wall,  and  show  the  plaster  away  from 
the  wall,  as  in  Fig.  8. 

Very  often,  instead  of  using  the  partition  as 
shown  in  Fig.  7,  it  will  be  built  up  solid  of  plaster 
2  inches  thick  with  a  layer  of  expanded  metal 
imbedded.  This  partition  is  shown  in  Fig.  9. 
It  will  be  found  a  very  satisfactory  partition, 
requiring  less  floor  space,  and  equal  in  every  way 
to  any  other  fireproof  partition. 

On  the  basement  plan,  various  lines  of  pipe 
should  be  shown.  There  should  be  a  porous  tile 
drain,  in  damp  soils,  all  around  the  outside  of 
the  basement  walls,  at  the  footing  line.  Such 
drains  are  constructed  of  porous  farm  tile,  laid 
with  butt  joints  and  no  cementing  of  any  kind. 
The  tile  being  porous,  the  water  in  the  soil  perco¬ 
lates  through  the  walls  of  the  tile,  and  is  carried 
away.  These  drains  are  indicated  as  shown  in 
Plate  B. 

For  the  sewer  connections  inside  the  build¬ 
ing,  and  extending  at  least  six  feet  outside  the 
basement  wall,  the  pipe  should  be  cast-iron  and 
have  calked  joints.  Such  pipes  are  shown  on 
the  basement  plan  as  in  Plate  B.  Connected  to 
this  cast-iron  pipe  outside  the  basement  wall,  a 
vitrified  tile  drain  should  be  used,  with  cemented 
joints.  Such  pipe  is  also  shown  in  Plate  B.  All 
these  pipe  lines  should  be  shown  in  black  on  the 
drawing. 

There  are  certain  lines  used  in  a  drawing  for 
reference,  such  as  axis  lines — that  is,  when  a 
room  or  building  is  symmetrically  arranged 


248 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


POROUS  TILE.  DP AJ MS. 


/ROT/  PIPE  DQA/NS. 


V/TQ/E/ED  SEWEQ  P/PE. 


7 'he  Above:  Should  Be  Shown  With  Bl  ac  K  Lines. 


AXIS  LINES  (Red). 


BUILDING  LINES  (Red). 


DOTTED  El  A/E  S  EO/3  GENERAL  USE. 

/<S'-Q" 


D/MENS/ON  E/AIES  (Usually  Red  With 

Beach  Arrows). 

Plate  B.  Conventional  Methods  of  Representing  Drain  and  Sewer 
Pipe,  Axis  Lines,  Building  Lines,  Dimension  Lines,  etc. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  24? 

around  a  center  line.  In  order  to  make  suck 
axis  lines  distinct  from  general  lines,  they  are 
usually  made  as  shown  in  Plate  B. 

When  there  are  offsets  or  projections  on  a 
wall,  such  work  is  measured  from  certain  lines 
established  as  building  lines  (see  Plate  B). 
Usually  the  outside  wall  line  of  the  first  story  is 
taken  as  this  reference  line;  and  the  basement 
wall  line,  the  second-story  line,  the  eave  fine, 
etc.,  are  all  measured  as  projecting  from  this 
line. 

All  dimension  lines  are  to  be  noted  as  shown 
on  this  same  plate,  in  which  the  arrow-heads 
are  black,  the  connecting  fine  is  red,  and  the 
figures  are  in  black,  always  above  this  line.  This 
is  the  best  practice,  though  sometimes  dimen¬ 
sions  are  placed  in  the  center  of  the  line,  the  line 
being  stopped  to  allow  the  figures  to  be  inserted. 
This  method  takes  more  time  and  is  not  so 
practical,  since  the  dimension  line  is  broken  and 
in  some  cases  there  might  be  a  dispute  as  to  just 
how  much  the  dimension  is  intended  to  include. 

For  lighting,  there  are  standard  symbols 
adopted  by  the  National  Electrical  Contractors’ 
Association  of  the  United  States.  These  are 
published  on  a  card  convenient  for  reference,  and 
copies  may  be  had  by  applying  to  the  Secretary. 
Another  form  of  symbols  has  been  adopted  by 
the  Boston  Society  of  Architects,  copies  of  which 
may  also  be  had  on  application.  The  latter  sym¬ 
bols  are  shown  on  Plate  C.  These  are  given  for 
convenience  in  laying  out  plans,  and  are  not 


250 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


This  Specification  is  based  upon  th e  use  of  the  follovumq  symbols 
and  of  such  others  aa  motf  6c  used  and  explained  on  the  Plans. 

ELECTRIC 

GAS 

COMBINATION 

CEILING  OUTLET 

WALL  OUTLET 

2.  Lights 

W 

FLOOR  OUTLET 
t  Light: 

■ 

a 

EASE  OUTLET 

JSL 

-H- 

5  Wi  TCH  [-C - Dotted  Line  shows  Switch 

1  vJ  Control. 

PUSH  BUTTON  0 

DANK  OF  SUTTON 5 

BELL.  § 

A  NNUNCtA  TOG  r^i 

CABINET 

SPEAKING  TUBE  [-^ 

HOUSE  TELEPHONE 

PUBLIC  TELEPHONE  A. 

HEIGHTS  OF  STORIES  -  TOP 

!*r  rr  in.  2.'ytx  ft  in. 

5™  FT  in  6™  FT  IN 

9'rH  FT-  IN.  IO™  FT-  IN- 

9  TO  TOR  BT  FT  /*. 

3*°  FT.  IN.  4VH  FT.  IM 

7™  *nr.  m  Q™  FT.  //y. 

IT*  nr-  in.  \zr*  FT. 

HEIGHTS  OF  CENTER  OF  WALL  OUTLETS. 

un/cjt  other w/j*  s/omcitied. 

LIV/NG  /ROOMS-  3LG’  OFFICES  -  S'- O" 

CHAM  BER  S-  3-  O"  CORRIDORS  -  G’-JT  " 

HEiGHT  OF  S  W ITCH  E  S  ~  Unless  otherwise  specified  ~  4  ~  O* 

Plate  C.  Standard  Symbols  for  Kepresenting  Fixtures,  Electric 
Outlets,  etc. 

Adopted  by  the  Boston  Society  of  Architects. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  251 

intended  to  be  complete  in  every  respect.  It  is 
essential  to  show  the  location  of  the  light  outlets 
in  all  rooms;  also  whether  they  are  to  be  gas, 
or  electric,  or  a  combination  of  both.  Push¬ 
buttons,  bells,  and  telephones  are  also  indicated. 
If  these  locations  are  not  shown,  the  contractor 
for  this  work  will  naturally  place  them  in  a  posh 


[  75  jF  ~\o 

A 


Fig.  17.  Conventional  Symbols  for  Heating  Apparatus. 

A — Steam  or  Hot-Water  Radiator;  B — Hot-Air  Register. 

tion  requiring  the  least  amount  of  pipe,  wire, 
etc.  Therefore  show  all  of  these  fixtures,  and 
there  can  then  be  no  dispute  as  to  the  true  intent 
of  the  plans  and  specifications. 

For  the  heating,  about  all  that  is  necessary  is 
to  show  the  location  of  the  registers  or  radiators, 
marking  the  number  of  square  feet  of  radiation 
on  each  radiator.  The  usual  method  is  shown  in 
Fig.  17  (A)  for  steam  or  hot  water,  and  in  Fig. 
17  (B)  for  hot  air.  The  specifications  should 


Fig  18  Conventional  Representation  of  Flues  for  Air  Supply 
and  Ventilation. 


252  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

describe  the  kind  of  heat,  and  go  into  detail 
about  pipe,  fittings,  etc. 

In  hospitals,  public  buildings,  and  school- 
houses,  where  there  are  a  number  of  occupants 
in  each  room,  it  will  be  necessary  to  furnish  a 
fresh-air  supply,  also  a  vent  flue.  These  are  all 
figured,  and  should  be  located  conveniently. 


Fig.  19.  Sketch  Plan  Showing  Arrangement  of  Furniture. 


The  method  of  figuring  the  correct  location  for 
such  work  will  be  considered  under  “Heating 
and  Ventilating.”  The  conventional  method  of 
showing  flues  for  air  supply  and  ventilation  is 
shown  in  Fig.  18. 

For  furniture,  certain  conventional  forms  are 
used,  and  shown  on  all  plans.  The  furniture  of 
the  bedrooms  and  bathrooms  is  usually  laid  out 
on  the  plans,  since  these  are  usually  made  as 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  253 

small  as  practicable;  therefore  the  furniture 
and  fittings  are  laid  out  to  make  sure  that  there 
will  be  room  to  get  them  all  in.  This  applies  to 
the  cheaper  classes  of  houses,  for  in  the  larger 
and  more  expensive  residences  the  rooms  are 
always  amply  large  to  accommodate  all  the  fur¬ 
niture  and  fittings  desirable.  In  Fig.  19,  a  bath¬ 
room  and  bedrooms  are  laid  out,  the  furniture 
being  indicated  by  numbers,  (1)  representing 
the  lavatory  or  wash-bowl,  (2)  the  closet, 
(3)  the  bathtub,  (4)  the  bed,  (5)  the  chiffonier, 
(6)  the  dresser,  and  (7)  a  table  or  writing  desk. 
See  also  Fig.  20. 

Sometimes  a  client  has  furniture  he  wishes 
to  put  into  a  new  home.  It  will  be  found  very 
convenient  to  get  the  dimensions  of  such  furni¬ 
ture,  and  cut  out  pieces  of  cardboard  the  exact 
sizes  of  this  furniture  according  to  the  scale  of 
the  plan.  Then  lay  them  on  the  plan  as  drawn, 
and  see  how  they  will  fit  wall  spaces,  nooks,  etc. 
By  this  method,  pieces  can  be  arranged,  and  it 
will  very  soon  be  shown  whether  or  not  the 
rooms  will  accommodate  the  furniture.  This 
will  be  found  very  convenient  in  all  classes  of 
work  (see  Fig.  20). 

Below  are  given  the  dimensions  of  some  of 
the  common  pieces  of  furniture.  These  sizes 
will  vary  somewhat,  but  in  general  they  will 
be  accurate  enough  in  laying  out  work. 

Dining  Tables— 3  ft.  6  in.  to  4  ft.  wide,  and  to  extend 
to  10  ft.  to  12  ft.  by  extra  leaves,  and  2  ft.  5  in.  high.. 

Writing  Tables— 2  ft.  6  in.  high. 


254 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Ordinary  Tables— 2  ft.  6  in.  high. 

Beds,  Single — 3  ft.  6  in.  wide; 

Beds,  Three-quarter — 4  ft.  to  4  ft.  6  in.  wide ; 
Beds,  Double — 4  ft.  6  in.  to  5  ft.  wide. 

All  beds  should  be  6  ft.  8  in.  long  inside. 
Dressers— 1  ft.  6  in.  to  2  ft.  by  3  ft.  5  in. 
Couches — 2  ft.  6  in.  by  6  ft.  8  in. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


255 


Chiffoniers — 2  ft.  by  3  ft.,  and  4  ft.  6  in.  high. 

Sideboards  vary  according  to  design,  4  ft.  to  6  ft.  long, 
and  from  2  ft.  to  2  ft.  2  in.  deep. 

Pianos,  Upright,  vary,  being  usually  3  ft.  3  in.  by  6  ft. 
6  in.  long,  and  4  ft.  to  4  ft.  9  in.  high. 

Bookcases — 10  in.  to  16  in.  deep,  any  length  and  height. 

Chairs  and  Seats — Usually  17  in.  high  at  front,  16  in.  at 
back,  and  the  seat  is  usually  17  in.  high  by  16  in.  inside ;  the 
back,  from  1  ft.  6  in.  to  1  ft.  8  in.  high,  slightly  inclined 
at  the  top. 

For  plumbing  fixtures,  consult  any  plumbing  cata¬ 
logue.  The  washstand  varies,  18  in.  deep  by  2  ft.  long 
being  about  the  minimum.  The  bathtub  varies  from  3  ft. 
6  in.  to  4  ft.  6  in.  long,  about  1  ft.  11  in.  high  above  the 
floor,  and  2  ft.  wide  across  the  rim.  Closets  are  about 
1  ft.  4  in.  wide,  and  about  2  ft.  from  the  wall. 

Ranges — 26  in.  to  30  in.  by  36  in.  by  42  in. 

Ranges,  Gas — 26  in.  by  34  in. 

Lunch  Counters — Height,  3  ft.  3  in. 

Stool,  2  ft.  2  in. 

Counter  projects  9  in.  and  is  2  ft. 
2  in.  wide. 

Foot-rest,  7  in.  high  and  9  in.  from 
counter. 

Urinals — 26  in.  to  30  in.,  center  to  center. 

Rugs — 4  ft.  6  in.  by  7  ft.  6  in.  up  to  11  ft.  3  in.  by  15  ft. 

The  above  dimensions  are  only  general,  but 
will  be  of  assistance  in  laying  out  the  furniture 
of  a  house. 

MATERIALS  OP  CONSTRUCTION 

There  will  be  found  a  great  variety  of  materi¬ 
als  for  the  construction  of  buildings,  nowadays. 
In  some  localities,  one  material  will  be  used 
more  than  others;  for  instance,  in  the  vicinity 


256 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  21.  Elevation  of  a  Porch. 

See  also  Figs.  22  and  23. 


SHADOWS  CAST  UPON  AN  ODDER  OF  ARCHITECTURE. 


PLATE  D — Architectural  Drafting, 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


257 


Detailed  for  Stone  Construction. 


Fig.  23.  Porch  of  Fig.  2 1 
Detailed  for  Wood  Construction. 


258 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


of  a  stone  quarry,  stone  will  usually  be  cheaper 
than  anything  else — even  in  some  cases  cheaper 
than  wood.  Should  your  client  be  interested  in 
a  brick  concern,  brick  would  undoubtedly  be 
used.  In  a  locality  where  timber  is  cheap,  that 
material  would  be  largely  employed. 

For  the  cheaper  class  of  work,  we  find  wood 
to  be  the  cheapest  material,  although,  within  the 
past  ten  years  or  so,  wood  has  advanced  in  price 
at  a  great  rate.  The  kind  of  wood  used  will 
vary  with  each  locality.  In  some  sections — espe¬ 
cially  the  South — yellow  pine  will  be  used;  in 
our  Western  States,  fir  and  local  varieties  will 
be  selected.  An  architect  in  a  new  locality, 
therefore,  should  become  familiar  with  the  local 
woods  used,  and  should  govern  his  work,  such 
as  spans  of  beams,  interior  finish,  etc.,  by  these 
conditions.  The  use  of  terra-cotta  for  the  facing 
of  masonry  walls,  for  ornamental  courses,  cor¬ 
nices,  and  window-sills,  is  quite  common.  Since 
this  is  a  product  made  of  clay,  properly  mixed, 
moulded,  and  burned,  it  can  be  treated  as  plainly 
or  as  elaborately  as  the  design  of  the  building 
warrants.  Terra-cotta,  of  course,  is  used  only 
with  masonry,  such  as  brick,  stone,  or  concrete. 

Fig.  21  shows  the  elevation  of  a  porch,  and 
Fig.  22  shows  this  porch  detailed  for  stone  con¬ 
struction;  while  Fig.  23  shows  the  same  porch 
detailed  for  wood. 


AECHITECTUEAL  DBAFTING 


259 


SHADES  AND  SHADOWS 

In  order  to  prepare  sketches  and  make  them 
attractive,  a  brief  treatment  of  Shades  and 
Shadows  will  be  taken  up,  the  main  general  rules 
and  principles  being  explained,  which  may  be 
applied  to  ordinary  architectural  drawing. 

By  the  use  of  shades  and  shadows,  very  im¬ 
portant  effects  are  produced.  The  general  pro¬ 
portions  of  the  cornice,  for  example,  are  empha¬ 
sized  by  using  shadows.  The  relative  amount 
of  window  area  to  wall  area  is  clearly  shown  by 
the  use  of  shadows. 

The  light  is  always  assumed  as  coming  over 
the  left  shoulder  of  the  person  looking  at  the 
drawing,  and  at  an  angle  as  explained  later. 
This  assumption  is  always  made,  being  merely  a 
conventional  or  customary  way  of  considering 


Fig.  24.  Fig.  25. 

Illustrating  Conventional  Method  of  Considering  Rays  of  Light  in 
Architectural  Drafting. 

the  light.  The  idea  intended  is  to  produce  the 
same  effect  on  a  drawing  that  the  sun  in  this 
one  position  would  produce  on  the  building. 
While  the  sun  would  actually  produce  a  shadow 
on  one  side  of  the  building  at  one  time,  and  on 
another  side  at  another  time,  in  architectural 


260  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

drawing  this  variation  is  not  shown.  No  matter 
what  elevation  or  side  of  the  building  is  being 
considered,  the  light  is  always  from  the  same 
direction. 

Thus  we  see  that  in  Figs.  24  and  25  the  sun 
really  would  make  one  side  always  in  shadow, 
but  we  do  not  so  consider  it.  In  Fig.  24  we 
see  the  side  A  is  in  sunlight,  and  the  side  B  is 
in  shade.  Looking  now  at  Fig.  25,  we  see  side 
B  in  sunlight,  and  0,  which  was  the  rear  end, 
now  in  shade.  This  is  the  conventional  method 
of  considering  the  rays  of  light  for  architectural 
drawings.  No  matter  what  elevations  or  draw¬ 
ings  are  considered,  or  how  many  of  the  same 
building  on  the  same  sheet,  the  direction  of  the 
rays  of  light  is  fixed. 

Perhaps  it  will  make  the  understanding  of 
this  subject  clearer  if  we  define  the  terms  shade 
and  shadow.  That  portion  of  a  building  or 
drawing  is  said  to  be  in  “ shade”  which  is  turned 
away  from  the  assumed  rays  of  light;  or,  it 
receives  no  rays  of  light,  in  contrast  to  the  sides 
which  are  in  light  or  upon  which  the  light  falls. 

If  a  body  is  placed  between  the  light  and  a 
plane  upon  which  the  rays  might  fall,  such  a 
body  will  prevent  a  portion  of  the  rays  from 
striking  the  plane,  therebj^  causing  a  shadow 
upon  the  plane. 

All  rays  of  light  are  assumed  as  parallel  and 
considered  as  straight  lines. 

The  rays  of  light  are  assumed  as  coming  over 
the  left  shoulder,  or  sloping  downward  and 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


261 


backward.  This  is  the  diagonal  of  a  cube.  The 
projections  of  this  diagonal  in  the  vertical  plane 
and  in  a  horizontal  plane  are  at  45  degrees,  while 
the  true  angle  of  the  diagonal  with  the  plane  is 
slightly  less  than  35  degrees  16  minutes.  If  we 
assume  the  side  of  the  cube  as  1,  then  the  true 
length  of  this  diagonal  is  nearly  one  and  three- 
quarters.  In  Fig.  26,  we  see  the  cube  and  the 
diagonal  drawn  as  a  heavy  line  with  an  arrow- 


Fig.  26.  Drawing  Showing  As-  Fig.  28.  Elevation  of  Point 
mimed  Direction  of  Light.  and  Shadow. 


Plane  of 

5  hs  do  vs/ 


Point-'* 


rr 

I  X 

■1 


Fig.  29.  Plan  of  Point  in  Space 
and  Plane. 

Shadow  of  a  Point  in  Space. 


Fig.  27.  Elevation  and  Plan  of 
Cube  of  Fig.  26. 


262 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


head  indicating  the  direction  of  the  light.  Fig. 
27  shows  the  elevation  and  plan  of  the  same 
cube. 

The  shadow  of  a  point  is  where  the  ray  of 
light  surrounding  the  point  intersects  the  plane 
upon  which  the  shadow  falls.  In  Fig.  28,  we 
see  the  light  surrounding  the  point,  and  inter¬ 
secting  the  plane,  giving  the  shadow  of  the  point 
upon  the  plane.  The  shadow  is  located  as  far 
down  and  as  far  to  the  right  of  the  point  in 
space  as  the  point  is  from  the  surface  or  plane 
upon  which  its  shadow  falls.  Fig.  29  shows  the 
plan  of  the  point,  its  distance  from  the  plane, 
and  the  plane. 


Fig.  30.  Elevation  of  Line  and  Fig.  31.  Plan  of  Line  in  Space 
Shadow.  and  Plane. 

Shadow  of  a  Line  Parallel  to  Plane  of  Shadow. 

The  shadow  of  a  straight  line  in  space  is  the 
intersection  of  the  light  surrounding  this  line 
with  the  plane  of  shadow.  By  casting  the  shad¬ 
ows  of  the  extremities  of  the  line  and  connecting 
these  points  of  shadows,  we  have  the  shadow  of 
the  line.  All  points  of  the  line  in  space  will 
cast  shadows  upon  the  plane  as  far  down  and  as 
far  to  the  right  as  the  point  is  from  the  plane. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


263 


If  the  line  is  parallel  to  the  plane,  the  shadow 
will  be  equal  in  length  and  parallel  to  the  line 
itself.  See  Fig.  30  for  an  elevation,  and  Fig.  31 
for  the  plan  of  the  line  and  plane. 

If  the  line  in  space  is  not  a  straight  line,  then 
the  shadow  of  the  line  may  he  found  by  casting 
the  shadows  of  any  number  of  points  on  the 
line,  and  connecting  these.  The  greater  the 
number  of  points  of  shadows  cast,  the  greater 
will  be  the  accuracy  of  the  work.  In  Fig.  32 


E.L  E.VATION*  PLAN 

Fig.  32.  Fig.  33. 

Shadow  of  an  Irregular  Shape  which  is  Parallel  to  Plane  of 
Shadow. 


we  see  the  shadow  of  an  angle  or  L-shape  cast 
on  the  plane  of  projection;  Fig.  33  shows  the 
plan  of  the  angle. 

The  shadow  of  a  straight  line  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  upon  which  the  shadow  falls,  is  a 
straight  line  at  45  degrees,  no  matter  what  the 
outline  of  the  surface  is  upon  which  the  shadow 
falls  (see  Figs.  34,  35,  and  36) . 

The  shadow  of  a  straight  line  parallel  to  the 
plane  upon  which  the  shadow  falls,  is  an  irregu- 


264 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


lar  line  giving  the  true  outline  of  the  surface 
(see  Fig.  37). 

The  shadow  of  a  perpendicular  line  on  a  roof 
is  therefore  a  line  which  gives  the  true  slope  of 
the  roof,  since  the  line  is  parallel  to  the  plane, 
and  therefore  casts  a  shadow  the  true  shape  of 
the  surface  upon  which  it  falls. 


rig.  34.  Fig.  35. 

Shadow  of  a  Line  which  is  Perpendicular  to  lane  of  Shadow. 


Fig.  36.  Showing  Shadow  of 
a  Line  Perpendicular  to 
Plane  of  Shadow. 


Fig.  37.  Showing  Shadow  of  a 
Line  Parallel  to  Plane  of 
Shadow  on  a  Moulded 
Surface. 


The  shadow  of  a  straight  line  inclined  to  the 
plane  upon  which  the  shadow  falls,  is  a  straight 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  265 


Fig.  38  Shadow  of  a  Line  Inclined  to  Plane  of  Shadow. 


Fig.  39.  Shadows  of  a  Square  and  a  Circle  Parallel  to  Plane  of 

Shadow. 


266 


AKCHITECTUEAL  DEAFTING 


line  connecting  the  shadows  of  the  ends  of  the 
line  (see  Fig.  38). 

As  in  the  case  of  a  line  parallel  to  the  plane 
upon  which  the  shadow  falls,  the  shadow  is  equal 
in  length  and  parallel  to  the  line,  so  it  is  with 
surfaces — the  square,  rectangle,  octagon,  etc. 
If  parallel  to  the  plane  of  shadows,  the  shadow 


Fig.  40.  Shadows  of  a  Square  and  Circle  Perpendicular  to  Plane  of 
Shadow. 

will  be  equal  in  size  and  shape  to  the  figure  ("see 
Tig.  39). 

A  square  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of 
shadow  will  cast  a  diamond-shaped  shadow,  for 
two  of  the  lines  are  parallel  to  the  plane,  and 
two  are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  (see  Fig.  40). 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


267 


Having  stated  a  few  principles  of  casting 
shadows,  these  will  be  applied  to  a  few  common 
examples. 

Take  an  example  of  a  brick  projecting  from 
a  wall  (Fig.  41).  We  apply  the  principles  as 


ELE.VA.TI  ON 


PLAN 

Fig.  41.  Shadows  of  Projections  from  Plane  of  Shadow. 


PLAN 

Fig.  42.  Illustrating  Principles  of  Shadows. 

stated,  to  each  edge  of  the  brick.  The  top,  bot¬ 
tom,  and  side  faces  of  the  brick  are  perpendicu- 


268  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

lar  to  the  plane,  therefore  the  shadows  will  be 
rectangular  in  shape. 


Figs.  42  and  43  show  a  further  application 
of  the  foregoing  principles. 


Plate  D  shows  the  shadows  as  cast  upon  an 
Order  of  architecture,  illustrating  also  how 
much  clearer  the  drawing  is  when  it  has  the 
shadows  worked  out  on  it. 

The  above  principles  will  give  a  general 
understanding  of  the  subject. 

DETAILS  OF  CONSTRUCTION 

It  is  essential  to  know  the  usual  method  of 
detailing  different  portions  of  the  building.  For 
the  clear  understanding  of  some  of  the  impor¬ 
tant  parts  of  a  building,  there  have  been  pre¬ 
pared  some  typical  details.  The  reader,  having 
become  familiar  with  the  details  shown,  can 
adapt  them  to  any  sort  of  building. 

Cornice.  The  cornice  is  the  projection  at  the 
top  of  the  building,  made  more  or  less  elaborate. 
There  are  several  kinds  of  cornices — the  box 
cornice,  as  shown  in  Fig.  44,  and  the  open  cor¬ 
nice,  as  shown  in  Fig.  45  (a  and  b).  Referring 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


269 


to  Fig.  44,  there  is  the  crown-mould  A,  the  fascia 
B;  the  planceer  or  soffit  C;  the  lookout  D;  the 


brackets  E ;  the  dentil  course  F.  Not  all  cornices 
have  all  these  parts.  The  plainer  ones  may  be 
without  the  brackets  E  and  the  dentils  F;  or 


270 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


more  elaborate  cornices  may  have  more  mem- 
bers.  The  closed  cornice  always  has  the  gutter 
built  into  the  upper  members;  the  open  cornice 


or  b). 

The  gutter,  in  the  best  work,  is  made  of  cop¬ 
per;  in  ordinary  work,  of  galvanized  iron;  and 
in  the  cheapest  class  of  work,  tin  is  used.  The 
durability  of  these  materials  is  in  the  order 
named,  the  copper  wearing  usually  the  life  of 
the  building.  Galvanized  and  tin  gutters  have 
to  be  kept  well  painted;  but  even  with  good 
care,  the  life  of  these  two  materials  is  limited. 

One  important  feature  of  a  good  gutter  is 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  271 

to  have  the  metal  run  well  up  under  the  roofing 
material,  and  out  over  the  crown-mould.  This 
keeps  any  water  from  overflowing  up  under  the 
roof  if  the  gutter  becomes  choked  with  ice  or 
leaves.  The  gutter  should  be  well  pitched  or 
graded  to  the  outlets.  The  gutter  outlets  are 
in  turn  connected  to  leaders  or  down-spouts. 
These  down-spouts  are  made,  usually,  of  the 


Fig.  45b.  Type  of  Open  Cornice  Known  as  Close-Eave  Cornice. 

same  material  as  the  gutter.  The  shape  of  the 
down-spouts  may  be  either  round  or  rectangu¬ 
lar;  a  very  common  form  is  made  of  corrugated 
iron,  either  round  or  rectangular.  The  gutter, 
especially  if  a  hanging  gutter,  must  be  securely 
fastened  to  the  roof  at  intervals  of  two  or  three 
feet,  by  means  of  some  sort  of  hanger.  The 
down-spouts  must  be  securely  fastened  to  the 
wall  by  some  approved  method. 

Floor  Construction.  The  floor  construction 
does  not  vary  much  (see  Fig.  46) .  In  this  figure 


272 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


we  have  the  usual  construction  and  method  of 
support  at  the  second  or  upper  floor  line.  The 
joists  must  be  of  ample  size,  not  only  to  carry 


Fig.  46.  Common  Floor  Construction  at  Second-Floor  Line. 

the  load  safely,  but  to  be  stiff  enough  not  to  sag 
or  vibrate  under  a  load,  since  this  would  crack 
the  plastering  or  the  ceiling  below.  On  the 
joists  is  laid  an  under-floor,  usually  of  boards 
Vs  inch  thick,  laid  diagonally  at  45  degrees  with 
the  joists,  and  spiked  with  two  nails  on  every 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  273 

joist.  The  flooring  laid  in  this  manner  braces 
the  building,  and  resists  any  tendency  to  twist. 

In  the  best  construction,  we  use  some  sort 
of  deafening  material  between  the  upper  and 
under  floor,  to  deaden  sound.  The  upper  floor 
is  of  maple,  oak,  or  yellow  pine  of  matched  or 
tongued-and-grooved  boards,  with  the  boards 
parallel  to  one  side  of  the  room.  This  floor  is 
blind-nailed;  that  is,  the  nails  are  driven  in  at 
the  intersection  of  the  tongue  and  the  vertical 
edge,  as  shown  in  Fig.  47.  This  keeps  all  nail- 


Fig.  47.  Section  Showing  Blind-Nailing. 


heads  hidden  from  view.  The  upper  floor  should 
be  thoroughly  kiln-dried — that  is,  dried  arti¬ 
ficially  to  drive  out  the  greater  part  of  the 
moisture,  so  that  when  it  is  finally  laid,  it  will 
not  dry  out  in  the  building  and  open  up  ugly 
cracks.  For  this  reason  the  finished  floor  should 
not  be  laid  until  the  plastering  is  thoroughly 
dry.  The  under  side  of  the  joists  is  lathed  and 
plastered. 

Around  openings,  chimneys,  or  stair-wells, 
the  joists  are  supported  at  the  ends  by  means 
of  a  header,  or  a  joist  running  at  right 
angles  to  them,  to  which  they  are  securely 


274  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

spiked;  or  they  may  rest  on  top  of  a  ribbon  or 
%-inch  board  let  into  the  studding,  the  con¬ 
struction  being  similar  to  the  support  for  the 
ceiling  joists  as  shown  in  Fig.  44. 

At  the  first-floor  line,  we  have  to  build  a  sill 
upon  the  basement  wall;  this  sill  forms  a  sup¬ 
port  for  the  joist,  and  also  gives  a  nailing  for 
the  studding.  The  method  is  clearly  shown  in 
Fig.  48. 

Lath  and  Plaster.  The  interior  finish  of 
almost  all  residence  work  is  lath  and  plaster. 
The  walls,  if  of  wood,  and  the  ceiling,  are  lathed 
with  good,  sound  lath,  free  from  blue  sap  or 
bark,  and  of  white  pine  or  spruce.  They  should 
be  spaced  at  least  1/4  inch  apart,  and  the  plaster 
pressed  firmly  onto  them  so  as  to  make  sure 
that  there  will  be  a  good  key  for  holding  the 
plaster.  All  lath  on  vertical  walls  should  be 
put  on  horizontally,  and  there  should  not  be  a 
vertical  joint  of  more  than  18  inches  between 
any  series  of  laths.  Under  no  consideration 
should  lath  be  put  on  a  vertical  wall  other  than 
horizontally.  In  hot  weather,  it  will  be  well 
to  wet  the  lath  before  applying  the  plaster,  as 
then  they  will  not  absorb  so  much  water  from 
the  plaster. 

Plaster  is  usually  put  on  in  three  coats  for 
woodwork,  and  in  two  coats  for  brickwork.  The 
first  coat  consists  of  slaked  lime,  sand,  and  long, 
clean  cattle  hair  or  fiber,  this  hair  or  fiber  being 
used  to  make  the  plaster  hold  together  better. 

The  first  or  scratch  coat  is  applied  and 


architectural  drafting 


275 


Fig.  48.  Floor  Construction  at  First-Floor  Line. 

pressed  well  into  the  spaces  between  the  lath. 
It  is  this  plaster  getting  in  between  the  lath  and 
falling  over  onto  the  lath,  which  forms  the  key 
or  clinch  for  the  plaster.  This  coat  is  then 
scratched  with  the  trowel  all  over,  in  all  direc¬ 
tions.  This  scratching  roughens  up  the  surface, 
and  makes  a  better  surface  for  the  second  coat 
to  adhere  to. 

The  second  or  brown  coat  is  a  mixture  ot  lime 


276  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

putty,  sand,  and  a  little  hair  or  fiber,  and  is 
applied  after  the  scratch  coat  has  partially 
dried.  This  brown  coat  is  brought  out  to  a  true 
line  for  all  walls  and  ceilings,  and  corners  are 
made  true  and  sharp.  There  are  placed  around 
all  openings  and  back  of  all  chair  rails,  base¬ 
boards,  etc.,  small  strips  %  inch  thick  for  three- 
coat  work,  and  %  inch  thick  for  two-coat  work, 
by  1%  inches  wide.  These  are  called  grounds, 
and  serve  as  a  guide  for  the  plaster  (see  Figs. 
71  and  72).  The  third  coat,  sometimes  called 
the  white  or  skim  coat,  is  a  mixture  of  lime  putty 
and  white  sand,  with  a  little  plaster  of  Paris. 
This  is  a  thin,  white  coat,  put  on  and  rubbed 
down  until  hard,  giving  a  hard  white  surface. 
Sometimes  marble  dust  is  added,  which  makes 
it  harder  and  gives  a  little  more  polish  to  the 
surface.  If  a  sand  finish  is  desired,  instead  of 
the  white  coat  as  above  described,  the  third  coat 
is  mixed  with  lime  putty  and  coarse  sand. 

Flashing  and  Counter- Flashing.  By  flashing 
and  counter-flashing  is  meant  metal  protection 
for  the  intersection  of  surfaces,  to  keep  out  the 
weather.  Take  an  example  of  a  chimney  going 
through  a  roof.  Some  means  must  be  provided 
to  prevent  snow  and  water  from  coming  in 
through  the  space  between  the  vertical  side  of 
the  chimney  and  the  roof.  This  is  accomplished 
by  using  sheet  metal — either  copper,  galvanized 
iron,  or  tin— and  fastening  it  under  the  roof 
covering,  turning  it  up  against  the  chimney,  as 
shown  in  Figs.  49  and  50,  the  piece  marked  A. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  277 

To  prevent  the  water  running  down  the  side  of 
the  chimney,  a  cover-piece,  called  the  counter¬ 
flashing,  is  fastened  into  a  mortar  joint  of  the 
brickwork,  and  turned  down  over  the  flashing. 
The  counter-flashing  should  extend  to  within 
two  inches  of  the  bottom  of  the  flashing.  This 
same  method  of  protection  applies  to  joining  a 
roof  to  a  vertical  wall,  the  protection  at  the 
outside  of  a  window-frame,  or  any  other  place 
needing  similar  protection. 


Fig.  49.  Section  Showing  Flashing  and  Counter-Flashing. 

Shrinkage.  A  word  might  be  said  about 
shrinkage.  All  lumber,  when  exposed  to  beat, 
will  shrink,  owing  to  the  moisture  drying  out. 
In  all  wooden  construction,  all  parts  should  be 
carefully  framed  together  to  reduce  the  shrink¬ 
age  to  a  minimum.  One  common  error  in 
framing  is  shown  in  Fig.  51.  The  girder  rests 
upon  the  post  below,  and  the  post  from  above 
rests  upon  the  girder.  We  can  see  at  a  glance 


278 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Tig.  60.  Flashing  and  Counter-Flashing  around  a  Chimney. 

what  happens  when  the  girder  commences  to 
dry  out.  It  will  shrink,  causing  the  post  above 
to  settle,  which  will  affect  the  part  of  the  build¬ 
ing  carried  in  this  way.  Pig.  52  shows  a  much 
better  way  of  framing  these  posts.  The  post 
above  rests  directly  on  the  post  below;  and  the 


F4r.  61.  Erroneous  Method.  Fig.  62.  Correct  Method. 
Framing  of  Posts  and  Girders  to  Counteract  Effects  of  Shrinkage. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


279 


girder  is  carried  by  the  steel  plate  as  shown,  or 
by  means  of  a  cast-iron  post-cap.  By  this  means 
the  shrinkage  in  the  girder  does  not  affect  the 


Tig.  53.  Section  of  Solid  Door. 


construction  above.  Carry  out  this  same  idea 
in  all  framing.  When  one  partition  comes  over 
another,  carry  it  on  the  cap  of  the  partition 
below,  and  not  on  top  of  the  floor  construction. 

Doors.  Doors  are  of  two  kinds — the  stock 
door  and  the  built-up  door.  The  stock  door  is 
made  solid,  with  a  simple  bevel  called  an  0.  G. 
(or  Ogee).  The  stock  doors  are  usually  V/s 
inches,  1%  inches,  and  1 %  inches  thick  (see  Fig. 
53).  The  built-up  door  has  a  core  of  %-inch 
pieces  of  pine  glued  together;  this  is  covered 
with  thin  sheets  of  wood  y8  inch  thick,  called 


Fig.  54.  Typical  Section  of  a  Built-Up  Door. 

veneer,  which  is  firmly  glued  to  the  core.  The 
veneer  is  made  of  wood  to  match  the  interior 
finish  of  a  residence. 

Fig.  54  shows  a  typical  section  of  a  built-up 
door;  and  Fig.  55  shows  elevations  of  different 


280  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

doors,  with  the  names  of  the  various  parts  of  a 
door. 

All  openings,  either  door  or  window,  should 
have  the  rough  framing  doubled  around  them. 

At  the  bottom  of  the  door  we  have  the 
threshold,  which  is  a  raised  piece,  usually  of  oak 
or  some  other  hard  wood.  This  gives  a  chance 
for  the  door  to  swing  clear  of  the  carpet  or 
rugs.  For  different  details  of  door  trim,  etc., 
see  Fig.  56. 


TO  P 

-  RAIL. 

j 

t, 

ir  1 

tu 

2 

A 

l 

it 

OJ 

J 

Ill 

1 

III! 

J 

jj 

h 

r 

S) 

fb 

b 

~ il 

1 

MIDDLE.  RAIL 

Wi 

IF 

Pj- 

III 

L 

J 

1 

bottom  rail 

rig.  55.  T; 

ppes  of  Par 

Leled  Doors. 

The  door  is  hung  in  a  wooden  frame  which 
is  securely  fastened  to  the  framing  of  the  house. 
The  inside  and  outside  casing  covers  the  space 
between  the  door  frame  and  the  rough  framing. 
See  Fig.  56  for  a  section  through  a  door. 

Porch  Construction.  In  Fig.  57  (also  Fig. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


281 


Fig.  56.  Sections  of  Front  Door  and  Side  Lights. 


282 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  57.  Part  Elevation  and  Section  Showing  Method  of  Porch 
Construction. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


283 


Fig.  58.  A  Typical  Fireplace  Construction. 


284 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


23),  we  see  a  part  elevation  and  a  section  show¬ 
ing  the  method  of  porch  construction.  The  floor 
construction  will  be  the  same  as  for  ordinary 
floor  construction,  except  that  only  one  thick¬ 
ness  of  flooring  is  used,  and  the  boards  must  run 
at  right  angles  to  the  house,  and  have  a  slight 
pitch  away  from  the  building.  This  allows  the 
water  to  drain  away  from  the  building.  In  the 
best  construction,  the  flooring  is  put  together 
with  white  lead,  thus  insuring  a  perfectly  tight 
joint  to  keep  the  water  from  soaking  in  at  the 
joints,  and  thus  causing  the  floor  to  rot. 

Fireplaces.  Fig.  58  shows  a  typical  fireplace 
construction.  The  flues  are  all  dotted  on  the 

FOR  9’6" 

FOR  9-0’ 

STRAIGHT 
STAIR  FOR 
6-6'CEIUNG. 

HEIGHT. 


Fig.  59.  A  Simple,  Straight  Stair. 

elevation.  There  should  be  an  ash-chute  from 
each  fireplace  connected  to  an  ash-pit  in  the 
basement.  There  should  be  a  damper  in  the 
throat  of  the  fireplace  to  regulate  the  draft.  All 
fireplaces  should  be  lined  with  firebrick. 

Stairs.  For  stair  construction,  see  Figs.  59 
to  65  inclusive.  The  simplest  stairway  is  the 
one  that  has  no  turns  in  it,  or  the  one  shown  in 
Fig.  59.  As  laid  out,  this  stair  is  for  an  8  ft.  6 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


285 


m.  ceiling.  Should  the  ceiling  be  higher,  other 
risers  may  be  added. 

In  Fig.  65  are  shown  the  customary  details. 
The  riser  is  known  as  the  vertical  portion,  and 
the  tread  as  the  horizontal  portion.  The  main 
supports  are  usually  2  by  10-inch  or  2  by  1 2-inch, 
notched  to  fit  the  treads  and  risers,  and  are 


\  STAIRS  WITH 
/ONE  LANDING. 
DRAWN  POH 
10-0"  CEILING. 


THIS  STTAIR.  WILL  GIVE 
HEAD  ROOM  FOR  PASS* 
AGE  UNDER  LANDING. 


Fig.  60.  Fig.  61. 

Types  of  Stairs  with  One  Landing. 


called  carriages.  The  balusters  are  the  upright 
spindles  or  ornamental  jjieces  supporting  the 
hand-rail. 

Various  heights  of  riser  to  tread  have  been 
tried,  but  the  one  found  most  satisfactory  is  to 
make  the  riser  from  7  inches  to  7 y2  inches.  The 
usual  rule  for  figuring  the  treads  and  risers  is 


286 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Tig.  64.  Elevation  of  Stairway,  Giving  Necessary  Information. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  287 

to  make  the  sum  of  a  tread  and  riser  equal  to 
17  inches  or  17 y2  inches.  From  this  we  see  that 
the  higher  the  riser,  the  narrower  will  be  the 
tread.  If  we  make  the  riser  7 y2  inches,  then  the 
tread  should  not  exceed  10  inches.  The  width 
of  tread  is  exclusive  of  the  nosing,  which  is 
usually  iy2  inches. 


Pig.  65.  Section  through  Stairs,  Showing  Customary  Details. 


Stone  stairs,  or  stairs  without  a  nosing,  will 
have  to  be  wider. 

For  figuring  the  number  of  risers,  divide  the 
height  from  floor  line  to  floor  line  (in  inches), 
by  the  height  of  one  riser;  the  result  will  be  the 
number  of  risers. 

Fig.  60  shows  a  stairway  with  a  landinj 
Fig.  61  is  another  form  of  stair  with  a  landing. 

Fig.  62  is  a  combination  front  and  back 


288  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

stairs.  There  are  separate  stairs  up  to  the  land¬ 
ing;  then  the  back  stair  joins  the  main  stair. 
Fig.  62  is  the  first-floor  plan,  and  Fig.  63  the 
second-floor  plan,  of  the  same  stairs. 


Fig.  66.  Single-Light  Window.  Fig.  67.  Two-Light  Window. 

Where  possible,  put  a  coat  closet  under  the 
stairs.  This  space  cannot  be  utilized  for  any¬ 
thing  but  a  basement  stair  or  a  closet.  Usually 
there  is  a  basement  stair  in  the  rear  of  the  house. 

Fig.  64  shows  an  elevation  of  the  stairway, 
giving  all  necessary  information. 


Fig.  68.  Fig.  69. 

Types  of  Window  Construction. 


Windows.  There  are  various  types  of  win¬ 
dows  used  in  the  construction  of  buildings.  The 
plainest  is  the  single-light  window  shown  in  Fig. 
66.  This  is  either  pivoted,  hinged,  or  fixed  to 
slide. 


d 

£ 

i— t 

w 

o 

H 

H 

M 

02 

P 


P 

O 

w 

H 

H 


O 

£ 

►—I 

H 

< 

M 

H 

02 

P 

P 

P 


u 

o 

*H 

0} 

£ 

o 

•a 

cd 

pa 

CO 

a> 

,a 

+-> 

O 

a> 

cd 

6 

£> 

CO 

a 

o 

pa 

4-» 

a 

cd 

Ps 

CO 

p 

• 

a> 

m 

Ph 

o 

P 

o 

c 

cd 

a 

*- 

p* 

a 

CO 

cd 

t* 

r— | 

a 

CO 

•  rH 

-M 

cd 

C 

o 

cd 

•  pH 

CO 

a 

(V 

•r-> 

C 


Cd 

<P 

•  pH 

cd 

o 

0> 

s 

*N 

Tl 

p 

cd 

pC 

o 

© 

a 

a 

o> 

CO 

cd 

o> 

r3 


o> 

o 


o 


PLATE  E — Architectural  Drafting. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


289 


The  windows  are  usually  designated  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  number  of  panes  of  glass  they  contain, 
Fig.  67,  for  example,  being  a  two-light  window. 
Very  often  a  large  glass  space  is  divided  into 
smaller  areas  by  means  of  horizontal  and  verti¬ 
cal  strips  called  muntins,  as  shown  in  Fig.  68. 
The  lower  sash  slides  up,  while  the  upper  one 
is  usually  fixed  in  place;  this  upper  sash  is 
called  a  transom. 

When  windows  are  grouped  in  twos  or 
threes,  they  are  separated  by  means  of  vertical 
divisions.  These  divisions  are  called  mullions. 
The  weights  of  the  sash  usually  travel  in  these 
(see  Fig.  69). 

The  sash  is  usually  the  movable  frame  that 
contains  the  glass.  A  double-hung  window  is 
one  in  which  the  sash  are  counterbalanced  by 
iron  weights  so  that  the  sash  will  slide  easily 
up  and  down  in  grooves  in  the  frame.  The  sash 
of  a  window  may  be  hinged  to  open  like  doors, 
in  which  case  the  window  is  called  a  casement 
window.  If  the  sash  are  hung  on  pivots,  either 
vertically  or  horizontally,  we  speak  of  the  win¬ 
dow  as  a  pivoted  window. 

Referring  to  Fig.  68,  A  is  the  lower  rail  of 
the  sash,  usually  from  2 y2  to  3  inches  wide;  B 
is  the  meeting  rail,  from  1  to  2  inches  wide; 
C  is  the  stile,  usually  2  inches  wide;  D  is  the 
upper  rail,  of  the  same  width  as  the  stile;  E 
indicates  the  muntins,  which  divide  the  sash 
into  small  areas;  F  is  the  transom  bar,  or  the 


290 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Jill 


Fig.  70.  Typical  Detail  of  Plank-Framed  Basement  Window. 

fixed  bar  between  the  transom  G  and  the  double- 
hung  sash  below. 

The  usual  thicknesses  of  sash  are  1  y8  inches 
for  small  windows,  to  1%,  1%,  and  sometimes 
2^4  inches,  depending  upon  the  size  of  sash. 
The  larger  the  window,  the  heavier  the  sash 
must  necessarily  be. 

In  Fig.  70  we  have  a  plank-framed  window. 

This  is  the  same  kind  of  frame  required  for  the 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


291 


casement  window  as  shown  in  Fig.  76.  Fig.  70 
is  the  typical  detail  for  cellar  window  construc¬ 
tion.  The  windows  usually  have  a  single  sash 
which  may  be  divided  by  muntins  into  smaller 


Fig.  71.  Double-Hung  Window,  Outside  of  Building  Plastered. 

lights.  Notice  the  projection  on  the  bottom 
rail,  which  serves  as  a  drip  for  all  water  coming 
from  the  glass.  Such  windows  are  usually  hung 
at  the  side  or  top.  Fig.  70  is  detailed  for  a 


292 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  72.  Double-Hung  Window  for  a  Erick  Wall. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


25)3 


Fig.  73.  Part  Section  Showing  Details  of  Bay  Window  Con¬ 
struction. 


Jettiom 

Fig.  74.  Details  for  a  Dormer  or  Roof  Window. 


CENTER’ LINE- 


294 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


jEtCTION 

Fig.  75.  Showing  Details  of  Construction  for  Projecting  Bay  Window. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


295 


Fig.  76.  Details  of  Casement  Window. 


29$  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

brick  wall,  although  the  same  detail  will  apply 
to  a  frame  wall. 

In  Fig.  71  we  have  the  details  and  dimen¬ 
sions  for  a  double-hung  window  in  a  frame  wall, 
the  exterior  of  the  wall  being  plastered.  In  Fig. 
72  we  have  the  details  for  a  double-hung  win¬ 
dow  in  a  brick  wall.  Notice  that  there  is  very 
little  difference  in  construction.  The  parts  of 
the  construction  are  named  for  the  sake  of 
clearness,  A  being  the  sash,  B  the  inside  stop, 
0  the  pulley  stile,  D  the  parting  strip,  E  the 
outside  casing,  F  the  brick  mould  or  staff-head, 
G-  the  back  lining,  H  the  sub-jamb,  J  the  inside 
casing,  K  the  stool,  L  the  apron,  M  the  ground, 
and  N  the  sill. 

In  Fig.  73  we  have  the  construction  for  a 
bay  window,  showing  the  boxes,  sash,  etc. 

Fig.  74  shows  the  details  for  a  dormer  or 
roof  window. 

Fig.  75  shows  the  construction  for  a  pro¬ 
jecting  bay  window,  the  sash  being  hung  to 
swing  out.  We  have  shown  a  half  exterior 
view,  a  half  interior  view,  and  a  section. 

Fig.  76  shows  the  details  of  a  casement  win¬ 
dow  in  which  the  head,  mullion,  and  sill,  with 
all  adjoining  construction,  are  shown.  Notice 
the  grounds  or  guide  for  the  plaster  work,  as 
spoken  of  under  “Lath  and  Plaster.” 

Fig.  77  shows  the  interior  elevation  of  the 
door  and  window  trim,  with  a  large-scale  draw¬ 
ing  of  the  exact  profiles  of  this  trim.  The  trim, 
and  in  fact  all  interior  woodwork,  are  fastened 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


297 


BASt 


Fig.  77.  Details  of  Window  and  Door  Trim. 


298 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


to  the  grounds,  which  are  set  to  serve  as  guides 
for  the  plasterer,  and  which  should  be  placed 
back  of  all  interior  finish.  The  base  shown  is 
the  finish  at  the  floor-line.  The  base  is  nailed 
to  grounds ;  and  the  quarter-round  mould  at  the 
floor  is  nailed  to  the  floor,  to  cover  the  crack  at 
the  joining  of  the  base  and  floor-line. 

SKETCHING 

In  all  architectural  work,  the  art  of  sketch¬ 
ing  is  important.  To  be  able  to  show  one’s  ideas 
clearly  and  artistically,  or  to  reproduce  some 
form  or  object  in  a  pleasing  manner,  is  indeed 
an  essential  qualification  for  the  draftsman  as 
well  as  the  architect.  Some  have  a  natural 
ability  to  sketch,  which  lacks  but  the  pencil  and 
paper  to  give  a  true  expression  of  the  idea  of 
the  mind;  while  others  acquire  the  art  of 
sketching  only  by  diligent  study  and  persistent 
practice.  Many  instances  have  proven  the  fact 
that  one  may  have  ability,  but  that  it  needs 
developing,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  mathema¬ 
tician,  who  becomes  an  expert  in  the  higher 
mathematics  by  a  gradual  training  from  the 
simpler  problems  on  up  through  more  complex 
ones.  Because  one  has  not  ability  that  is  appar¬ 
ent  at  the  outset,  is  no  criterion  whereby  we 
may  judge  of  his  ability  along  any  particular 
line.  Learn  to  sketch,  as  it  is  a  valuable  asset 
for  the  architect. 

Fundamental  Principle.  To  the  beginner, 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  299 

the  object  usually  presents  itself  as  made  up 
of  small  portions,  and  ordinarily  he  will  make 
an  attempt  to  show  all  the  small  details,  over¬ 
looking  the  main  mass  or  body  of  the  object. 
The  first  thing  is  to  be  able  to  see  the  object 
as  it  really  is,  as  it  would  really  appear  to  the 
best  advantage  when  sketched  roughly  and 
quickly.  Learn  to  look  at  the  general  grouping 
of  the  different  portions,  and  their  relation  to 
one  another.  The  beginner  attempts  to  draw 
the  object  as  he  sees  it  at  close  range,  while  the 
experienced  person  draws  it  as  it  appears  at 
a  distance.  The  tendency  of  the  beginner  is  to 
represent  everything  with  hard,  sharp,  and 
exact  lines  which  are  known  from  actual  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  object  to  exist,  although  they  do 
not  really  appear  so.  Learn  to  study  the  gen¬ 
eral  proportions  as  expressed  by  the  shadows, 
rather  than  by  the  exact  outlines  bounding  each 
surface.  Studying  an  object  for  sketching  is 
really  a  study  of  the  shadows.  In  all  sketching, 
the  proportion  is  the  fundamental  principle. 
Having  correctly  represented  the  proportions, 
then  represent  the  object  by  means  of  the  shad¬ 
ows  as  cast  upon  the  object,  and  let  the  details 
be  merely  an  after  consideration.  Learn  to  see 
the  object  correctly,  and  the  representation  by 
lines  will  come  by  practice. 

Pencils  and  Paper.  The  pencil  is  present  on 
all  occasions;  therefore  it  is  used  a  great  deal 
in  sketching.  Pencils  may  be  obtained  in  all 
degrees  of  hardness  and  softness.  Drawing 


300 


AECHITECTUEAL  DBAFTING 


pencils  are  usually  denoted  by  H,  HH,  etc.,  for 
hard  pencils,  up  to  8H,  which  is  a  very  hard 
lead;  the  soft  pencils  are  denoted  by  B,  BB, 
etc.,  up  to  4B  for  very  soft  pencils.  An  inter¬ 
mediate  grade  known  as  an  HB  is  between  the 
hard  leads  commencing  with  H  and  the  soft 
leads  commencing  with  B.  This  is  a  very  con¬ 
venient  grade  to  use  for  all  kinds  of  work.  A 
good  drawing  pencil  should  contain  no  grit. 

As  a  general  rule,  the  larger  the  drawing, 
the  softer  the  pencil,  since  the  lead  in  the  soft 
pencils  is  larger  than  that  in  the  hard  pencils. 
Therefore,  it  is  rather  difficult  to  make  a  small 
drawing  with  a  really  soft  pencil.  As  stated 
above,  the  most  satisfactory  pencil  for  all- 
around  work  is  the  medium  grade  or  the  HB 
pencil. 

The  pencil  should  never  be  sharpened  to  a 
point.  Cut  away  the  wood,  leaving  the  lead  its 
full  size;  and  by  a  few  strokes  on  a  piece  of 
scratch  paper,  wear  off  the  sharp  edge,  until 
you  have  a  line  the  full  thickness  of  the  lead. 

Hold  the  pencil  comfortably  between  the 
fingers,  not  in  a  cramped  position,  but  free  and 
easy.  The  length  of  line,  the  position  on  the 
paper,  and  the  width  and  intensity  of  the  lines 
will  determine  just  which  movements  of  the 
fingers,  wrist,  or  arm  are  the  best  suited  to  the 
work.  In  all  work,  avoid  bending  over  the 
drawing;  sit  upright  so  that  the  drawing  may 
be  all  seen  at  a  glance,  The  paper  should 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


301 


always  be  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  sight, 
to  insure  the  best  work. 

The  paper  should  have  a  somewhat  rough 
texture  for  the  best  work,  although  some  very 
pleasing  sketches  have  been  made  upon  smooth 
paper.  Never  use  a  glazed  paper.  The  smooth 
paper  requires  greater  care  in  its  use,  it  being 
harder  to  erase  anything  successfully.  A  good 
grade  of  tracing  paper  makes  a  very  good  paper 
for  sketches  with  a  medium-soft  pencil. 

Method.  Begin  sketching  by  drawing  paral¬ 
lel  lines  horizontally;  then  make  them  vertical; 
then  slanting  lines — endeavoring  all  the  time 
to  make  them  all  of  the  same  width  and 
intensity.  After  exercises  in  the  drawing  of 
straight  lines,  try  circles  and  ellipses.  Then 
sketch  familiar  household  articles.  From  these, 
let  the  student  take  up  more  difficult  work, 
learning  to  see  objects  as  they  actually  appear 
to  the  e}^e,  and  not  as  they  are  really  known  to 
exist. 

Referring  to  Plates  E  and  F,  notice  the 
method  used  for  indicating  surfaces.  Instead 
of  covering  the  side  of  the  building  with  long, 
mechanical,  parallel  lines,  the  lines  are  made 
short,  and  broad,  and  break  joint  so  as  to  give 
an  uneven  surface.  The  eaves  are  all  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  shadow  they  produce,  there  being 
no  definite  line  for  the  edge  of  the  roof.  For 
the  corners  of  the  building,  there  is  not  a  hard, 
sharp  line,  but  a  broken,  irregular  line.  The 


302  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

doors  and  windows  are  all  represented  by  the 
shadows  they  cast. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  shadow  is  the 
thing  to  reproduce.  If  the  shadows  are  shown 
in  their  true  relative  proportions,  in  intensity 
and  size,  we  are  reasonably  sure  of  a  satisfac¬ 
tory  sketch.  For  such  work,  the  object  is 


usually  outlined  with  a  light  line,  to  get  the 
proper  lines  and  proportions;  in  other  words, 
just  enough  lines  are  given  to  show  the  proper 
relation  of  dimensions. 

Having  outlined  the  object,  then  commence 
with  the  soft,  broad  pencil,  and  indicate  the 
texture  and  shadows  by  varying  intensities  of 
lines. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  303 

Practice  will  give  you  the  best  training  for 
developing  the  art  of  sketching.  It  is  not 
enough  to  study  work  already  done,  analyzing 
lines  and  surfaces.  Actual  work  and  practice 
in  drawing  and  sketching  will  do  more  for  you 
than  any  mere  study  of  sketches. 

Learn  to  make  preliminary  sketches  quickly, 
and  yet  indicate  general  proportions  and  out¬ 
lines  (see  Pig.  78).  This  sketch  was  made  in 
about  five  minutes’  time,  while  the  architect 
was  talking  to  his  client.  Some  of  the  finer 
points  of  the  original  pencil  sketch  are  neces¬ 
sarily  lost  in  the  pen-and-ink  reproduction  from 
which  the  cut  was  engraved.  The  figure  repre¬ 
sents  a  possible  treatment  for  a  boiler  house. 
This  is  a  good  example  of  a  preliminary  sketch, 
there  being  no  particular  time  spent  in  the 
drawing  and  very  few  straight  lines  used,  yet, 
when  the  sketch  is  studied,  we  can  see  the  gen¬ 
eral  effect  that  such  a  building  would  produce 
in  sunlight. 

Make  your  sketches  have  some  “snap”  to 
them.  Let  each  line  be  firm,  starting  and  stop¬ 
ping  in  a  way  that  shows  it  to  be  there  for  a 
definite  purpose.  Use  plenty  of  free  and  easy 
lines,  and  also  black  lines.  Do  away  with  sharp 
lines,  and  never  use  hard  pencils  for  this  work. 

Por  the  purpose  of  laying  out  drawing,  either 
for  pencil,  pen  and  ink,  or  pen-and-ink  render¬ 
ing,  a  sketch  will  be  shown  to  illustrate  clearly 
the  quickest  and  most  satisfactory  method. 
See  Pig.  79,  where  the  sketches  are  all  rather 


304 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Fig.  79.  Sheet  of  Drawings  Laid  Out  with  a  Sense  of  Proportion. 


o3 

£ 

o 

HP 

P 

rP 

02 

«4H 

o 

<D 

02 

p 

<D 

rP 


P 

CD 

> 

•  pH 

&0 


<d 

o 

a 

a> 

p 

•  rH 

s 


o 

fH 

pH 


<d 

rP 


P 

P 

0Q 

<D 

P 

•  rH 


o 

rP 

-M 

O 

-4-^ 

P 

CD 

s 

<D 

> 

O 

s 

02 

P 

CD 

ro 

p 

p 

<D 

<D 

Jm 

<V 

*P 


<D 

C 

•fH 
-4— > 

o 

£ 


6 

£ 

M 

H 

◄ 

« 

Q 

p 

H 

« 

P 

H 

U 

H 

H 

►H 

HH 

P 

a 

« 

<5 


fa 

H 

H 

<1 

fa 

fa 


> 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


305 


rough  or  uneven,  but  the  general  drawing  shows 
the  effect  of  proportions.  The  lines,  instead  of 
being  long  and  continuous,  are  made  up  of 
short  lines  almost  joining. 

PEN-AND  INK  RENDERING 

Finished  drawings  may  be  colored  or  ren¬ 
dered  in  a  number  of  ways.  The  method  of 
pen-and-ink  rendering  is  very  often  used.  It 
is  indeed  an  accomplishment  to  be  able  to  render 
in  pen  and  ink  successfully.  This  usually  comes 
only  from  long  and  patient  work  in  practicing. 
A  drawing  may  also  be  rendered  in  pencil,  or 
colored  by  means  of  water- colors. 

For  pen-and-ink  rendering,  any  black  ink 
will  do.  A  good  grade  of  India  ink  is  very 
satisfactory  and  convenient.  There  was  a  time 
when  all  drawing  inks  were  made  by  grinding 
a  stick  of  India  ink  in  water  on  a  stone  bed; 
but  now  prepared  inks  are  used  almost  entirely. 
The  pens  should  be  fairly  large,  and  have  a 
medium  point;  the  tendency  of  beginners  is  to 
use  too  fine  a  point.  Any  good-quality  tracing 
paper  may  be  used. 

The  outline  of  the  work  may  be  made  upon 
scratch  paper;  and,  by  placing  the  tracing 
paper  over  it,  the  ink  rendering  can  be  made 
directly  over  the  outline.  Papers  with  soft  sur¬ 
faces  should  be  avoided,  since  the  ink  will  have 
a  tendency  to  spread,  the  points  of  the  pen  will 
often  catch  and  spatter  ink,  and  erasing  is 


306 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


Sv  fe*— J 


t-J  !> 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  307 

almost  impossible.  Good  bristol  board  makes 
a  satisfactory  surface  to  work  upon. 

All  lines  should  be  firm  and  uniform,  and 
series  of  parallel  lines  should  give  an  even 
texture  or  appearance  to  a  surface.  Avoid  the 
stiff,  hair  lines,  which  are  too  fine  to  give  any 
character  to  the  work.  In  making  ink  lines, 
while  the  general  direction  of  the  line  may  be 
straight,  yet  a  line  slightly  wavy,  or  a  line  such 
as  would  be  made  by  the  trembling  of  the  hand, 
is  not  objectionable. 

Use  care  in  drawing  lines  to  make  them  as 
uniform  as  possible,  and  exercise  care  in  the 
starting  and  stopping  of  lines.  Lines  should 
naturally  be  a  little  heavier  at  the  ending  than 
at  the  beginning. 

Referring  to  Fig.  80,  we  see  in  this  draw¬ 
ing,  the  general  method  of  rendering  a  building 
in  pen  and  ink.  The  window-panes,  instead 
of  being  hard,  sharp  lines,  are  made  by  a  series 
of  parallel  lines  representing  the  shadow. 
Notice  the  treatment  of  the  roof,  the  shadow 
of  the  cornice,  and  the  general  lines  of  the 
building. 

Fig.  81  shows  the  use  of  parallel  lines  en¬ 
tirely  for  the  texture  of  the  wall,  and  also  for 
the  shadows. 

Fig.  82  shows  a  very  attractive  drawing. 
Study  the  foliage  around  the  house;  see  how 
it  has  been  represented  by  lines,  sometimes 
straight  and  sometimes  curved.  The  distance 
to  the  background  is  obtained  by  the  quality 


308 


309 


Courtesy  of  “Inland  Architect  and  News  Record. 

Fig.  82.  A  Well-Executed  Example  of  Pen-and-ink  Rendering. 


310 


AKCHITECTUKAL  DRAFTING 


of  the  line;  the  further  away  the  background, 
the  lighter  the  line.  Study  the  lines  represent¬ 
ing  the  wall  and  roof  surfaces.  Notice  that 
the  lines  in  general  are  not  straight,  but  are 
more  or  less  irregular.  The  shadows  in  Figs. 
81  and  82  are  composed  of  entirely  different 
kinds  of  lines.  Probably  the  best  and  easiest 
method  is  by  the  use  of  vertical  lines.  Notice, 
generally  speaking,  that  there  are  no  long  lines. 
If  it  is  necessary  to  make  such  a  line,  let  it 
be  represented  by  a  series  of  short  lines,  with 
their  ends  almost  touching.  The  tendency  of 
the  beginner  is  to  make  the  rendering  all  too 
light.  Put  in  some  black,  somewhere,  as  it 
makes  the  drawing  more  in  contrast,  and 
emphasizes  other  portions  of  the  work. 

Plate  G  is  a  good  example  of  a  sketch  ren¬ 
dered  in  pen  and  ink. 

WASH  DRAWINGS 

Water-colors  or  India  ink  for  coloring  draw¬ 
ings,  are  used  for  the  best  work,  almost  entirely. 
By  means  of  color  or  by  the  use  of  India  ink 
for  a  monotone,  the  shades  and  shadows  can 
be  emphasized  and  the  drawing  made  much 
more  attractive.  The  usual  method  of  proce¬ 
dure  is  to  have  the  paper  upon  which  the  draw¬ 
ing  is  to  be  made,  stretched  tight  upon  a  board; 
then  cast  the  shadows,  marking  the  outlines 
faintly  with  a  hard  pencil;  then  clean  the 
drawing  with  a  soft  eraser;  finally,  have  all 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


311 


materials  ready  for  applying  the  washes,  and 
then  start  the  color  work. 

Materials.  The  usual  materials  for  wash 
drawings  are:  the  colors  or  the  India  ink;  a 
number  of  brushes  (one  a  bristle  brush  and  the 
others  soft  camel-hair  or  Japanese  brushes); 
plenty  of  receptacles  for  holding  the  color  in  its 
various  shades,  also  one  large  receptacle  for 
clean  water.  Porcelain  or  china  dishes  made 
especially  for  this  work  may  be  purchased  from 
any  dealer  in  artists’  materials.  In  addition  to 
the  above,  a  soft  sponge  and  a  number  of  blotters 
will  be  necessary.  The  paper  should  have  a 
rough  finish,  as  this  takes  the  color  or  wash  much 
better  than  paper  with  a  smooth  or  glazed  sur¬ 
face.  Hot-pressed  and  cold-pressed  papers  of 
good  quality  are  largely  used  for  this  work.  The 
cold-pressed  is  a  little  rougher  than  the  hot- 
pressed  and  is  perhaps  more  frequently  used.  A 
good  tracing  paper  may  be  used  if  the  color  is 
applied  thick  and  in  spots,  or  where  no  attempt 
at  a  true  wash  drawing  is  made.  Care  will  have 
to  be  exercised  in  the  use  of  tracing  paper,  as 
too  much  water  will  spoil  the  work. 

As  mentioned  above,  the  paper  upon  which 
the  drawing  is  made  has  to  be  stretched  tight  on 
the  drawing  board.  This  may  be  done  after  the 
drawing  has  been  made,  although  it  will  be 
found  much  more  convenient  to  stretch  the 
paper  first,  and  then  make  the  drawing.  To 
stretch  the  paper,  it  should  be  thoroughly 
wetted  all  over,  and  kept  wet  until  it  is  firmly 


312 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


fastened  in  place;  this  wetting  causes  the  paper 
to  expand.  On  the  four  edges  of  the  paper,  for 
about  an  inch  back  from  the  edge  all  around, 
place  glue  or  drawing-board  paste.  The  paper, 
being  expanded  by  the  water,  should  now  be 
fastened  or  pressed  down  onto  the  board,  work¬ 
ing  opposite  edges  at  the  same  time.  Do  not 
attempt  to  stretch  the  paper  perfectly  tight. 
Be  careful  to  see  that  the  edges  of  the  paper  are 
in  contact  with  the  board,  and  run  the  back  edge 
of  a  pocket-knife  all  around,  to  insure  the  glue 
or  paste  on  the  edge  of  the  paper  coming  into 
contact  with  the  board. 

After  the  paper  is  thus  stretched,  take  all  sur¬ 
plus  water  off  by  means  of  a  sponge,  and  dry  the 
paper  as  much  as  possible  with  the  sponge. 
Allow  the  paper  to  stand  until  thoroughly  dry, 
when  it  will  be  found  that  the  paper  has 
shrunken  tight  and  smooth,  giving  a  good  sur¬ 
face  for  the  drawing,  and  the  rendering  will  be 
much  easier  because  the  paper  is  held  firmly  in 
place.  Be  very  careful  to  see  that  the  paper  is 
stuck  to  the  board  all  along  each  of  the  four 
edges,  before  allowing  the  paper  to  dry. 

After  the  drawing  has  been  made,  the 
shadows  are  cast  with  light  pencil  lines.  Clean 
the  drawing  with  a  soft  eraser,  either  of 
kneaded  rubber  or  of  “sponge”  rubber.  These 
erasers  remove  the  general  surface  dirt  without 
affecting  the  lines  materially. 

The  use  of  an  India  ink  wash  will  be 
described,  although  the  same  treatment  wiU  be 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


313 


true  of  colors.  The  drawing  should,  of  course, 
be  inked  very  carefully  before  any  tinting  is 
started.  The  erasing  of  lines  should  be  done 
very  carefully  as  the  surface  of  the  paper,  if 
rubbed  too  hard,  will  be  abraded — so  that  when 
colors  are  applied  they  will  soak  in  instead  of 
remaining  on  the  surface.  The  drawing  may  be 
very  carefully  washed  after  the  inking  is  com¬ 
pleted,  with  a  soft  sponge;  this  removes  surplus 
ink  and  leaves  the  lines  more  subdued. 

Method  of  Applying  Wash.  Having  the 
drawing  all  ready  to  render,  a  few  principles 
must  be  followed  to  insure  the  best  results. 
Have  your  water,  color,  brushes,  blotters,  and 
sponge,  all  handy;  have  plenty  of  clean  water 
convenient;  for  heavy  or  dark  shades,  apply  sev¬ 
eral  washes  of  a  lighter  value,  instead  of  putting 
the  heavy  color  on  all  at  once. 

Having  once  started  the  wash,  carry  it  on 
continuously,  without  allowing  it  to  dry;  any 
mistakes  can  be  remedied  after  the  wash  is  com¬ 
pleted,  but  the  wash  should  never  be  interrupted 
to  rectify  mistakes.  Lighten  the  wash  by  the 
gradual  addition  of  clean  water;  be  careful  to 
take  the  color  from  the  top  of  the  dish,  to  avoid 
getting  the  sediment.  Always  take  about  the 
same  amount  on  the  brush,  and  do  not  allow  the 
brush  to  become  too  dry  before  adding  more,  as 
this  will  dry  much  quicker  on  the  paper,  and  the 
addition  of  more  will  cause  a  streaked  or 
mottled  effect. 

Having  reached  the  bottom  of  the  drawing, 


314  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

take  up  any  standing  water  or  color  with  a 
blotter,  as  it  will  make  a  bad  appearance  if  this 
is  all  allowed  to  stand  and  dry.  The  board 
should  be  tilted  slightly,  so  that  the  wash  will 
have  a  tendency  to  move  downward;  and  it 
should  be  left  in  this  position  until  the  color  is 
dry.  Do  not  attempt  to  patch  or  add  color  to 
any  portion  of  the  drawing  that  has  commenced 
to  dry. 

Having  put  into  a  saucer  enough  of  the  ink 
for  the  drawing,  apply  the  brush  to  the  surface 
of  the  ink,  soaking  up  a  brushful.  If  the  draw¬ 
ing  is  of  any  considerable  size,  a  wide,  flat  brush 
of  carneTs  hair  can  be  used  to  better  advantage 
than  a  pointed  brush.  The  pointed  brush,  how¬ 
ever,  will  be  the  one  most  used  on  ordinary-sized 
drawings. 

With  the  brush  filled  with  the  ink,  apply  to 
the  upper  edge  of  the  drawing,  carrying  it 
across  the  top  and  gradually  working  it  down¬ 
ward,  adding  more  ink  as  the  brush  becomes 
drier.  Since  all  work  is  darker  at  the  top  and 
gradually  shades  lighter,  as  the  wash  is  carried 
down  the  sheet,  add  a  little  clean  water  each 
time,  until,  at  the  bottom  or  last  application  of 
the  brush,  it  should  contain  almost  clear  water. 
This  shading  from  darker  at  the  top  to  lighter 
at  the  bottom  is  a  conventional  way  of  rendering 
plans. 

Plate  H  (lower  figure),  shows  a  plan 
rendered  in  this  way,  the  darker  effect  being 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


315 


obtained  by  a  series  of  light  washes  and  not  by 
a  single  wash. 

The  brush  is  held  in  much  the  same  way  as 
a  pencil,  the  hand  being  entirely  free  from  the 
paper,  or  perhaps  at  times  resting  on  the  little 
finger. 

In  case  of  any  blotches  or  other  objection¬ 
able  portions,  these  can  be  remedied  with  a  little 
care.  Take  the  sponge  and  dip  it  into  clear 
water.  Sop  the  portion  thoroughly,  allowing 
enough  time  for  the  water  to  soak  into  the  color; 
then  apply  a  clean  blotter,  and  soak  up  the 
water.  Be  very  careful  not  to  rub  the  blotter 
over  the  surface.  If  very  carefully  done,  the 
trouble  can  be  remedied,  and  the  drawing  will 
scarcely  show  the  spot. 

Be  careful,  in  all  work,  not  to  allow  dust  or 
hairs  from  the  brushes  to  remain  on  the  draw¬ 
ing.  These  may  be  removed  with  a  toothpick, 
by  slightly  moistening  the  end  of  the  toothpick 
in  the  mouth  and  carefully  lifting  the  objects  off 
the  drawing.  For  lines  that  have  overrun  after 
the  wash  has  become  dry,  take  the  bristle  brush, 
moisten  it  in  clean  water,  and  rub  gently  over 
the  color  outside  the  line.  When  the  water  has 
soaked  into  the  color,  use  the  blotter.  The 
trouble  can  be  remedied  by  one  or  two  such 
treatments. 

The  methods  of  procedure  described  above 
concern  the  application  of  flat  washes. 

It  will  take  considerable  practice  to  render 
well.  The  beginner  is  advised  to  make  several 


316 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


sheets  of  such  work  as  described  above,  before 
attempting  a  plan  or  elevation.  Use  the  washes 
on  the  elevations  to  show  shadows,  or  the  por¬ 
tions  in  shade.  See  Plate  H  (upper  figure), 
which  shows  an  elevation  rendered  in  the 
conventional  way. 

Water-colors  are  applied  or  “ floated  on”  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  India  ink  washes.  Re¬ 
member  that  in  the  use  of  colors  you  will  have 
to  be  very  careful  to  have  a  dish  and  a  brush 
for  each  color,  as  the  least  i>article  of  color  in  the 
clear  water  will  sometimes  change  the  color  of 
some  other  dish  if  the  two  are  used.  Clean  color 
boxes,  brushes,  and  water  are  the  first  requisites 
of  good  rendering  in  color. 

Colors  may  be  obtained  either  in  tubes,  sim¬ 
ilar  to  oil  paints,  or  in  pans,  which  are  small 
dishes  of  color.  These  should  all  be  kept  in  a 
water-color  box.  There  are  usually  two  palettes 
or  lids  to  this  box,  on  which  the  colors  may  be 
mixed.  If  there  is  to  be  any  quantity  of  color 
used,  these  palettes  will  not  be  large  enough, 
and  the  dishes  should  be  used. 

In  the  use  of  either  color  or  India  ink,  apply 
enough  color  to  give  the  drawing  some  char¬ 
acter;  make  it  4 4 snap;”  do  not  commit  the  oft- 
repeated  offense  of  having  your  drawing  look 
“ sickly”  or  have  a  washed-out  appearance. 
Attack  the  problem  of  rendering,  with  determi¬ 
nation;  put  on  the  colors  as  colors,  and  not  as  if 
you  were  afraid  of  spoiling  something. 

Red,  blue,  and  yellow  are  commonly  called 


AECHITECTTJEAL  DEAFTING  317 

the  three  primary  colors,  and  in  combination 
will  give  the  intervening  tints  or  colors  of  the 
prism.  Thus  blue  and  yellow  will  give  green; 
red  and  yellow  will  give  orange,  and  red  and 
blue  will  give  violet  or  purple,  the  tints  varying 
according  as  one  or  the  other  color  predominates 
in  the  combination. 

ORDERS  OF  ARCHITECTURE 

In  the  study  of  architectural  history,  we  turn 
to  the  Greeks  and  Romans  for  a  great  many 
fundamental  principles  of  design.  We  see  that 
they  had  proportions  for  everything.  Adopting 
some  unit,  the  building  was  designed  and 
erected  with  this  as  a  unit.  They  had  certain 
arrangements  of  a  cornice,  a  column,  and  a 
base  which  have  been  handed  down  for  ages. 
All  of  the  parts  had  certain  relations  to  one  an¬ 
other  in  size.  This  combination  we  have  called 
an  Order. 

We  have  four  Orders  which  are  used  in  archi¬ 
tecture — the  Tuscan,  Doric,  Ionic,  and  Cor¬ 
inthian.  (See  Pigs.  83  to  86.)  A  fifth  Order — 
the  so-called  Composite  Order — combines  fea¬ 
tures  of  the  others. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  all  the  ornamentation 
on  the  mouldings  has  been  omitted  for  the  sake 
of  clearness  in  revealing  the  important  propor¬ 
tions.  Each  Order  has  the  three  main  divisions 
— the  entablature,  column,  and  pedestal.  In  our 
architectural  design,  the  base  or  pedestal  is 


318  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


6  *CORNlCB 
3  •  FRIEZE. 

*  ARCH  IT  RAVE 
3  •  CAP. 

£  •  BASE. 

I  *  PLINTH 


Fig.  83.  The  Tuscan  Order. 


AECHITECTUEAL  DEAFTING  319 

usually  omitted.  As  will  be  seen  from  the 
drawings,  the  entablature  has  three  divisions— 
the  cornice,  frieze,  and  architrave;  the  column 
is  divided  into  the  cap,  shaft,  and  base;  the 
pedestal,  into  the  cap,  die,  and  base. 

The  entablature  varies  from  1 %  to  2 y2  times 
the  diameter  of  the  column.  The  cornice  pro¬ 
jects  from  the  face  of  the  column  a  distance 
equal  to  the  height  of  the  cornice  in  all  cases 
except  in  the  Doric  Order.  The  frieze  is  a  flat 
band  or  surface,  sometimes  ornamented.  The 
architrave  may  be  made  of  a  single  band,  or  it 
may  be  divided  into  a  number  of  bands. 

The  column  has  a  capital  or  top,  varying 
from  a  plain  cushion  to  the  elaborate  cap  of  the 
Corinthian  and  Composite  Orders.  The  shaft, 
in  some  Orders,  is  perfectly  plain,  while  in 
others  it  is  fluted.  All  columns  have  a  taper  at 
the  top.  The  shaft  is  carried  up  straight  for 
one-third  the  height;  and  from  this  point  it 
tapers.  This  tapering  is  called  entasis.  The 
shaft  rests  on  a  base  which  consists  of  a  torus 
and  a  plinth,  or  a  series  of  toruses  called  an 
Attic  base. 

The  diameter  of  the  column  at  the  straight 
portion  is  used  as  the  unit  of  measurement  for 
all  other  parts. 

Fig.  83  shows  the  Tuscan  Order,  with  the 
principal  proportions.  This  is  the  simplest 
Order,  being  perfectly  plain.  It  is  used  a  great 
deal  for  porches,  or  for  lower  stories  where  there 
are  a  series  of  Orders  above. 


330 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


. 


. 


- 


* 


PLATE  G — Architectural  Drafting, 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


321 


Fig.  85.  The  Ionic  Order. 


323  ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 

Fig.  84  shows  the  Doric  Order.  This  has 
a  great  deal  of  ornament,  both  on  the  soffit  of 
the  corona  (the  projecting,  crowning  member  of 
the  cornice),  and  on  the  mouldings.  In  most 
modern  designs,  we  see  this  Order  modified 
more  or  less. 

There  are  two  types  of  cornices  used  with 
the  Doric  Order— one  with  the  mutules  (project¬ 
ing  flat  blocks  ornamented  on  the  under  sur¬ 
face)  ;  and  the  other  with  the  dentils  (a  course  of 
small  cubes  in  the  bed-moulding).  The  general 
profile  of  the  cornice  is  different  in  the  two 
types.  The  shaft  is  very  often  fluted. 

Fig.  85  shows  the  Ionic  Order,  with  the  prin¬ 
cipal  proportions.  The  cornice  may  have 
brackets  called  modillions,  or  it  may  have  the 
dentils.  The  capital  for  the  column  varies,  the 
left-hand  half  showing  the  cushion  capital,  and 
the  right  half  shows  the  volute  turned  at  45 
degrees,  thus  giving  all  faces  alike.  The  shaft 
is  fluted,  and  the  mouldings  are  usually 
ornamented. 

Fig.  86  shows  the  Corinthian  Order.  The 

main  difference  from  the  other  Orders  is  the 
capital,  which  is  highly  ornamented  by  means 
of  acanthus  leaves.  This  Order  is  probably  the 
most  dignified,  and  is  also  the  most  expensive. 
Sometimes  the  shaft  is  fluted.  The  mouldings 
are  all  greatly  ornamented. 

There  is  a  variation  of  the  Corinthian 
Order,  called  the  Composite  Order,  already  re¬ 
ferred  to.  The  chief  difference  is  in  the  volutes 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


323 


Fig.  86.  The  Corinthian  Order, 


STRAIGHT 


OVOIO  0R3OWTEL 


ELLIPTICAL  OVOLO 


CAVELTTO 


TORUS  OR  BEAD 


FILLET  OR  lISTEL 


CONGE 


3/4-  POUND  BEAK  MOULDING  SPLAT-FACE,  BEVEL  OR  CHAMFER 


SUNK  <«N  o  Raided  FU.L6T  SCOTIA 


THUMB  MOULDING 


CYMA  EECTA  CYMA  REVERSA 


QUIRKED  CYMA 


REEDING 


Fig.  87.  Common  Forms  of  Classic  Mouldings. 


324 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  325 

of  the  capital,  they  being  much  larger  and 
turned  out  the  same  way  as  in  the  true 
Corinthian. 

All  of  these  Orders  are  modified  to  a  greater 
or  less  degree  in  all  applications  of  them,  each 
architect  making  changes  to  conform  to  general 
styles  he  is  using  on  the  building.  The  propor¬ 
tions,  however,  cannot  be  varied  much  without 
spoiling  the  general  effect  of  the  Order. 

Fig.  87  gives  some  of  the  common  forms  of 
mouldings,  with  the  corresponding  names. 

ARCHITECTURAL  LETTERING 

Good  lettering  is  an  essential  requisite  of  a 
good  set  of  plans.  A  drawing  poorly  executed 
but  lettered  attractively  and  well,  will  look  a 
great  deal  better  than  one  which  is  well  drawn 
but  which  is  poorly  lettered.  Therefore,  at  the 
start,  let  it  be  said  that  a  draftsman  needs  to  be 
a  good  letterer  as  well  as  a  good  draftsman. 

We  find  lettering  used  with  the  earliest  art 
of  the  Egyptians.  These  ancient  people  ex¬ 
pressed  their  thoughts  by  means  of  symbols, 
more  or  less  geometrical  in  outline.  These  in¬ 
scriptions  we  find  in  the  oldest  of  our  Biblical 
writings;  they  were  worked  in  stone  and  written 
on  their  papyrus.  The  forms  used  are  called 
hieroglyphics,  and  students  of  ancient  languages 
have  been  able  to  translate  these  strange 
characters. 

The  Greeks  and  Romans  had  characters  very 


326 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


similar  to  ours.  We  have  copied  their  forms, 
and  use  them  to-day  for  our  letters.  Some  of 
the  inscriptions  on  the  ancient  Greek  and 
Roman  temples  are  splendid  examples  of  letter¬ 
ing,  as  to  both  form  and  spacing. 

The  first  principle  to  remember  is  that  good 
lettering  comes  from  freehand  work,  and  not  a 
mechanical  product.  The  tendency  of  the  begin¬ 
ner,  especially,  is  to  make  all  letters  by  means 
of  straight  edges  and  drawing  instruments. 
The  difference  in  the  two  methods  is  evident 
when  we  compare  work  of  the  two  kinds.  The 
printed  letter  such  as  is  used  for  newspaper 
headlines,  and  the  title  as  executed  on  a  set  of 
drawings,  show  very  clearly  that  the  former  is 
too  mechanical  and  stiff,  wThile  the  latter,  if  well 
executed,  is  much  the  more  attractive.  Then 
again,  freehand  lettering  can  be  adjusted  to  the 
general  type  of  the  drawing. 

After  the  graceful  ease  and  ready  adapta¬ 
bility  of  freehand  work,  the  next  requisite  in 
good  achitectural  lettering  is  simplicity.  The 
simpler  the  letter,  the  easier  made,  and  the 
better  the  general  effect.  Examples  illustrating 
this  can  be  seen  in  the  effect  of  highly  orna¬ 
mental  letters  in  newspaper  advertising. 

Learn  to  make  the  titles  the  same  as  a  free¬ 
hand  sketch.  Make  plenty  of  strokes  of  the 
pencil;  get  the  general  shape  of  the  letters,  and 
the  spacing.  Do  not  attempt  to  make  each  letter 
with  one  stroke  of  the  pencil. 

After  having  made  the  title  with  several  out- 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


327 


lines,  then  go  over  this,  and  the  final  lettering 
can  be  done  from  this  sketch  of  the  letters.  Get 
the  general  proportions  and  shapes  first,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  spacing,  before  trying  to  get  a 
finished  title.  Develop  the  title  as  a  whole,  and 
let  the  small  details  of  each  letter  be  the  last 
thing  attempted. 

The  effect  of  the  spacing  of  letters  upon  the 
general  appearance  of  the  title,  will  be  seen 
from  the  accompanying  illustrations  of  ex¬ 
amples.  Study  the  available  space  for  the  title; 


and  make  the  size,  style,  and  spacing  of  the 
letters  to  suit  the  conditions.  The  guide  lines, 
with  perhaps  a  few  lines  limiting  the  edges  of 
the  letters,  are  the  only  mechanical  lines  that 
should  be  used. 

It  will  be  well  to  consider  some  of  the  letter 
forms,  in  order  to  understand  just  how  they  are 
made  to  look  the  best.  See  Fig.  88.  The  A  is 
made  wide  enough  at  the  bottom  to  give  the 
appearance  of  stability.  The  cross-line  should 
always  be  below  the  center,  for,  if  exactly  on 
the  center,  the  upper  portion  appears  too  small 
for  the  base.  The  B  should  have  the  upper  half 


328 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


smaller  than  the  lower,  both  as  to  the  width  and 
the  cross-line.  It  appears  over-balanced  if  the 
upper  half  is  made  exactly  like  the  lower  half. 
The  C  should  have  the  upper  projection  of  the 
curve  a  little  less  than  the  lower.  E  should  be 
smaller  above  the  center  line  than  below.  The 
cross-line  of  P,  H,  and  R  should  be  the  same. 
G  should  be  similar  to  C  in  the  greater  projec¬ 
tion  of  the  lower  part  of  the  curve.  P,  because 
it  has  no  lower  portion,  should  be  made  a  little 
larger  than  one-half  the  height.  S  should  have 
the  upper  half  the  smaller.  X  and  Y  usually 
have  their  intersection  on  the  center  line. 

By  keeping  these  facts  in  mind,  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  letters  will  be  much  improved. 

For  different  styles  of  titles,  where  certain 
types  of  letters  are  used,  the  above  rules  will 
be  modified;  but  for  general  work  they  should 
be  followed. 

Single-line  letters  are  used  almost  entirely  in 
lettering  plans  and  drawings. 

Spacing  of  Letters.  As  to  the  spacing,  there 
is  no  set  rule  for  standard  dimensions;  but  a  few 
rules  may  be  given  as  a  guide.  Letters  which 
have  vertical  and  parallel  sides  coming  together, 
are  spaced  the  greatest  distance  apart.  Take  II 
and  B,  for  example;  these  require  the  largest 
space.  In  case  of  a  curve,  as  an  0  or  a  C,  with 
an  N  or  an  II,  the  spacing  will  be  about  two- 
thirds  of  that  for  the  H  and  the  N.  This  same 
rule  will  hold  for  the  curve  of  a  D  with  an  N  or 
M  or  any  letter  with  a  vertical  line. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  329 

If  two  curves  come  together — as,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  a  C  and  a  G,  or  a  B  and  a  C — the  space 
is  slightly  less  than  for  N  and  0. 

If  A  and  V  come  together,  make  the  lower 
point  of  the  A  come  directly  under  the  upper 
point  of  the  V ;  there  should  be  no  vertical  space 
between  these  letters.  A  or  Y,  with  0  or  B, 
will  have  about  the  same  spacing  as  two  curves, 
such  as  B  and  C  or  C  and  0. 

While  the  above  rules  are  only  general,  yet 
they  will  serve  as  a  guide. 

When  marks  of  punctuation  are  used,  the 
spacing  will  have  to  be  increased  over  that  of 
the  regular  arrangement.  The  spacing  between 
words  depends  upon  the  style  of  letter  used  and 
the  available  space.  Increasing  the  spacing  will 
make  the  words  more  prominent. 

In  doing  all  letter  work,  it  should  first  be 
penciled  completely,  before  any  inking  is  done. 
It  is  much  easier  to  erase  and  make  changes 
while  the  title  is  still  in  pencil  than  after  it  is 
inked.  The  ink  will  emphasize  all  irregularities. 

The  tendency  of  the  beginner  is  to  use  too 
fine  a  pen.  A  new  pen  is  always  hard  to  work 
with,  since  it  makes  a  thin  hair  line.  Sometimes 
a  new  pen  can  be  made  to  work  more  easily,  by 
heating  the  point  with  a  match.  This  will 
render  it  more  flexible,  although  the  pen  will 
not  last  so  long.  Be  very  careful  to  make  the 
same  thickness  of  line  for  all  parts  of  the  letters, 
and  for  all  letters  of  the  title.  It  will  require 
practice  to  be  able  to  use  the  pen  satisfactorily. 


330 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


The  inks  can  be  any  of  the  ready-mixed 
India  inks.  These  are  very  satisfactory,  and  are 
much  more  convenient  than  grinding  the  ink 
from  an  India  ink  stick.  Since  the  prepared 
inks  evaporate  and  therefore  thicken  when  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  air,  the  cork  of  the  bottle  should 
always  be  at  once  replaced  after  filling  the  pen. 
Some  grades  of  black  writing  ink  may  be 
used,  although  the  India  ink  is  much  more 
satisfactory. 

Almost  all  of  the  drawing  papers  will  take 
ink.  Tracing  paper  and  tracing  cloth  are  used 
a  great  deal.  Bristol  board  is  used  where  letter¬ 
ing  is  employed,  as  for  an  inscription,  or 
where  it  is  not  a  part  of  a  drawing. 

In  lettering,  first  rule  the  guide-lines  in 
pencil;  then  pencil  the  letters,  and  then  ink. 
There  is  no  rule  for  holding  the  pen;  be  sure  to 
learn  to  have  a  free  and  easy  stroke.  By 
practice,  learn  to  have  a  uniform  line;  and  have 
confidence  in  your  ability  before  you  start. 
Usually  the  beginner  is  a  little  backward  when 
starting  the  lettering  on  a  sheet.  By  practicing 
vertical  lines,  inclined  lines,  and  curves,  one 
gradually  learns  the  use  of  the  pen.  It  should  be 
noted  that  the  strokes  are  all  downward;  and 
a  curve,  as  for  0,  is  made  up  of  a  series  of 
strokes.  There  will  be  difficulty  in  getting 
straight  lines  and  curves  of  the  same  size. 

In  penciling,  always  use  a  soft  pencil,  one 
free  from  grit.  Make  the  lines  as  light  as  pos¬ 
sible,  so  that  they  can  be  erased  with  as  little 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  331 

pressure  as  possible.  Keep  the  paper  as  free 
from  erased  lines  as  possible,  as  the  erasing 
tends  to  destroy  the  general  surface  of  the 
paper,  and  makes  it  much  more  difficult  to  ink 
properly  upon  it.  Should  a  mistake  be  made, 
after  the  ink  has  become  thoroughly  dry,  use 
an  ordinary  pencil  eraser,  and  rub  gently  in  all 
directions.  Stop  at  short  intervals  to  allow  the 
eraser  to  cool,  as  it  will  smear  the  ink  if  it 
becomes  too  hot  from  rubbing.  After  the  eras¬ 
ing,  take  some  smooth,  hard  surface — be  sure  it 
is  clean — and  rub  gently  over  the  erased  surface 
to  give  a  smooth  finish  to  the  paper.  Some 
think  that  a  regular  ink  eraser  is  necessary  to 
remove  the  ink;  but  the  pencil  eraser  will  do  the 
work  better  and  leave  the  surface  of  the  paper 
in  much  better  condition.  The  work  of  erasing 
will  be  slow  and  tedious,  but  it  should  be  care¬ 
fully  done. 

The  size  of  letter  will  depend  upon  the  space, 
if  the  space  is  limited.  Otherwise  the  letter 
should  be  made  to  correspond  to  the  size  of  the 
drawing,  a  large,  full-size  drawing  requiring  a 
large  letter,  while  a  quarter-inch  scale  drawing 
will  require  a  small  letter.  By  a  careful  study  of 
proportions,  one  can  make  a  drawing  look  the 
best.  Poor  judgment  in  this  respect  will  often 
spoil  a  well-drawn  plan. 

Titles  are  put  on  ever}^  sheet  of  a  set  of  draw¬ 
ings.  Each  drawing  on  the  sheet  must  have  a 
single-line  title;  and  each  sheet  must  have  a  title 
complete,  giving  the  name  of  the  work,  the 


332 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


client’s  name,  the  location,  the  scale,  and  some¬ 
times  the  date.  For  the  convenience  of  the 
architect,  he  usually  places  in  one  corner  his 
name,  the  number  of  the  sheet,  the  job  number, 
the  initials  of  the  different  men  who  made  the 
drawing,  and  the  date.  This  gives  him  his 
record  for  filing  the  set  of  drawings. 

Choose  a  style  of  letter  that  will  be  clear  and 
simple.  While  the  architect  has  more  liberty  in 
the  choice  and  spacing  of  letters  than  the 
engineer,  yet  the  fundamental  principle  is  clear¬ 
ness.  Capitals  are  used  almost  entirely  for 
titles,  and  small  letters  for  notes  of  all  kinds. 


The  Kactor.i>  A  wLh  \ te ctural  Co- 

I  Z  3  4-  S  6  7  8  9  IO  II  12  13  M-  \lS  U,  17  18  19  20  4'  22  23  £«*  26  2*  27  29 


T 


C  H  I  C  A  C,  O  1  LLIM01  S 

I  2  3  4  5  6  1  «|  9  10  HI2  13  H-ltfi* 


jCH  ITEXTURAL  C(po 


M  LL1N0I5* 

1$  23  22  21  20  19  18  17  16  ! 

T  dford  Architectural  Co- 

o  -  Illinois- 

Fig.  89.  Method  of  Centering  a  Title. 


In  laying  out  a  title,  there  is  usually  a  cer¬ 
tain  space  it  will  have  to  occupy;  therefore  the 
title  must  be  centered  about  a  vertical  center 
line  through  this  space.  The  method  of  center¬ 
ing  a  title  is  shown  in  Fig.  89.  Decide  upon  the 
wording,  and  write  out  each  line  as  it  is  to  be 
copied.  Upon  a  piece  of  scratch-paper,  spell  out 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  333 

the  letters  in  each  line,  numbering  each  letter  in 
order,  and  also  the  spaces  between  the  letters. 
The  center  of  each  line  is  then  evident. 

Lay  out  the  center  line  of  the  space  to  be 
occupied  on  the  drawing,  and,  after  drawing  the 
guide-lines,  start  at  the  center  line,  and  com¬ 
mence  sketching  in  the  letters,  first  to  the  right, 
as  shown  in  the  third  line,  Fig.  89.  Thus  the 
right  half  of  the  title  is  sketched  first.  Now 
take  a  piece  of  paper,  and  lay  off  to  the  left  the 
same  distance  as  the  right  half  extends  to  the 
right.  This  gives  us  a  starting  point  for  the 
left  half.  This  part  may  be  worked  either  from 
the  left  to  the  right,  or,  as  shown  in  the  fifth 
line,  the  letters  may  be  placed  in  the  order  as 

•Interior  Details- 

•Residence. •  fojs.  Hom-  A-.5-Pe.ape.r- 

■Albany  -  -  -  We.w  York* 
•Ja5-M'WH!TIL  £  5tTH J.TE.MPLE- 
*  Associated  Architects  • 

-  Vfbana  -  Illinois* 

Fig.  90.  Arrangement  of  a  Title  Showing  Symmetry  hut  not 
Mechanical  Stiffness. 

numbered.  A  little  experience  will  enable  one 
to  lay  out  a  title  quickly  and  accurately  in  this 
manner. 

Having  the  general  arrangement  in  pencil, 
go  over  it  carefully,  and  make  the  letters, 
properly  spaced  and  in  good  outline.  The  title 
is  then  ready  for  inking.  In  all  titles,  let  the 
composition  or  spacing  be  such  that  while  the 
title  as  a  whole  shall  be  symmetrical,  its  general 


334 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


ARCHITECTURAL 

•  LCTITRU- 

TO  12. 

TITLEC^-OHEETA 

abcdef^hij  klron 

*  opcjrsf  uuvaxyz- 
Convenient  for  all  notes 

on  Scale  Drawings* 

ADCDUrGMIJ 

KLMN0PQR5T 

-UVWXYZ.- 

•  locale  incVi-  i  foof* 

Fig.  91.  Easily-Made  Letters  for  General  Drawings. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


335 


ALCHITCCTUm 

LLTT1RJ 

abcdcf^hijklinrtn 

opcjn/iuvwxyz. 

A  good  letter  for 

Inj'cri'pdom  and 

General  nolej-'A 
Dignified  leti  cr 

ABCDETGfllJK 
LMNOPQAJTV 
YWXYZ — 

-Front  ellvation- 

Fig.  92.  A  Dignified  Type  of  Letter  for  Inscriptions,  General 
Notes,  etc. 


336 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


ARCHITECTURAL 

LETTERS 

A&CDE.FSH  IJK.LM.NO 
pgl&stvvwxya- 


ADCDEf&HUKLMNO 
PG.&5TWWYYZ ■  £ 

ABCJDEF  GH1 JKJL 
MNOPQ.RSTW 
—WXYZ  - 
-  ELEVATION  - 

-.SCALE  flNCH' 

Fig.  93.  Showing  Double-Line  Letters  Used  Largely  for  General 
Titles. 


DESIGN  OF  A  COURT  HOUSE  FOR  A  SMALL  CITY. 


Courtesy  of  Armour  Institute  of  Technology. 

ELEVATION  AND  PLAN  RENDERED  IN  WASH. 


PLATE  H — Architectural  Drafting. 


ARCHITECTUKAL  DRAFTING 


337 


ARCH  1  TtCTURAL 
LLTTLRA 
DIAdFAH  "rA-y-CORim 
APCDnrq/H!j  k 
L/Yi°fo-K^T 
V  V/XYZ  •  A<3°°p 
LETTE.R  r°K 
IAR(4RDRAV!HCC 
mKL  ALL  LjHD 
P  R  EXA4RD  * 
1234567390- 

Fig.  94.  Letters  Suitable  for  Large-Scale  and  Full-Sized  Details. 


*QErL.A-nvE:Ofzn:- or •  Let teteinq  poe  E^awimq^* 


’$v§ 


r*> 


338 


Fig.  95.  Sheet  Showing  Relative  Sizes  of  Letters  to  Use  on  a  Drawing. 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  389 

♦ 

ARCHITECTURAL 

LETTERS 

A  GOOD  STYLE  or 
LETTER™  NULL 
SHE  DETAILS 

<3bccT^/^l?ijJc!mnop^rsi 

uvwxyz.  -  /Z345G7&90- 

DETAIL 3  or EOOK 
CASE  -  NOTE- Mm 

gj]  doors  io  slide.  - — =- 


Fig.  96.  A  Good  Form  of  Slanting  Letter  for  Large  Work  and 
Full-Sized  Details. 


340 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING 


outline  shall  not  be  inclosed  by  straight  lines. 
A  line,  for  example,  connecting  the  ends  of  the 
different  lines  of  a  title  should  not  be  straight, 
but  irregular,  as  shown  in  Fig.  90.  Try  to  avoid 
making  the  lines  exactly  the  same  length. 
Where  the  same  general  title  is  to  be  used  on  a 
number  of  drawings  of  a  set,  it  is  very  con¬ 
venient  to  make  the  title  in  pencil  on  a  piece  of 
paper,  and  trace  it  through  the  tracing  cloth 
for  the  finished  drawing.  This  saves  a  great 
deal  of  time,  and  gives  a  uniform  title  for  every 
sheet. 

The  styles  of  letters  mostly  in  use  by  archi¬ 
tects  are  shown  in  Figs.  91  to  96. 

Fig.  91  presents  an  easy  substantial  title, 
quickly  made,  and  very  clear.  This  form  of 
letter  will  be  found  very  satisfactory  for  general 
drawings. 

Fig.  92  shows  a  type  of  letter  largely  used. 
It  has  a  dignified  appearance,  is  suitable  espe¬ 
cially  for  inscriptions  on  tablets  or  buildings, 
and  is  quickly  and  easily  made. 

Fig.  93  shows  a  form  of  double-line  letter, 
very  quickly  made;  this  letter  is  used  largely  for 
general  titles. 

Fig.  94  shows  a  good  style  of  letter  to  use  on 
full-sized  details  and  large-scale  details.  It  is 
made  by  several  strokes  of  the  pen.  Long  lines 
are  hard  to  make;  therefore  the  long  lines  are 
made  up  of  a  series  of  short  lines.  When  well 
done,  it  makes  a  very  attractive  form  of  letter 
to  use.  The  figure  is  small,  and  the  true  values 


ARCHITECTURAL  DRAFTING  341 

of  the  broken  lines  do  not  show  up  as  they  do 
on  large  work. 

Fig.  95  is  a  sheet  showing  the  relative  sizes 
of  letters  to  use  on  a  drawing.  The  small  letters 
may  he  made  either  slanting  or  vertical. 

It  is  much  easier  to  make  a  slanting  line  than 
a  vertical  line.  Irregularities  show  less  in  slant¬ 
ing  letters  than  in  vertical  letters,  and  for 
this  reason  some  architects  use  a  slanting  letter 
entirely.  The  vertical  letter,  however,  is  much 
more  dignified,  and,  when  well  done,  is  more 
satisfactory. 

Fig.  96  is  a  good  form  of  slanting  letter  for 
full-size  detailing  and  large  work. 

It  is  as  true  of  drafting  as  it  is  of  every  other 
branch  of  worthy  human  endeavor. '  Experience 
is  the  one  great  and  indispensable  teacher.  Just 
as  we  learn  to  sing  by  singing,  and  to  build 
houses  by  building  them,  so  we  learn  to  draw 
by  drawing;  and  it  is  only  by  persistent 
practice  on  the  part  of  the  draftsman  that  the 
highest  proficiency  can  be  acquired. 


INDEX 


Mechanical  Drafting 


A 

PAGE 

Alternate  Spaces .  186 

Angle,  To  Bisect  an .  34 

Angles . 178 

Approximate  Developments..  118 

Approximations .  43 

Arch .  140 

Architect’s  Scale . 11,  19 

Assembly  Drawings .  147 

Auxiliary  Planes .  101 

Auxiliary  Planes  of  Projec¬ 
tion .  78 

Axes,  Isometric .  128 

B 

Beam  Compass .  5 

Beams .  178 

Bisecting  an  Angle .  34 

Bisecting  a  Straight  Line..  33 

Blue-Prints . 152,  154 

Board,  Drawing .  7 

Bolts .  180 

Dimensioning  of .  158 

Border  Line,  Laying  Out...  19 

Bow  Pen .  22 

Bow  Pencil . 4,  22 

Bow  Spacers . 4,  22 

Building  Construction, 

Working  Drawings  for...  166 
Built-Up  Members .  178 

C 

Cabinet  Projection .  137 

Cavalier  Projection .  137 

Center  Line .  149 

Channels . 5,  178 

Circle,  Circumscribing  about 

a  Triangle .  38 

To  Inscribe  in  a  Triangle  39 

Circles,  Shading  of .  151 

Clearness .  148 

Columns . 178 

Compass . 4,  19 

Beam .  21 

Small . 22 

To  Ink  with.. .  25 


PAGE 

Cone,  Isometric  of  a .  136 

Co-ordinate  Planes .  50 

Cross-Hatching  . 160 

Curved  Lines,  Isometric  of.  133 
Curved  Surfaces,  Intersec¬ 
tion  of .  115 

Curves,  Irregular  or 

French  . 10,  22 

Cylinder 

Development  of  the .  117 

Isometric  of  Vertical .  135 

D 

Detail  Drawings .  147 

Details  of  a  Vertical  Post.  .  185 

Development  .  86 

Developments,  Approximate.  118 
Development  of  the  Cylinder  117 

Dimensioning .  155 

Dimensions,  Distribution  of.  158 

Dividers  .  4 

Hair-Spring  .  21 

Dotted  Line .  149 

Drafting,  Practical .  145 

Draftsman ’s  Outfit .  2 

Drawing  Board .  7 

How  to  Use .  15 

Drawing,  Beading  a .  70 

Drawings 

Assembly .  147 

Detail  . 147 

Preliminary  .  147 

WTorking  .  147 

Drawing  to  Scale .  19 

Duplication  of  Parts .  159 

E 

Elevations  .  51 

Ellipse;  Problems . 41,  42 

Erasers  .  11 

Extension  Lines .  156 

F 

Field  Biveting .  180 

Finished  Surfaces. . . . .  159 

343 


344 


INDEX 


G 


PAGE 

French  Curves . 10,  22 

Geometrical  Problems .  33 

Girders  .  178 

Ground  Line .  50 


PAGE 

Lines — Continued 

Projection  of  Oblique....  59 
Shade .  150 

M 


H 


Micrometer  Screw .  6 


Hair-Spring  Dividers . 4,  21 

Hexagon ;  Problems .  40 

Hexagon,  To  Construct  a . . .  30 

I 


O 


Oblique  Projection .  137 

Orthographic  Projection. ..  .  50 

Outfit .  2 


Inclined  Lines,  Drawing. ...  16 


Ink,  Drawing .  12 

Inking . 23,  32 

Instruments 

How  to  Use .  15 

Illustrated  .  3 

Testing  .  13 

Intersection  .  86 

Intersection  and  Develop¬ 
ment  .  86 

Essential  Principles .  119 

Intersection  of  Solids .  104 

Irregular  Curves . 10,  22 

Isometric  Axes .  128 

Isometric  Drawing.  .  . . . 126 

Isometric  of  Curved  Lines. .  133 

K 

Kinds  of  Lines .  148 

L 

Lengthening  Bar . 4,  21 

Lettering  .  163 

Line 

Center  .  149 

Construction  .  149 

Dimension .  149 

Dotted .  149 

Full  .  149 

Ground  .  50 

To  Bisect  a .  33 

To  Divide  into  Equal  Parts  37 
Lines 

Drawing  Vertical  or  In¬ 
clined  .  16 

Kinds  of .  148 

Non-Isometric  .  130 

Oblique  f , . .  , .  55 


P 

Paper 

Detail  .  12 

Duplex .  12 

White  Bond .  12 

Cold-Pressed .  12 

Hot-Pressed  .  12 

Normal  .  13 

Bristol  Board .  13 

Parallels,  To  Draw .  36 

Pen 

Bow .  22 

To  Sharpen .  27 

Pencils  . 12,  19 

Penciling  and  Inking .  27 

Perpendicular,  to  Draw  a...  35 

Perpendicular  Lines,  Draw¬ 
ing  .  17 

Pictorial  Drawing . .  126 

Planes 

Auxiliary  . 101 

Auxiliary,  of  Projection. .  78 

Co-ordinate .  50 

Co-ordinate  Seen  Edgewise  53 

Intersection  of . %....  86 

Planes  of  Projection.......  50 

Planes,  Profile .  64 

Plates  .  178 

Plans  and  Elevations .  51 

Practical  Drafting .  145 

Practical  Problems .  120 

Preliminary  Drawings . 147 

Pricker .  11 

Prism,  Development  of  the. .  107 

Profile  Planes .  64 

Projection .  49 

Auxiliary  Planes  of .  78 

Exercises  in .  81 

Important  Principles .  80 

Oblique  .  136 


INDEX 


345 


Pro  j  ection — Continued 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Spaces,  Alternate . 

Planes  of . 

50 

Spacing . 

Third  Angle . 

66 

Spiral  of  Archimedes . 

.  45 

Third  Plane  of . 

64 

Spirals  . 

Projection  of  Oblique  Lines. 

59 

Structural  Drafting . 

.  176 

Projections,  Actual . 

52 

Surfaces,  Finished . 

.  159 

Protractor . 

6 

i 

T 

Q 

T-Square  . 

Quadrants . 

51 

How  to  Use . 

Testing  . 

E 

Testing  Instruments . 

.  13 

Reading  a  Drawing . 

Third-Angle  Projection . . .  . 

.  66 

71 

Thumb-Tacks  . 

7 

Rivets  and  Bolts . 

180 

Tracing  Cloth . 

.  13 

Ruling  Pen . 

5 

Tracing,  The . 

To  Ink  with . 

24 

Triangles  . 

How  to  Use . 

S 

Problem  . 

Scales  . 

10 

Testing  . 

Scale,  Architect's . 

11 

TT 

Screw,  Micrometer . 

6 

V 

Sections  . 

160 

Vertical  Lines,  Drawing.  . . 

.  16 

Shade  Lines . 

150 

Vertical  Post,  Details  of  a. 

.  185 

Examples  of . 

150 

How  Used . 

150 

W 

Shading  of  Circles . 

Shop  Riveting . 

Sketches  . 

151 

180 

147 

Working  Drawings . 

Working  Edge . 

.  147 

Slope  . 

58 

7 

Solids,  Intersection  of . 

104 

4i 

Solid  Members . 

178 

Z-Bars . 

y 


1 


I 


I 


V 


4 


INDEX 


Architectural  Drafting 


A 

PAGE 

Aligraphy .  240 

Apron  .  296 

Architecture,  Colonial .  2i9 

Architectural  Drafting .  187 

Architectural  Drawings .....  194 

Architectural  Forms .  244 

Architectural  Lettering . 325 

Architrave  .  217 

B 

Back-Lining .  296 

Balusters .  285 

Base .  217 

Bay  Window .  296 

Blue-Printing .  238 

Box  Cornice .  268 

Brackets  .  269 

Brick  Moulds . 296 

Buildings,  Types  of .  220 

Building  Lines .  249 

Built-Up  Doors .  279 


PAGE 

Counter-Flashing .  276 

Crown-Mould  .  269 

D 

Deadening  Material . .  273 

Dentil  Course .  269 

Details  of  Construction . 268 

Die .  217 

Dimension  Lines .  249 

Doric  Order .  317 

Dormer  Windows .  296 

Doors .  279 

Built-Up  .  279 

Stock  .  279 

Double-Hung  Windows .  289 

Drawings 

Architectural  .  194 

Competition  . .  203 

Reproducing .  238 

Wash  .  310 

Working  .  206 


c 

E 

Elevation,  The . 

.  216 

Cap . 

217 

Elevations,  Treatment  of. . 

.  221 

Capital . 

217 

Entablature . 

.  217 

Carriages  . 

285 

Casing 

F 

Inside  . 

296 

Outside  . 

296 

Fascia  . . 

.  269 

Casement  Windows . 

289 

Fireplaces . 

Colonial  Architecture .  . . 

219 

Flashing  and  Counter- 

Colors,  Primary . 

317 

Flashing  . 

..276 

Column  . 

217 

Floor  Construction . 

.  271 

Competition  Drawings . 

203 

Deadening  Material . 

.  273 

Composite  Order . 

317 

Under-Floor  . . 

.  272 

Composition  of  a  Building 

Flue,  Vent . 

.  252 

Construction 

Forms,  Architectural . 

.  244 

Details  of . 

268 

Fresh- Air  Supply . 

.  252 

Floor  . 

271 

Frieze  . . 

.  217 

Materials  of . 

25$ 

Corinthian  Order . 

317 

G 

Cornice . 217, 

268 

Box  . 

268 

Ground,  The . 

.  296 

Open  . 

268 

Gutter  . . 

.  270 

347 


348 


INDEX 


H 

Header  . 

Hectograph  Process . 

I 

India-Ink  . 

Ionic  Order . 

J 

Joists . 

L 

Lath  and  Plaster . 

Lettering 

Architectural  . 

Spacing . 

Library  . 

Lines 

Building  . 

Dimension  . 

Lining,  Back . 

Lookout . 

M 

Materials  of  Construction . . . 
Muntins . 

O 

Office  Building . 

Open  Cornice . 

Openings,  Location  of . 

Orders,  Use  of  the . 

Orders  of  Architecture . 

P 

Parting  Strip . 

Pedestal  . 

Pen  and  Ink  Rendering . 

Perspective  Sketches . 

Pivoted  Windows . 

Plan,  The . 

Planceer  . 

Plank-Framed  Windows. . . . 

Plaster  . * . . . 

Plinth  . 

Porch  Construction . 

Preliminary  Sketches . 

Primary  Colors . . . 


R 

PAGE 


Pulley  Stile .  296 

Rendering,  Pen  and  Ink. . . .  305 

Reproducing  Drawings .  238 

Riser  . , .  285 

Roof  Windows .  296 

S 

Sash  .  289 

Scale  Details .  227 

Schoolhouse  .  220 

Section,  The .  227 

Shades  and  Shadows .  259 

Shadows,  Shades  and . 259 

Shaft .  217 

Shrinkage  . . .  . .  277 

Sill  .  296 

Single-Light  Windows .  288 

Sketches 

Perspective .  203 

Preliminary  .  194 

Sketching  .  298 

Fundamental  Principles. . .  298 

Method  .  301 

Soffit .  269 

Staff-Head  .  296 

Stairs .  284 

Stile,  Pulley .  296 

Stock  Doors .  279 

Stool  .  296 

Strip,  Parting .  296 

Sub- Jamb  .  296 

Symbols,  Architectural .  244 

T 

Threshold  .  280 

Tracing  Cloth .  243 

Transom  .  289 

Tread  .  285 

Treatment  of  Elevations. . . .  221 

Tuscan  Order .  317 

Types  of  Buildings . 220 

U 

Under-Floor  .  272 

Use  of  the  Orders .  216 

V 

Veneer .  279 


PAGE 

,  273 

,  240 

310 

317 

272 

274 

325 

328 

220 

249 

249 

296 

269 

255 

289 

220 

268 

226 

216 

317 

296 

217 

305 

203 

289 

206 

269 

290 

274 

217 

280 

194 

317 


INDEX 


349 


W 

PAGE 

Warehouse  .  221 

Wash  Drawings .  310 

Method  .  310 

Water-Table .  217 

Water-Colors . 305,  310 

White-Printing  .  239 

Windows  . 288,  296 


PAGE 


Bay  .  296 

Casement  .  289 

Double-Hung  .  289 

Pivoted  .  289 

Plank-Framed  .  290 

Roof .  296 

Single-Light .  288 

Working  Drawings . 206 


* 


* 


