'Vtfmwimtttim 


■"■•■  :  '"'•': 

liiifijiiiji  jiSiiilllii  liiiii 

Mm 


"I  II 


Qa\jld  ©.oUc^Kay  ^gib/ta/ty 


SpC 

NA 
525 
R8 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/stonesofvenice22rusk 


THE 


STONES    OF    VENICE 


Nk.w  York  : 

S.  W.  Benedict,  Print. 

It)  Spruce  street 


THE 


STONES  OF  VENICE 


®t)C    jFoun&citions 


BY  JOHN  RUSKIN, 


•»     T1TTT7  CT<1TT?-\T  T      A   ATTIC         r\  T*  A   T>  n  XT  T  T>  T7 /"<  T' T  T  T>  TTI       ''  »• 


AUTHOR     OF     "THE     SEVEN     LAMPS    OF     ARCHITECTURE,77     kk  MODERN 

PAINTERS,"    ETC.,    ETC. 


WITH  ILLUSTRATIONS  DRAWN  BY  THE  AUTHOR, 


NEW  YORK: 
JOHN     WILEY,     304     BROADWAY, 

CORNER    OF    DUANE   STREET. 

1851. 


PREFACE. 


Ik  the  course  of  arranging  the  following  essay,  I  put  many 
things  aside  in  my  thoughts,  to  be  said  in  the  Preface,  things 
which  I  shall  now  put  aside  altogether,  and  pass  by  ;  for  when  a 
book  has  been  advertised  a  year  and  a  half,  it  seems  best  to  pre- 
sent it  with  as  little  preface  as  possible. 

Thus  much,  however,  it  is  necessary  for  the  reader  to  know, 
that,  when  I  planned  the  work,  I  had  materials  by  me,  collected 
at  different  times  of  sojourn  in  Yenice  during  the  last  seventeen 
years,  which  it  seemed  to  me  might  be  arranged  with  little  diffi- 
culty, and  which  I  believed  to  be  of  value  as  illustrating  the  his- 
tory of  Southern  Gothic.  Requiring,  however,  some  clearer 
assurance  respecting  certain  points  of  chronology,  I  went  to 
Yenice  finally  in  the  autumn  of  1849,  not  doubting  but  that  the 
dates  of  the  principal  edifices  of  the  ancient  city  were  either 
ascertained,  or  ascertainable  without  extraordinary  research.  To 
my  consternation,  I  found  that  the  Yenetian  antiquaries  were  not 
agreed  within  a  century  as  to  the  date  of  the  building  of  the 
facades  of  the  Ducal  Palace,  and  that  nothing  was  known  of  any 
other  civil  edifice  of  the  early  city,  except  that  at  some  time  or 
other  it  had  been  fitted  up  for  somebody's  reception,  and  been 
thereupon  fresh  painted.  Every  date  in  question  was  determina- 
ble only  by  internal  evidence ;  and  it  became  necessary  for  me 
to  examine  not  only  every  one  of  the  older  palaces,  stone  by 


VI  PKEFACE. 


stone,  but  every  fragment  throughout  the  city  .which  afforded 
any  clue  to  the  formation  of  its  styles.  This  I.did  as  well  as  I 
could,  and  I  believe  there  will  be  found,  in  the  following  pages, 
the  only  existing  account  of  the  details  of  early  Venetian  archi- 
tecture on  which  dependence  can  be  placed,  as  far  as  it  goes. 
I  do  not  care  to  point  out  the  deficiencies  of  other  works  on  this 
subject ;  the  reader  will  find,  if  he  examines  them,  either  that 
the  buildings  to  which  I  shall  specially  direct  his  attention  have 
been  hitherto  undescribed,  or  else  that  there  are  great  discrepan- 
cies between  previous  descriptions  and  mine :  for  which  discrep- 
ancies I  may  be  permitted  to  give  this  single  and  sufficient 
reason,  that  my  account  of  every  building  is  based  on  personal 
examination  and  measurement  of  it,  and  that  my  taking  the 
pains  so  to  examine  what  I  had  to  describe,  was  a  subject  of 
grave  surprise  to  my  Italian  friends.  The  work  of  the  Marchese 
Selvatico  is,  however,  to  be  distinguished  with  respect ;  it  is  clear 
in  arrangement,  and  full  of  useful,  though  vague,  information  : . 
and  I  have  found  cause  to  adopt,  in  great  measure,  its  views  of 
the  chronological  succession  of  the  edifices  of  Yenice.  I  shall 
have  cause  hereafter  to  quarrel  with  it  on  other  grounds,  but  not 
without  expression  of  gratitude  for  the  assistance  it  has  given 
me.  Fontana's  "  Fabbriche  di  Venezia"  is  also  historically  val- 
uable, but  does  not  attempt  to  give  architectural  detail.  Cicog- 
nara,  as  is  now  generally  known,  is  so  inaccurate  as  hardly  to 
deserve  mention. 

Indeed,  it  is  not  easy  to  be  accurate  in  an  account  of  anything, 
however  simple.  Zoologists  often  disagree  in  their  descriptions 
of  the  curve  of  a  shell,  or  the  plumage  of  a  bird,  though  they 
may  lay  their  specimen  on  the  table,  and  examine  it  at  their 
leisure ;  how  much  greater  becomes  the  likelihood  of  error  in 
the  description  of  things  which  must  be  in  many  parts  observed 
from  a  distance,  or  under  unfavourable  circumstances  of  light 


PKEFACE.  Vll 

and  shade ;  and  of  which  many  of  the  distinctive  features  have 
been  worn  away  by  time.  I  believe  few  people  have  any  idea 
of  the  cost  of  truth  in  these  things  ;  of  the  expenditure  of  time 
necessary  to  make  sure  of  the  simplest  facts,  and  of  the  strange 
way  in  which  separate  observations  will  sometimes  falsify  each 
other,  incapable  of  reconcilement,  owing  to  some  imperceptible 
inadvertency.  I  am  ashamed  of  the  number  of  times  in  which  I 
have  had  to  say,  in  the  following  pages,  "  I  am  not  sure,"  and  I 
claim  for  them  no  authority,  as  if  they  were  thoroughly  sifted 
from  error,  even  in  what  they  more  confidently  state.  Only,  as 
far  as  my  time,  and  strength,  and  mind  served  me,  I  have  en- 
deavoured, down  to  the  smallest  matters,  to  ascertain  and  speak 
the  truth. 

'Nov  was  the  subject  without  many  and  most  discouraging 
difficulties,  peculiar  to  itself.  As  far  as  my  inquiries  have  ex- 
tended, there  is  not  a  building  in  Yenice,  raised  prior  to  the  six- 
teenth century,  which  has  not  sustained  essential  change  in  one 
or  more  of  its  most  important  features.  By  far  the  greater 
number  present  examples  of  three  or  four  different  styles,  it  may 
be  successive,  it  may  be  accidentally  associated  ;  and,  in  many 
instances,  the  restorations  or  additions  have  gradually  replaced 
the  entire  structure  of  the  ancient  fabric,  of  which  nothing  but 
the  name  remains,  together  with  a  kind  of  identity,  exhibited  in 
the  anomalous  association  of  the  modernized  portions :  the  Will 
of  the  old  building  asserted  through  them  all,  stubbornly,  though 
vainly,  expressive  ;  superseded  by  codicils,  and  falsified  by  mis- 
interpretation ;  yet  animating  what  would  otherwise  be  a  mere 
group  of  fantastic  masque,  as  embarrassing  to  the  antiquary,  as, 
to  the  mineralogist,  the  epigene  crystal,  formed  by  materials  of 
one  substance  modelled  on  the  perished  crystals  of  another.  The 
church  of  St.  Mark's  itself,  harmonious  as  its  structure  may  at 
first  sight  appear,  is  an  epitome  of  the  changes  of  Venetian 


vill  PBEFAOB. 

architecture  from  the  tenth  to  the  nineteenth  century,  [ts  crypt, 
and  the  lino  of  low  arches  which  support  the  screen,  are  appa- 
rently the  curliest  portions  ;  the  lower  stories  of  the  main  fabric 

are  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries,  with  later  Gothic  in- 
terpolations ;  the  pinnacles  are  of  the  earliest  fully  developed 
Venetian  Gothic  (fourteenth  century) ;  but  one  of  them,  that  on 
the  projection  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  Piazzetta  de  Leoni, 
is  of  far  finer,  and  probably  earlier  workmanship  than  all  the 
rest.  The  southern  range  of  pinnacles  is  again  inferior  to  the 
northern  and  western,  and  visibly  of  later  date.  Then  the  screen, 
wrhich  most  writers  have  described  as  part  of  the  original  fabric, 
bears  its  date  inscribed  on  its  architrave,  1394,  and  with  it  are 
associated  a  multitude  of  small  screens,  balustrades,  decorations 
of  the  interior  building,  and  j)robably  the  rose  window  of  the 
south  transept.  Then  come  the  interpolated  traceries  of  the  front 
and  sides ;  then  the  crocketings  of  the  upper  arches,  extravagan- 
ces of  the  incipient  Renaissance  ;  and,  finally,  the  figures  which 
carry  the  water-spouts  on  the  north  side — utterly  barbarous  seven- 
teenth or  eighteenth  century  work — connect  the  whole  with  the 
plastered  restorations  of  the  years  1844  and  1845.  Most  of  the 
palaces  in  Venice  have  sustained  interpolations  hardly  less  nu- 
merous ;  and  those  of  the  Ducal  Palace  are  so  intricate,  that  a 
year's  labour  would  probably  be  insufficient  altogether  to  disen- 
tangle and  define  them.  I  therefore  gave  up  all  thoughts  of  ob- 
taining a  perfectly  clear  chronological  view  of  the  early  archi- 
tecture ;  but  the  dates  necessary  to  the  main  purposes  of  the 
book  the  reader  will  find  well  established  ;  and  of  the  evidence 
brought  forward  for  those  of  less  importance,  he  is  himself  to 
judge.  Doubtful  estimates  are  never  made  grounds  <  >f  argument ; 
and  the  accuracy  of  the  account  of  the  buildings  themselves,  for 
which  alone  I  pledge  myself,  is  of  course  entirely  independent 
of  them. 


WL 


PKEFACE.  IX 

In  like  manner,  as  the  statements  briefly  made  in  the  chapters 
on  construction  involve  questions  so  difficult  and  so  general,  that 
I  cannot  hope  that  every  expression  referring  to  them  will  be 
found  free  from  error  :  and  as  the  conclusions  to  which  I  have 
endeavoured  to  lead  the  reader  are  thrown  into  a  form  the  valid- 
ity of  which  depends  on  that  of  each  successive  step,  it  might 
be  argued,  if  fallacy  or  weakness  could  be  detected  in  one  of 
them,  that  all  the  subsequent  reasonings  were  valueless.  The 
reader  may  be  assured,  however,  that  it  is  not  so  ;  the  method  of 
proof  used  in  the  following  essay  being  only  one  out  of  many 
which  were  in  my  choice,  adopted  because  it  seemed  «to  me  the 
shortest  and  simplest,  not  as  being  the  strongest.  In  many  cases, 
the  conclusions  are  those  which  men  of  quick  feeling  would  ar- 
rive at  instinctively  ;  and  I  then  sought  to  discover  the  reasons 
of  what  so  strongly  recommended  itself  as  truth.  Though  these 
reasons  could  every  one  of  them,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end 
of  the  book,  be  proved  insufficient,  the  truth  of  its  conclusions 
would  remain  the  same.  I  should  only  regret  that  I  had  dishon- 
oured them  by  an  ill-grounded  defence  ;  and  endeavour  to  repair 
my  error  by  a  better  one. 

I  have  not,  however,  written  carelessly ;  nor  should  I  in  any 
wise  have  expressed  doubt  of  the  security  of  the  following  argu 
ment,  but  that  it  is  physically  impossible  for  me,  being  engaged 
quite  as  much  with  mountains,  and  clouds,  and  trees,  and  criti- 
cism of  painting,  as  with  architecture,  to  verify,  as  I  should  desire, 
the  expression  of  every  sentence  bearing  upon  empirical  and 
technical  matters.  Life  is  not  long  enough  ;  nor  does  a  day  pass 
by  without  causing  me  to  feel  more  bitterly  the  impossibility  of 
carrying  out  to  the  extent  which  I  should  desire,  the  separate 
studies  which  general  criticism  continually  forces  me  to  under- 
take. I  can  only  assure  the  reader,  that  he  will  find  the  certain- 
ty of  every  statement  I  permit  myself  to  make,  increase  with  its 


X  PEEFACE. 

importance ;  and  that,  for  the  security  of  the  final  conclusions  of 
the  following  essay,  as  well  as  for  the  resolute  veracity  of 
its  account  of  whatever  facts  have  come  under  my  own  imme- 
diate cognizance,  I  will  pledge  myself  to  the  uttermost. 

It  was  necessary,  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  purpose  of  the 
work  (of  which  account  is  given  in  the  First  Chapter),  that  I 
should  establish  some  canons  of  judgment,  which  the  general 
reader  should  thoroughly  understand,  and,  if  it  pleased  him, 
accept,  before  we  took  cognizance,  together,  of  any  architecture 
whatsoever.  It  has  taken  me  more  time  and  trouble  to  do  this 
than  I  expected ;  but,  if  I  have  succeeded,  the  thing  done  will  be 
of  use  for  many  other  purposes  than  that  to  which  it  is  now  put. 
The  establishment  of  these  canons,  which  I  have  called  "the 
Foundations,"  and  some  account  of  the  connection  of  Venetian 
architecture  with  that  of  the  rest  of  Europe,  have  filled  the  pre- 
sent volume.  The  second  will,  I  hoj)e,  contain  all  I  have  to  say 
about  Venice  itself. 

It  was  of  course  inexpedient  to  reduce  drawings  of  crowded 
details  to  the  size  of  an  octavo  volume, — I  do  not  say  impossible, 
but  inexpedient ;  requiring  infinite  pains  on  the  part  of  the  en- 
graver, with  no  result  except  farther  pains  to  the  beholder.  And 
as,  on  the  other  hand,  folio  books  are  not  easy  reading,  I  deter- 
mined to  separate  the  text  and  the  unreduceable  plates.  I  have 
given,  with  the  principal  text,  all  the  illustrations  absolutely  ne- 
cessary to  the  understanding  of  it,  and,  in  the  detached  work, 
such  additional  text  as  had  special  reference  to.  the  larger  illus- 
trations. 

A  considerable  number  of  these  larger  plates  were  at  first 
intended  to  be  executed  in  tinted  lithography ;  but,  finding  the 
result  unsatisfactory,  I  have  determined  to  prepare  the  principal 
subjects  for  mezzotinting, — a  change  of  method  requiring  two 
new  drawings  to  be  made  of  every  subject ;   one  a  carefully 


PREFACE.  XI 

penned  outline  for  the  etcher,  and  then  a  finished  drawing  upon 
the  etching.  This  work  does  not  proceed  fast,  while  I  am  also 
occupied  with  the  completion  of  the  text ;  but  the  numbers  of  it 
will  appear  as  fast  as  I  can  prepare  them. 

For  the  illustrations  of  the  body  of  the  work  itself,  I  have  used 
any  kind  of  engraving  which  seemed  suited  to  the  subjects — line 
and  mezzotint,  on  steel,  with  mixed  lithographs  and  woodcuts,  at 
considerable  loss  of  uniformity  in  the  appearance  of  the  volume, 
but,  I  hope,  with  advantage,  in  rendering  the  character  of  the 
architecture  it  describes.  And  both  in  the  plates  and  the  text  I 
have  aimed  chiefly  at  clear  intelligibility  ;  that  any  one,  however 
little  versed  in  the  subject,  might  be  able  to  take  up  the  book,  and 
understand  what  it  meant  forthwith.  I  have  utterly  failed  of 
my  purpose,  if  I  have  not  made  all  the  essential  parts  of  the 
essay  intelligible  to  the  least  learned,  and  easy  to  the  most 
desultory  readers,  who  are  likely  to  take  interest  in  the  matter 
at  all.  There  are  few  passages  which  even  require  so  much  as 
an  acquaintance  with  the  elements  of  Euclid,  and  these  may  be 
missed,  without  harm  to  the  sense  of  the  rest,  by  every  reader  to 
whom  they  may  appear  mysterious  ;  and  the  architectural  terms 
necessarily  employed  (which  are  very  few)  are  explained  as  they 
occur,  or  in  a  note  ;  so  that,  though  I  may  often  be  found  trite  or 
tedious,  I  trust  that  I  shall  not  be  obscure.  I  am  especially 
anxious  to  rid  this  essay  of  ambiguity,  because  I  want  to  gain 
the  ear  of  all  kinds  of  persons.  Every  man  has,  at  some  time  of 
his  life,  personal  interest  in  architecture.  He  has  influence  on 
the  design  of  some  public  building  ;  or  he  has  to  buy,  or  build, 
or  alter  his  own  house.  It  signifies  less  whether  the  knowledge 
of  other  arts  be  general  or  not ;  men  may  live  without  buying 
pictures  or  statues  :  but,  in  architecture,  all  must  in  some  way 
commit  themselves ;  they  must  do  mischief,  and  waste  their 
money,  if  they  do  not  know  how  to  turn  it  to  account.     Churches, 


Xll  TEEFACE. 

and  shops,  and  warehouses,  and  cottages,  and  small  row,  and 
place,  and  terrace  houses,  must  Le  built,  and  lived  in,  however 
joyless  or  inconvenient.  And  it  is .  assuredly  intended  that  all 
of  us  should  have  knowledge,  and  act  upon  our  knowledge,  in 
matters  with  which  we  are  daily  concerned,  and  not  Le  left  to 
the  caprice  of  architects,  or  mercy  of  contractors.  There  is  not, 
indeed,  anything  in  the  following  essay  bearing  on  the  special 
forms  and  needs  of  modern  buildings  ;  but  the  principles  it 
inculcates  are  universal ;  and  they  are  illustrated  from  the  re- 
mains of  a  city  which  should  surely  be  interesting  to  the  men  of 
London,  as  affording  the  richest  existing  examples  of  archi- 
tecture raised  by  a  mercantile  community,  for  civil  uses,  and 
domestic  magnificence. 


Denmark  Hill, 
February,  185L 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Preface  -------  v 

Chapter  I.  The  Quarry  1 

II.  The  Virtues  of  Architecture          -  37 

III.  The  Six  Divisions  of  Architecture  -  48 

IV.  The  Wall  Base        -  -            -  -  53 
V.  The  Wall  Yeil        -            -            -  -  59 

YI.  The  Wall  Cornice  -            -            -  -64 

VII.  The  Pier  Base          -            -            -  -72 

VIII.  The  Shaft      -            -            -            -  -  85 

IX.  The  Capital               -            -            -  -  106 

X.  Tile  Arch  Line         -            -            -  -  124 

XI.  The  Arch  Masonry               -            -  -  134 

XII.  The  Arch  Load        -            -            -  -  146 

XIII.  The  Koof 150 

XIV.  The  Eoof  Cornice    -  -            -  -  157 
XV.  The  Buttress             -            -            -  -  168 

XVI.  Form  of  Aperture    -            -            -  -  176 

XVII.  Filling  of  Aperture            -            -  -  185 

XVIII.  Protection  of  Aperture       -            -  -  197 

XIX.  Superimposition          -            -            -  -  202 

XX.  The  Material  of  Ornament            -  -  213 

XXI.  Treatment  of  Ormament      -            -  -  239 


X 1 V  CONTENTS. 

Chapter  Page 

AXIL  Tile  Angle 262 

XXIII.  The  Edge  and  Fillet                                     -  270 

XXIV.  The  Eoll  and  Beoess          -           -           -  279 
XXV.  The  Base       -            -            -            -            -  284 

XXVI.  The  Wall  Veil  and  Shaft                          -  298 

XXVII.  The  Cornice  and  Capital    -            -            -  309 

XXVIII.  The  Arcihvolt          -                                      -  337 

XXIX.  The  Eoof 348 

XXX.  The  Vestibule           ....  354 


APPENDIX. 

1.  Foundation  of  Venice  -  -  363 

2.  Power  of  the  Doges  -  -  -  -  -  364 

3.  Serrar  del  Consiglio  ....  3^4. 

4.  S.  Pietro  di  Castello  -  -  -  -  365 

5.  Papal  Power  in  Venice  -  -  -  -  366 

6.  Renaissance  Ornaments  -  -  -  -  373 

7.  Varieties  of  the  Orders  -  -  -  -  374 

8.  The  Northern  Energy  -  375 

9.  Wooden  Churches  of  the  North  -  -  -  384 

10.  Church  of  Alexandria  -  384 

11.  Renaissance  Landscape  -  -  -  -  384 

12.  Romanist  Modern  Art  -  387 

13.  Mr.  Fergusson's  System  -  -  -  -  391 

14.  Divisions  of  Humanity  -  -  -  -  397 


CONTENTS.  XV 

Page 

15.  Instinctive  Judgments              -  402 

16.  Strength  of  Shafts     -----  404 

17.  Answer  to  Mr.  Garbett        -  405 

18.  Early  English  Capitals         -            -            -            -  413 

19.  Tombs  near  St.  Anastasia       ...            -  414 

20.  Shafts  of  the  Ducal  Palace             -            -            -  415 

21.  Ancient  Representations  of  Water              -            -  418 

22.  Arabian  Ornamentation         -            -            -            -  430 

23.  Varieties  of  Chamfer             -  430 

24.  Renaissance  Bases       -----  432 

25.  Romanist  Decoration  of  Bases          -            -            -  433 


LIST    OF    PLATES. 


Plate 


II. 
III. 
IV. 

V. 

YI. 

VII. 

Yin. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIY. 

XV. 

XYI. 

XYII. 

XYIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 


Wall  Yeil  Decoration,  Ca'  Trevisan  and  Ca' 

Dario,     -            .            -  to  face  page  13 

Plans  of  Piers        -            -            -  „  101 

Arch  Masonry       -            -            -  „  *    136 

Arch  Masonry       -            -            -  „  138 

Arch  Masonry,  Broletto  of  Como  -        „  143 

Types  of  Towers    -  „  209 

Abstract  Lines       -            -            -  „  224 

Decoration  by  Disks,  Ca'  Badoari  -         ,,  245 

Edge  Decoration   -  „  271 

Profiles  of  Bases    -            -            -  „  287 

Plans  of  Bases       -            -            -  „  291 

Decorations  of  Bases          -            -  „  293 

Wall  Yeil  Decoration  „  299 

Spandril  Decoration,  Dncal  Palace  -         „  303 

Cornice  Profiles    -            -             -  -         ,,310 

Cornice  Decoration            -            -  „  315 

Capitals — Concave             -            -  „  327 

Capitals — Convex              -            -  „  332 

Archivolt  Decoration,  Yerona       -  -        „  337 

Wall  Yeil  Decoration,  Ca'  Trevisan  -        „  373 

Wall  Yeil  Decoration,  San  Michele,  Lucca       „  380 


THE 


STONES   OF   VENICE 


CHAPTEE   I. 

THE    QUAKKY. 

§  i.  Since  the  first  dominion  of  men  was  asserted  over  the  ocean, 
three  thrones,  of  mark  beyond  all  others,  have  been  set  upon  its 
sands  :  the  thrones  of  Tyre,  Venice,  and  England.  Of  the  First 
of  these  great  powers  only  the  memory  remains  ;  of  the  Second, 
the  ruin ;  the  Third,  which  inherits  their  greatness,  if  it  forget 
their  example,  may  be  led  through  prouder  eminence  to  less 
pitied  destruction. 

The  exaltation,  the  sin,  and  the  punishment  of  Tyre  have 
been  recorded  for  us,  in  perhaps  the  most  touching  words  ever  ut- 
tered by  the  Prophets  of  Israel  against  the  cities  of  the  stranger. 
But  we  read  them  as  a  lovely  song  ;  and  close  our  ears  to  the  stern- 
ness of  their  warning :  for  the  very  depth  of  the  Fall  of  Tyre 
has  blinded  us  to  its  reality,  and  we  forget,  as  we  watch  the 
bleaching  of  the  rocks  between  the  sunshine  and  the  sea,  that 
they  were  once  "  as  in  Eden,  the  garden  of  God." 

Her  successor,  like  her  in  perfection  of  beauty,  though  less  in 
endurance  of  dominion,  is  still  left  for  our  beholding  in  the  final 
period  of  her  decline :  a  ghost  upon  the  sands  of  the  sea,  so 
weak — so  quiet, — so  bereft  of  all  but  her  loveliness,  that  we 
might  well  doubt,  as  we  watched  her  faint  reflection  in  the  mi- 
rage of  the  lagoon,  which  was  the  City,  and  which  the  Shadow. 

I  would  endeavour  to  trace  the  lines  of  this  image  before  it  be 


2  THE   QUARRY. 

for  ever  lost,  and  to  record,  as  far  as  I  may,  the  warning  which 
seems  to  me  to  be  uttered  by  every  one  of  the  fast-gaining  waves, 
that  beat,  like  passing  bells,  against  the  Stones  of  Venice. 

§  ii.  It  would  be  difficult  to  overrate  the  value  of  the  lessons 
which  might  be  derived  from  a  faithful  study  of  the  history  of 
this  strange  and  mighty  city  :  a  history  which,  in  spite  of  the 
labour  of  countless  chroniclers,  remains  in  vague  and  disputable 
outline, — barred  with  brightness  and  shade,  like  the  far  away 
edge  of  her  own  ocean,  where  the  surf  and  the  sandbank  are 
mingled  with  the  sky.  The  inquiries  in  which  we  have  to  engage 
will  hardly  render  this  outline  clearer,  but  their  results  will,  in 
some  degree,  alter  its  aspect ;  and,  so  far  as  they  bear  upon  it  at 
all,  they  possess  an  interest  of  a  far  higher  kind  than  that  usually 
belonging  to  architectural  investigations.  I  may,  perhaps,  in  the 
outset,  and  in  few  words,  enable  the  general  reader  to  form  a 
clearer  idea  of  the  importance  of  every  existing  expression  of 
Venetian  character  through  Venetian  art,  and  of  the  breadth  of 
interest  which  the  true  history  of  Venice  embraces,  than  he  is 
likely  to  have  gleaned  from  the  current  fables  of  her  mystery  or 
magnificence. 

§  in.  Venice  is  usually  conceived  as  an  oligarchy  :  She  was  so 
during  a  period  less  than  the  half  of  her  existence,  and  that  in- 
cluding the  days  of  her  decline  ;  and  it  is  one  of  the  first  ques- 
tions needing  severe  examination,  whether  that  decline  was  owing 
in  any  wise  to  the  change  in  the  form  of  her  government,  or 
altogether,  as  assuredly  in  great  part,  to  changes,  in  the  charac- 
ter of  the  persons  of  whom  it  was  composed. 

The  state  of  Venice  existed  Thirteen  Hundred  and  Seventy- 
six  years,  from  the  first  establishment  of  a  consular  government 
on  the  island  of  the  Rialto *,  to  the  moment  when  the  General-in- 
chief  of  the  French  army  of  Italy  pronounced  the  Venetian 
republic  a  thing  of  the  past.  Of  this  period,  Two  Hundred  and 
Seventy-sixf  years  were  passed  in  a  nominal  subjection  to  the 

*  Appendix  1.  :  "  Foundation  of  ¥011106/' 
f  Appendix  2.  :  "  Power  of  the  Doges." 


THE   QUARRY.  3 

cities  of  old  Yenetia,  especially  to  Padua,  and  in  an  agitated 
form  of  democracy,  of  which  the  executive  appears  to  have  been 
entrusted  to  tribunes*,  chosen,  one  by  the  inhabitants  of  each  of 
the  principal  islands.  For  six  hundred  yearsf,  during  which  the 
power  of  Venice  was  continually  on  the  increase,  her  government 
was  an  elective  monarchy,  her  King  or  doge  possessing,  in  early 
times  at  least,  as  much  independent  authority  as  any  other  Euro- 
pean sovereign,  but  an  authority  gradually  subjected  to  limita- 
tion, and  shortened  almost  daily  of  its  prerogatives,  while  it 
increased  in  a  spectral  and  incapable  magnificence.  The  final 
government  of  the  nobles,  under  the  image  of  a  king,  lasted  for 
five  hundred  years,  during  which  Venice  reaped  the  fruits  of  her 
former  energies,  consumed  them, — and  expired. 

§  rv.  Let  the  reader  therefore  conceive  the  existence  of  the 
Venetian  state  as  broadly  divided  into  two  periods  :  the  first  of 
nine  hundred,  the  second  of  Hve  hundred  years,  the  separation 
being  marked  by  what  was  called  the  "  Serrar  del  Consiglio  ;" 
that  is  to  say,  the  final  and  absolute  distinction  of  the  nobles 
from  the  commonalty,  and  the  establishment  of  the  government 
in  their  hands  to  the  exclusion  alike  of  the  influence  of  the 
people  on  the  one  side,  and  the  authority  of  the  doge  on  the 
other. 

Then  the  first  period,  of  nine  hundred  years,  presents  us  with 
the  most  interesting  spectacle  of  a  people  struggling  out  of  an- 
archy into  order  and  power ;  and  then  governed,  for  the  most 
part,  by  the  worthiest  and  noblest  man  whom  they  could  find 
among  them;}:,  called  their  Doge  or  Leader,  with  an  aristocracy 
gradually  and  resolutely  forming  itself  around  him,  out  of  which, 
and  at  last  by  which,  he  was  chosen ;  an  aristocracy  owing  its 
origin  to  the  accidental  numbers,  influence,  and  wealth  of  some 

*  Sismondi,  Hist,  des  Rep.  Ital.,  vol.  i.  ch.  v. 

f  Appendix  3. :  "  Serrar  del  Consiglio." 

|  "  Ha  saputo  trovar  modo  che  non  uno,  non  pochi,  non  molti,  signoreggiano,  ma 
molti  buoni,  pochi  migliori,  e  insiememente,  un  ottimo  solo?1  (Sansovino.)  Ah,  well 
done,  Venice  !     Wisdom  this,  indeed. 


4  THE    QUARRY. 

among  the  families  of  the  fugitives  from  the  older  Venetia,  and 
gradually  organising  itself,  by  its  unity  and  heroism,  into  a  sepa- 
rate body. 

This  first  period  includes  the  Rise  of  Venice,  her  noblest 
achievements,  and  the  circumstances  which  determined  her  cha- 
racter and  position  among  European  powers ;  and  within  its 
range,  as  might  have  been  anticipated,  we  find  the  names  of  all 
her  hero  princes, — of  Pietro  Urseolo,  Ordalafo  Falier,  Domenico 
Michieli,  Sebastiano  Ziani,  and  Enrico  Dandolo. 

§  v.  The  second  period  opens  with  a  hundred  and  twenty 
years,  the  most  eventful  in  the  career  of  Venice — the  central 
struggle  of  her  life — stained  with  her  darkest  crime,  the  murder 
of  Carrara — disturbed  by  her  most  dangerons  internal  sedition, 
the  conspiracy  of  Falier — oppressed  by  her  most  fatal  war,  the 
war  of  Chiozza — and  distinguished  by  the  glory  of  her  two  no- 
blest citizens  (for  in  this  period  the  heroism  of  her  citizens 
replaces  that  of  her  monarchs),  Vittor  Pisani  and  Carlo  Zeno. 

I  date  the  commencement  of  the  Fall  of  Venice  from  the  death 
of  Carlo  Zeno,  8th  May,  1418*;  the  visible  commencement  from 
that  of  another  of  her  noblest  and  wisest  children,  the  Doge 
Tomaso  Mocenigo,  who  expired  five  years  later.  The  reign  of 
Foscari  followed,  gloomy  with  pestilence  and  war ;  a  war  in 
which  large  acquisitions  of  territory  were  made  by  subtle  or 
fortunate  policy  in  Lombardy,  and  disgrace,  significant  as  irrepa- 
rable, sustained  in  the  battles  on  the  Po  at  Cremona,  and  in  the 
marshes  of  Caravaggio.  In  1454,  Venice,  the  first  of  the  states 
of  Christendom,  humiliated  herself  to  the  Turk  :  in  the  same 
year  was  established  the  Inquisition  of  Statef,  and  from  this 
period  her  government  takes  the  perfidious  and  mysterious  form 
under  which  it  is  usually  conceived.  In  1477,  the  great  Turkish 
invasion  spread  terror  to  the  shores  of  the  lagoons  ;  and  in  1508 
the  league  of  Cambrai  marks  the  period  usually  assigned  as  the 

*  Daru.,  liv.  xii.  ch.  xii. 

t  Daru.,  liv.  xvi.  cap.  xx.     We  owe  to  this  historian  the  discovery  of  the  statutes  of 
the  tribunal  and  date  of  its  establishment. 


THE   QUARRY.  5 

commencement  of  the  decline  of  the  Venetian  power*  ;  the  com- 
mercial prosperity  of  Venice  in  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century 
blinding  her  historians  to  the  previous  evidence  of  the  diminu- 
tion of  her  internal  strength. 

§  vi.  Now  there  is  apparently  a  significative  coincidence  be- 
tween the  establishment  of  the  aristocratic  and  oligarchical  pow- 
ers, and  the  diminution  of  the  prosperity  of  the  state.  But  this 
is  the  very  question  at  issue  ;  and  it  appears  to  me  quite  unde- 
termined by  any  historian,  or  determined  by  each  in  accordance 
with  his  own  prejudices.  It  is  a  triple  question :  first,  whether 
the  oligarchy  established  by  the  efforts  of  individual  ambition 
was  the  cause,  in  its  subsequent  operation,  of  the  Fall  of  Venice ; 
or  (secondly)  whether  the  establishment  of  the  oligarchy  itself  be 
not  the  sign  and  evidence,  rather  than  the  cause,  of  national  ener- 
vation; or  (lastly)  whether,  as  I  rather  think,  the  history  of 
Venice  might  not  be  written  almost  without  reference  to  the 
construction  of  her  senate  or  the  prerogatives  of  her  Doge.  It 
is  the  history  of  a  people  eminently  at  unity  in  itself,  descendants 
of  Roman  race,  long  disciplined  by  adversity,  and  compelled  by 
its  position  either  to  live  nobly  or  to  perish : — for  a  thousand 
years  they  fought  for  life ;  for  three  hundred  they  invited  death  : 
their  battle  was  rewarded,  and  their  call  was  heard. 

§  vn.  Throughout  her  career,  the  victories  of  Venice,  and,  at 
many  periods  of  it,  her  safety,  were  purchased  by  individual 
heroism ;  and  the  man  who  exalted  or  saved  her  was  sometimes 
(oftenest)  her  king,  sometimes  a  noble,  sometimes  a  citizen.  To 
him  no  matter,  nor  to  her :  the  real  question  is,  not  so  much  what 
names  they  bore,  or  with  what  powers  they  were  entrusted,  as 
how  they  were  trained ;  how  they  were  made  masters  of  them- 
selves, servants  of  their  country,  patient  of  distress,  impatient  of 
dishonour  ;  and  what  was  the  true  reason  of  the  change  from  the 
time  when  she  could  find  saviours  among  those  whom  she  had 

*  Ominously  signified  by  their  humiliation  to  the  Papal  power  (as  before  to  the 
Turkish)  in  1509,  and  their  abandonment  of  their  right  of  appointing  the  clergy  of 
Iheir  territories. 


6  THE    QUARRY. 

cast  into  prison,  to  that  when  the  voices  of  her  own  children 
commanded  her  to  sign  covenant  with  Death.* 

§  viii.  On  this  collateral  question  I  wish  the  reader's  mind 
to  be  fixed  throughout  all  our  subsequent  inquiries.  It  will  give 
double  interest  to  every  detail :  nor  will  the  interest  be  profitless  ; 
for  the  evidence  which  I  shall  be  able  to  deduce  from  the  arts  of 
Venice  will  be  both  frequent  and  irrefragable,  that  the  decline 
of  her  political  prosperity  was  exactly  coincident  with  that  of 
domestic  and  individual  religion. 

I  say  domestic  and  individual ;  for — and  this  is  the  second 
point  which  I  wish  the  reader  to  keep  in  mind — the  most  curious 
phenomenon  in  all  Venetian  history  is  the  vitality  of  religion  in 
private  life,  and  its  deadness  in  public  policy.  Amidst  the 
enthusiasm,  chivalry,  or  fanaticism  of  the  other  states  of  Europe, 
Venice  stands,  from  first  to  last,  like  a  masked  statue  ;  her  cold- 
ness impenetrable,  her  exertion  only  aroused  by  the  touch  of  a 
secret  spring.  That  spring  was  her  commercial  interest, — this 
the  one  motive  of  all  her  important  political  acts,  or  enduring 
national  animosities.  She  could  forgive  insults  to  her  honour, 
but  never  rivalship  in  her  commerce  ;  she  calculated  the  glory  of 
her  conquests  by  their  value,  and  estimated  their  justice  by  their 
facility.  The  fame  of  success  remains,  when  the  motives  of 
attempt'  are  forgotten  ;  and  the  casual  reader  of  her  history  may 
perhaps  be  surprised  to  be  reminded,  that  the  expedition  which 
was  commanded  by  the  noblest  of  her  princes,  and  whose  results 
added  most  to  her  military  glory,  was  one  in  which  while  all 
Europe  around  her  was  wasted  by  the  fire  of  its  devotion,  she 
first  calculated  the  highest  price  she  could  exact  from  its  piety 
for  the  armament  she  furnished,  and  then,  for  the  advancement 
of  her  own  private  interests,  at  once  broke  her  faithf  and 
betrayed  her  religion. 

*  The  senate  voted  the  abdication  of  their  authority  by  a  majority  of  512  to  14. 
(Alison,  ch.  xxiii.) 

f  By  directing  the  aftns  of  the  Crusaders  against  a  Christian  prince.  (Daru.>  liv.  iv. 
ch.  iv.  viii.) 


THE    QUARRY.  7 

§  ix.  And  yet,  in  the  midst  of  this  national  criminality,  we 
shall  be  struck  again  and  again  by  the  evidences  of  the  most 
noble  individual  feeling.  The  tears  of  Dandolo  were  not  shed  in 
hypocrisy,  though  they  could  not  blind  him  to  the  importance  of 
the  conquest  of  Zara.  The  habit  of  assigning  to  religion  a  direct 
influence  over  all  his  own  actions,  and  all  the  affairs  of  his  own 
daily  life,  is  remarkable  in  every  great  Venetian  during  the  times 
of  the  prosperity  of  the  state ;  nor  are  instances  wanting  in  which 
the  private  feeling  of  the  citizens  reaches  the  sphere  of  their 
policy,  and  even  becomes  the  guide  of  its  course  where  the  scales 
of  expediency  are  doubtfully  balanced.  I  sincerely  trust  that 
the  inquirer  would  be  disappointed  who  should  endeavour  to 
trace  any  more  immediate  reasons  for  their  adoption  of  the  cause 
of  Alexander  III.  against  Barbarossa,  than  the  piety  which  was 
excited  by  the  character  of  their  suppliant,  and  the  noble  pride 
which  was  provoked  by  the  insolence  of  the  emperor.  But  the 
heart  of  Venice  is  shown  only  in  her  hastiest  counsels ;  her 
worldly  spirit  recovers  the  ascendancy  whenever  she  has  time 
to  calculate  the  probabilities  of  advantage,  or  when  they  are 
sufficiently  distinct  to  need  no  calculation ;  and  the  entire 
subjection  of  private  piety  to  national  policy  is  not  only  remark- 
able throughout  the  almost  endless  series  of  treacheries  and 
tyrannies  by  which  her  empire  was  enlarged  and  maintained,  but 
symbolised  by  a  very  singular  circumstance  in  the  building  of 
the  city  itself.  I  am  aware  of  no  other  city  of  Europe  in  which 
its  cathedral  was  not  the  principal  feature.  But  the  principal 
church  in  Venice  was  the  chapel  attached  to  the  palace  of  her 
prince,  and  called  the  "  Chiesa  Ducale."  The  patriarchal 
church*,  inconsiderable  in  size  and  mean  in  decoration,  stands  on 
the  outermost  islet  of  the  Venetian  group,,  and  its  name,  as  well  as 
its  site,  is  probably  unknown  to  the  greater  number  of  travellers 
passing  hastily  through  the  city.  Nor  is  it  less  worthy  of 
remark,  that  the  two  most  important  temples  of  Venice,  next  to 
the  ducal  chapel,  owe  their  size  and  magnificence,  not  to  national 

*  Appendix  4  :  "  San  Pietro  di  Castello." 


8  I'll!-:   QUAERf. 

effort,  but  to  the  energy  of  the  Franciscan  and  Dominican 
monks,  supported  by  the  vast  organisation  of  those  great  societies 
on  the  mainland  of  Italy,  and  countenanced  by  the  most  pious, 
and  perhaps  also,  in  his  generation,  the  most  wise,  of  all  the 
princes  of  Venice'*,  who  now  rests  beneath  the  roof  of  one  of 
those  very  temples,  and  whose  life  is  not  satirized  by  the  images 
of  the  Virtues  which  a  Tuscan  sculptor  has  placed  around  his 
tomb. 

§  x.  There  are,  therefore,  two  strange  and  solemn  lights  in 
which  we  have  to  regard  almost  every  scene  in  the  fitful  history 
of  the  Rivo  Alto.  We  find,  on  the  one  hand,  a  deep  and  constant 
tone  of  individual  religion  characterising  the  lives  of  the  citizens 
of  Venice  in  her  greatness  ;  we  find  this  spirit  influencing  them 
in  all  the  familiar  and  immediate  concerns  of  life,  giving  a 
peculiar  dignity  to  the  conduct  even  of  their  commercial  trans- 
actions, and  confessed  by  them  with  a  simplicity  of  faith  that 
may  well  put  to  shame  the  hesitation  with  which  a  man  of  the 
world  at  present  admits  (even  if  it  be  so  in  reality)  that  religious 
feeling  has  any  influence  over  the  minor  branches  of  his  conduct. 
And  we  find  as  the  natural  consequence  of  all  this,  a  healthy 
serenity  of  mind  and  energy  of  will  expressed  in  all  their  actions, 
and  a  habit  of  heroism  which  never  fails  them,  even  when  the 
immediate  motive  of  action  ceases  to  be  praiseworthy.  With  the 
fulness  of  this  spirit  the  prosperity  of  the  state  is  exactly  cor- 
respondent, and  with  its  failure  her  decline,  and  that  with  a 
closeness  and  j)recision  which  it  will  be  one  of  the  collateral 
objects  of  the  following  essay  to  demonstrate  from  such  acci- 
dental evidence  as  the  field  of  its  inquiry  presents.  And,  thus 
far,  all  is  natural  and  simple.  But  the  stopping  short  of  this 
religious  faith  when  it  appears  likely  to  influence  national  action, 
correspondent  as  it  is,  and  that  most  strikingly,  with  several 
characteristics  of  the  temper  of  our  present  English  legislature, 
is  a  subject,  morally  and  politically,  of  the  most  curious  interest 
and  complicated  difficulty  ;  one,  however,  which  the  range  of  my 

*  Tomaso  Mocenigo,  above  named,  §  V. 


THE   QUAEKY.  9 

present  inquiry  will  not  permit  me  to  approach,  and  for  the 
treatment  of  which  I  must  be  content  to  furnish  materials  in  the 
light  I  may  be  able  to  throw  upon  the  private  tendencies  of  the 
Venetian  character. 

§  xi.  There  is,  however,  another  most  interesting  feature  in 
the  policy  of  Venice  which  will  be  often  brought  before  us ; 
and  which  a  Romanist  would  gladly  assign  as  the  reason  of  its 
irreligion ;  namely,  the  magnificent  and  successful  struggle  which 
she  maintained  against  the  temporal  authority  of  the  Church  of 
Rome.  It  is  true  that,  in  a  rapid  survey  of  her  career,  the  eye  is 
at  first  arrested  by  the  strange  drama  to  which  I  have  already 
alluded,  closed  by  that  ever  memorable  scene  in  the  portico  of 
St.  Mark's*,  the  central  expression  in  most  men's  thoughts  of 
the  unendurable  elevation  of  the  pontifical  power  ;  it  is  true  that 
the  proudest  thoughts  of  Venice,  as  well  as  the  insignia  of  her 
prince,  and  the  form  of  her  chief  festival,  recorded  the  service 
thus  rendered  to  the  Roman  Church.  But  the  enduring  senti- 
ment of  years  more  than  balanced  the  enthusiasm  of  a  moment ; 
and  the  bull  of  Clement  V.,  which  excommunicated  the  Venetians 
and  their  doge,  likening  them  to  Dathan,  Abiram,  Absalom, 
and  Lucifer,  is  a  stronger  evidence  of  the  great  tendencies  of  the 
Venetian  government  than  the  umbrella  of  the  doge  or  the  ring 
of  the  Adriatic.     The  humiliation  of  Francesco  Dandolo  blotted 

*  "  In  that  temple  porch, 

(The  brass  is  gone,  the  porphyry  remains,) 
Did  Barbarossa  fling  his  mantle  off, 
And  kneeling,  on  his  neck  receive  the  foot 
Of  the  proud  Pontiff — thus  at  last  consoled 
For  flight,  disguise,  and  many  an  anguish  shake 
On  his  stone  pillow." 

I  need  hardly  say  whence  the  lines  are  taken :  Rogers'  "  Italy"  has.  I  believe, 
now  a  place  in  the  best  beloved  compartment  of  all  libraries,  and  will  never  be 
removed  from  it.  There  is  more  true  expression  of  the  spirit  of  Venice  in  the 
passages  devoted  to  her  in  that  poem,  than  in  all  else  that  has  been  written 
of  her. 


10  THE    QUARRY. 

out  the  shame  of  Barbarossa,  and  the  total  exclusion  of  eccle- 
siastics from  all  share  in  the  councils  of  Venice  became  an 
enduring  mark  of  her  knowledge  of  the  spirit  of  the  Church 
of  Rome,  and  of  her  defiance  of  it. 

To  this  exclusion  of  Papal  influence  from  her  councils,  the 
Romanist  will  attribute  their  irreligion,  and  the  Protestant  their 
success.*  The  first  may  be  silenced  by  a  reference  to  the  cha- 
racter of  the  policy  of  the  Vatican  itself;  and  the  second  by  his 
own  shame,  when  he  reflects  that  the  English  legislature  sacri- 
ficed their  principles  to  exjDose  themselves  to  the  very  danger 
which  the  Venetian  senate  sacrificed  theirs  to  avoid. 

§  xii.  One  more  circumstance  remains  to  be  noted  respecting 
the  Venetian  government,  the  singular  unity  of  the  families  com- 
posing it,— unity  far  from  sincere  or  perfect,  but  still  admirable 
when  contrasted  with  the  fiery  feuds,  the  almost  daily  revolu- 
tions, the  restless  successions  of  families  and  parties  in  power, 
which  fill  the  annals  of  the  other  states  of  Italy.  That  rivalship 
should  sometimes  be  ended  by  the  dagger,  or  enmity  conducted 
to  its  ends  under  the  mask  of  law,  could  not  but  be  anticipated 
where  the  fierce  Italian  spirit  was  subjected  to  so  severe  a  re- 
straint :  it  is  much  that  jealousy  appears  usually  unmingled 
with  illegitimate  ambition,  and  that,  for  every  instance  in  which 
private  passion  sought  its  gratification  through  public  danger, 
there  are  a  thousand  in  which  it  was  sacrificed  to  the  public  ad- 
vantage. Venice  may  well  call  upon  us  to  note  with  reverence, 
that  of  all  the  towers  which  are  still  seen  rising  like  a  branchless 
forest  from  her  islands,  there  is  but  one  whose  office  was  other 
than  that  of  summoning  to  prayer,  and  that  one  was  a  watch- 
tower  only :  from  first  to  last,  while  the  palaces  of  the  other 
cities  of  Italy  were  lifted  into  sullen  fortitudes  of  rampart,  and 
fringed  with  forked  battlements  for  the  javelin  and  the  bow,  the 
sands  of  Venice  never  sank  under  the  weight  of  a  war  tower, 

*  At  least,  such  success  as  they  had.     Vide  Appendix  5. :    "  The  Papal  Power  in 
Venice." 


THE   QUAEEY.  11 

and  her  roof  terraces  were  wreathed  with  Arabian  imagery,  of 
golden  globes  suspended  on  the  leaves  of  lilies.* 

§  xiii.  These,  then,  appear  to  me  to  be  the  points  of  chief 
general  interest  in  the  character  and  fate  of  the  Venetian  people. 
I  would  next  endeavour  to  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  testimony  of  Art  bears  upon  these  questions 
and  of  the  aspect  which  the  arts  themselves  assume  when  they 
are  regarded  in  their  true  connection  with  the  history  of  the  state : 

1st.  Receive  the  witness  of  Painting. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  I  put  the  commencement  of  the 
Fall  of  Venice  as  far  back  as  1418. 

Now,  John  Bellini  was  born  in  1423,  and  Titian  in  1480. 
John  Bellini,  and  his  brother  Gentile,  two  years  older  than  he, 
close  the  line  of  the  sacred  painters  of  Venice.  But  the  most 
solemn  spirit  of  religious  faith  animates  their  works  to  the  last. 
There  is  no  religion  in  any  work  of  Titian's  :  there  is  not  even 
the  smallest  evidence  of  religious  temper  or  sympathies  either  in 
himself,  or  in  those  for  whom  he  painted.  His  larger  sacred 
subjects  are  merely  themes  for  the  exhibition  of  pictorial  rhetoric, 
— composition  and  colour.  His  minor  works  are  generally  made 
subordinate  to  purposes  of  portraiture.  The  Madonna  in  the 
church  of  the  Frari  is  a  mere  lay  figure,  introduced  to  form  a 
link  of  connection  between  the  portraits  of  various  members  of 
the  Pesaro  family  who  surround  her. 

Now  this  is  not  merely  because  John  Bellini  was  a  religious 
man  and  Titian  was  not.  Titian  and  Bellini  are  each  true  repre- 
sentatives of  the  school  of  painters  contemporary  with  them ;  and 
the  difference  in  their  artistic  feeling  is  a  consequence  not  so 
much  of  difference  in  their  own  natural  characters  as  in  their 
early  education  :  Bellini  was  brought  up  in  faith  ;  Titian  in  for- 
malism. Between  the  years  of  their  births  the  vital  religion  of 
Venice  had  expired. 

*  The  inconsiderable  fortifications  of  the  arsenal  are  no  exception  to  this  statement, 
as  far  as  it  regards  the  city  itself.  They  are  little  more  than  a  semblance  of  precau- 
tion against  the  attack  of  a  foreign  enemy. 


12  THE    QT7ABRY. 

§  xiv.  The  vital  religion,  observe,  not  the  formal.  Outward 
observance  was  as  strict  as  ever  ;  and  doge  and  senator  still  were 
painted,  in  almost  every  important  instance,  kneeling  before  the 
Madonna  or  St.  Mark  ;  a  confession  of  faith  made  universal  by 
the  pure  gold  of  the  Venetian  sequin.  But  observe  the  great 
picture  of  Titian's,  in  the  ducal  palace,  of  the  Doge  Autonio 
Grimani  kneeling  before  Faith  :  there  is  a  curious  lesson  in  it. 
The  figure  of  Faith  is  a  coarse  portrait  of  one  of  Titian's  least 
graceful  female  models  :  Faith  had  become  carnal.  The  eye  is 
first  caught  by  the  flash  of  the  Doge's  armour.  The  heart  of 
Venice  was  in  her  wars,  not  in  her  worship. 

The  mind  of  Tintoret,  incomparably  more  deep  and  serious 
than  that  of  Titian,  casts  the  solemnity  of  its  own  tone  over  the 
sacred  subjects  which  it  approaches,  and  sometimes  forgets  itself 
into  devotion ;  but  the  principle  of  treatment  is  altogether  the 
same  as  Titian's  :  absolute  subordination  of  the  religious  subject 
to  purposes  of  decoration  or  portraiture. 

The  evidence  might  be  accumulated  a  thousandfold  from  the 
works  of  Veronese,  and  of  every  succeeding  painter, — that  the 
fifteenth  century  had  taken  away  the  religious  heart  of  Venice. 

§  xv.  Such  is  the  evidence  of  Painting.  To  collect  that  of 
Architecture  will  be  our  task  through  many  a  page  to  come  ;  but 
I  must  here  give  a  general  idea  of  its  heads. 

Phillipe  de  Commynes,  writing  of  his  entry  into  Venice  in 
1495,  says, — • 

"  Chascun  me  feit  seoir  au  meillien  de  ces  deux  ambassadeurs 
qui  est  l'honneur  d'ltalie  que  d'estre  au  meillieu  ;  et  me  menerent 
au  long  de  la  grant  rue,  qu'ilz  appellent  le  Canal  Grant,  et  est 
bien  large.  Les  gallees  y  passent  a  travers  et  y  ay  veu  navire 
de  quatre  cens  tonneaux  ou  plus  pres  des  maisons  :  et  est  la  plus 
belle  rue  que  je  croy  qui  soit  en  tout  le  monde,  et  la  mieulx 
maisonnee,  et  va  le  long  de  la  ville.  Les  maisons  sont  fort 
grandes  et  hanltes,  et  de  bonne  pierre,  et  les  anciennes  toutes 
painctes ;  les  aultres  faictes  depuis  cent  ans  :  toutes  ont  le  de- 
vant  de  marbre  blanc,  qui  leur  vient  dTstrie,  a  cent  mils  de  la, 


\% 


l.illi  Ml 


Wall-Ynl  DecDT-atiou. 


THE   QUARRY.  13 

et  encores  maincte  grant  piece  de  porphire  et  de  sarpentine  sur 
le  devant.  .  .  .  C'est  la  plus  triumphante  cite  que  j'aye  jamais 
veue  et  qui  plus  faict  d'honneur  a  ambassadeurs  et  estrangiers, 
et  qui  plus  saigement  se  gouverne,  et  ou  le  service  de  Dieu  est 
le  plus  sollempnellement  faict :  et  encores  qu'il  y  peust  bien 
avoir  d'aultres  faultes,  si  croy  je  que  Dieu  les  a  en  ayde  pour  la 
reverence  qu'ilz  portent  an  service  de  l'Eglise."* 

§  xvi.  This  passage  is  of  peculiar  interest,  for  two  reasons. 
Observe,  first,  the  impression  of  Commynes  respecting  the  reli- 
gion of  Yenice  :  of  which,  as  I  have  above  said,  the  forms  still 
remained  with  some  glimmering  of  life  in  them,  and  were  the 
evidence  of  what  the  real  life  had  been  in  former  times.  But 
observe,  secondly,  the  impression  instantly  made  on  Commynes' 
mind  by  the  distinction  between  the  elder  palaces  and  those 
built  "  within  this  last  hundred  years  ;  which  all  have  their 
fronts  of  white  marble  brought  from  Istria,  a  hundred  miles 
away,  and  besides,  many  a  large  piece  of  porphyry  and  serpen- 
tine upon  their  fronts." 

On  the  opposite  page  I  have  given  two  of  the  ornaments  of 
the  palaces  which  so  struck  the  French  ambassador.f  He  was 
right  in  his  notice  of  the  distinction.  There  had  indeed  come  a 
change  over  Yenetian  architecture  in  the  fifteenth  century ;  and 
a  change  of  some  importance  to  us  moderns  :  we  English  owe  to 
it  our  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  and  Europe  in  general  owes  to  it  the 
utter  degradation  or  destruction  of  her  schools  of  architecture, 
never  since  revived.  But  that  the  reader  may  understand  this, 
it  is  necessary  that  he  should  have  some  general  idea  of  the 
connection  of  the  architecture  of  Yenice  with  that  of  the  rest  of 
Europe,  from  its  origin  forwards. 

§  xvn.  All  European  architecture,  bad  and  good,  old  and 
new,  is  derived  from  Greece  through  Home,  and  coloured  and 
perfected  from  the  East.  The  history  of  architecture  is  nothing 
but  the  tracing  of  the   various   modes  and   directions  of  this 

*  Memoires  de  Commynes,  liv.  vii.  ch.  xviii. 
t  Appendix  6  :  "  Renaissance  Ornaments." 


16  THE    QUABBY. 

old  Rome  Itself,  flowing  uninterruptedly  down  from  the  fountain- 
head,  and  entrusted  always  to  the  best  workmen  who  could  be 
found — Latins  in  Italy  and  Greeks  in  Greece;  and  thus  both 
branches  may  be  ranged  under  the  general  term  of  Christian 
Romanesque,  an  architecture  which  had  lost  the  refinement  of 
Pagan  art  in  the  degradation  of  the  empire,  but  which  was 
elevated  by  Christianity  to  higher  aims,  and  by  the  fancy  of  the 
Greek  workmen  endowed  with  brighter  forms.  And  this  art  the 
reader  may  conceive  as  extending  in  its  various  branches  over 
all  the  central  provinces  of  the  empire,  taking  aspects  more  or 
less  refined,  according  to  its  proximity  to  the  seats  of  govern- 
ment ;  dependent  for  all  its  power  on  the  vigour  and  freshness 
of  the  religion  which  animated  it ;  and  as  that  vigour  and  purity 
departed,  losing  its  own  vitality,  and  sinking  into  nerveless  rest, 
not  deprived  of  its  beauty,  but  benumbed,  and  incapable  of 
advance  or  change. 

§  xxn.  Meantime  there  had  been  preparation  for  its  renewal. 
While  in  Rome  and  Constantinople,  and  in  the  districts  under 
their  immediate  influence,  this  Roman  art  of  pure  descent  was 
practised  in  all  its  refinement,  an  impure  form  of  it — a  patois  of 
Romanesque — was  carried  by  inferior  workmen  into  distant 
provinces  ;  and  still  ruder  imitations  of  this  patois  were  executed 
by  the  barbarous  nations  on  the  skirts  of  the  empire.  But  these 
barbarous  nations  were  in  the  strength  of  their  youth ;  and  while, 
in  the  centre  of  Europe,  a  refined  and  purely  descended  art  was 
sinking  into  graceful  formalism,  on  its  confines  a  barbarous  and 
borrowed  art  was  organising  itself  into  strength  and  consistency. 
The  reader  must  therefore  consider  the  history  of  the  work  of  the 
period  as  broadly  divided  into  two  great  heads:  the  one  em- 
bracing the  elaborately  languid  succession  of  the  Christian  art  of 
Rome ;  and  the  other,  the  imitations  of  it  executed  by  nations  in 
every  conceivable  phase  of  early  organisation,  on  the  edges  of 
the  empire,  or  included  in  its  now  merely  nominal  extent. 

§  xxm.  Some  of  the   barbaric   nations  were,  of  course,  not 
susceptible  of  this  influence;    and  when  they  burst  over  the 


THE    QUARRY.  17 

Alps,  appear,  like  the  Huns,  as  scourges  only,  or  mix  as  the 
Ostrogoths,  with  the  enervated  Italians,  and  give  physical 
strength  to  the  mass  with  which  they  mingle,  without  materially 
affecting  its  intellectual  character.  But  others,  both  south  and 
north  of  the  empire,  had  felt  its  influence,  back  to  the  beach  of 
the  Indian  Ocean  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  ice  creeks  of  the 
North  Sea  on  the  other.  On  the  north  and  west  the  influence 
was  of  the  Latins ;  on  the  south  and  east,  of  the  Greeks.  Two 
nations,  pre-eminent  above  all  the  rest,  represent  to  us  the  force 
of  derived  mind  on  either  side.  As  the  central  power  is  eclipsed, 
the  orbs  of  reflected  light  gather  into  their  fulness ;  and  when 
sensuality  and  idolatry  had  done  their  work,  and  the  religion  of 
the  empire  was  laid  asleep  in  a  glittering  sepulchre,  the  living 
light  rose  upon  both  horizons,  and  the  fierce  swords  of  the  Lom- 
bard and  Arab  were  shaken  over  its  golden  paralysis. 

§  xxiv.  The  work  of  the  Lombard  was  to  give  hardihood  and 
system  to  the  enervated  body  and  enfeebled  mind  of  Christen- 
dom ;  that  of  the  Arab  was  to  punish  idolatry,  and  to  proclaim 
the  spirituality  of  worship.  The  Lombard  covered  every  church 
which  he  built  with  the  sculptured  representations  of  bodily  ex- 
ercises— hunting  and  war.*  The  Arab  banished  all  imagination 
of  creature  form  from  his  temples,  and  proclaimed  from  their 
minarets,  "  There  is  no  god  but  God."  Opposite  in  their  cha- 
racter and  mission,  alike  in  their  magnificence  of  energy,  they 
came  from  the  North  and  from  the  South,  the  glacier  torrent  and 
the  lava  stream  :  they  met  and  contended  over  the  wreck  of  the 
Roman  empire  ;  and  the  very  centre  of  the  struggle,  the  point  of 
pause  of  both,  the  dead  water  of  the  opposite  eddies,  charged 
with  embayed  fragments  of  the  Roman  wreck,  is  Yenice. 

The  Ducal  palace  of  Venice  contains  the  three  elements  in 
exactly  equal  proportions — the  Roman,  Lombard,  and  Arab.  It 
is  the  central  building  of  the  world. 

§  xxv.  The  reader  will  now  begin  to  understand  something 
of  the  importance  of  the  study  of  the  edifices  of  a  city  which 

*  Appendix  8. :  u  The  Northern  Energy." 
2 


18  THE    QUARRY. 

concludes,  within  the  circuit  of  some  seven  or  eight  miles,  the 
field  of  contest  between  the  three  pre-eminent  architectures  of 
the  world : — each  architecture  expressing  a  condition  of  religion ; 
each  an  erroneous  condition,  yet  necessary  to  the  correction  of 
the  others,  and  corrected  by  them. 

§  xxvi.  It  will  be  part  of  my  endeavour  in  the  following 
work,  to  mark  the  various  modes  in  which  the  northern  and 
southern  architectures  were  developed  from  the  Roman :  here  I 
must  ]3ause  only  to  name  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the 
great  families.  The  Christian  Roman  and  Byzantine  work  is 
round-arched,  with  single  and  well-proportioned  shafts ;  capitals 
imitated  from  classical  Roman ;  mouldings  more  or  less  so ;  and 
large  surfaces  of  walls  entirely  covered  with  imagery,  mosaic, 
and  paintings,  whether  of  scripture  history  or  of  sacred  symbols. 

The  Arab  school  is  at  first  the  same  in  its  principal  features, 
the  Byzantine  workmen  being  employed  by  the  caliphs;  but 
the  Arab  rapidly  introduces  characters  half  Persepolitan,  half 
Egyptian,  into  the  shafts  and  capitals:  in  his  intense  love  of 
excitement  he  points  the  arch  and  writhes  it  into  extravagant 
foliations ;  he  banishes  the  animal  imagery,  and  invents  an 
ornamentation  of  his  own  (called  Arabesque)  to  replace  it :  this 
not  being  adapted  for  covering  large  surfaces,  he  concentrates  it 
on  features  of  interest,  and  bars  his  surfaces  with  horizontal  lines 
of  colour,  the  expression  of  the  level  of  the  Desert.  He  retains 
the  dome,  and  adds  the  mii^et.  All  is  done  with  exquisite 
refinement. 

§  xxvii.  The  changes  effected  by  the  Lombard  are  more 
curious  still,  for  they  are  in  the  anatomy  of  the  building,  more 
than  its  decoration.  The  Lombard  architecture  represents,  as 
I  said,  the  whole  of  that  of  the  northern  barbaric  nations.  And 
this  I  believe  was,  at  first,  an  imitation  in  wood  of  the  Christian 
Roman  churches  or  basilicas.  Without  staying  to  examine  the 
whole  structure  of  a  basilica,  the  reader  will  easily  understand 
thus  much  of  it :  that  it  had  a  nave  and  two  aisles,  the  nave 
much  higher  than  the  aisles  ;  that  the  nave  was  separated  from 


THE    QUARRY.  19 

the  aisles  by  rows  of  shafts,  which  supported,  above,  large  spaces 
of  flat  or  dead  wall,  rising  above  the  aisles,  and  forming  the 
upper  part  of  the  nave,  now  called  the  clerestory,  which  had  a 
gabled  wooden  roof. 

These  high  dead  walls  were,  in  Roman  work,  built  of  stone ; 
but  in  the  wooden  work  of  the  North,  they  must  necessarily  have 
been  made  of  horizontal  boards  or  timbers  attached  to  uprights 
on  the  top  of  the  nave  pillars,  which  wTere  themselves  also  of 
wood.*  Now,  these  uprights  were  necessarily  thicker  than  the 
rest  of  the  timbers,  and  formed  vertical  square  pilasters  above 
the  nave  piers.  As  Christianity  extended  and  civilisation  in- 
creased, these  wooden  structures  w^ere  changed  into  stone ;  but 
they  were  literally  petrified,  retaining  the  form  which  had  been 
made  necessary  by  their  being  of  wood.  The  upright  pilaster 
above  the  nave  pier  remains  in  the  stone  edifice,  and  is  the  first 
form  of  the  great  distinctive  feature  of  Northern  architecture — • 
the  vaulting  shaft.  In  that  form  the  Lombards  brought  it  into 
Italy,  in  the  seventh  century,  and  it  remains  to  this  day  in  St. 
Ambrogio  of  Milan,  and  St.  Michele  of  Pavia. 

§  xxviii.  When  the  vaulting  shaft  was  introduced  in  the  cle- 
restory walls,  additional  members  were  added  for  its  support  to 
the  nave  piers.  Perhaps  two  or  three  pine  trunks,  used  for  a 
single  pillar,  gave  the  first  idea  of  the  grouped  shaft.  Be  that 
as  it  may,  the  arrangement  of  the  nave  pier  in  the  form  of  a 
cross  accompanies  the  superimposition  of  the  vaulting  shaft; 
together  with  correspondent  grouping  of  minor  shafts  in  door- 
ways and  apertures  of  windows.  Thus,  the  wThole  body  of  the 
Northern  architecture,  represented  by  that  of  the  Lombards, 
may  be  described  as  rough  but  majestic  work,  round-arched, 
with  grouped  shafts,  added  vaulting  shafts,  and  endless  imagery 
of  active  life  and  fantastic  superstitions. 

§  xxix.  The  glacier  stream  of  the  Lombards,  and  the  following 
one  of  the  Normans,  left  their  erratic  blocks  wherever  they  had 
flowed ;  but  without  influencing,  1  think,  the  Southern  nations 

*  Appendix  9.:  "Wooden  Churches  of  the  North." 


20  THE    QUARRY. 

beyond  the  sphere  of  their  own  presence.  But  the  lava  stream 
of  the  Arab,  even  after  it  ceased  to  flow,  warmed  the  whole  of 
the  Northern  air;  and  the  history  of  Gothic  architecture  is  the 
history  of  the  refinement  and  spiritualisation  of  Northern  work 
under  its  influence.  The  noblest  buildings  of  the  world,  the 
Pisan-Romanesque,  Tuscan  (Giottesque)  Gothic,  and  Veronese 
Gothic,  are  those  of  the  Lombard  schools  themselves,  under  its 
close  and  direct  influence ;  the  various  Gothics  of  the  North  are 
the  original  forms  of  the  architecture  which  the  Lombards 
brought  into  Italy,  changing  under  the  less  direct  influence  of 
the  Arab. 

§  xxx.  Understanding  thus  much  of  the  formation  of  the 
great  European  styles,  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  tracing  the 
succession  of  architectures  in  "Venice  herself.  From  what  I  said 
of  the  central  character  of  Venetian  art,  the  reader  is  not,  of 
course,  to  conclude  that  the  Roman,  Northern,  and  Arabian 
elements  met  together  and  contended  for  the  mastery  at  the 
same  period.  The  earliest  element  was  the  pure  Christian  Ro- 
man ;  but  few,  if  any,  remains  of  this  art  exist  at  Venice ;  for 
the  present  city  was  in  the  earliest  times  only  one  of  many 
settlements  formed  on  the  chain  of  marshy  islands  which  extend 
from  the  mouths  of  the  Isonzo  to  those  of  the  Adige,  and  it  was 
not  until  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century  that  it  became  the 
seat  of  government;  while  the  cathedral  of  Torcello,  though 
Christian  Roman  in  general  form,  was  rebuilt  in  the  eleventh 
century,  and  shows  evidence  of  Byzantine  workmanship  in 
many  of  its  details.  This  cathedral,  however,  with  the  church 
of  Santa  Fosca  at  Torcello,  San  Giacomo  di  Rialto  at  Venice, 
and  the  crypt  of  St.  Mark's,  form  a  distinct  group  of  buildings, 
in  which  the  Byzantine  influence  is  exceedingly  slight;  and 
which  is  probably  very  sufficiently  representative  of  the  earliest 
architecture  on  the  islands. 

§  xxxi.  The  Ducal  residence  was  removed  to  Venice  in  809, 
and  the  body  of  St.  Mark  was  brought  from  Alexandria  twenty 
years  later.    The  first  chvrch  of  St.  Mark's  was,  doubtless,  built 


THE    QUAEKY.  21 

in  imitation  of  that  destroyed  at  Alexandria,  and  from  which  the 
relics  of  the  saint  had  been  obtained.  During  the  ninth,  tenth, 
and  eleventh  centuries,  the  architecture  of  Venice  seems  to  have 
been  formed  on  the  same  model,  and  is  almost  identical  with 
that  of  Cairo  under  the  caliphs,*  it  being  quite  immaterial 
whether  the  reader  chooses  to  call  both  Byzantine  or  both  Arabic ; 
the  workmen  being  certainly  Byzantine,  but  forced  to  the  inven- 
tion of  new  forms  by  their  Arabian  masters,  and  bringing  these 
forms  into  use  in  whatever  other  parts  of  the  world  they  were 
employed. 

To  this  first  manner  of  Venetian  architecture,  together  with 
such  vestiges  as  remain  of  the  Christian  Roman,  I  shall  devote 
the  first  division  of  the  following  inquiry.  The  examples  re- 
maining of  it  consist  of  three  noble  churches  (those  of  Torcello, 
Murano,  and  the  greater  part  of  St.  Mark's),  and  about  ten  or 
twelve  fragments  of  palaces. 

§  xxxii.  To  this  style  succeeds  a  transitional  one,  of  a  cha- 
racter much  more  distinctly  Arabian :  the  shafts  become  more 
slender,  and  the  arches  consistently  pointed,  instead  of  round ; 
certain  other  changes,  not  to  be  enumerated  in  a  sentence,  taking 
place  in  the  capitals  and  mouldings.  This  style  is  almost  ex- 
clusively secular.  It  was  natural  for  the  Venetians  to  imitate 
the  beautiful  details  of  the  Arabian  dwelling-house,  while  they 
would  with  reluctance  adopt  those  of  the  mosque  for  Christian 
churches. 

I  have  not  succeeded  in  fixing  limiting  dates  for  this  style. 
It  appears  in  part  contemporary  with  the  Byzantine  manner, 
but  outlives  it.  Its  position  is,  however,  fixed  by  the  central 
date,  1180,  that  of  the  elevation  of  the  granite  shafts  of  the 
Piazzetta,  whose  capitals  are  the  two  most  important  pieces 
of  detail  in  this  transitional  style  in  Venice.  Examples  of  its 
application  to  domestic  buildings  exist  in  almost  every  street  of 
the  city,  and  will  form  the  subject  of  the  second  division  of  the 
following  essay. 

*  Appendix  10. :  M  Church  of  Alexandria." 


22  THE    QUARRY. 

§  xxxiii.  The  Venetians  were  always  ready  to  receive  lessons 
in  art  from  their  enemies  (else  had  there  been  no  Arab  work  in 
Venice).  But  their  especial  dread  and  hatred  of  the  Lombards 
appears  to  have  long  prevented  them  from  receiving  the  influ- 
ence of  the  art  which  that  people  had  introduced  on  the  main- 
land of  Italy.  Nevertheless,  during  the  practice  of  the  two 
styles  above  distinguished,  a  peculiar  and  very  primitive  condi- 
tion of  pointed  Gothic  had  arisen  in  ecclesiastical  architecture. 
It  appears  to  be  a  feeble  reflection  of  the  Lombard- Arab  forms, 
which  were  attaining  perfection  upon  the  continent,  and  would 
probably,  if  left  to  itself,  have  been  soon  merged  in  the  Vene- 
tian-Arab school,  with  which  it  had  from  the  first  so  close  a  fel- 
lowship, that  it  will  be  found  difficult  to  distinguish  the  Arabian 
ogives  from  those  which  seem  to  have  been  built  under  this  early 
Gothic  influence.  The  churches  of  San  Giacopo  dell'  Orio,  San 
Giovanni  in  Bragora,  the  Carmine,  and  one  or  two  more,  furnish 
the  only  important  examples  of  it.  But,  in  the  thirteenth  cen- 
tury, the  Franciscans  and  Dominicans  introduced  from  the  con- 
tinent their  morality  and  their  architecture,  already  a  distinct 
Gothic,  curiously  developed  from  Lombardic  and  Northern 
(German  ?)  forms  ;  and  the  influence  of  the  principles  exhibited 
in  the  vast  churches  of  St.  Paul  and  the  Frari  began  rapidly  to 
affect  the  Venetian-Arab  school.  Still  the  two  systems  never 
became  united  ;  the  Venetian  policy  repressed  the  power  of  the 
church,  and  the  Venetian  artists  resisted  its  example ;  and 
thenceforward  the  architecture  of  the  city  becomes  divided  into 
ecclesiastical  and  civil :  the  one  an  ungraceful  yet  powerful  form 
of  the  Western  Gothic,  common  to  the  whole  peninsula,  and  only 
showing  Venetian  sympathies  in  the  adoption  of  certain  charac- 
teristic mouldings ;  the  other  a  rich,  luxuriant,  and  entirely 
original  Gothic,  formed  from  the  Venetian- Arab  by  the  influence 
of  the  Dominican  and  Franciscan  architecture,  and  especially  by 
the  engrafting  upon  the  Arab  forms  of  the  most  novel  feature  of 
the  Franciscan  work,  its  traceries.  These  various  forms  of 
Gothic,  the  distinctive  architecture   of  Venice,   chiefly  repre- 


THE    QUAKRY.  23 

sented  by  the  churches  of  St.  John  and  Paul,  the  Frari,  and  San 
Stefano,  on  the  ecclesiastical  side,  and  by  the  Ducal  palace,  and 
the  other  principal  Gothic  palaces,  on  the  secular  side,  will  be 
the  subject  of  the  third  division  of  the  essay. 

§  xxxiv.  Now  observe.  The  transitional  (or  especially  Arabic) 
style  of  the  Yenetian  work  is  centralised  by  the  date  1180,  and 
is  transformed  gradually  into  the  Gothic,  which  extends  in  its 
purity  from  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  to  the  beginning  of 
the  fifteenth  century ;  that  is  to  say,  over  the  precise  period 
which  I  have  described  as  the  central  epoch  of  the  life  of  Venice. 
I  dated  her  decline  from  the  year  1418 ;  Foscari  became  doge 
five  years  later,  and  in  his  reign  the  first  marked  signs  appear  in 
architecture  of  that  mighty  change  which  Philippe  de  Commynes 
notices  as  above,  the  change  to  which  London  owes  St.  Paul's, 
Rome  St.  Peter's,  Venice  and  Vicenza  the  edifices  commonly 
supposed  to  be  their  noblest,  and  Europe  in  general  the  degra- 
dation of  every  art  she  has  since  practised. 

§  xxxv.  This  change  appears  first  in  a  loss  of  truth  and  vitality 
in  existing  architecture  all  over  the  world.  (Compare  "  Seven 
Lamps,"  chap,  ii.)  All  the  Gothics  in  existence,  southern  or 
northern,  were  corrupted  at  once :  the  German  and  French  lost 
themselves  in  every  species  of  extravagance ;  the  English  Gothic 
was  confined,  in  its  insanity,  by  a  strait-waistcoat  of  perpendicu- 
lar lines ;  the  Italian  effloresced  on  the  mainland  into  the  mean- 
ingless ornamentation  of  the  Certosa  of  Pavia  and  the  Cathe- 
dral of  Como  (a  style  sometimes  ignorantly  called  Italian 
Gothic),  and  at  Venice  into  the  insipid  confusion  of  the  Porta 
della  Carta  and  wild  crockets  of  St.  Mark's.  This  corruption  of 
all  architecture,  especially  ecclesiastical,  corresponded  with,  and 
marked  the  state  of  religion  over  all  Europe, — the  peculiar 
degradation  of  the  Romanist  superstition,  and  of  public  morality 
in  consequence,  which  brought  about  the  Reformation. 

§  xxxvi.  Against  the  corrupted  papacy  arose  two  great 
divisions  of  adversaries,  Protestants  in  Germany  and  England, 
Rationalists  in  France  and  Italy ;  the  one  requiring  the  purifica- 


24  THE    QUARRY. 

tion  of  religion,  the  other  its  destruction.  The  Protestant  kept 
the  religion,  but  cast  aside  the  heresies  of  Home,  and  with  them 
her  arts,  by  which  last  rejection  he  injured  his  own  character, 
cramped  his  intellect  in  refusing  to  it  one  of  its  noblest  exercises, 
and  materially  diminished  his  influence.  It  may  be  a  serious 
question  how  far  the  Pausing  of  the  Reformation  has  been  a 
consequence  of  this  error. 

The  Rationalist  kept  the  arts  and  cast  aside  the  religion.  This 
rationalistic  art  is  the  art  commonly  called  Renaissance,  marked 
by  a  return  to  pagan  systems,  not  to  adopt  them  and  hallow  them 
for  Christianity,  but  to  rank  itself  under  them  as  an  imitator  and 
pupil.  In  Painting  it  is  headed  by  Giulio  Romano  and  Nicolo 
Poussin  ;  in  Architecture,  by  Sansovino  and  Palladio. 

§  xxxvu.  Instant  degradation  followed  in  every  direction, — a 
flood  of  folly  and  hypocrisy.     Mythologies  ill  understood  at  first, 
then  perverted  into  feeble  sensualities,  take  the  place   of  the 
representations  of  Christian  subjects,  which  had  become  blas- 
phemous under  the  treatment  of  men  like  the  Caracci.     Gods 
without  power,  satyrs  without  rusticity,  nymphs  without  inno- 
cence, men  without  humanity,  gather  into  idiot  groups  upon  the 
polluted   canvass,  and  scenic  affectations  encumber  the  streets 
with  preposterous  marble.     Lower  and  lower  declines  the  level 
of  abused  intellect ;  the  base  school  of  landscape*  gradually 
usurps  the  place  of  the  historical  painting,  which  had  sunk  into 
prurient  pedantry, — the   Alsatian   sublimities  of  Salvator,   the 
confectionary  idealities  of  Claude,  the  dull  manufacture  of  Gas- 
par  and  Canaletto,  south  of  the  Alps,  and  on  the  north  the 
patient  devotion  of  besotted  lives  to  delineation  of  bricks  and 
fogs,  fat  cattle  and  ditchwater.     And  thus  Christianity  and  mo- 
rality, courage,  and  intellect,  and  art  all  crumbling  together  into 
one  wreck,  we  are  hurried  on  to  the  fall  of  Italy,  the  revolution 
in  France,  and  the  condition  of  art  in  England  (saved  by  her 
Protestantism  from  severer  penalty)  in  the  time  of  George  II. 

§  xxxviii.  I  have  not  written  in  vain  if  I  have  heretofore  done 

*  Appendix  11.  :  "Renaissance  Landscape.'7 


THE    QUAERY.  25 

anything  towards  diminishing  the  reputation  of  the  Renaissance 
landscape  painting.  But  the  harm  which  has  been  done  by 
Claude  and  the  Poussins  is  as  nothing  when  compared  to  the 
mischief  effected  by  Palladio,  Scamozzi,  and  Sansovino.  Claude 
and  the  Poussins  were  weak  men,  and  have  had  no  serious  influ- 
ence on  the  general  mind.  There  is  little  harm  in  their  works 
being  purchased  at  high  prices  :  their  real  influence  is  very 
slight,  and  they  may  be  left  without  grave  indignation  to  their 
poor  mission  of  furnishing  drawing-rooms  and  assisting  stranded 
conversation.  Not  so  the  Renaissance  architecture.  Raised  at 
once  into  all  the  magnificence  of  which  it  was  capable  by 
Michael  Angelo,  then  taken  up  by  men  of  real  intellect  and  im- 
agination, such  as  Scamozzi,  Sansovino,  Inigo  Jones,  and  Wren, 
it  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  extent  of  its  influence  on  the 
European  mind;  and  that  the  more,  because  few  persons  are 
concerned  with  painting,  and,  of  those  few,  the  larger  number 
regard  it  with  slight  attention  ;  but  all  men  are  concerned  with 
architecture,  and  have  at  some  time  of  their  lives  serious  busi- 
ness with  it.  It  does  not  much  matter  that  an  individual  loses 
two  or  three  hundred  pounds  in  buying  a  bad  picture,  but  it  is 
to  be  regretted  that  a  nation  should  lose  two  or  three  hundred 
thousand  in  raising  a  ridiculous  building.  Nor  is  it  merely 
wasted  wealth  or  distempered  conception  which  we  have  to 
regret  in  this  Renaissance  architecture  :  but  we  shall  find  in  it 
partly  the  root,  partly  the  expression,  of  certain  dominant  evils 
of  modern  times — over-sophistication  and  ignorant  classicalism  ; 
the  one  destroying  the  healthfulness  of  general  society,  the  other 
rendering  our  schools  and  universities  useless  to  a  large  number 
of  the  men  who  pass  through  them. 

Now  Venice,  as  she  was  once  the  most  religious,  was  in  her 
fall  the  most  corrupt,  of  European  states ;  and  as  she  was  in  her 
strength  the  centre  of  the  pure  currents  of  Christian  architecture, 
so  she  is  in  her  decline  the  source  of  the  Renaissance.  It  was 
the  originality  and  splendour  of  the  palaces  of  Yicenza  and  Venice 
which  gave  this  school  its  eminence  in  the  eyes  of  Europe ;  and  the 


26  TIIE    QUARRY. 

dying  city,  magnificent  in  her  dissipation,  and  graceful  in  her 
follies,  obtained  wider  worship  in  her  decrepitude  than  in  her 
youth,  and  sank  from  the  midst  of  her  admirers  into  the  grave. 

§  xxxix.  It  is  in  Venice,  therefore,  and  in  Venice  only,  that 
effectual  blows  can  be  struck  at  this  pestilent  art  of  the  Renais- 
sance. Destroy  its  claims  to  admiration  there,  and  it  can  assert 
them  nowhere  else.  This,  therefore,  will  be  the  final  purpose  of 
the  following  essay.  I  shall  not  devote  a  fourth  section  to  Pal- 
ladio,  nor  weary  the  reader  with  successive  chapters  of  vitupera- 
tion ;  but  I  shall,  in  my  account  of  the  earlier  architecture, 
compare  the  forms  of  all  its  leading  features  with  those  into 
which  they  were  corrupted  by  the  Classicalists  ;  and  pause,  in 
the  close,  on  the  edge  of  the  precipice  of  decline,  so  soon  as  I 
have  made  its  depth  discernible.  In  doing  this  I  shall  depend 
upon  two  distinct  kinds  of  evidence  : — the  first,  the  testimony 
borne  by  particular  incidents  and  facts  to  a  want  of  thought  or 
of  feeling  in  the  builders  ;  from  which  we  may  conclude  that 
their  architecture  must  be  bad  : — the  second,  the  sense,  which 
I  doubt  not  I  shall  be  able  to  excite  in  the  reader,  of  a  system- 
atic ugliness  in  the  architecture  itself.  Of  the  first  kind  of  testi- 
mony I  shall  here  give  two  instances,  which  may  be  immediate- 
ly useful  in  fixing  in  the  reader's  mind  the  epoch  above  indi- 
cated for  the  commencement  of  decline. 

§  xl.  I  must  again  refer  to  the  importance  which  I  have  above 
attached  to  the  death  of  Carlo  Zeno  and  the  doge  Tomaso 
Mocenigo.  The  tomb  of  that  doge  is,  as  I  said,  wrought  by  a 
Florentine  ;  but  it  is  of  the  same  general  type  and  feeling  as  all 
the  Venetian  tombs  of  the  period,  and  it  is  one  of  the  last  which 
retains  it.  The  classical  element  enters  largely  into  its  details, 
but  the  feeling  of  the  whole  is  as  yet  unaffected.  Like  all  the 
lovely  tombs  of  Venice  and  Verona,  it  is  a  sarcophagus  with  a 
recumbent  figure  above,  and  this  figure  is  a  faithful  but  tender 
portrait,  wrought  as  far  as  it  can  be  without  painfullness,  of  the 
doge  as  he  lay  in  death,  lie  wears  his  ducal  robe  and  bonnet 
■ — his  head  is  laid  slightly  aside  upon  his  pillow — his  hands  are 


THE    QUAKRY.  27 

simply  crossed  as  they  fall.  The  face  is  emaciated,  the  features 
large,  but  so  pure  and  lordly  in  their  natural  chiselling,  that  they 
must  have  looked  like  marble  even  in  their  animation.  They 
are  deeply  worn  away  by  thought  and  death ;  the  veins  on  the 
temples  branched  and  starting  ;  the  skin  gathered  in  sharp  folds  ; 
the  brow  high-arched  and  shaggy ;  the  eye-ball  magnificently 
large  ;  the  curve  of  the  lips  just  veiled  by  the  light  moustache 
at  the  side ;  the  beard  short,  double,  and  sharp-pointed :  all 
noble  and  quiet ;  the  white  sepulchral  dust  marking  like  light 
the  stern  angles  of  the  cheek  and  brow. 

This  tomb  was  sculptured  in  1424,  and  is  thus  described  by 
one  of  the  most  intelligent  of  the  recent  writers  who  represent 
the  popular  feeling  respecting  Venetian  art. 

"  Of  the  Italian  school  is  also  the  rich  but  ugly  (ricco  ma  non  bel)  sarcopha- 
gus in  which  repose  the  ashes  of  Tomaso  Mocenigo.  It  may  be  called  one  of 
the  last  links  which  connect  the  declining  art  of  the  Middle  Ages  with  that  of 
the  Renaissance,  which  was  in  its  rise.  We  will  not  stay  to  particularise  the 
defects  of  each  of  the  seven  figures  of  the  front  and  sides,  which  represent  the 
cardinal  and  theological  virtues  ;  nor  will  we  make  any  remarks  upon  those 
which  stand  in  the  niches  above  the  pavilion,  because  we  consider  them  unwor- 
thy both  of  the  age  and  reputation  of  the  Florentine  school,  which  was  then 
with  reason  considered  the  most  notable  in  Italy."* 

It  is  well,  indeed,  not  to  pause  over  these  defects;  but  it 
might  have  been  better  to  have  paused  a  moment  beside  that 
noble  image  of  a  king's  mortality. 

§  xli.  In  the  choir  of  the  same  church,  St.  Giov.  and  Paolo,  is 
another  tomb,  that  of  the  Doge  Andrea  Vendramin.  This  doge 
died  in  1478,  after  a  short  reign  of  two  years,  the  most  disastrous 
in  the  annals  of  Yenice.  He  died  of  a  pestilence  which  follow- 
ed the  ravage  of  the  Turks,  carried  to  the  shores  of  the  lagoons. 
He  died,  ]eaving  Yenice  disgraced  by  sea  and  land,  with  the 
smoke  of  hostile  devastation  rising  in  the  blue  distances  of  Friuli ; 
and  there  was  raised  to  him  the  most  costly  tomb  ever  bestowed 
on  her  monarchs. 

*  Selvatico,  "  Architettura  di  Venezia,"  p.  147. 


28  THE    QUARRY. 

§  xlii.  If  the  writer  above  quoted  was  cold  beside  the  statue 
of  one  of  the  lathers  of  his  country,  lie  atones  for  it  by  his  elo- 
quence beside  the  tomb  of  the  Vendramin.  I  must  not  spoil  the 
force  of  Italian  superlative  by  translation. 

"  Quando  si  guarda  a  quella  corrctta  eleganza  di  profili  e  di  proporzioni,  a 
quclla  squlsitezza  d'ornamenti,  a  quel  certo  saporc  antico  che  senza  ombra  d' 
iinitazione  traspare  da  tutta  1'  opera — &c.  Sopra  ornatissimo  zoccolo  fornito  di 
squisiti  intagli  s'  alza  uno  stylobate — &c.  Sotto  le  colonne,  il  predetto  stilobate 
si  muta  leggiadramente  in  piedistallo,  poi  con  bella  novita  di  pensiero  e  di  effetto 
va  coronato  da  un  fregio  il  piu  gentile  che  veder  si  possa — &c.  Non  puossi 
lasciar  senza  un  cenno  1'  area  dove  sta  chiuso  il  doge ;  capo  lavoro  di  pensiero  e 
di  esecuzione."  &c. 

There  are  two  pages  and  a  half  of  closely  printed  praise,  of 
which  the  above  specimens  may  suffice ;  but  there  is  not  a  word 
of  the  statue  of  the  dead  from  beginning  to  end.  I  am  myself 
in  the  habit  of  considering  this  rather  an  important  part  of  a 
tomb,  and  I  was  especially  interested  in  it  here,  because  Selvati- 
co  only  echoes  the  praise  of  thousands.  It  is  unanimously  de- 
clared the  chef  d'oeuvre  of  Renaissance  sepulchral  work,  and 
pronounced  by  Cicognara,  (also  quoted  by  Selvatico) 

"  II  vertice  a  cui  1'  arti  Veneziane  si  spinsero  col  ministero  del  scalpello,"— 
"  The  very  culminating  point  to  which  the  Venetian  arts  attained  by  ministry  of 
the  chisel." 

To  this  culminating  point,  therefore,  covered  with  dust  and 
cobwebs,  I  attained,  as  I  did  to  every  tomb  of  importance  in 
Venice,  by  the  ministry  of  such  ancient  ladders  as  were  to  be 
found  in  the  sacristan's  keeping.  I  was  struck  at  first  by  the 
excessive  awkwardness  and  want  of  feeling  in  the  fall  of  the 
hand  towards  the  spectator,  for  it  is  thrown  off  the  middle  of  the 
body  in  order  to  show  its  fine  cutting.  Now  the  Mocenigo  hand, 
severe  and  even  stiff  in  its  articulations,  has  its  veins  finely 
drawn,  its  sculptor  having  justly  felt  that  the  delicacy  of  the 
veining  expresses  alike  dignity  and  age  and  birth.     The  Vendra- 


THE    QUAHKY.  29 

min  hand  is  far  more  laboriously  cut,  but  its  blunt  and  clumsy 
contour  at  once  makes  us  feel  that  all  the  care  has  been  thrown 
away,  and  well  it  may  be,  for  it  has  been  entirely  bestowed  in 
cutting  gouty  wrinkles  about  the  joints.  Such  as  the  hand  is,  I 
looked  for  its  fellow.  At  first  I  thought  it  had  been  broken  off, 
but,  on  clearing  away  the  dust,  I  saw  the  wretched  effigy  had 
only  one  hand,  and  was  a  mere  block  on  the  inner  side.  The 
face,  heavy  and  disagreeable  in  its  features,  is  made  monstrous 
by  its  semi-sculpture.  One  side  of  the  forehead  is  wrinkled 
elaborately,  the  other  left  smooth ;  one  side  only  of  the  doge's 
cap  is  chased ;  one  cheek  only  is  finished,  and  the  other  block- 
ed out  and  distorted  besides  ;  finally,  the  ermine  robe,  which  is 
elaborately  imitated  to  its  utmost  lock  of  hair  and  of  ground 
hair  on  the  one  side,  is  blocked  out  only  on  the  other  :  it  having 
been  supposed  throughout  the  work  that  the  eifigy  was  only  to 
be  seen  from  below,  and  from  one  side. 

§  xLin.  It  was  indeed  to  be  so  seen  by  nearly  every  one  ;  and 
I  do  not  blame — I  should,  on  the  contrary,  have  praised — the 
sculptor  for  regulating  his  treatment  of  it  by  its  position  ;  if  that 
treatment  had  not  involved,  first,  dishonesty,  in  giving  only 
half  a  face,  a  monstrous  mask,  when  we  demanded  true  por- 
traiture of  the  dead  ;  and,  secondly,  such  utter  coldness  of  feel- 
ing, as  could  only  consist  with  an  extreme  of  intellectual  and 
moral  degradation  :  "Who,  with  a  heart  in  his  breast,  could  have 
stayed  his  hand  as  he  drew  the  dim  lines  of  the  old  man's  coun- 
tenance— unmajestic  once,  indeed,  but  at  least  sanctified  by  the 
solemnities  of  death — could  have  stayed  his  hand,  as  he  reached 
the  bend  of  the  grey  forehead,  and  measured  out  the  last  veins 
of  it  at  so  much  the  zecchin  ? 

I  do  not  think  the  reader,  if  he  has  feeling,  will  expect  that 
much  talent  should  be  shown  in  the  rest  of  his  work,  bv  the 
sculptor  of  this  base  and  senseless  lie.  The  whole  monument  is 
one  wearisome  aggregation  of  that  species  of  ornamental  flourish, 
which,  when  it  is  done  with  a  pen,  is  called  penmanship,  and 
when  done  with  a  chisel,  should  be  called  chiselmanship ;  the 


30  THE    QTJAKRY. 

subject  of  it  being  chiefly  fat-limbed  boys  sprawling  on  dolphins, 
dolphins  incapable  of  swimming,  and  dragged  along  the  sea  by 
expanded  pocket-handkerchiefs. 

But  now,  reader,  comes  the  very  gist  and  point  of  the  whole 
matter.  This  lying  monument  to  a  dishonoured  doge,  this  cul- 
minating pride  of  the  Renaissance  art  of  Venice,  is  at  least  vera- 
cious, if  in  nothing  else,  in  its  testimony  to  the  character  of  its 
sculptor.     He  was  banished  from  Venice  for  forgery  in  1487.* 

§  xliv.  I  have  more  to  say  about  this  convict's  work  hereafter ; 
but  I  pass  at  present,  to  the  second,  slighter,  but  yet  more  inte- 
resting piece  of  evidence,  which  I  promised. 

The  ducal  palace  has  two  principal  facades  ;  one  towards  the 
sea,  the  other  towards  the  Piazzetta.  The  seaward  side,  and,  as 
far  as  its  seventh  main  arch  inclusive,  the  Piazzetta  side,  is 
work  of  the  early  part  of  the  fourteenth  century,  some  of  it 
perhaps  even  earlier  ;  while  the  rest  of  the  Piazzetta  side  is  of  the 
fifteenth.  The  difference  in  age  has  been  gravely  disputed  by 
the  Venetian  antiquaries,  who  have  examined  many  documents 
on  the  subject,  and  quoted  some  which  they  never  examined.  I 
have  myself  collated  most  of  the  written  documents,  and  one 
document  more,  to  which  the  Venetian  antiquaries  never  thought 
of  referring, — the  masonry  of  the  palace  itself. 

§  xlv.  That  masonry  changes  at  the  centre  of  the  eighth  arch 
from  the  sea  angle  on  the  Piazzetta  side.  It  has  been  of  com- 
paratively small  stones  up  to  that  point ;  the  fifteenth  century 
work  instantly  begins  with  larger  stones,  "  brought  from  Istria,  a 
hundred  miles  away."f  The  ninth  shaft  from  the  sea  in  the  lower 
arcade,  and  the  seventeenth,  which  is  above  it,  in  the  upper 
arcade,  commence  the  series  of  fifteenth  century  shafts.  These 
two  are  somewhat  thicker  than  the  others,  and  carry  the  party- 
wall  of  the  Sala  del  Scrutinio.  !Now  observe,  reader.  The  face 
of  the  palace,  from  this  point  to  the  Porta  della  Carta,  was  built  at 
the  instance  of  that  noble  Doge  M^ocenigo  beside  whose  tomb  you 

*  Selvatico,  p.  221. 

t  The  older  work  is  of  Istrian  stone  also3  but  of  different  quality. 


THE    QUARRY.  31 

have  been  standing ;  at  his  instance,  and  in  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  his  successor,  Foscari ;  that  is  to  say,  circa  1424.  This 
is  not  disputed ;  it  is  only  disputed  that  the  sea  facade  is  earlier ; 
of  which,  however,  the  proofs  are  as  simple  as  they  are  incontro- 
vertible :  for  not  only  the  masonry,  but  the  sculpture,  changes  at 
the  ninth  lower  shaft,  and  that  in  the  capitals  of  the  shafts  both 
of  the  upper  and  lower  arcade :  the  costumes  of  the  figures 
introduced  in  the  sea  facade  being  purely  Giottesque,  corre- 
spondent with  those  of  Giotto's  work  in  the  Arena  Chapel  at 
Padua,  while  the  costume  on  the  other  capitals  is  Renaissance- 
Classic  :  and  the  lions'  heads  between  the  arches  change  at  the 
same  point.  And  there  are  a  multitude  of  other  evidences  in  the 
statues  of  the  angles,  with  which  I  shall  not  at  present  trouble 
the  reader. 

§  xlvi.  Now,  the  architect  who  built  under  Foscari,  in  1424 
(remember  my  date  for  the  decline  of  Venice,  1418),  was  obliged 
to  follow  the  principal  forms  of  the  older  palace.  But  he  had  not 
the  wit  to  invent  new  capitals  in  the  same  style ;  he  therefore 
clumsily  copied  the  old  ones.  The  palace  has  seventeen  main 
arches  on  the  sea  facade,  eighteen  on  the  Piazzetta  side,  which 
in  all  are  of  course  carried  by  thirty-six  pillars  ;  and  these  pillars 
I  shall  always  number  from  right  to  left,  from  the  angle  of  the 
palace  at  the  Ponte  della  Paglia  to  that  next  the  Porta  della 
Carta.  I  number  them  in  this  succession,  because  I  thus  have 
the  earliest  shafts  first  numbered.  So  counted,  the  1st,  the  18th, 
and  the  36th,  are  the  great  supports  of  the  angles  of  the  palace  ; 
and  the  first  of  the  fifteenth  century  series,  being,  as  above 
stated,  the  9th  from  the  sea  on  the  Piazzetta  side,  is  the  26th 
of  the  entire  series,  and  will  always  in  future  be  so  numbered, 
so  that  all  numbers  above  twenty-six  indicate  fifteenth  century 
work,  and  all  below  it,  fourteenth  century,  with  some  exceptional 
cases  of  restoration. 

Then  the  copied  capitals  are :  the  28th,  copied  from  the  7th ; 
the  29th,  from  the  9th ;  the  30th,  from  the  10th ;  the  31st,  from 
the  8th ;  the  33d,  from  the  12th ;  and  the  34th,  from  the  11th ; 


34:  THE    QUARRY. 

belief  that  men  are  intended,  without  excessive  difficulty,  and 
by  use  of  their  general  common  sense,  to  know  good  things 
from  bad;  and  that  it  is  only  because  they  will  not  be  at  the 
pains  required  for  the  discernment,  that  the  world  is  so  widely 
encumbered  with  forgeries  and  basenesses.  I  found  the  work 
simpler  than  I  had  hoped;  the  reasonable  things  ranged  them- 
selves in  the  order  I  required,  and  the  foolish  things  fell  aside, 
and  took  themselves  away  so  soon  as  they  were  looked  in  the 
face.  I  had  then,  with  respect  to  Venetian  architecture,  the 
choice,  either  to  establish  each  division  of  law  in  a  separate  form, 
as  I  came  to  the  features  with  which  it  was  concerned,  or  else  to 
ask  the  reader's  patience,  while  I  followed  out  the  general  inquiry 
first,  and  determined  with  him  a  code  of  right  and  wrong,  to 
which  we  might  together  make  retrospective  appeal.  I  thought 
this  the  best,  though  perhaps  the  dullest  way ;  and  in  these  first 
following  pages  I  have  therefore  encle^  ~7oured  to  arrange  those 
foundations  of  criticism,  on  which  I  shall  rest  in  my  account  of 
Yenetian  architecture,  in  a  form  clear  and  simple  enough  to  be 
intelligible  even  to  those  who  never  thought  of  architecture 
before.  To  those  who  have,  much  of  what  is  stated  in  them 
will  be  well-known  or  self-evident ;  but  they  must  not  be  indig- 
nant at  a  simplicity  on  which  the  whole  argument  depends  for 
its  usefulness.  From  that  which  appears  a  mere  truism  when 
first  stated,  they  will  find  very  singular  consequences  sometimes 
following, — consequences  altogether  unexpected,  and  of  con- 
siderable importance;  I  will  not  pause  here  to  dwell  on  their 
importance,  nor  on  that  of  the  thing  itself  to  be  done ;  for  I 
believe  most  readers  will  at  once  admit  the  value  of  a  criterion 
of  right  and  wrong  in  so  practical  and  costly  an  art  as  architec- 
ture, and  will  be  apt  rather  to  doubt  the  possibility  of  its  attain- 
ment than  dispute  its  usefulness  if  attained.  I  invite  them, 
therefore,  to  a  fair  trial,  being  certain  that  even  if  I  should  fail 
in  my  main  purpose,  and  be  unable  to  induce  in  my  reader  the 
confidence  of  judgment  I  desire,  I  shall  at  least  receive  his  thanks 


THE , QUARRY.  35 

for  the  suggestion  of  consistent  reasons,  which  may  determine 
hesitating  choice,  or  justify  involuntary  preference.  And  if  I 
should  succeed,  as  I  hope,  in  making  the  Stones  of  Venice 
touchstones,  and  detecting,  by  the  mouldering  of  her  marble, 
poison  more  subtle  than  ever  was  betrayed  by  the  rending 
of  her  crystal ;  and  if  thus  I  am  enabled  to  show  the  baseness  of 
the  schools  of  architecture  and  nearly  every  other  art,  which  have 
for  three  centuries  been  predominant  in  Europe,  I  believe  the 
result  of  the  inquiry  may  be  serviceable  for  proof  of  a  more  vital 
truth  than  any  at  which  I  have  hitherto  hinted.  For  observe : 
I  said  the  Protestant  had  despised  the  arts,  and  the  Rationalist 
corrupted  them.  But  what  has  the  Romanist  done  meanwhile? 
He  boasts  that  it  was  the  papacy  which  raised  the  arts ;  why 
could  it  not  support  them  when  it  was  left  to  its  own  strength  ? 
How  came  it  to  yield  to  the  Classicalism  which  was  based  on 
infidelity,  and  to  oppose  no  barrier  to  innovations,  which  have 
reduced  the  once  faithfully  conceived  imagery  of  its  worship  to 
sta^e  decoration?     Shall   we   not   rather  find  that   Romanism, 

O  7 

instead  of  being  a  promoter  of  the  arts,  has  never  shown  itself 
capable  of  a  single  great  conception  since  the  separation  of  Protes- 
tantism from  its  side.*  So  long  as,  corrupt  though  it  might  be, 
no  clear  witness  had  been  borne  against  it,  so  that  it  still  in- 
cluded in  its  ranks  a  vast  number  of  faithful  Christians,  so  long  its 
arts  were  noble.  But  the  witness  was  borne — the  error  made 
apparent ;  and  Rome,  refusing  to  hear  the  testimony  or  forsake 
the  falsehood,  has  been  struck  from  that  instant  with  an  intellec- 
tual palsy,  which  has  not  only  incapacitated  her  from  any  further 
use  of  the  arts  which  once  were  her  ministers,  but  has  made  her 
worship  the  shame  of  its  own  shrines,  and  her  worshippers  their 
destroyers.  Come,  then,  if  truths  such  as  these  are  worth  our 
thoughts  ;  come,  and  let  us  know,  before  we  enter  the  streets  of 
the  Sea  city,  whether  we  are  indeed  to  submit  ourselves  to  their 

Appendix  12  :  "  Romanist  Modern  Art.,? 


36  THE    QUAEEY. 

undistinguished  enchantment,  and  to  look  upon  the  last  changes 
which  were  wrought  on  the  lifted  forms  of  her  palaces,  as  we 
should  on  the  capricious  towering  of  summer  clouds  in  the  sunset, 
ere  they  sank  into  the  deep  of  night ;  or,  whether,  rather,  we  shall 
not  behold  in  the  brightness  of  their  accumulated  marble,  pages 
on  which  the  sentence  of  her  luxury  was  to  be  written  until  the 
waves  should  efface  it,  as  they  fulfilled — -"  God  has  numbered  thy 
kingdom,  and  finished  it." 


37 


CHAPITER  II. 


THE   VIRTUES   OF   AKCIHTECTURE. 


§  i.  We  address  ourselves,  then,  first  to  the  task  of  determin- 
ing some  law  of  right,  which  we  may  apply  to  the  architec- 
ture of  all  the  world  and  of  all  time ;  and  by  help  of  which, 
and  judgment  according  to  which,  we  may  easily  pronounce 
whether  a  building  is  good  or  noble,  as,  by  applying  a  plumb- 
line,  whether  it  be  perpendicular. 

The  first  question  will  of  course  be,  What  are  the  possible 
Virtues  of  architecture  ? 

In  the  main,  we  require  from  buildings,  as  from  men,  two 
kinds  of  goodness :  first,  the  doing  their  practical  duty  well : 
then  that  they  be  graceful  and  pleasing  in  doing  it ;  which  last 
is  itself  another  form  of  duty. 

Then  the  practical  duty  divides  itself  into  two  branches, — 
acting  and  talking : — acting,  as  to  defend  us  from  weather  or 
violence  ;  talking,  as  the  duty  of  monuments  or  tombs,  to  record 
facts  and  express  feelings ;  or  of  churches,  temples,  public 
edifices,  treated  as  books  of  history,  to  tell  such  history  clearly 
and  forcibly. 

We  have  thus,  altogether,  three  great  branches  of  architec- 
tural virtue,  and  we  require  of  any  building, — 

1.  That  it  act  well,  and  do  the  things  it  was  intended  to  do  in 

the  best  way. 

2.  That  it  speak  well,  and  say  the  things  it  was  intended  to 

say  in  the  best  words. 

3.  That  it  look  well,  and  please  us  by  its  presence,  whatever  it 
.    has  to  do  or  say.* 

*  Appendix  13. :  "  Mr.  Fergusson's  System." 


38  n.    THE   VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE. 

§  ii.  Now,  as  regards  the  second  of  these  virtues,  it  is  evident 
that  we  can  establish  no  general  laws.  First,  because  it  is  not  a 
virtue  required  in  all  buildings ;  there  are  some  which  are  only 
for  covert  or  defence,  and  from  which  we  ask  no  conversation. 
Secondly,  because  there  are  countless  methods  of  expression, 
some  conventional,  some  natural :  each  conventional  mode  has 
its  own  alphabet,  which  evidently  can  be  no  subject  of  general 
laws.  Every  natural  mode  is  instinctively  employed  and  in- 
stinctively understood,  wherever  there  is  true  feeling ;  and  this 
instinct  is  above  law.  The  choice  of  conventional  methods 
depends  on  circumstances  out  of  calculation,  and  that  of  natural 
methods  on  sensations  out  of  control ;  so  that  we  can  only  say 
that  the  choice  is  right,  when  we  feel  that  the  means  are  ef- 
fective ;  and  we  cannot  always  say  that  it  is  wrong  when  they 
are  not  so. 

A  building  which  recorded  the  Bible  history  by  means  of  a 
series  of  sculptural  pictures,  would  be  perfectly  useless  to  a  per- 
son unacquainted  with  the  Bible  beforehand ;  on  the  other  hand, 
the  text  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  might  be  written  on  its 
walls,  and  yet  the  building  be  a  very  inconvenient  kind  of  book, 
not  so  useful  as  if  it  had  been  adorned  with  intelligible  and  vivid 
sculpture.     So,  again,  the  power  of  exciting  emotion  must  vary 
or  vanish,  as  the  spectator  becomes  thoughtless  or  cold ;  and  the 
building  may  be  often  blamed  for  what  is  the  fault  of  its  critic, 
or  endowed  with  a  charm  which  is  of  its  spectator's  creation.     It 
is  not,  therefore,  possible  to  make  expressional  character  any  fair 
criterion  of  excellence  in  buildings,  until  we  can  fully  place  our- 
selves in  the  position  of  those  to  whom  their  expression  was 
originally  addressed,  and  until  we  are  certain  that  we  understand 
every  symbol,  and  are  capable  of  being  touched  by  every  associ- 
ation which  its  builders  employed  as  letters  of  their  language. 
I  shall  continually  endeavour  to  put  the  reader  into  such  sympa- 
thetic temper,  when  I  ask  for  his  judgment  of  a  building ;  and 
in  every  work  I  may  bring  before  him  I  shall  point  out,  as  far  as 
I  am  able,  whatever  is  peculiar  in  its  expression ;  nay,  I  must 


n.    THE   VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE.  39 

even  depend  on  snch  peculiarities  for  much  of  my  best  evidence 
respecting  the  character  of  the  builders.  But  I  cannot  legalise 
the  judgment  for  which  I  plead,  nor  insist  upon  it  if  it  be  re- 
fused. I  can  neither  force  the  reader  to  feel  this  architectural 
rhetoric,  nor  compel  him  to  confess  that  the  rhetoric  is  powerful, 
if  it  have  produced  no  impression  on  his  own  mind. 

§  in.  I  leave,  therefore,  the  expression  of  buildings  for  inci- 
dental notice  only.  But  their  other  two  virtues  are  proper  sub- 
jects of  law, — their  performance  of  their  common  and  necessary 
work,  and  their  conformity  with  universal  and  divine  canons  of 
loveliness :  respecting  these  there  can  be  no  doubt,  no  ambiguity. 
I  would  have  the  reader  discern  them  so  quickly  that,  as  he 
passes  along  a  street,  he  may,  by  a  glance  of  the  eye,  distinguish 
the  noble  from  the  ignoble  work.  He  can  do  this,  if  he  permit 
free  play  to  his  natural  instincts ;  and  all  that  I  have  to  do  for 
him  is  to  remove  from  those  instincts  the  artificial  restraints 
which  prevent  their  action,  and  to  encourage  them  to  an  un- 
affected and  unbiassed  choice  between  right  and  wrong. 

§  rv.  We  have,  then,  two  qualities  of  buildings  for  subjects 
of  separate  inquiry :  their  action,  and  asj)ect,  and  the  sources  of 
virtue  in  both ;  that  is  to  say,  Strength  and  Beauty,  both  of  these 
being  less  admired  in  themselves,  than  as  testifying  the  intelli- 
gence or  imagination  of  the  builder. 

For  we  have  a  worthier  way  of  looking  at  human  than  at 
divine  architecture  :  much  of  the  value  both  of  construction  and 
decoration,  in  the  edifices  of  men,  depends  upon  our  being  led 
by  the  thing  produced  or  adorned,  to  some  contemplation  of 
the  powers  of  mind  concerned  in  its  creation  or  adornment. 
We  are  not  so  led  by  divine  work,  but  are  content  to  rest  in 
the  contemplation  of  the  thing  created.  I  wish  the  reader  to 
note  this  especially ;  we  take  pleasure,  or  sliould  take  pleasure, 
in  architectural  construction  altogether  as  the  manifestation  of 
an  admirable  human  intelligence  ;  it  is  not  the  strength,  not  the 
size,  not  the  finish  of  the  work  which  we  are  to  venerate :  rocks 
are  always  stronger,  mountains  always  larger,  all  natural  objects 


40  II.    THE   VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE. 

more  finished ;  but  it  is  the  intelligence  and  resolution  of  man 
in  overcoming  physical  difficulty  which  are  to  be  the  source  of 
our  pleasure  and  subject  of  our  praise.  And  again,  in  decora- 
tion or  beauty,  it  is  less  the  actual  loveliness  of  the  thing  pro- 
duced, than  the  choice  and  invention  concerned  in  the  produc- 
tion, which  are  to  delight  us ;  the  love  and  the  thoughts  of  the 
workman  more  than  his  work :  his  work  must  always  be  imper- 
fect, but  his  thoughts  and  affections  may  be  true  and  deep. 

§  v.  This  origin  of  our  pleasure  in  architecture  I  must  insist 
upon  at  somewhat  greater  length,  for  I  would  fain  do  away  with 
some  of  the  ungrateful  coldness  which  we  show  towards  the 
good  builders  of  old  time.  In  no  art  is  there  closer  connection 
between  our  delight  in  the  work,  and  our  admiration  of  the 
workman's  mind,  than  in  architecture,  and  yet  we  rarely  ask  for 
a  builder's  name.  The  patron  at  whose  cost,  the  monk  through 
whose  dreaming,  the  foundation  was  laid,  we  remember  occa- 
sionally; never  the  man  who  verily  did  the  work.  Did  the 
reader  ever  hear  of  William  of  Sens  as  having  had  anything  to 
do  with  Canterbury  Cathedral  ?  or  of  Pietro  Basegio  as  in  any- 
wise connected  with  the  Ducal  palace  of  Venice?  There  is 
much  ingratitude  and  injustice  in  this ;  and  therefore  I  desire 
my  reader  to  observe  carefully  how  much  of  his  pleasure  in 
building  is  derived,  or  should  be  derived,  from  admiration  of  the 
intellect  of  men  whose  names  he  knows  not. 

§  vi.  The  two  virtues  of  architecture  which  we  can  justly 
weigh,  are,  we  said,  its  strength  or  good  construction,  and  its 
beauty  or  good  decoration.  Consider  first,  therefore,  what  you 
mean  when  you  say  a  building  is  well  constructed  or  well  built ; 
you  do  not  merely  mean  that  it  answers  its  purpose, — this  is 
much,  and  many  modern  buildings  fail  of  this  much ;  but  if  it 
be  verily  well  built,  it  must  answer  this  purpose  in  the  simplest 
way,  and  with  no  over-expenditure  of  means.  We  require  of  a 
light-house,  for  instance,  that  it  shall  stand  firm  and  carry  a 
light;  if  it  do  not  this,  assuredly  it  has  been  ill  built;  but  it  may 
do  it  to  the  end  of  time,  and  yet  not  be  well  built.     It  may  have 


n.    THE   VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE.  41 

hundreds  of  tons  of  stone  in  it  more  than  were  needed,  and  have 
cost  thousands  of  pounds  more  than  it  ought.  To  pronounce  it 
well  or  ill  built,  we  must  know  the  utmost  forces  it  can  have  to 
resist,  and  the  best  arrangements  of  stone  for  encountering  them, 
and  the  quickest  ways  of  effecting  such  arrangements :  then 
only,  so  far  as  such  arrangements  have  been  chosen,  and  such 
methods  used,  is  it  well  built.  Then  the  knowledge  of  all  diffi- 
culties to  be  met,  and  of  all  means  of  meeting  them,  and  the 
quick  and  true  fancy  or  invention  of  the  modes  of  applying  the 
means  to  the  end,  are  what  we  have  to  admire  in  the  builder, 
even  as  he  is  seen  through  this  first  or  inferior  part  of  his  work. 
Mental  power,  observe :  not  muscular  nor  mechanical,  nor  tech- 
nical, nor  empirical, — pure,  precious,  majestic,  massy  intellect ; 
not  to  be  had  at  vulgar  price,  nor  received  without  thanks,  and 
without  asking  from  whom. 

§  vii.  Suppose,  for  instance,  we  are  present  at  the  building  of 
a  bridge :  the  bricklayers  or  masons  have  had  their  centering 
erected  for  them,  and  that  centering  was  put  together  by  a 
carpenter,  who  had  the  line  of  its  curve  traced  for  him  by  the 
architect :  the  masons  are  dexterously  handling  and  fitting  their 
bricks,  or,  by  the  help  of  machinery,  carefully  adjusting  stones 
which  are  numbered  for  their  places.  There  is  probably  in  their 
quickness  of  eye  and  readiness  of  hand  something  admirable ; 
but  this  is  not  what  I  ask  the  reader  to  admire :  not  the  carpen- 
tering, nor  the  bricklaying,  nor  anything  that  he  can  presently 
see  and  understand,  but  the  choice  of  the  curve,  and  the  shamu^ 
of  the  numbered  stones,  and  the  appointment  of  that  number ; 
there  were  many  things  to  be  known  and  thought  upon  before 
these  were  decided.  The  man  who  chose  the  curve  and  num- 
bered the  stones,  had  to  know  the  times  and  tides  of  the  river, 
and  the  strength  of  its  floods,  and  the  height  and  flow  of  them, 
and  the  soil  of  the  banks,  and  the  endurance  of  it,  and  the  weight 
of  the  stones  he  had  to  build  with,  and  the  kind  of  traffic  that 
day  by  day  would  be  carried  on  over  his  bridge,— all  this 
specially,  and  all  the  great  general  laws  of  force  and  weight,  and 


42  n.    TIIE   VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE. 

their  working  ;  and  in  the  choice  of  the  curve  and  numbering 
of  stones  are  expressed  not  only  his  knowledge  of  these,  bnt  such 
ingenuity  and  firmness  as  he  had,  in  applying  special  means  to 
overcome  the  special  difficulties  about  his  bridge.  There  is  no 
saying  how  much  wit,  how  much  depth  of  thought,  how  much 
fancy,  presence  of  mind,  courage,  and  fixed  resolution  there  may 
have  gone  to  the  placing  of  a  single  stone  of  it.  This  is  what  we 
have  to  admire, — this  grand  power  and  heart  of  man  in  the 
thing  ;  not  his  technical  or  empirical  way  of  holding  the  trowel 
and  laying  mortar. 

§  viii.  Now  there  is  in  everything  properly  called  art  this  con- 
cernment of  the  intellect,  even  in  the  province  of  the  art  which 
seems  merely  practical.  For  observe  :  in  this  bridge-building  I 
suppose  no  reference  to  architectural  principles  ;  all  that  I  sup- 
pose we  want  is  to  get  safely  over  the  river ;  the  man  who  has 
taken  us  over  is  still  a  mere  bridge-builder, — a  btdlder,  not  an 
architect :  he  may  be  a  rough,  artless,  feelingless  man,  incapable 
of  doing  any  one  truly  fine  thing  all  his  days.  I  shall  call  upon 
you  to  despise  him  presently  in  a  sort,  but  not  as  if  he  were  a 
mere  smoother  of  mortar ;  perhaps  a  great  man,  infinite  in 
memory,  indefatigable  in  labour,  exhaustless  in  expedient,  un- 
surpassable in  quickness  of  thought.  Take  good  heed  you 
understand  him  before  you  despise  him. 

§  ix.  But  why  is  he  to  be  in  anywise  despised  ?  By  no  means 
despise  him,  unless  he  happen  to  be  without  a  soul*,  or  at  least 
to  show  no  signs  of  it ;  which  possibly  he  may  not  in  merely 
carrying  you  across  the  river.  He  may  be  merely  what  Mr. 
Carlyle  rightly  calls  a  human  beaver  after  all ;  and  there  may  be 
nothing  in  all  that  ingenuity  of  his  greater  than  a  complication 
of  animal  faculties,  an  intricate  bestiality, — nest  or  hive  building 
in  its  highest  development.  You  need  something  more  than 
this,  or  the  man  is  despicable  ;  you  need  that  virtue  of  building 
through  which  he  may  show  his  affections  and  delights  ;  you 
need  its  beauty  or  decoration. 

*  Appendix  14.  :  "Divisions  of  Humanity." 


XI.    THE   VIRTUES   OF   ARCHITECTURE.  43 

§  x.  Not  that,  in  reality,  one  division  of  the  man  is  more 
human  than  another.  Theologists  fall  into  this  error  very  fatally 
and  continually ;  and  a  man  from  whom  I  have  learned  much, 
Lord  Lindsay,  has  hurt  his  noble  book  by  it,  speaking  as  if  the 
spirit  of  the  man  only  were  immortal,  and  were  opposed  to  his 
intellect,  and  the  latter  to  the  senses ;  whereas  all  the  divisions 
of  humanity  are  noble  or  brutal,  immortal  or  mortal,  according 
to  the  degree  of  their  sanctiflcation :  and  there  is  no  part  of  the 
man  which  is  not  immortal  and  divine  when  it  is  once  given  to 
God,  and  no  part  of  him  which  is  not  mortal  by  the  second 
death,  and  brutal  before  the  first,  when  it  is  withdrawn  from 
God.  For  to  what  shall  we  trust  for  our  distinction  from  the 
beasts  that  perish  ?  To  our  higher  intellect  ? — yet  are  we  not 
bidden  to  be  wise  as  the  serpent,  and  to  consider  the  ways  of  the 
ant  ? — or  to  our  affections  ?  nay ;  these  are  more  shared  by  the 
lower  animals  than  our  intelligence.  Hamlet  leaps  into  the 
grave  of  his  beloved,  and  leaves  it, — a  dog  had  stayed.  Hu- 
manity and  immortality  consist  neither  in  reason,  nor  in  love ; 
not  in  the  body,  nor  in  the  animation  of  the  heart  of  it,  nor  in 
the  thoughts  and  stirrings  of  the  brain  of  it, — but  in  the  dedica- 
tion of  them  all  to  Him  who  will  raise  them  up  at  the  last  day. 

§  xi.  It  is  not,  therefore,  that  the  signs  of  his  affections,  which 
man  leaves  upon  his  work,  are  indeed  more  ennobling  than  the 
signs  of  his  intelligence ;  but  it  is  the  balance  of  both  whose 
expression  we  need,  and  the  signs  of  the  government  of  them 
all  by  Conscience  ;  and  Discretion,  the  daughter  of  Conscience. 
So,  then,  the  intelligent  part  of  man  being  eminently,  if  not 
chiefly,  displayed  in  the  structure  of  his  work,  his  affectionate 
part  is  to  be  shown  in  its  decoration  ;  and,  that*  decoration  may 
be  indeed  lovely,  two  things  are  needed  :  first,  that  the  affections 
be  vivid,  and  honesty  shown  ;  secondly,  that  they  be  fixed  on  the 
right  things. 

§  xii.  You  think,  perhaps,  I  have  put  the  requirements  in 
wrong  order.  Logically  I  have  ;  practically  I  have  not :  for  it 
is  necessary  first  to  teach  men  to  speak  out,  and  say  what  they 


44  n.   TIIE  VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE. 

like,  truly ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  to  teach  them  which  of  their 
likings  are  ill  set,  and  which  justly.  If  a  man  is  cold  in  his 
likings  and  dislikings,  or  if  he  will  not  tell  yon  what  he  likes,  you 
can  make  nothing  of  him.  Only  get  him  to  feel  quickly  and  to 
speak  plainly,  and  you  may  set  him  right.  And  the  fact  is,  that 
the  great  evil  of  all  recent  architectural  effort  has  not  been  that 
men  liked  wrong  things  :  but  that  they  either  cared  nothing  about 
any,  or  pretended  to  like  what  they  did  not.  Do  you  suppose 
that  any  modern  architect  likes  what  he  builds,  or  enjoys  it? 
Not  in  the  least.  He  builds  it  because  he  has  been  told  that  such 
and  such  things  are  fine,  and  that  he  should  like  them.  He  pre- 
tends to  like  them,  and  gives  them  a  false  relish  of  vanity.  Do 
you  seriously  imagine,  reader,  that  any  living  soul  in  London 
likes  triglyphs?* — or  gets  any  hearty  enjoyment  out  of  pedi- 
ments ?f  You  are  much  mistaken.  Greeks  did  :  English  people 
never  did,— never  will.  Do  you  fancy  that  the  architect  of  old 
Burlington  Mews,  in  Eegent  Street,  had  any  particular  satisfac- 
tion in  putting  the  blank  triangle  over  the  archway,  instead  of  a 
useful  garret  window  ?  By  no  manner  of  means.  He  had  been 
told  it  was  right  to  do  so,  and  thought  he  should  be  admired  for 
doing  it.  Yery  few  faults  of  architecture  are  mistakes  of  honest 
choice :  they  are  almost  always  hypocrisies. 

§  xiii.  So,  then,  the  first  thing  we  have  to  ask  of  the  decora- 
tion is  that  it  should  indicate  strong  liking,  and  that  honestly. 
It  matters  not  so  much  what  the  thing  is,  as  that  the  builder 
should  really  love  it  and  enjoy  it,  and  say  so  plainly.  The  archi- 
tect of  Bourges  Cathedral  liked  hawthorns  ;  so  he  has  covered 
his  porch  with  hawthorn, — it  is  a  perfect  JNTiobe  of  May.  Never 
was  such  hawthorn ;  you  would  try  to  gather  it  forthwith,  but 
for  fear  of  being  pricked.     The  old  Lombard  architects  liked 

*  Triglyph.  Literally,  "  Three  Cut."  The  awkward  upright  ornament  with  two 
notches  in  it,  and  a  cut  at  each  side,  to  be  seen  everywhere  at  the  tops  of  Doric  colon- 
nades, ancient  and  modern. 

t  Pediment.  The  triangular  space  above  Greek  porticos,  as  on  the  Mansion  House 
or  Royal  Exchange. 


n.   THE   VIRTUES   OF   ARCHITECTURE.  45 

hunting;  so  they  covered  their  work  with  horses  and  hounds, 
and  men  blowing  trumpets  two  yards  long.  The  base  Renais- 
sance architects  of  Venice  liked  masquing  and  fiddling ;  so  they 
covered  their  work  with  comic  masks  and  musical  instruments. 
Even  that  was  better  than  our  English  way  of  liking  nothing, 
and  professing  to  like  triglyphs. 

§  xiv.  But  the  second  requirement  in  decoration,  is  sign  of  our 
liking  the  right  thing.  And  the  right  thing  to  be  liked  is  God's 
work,  which  He  made  for  our  delight  and  contentment  in  this 
world.  And  all  noble  ornamentation  is  the  expression  of  man's 
delight  in  God's  work. 

§  xv.  So,  then,  these  are  the  two  virtues  of  building :  first, 
the  signs  of  man's  own  good  work  ;  secondly,  the  expression  of 
man's  delight  in  better  work  than  his  own.  And  these  are  the 
two  virtues  of  which  I  desire  my  reader  to  be  able  quickly  to 
judge,  at  least  in  some  measure  ;  to  have  a  definite  opinion  up 
to  a  certain  point.  Beyond  a  certain  point  he  cannot  form  one. 
"When  the  science  of  the  building  is  great,  great  science  is  of 
course  required  to  comprehend  it ;  and,  therefore,  of  difficult 
bridges,  and  light-houses,  and  harbour  walls,  and  river  dykes, 
and  railway  tunnels,  no  judgment  may  be  rapidly  formed.  But 
of  common  buildings,  built  in  common  circumstances,  it  is  very 
possible  for  every  man,  or  woman,  or  child,  to  form  judgment 
both  rational  and  rapid.  Their  necessary,  or  even  possible,  fea- 
tures are  but  few ;  the  laws  of  their  construction  are  as  simple 
as  they  are  interesting.  The  labour  of  a  few  hours  is  enough  to 
render  the  reader  master  of  their  main  points  ;  and  from  that 
moment  he  will  find  in  himself  a  power  of  judgment  which  can 
neither  be  escaped  nor  deceived,  and  discover  subjects  of  interest 
where  everything  before  had  appeared  barren.  For  though  the 
laws  are  few  and  simple,  the  modes  of  obedience  to  them  are 
not  so.  Every  building  presents  its  own  requirements  and  diffi- 
culties ;  and  every  good  building  has  peculiar  appliances  or  con- 
trivances to  meet  them.  Understand  the  laws  of  structure,  and 
you  will  feel  the  special  difficulty  in  every  new  building  which 


46  n.    THE   VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE. 

you  approach ;  and  you  will  know  also,  or  feel  instinctively,* 
whether  it  has  been  wisely  met  or  otherwise.  And  an  enormous 
number  of  buildings,  and  of  styles  of  buildings,  you  will  be  able 
to  cast  aside  at  once,  as  at  variance  with  these  constant  laws  of 
structure,  and  therefore  unnatural  and  monstrous. 

§  xvi.  Then,  as  regards  decoration,  I  want  you  only  to  consult 
your  own  natural  choice  and  liking.  There  is  a  right  and  wrong 
in  it ;  but  you  will  assuredly  like  the  right  if  you  suffer  your 
natural  instinct  to  lead  you.  Half  the  evil  in  this  world  comes 
from  people  not  knowing  what  they  do  like,  not  deliberately 
setting  themselves  to  find  out  what  they  really  enjoy.  All  peo- 
ple enjoy  giving  away  money,  for  instance  :  they  don't  know 
that, — they  rather  think  they  like  keeping  it ;  and  they  do  keep 
it  under  this  false  impression,  often  to  their  great  discomfort. 
Every  body  likes  to  do  good  ;  but  not  one  in  a  hundred  finds 
this  out.  Multitudes  think  they  like  to  do  evil ;  yet  no  man 
ever  really  enjoyed  doing  evil  since  God  made  the  world. 

So  in  this  lesser  matter  of  ornament.  It  needs  some  little  care 
to  try  experiments  upon  yourself;  it  needs  deliberate  question 
and  upright  answer.  But  there  is  no  difficulty  to  be  overcome, 
no  abstruse  reasoning  to  be  gone  into ;  only  a  little  watchfulness 
needed,  and  thoughtfulness,  and  so  much  honesty  as  will  enable 
you  to  confess  to  yourself,  and  to  all  men,  that  you  enjoy  things, 
though  great  authorities  say  you  should  not. 

§  xvn.  This  looks  somewhat  like  pride  ;  but  it  is  true  humil- 
ity, a  trust  that  you  have  been  so  created  as  to  enjoy  what  is 
fitting  for  you,  and  a  willingness  to  be  pleased,  as  it  was  intend- 
ed you  should  be.  It  is  the  child's  spirit,  which  we  are  then 
most  happy  when  we  most  recover  ;  only  wiser  than  children  in 
that  we  are  ready  to  think  it  subject  of  thankfulness  that  we  can 
still  be  pleased  with  a  fair  colour  or  a  dancing  light.  And, 
above  all,  do  not  try  to  make  all  these  pleasures  reasonable,  nor 
to  connect  the  delight  which  you  take  in  ornament  with  that 

*  Appendix  15  :  "  Instinctive  Judgments," 


II.    TIIE   VIRTUES    OF   ARCHITECTURE.  47 

which  you  take  in  construction  or  usefulness.  They  have  no 
connection ;  and  every  effort  that  you  make  to  reason  from  one 
to  the  other  will  blunt  your  sense  of  beauty,  or  confuse  it  with 
sensations  altogether  inferior  to  it.  You  were  made  for  enjoy- 
ment, and  the  world  was  filled  with  things  which  you  will  enjoy, 
unless  you  are  too  proud  to  be  pleased  by  them,  or  too  grasping 
to  care  for  what  you  cannot  turn  to  other  account  than  mere  de- 
light. Remember  that  the  most  beautiful  things  in  the  world 
are  the  most  useless  ;  peacocks  and  lilies  for  instance  ;  at  least 
I'Suppose  this  quill  I  hold  in  my  hand  writes  better  than  a  pea- 
cock's would,  and  the  peasants  of  Vevay,  whose  fields  in  spring 
time  are  as  white  with  lilies  as  the  Dent  du  Midi  is  with  its 
snow,  told  me  the  hay  was  none  the  better  for  them. 

§  xvm.  Our  task  therefore  divides  itself  into  two  branches, 
and  these  I  shall  follow  in  succession.  I  shall  first  consider  the 
construction  of  buildings,  dividing  them  into  their  really  neces- 
sary members  or  features ;  and  I  shall  endeavour  so  to  lead  the 
reader  forward  from  the  foundation  upwards,  as  that  he  may  find 
out  for  himself  the  best  way  of  doing  everything,  and  having  so 
discovered  it,  never  forget  it.  I  shall  give  him  stones,  and 
bricks,  and  straw,  chisels  and  trowels,  and  the  ground,  and  then 
ask  him  to  build  ;  only  helping  him,  as  I  can,  if  I  find  him 
puzzled.  And  when  he  has  built  his  house  or  church,  I  shall  ask 
him  to  ornament  it,  and  leave  it  to  him  to  choose  the  ornaments 
as  I  did  to  find  out  the  construction  :  I  shall  use  no  influence 
with  him  whatever,  except  to  counteract  previous  prejudices, 
and  leave  him,  as  far  as  may  be,  free.  And  when  he  has  thus 
found  out  how  to  build,  and  chosen  his  forms  of  decoration,  I 
shall  do  what  I  can  to  confirm  his  confidence  in  what  he  has 
done.  I  shall  assure  him  that  no  one  in  the  world  could,  so  far, 
have  done  better,  and  require  him  to  condemn,  as  futile  or  falla- 
cious, whatever  has  no  resemblance  to  his  own  performances. 


48 


CHAPTER  m. 

THE   SIX    DIVISIONS   OF   ARCHITECTURE. 

§  i.  The  practical  duties  of  buildings  are  twofold. 

They  have  either  (1),  to  hold  and  protect  something;  or  (2),  to 
place  or  carry  something. 

1.  Architecture  of  Protection.     This  is  architecture  intended 

to  protect  men  or  their  possessions  from  violence  of  any 
kind,  whether  of  men  or  of  the  elements.  It  will  include 
all  churches,  houses,  and  treasuries ;  fortresses,  fences, 
and  ramparts  ;  the  architecture  of  the  hut  and  sheepfold  ; 
of  the  palace  and  citadel ;  of  the  dyke,  breakwater,  and 
sea-wall.  And  the  protection,  when  of  living  creatures, 
is  to  be  understood  as  including  commodiousness  and 
comfort  of  habitation,  wherever  these  are  possible  under 
the  given  circumstances. 

2.  Architecture  of  Position.    This  is  architecture  intended  to 

carry  men  or  things  to  some  certain  places,  or  to  hold  them 
there.  This  will  include  all  bridges,  aqueducts,  and  road 
architecture;  light-houses,  which  have  to  hold  light  in 
appointed  places ;  chimnies  to  carry  smoke  or  direct 
currents  of  air ;  staircases ;  towers,  which  are  to  be 
watched  from  or  cried  from,  as  in  mosques,  or  to  hold 
bells,  or  to  place  men  in  positions  of  offence,  as  ancient 
moveable  attacking  towers,  and  most  fortress  towers. 

§  ji.  Protective  architecture  has  to  do  one  or  all  of  three  things  : 
to  wail  a  space,  to  roof  it,  and  to  give  access  to  it,  of  persons, 


III.    THE    SIX   DIVISIONS   OP   ARCHITECTURE.  49 

light,  and  air ;  and  it  is  therefore  to  be  considered  under  the 
three  divisions  of  walls,  roofs,  and  apertures. 

We  will  take,  first,  a  short  general  view  of  the  connection  of 
these  members,  and  then  examine  them  in  detail :  endeavouring 
always  to  keep  the  simplicity  of  our  first  arrangement  in  view ; 
for  protective  architecture  has  indeed  no  other  members  than 
these,  unless  flooring  and  paving  be  considered  architecture, 
which  it  is  only  when  the  flooring  is  also  a  roof;  the  laying  of 
the  stones  or  timbers  for  footing  being  paviour's  or  carpenter's 
work,  rather  than  architect's ;  and,  at  all  events,  work  respecting 
the  well  or  ill  doing  of  which  we  shall  hardly  find  much  differ- 
ence of  opinion,  except  in  points  of  aesthetics.  We  shall  there- 
fore concern  ourselves  only  with  the  construction  of  walls,  roofs, 
and  apertures. 

§  in.  1.  Walls. — A  wall  is  an  even  and  united  fence,  whether 
of  wood,  earth,  stone,  or  metal.  When  meant  for  jDurposes  of 
mere  partition  or  enclosure,  it  remains  a  wall  proper :  but  it  has 
generally  also  to  sustain  a  certain  vertical  or  lateral  pressure, 
for  which  its  strength  is  at  first  increased  by  some  general 
addition  to  its  thickness ;  but  if  the  pressure  becomes  very  great, 
it  is  gathered  up  into  piers  to  resist  vertical  pressure,  and  sup- 
ported by  ~butiyr esses  to  resist  latteral  pressure. 

If  its  functions  of  partition  or  enclosure  are  continued,  together 
with  that  of  resisting  vertical  pressure,  it  remains  as  a  wall  veil 
between  the  piers  into  which  it  has  been  partly  gathered;  but 
if  it  is  required  only  to  resist  the  vertical  or  roof  pressure,  it  is 
gathered  up  into  piers  altogether,  loses  its  wall  character,  and 
becomes  a  group  or  line  of  piers. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  lateral  pressure  be  slight,  it  may 
retain  its  character  of  a  wall,  being  supported  against  the  pres- 
sure by  buttresses  at  intervals ;  but  if  the  lateral  pressure  be  very 
great,  it  is  supported  against  such  pressure  by  a  continuous  but- 
fcress,  loses  its  wall  character,  and  becomes  a  dyke  or  rampart. 

§  iv.  We  shall  have  therefore  (A)  first  to  get  a  general  idea 
of  a  wall,  and  of  right  construction  of  walls ;  then  (B)  to  see  how 
4 


50 


III.    THE   SIX   DIVISIONS    OF   AECIHTECTUIil-:. 


this  wall  is  gathered  into  piers  ;  and  to  get  a  general  idea  of  piers 
and  the  right  construction  of  piers;  then  (C)  to  see  how  a  wall 
is  supported  by  buttresses,  and  to  get  a  general  idea  of  buttresses 
and  the  right  construction  of  buttresses.  This  is  surely  very 
simple,  and  it  is  all  we  shall  have  to  do  with  walls  and  their 
divisions. 

§  v.  2.  Roofs. — A  roof  is  the  covering  of  a  space,  narrow  or 
wide.  It  will  be  most  conveniently  studied  by  first  considering 
the  forms  in  which  it  may  be  carried  over  a  narrow  space,  and 
then  expanding  these  on  a  wide  plan :  only  there  is  some  diffi- 
culty here  in  the  nomenclature,  for  an  arched  roof  over  a  narrow 
space  is  called  an  arch ;  but  a  flat  roof  over  a  narrow  space  has 
(I  believe)  no  name,  except  that  which  belongs  properly  to  the 
piece  of  stone  or  wTood  composing  such  a  roof,  namely,  lintel. 
But  the  reader  will  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  that  he 
is  first  to  consider  roofs  on  the  section  only,  thinking  how  best 
to  construct  a  narrow  bar  or  slice  of  them,  of  whatever  form ;  as, 


Fig.  I. 


.f\ 


l: 


a 


III.    THE   SIX   DIVISIONS    OF   ARCHITECTURE.  51 

for  instance,  x,  y,  or  2,  over  the  plan  or  area  «■,  Fig.  I.  Having 
done  this,  let  him  imagine  these  several  divisions,  first  moved 
along  (or  set  side  by  side)  over  a  rectangle,  6,  Fig.  L,  and  then 
revolved  round  a  point  (or  crossed  at  it)  over  a  polygon,  <?,  or 
circle  c7,  and  he  will  have  every  form  of  simple  roof:  the  arched 
section  giving  successively  the  vaulted  roof  and  dome,  and  the 
gabled  section  giving  the  gabled  roof  and  spire. 

As  we  go  further  into  the  subject,  we  shall  only  have  to  add 
one  or  two  forms  to  the  sections  here  given,  in  order  to  embrace 
all  the  iincombined  roofs  in  existence  ;  and  we  shall  not  trouble 
the  reader  with  many  questions  respecting  cross-vaulting,  and 
other  modes  of  their  combination. 

§  vi.  Now,  it  also  happens,  from  its  place  in  buildings,  that 
the  sectional  roof  over  a  narrow  space  will  need  to  be  considered 
before  we  come  to  the  expanded  roof  over  a  broad  one.  For 
when  a  wall  has  been  gathered,  as  above  explained,  into  piers, 
that  it  may  better  bear  vertical  pressure,  it  is  generally  necessary 
that  it  should  be  expanded  again  at  the  top  into  a  continuous 
wall  before  it  carries  the  true  roof.  Arches  or  lintels  are,  there- 
fore, thrown  from  pier  to  pier,  and  a  level  preparation  for  carry- 
ing the  real  roof  is  made  above  them.  After  we  have  examined 
the  structure  of  jners,  therefore,  we  shall  have  to  see  how  lintels 
or  arches  are  thrown  from  pier  to  pier,  and  the  whole  prepared 
fur  the  superincumbent  roof;  this  arrangement  being  universal 
in  all  good  architecture  prepared  for  vertical  pressures  :  and  we 
shall  then  examine  the  condition  of  the  great  roof  itself.  And 
because  the  structure  of  the  roof  very  often  introduces  certain 
lateral  pressures  which  have  much  to  do  with  the  placing  of 
buttresses,  it  will  be  well  to  do  all  this  before  we  examine  the 
nature  of  buttresses,  and,  therefore,  between  parts  (B)  and  (C) 
of  the  above  plan,  §  iv.  So  now  we  shall  have  to  study:  (A) 
the  construction  of  walls;  (B)  that  of  piers;  (C)  that  of  lintels 
or  arches  prepared  for  roofing;  (D)  that  of  roofs  proper;  and 
(E)  that  of  butt]-.  -  jes. 

§  vir.  :\.  A j><, hires. — There  must  either  be  intervals  between 


52  III.    THE   SIX   DIVISIONS    OF   ARCHITECTURE. 

the  piers,  of  which  intervals  the  character  will  be  determined  by 
that  of  the  piers  themselves,  or  else  doors  or  windows  in  the 
walls  proper.  And,  respecting  doors  or  windows,  we  have  to 
determine  three  things :  first,  the  proper  shape  of  the  entire 
aperture ;  secondly,  the  way  in  which  it  is  to  be  filled  with 
valves  or  glass ;  and  thirdly,  the  modes  of  protecting  it  on  the 
outside,  and  fitting  appliances  of  convenience  to  it,  as  porches 
or  balconies.  And  this  will  be  our  division  F ;  and  if  the  reader 
will  have  the  patience  to  go  through  these  six  heads,  which 
include  every  possible  feature  of  protective  architecture,  and  to 
consider  the  simple  necessities  and  fitnesses  of  each,  I  will 
answer  for  it,  he  shall  never  confound  good  architecture  with 
bad  any  more.  For,  as  to  architecture  of  position,  a  great  part 
of  it  involves  necessities  of  construction  with  which  the  spec- 
tator cannot  become  generally  acquainted,  and  of  the  compliance 
with  which  he  is  therefore  never  expected  to  judge, — as  in 
chimnies,  light-houses,  &c. :  and  the  other  forms  of  it  are  so 
closely  connected  with  those  of  protective  architecture,  that  a 
few  words  in  Chap.  XIX.  respecting  staircases  and  towers,  will 
contain  all  with  which  the  reader  need  be  troubled  on  the 
subject 


53 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE  WALL  BASE. 


§  i.  Our  first  business,  then,  is  with.  Wall,  and  to  find  out 
wherein  lies  the  true  excellence  of  the  "  Wittiest  Partition."  For 
it  is  rather  strange  that,  often  as  we  speak  of  a  "  dead"  wall,  and 
that  with  considerable  disgust,  we  have  not  often,  since  Snout's 
time,  heard  of  a  living  one.  But  the  common  epithet  of  oppro- 
brium is  justly  bestowed,  and  marks  a  right  feeling.  A  wall  has 
no  business  to  be  dead.  It  ought  to  have  members  in  its  make, 
and  purposes  in  its  existence,  like  an  organised  creature,  and  to 
answer  its  ends  in  a  living  and  energetic  way ;  and  it  is  only 
when  we  do  not  choose  to  put  any  strength  nor  organisation  into 
it,  that  it  offends  us  by  its  deadness.  Every  wall  ought  to  be  a 
"  sweet  and  lovely  wall."  I  do  not  care  about  its  having  ears  ; 
but,  for  instruction  and  exhortation,  I  would  often  have  it  to 
"  hold  up  its  fingers."  What  its  necessary  members  and  excel- 
lences are,  it  is  our  present  business  to  discover. 

§  ii.  A  wall  has  been  defined  to  be  an  even  and  united  fence  of 
wood,  earth,  stone,  or  metal.  Metal  fences,  however,  seldom,  if 
ever,  take  the  form  of  walls,  but  of  railings  ;  and,  like  all  other 
metal  constructions,  must  be  left  out  of  our  present  investiga- 
tion ;  as  may  be  also  walls  composed  merely  of  light  planks 
or  laths  for  purposes  of  partition  or  inclosure.  Substantial 
walls,  whether  of  wood  or  earth  (I  use  the  word  earth  as  in- 
cluding clay,  baked  or  unbaked,  and  stone),  have,  in  their  perfect 
form,  three  distinct  members ; — the  Foundation,  Body  or  Veil, 
and  Cornice. 

§  in.  The  foundation  is  to  the  wall  what  the  paw  is  to  an 
animal.     It  is  a  long  foot,  wider  than  the  wall,  on  which  the  wall 


54  IV.    THE    WALL   BASE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


is  to  stand,  and  which  keeps  it  from  settling  into  the  ground. 
It  is  most  necessary  that  this  great  element  of  security  should  be 
visible  to  the  eye,  and  therefore  made  a  part  of  the  structure 
above  ground.  Sometimes,  indeed,  it  becomes  incorporated  with 
the  entire  foundation  of  the  building,  a  vast  table  on  which  walls 
or  piers  are  alike  set :  but  even  then,  the  eye,  taught  by  the 
reason,  requires  some  additional  preparation  or  foot  for  the  wall, 
and  the  building  is  felt  to  be  imperfect  without  it.  This  founda- 
tion we  shall  call  the  Base  of  the  wall. 

§  iv.  The  body  of  the  wall  is  of  course  the  principal  mass  of 
it,  formed  of  mud  or  clay,  of  bricks  or  stones,  of  logs  or  hewn 
timber ;  the  condition  of  structure  being,  that  it  is  of  equal 
thickness  everywhere,  below  and  above.  It  may  be  half  a  foot 
thick,  or  six  feet  thick,  or  fifty  feet  thick ;  but  if  of  equal  thick- 
ness everywhere,  it  is  still  a  wall  proper :  if  to  its  fifty  feet  of 
proper  thickness  there  be  added  so  much  as  an  inch  of  thickness 
in  particular  parts,  that  added  thickness  is  to  be  considered  as 
some  form  of  buttress  or  pier,  or  other  appliance.* 

In  perfect  architecture,  however,  walls  are  generally  kept  of 
moderate  thickness,  and  strengthened  by  piers  or  buttresses ;  and 
the  part  of  the  wall  between  these,  being  generally  intended  only 
to  secure  privacy,  or  keep  out  the  slighter  forces  of  weather,  may 
be  properly  called  a  "Wall  Veil.  I  shall  always  use  this  word 
"Veil"  to  signify  the  even  portion  of  a  wall,  it  being  more 
expressive  than  the  term  Body. 

§  v.  When  the  materials  with  which  this  veil  is  built  are  very 
loose,  or  of  shapes  which  do  not  fit  well  together,  it  sometimes 
becomes  necessary,  or  at  least  adds  to  security,  to  introduce 
courses  of  more  solid  material.  Thus,  bricks  alternate  with 
rolled  pebbles  in  the  old  walls  of  Verona,  and  hewn  stones  with 
brick  in  its  Lombard  churches.     A  banded  structure,  almost  a 

*  Many  walls  are  slightly  sloped  or  curved  towards  their  tops,  and  have  buttresses 
added  to  them  (that  of  the  Queen's  Bench  Prison  is  a  curious  instance  of  the  ver- 
tical  buttress  and  inclined  wall)  ;  but  in  all  such  instances  the  slope  of  the  wall  is 
properly  to  be  considered  a  condition  of  incorporated  buttress. 


construction.  IV.    THE   WALL   BASE.  55 

stratification  of  the  wall,  is  thus  produced ;  and  the  courses  of 
more  solid  material  are  sometimes  decorated  with  carving.  Even 
when  the  wall  is  not  thus  banded  through  its  whole  height,  it 
frequently  becomes  expedient  to  lay  a  course  of  stone,  or  at  least 
of  more  carefully  chosen  materials,  at  regular  heights  ;  and  such 
belts  or  bands  we  may  call  String  courses.  These  are  a  kind  of 
epochs  in  the  wall's  existence  ;  something  like  periods  of  rest  and 
reflection  in  human  life,  before  entering  on  a  new  career.  Or 
else,  in  the  building,  they  correspond  to  the  divisions  of  its  stories 
within,  express  its  internal  structure,  and  mark  off  some  portion 
of  the  ends  of  its  existence  already  attained. 

§  vi.  Finally,  on  the  top  of  the  wall  some  protection  from  the 
weather  is  necessary,  or  some  preparation  for  the  reception  of 
superincumbent  weight,  called  a  coping,  or  Cornice.  I  shall 
use  the  word  Cornice  for  both  ;  for,  in  fact,  a  cojDing  is  a  roof  to 
the  wall  itself,  and  is  carried  by  a  small  cornice  as  the  roof  of 
the  building  by  a  large  one.  In  either  case,  the  cornice,  small  or 
large,  is  the  termination  of  the  wall's  existence,  the  accomplish- 
ment of  its  work.  When  it  is  meant  to  carry  some  superin- 
cumbent weight,  the  cornice  may  be  considered  as  its  hand, 
opened  to  carry  something  above  its  head  ;  as  the  base  was  con- 
sidered its  foot :  and  the  three  parts  should  grow  out  of  each 
other  and  form  one  whole,  like  the  root,  stalk,  and  bell  of  a 
flower. 

These  three  parts  we  shall  examine  in  succession ;  and,  first, 
the  Base. 

§  vii.  It  may  be  sometimes  in  our  power,  and  it  is  always 
expedient,  to  prepare  for  the  whole  building  some  settled  founda- 
tion, level  and  firm,  out  of  sight.  But  this  has  not  been  done  in 
some  of  the  noblest  buildings  in  existence.  It  cannot  always  be 
done  perfectly,  except  at  enormous  expense;  and,  in  reasoning 
upon  the  superstructure,  we  shall  never  suppose  it  to  be  done. 
The  mind  of  the  spectator  does  not  conceive  it;  and  he  estimates 
the  merits  of  the  edifice  on  the  supposition  of  its  being  built 
upon  the  ground.     Even  if  there  be  a  vast  table  hind  of  founda- 


56 


IV.    THE    WALL    BASE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Fig.  II. 


tion  elevated  for  the  whole  of  it,  accessible  by  steps  all  round, 
as  at  Pisa,  the  Burface  of  this  table  is  always  conceived  as  capa- 
ble of  yielding  somewhat  to  superincumbent  weight,  and  gene- 
rally is  so  ;  and  we  shall  base  all  our  arguments  on  the  widest 
possible  supposition,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  building  stands  on  a 
surface  either  of  earth,  or,  at  all  events,  capable  of  yielding  in 
some  degree  to  its  weight. 

§  viii.  STow,  let  the  reader  simply  ask  himself  how,  on  such  a 
surface,  he  would  set  about  building  a  substantial  wall,  that 
should  be  able  to  bear  weight  and  to  stand  for  ages.  He  would 
assuredly  look  about  for  the  largest  stones  he  had  at  his  disposal, 
and,  rudely  levelling  the  ground,  he  would  lay  these  well  together 
over  a  considerably  larger  width  than  he  required  the  wall  to  be, 

(suppose  as  at  a,  Fig.  II.), 
in  order  to  equalise  the 
pressure  of  the  wall  over 
a  large  surface,  and  form 
its  foot.  On  the  top  of 
these  he  would  perhaps 
lay  a  second  tier  of  large 
stones,  5,  or  even  a  third, 
<?,  making  the  breadth 
somewhat  less  each  time, 
so  as  to  prepare  for  the 
pressure  of  the  wall  on 
the  centre,  and,  naturally 
or  necessarily,  using  somewhat  smaller  stones  above  than  below 
(since  we  supposed  him  to  look  about  for  the  largest  first),  and 
cutting  them  more  neatly.  His  third  tier,  if  not  his  second, 
will  probably  appear  a  sufficiently  secure  foundation  for  finer 
work ;  for  if  the  earth  yield  at  all,  it  will  probably  yield  pretty 
equally  under  the  great  mass  of  masonry  now  knit  together  over 
it.  So  he  will  prepare  for  the  wall  itself  at  once  by  sloping  off 
the  next  tier  of  stones  to  the  right  diameter,  as  at  d.  If  there  be 
any  joints  in  this  tier  within  the  wall,  he  may  perhaps,  for  further 


CONSTRUCTION. 


IV.    THE   WALL   BASE.  57 


security,  lav  a  binding  stone  across  them,  £,  and  then  begin  the 
work  of  the  wall  veil  itself,  whether  in  bricks  or  stones. 

§  ix.  I  have  supposed  the  preparation  here  to  be  for  a  large 
wall,  because  such  a  preparation  will  give  us  the  best  general 
type.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  essential  features  of  the  arrange- 
ment are  only  two,  that  is  to  say,  one  tier  of  massy  work  for 
foundation,  suppose  £,  missing  the  first  two ;  and  the  receding 
tier  or  real  foot  of  the  wall,  d.  The  reader  will  find  these  mem- 
bers, though  only  of  brick,  in  most  of  the  considerable  and  inde- 
pendent walls  in  the  suburbs  of  London. 

§  x.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the  general  type,  Fig.  II.,  will  be 
subject  to  many  different  modifications  in  different  circumstances. 
Sometimes  the  ledges  of  the  tiers  a  and  h  may  be  of  greater  width ; 
and  when  the  building  is  in  a  secure  place,  and  of  finished  ma- 
sonry, these  may  be  sloped  off  also  like  the  main  foot  d.  In 
"Venetian  buildings  these  lower  ledges  are  exposed  to  the  sea, 
and  therefore  left  rough  hewn ;  but  in  fine  work  and  in  important 
positions  the  lower  ledges  may  be  bevelled  and  decorated  like  the 
upper,  or  another  added  above  d ;  and  all  these  parts  may  be  in 
different  proportions,  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  building 
above  them.  But  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  any  of  these  varia- 
tions at  present,  they  being  all  more  or  less  dependent  upon  deco- 
rative considerations,  except  only  one  of  very  great  importance,  that 
is  to  say,  the  widening  of  the  lower  ledge  into  a  stone  seat,  which 
may  be  often  done  in  buildings  of  great  size  with  most  beautiful 
effect :  it  looks  kind  and  hospitable,  and  preserves  the  work  above 
from  violence.  In  St.  Mark's  at  Venice,  which  is  a  small  and  low 
church,  and  needing  no  great  foundation  for  the  wall  veils  of  it, 
we  find  only  the  three  members,  £,  c,  and  d.  Of  these  the  first 
rises  about  a  foot  above  the  pavement  of  St.  Mark's  Place,  and 
forms  an  elevated  dais  in  some  of  the  recesses  of  the  porches, 
chequered  red  and  white ;  c  forms  a  seat  which  follows  the  line  of 
the  walls,  while  its  basic  character  is  marked  by  its  also  carrying 
certain  shafts  with  whieh  we  have  here  no  concern  ;  d  is  of  white 
marjjle  ;  and  all  are  enriched  and  decorated  in  the  simplest  and 


58  IV.    TIIE   WALL   BASE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


most  perfect  manner  possible,  as  we  shall  see  in  Chap.  XXY. 
And  thus  much  may  serve  to  fix  the  type  of  wall  bases,  a  type 
oftener  followed  in  real  practice  than  any  other  we  shall  hereafter 
be  enabled  to  determine :  for  wall  bases  of  necessity  must  be 
solidly  built,  and  the  architect  is  therefore  driven  into  the 
adoption  of  the  right  form;  or  if  he  deviate  from  it,  it  is 
generally  in  meeting  some  necessity  of  peculiar  circumstances, 
as  in  obtaining  cellars  and  underground  room,  or  in  preparing 
for  some  grand  features  or  particular  parts  of  the  wall,  or  in 
some  mistaken  idea  of  decoration, — into  which  errors  we  had 
better  not  pursue  him  until  we  understand  something  more  of 
the  rest  of  the  building :  let  us  therefore  proceed  to  consider  the 
wall  veil. 


59 


CHAPTER  V. 


THE    WALL     VEIL. 


><  i.  The  summer  of  the  year  1849  was  spent  by  the  writer  in 
researches  little  bearing  upon  his  present  subject,  and  connected 
chiefly  with  proposed  illustrations  of  the  mountain  forms  in  the 
works  of  J.  M.  "W.  Turner.  But  there  are  sometimes  more  valu- 
able lessons  to  be  learned  in  the  school  of  nature  than  in  that  of 
Vitruvius,  and  a  fragment  of  building  among  the  Alps  is  singu- 
larly illustrative  of  the  chief  feature  which  I  have  at  present  to 
develope  as  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  the  wall  veil. 

It  is  a  fragment  of  some  size ;  a  group  of  broken  walls,  one  of 
them  overhanging ;  crowned  with  a  cornice,  nodding  some  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  over  its  massy  flank,  three  thousand  above  its  glacier 
base,  and  fourteen  thousand  above  the  sea, — a  wall  truly  of 
some  majesty,  at  once  the  most  precipitous  and  the  strongest  mass 
in  the  whole  chain  of  the  Alps,  the  Mont  Cervin. 

§  ii.  It  has  been  falsely  represented  as  a  peak  or  tower.  It  is 
a  vast  ridged  promontory,  connected  at  its  western  root  with  the 
Dent  d'Erin,  and  lifting  itself  like  a  rearing  horse  with  its  face  to 
the  east.  All  the  way  along  the  flank  of  it,  for  half  a  day's 
journey  on  the  Zmutt  glacier,  the  grim  black  terraces  of  its 
foundations  range  almost  without  a  break  ;  and  the  clouds,  when 
their  day's  work  is  done,  and  they  are  weary,  lay  themselves  down 
i  hi  those  foundation  steps,  and  rest  till  dawn,  each  with  his  leagues 
of  grey  mantle  stretched  along  the  grisly  ledge,  and  the  cornice 
of  the  mighty  wall  gleaming  in  the  moonlight,  three  thousand  feet 
above. 

§  m.  The  eastern  face  of  the  promontory  is  hewn  down,  as  [f  by 
the  single  sweep  <>t'  a  -word,  from  the  crest  of  it  t<>  the  basej  hewn 


00  V.   THE   WALL    \  l  if.. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


concave  and  smooth,  like  the  hollow  of  a  wave  :  on  each  flank  of 
it  there  is  set  a  buttress,  both  of  aDOut  equal  height,  their  heads 

sloped  out  from  the  main  wall  about  seven  hundred  feet  below 
its  summit.  That  on  the  north  is  the  most  important;  it  is  as 
sharp  as  the  frontal  angle  of  a  bastion,  and  sloped  sheer  away  to 
the  north-east,  throwing  out  spur  beyond  spur,  until  it  terminates 
in  a  long  low  curve  of  russet  precipice,  at  whose  foot  a  great  bay 
of  the  glacier  of  the  Col  de  Cervin  lies  as  level  as  a  lake.  This 
spur  is  one  of  the  few  points  from  which  the  mass  of  the  Mont 
Cervin  is  in  anywise  approachable.  It  is  a  continuation  of  the 
masonry  of  the  mountain  itself,  and  affords  us  the  means  of  ex- 
amining the  character  of  its  materials. 

§  iv.  Few  architects  would  like  to  build  with  them.  The 
slope  of  the  rocks  to  the  north-west  is  covered  two  feet  deep  with 
their  ruins,  a  mass  of  loose  and  slaty  shale,  of  a  dull  brick-red 
colour,  which  yields  beneath  the  foot  like  ashes,  so  that,  in  running 
down,  you  step  one  yard,  and  slide  three.  The  rock  is  indeed  hard 
beneath,  but  still  disposed  in  thin  courses  of  these  cloven  shales, 
so  finely  laid  that  they  look  in  places  more  like  a  heap  of  crushed 
autumn  leaves  than  a  rock ;  and  the  first  sensation  is  one  of 
unmitigated  sunrise,  as  if  the  mountain  were  upheld  by  miracle  ; 
but  surprise  becomes  more  intelligent  reverence  for  the  great 
builder,  when  we  find,  in  the  middle  of  the  mass  of  these  dead 
leaves,  a  course  of  living  rock,  of  quartz  as  white  as  the  snow 
that  encircles  it,  and  harder  than  a  bed  of  steel. 

§  v.  It  is  one  only  of  a  thousand  iron  bands  that  knit  the 
strength  of  the  mighty  mountain.  Through  the  buttress  and  the 
wall  alike,  the  courses  of  its  varied  masonry  are  seen  in  their 
successive  order,  smooth  and  true  as  if  laid  by  line  and 
plummet*,  but  of  thickness  and  strength  continually  varying, 
and  with  silver  cornices  glittering  along  the  edge  of  each,  laid  by 
the  snowy  winds  and  carved  by  the  sunshine, — stainless  orna- 
ments of  the  eternal  temple,  by  which  "neither  the  hammer  nor 
the  axe,  nor  any  tool,  was  heard  while  it  was  in  building." 

*  On  the  eastern  side :  violently  contorted  on  the  northern  and  western. 


construction.  V.    THE   WALL   VEIL.  61 

§  vi.  I  do  not,  however,  bring  this  forward  as  an  instance  of 
any  universal  law  of  natural  building  ;  there  are  solid  as  well  as 
coursed  masses  of  precipice,  but  it  is  somewhat  curious  that  the 
most  noble  cliff  in  Europe,  which  this  eastern  front  of  the  Cervin 
is,  I  believe,  without  dispute,  should  be  to  us  an  example  of  the 
utmost  possible  stability  of  precipitousness  attained  with  materials 
of  imperfect  and  variable  character ;  and,  what  is  more,  there  are 
very  few  cliffs  which  do  not  display  alternations  between  compact 
and  friable  conditions  of  their  material,  marked  in  their  contours 
by  bevelled  slopes  when  the  bricks  are  soft,  and  vertical  steps  when 
they  are  harder.  And,  although  we  are  not  hence  to  conclude 
that  it  is  well  to  introduce  courses  of  bad  materials  when  we  can 
get  perfect  material,  I  believe  we  may  conclude  with  great  certain- 
ty that  it  is  better  and  easier  to  strengthen  a  wall  necessarily  of 
imperfect  substance,  as  of  brick,  by  introducing  carefully  laid 
courses  of  stone,  than  by  adding  to  its  thickness ;  and  the  first 
impression  we  receive  from  the  unbroken  aspect  of  a  wall  veil, 
unless  it  be  of  hewn  stone  throughout,  is  that  it  must  be  both 
thicker  and  weaker  than  it  would  have  been,  had  it  been  properly 
coursed.  The  decorative  reasons  for  adopting  the  coursed  arrange- 
ment, which  we  shall  notice  hereafter,  are  so  weighty,  that  they 
would  alone  be  almost  sufficient  to  enforce  it ;  and  the  construc- 
tive  ones  will  apply  universally,  except  in  the  rare  cases  in  which 
the  choice  of  perfect  or  imperfect  material  is  entirely  open  to  us, 
or  where  the  general  system  of  the  decoration  of  the  building  re- 
quires absolute  unity  in  its  surface. 

§  vii.  As  regards  the  arrangement  of  the  intermediate  parts 
themselves,  it  is  regulated  by  certain  conditions  of  bonding  and 
fitting  the  stones  or  bricks,  which  the  reader  need  hardly  be 
fbled  to  consider,  and  which  I  wish  that  bricklayers  them- 
selves were  always  honest  enough  to  observe.  But  I  hardly 
know  whether  to  note  under  the  head  of  aesthetic  or  constructive 
law,  this  important  principle,  that  masonry  is  always  bad  which 
appears  to  have  arrested  the  attention  of  the  architect  more  than 
absolute  conditions  of  strength  require.    Nothing  is  more  con- 


V.   THE    WALL    VEIL. 


•   -\»l'RrcTIO.\ 


temptible  in  any  wort  than  an  appearance  of  the  slightest  desire 
on  the  part  of  the  builder  to  direct  nftnition  to  the  way  its  stoi. 
are  put  together,  or  of  any  tronble  taken  either  to  show  or  to 
conceal  it  more  than  was  rigidly  necessary :  it  may  sometimes, 
on  the  one  hand,  be  necessary  to  conceal  it  as  far  as  may  "be,  bj 
delicate  and  close  fitting,  when  the  joints  would  interfere  with 
lines  of  sculpture  or  of  mouldings;  and  it  may  often,  on  the 
other  hand,  be  delightful  to  show  it,  as  it  is  delightful  in  places 
to  show  the  anatomy  even  of  the  most  delicate  human  frame : 
but  st iKii ok.s! ij  to  conceal  it  is  the  error  of  vulgar  painters,  who 
are  afraid  to  show  that  their  figures  have  bones;  and  studiously 
to  display  it  is  the  error  of  the  base  pupils  of  Michael  Angelo, 
who  turned  heroes'  limbs  into  surgeons'  diagrams, — but  with 
less  excuse  than  theirs,  for  there  is  less  interest  in  the  anatomy 
displayed.  Exhibited  masonry  is  in  most  cases  the  expedient  of 
architects  who  do  not  know  how  to  fill  up  blank  spaces,  and 
many  a  building,  which  would  have  been  decent  enough  if  let 
alone,  has  been  scrawled  over  with  straight  lines,  as  in  Fig.  III., 

on  exactly  the  same  principles, 
and  with  just  the  same  amount 
of  intelligence  as  a  boy's  in 
scrawling  his  copy-book  when 
he  cannot  write.  The  device 
w^as  thought  ingenious  at  one 
period  of  architectural  history ; 
St.  Paul's  and  Whitehall  are 
covered  with  it,  and  it  is  in 
this  I  imagine  that  some  of  our 
modern  architects  suppose  the  great  merit  of  those  buildings  to 
consist.  There  is,  however,  no  excuse  for  errors  in  disposition 
of  masonry,  for  there  is  but  one  law  upon  the  subject,  and  that 
easily  complied  with,  to  avoid  all  affectation  and  all  unnecessary 
expense,  either  in  showing  or  concealing.  Every  one  knows  a 
building  is  built  of  separate  stones ;  nobody  will  ever  object  to 
seeing  that  it  is  so,  but  nobody  wants  to  count  them.     The  divi- 


Fig.  III. 


construction.  V.   THE   WALL   VEIL.  63 

sions  of  a  church  are  much  like  the  divisions  of  a  sermon ;  they 
are  always  right  so  long  as  they  are  necessary  to  edification,  and 
always  wrong  when  they  are  thrust  upon  the  attention  as  divi- 
sions only.  There  may  be  neatness  in  carving  when  there  is 
richness  in  feasting ;  but  I  have  heard  many  a  discourse,  and 
seen  many  a  church  wall,  in  which  it  was  all  carving  and  no 
meat 


04 


CHAPTER  VI. 


THE   WALL    CORNICE. 


§  i.  We  have  lastly  to  consider  the  close  of  the  wall's  existence, 
or  its  cornice.  It  was  above  stated,  that  a  cornice  has  one  of  two 
offices  :  if  the  wall  have  nothing  to  cany,  the  cornice  is  its  roof, 
and  defends  it  from  the  weather ;  if  there  is  weight  to  be  carried 
above  the  wall,  the  cornice  is  its  hand,  and  is  expanded  to  carry 
the  said  weight. 

There  are  several  ways  of  roofing  or  protecting  independent 
walls,  according  to  the  means  nearest  at  hand :  sometimes  the 
wall  has  a  true  roof  all  to  itself;  sometimes  it  terminates  in  a 
small  gabled  ridge,  made  of  bricks  set  slanting,  as  constantly  in 
the  suburbs  of  London ;  or  of  hewn  stone,  in  stronger  work ;  or 
in  a  single  sloping  face,  inclined  to  the  outside.  We  need  not 
trouble  ourselves  at  present  about  these  small  roofings,  which 
are  merely  the  diminutions  of  large  ones ;  but  we  must  examine 
the  important  and  constant  member  of  the  wall  structure,  which 
prepares  it  either  for  these  small  roofs  or  for  weights  above,  and 
is  its  true  cornice. 

§  ii.  The  reader  will,  perhaps,  as  heretofore,  be  kind  enough 
to  think  for  himself,  how,  having  carried  up  his  wall  veil  as  high 
as  it  may  be  needed,  he  will  set  about  protecting  it  from  weather, 
or  preparing  it  for  weight.  Let  him  imagine  the  top  of  the  un- 
finished wall,  as  it  would  be  seen  from  above,  with  all  the  joints, 
perhaps  uncemented,  or  imperfectly  filled  up  with  cement,  open 
to  the  sky ;  and  small  broken  materials  filling  gaps  between  large 
ones,  and  leaving  cavities  ready  for  the  rain  to  soak  into,  and 
loosen  and  dissolve  the  cement,  and  split,  as  it  froze,  the  whole  to 
pieces.     I  am  much  mistaken  if  his  first  impulse  would  not  be  to 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VI.    THE    WALL    CORNICE. 


65 


Fig.  IV. 

Ilk 


1 


take  a  great  flat  stone  and  lay  it  on  the  top ;  or  rather  a  series  of 
snch,  side  by  side,  projecting  well  over  the  edge  of  the  wall  veil. 
If,  also,  he  proposed  to  lay  a  weight  (as,  for  instance,  the  end  of 
a  beam)  on  the  wall,  he  would  feel  at  once  that  the  pressure  of 
this  beam  on,  or  rather  among,  the  small  stones  of  the  wall  veil, 
might  very  possibly  dislodge  or  disarrange  some  of  them ;  and 
the  first  impulse  would  be,  in  this  case,  also  to  lay  a  large  flat 
stone  on  the  top  of  all  to  receive  the  beam,  or 
any  other  weight,  and  distribute  it  equally 
among  the  small  stones  below,  as  at  a, 
Fig.  IV. 

§  in.  We  must  therefore  have  our  flat  stone 
in  either  case ;  and  let  J,  Fig.  IV.,  be  the  sec- 
tion or  side  of  it,  as  it  is  set  across  the  wall. 
Now,  evidently,  if  by  any  chance  this  weight  ^LiiLj 
happen  to  be  thrown  more  on  the  edges  of 
this  stone  than  the  centre,  there  will  be  a 
chance  of  these  edges  breaking  off.  Had  we 
not  better,  therefore,  put  another  stone, 
sloped  off  to  the  wall,  beneath  the  projecting 
one,  as  at  c.  But  now  our  cornice  looks 
somewhat  too  heavy  for  the  wall ;  and  as  the 
upper  stone  is  evidently  of  needless  thickness, 
we  will  thin  it  somewhat,  and  we  have  the 
form  d.  Now  observe :  the  lower  or  bevelled  stone  here  at  d 
corresponds  to  d  in  the  base  (Fig.  II.,  page  56.).  That  was  the 
foot  of  the  wall ;  this  is  its  hand.  And  the  top  stone  here,  which 
is  a  constant  member  of  cornices,  corresponds  to  the  under  stone 
c,  in  Fig.  II.,  which  is  a  constant  member  of  bases.  The  reader 
hae  no  idea  at  present  of  the  enormous  importance  of  these  mem- 
bers :  but  as  we  shall  have  to  refer  to  them  perpetually,  I  must 
ask  him  to  compare  them,  and  fix  their  relations  well  in  his 
mind  :  and,  for  convenience,  I  shall  call  the  bevelled  or  sloping 
stone,  X.  and  the  upright  edged  stone,  Y.  The  reader  may  re- 
member easily  which  is  which ;  for  X  is  an  intersection  of  two 

5 


d 


06 


VI.    THE    WALL    CORNICE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


a 


slopes,  and  may  therefi  >re  properly  mean  either  of  the  two  sloping 
stones;  and  Y  is  a  figure  with  a  perpendicular  line  and  two 
slopes,  and  may  therefore  fitly  stand  for  the  upright  stone  in 
relation  to  each  of  the  sloping  ones;  and  as  we  shall  have  to  say 
much  more  about  cornices  than  about  bases,  let  X  and  Y  stand 
for  the  stones  of  the  cornice,  and  Xb  and  Yb  for  those  of  the 
1  >ase,  when  distinction  is  needed. 

§  iv.  Now  the  form  at  d.  Fig.  IY.,  is  the  great  root  and  primal 
type  of  all  cornices  whatsoever.  In  order  to  see  what  forms  may 
be  developed  from  it,  let  us  take  its  profile  a  little  larger — a, 
Fig.  Y.,  with  X  and  Y  duly  marked.     ]STow  this  form,  being  the 

root   of   all  cor- 

Fiff  V  .  .  , 

&'    '  mces,  may  either 

have  to  finish  the 
wall,  and  so  keep 
off  rain ;  or,  as  so 
often  stated,  to 
carry  weight.  If 
the  former,  it  is 
evident  that,  in 
its  present  pro- 
file, the  rain  will 
run  back  down 
the  slope  of  X; 
and  if  the  latter, 
that  the  sharp  angle  or  edge  of  X,  at  Z',  may  be  a  little  too 
weak  for  its  work,  and  run  a  chance  of  giving  way.  To  avoid 
the  evil  in  the  first  case,  suppose  we  hollow  the  slope  of  X 
inwards,  as  at  b ;  and  to  avoid  it  in  the  second  case,  suppose 
we  strengthen  X  by  letting  it  bulge  outwards,  as  at  c. 

§  v.  These  (b  and  c)  are  the  profiles  of  two  vast  families  of 
cornices,  springing  from  the  same  root,  which,  with  a  third 
arising  from  their  combination  (owing  its  origin  to  assthetic  con- 
siderations, and  inclining  sometimes  to  the  one,  sometimes  to  the 
other),  have  been  employed,  each  on  its  third  part  of  the  archi- 


r 


,\ 


/ 


construction.  VI.    THE   WALL   CORNICE.  67 

tecture  of  the  whole  world  throughout  all  ages,  and  must  con- 
tinue to  be  so  employed  through  such  time  as  is  yet  to  come. 
We  do  not  at  present  speak  of  the  third  or  combined  group ;  but 
the  relation  of  the  two  main  branches  to  each  other,  and  to  the 
line  of  origin,  is  given  at  £,  Fig.  Y. ;  where  the  dotted  lines  are 
the  representatives  of  the  two  families,  and  the  straight  line  of 
the  root.  The  slope  of  this  right  line,  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the 
curves,  here  drawn  as  segments  of  circles,  we  leave  undetermin- 
ed :  the  slope,  as  well  as  the  proportion  of  the  depths  of  X  and  Y 
to  each  other,  vary  according  to  the  weight  to  be  carried,  the 
strength  of  the  stone,  the  size  of  the  cornice,  and  a  thousand 
other  accidents;  and  the  nature  of  the  curves  according  to 
aesthetic  laws.  It  is  in  these  infinite  fields  that  the  invention  of 
the  architect  is  permitted  to  expatiate,  but  not  in  the  alteration 
of  primitive  forms. 

§  vi.  But  to  proceed.  It  will  doubtless  appear  to  the  reader, 
that,  even  allowing  for  some  of  these  permissible  variations  in  the 
curve  or  slope  of  X,  neither  the  form  at  5,  nor  any  approximation 
to  that  form,  would  be  sufficiently  undercut  to  keep  the  rain  from 
running  back  upon  it.  This  is  true ;  but  we  have  to  consider 
that  the  cornice,  as  the  close  of  the  wall's  life,  is  of  all  its 
features  that  which  is  best  fitted  for  honour  and  ornament.  It 
has  been  esteemed  so  by  almost  all  builders,  and  has  been 
lavishly  decorated  in  modes  hereafter  to  be  considered.  But 
it  is  evident  that,  as  it  is  high  above  the  eye,  the  fittest  place 
to  receive  the  decoration  is  the  slope  of  X,  which  is  inclined 
towards  the  spectator;  and  if  we  cut  away  or  hollow  out  this 
Blope  more  than  we  have  done  at  &,  all  decoration  will  be  hid  in 
tin-  -1 1 a <low.  If,  therefore,  the  climate  be  fine,  and  rain  of  long 
continuance  not  to  be  dreaded,  we  shall  not  hollow  the  stone  X 
farther,  adopting  the  curve  at  h  merely  as  the  most  protective  in 
our  power.  But  if  the  climate  be  one  in  which  rain  is  frequent 
and  dangerons,  as  in  alternations  with  frost,  we  may  be  com- 
pelled to  consider  the  cornice  in  a  character  distinctly  j)rotective, 
and  to  hollow  oat  X   farther,  so  as  to  enable  it  thoroughly  to 


68  VI.   THE   WALL   CORNICE.  construction. 

accomplish  its  purpose.  A  cornice  thus  treated  loses  its  cha- 
racter as  the  crown  or  honour  of  the  wall,  takes  the  office  of  its 
protector,  and  is  called  a  dripstone.  The  dripstone  is  natu- 
rally the  attribute  of  Northern  buildings,  and  therefore  especially 
of  Gothic  architecture ;  the  true  cornice  is  the  attribute  of 
Southern  buildings,  and  therefore  of  Greek  and  Italian  archi- 
tecture ;  and  it  is  one  of  their  peculiar  beauties,  and  eminent 
features  of  superiority. 

§  vii.  Before  passing  to  the  dripstone,  however,  let  us  examine 
a  little  farther  into  the  nature  of  the  true  cornice.  We  cannot, 
indeed,  render  either  of  the  forms  b  or  c,  Fig.  V.,  perfectly  protec- 
tive from  rain,  but  we  can  help  them  a  little  in  their  duty  by  a 
slight  advance  of  their  upper  ledge.  This,  with  the  form  5,  we 
can  best  manage  by  cutting  off  the  sharp  upper  point  of  its  curve, 
which  is  evidently  weak  and  useless;  and  we  shall  have  the 
form  f.  By  a  slight  advance  of  the  upper  stone  in  c,  we  shall 
have  the  parallel  form  g. 

These  two  cornices,/*  and  </,  are  characteristic  of  early  Byzan- 
tine work,  and  are  found  on  all  the  most  lovely  examples  of  it  in 
Venice .  The  type  a  is  rarer,  but  occurs  pure  in  the  most 
exquisite  piece  of  composition  in  Venice — the  northern  portico 
of  St.  Mark's  ;  and  will  be  given  in  due  time. 

§  vin.  ]STow  the  reader  has  doubtless  noticed  that  these  forms 
of  cornice  result,  from  considerations  of  fitness  and  necessity,  far 
more  neatly  and  decisively  than  the  forms  of  the  base,  which  we 
left  only  very  generally  determined.  The  reason  is,  that  there 
are  many  ways  of  building  foundations,  and  many  good  ways, 
dependent  upon  the  peculiar  accidents  of  the  ground  and  nature 
of  accessible  materials.  There  is  also  room  to  spare  in  width, 
and  a  chance  of  a  part  of  the  arrangement  being  concealed  by  the 
ground,  so  as  to  modify  height.  But  we  have  no  room  to  spare 
in  width  on  the  top  of  a  wall,  and  all  that  we  do  must  be 
thoroughly  visible  ;  and  we  can  but  have  to  deal  with  bricks,  or 
stones  of  a  certain  degree  of  fineness,  and  not  with  mere  gravel, 
or  sand,  or  clay, — so  that  as  the  conditions  are  limited,  the  forms 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VI.    THE   WALL    COKNICE. 


69 


become  determined  ;  and  our  steps  will  be  more  clear  and  certain 
the  farther  we  advance.  The  sources  of  a  river  are  usually  half 
lost  among  moss  and  pebbles,  and  its  first  movements  doubtful 
in  direction ;  but,  as  the  current  gathers  force,  its  banks  are  de- 
termined, and  its  branches  are  numbered. 

§  ix.  So  far  of  the  true  cornice  :  we  have  still  to  determine  the 
form  of  the  dripstone. 

We  go  back  to  our  primal  type  or  root  of  cornice,  a  of  Fig.  Y. 
We  take  this  at  a  in  Fig.  VI.,  and  we  are  to  consider  it  entirely  as 
a  protection  against  rain.  Now  the  only  way  in  which  the  rain 
can  be  kept  from  running  back  on  the  slope  of  X  is  by  a  bold 
hollowing  out  of  it  upwards,  b.  But  clearly,  by  thus  doing,  we 
shall  so  weaken  the  projecting  part  of  it  that  the  least  shock 
would  break  it  at  the  neck,  c  /  we  must  therefore  cut  the  whole 
out  of  one  stone,  which  will  give  us  the  form  d.     That  the  water 

Fig.  vi. 


a 


may  not  lodge  on  the  upper  ledge  of  this,  we  had  better  round 
it  off;  and  it  will  better  protect  the  joint  at  the  bottom  of  the 
slope  if  we  let  the  stone  project  over  it  in  a  roll,  cutting  the 
recess  deeper  above.  These  two  changes  are  made  in  e :  e  is  the 
type  of  dripstones ;  the  projecting  part  being,  however,  more  or 
less  rounded  into  an  approximation  to  the  shape  of  a  falcon's 
beak,  and  often  reaching  it  completely.  But  the  essential  part  of 
the  arrangement  is  the  up  and  under  cutting  of  the  curve. 
Wherever  we  find  this,  we  are  sure  that  the  climate  is  wet,  or 
that  the  builders  have  been  bred  in  a  wet  country,  and  that  the 
rest  of  the  building  will  be  prepared  for  rough  weather.  The  up 
cutting  of  the  curve  is  sometimes  all  the  distinction  between  the 
mouldings  of  far-distant  countries  and  utterly  strange  nations. 


70 


VI.    TIIE   WALL    CORNICE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Fig.  Vll.  Fjg.  VII.  represents  a  moulding  with  an 

outer  and  inner  curve,  the  latter  under-cut. 
Take  the  outer  line,  and  this  moulding  is  one 
constant  in  Venice,  in  architecture  traceable 
to  Arabian  types,  and  chiefly  to  the  early 
mosques  of  Cairo.  But  take  the  inner  line ; 
it  is  a  dripstone  at  Salisbury.  In  that  nar- 
row interval  between  the  curves  there  is, 
when  we  read  it  rightly,  an  expression  of 
another  and  mightier  curve, — the  orbed  sweep  of  the  earth  and 
sea,  between  the  desert  of  the  Pyramids,  and  the  green  and  level 
fields  through  which  the  clear  streams  of  Sarum  wind  so  slowly. 
And  so  delicate  is  the  test,  that  though  pure  cornices  are  often 
found  in  the  North, — borro wed  from  classical  models, — so  surely 
as  we  find  a  true  dripstone  moulding  in  the  South,  the  influence 
of  Northern  builders  has  been  at  work  ;  and  this  will  be  one  of 
the  principal  evidences  which  I  shall  use  in  detecting  Lombard 
influence  on  Arab  work;  for  the  true  Byzantine  and  Arab 
mouldings  are  all  open  to  the  sky  and  light,  but  the  Lombards 
brought  with  them  from  the  North  the  fear  of  rain,  and  in  all  the 
Lombardic  Gothic  we  instantly  recognize  the  shadowy  dripstone : 
0,  Fig.  VIII.,  is  from  a  noble  fragment  at  Milan,  in  the  Piazza  dei 
Mercanti ;  &,  from  the  Broletto  of  Como.     Compare  them  with c 

and  d,  both  from  Sa- 


Fig.  VIIL 


a 


lisbury;  e  and/from 
Lisieux,  Normandy ; 
g  and  h  from  Wen- 
lock  Abbey,  Shrop- 
shire. 

§  x.  The  reader  is 
now  master  of  all 
that  he  need  know 
about  the  construe 
tion  of  the  gene- 
ral wall  cornice,  fit- 


construction.  VI.   THE   WALL   CORNICE.  71 

ted  either  to  become  a  crown  of  the  wall,  or  to  carry  weight 
above.  If,  however,  the  weight  above  become  considerable,  it 
may  be  necessary  to  support  the  cornice  at  intervals  with  brack- 
ets ;  especially  if  it  be  required  to  project  far,  as  well  as  to  carry 
weight ;  as,  for  instance,  if  there  be  a  gallery  on  the  top  of  the 
wall.  This  kind  of  bracket-cornice,  deep  or  shallow,  forms  a  se- 
parate family,  essentially  connected  with  roofs  and  galleries  ;  for 
if  there  be  no  superincumbent  weight,  it  is  evidently  absurd  to 
put  brackets  to  a  plain  cornice  or  dripstone  (though  this  is  some- 
times done  in  carrying  out  a  style) ;  so  that,  as  soon  as  we  see  a 
bracket  put  to  a  cornice,  it  implies,  or  should  imply,  that  there  is 
a  roof  or  gallery  above  it.  Hence  this  family  of  cornices  I  shall 
consider  in  connection  with  roofing,  calling  them  "  roof  cor- 
nices," while  what  we  have  hitherto  examined  are  proper  "  wall 
cornices."  The  roof  cornice  and  wall  cornice  are  therefore  treat- 
ed in  division  D. 

~We  are  not,  however,  as  yet  nearly  ready  for  our  roof.  We 
have  only  obtained  that  which  was  to  be  the  object  of  our  first 
division  (A) ;  we  have  got,  that  is  to  say,  a  general  idea  of  a 
wall  and  of  the  three  essential  parts  of  a  wall ;  and  we  have  next, 
it  will  be  remembered,  to  get  an  idea  of  a  pier  and  the  essential 
parts  of  a  pier,  which  were  to  be  the  subjects  of  our  second  divi- 
sion (B). 


72 


CHAPTEE  YII. 


THE    PIER   BASE. 


§  i.  In  §  in.  of  Chap.  III.,  it  was  stated  that  when  a  wall  had 
to  sustain  an  addition  of  vertical  pressure,  it  was  first  fitted  to 
sustain  it  by  some  addition  to  its  own  thickness  ;  bnt  if  the  pres- 
sure became  very  great,  by  being  gathered  up  into  Piers. 

I  must  first  make  the  reader  understand  what  I  mean  by  a 
wall's  being  gathered  up.  Take  a  piece  of  tolerably  thick  draw- 
ing-paper, or  thin  Bristol  board,  five  or  six  inches  square.  Set 
it  on  its  edge  on  the  table,  and  put  a  small  octavo  book  on  the 
edge  or  top  of  it,  and  it  will  bend  instantly.  Tear  it  into  four 
strips  ail  across,  and  roll  up  each  strip  tightly.  Set  these  rolls 
on  end  on  the  table,  and  they  will  carry  the  small  octavo  perfect- 
ly well.  Now  the  thickness  or  substance  of  the  paper  employed 
to  carry  the  weight  is  exactly  the  same  as  it  was  before,  only  it 
is  differently  arranged,  that  is  to  say,  "  gathered  up."*  If  there- 
fore a  wall  be  gathered  up  like  the  Bristol  board,  it  will  bear 
greater  weight  than  it  would  if  it  remained  a  wall  veil.  The 
sticks  into  which  you  gather  it  are  called  Piers.  A  pier  is  a 
coagulated  wall. 

§  ii.  Now  you  cannot  quite  treat  the  wall  as  you  did  the  Bris- 
tol board,  and  twist  it  up  at  once  ;  but  let  us  see  how  you  can 
treat  it.  Let  a,  Fig.  IX.  be  the  plan  of  a  wall  which  you  have 
made  inconveniently  and  expensively  thick,  and  which  still  ap- 

*  The  experiment  is  not  quite  fair  in  this  rude  fashion  ;  for  the  small  rolls  owe  their 
increase  of  strength  much  more  to  their  tubular  form  than  their  aggregation  of  mate- 
rial 5  but  if  the  paper  be  cut  up  into  small  strips,  and  tied  together  firmly  in  three  or 
four  compact  bundles,  it  will  exhibit  increase  of  strength  enough  to  show  the  princi- 
ple.   Vide,  however,  Appendix  16.,  "  Strength  of  Shafts." 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VII.   THE   PIER   BASE. 


73 


pears  to  be  slightly  too  weak  for  what  it  must  carry  :  divide  it, 
as  at  b,  into  equal  spaces,  «,  &,  0,  6,  &c.  Cut  out  a  thin  slice  of 
it  at  every  a  on  each  side,  and  put  the  slices  you  cut  out  on  at 
every  b  on  each  side,  and  you  will  have  the  plan  at  b,  with  ex- 
actly the  same  quantity  of  bricks.  But  your  wall  is  now  so 
much  concentrated,  that,  if  it  was  only  slightly  too  weak  before, 
it  will  be  stronger  now  than  it  need  be  ;  so  you  may  spare  some 

Fig.  IX. 


D 


if  ill! 


Jilillillllllllllililiill 


E 


of  your  space  as  well  as  your  bricks  by  cutting  off  the  corners  of 
the  thicker  parts,  as  suppose  <?,  c,  c,  <?,  at  c :  and  you  have  now 
a  series  of  square  piers  connected  by  a  wall  veil,  which,  on  less 
space  and  with  less  materials,  will  do  the  work  of  the  wall  at  a 
perfectly  well. 

§  hi.  I  do  not  say  how  much  may  be  cut  away  in  the  corners 
0,  c, — that  is  a  mathematical  question  with  which  we  need  not 


74  VII.    THE   PIER   BASE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


trouble  ourselves  :  all  that  we  need  know  is,  that  out  of  every 
slice  we  take  from  the  "  5's"  and  put  on  at  the  "  $'s,"  we  may 
keep  a  certain  percentage  of  room  and  bricks,  until,  supposing 
that  we  do  not  want  the  wall  veil  for  its  own  sake,  this  latter  is 
thinned  entirely  away,  like  the  girdle  of  the  Lady  of  Avenal, 
and  finally  breaks,  and  we  have  nothing  but  a  row  of  square 
piers,  d. 

§  iv.  But  have  we  yet  arrived  at  the  form  which  will  spare 
most  room,  and  use  fewest  materials  ?  JSTo ;  and  to  get  farther 
we  must  apply  the  general  principle  to  our  wall,  which  is  equally 
true  in  morals  and  mathematics,  that  the  strength  of  materials, 
or  of  men,  or  of  minds,  is  always  most  available  when  it  is  applied 
as  closely  as  possible  to  a  single  point. 

Let  the  point  to  which  we  wish  the  strength  of  our  square  piers 
to  be  applied,  be  chosen.  Then  we  shall  of  course  put  them 
directly  under  it,  and  the  point  will  be  in  their  centre.  But  now 
some  of  their  materials  are  not  so  near  or  close  to  this  point  as 
others.     Those  at  the  corners  are  farther  off  than  the  rest. 

Now,  if  every  particle  of  the  pier  be  brought  as  near  as  possi- 
ble to  the  centre  of  it,  the  form  it  assumes  is  the  circle. 

The  circle  must  be,  therefore,  the  best  possible  form  of  plan 
for  a  pier,  from  the  beginning  of  time  to  the  end  of  it.  A  circular 
pier  is  called  a  pillar  or  column,  and  all  good  architecture  adapt- 
ed to  vertical  support  is  made  up  of  pillars,  has  always  been  so, 
and  must  ever  be  so,  as  long  as  the  laws  of  the  universe  hold. 

The  final  condition  is  represented  at  e,  in  its  relation  to  that 
at  d.  It  will  be  observed  that  though  each  circle  projects  a  little 
beyond  the  side  of  the  square  out  of  which  it  is  formed,  the  space 
cut  off  at  the  angles  is  greater  than  that  added  at  the  sides  ;  for, 
having  our  materials  in  a  more  concentrated  arrangement,  we 
can  afford  to  part  with  some  of  them  in  this  last  transformation, 
as  in  all  the  rest. 

§  v.  And  now,  what  have  the  base  and  the  cornice  of  the  wall 
been  doing  while  we  have  been  cutting  the  veil  to  pieces  and 
gathering  it  together  ? 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VII.    THE   PIER   BASE. 


75 


The  base  is  also  cut  to  pieces,  gathered  together,  and  becomes 
the  base  of  the  column. 

The  cornice  is  cut  to  pieces,  gathered  together,  and  becomes 
the  capital  of  the  column.  Do  not  be  alarmed  at  the  new  word, 
it  does  not  mean  a  new  thing  ;  a  capital  is  only  the  cornice  of  a 
column,  and  you  may,  if  you  like,  call  a  cornice  the  capital  of  a 
wall. 

We  have  now,  therefore,  to  examine  these  three  concentrated 
forms  of  the  base,  veil,  and  cornice :  first,  the  concentrated  base, 
still  called  the  Base  of  the  column  ;  then  the  concentrated  veil, 
called  the  Shaft  of  the  column  ;  then  the  concentrated  cornice, 
called  the  Capital  of  the  column. 

And  first  the  Base  : — 

§  vi.  Look  back  to  the  main  type,  Fig.  II.  page  56.,  and  apply 
its  profiles  in  due  proportion  to  the  feet  of  the  pillars  at  e  in 
Fig.  IX.  above  :  If  each  step  in  Fig.  II.  were  gathered  accurately, 
the  projection  of  the  entire  circular  base  would  be  less  in  propor- 
tion to  its  height  than  it  is  in  Fig.  II. ;  but  the  approximation  to 
the  result  in  Fig.  X.  is  quite  accurate  enough  for  our  purposes. 
(I  pray  the  reader  to  observe  that  I  have  not  made  the  smallest 
change,  except  this  necessary  expression  of  a  reduction  in 
diameter,  in  Fig.  IT.  as  it  is  applied  in  Fig.  X.,  only  I  have  not 


Fig.  X. 


drawn  the  joints  of  the  stones,  because  these  would  confuse  the 
outlines  of  the  bases  ;  and  I  have  not  represented  the  rounding 


76 


VII.    THE   PIER   BASE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


of  the  shafts,  because  it  does  not  bear  at  present  on  the  argu- 
ment.) ~Now  it  would  hardly  be  convenient,  if  we  had  to  pass 
between  the  pillars,  to  have  to  squeeze  ourselves  through  one  of 
those  angular  gaps  or  breches  de  Roland  in  Fig.  X.  Our  first 
impulse  would  be  to  cut  them  open  ;  but  we  cannot  do  this,  or 
our  piers  are  unsafe.  We  have  but  one  other  resource,  to  fill 
them  up  until  we  have  a  floor  wide  enough  to  let  us  pass  easily  : 
this  we  may  perhaps  obtain  at  the  first  ledge,  we  are  nearly  sure 
to  get  it  at  the  second,  and  we  may  then  obtain  access  to  the 
raised  interval,  either  by  raising  the  earth  over  the  lower  courses 
of  foundation,  or  by  steps  round  the  entire  building. 

Fig.  XL 


Fig.  XI.  is  the  arrangement  of  Fig.  X.  so  treated. 

§  vii.  But  suppose  the  pillars  are  so  vast  that  the  lowest  chink 
in  Fig.  X.  would  be  quite  wide  enough  to  let  us  pass  through  it. 
Is  there  then  any  reason  for  filling  it  up  ?  Yes.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  in  Chap.  IV.  §  vm.  the  chief  reason  for  the 
wide  foundation  of  the  wall  was  stated  to  be  "  that  it  might 
equalise  its  pressure  over  a  large  surface  ;"  but  when  the  founda- 
tion is  cut  to  pieces  as  in  Fig.  X.,  the  pressure  is  thrown  on  a 
succession  of  narrowed  and  detached  spaces  of  that  surface.  If 
the  ground  is  in  some  places  more  disposed  to  yield  than  in 
others,  the  piers  in  those  places  will  sink  more  than  the  rest,  and 
this  distortion  of  the  system  will  be  probably  of  more  importance 
in  pillars  than  in  a  wall,  because  the  adjustment  of  the  weight 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VII.    THE   PIEK   BASE.  77 


above  is  more  delicate  ;  we  thus  actually  want  the  weigltt  of  the 
stones  between  the  pillars,  in  order  that  the  whole  foundation 
may  be  bonded  into  one,  and  sink  together  if  it  sink  at  all :  and 
the  more  massy  the  pillars,  the  more  we  shall  need  to  fill  the 
intervals  of  their  foundations.  In  the  best  form  of  Greek  archi- 
tecture, the  intervals  are  filled  up  to  the  root  of  the  shaft,  and 
the  columns  have  no  independent  base  ;  they  stand  on  the  even 
floor  of  their  foundation. 

§  vm.  Such  a  structure  is  not  only  admisible,  but,  when  the 
column  is  of  great  thickness  in  proportion  to  its  height,  and  the 
sufficient  firmness,  either  of  the  ground  or  prepared  floor,  is 
evident,  it  is  the  best  of  all,  having  a  strange  dignity  in  its  exces- 
sive simplicity.  It  is,  or  ought  to  be,  connected  in  our  minds 
with  the  deep  meaning  of  primeval  memorial.  "  And  Jacob 
took  the  stone  that  he  had  put  for  his  pillow,  and  set  it  up  for  a 
pillar."  I  do  not  fancy  that  he  put  a  base  for  it  first.  If  you 
try  to  put  a  base  to  the  rock-piers  of  Stonehenge,  you  will  hardly 
find  them  improved ;  and  two  of  the  most  perfect  buildings  in 
the  world,  the  Parthenon  and  Ducal  palace  of  Venice,  have  no 
bases  to  their  inllars  :  the  latter  has  them,  indeed,  to  its  upper 
arcade  shafts  ;  and  had  once,  it  is  said,  a  continuous  raised  base 
for  its  lower  ones  :  but  successive  elevations  of  St.  Mark's  Place 
have  covered  this  base,  and  parts  of  the  shafts  themselves,  with 
an  inundation  of  paving  stones  ;  and  yet  the  building  is,  I  doubt 
not,  as  grand  as  ever.  Finally,  the  two  most  noble  pillars  in 
Venice,  those  brought  from  Acre,  stand  on  the  smooth  marble 
surface  of  the  Piazzetta,  with  no  independent  bases  whatever. 
They  are  rather  broken  away  beneath,  so  that  you  may  look 
under  parts  of  them,  and  stand  (not  quite  erect,  but  leaning 
somewhat)  safe  by  their  own  massy  weight.  Nor  could  any 
bases  possibly  be  devised  that  would  not  spoil  them. 

§  ix.  But  it  is  otherwise  if  the  pillar  be  so  slender  as  to  look 
doubtfully  balanced.  It  would  indeed  stand  quite  as  safely 
without  an  independent  base  as  it  would  with  one  (at  least, 
unless  the  base  be  in  the  form  of  a  socket).     But  it  will  not 


78  VII.    THE   PIER   BASE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


appear  so  safe  to  the  eye.  And  here  for  the  first  time,  I  have  to 
express  and  apply  a  principle,  which  I  believe  the  reader  will  at 
once  grant, — that  features  necessary  to  express  security  to  the 
imagination,  are  often  as  essential  parts  of  good  architecture  as 
those  required  for  security  itself.  It  was  said  that  the  wall  base 
was  the  foot  or  paw  of  the  wall.  Exactly  in  the  same  way,  and 
with  clearer  analogy,  the  pier  base  is  the  foot  or  paw  of  the  pier. 
Let  us,  then,  take  a  hint  from  nature.  A  foot  has  two  offices,  to 
bear  up,  and  to  hold  firm.  As  far  as  it  has  to  bear  up,  it  is  un- 
cloven,  with  slight  projection, — look  at  an  elephant's  (the  Doric 
base  of  animality)* ;  but  as  far  as  it  has  to  hold  firm,  it  is  divided 
and  clawed,  with  wide  projections, — look  at  an  eagle's. 

§  x.  Now  observe.  In  proportion  to  the  massiness  of  the 
column,  we  require  its  foot  to  express  merely  the  power  of 
bearing  up ;  in  fact,  it  can  do  without  a  foot,  like  the  Squire  in 
Chevy  Chase,  if  the  ground  only  be  hard  enough.  But  if  the 
column  be  slender,  and  look  as  if  it  might  lose  its  balance,  we 
require  it  to  look  as  if  it  had  hold  of  the  ground,  or  the  ground 
hold  of  it,  it  does  not  matter  which, — some  expression  of  claw, 
prop,  or  socket.  Now  let  us  go  back  to  Fig.  XI.,  and  take  up 
one  of  the  bases  there,  in  the  state  in  which  wTe  left  it.  We  may 
leave  out  the  two  lower  steps  (with  which  we  have  nothing  more 
to  do,  as  they  have  become  the  united  floor  or  foundation  of  the 
whole),  and,  for  the  sake  of  greater  clearness,  I  shall  not  draw 
the  bricks  in  the  shaft,  nor  the  flat  stone  which  carries  them, 
though  the  reader  is  to  suppose  them  remaining  as  drawn  in  Fig. 
XL ;  but  I  shall  only  draw  the  shaft  and  its  two  essential  mem- 
bers of  base,  Xb  aud  Yb,  as  explained  at  p.  66,  above  :  and  now, 
ex  pressing  the  rounding  of  these  members  on  a  somewhat  larger 
scale,  we  have  the  profile  #,  Fig.  XII. ;  Z»,  the  perspective 
appearance  of  such  a  base  seen  from  above  ;  and  c,  the  plan 
of  it. 

§  xi.  Now  I  am  quite  sure  the  reader  is  not  satisfied  of  the 

*  Appendix  17.:  "Answer to  Mr.  Garbett." 


CONSTRUCTION, 


VII.    THE    PIER    BASE. 


79 


Fiar.  XII. 


a 


d 


3 


stability  of  this  form  as  it  is  seen  at  h  ;  nor  would  he  ever  be  so 
with  the  main  contour  of  a  circular  base.  Observe,  we  have 
taken  some  trouble  to  reduce  the  member  Yb  into  this  round 
form,  and  all  that  we  have  gained  by  doing  so,  is  this  unsatisfac- 
tory and  unstable  look  of  the  base  ;  of  which  the  chief  reason  is, 
that  a  circle,  unless  enclosed  by  right  lines,  has  never  an  appear- 
ance of  fixture,  or  definite  place*, — we  suspect  it  of  motion,  like 
an  orb  of  heaven  ;  and  the  second  is,  that  the  whole  base,  con- 
sidered as  the  foot  of  the  shaft,  has  no  grasp  nor  hold  :  it  is  a 
club-foot,  and  looks  too  blunt  for  the  limb, — it  wants  at  least  ex- 
pansion, if  not  division. 

§  xn.  Suppose,  then,  instead  of  taking  so  much  trouble  with 


*  Yet  more  so  than  any  other  figure  enclosed  by  a  curved  line :  for  the  circle,  in  its 
relations  to  its  own  centre,  is  the  curve  of  greatest  stability.  Compare"  §  xx.  of 
Chap.  XX. 


80  VII.    THE    TIER   BASE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


the  member  Yb,  we  save  time  and  labour,  and  leave  it  a  square 
block.  Xb  must,  however,  evidently  follow  the  pillar,  as  its  con- 
dition is  that  it  slope  to  the  very  base  of  the  wall  veil,  and  of 
whatever  the  wall  veil  becomes.  So  the  corners  of  Yb  will  pro- 
ject beyond  the  circle  of  Xb,  and  we  shall  have  (Fig.  XII.)  the  pro- 
file d,  the  perspective  appearance  <3,  and  the  plan/l  I  am  quite 
sure  the  reader  likes  e  much  better  than  he  did  b.  The  circle  is 
now  placed,  and  we  are  not  afraid  of  its  rolling  away.  The  foot 
has  greater  expansion,  and  we  have  saved  labour  besides,  with 
little  loss  of  space,  for  the  interval  between  the  bases  is  just  as 
great  as  it  was  ,before, — we  have  only  filled  up  the  corners  of  the 
squares. 

But  is  it  not  possible  to  mend  the  form  still  farther  ?  There  is 
surely  still  an  aj3pearance  of  separation  between  Xb  and  Yb,  as 
if  the  one  might  slip  off  the  other.  The  foot  is  expanded  enough  ; 
but  it  needs  some  expression  of  grasp  as  well.  It  has  no  toes. 
Suppose  we  were  to  put  a  spur  or  prop  to  Xb  at  each  corner,  so 
as  to  hold  it  fast  in  the  centre  of  Yb.  We  will  do  this  in  the 
simplest  possible  form.  We  will  have  the  spur,  or  small  buttress, 
sloping  straight  from  the  corner  of  Yb  up  to  the  top  of  Xb,  and 
as  seen  from  above,  of  the  shape  of  a  triangle.  Applying  such 
spurs  in  Fig.  XII.,  we  have  the  diagonal  j>i*ofile  at  </,  the  per- 
spective A,  and  the  plan  i. 

§  xin.  I  am  quite  sure  the  reader  likes  this  last  base  the  best, 
and  feels  as  if  it  were  the  firmest.  But  he  must  carefully  distin- 
guish between  this  feeling  or  imagination  of  the  eye,  and  the  real 
stability  of  the  structure.  That  this  real  stability  has  been 
slightly  increased  by  the  changes  between  1)  and  7^,  in  Fig.  XII., 
is  true.  There  is  in  the  base  li  somewhat  less  chance  of 
accidental  dislocation,  and  somewhat  greater  solidity  and  weight. 
But  this  very  slight  gain  of  security  is  of  no  importance  what- 
ever when  compared  with  the  general  requirements  of  the  struc- 
ture. The  pillar  must  be  perfectly  secure,  and  more  than  secure, 
with  the  base  Z>,  or  the  building  will  be  unsafe,  whatever  other 
base  you  put  to  the  pillar.     The  changes  are  made,  not  for  the 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VII.    THE   PIER   BASE.  81 


sake  of  the  almost  inappreciable  increase  of  security  they  involve, 
but  in  order  to  convince  the  eye  of  the  real  security  which  the 
base  1)  appears  to  compromise.  This  is  especially  the  case  with 
regard  to  the  props  or  spurs,  which  are  absolutely  useless  in 
reality,  but  are  of  the  highest  importance  as  an  expression  of 
safety.  And  this  will  farther  appear  when  we  observe  that  they 
have  been  above  quite  arbitrarily  supposed  to  be  of  a  triangular 
form.  Why  triangular?  Why  should  not  the  spur  be  made 
wider  and  stronger,  so  as  to  occupy  the  whole  width  of  the  angle 
of  the  square,  and  to  become  a  complete  expansion  of  Xb  to  the 
edge  of  the  square  ?  Simply  because,  whatever  its  width,  it  has, 
in  reality,  no  supporting  power  whatever ;  and  the  expression  of 
support  is  greatest  where  it  assumes  a  form  approximating  to  that 
of  the  spur  or  claw  of  an  animal.  We  shall,  however,  find  here- 
after, that  it  ought  indeed  to  be  much  wider  than  it  is  in  Fig. 
XII.,  where  it  is  narrowed  in  order  to  make  its  structure  clearly 
intelligible. 

§  xiv.  If  the  reader  chooses  to  consider  this  spur  as  an  aesthetic 
feature  altogether,  he  is  at  liberty  to  do  so,  and  to  transfer  what 
we  have  here  said  of  it  to  the  beginning  of  Chap.  XXV.  I  think 
that  its  true  place  is  here,  as  an  expression  of  safety,  and  not  a 
means  of  beauty;  but  I  will  assume  only,  as  established,  the 
6  inn  e  of  Fig.  XII.,  which  is  absolutely,  as  a  construction,  easier, 
Wronger,  and  more  perfect  than  h.  A  word  or  two  now  of  its 
] Materials.  The  wall  base,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  built  of 
Btones  more  neatly  cut  as  they  were  higher  in  place;  and  the 
members,  Y  and  X,  of  the  pier  base,  were  the  highest  members 
of  the  wall  base  gathered.     But,  exactly  in  proportion  to  this 

gathering  or  concentration  in  form,  should,  if  possible,  be  the 
gathering  or  content  ration  of  substance.  For  as  the  whole  weight 
of  the  boilding  is  now  to  rest  upon  few  and  limited  spaces,  it  is 

4  the  greater  importance  that  it  should  be  there  received  by 
solid  masonry.  Xb  and  Yb  are  therefore,  if  possible,  to  be  each 
of  a  single  -tone  ;  or,  when  the  shaft  is  small,  both  cut  out  of  one 
block,  and  especially  if  spurs  are  to  be  added  to  Xb.  The  reader 
6 


82  VII.   THE   PIER  BASE.  construction. 

must  not  be  angry  with  me  for  stating  things  so  self-evident,  for 
these  are  all  necessary  steps  in  the  chain  of  argument  which  I 
must  not  Veak.  Even  this  change  from  detached  stones  to  a 
single  block  is  not  without  significance  ;  for  it  is  part  of  the  real 
service  and  value  of  the  member  Yb  to  provide  for  the  reception 
of  the  shaft  a  surface  free  from  joints ;  and  the  eye  always  con- 
ceives it  as  a  firm  covering  over  all  inequalities  or  fissures  in  the 
smaller  masonry  of  the  floor. 

§  xv.  I  have  said  nothing  yet  of  the  proportion  of  the  height 
of  Yb  to  its  width,  nor  of  that  of  Yb  and  Xb  to  each  other. 
Both  depend  much  on  the  height  of  shaft,  and  are  besides  varia- 
ble within  certain  limits,  at  the  architect's  discretion.  But  the 
limits  of  the  height  of  Yb  may  be  thus  generally  stated.  If  it 
look  so  thin  as  that  the  weight  of  the  column  above  might  break 
it,  it  is  too  low ;  and  if  it  is  higher  than  its  own  width,  it  is  too 
high.  The  utmost  admissible  height  is  that  of  a  cubic  block ;  for 
if  it  ever  become  higher  than  it  is  wide,  it  becomes  itself  a  part 
of  a  pier,  and  not  the  base  of  one. 

§  xvi.  I  have  also  supposed  Yb,  when  expanded  from  beneath 
Xb,  as  always  expanded  into  a  square,  and  four  spurs  only  to  be 
added  at  the  angles.  But  Yb  may  be  expanded  into  a  pentagon, 
hexagon,  or  polygon  ;  and  Xb  then  may  have  ^.ve^  six,  or  many 
spurs.  In  proportion,  however,  as  the  sides  increase  in  number, 
the  spurs  become  shorter  and  less  energetic  in  their  effect,  and 
the  square  is  in  most  cases  the  best  form. 

§  xvn.  We  have  hitherto  conducted  the  argument  entirely  on 
the  supposition  of  the  pillars  being  numerous,  and  in  a  range. 
Suppose,  however,  that  we  require  only  a  single  pillar :  as  we 
have  free  space  round  it,  there  is  no  need  to  fill  up  the  first  ranges 
of  its  foundations  ;  nor  need  we  do  so  in  order  1fc  equalise  pres- 
sure, since  the  pressure  to  be  met  is  its  own  alone.  Under  such 
circumstances,  it  is  well  to  exhibit  the  lower  tiers  of  the  founda- 
tion as  well  as  Yb  and  Xb.  The  noble  bases  of  the  two  granite 
pillars  of  the  Piazzetta  at  Venice  are  formed  by  the  entire  series 
of  members  given  in  Fig.  X.,  the  lower  courses  expanding  into 


construction.  VII.    THE   PIER   BASE.  83 

steps,  with  a  superb  breadth  of  proportion  to  the  shaft.  The 
member  Xb  is  of  course  circular,  having  its  proper  decorative 
mouldings,  not  here  considered ;  Yb  is  octagonal,  but  filled  up 
into  a  square  by  certain  curious  groups  of  figures  representing 
the  trades  of  Yenice.  The  three  courses  below  are  octagonal, 
with  their  sides  set  across  the  angles  of  the  innermost  octagon, 
Yb.  The  shafts  are  15  feet  in  circumference,  and  the  lowest  octa- 
gons of  the  bases  56,  (7  feet  each  side). 

§  xvm.  Detached  buildings,  like  our  own  Monument,  are  not 
pillars,  but  towers  built  in  imitation  of  pillars.     As  towers  they 
are  barbarous,   being  dark,   inconvenient,  and  unsafe,  besides 
lying,  and  pretending  to  be  what  they  are  not.     As  shafts  they 
are  barbarous,  because  they  were  designed  at  a  time  when  the 
Renaissance  architects  had  introduced  and  forced  into  acceptance, 
as  de  rigueur,  a  kind  of  columnar  high-heeled  shoe, — a  thing 
which  they  called  a  pedestal,  and  which  is  to  a  true  base  exactly 
what  a  Greek  actor's  cothurnus  was  to  a  Greek  gentleman's 
sandal.     But  the  Greek  actor  knew  better,  I  believe,  than  to  ex- 
hibit or  to  decorate  his  cork  sole ;  and,  with  shafts  as  with  heroes,  it 
is  rather  better  to  put  the  sandal  off  than  the  cothurnus  on.     There 
are,  indeed,  occasions  on  which  a  pedestal  may  be  necessary ;  it 
may  be  better  to  raise  a  shaft  from  a  sudden  depression  of  plinth 
to  a  level  with  others,  its  companions,  by  means  of  a  pedestal, 
than  to  introduce  a  higher  shaft ;  or  it  may  be  better  to  place  a 
shaft  of  alabaster,  if  otherwise  too  short  for  our  purpose,  on  a 
pedestal,  than  to  use  a  larger  shaft  of  coarser  material ;  but  the 
pedestal  is  in  each  case  a  make-shift,  not  an  additional  perfection. 
It  may,  in  the  like  manner,  be  sometimes  convenient  for  men  to 
walk  on  stilts,  but  not  to  keep  their  stilts  on  as  ornamental  parts 
of  dress.    The  bases  of  the  Nelson  Column,  the  Monument,  and 
the  column  of  the  Place  Yendome,  are  to  the  shafts,  exactly 
what  highly  ornamented  wooden  legs  would  be  to  human  beings. 

§  xix.  So  far  of  bases  of  detached  shafts.     As  we  do  not  yet 
know  in  what  manner  shafts  are  likely  to  be  grouped,  we  can  say 


84  VII.    THE   PIER   BASE.  coNsfKUCTiON. 

nothing  of  those  of  grouped  shafts  until  we  know  more  of  what 
they  are  to  support. 

Lastly ;  we  have  throughout  our  reasoning  upon  the  base  sup- 
posed the  pier  to  be  circular.  But  circumstances  may  occur  to 
prevent  its  being  reduced  to  this  form,  and  it  may  remain  square 
or  rectangular ;  its  base  will  then  be  simply  the  wall  base  follow- 
ing its  contour,  and  we  have,  no  spurs  at  the  angles.  Thus  much 
may  serve  respecting  pier  bases  ;  we  have  next  to  examine  the 
concentration  of  the  Wall  Veil,  or  the  Shaft. 


85 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


THE   SHAFT. 


§  i.  We  have  seen  in  the  last  Chapter  how,  in  converting  the 
wall  into  the  square  or  cylindrical  shaft,  we  parted  at  every 
change  of  form  with  some  quantity  of  material.  In  proportion 
to  the  quantity  thus  surrendered,  is  the  necessity  that  what  we 
retain  should  be  good  of  its  kind,  and  well  set  together,  since 
everything  now  depends  on  it. 

It  is  clear  also  that  the  best  material,  and  the  closest  concen- 
tration, is  that  of  the  natural  crystalline  rocks;  and  that,  by 
having  reduced  our  wall  into  the  shape  of  shafts,  we  may  be 
enabled  to  avail  ourselves  of  this  better  material,  and  to  exchange 
cemented  bricks  for  crystallised  blocks  of  stone.  Therefore,  the 
general  idea  of  a  perfect  shaft  is  that  of  a  single  stone  hewn  into 
a  form  more  or  less  elongated  and  cylindrical.  Under  this  form, 
or  at  least  under  the  ruder  one  of  a  long  stone  set  upright,  the 
conception  of  true  shafts  appears  first  to  have  occurred  to  the 
human  mind ;  for  the  reader  must  note  this  carefully,  once  for 
all,  it  does  not  in  the  least  follow  that  the  order  of  architectural 
features  which  is  most  reasonable  in  their  arrangement,  is  most 
probable  in  their  invention.  I  have  theoretically  deduced  shafts 
from  Avail-,  but  shafts  were  never  so  reasoned  out  in  architectural 
practice.  The  man  who  first  propped  a  thatched  roof  with  poles 
was  the  discoverer  of  their  principle;  and  he  who  first  hewed  a 
long  stone  into  a  cylinder,  the  perfecter  of  their  practice. 

§  ir.  It  is  clearly  necessary  that  shafts  of  this  kind  (we  will 
call  them,  for  convenience,  "block  shafts)  should  be  composed  of 
stone  not  liable  to  flaws  or  fissures;  and  therefore  that  we  must 
no  longer  continue  our  argument  as  if  it  were  always  possible  to 


86  VIII.    THE   SHAFT. 


CONSTRUCTION- 


do  what  is  to  be  done  in  the  best  way  ;  for  th(^  style  of  a  national 
architecture  may  evidently  depend,  in  great  measure,  upon  the 
nature  of  the  rocks  of  the  country. 

Our  own  English  rocks,  which  supply  excellent  building  stone 
from  their  thin  and  easily  divisible  beds,  are  for  the  most  part 
entirely  incapable  of  being  worked  into  shafts  of  any  size,  except 
only  the  granites  and  whinstones,  whose  hardness  renders  them 
intractable  for  ordinary  purposes ; — and  English  architecture 
therefore  supplies  no  instances  of  the  block  shaft  applied  on  an 
extensive  scale ;  while  the  facility  of  obtaining  large  masses  of 
marble  has  in  Greece  and  Italy  been  partly  the  cause  of  the 
adoption  of  certain  noble  types  of  architectural  form  peculiar 
to  those  countries,  or,  when  occurring  elsewhere,  derived  from 
them. 

We  have  not,  however,  in  reducing  our  walls  to  shafts,  calcu- 
lated on  the  probabilities  of  our  obtaining  better  materials  than 
those  of  which  the  walls  were  built ;  and  we  shall  therefore  first 
consider  the  form  of  shaft  which  will  be  best  when  we  have  the 
best  materials;  and  then  consider  how  far  we  can  imitate,  or 
how  far  it  will  be  wise  to  imitate,  this  form  with  any  materials 
we  can  obtain. 

§  in.  Now  as  I  gave  the  reader  the  ground,  and  the  stones, 
that  he  might  for  himself  find  out  how  to  build  his  wall,  I  shall 
give  him  the  block  of  marble,  and  the  chisel,  that  he  may  him- 
self find  out  how  to  shape  his  column.  Let  him  suppose  the 
elongated  mass,  so  given  him,  rudely  hewn  to  the  thickness 
which  he  has  calculated  will  be  proportioned  to  the  weight  it 
has  to  carry.  The  conditions  of  stability  will  require  that  some 
allowance  be  made  in  finishing  it  for  any  chance  of  slight  dis- 
turbance or  subsidence  of  the  ground  below,  and  that,  as  every- 
thing must  depend  on  the  uprightness  of  the  shaft,  as  little  chance 
should  be  left  as  possible  of  its  being  thrown  off  its  balance.  It 
will  therefore  be  prudent  to  leave  it  slightly  thicker  at  the  base 
than  at  the  top.  This  excess  of  diameter  at  the  base  being 
determined,  the  reader  is  to  ask  himself  how  most  easily  and 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VIII.    THE   SHAFT. 


87 


simply  to  smooth  the  column  from  one  extremity  to  the  other. 
To  cut  it  into  a  true  straight-sided  cone  would  be  a  matter  of 
much  trouble  and  nicety,  and  would  incur  the  continual  risk  of 
chipping  into  it  too  deep.  Why  not  leave  some  room  for  a 
chance  stroke,  work  it  slightly,  very  slightly  convex,  and  smooth 
the  curve  by  the  eye  between  the  two  extremities  ?  you  will  save 
much  trouble  and  time,  and  the  shaft  will  be  all  the  stronger. 

This  is  accordingly  the  natural  form  of  a  detached  block  shaft. 
It  is  the  best.  No  other  will  ever  be  so  agreeable  to  the  mind 
or  eye.  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  not  capable  of  more  refined 
execution,  or  of  the  application  of  some  of  the  laws  of  aesthetic 
beauty,  but  that  it  is  the  best  recipient  of  execution  and  subject 
of  law ;  better  in  either  case,  than  if  you  had  taken  more  pains, 
and  cut  it  straight. 

§  rv.  You  will  observe,  however,  that  the  convexity  is  to  be 
very  slight,  and  that  the  shaft  is  not  to  bulge  in  the  centre,  but 
to  taper  from  the  root  in  a  curved  line ;  the  peculiar  character  of 
the  curve  you  will  discern  better  by  exaggerating,  in  a  diagram, 
the  conditions  of  its  sculpture. 

Let  a,  #,  5,  5,  at  a,  Fig.  XIII.,  be  the  rough  block  of  the  shaft, 


Fig.  XIII. 


A 


a 

c 

d 


B 


±!iui^n..iijiiii*l,lt£j:g2 


f 


-    9 
_-    k 


laid  on  the  ground;  and  as  thick  as  you  can  by  any  chance 
require  it  to  be ;  you  will  leave  it  of  this  full  thickness  at  its 
base  at  a,  but  at  the  other  end  you  will  mark  off  upon  it  the 
diameter  c,  d,  which  you  intend  it  to  have  at  the  summit ;  you 


88  VIII.   TIIE   SHAFT.  construction 

will  then  take  your  mallet  and  chisel,  and  working  from  c  and  d 
you  will  roughly  knock  off  the  corners,  shaded  in  the  figure,  so 
as  to  reduce  the  shaft  to  the  figure  described  by  the  inside  lines 
in  a  and  the  outside  lines  in  b  ;  you  then  proceed  to  smooth  \tr 
you  chisel  away  the  shaded  parts  in  b,  and  leave  your  finished 
shaft  of  the  form  of  the  inside  lines  ey  g,  f,  7i. 

The  result  of  this  operation  will  be  of  course  that  the  shaft 
tapers  faster  towards  the  top  than  it  does  near  the  ground. 
Observe  this  carefully ;  it  is  a  point  of  great  future  importance. 

§  v.  So  far  of  the  shape  of  detached  or  block  shafts.  We  can 
carry  the  type  no  farther  on  merely  structural  considerations  ; 
let  us  pass  to  the  shaft  of  inferior  materials. 

Unfortunately,  in  practice,  this  step  must  be  soon  made.  It  is 
alike  difficult  to  obtain,  transport,  and  raise,  block  shafts  more 
than  ten  or  twelve  feet  long,  except  in  remarkable  positions,  and 
as  pieces  of  singular  magnificence.  Large  pillars  are  therefore 
always  composed  of  more  than  one  block  of  stone.  Such  pillars 
are  either  jointed  like  basalt  columns,  and  composed  of  solid 
pieces  of  stone  set  one  above  another ;  or  they  are  filled  up 
towers,  built  of  small  stones  cemented  into  a  mass,  with  more  or 
less  of  regularity :  Keep  this  distinction  carefully  in  mind,  it  is 
of  great  importance ;  for  the  jointed  column,  every  stone  com- 
posing which,  however  thin,  is  (so  to  speak)  a  complete  slice  of 
the  shaft,  is  just  as  strong  as  the  block  pillar  of  one  stone,  so 
long  as  no  forces  are  brought  into  action  upon  it  which  would 
have  a  tendency  to  cause  horizontal  dislocation.  But  the  pillar 
which  is  built  as  a  filled-up  tower  is  of  course  liable  to  fissure  in 
any  direction,  if  its  cement  give  way. 

But,  in  either  case,  it  is  evident  that  all  constructive  reason 
for  the  curved  contour  is  at  once  destroyed.  Far  from  being 
an  easy  or  natural  procedure,  the  fitting  of  each  portion  of  the 
curve  to  its  fellow,  in  the  separate  stones,  would  require  painful 
care  and  considerable  masonic  skill;  while,  in  the  case  of  the 
filled-up  tower,  the  curve  outwards  would  be  even  unsafe ;  for 
its  greatest  strength  (and  that  the  more  in  proportion  to  its  care- 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VIII.    THE   SHAFT.  89 


less  building)  lies  in  its  bark,  or  shell  of  outside  stone ;  and  this, 
if  curved  outwards,  would  at  once  burst  outwards,  if  heavily 
loaded  above. 

If,  therefore,  the  curved  outline  be  ever  retained  in  such 
shafts,  it  must  be  in  obedience  to  aesthetic  laws  only. 

§  vi.  But  farther.  Not  only  the  curvature,  but  even  the 
tapering  by  straight  lines,  would  be  somewhat  difficult  of  exe- 
"  cution  in  the  pieced  column.  Where,  indeed,  the  entire  shaft 
is  composed  of  four  or  five  blocks  set  one  upon  another,  the 
diameters  may  be  easily  determined  at  the  successive  joints,  and 
the  stones  chiselled  to  the  same  slope.  But  this  becomes  suffi- 
ciently troublesome  when  the  joints  are  numerous,  so  that  the 
pillar  is  like  a  pile  of  cheeses ;  or  when  it  is  to  be  built  of  small 
and  irregular  stones.  We  should  be  naturally  led,  in  the  one 
case,  to  cut  all  the  cheeses  to  the  same  diameter ;  in  the  other 
to  build  by  the  plumb-line  ;  and,  in  both  to  give  up  the  tapering 
altogether. 

§  vii.  Farther.  Since  the  chance,  in  the  one  case,  of  horizontal 
dislocation,  in  the  other,  of  irregular  fissure,  is  much  increased  by 
the  composition  of  the  shaft  out  of  joints  or  small  stones,  a 
larger  bulk  of  shaft  is  required  to  carry  the  given  weight ;  and, 
cceteris  jMtribus,  jointed  and  cemented  shafts  must  be  thicker  in 
proportion  to  the  weight  they  carry  than  those  which  are  of  one 
block. 

We  have  here  evidently  natural  causes  of  a  very  marked 
division  in  schools  of  architecture :  one  group  composed  of 
buildings  whose  shafts  are  either  of  a  single  stone  or  of  few  joints ; 
the  shafts,  therefore,  being  gracefully  tapered,  and  reduced  by 
succes-ive  experiments  to  the  narrowest  possible  diameter  j>ro- 
portioned  to  the  weight  they  carry:  and  the  other  group  em- 
bracing those  buildings  whose  shafts  are  of  many  joints  or  of 
3maU  stones  ;  shafts  which  are  therefore  not  tapered,  and  rather 
thick  and  ponderous  in  proportion  to  the  weight  they  carry;  the 
latter  school  being  evidently  somewhat  imperfect  and  inelegant 
as  compared  with  the  former. 


90  VIII.   TIIE   SHAFT.  construction. 

It  may  perhaps  appear,  also,  that  this  arrangement  of  the 
materials  in  cylindrical  shafts  at  all  would  hardly  have  suggested 
itself  to  a  people  who  possessed  no  large  blocks  out  of  which  to 
hew  them  ;  and  that  the  shaft  built  of  many  pieces  is  probably 
derived  from,  and  imitative  of,  the  shaft  hewn  from  few  or  from 
one. 

§  vni.  If,  therefore,  you  take  a  good  geological  j  nap  of  Europe, 
and  lay  your  finger  upon  the  spots  where  volcanic  influences 
supply  either  travertin  or  marble  in  accessible  and  available 
masses,  you  will  probably  mark  the  points  where  the  types  of  the 
first  school  have  been  originated  and  developed.  If,  in  the  next 
place,  you  will  mark  the  districts  where  broken  and  rugged  basalt 
or  whinstone,  or  slaty  sandstone,  supply  materials  on  easier  terms 
indeed,  but  fragmentary  and  unmanageable,  you  will  probably 
distinguish  some,  of  the  birthplaces  of  the  derivative  and  less 
graceful  school.  You  will,  in  the  first  case,  lay  your  finger  on 
Psestum,  Agrigentum,  and  Athens ;  in  the  second,  on  Durham 
and  Lindisfarne. 

The  shafts  of  the  great  primal  school  are,  indeed,  in  their  first 
form,  as  massy  as  those  of  the  other,  and  the  tendency  of  both  is 
to  continual  diminution  of  their  diameters  :  but  in  the  first  school 
it  is  a  true  diminution  in  the  thickness  of  the  independent  pier  ; 
in  the  last,  it  is  an  apparent  diminution,  obtained  by  giving 
it  the  appearance  of  a  group  of  minor  piers.  The  distinction, 
however,  with  which  we  are  concerned  is  not  that  of  slenderness, 
but  of  vertical  or  curved  contour  ;  and  we  may  note  generally 
that  while  throughout  the  whole  range  of  Northern  work,  the 
perpendicular  shaft  appears  in  continually  clearer  development, 
throughout  every  group  which  has  inherited  the  spirit  of  the 
Greek,  the  shaft  retains  its  curved  or  tapered  form ;  and  the 
occurrence  of  the  vertical  detached  shaft  may  at  all  times,  in 
European  architecture,  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  important 
collateral  evidences  of  Northern  influence. 

§  ix.  It  is  necessary  to  limit  this  observation  to  European 
architecture,  because  the  Egyptian  shaft  is  often  untapered,  like 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VIII.    THE   SHAFT.  91 


the  Northern.  It  appears  that  the  Central  Southern,  or  Greek 
shaft,  was  tapered  or  curved  on  aesthetic  rather  than  constructive 
principles  ;  and  the  Egyptian  which  precedes,  and  the  Northern 
which  follows  it,  are  both  vertical,  the  one  because  the  best 
form  had  not  been  discovered,  the  other  because  it  could  not 
be  attained.  Both  are  in  a  certain  degree  barbaric ;  and  both 
possess  in  combination  and  in  their  ornaments  a  power  altogether 
different  from  that  of  the  Greek  shaft,  and  at  least  as  impressive, 
if  not  as  admirable. 

§.x.  We  have  hitherto  spoken  of  shafts  as  if  their  number  were 
fixed,  and  only  their  diameter  variable  according  to  the  weight  to 
be  borne.  But  this  supposition  is  evidently  gratuitous ;  for  the 
same  weight  may  be  carried  either  by  many  and  slender,  or  by 
few  and  massy  shafts.  If  the  reader  will  look  back  to  Fig.  IX., 
he  will  find  the  number  of  shafts  into  which  the  wall  was  reduced 
to  be  dependent  altogether  upon  the  length  of  the  spaces  $,  5,  &, 
J,  &c,  a  length  which  was  arbitrarily  fixed.  We  are  at  liberty  to 
make  these  spaces  of  what  length  we  choose,  and,  in  so  doing,  to 
increase  the  number  and  diminish  the  diameter  of  the  shafts,  or 
vice  versa. 

§  xi.  Supposing  the  materials  are  in  each  case  to  be  of  the 
same  kind,  the  choice  is  in  great  part  at  the  architect's  discretion, 
only  there  is  a  limit  on  the  one  hand  to  the  multiplication  of  the 
slender  shaft,  in  the  inconvenience  of  the  narrowed  interval,  and 
on  the  other,  to  the  enlargement  of  the  massy  shaft,  in  the  loss 
of  breadth  to  the  building."  That  will  be  commonly  the  best 
proportion  which  is  a  natural  mean  between  the  two  limits; 
leaning  to  the  side  of  grace  or  of  grandeur  according  to  the 

rpressional  intention  of  the  work.  I  say,  commonly  the  best, 
in  some  cases,  this  expressional  invention  may  prevail 

*  In  saying  this,  it  is  assumed  that  the  interval  is  one  which  is  to  be  traversed  by 
men ;  and  that  a  certain  relation  of  the  shafts  and  intervals  to  the  size  of  the  human 
figure  is  therefore  necessary.  When  shafts  are  used  in  the  upper  stories  of  buildings, 
or  on  a  scale  which  ignores  all  relation  to  the  human  figure,  no  such  relative  limits 
exist  either  to  slenderness  or  solidity, 


92  VII I.   THE   SHAFT.  construction. 

over  all  other  considerations,  and  a  column  of  unnecessary  bulk 
or  fantastic  slightness  be  adopted  in  order  to  strike  the  spectator 
with  awe  or  with  surprise.*  The  architect  is,  however,  rarely  in 
practice  compelled  to  use  one  kind  of  material  only;  and  his 
choice  lies  frequently  between  the  employment  of  a  larger  num- 
ber of  solid  and  perfect  small  shafts,  or  a  less  number  of  pieced 
and  cemented  large  ones.  It  is  often  possible  to  obtain  from  quar- 
ries  near  at  hand,  blocks  which  might  be  cut  into  shafts- eight  or 
twelve  feet  long  and  four  or  five  feet  round,  when  larger  shafts 
can  only  be  obtained  in  distant  localities  ;  and  the  question  then 
is  between  the  perfection  of  smaller  features  and  the  imperfection 
of  larger.  We  shall  find  numberless  instances  in  Italy  in  which 
the  first  choice  has  been  boldly,  and  I  think  most  wisely  made  ; 
and  magnificent  buildings  have  been  composed  of  systems  of 
small  but  perfect  shafts,  multiplied  and  superimposed.  So  long 
as  the  idea  of  the  symmetry  of  a  perfect  shaft  remained  in  the 
builder's  mind,  his  choice  could  hardly  be  directed  otherwise,  and 
the  adoption  of  the  built  and  tower-like  shaft  appears  to  have 
been  the  result  of  a  loss  of  this  sense  of  symmetry  consequent  on 
the  employment  of  intractable  materials. 

§  xii.  But  farther :  we  have  up  to  this  point  spoken  of  shafts  as 
always  set  in  ranges,  and  at  equal  intervals  from  each  other.  But 
there  is  no  necessity  for  this ;  and  material  differences  may  be 
made  in  their  diameters  if  two  or  more  be  grouped  so  as  to  do 
together  the  work  of  one  large  one,  and  that  within,  or  nearly 
within,  the  space  which  the  larger  one  would  have  occupied. 

§  xni.  Let  a,  b,  c,  Fig.  XIY.  be  three  surfaces,  of  which  b  and 
c  contain  equal  areas,  and  each  of  them  double  that  of  a  :  then 
supposing  them  all  loaded  to  the  same  height,  b  or  c  would  re- 
ceive twice  as  much  weight  as  a;  therefore,  to  carry  b  or  o 
loaded,  we  should  need  a  shaft  of  twice  the  strength  needed  to 
carry  a.  Let  s  be  the  shaft  required  to  cany  a,  and  sa  the  shaft 
required  to  carry  b  or  c ;   then  s  may  be  divided  into  two  shafts, 

*  Vide  the  interesting  discussion  of  this  point  in  Mr.  Fergusson's  account  of  the  Tem- 
ple of  Karnak,  "  Principles  of  Beauty  in  Art,"  p.  219. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Till.    THE   SHAFT. 


93 


or  s2  into  four  shafts,  as 
at  s3,  all  equal  in  area  or 
solid  contents*  ;  and  the 
mass  a  might  be  carried 
safely  by  two  of  them, 
and  the  masses  b  and  c, 
each  by  four  of  them. 

Now  if  we  put  the  sin- 
gle shafts  each  under  the 
centre  of  the  mass  they 
haTe  to  bear,  as  repre- 
sented by  the  shaded  cir- 


Fig.  XIV. 


S 


s- 


B 


C 


cles   at    0,    a. 


a. 


the 


'5       u"2?      ^3  5 

masses  a  and  c  are  both 
of  them  very  ill  support- 
ed, and  even  b  insuffi- 
ciently; but  apply  the 
four  and  the  two  shafts 
as  at  &,  &3,  5S,  and  they 
arc  Bupported  satisfacto- 
rily. Let  the  weight  on 
each  of  the  masses   be 


a 


% 

c3 


doubled,  and  the  shafts 
doubled  in  area,  then  we 
shall  have  such  arrange- 
ments as  those  at  <?,  c\,,c3; 
and  if  again  the  shafts 
and  weight  be  doubled, 
shall  have  d,  d2,  d3. 
§  xiv.  Now  it  will  at 
once  be  observed  that  the 
arrangement  of  the  shafts 
in  the  series  of  b  and  o  is 


*  I  have  assumed  that  the  strength  of  similar  shafts  of  equal  height  is  as  the  squares 
of  their  di  which,  though  not  actually  a.  correct  expression,  is  sufficiently  so 

for  all  our  present  purposes. 


:-■ 


94  Till.    TIIE    SnAFT. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


always  exactly  the  same  in  their  relations  to  each  other ;  only  the 
group  of  b Js  set  evenly,  and  the  group  of  c  is  set  obliquely, — the 
one  carrying  a  square,  the  other  a  cross. 

You  have  in.  these  two  series  the  primal  representations  of 
shaft  arrangement  in  the  Southern  and  Northern  schools  ;  while 
the  group  5,  of  which  b2  is  the  double,  set  evenly,  and  c2  the 
double,  set  obliquely,  is  common  to  both.  The  reader  will  be 
surprised  to  find  how  all  the  complex  and  varied  forms  of  shaft 
arrangement  will  range  themselves  into  one  or  other  of  these 
groups  ;  and  still  more  surprised  to  find  the  oblique  or  cross  set 
system  pn  the  one  hand,  and  the  square  set  system  on  the  other, 
severally  distinctive  of  Southern  and  Northern  work.  The  dome 
of  St.  Mark's,  and  the  crossing  of  the  nave  and  transepts  of 
Beauvais,  are  both  carried  by  square  piers ;  but  the  piers  of  St. 
Mark's  are  set  square  to  the  walls  of  the  church,  and  those  of 
Beauvais  obliquely  to  them :  and  this  difference  is  even  a  more 
essential  one  than  that  between  the  smooth  surface  of .  the  one 
and  the  reedy  complication  of  the  other.  The  two  squares  here 
in  the  margin  (Fig.  XV.)  are  exactly  of  the  same  size,  but  their 

expression  is  altogether  different,  and 
in  that  difference  lies  one  of  the  most 
subtle  distinctions  between  the  Gothic 
and  Greek  spirit, — from  the  shaft, 
which  bears  the  building,  to  the 
smallest  decoration.  The  Greek 
square  is  by  preference  set  evenly, 
the  Gothic  square  obliquely;  and  that  so  constantly,  that 
wherever  we  find  the  level  or  even  square  occurring  as  a 
prevailing  form,  either  in  plan  or  decoration,  in  early  northern 
work,  there  we  may  at  least  suspect  the  presence  of  a 
southern  or  Greek  influence ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  wher- 
ever the  oblique  square  is  prominent  in  the  south,  we  may 
confidently  look  for  farther  evidence  of  the  influence  of  the 
Gothic  architects.  The  rule  must  not  of  course  be  pressed  far 
when,  in  either  school,  there  has  been  determined  search  for 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VIII.    THE   SHAFT.  95 


every  possible  variety  of  decorative  figures  ;  and  accidental  cir- 
cumstances may  reverse  the  usual  system  in  special  cases :  but 
the  evidence  drawn  from  this  character  is  collaterally  of  the 
highest  value,  and  the  tracing  it  out  is  a  pursuit  of  singular  in- 
terest. Thus,  the  Pisan  Romanesque  might  in  an  instant  be 
pronounced  to  have  been  formed  under  some  measure  of  Lom- 
barclic  influence,  from  the  oblique  squares  set  under  its  arches  ; 
and  in  it  we  have  the  spirit  of  northern  Gothic  affecting  details 
of  the  southern ; — obliquity  of  square,  in  magnificently  shafted 
Romanesque.  At  Monza,  on  the  other  hand,  the  levelled  square 
is  the  characteristic  figure  of  the  entire  decoration  of  the  facade 
of  the  Duomo,  eminently  giving  it  southern  character  ;  but  the 
details  are  derived  almost  entirely  from  the  northern  Gothic. 
Here  then  we  have  southern  spirit  and  northern  detail.  Of  the 
cruciform  outline  of  the  load  of  the  shaft,  a  still  more  positive 
test  of  northern  work,  we  shall  have  more  to  say  in  the  28th 
Chapter  ;  we  must  at  present  note  certain  farther  changes  in  the 
form  of  the  grouped  shaft,  which  open  the  way  to  every  branch 
of  its  endless  combinations,  southern  or  northern. 

§  xv.  1.  If  the  group  at  d3,  Fig.  XIY.,  be  taken  from  under 
its  loading,  and  have  its  centre  filled  up,  it  will  become  a  quatre- 
foil ;  and  it  will  represent,  in  their  form  of  most  frequent  occur- 
rence, a  family  of  shafts,  whose  plans  are  foiled  figures,  trefoils., 
quatrefoils,  cinquefoils,  &c. ;  of  which  a  trefoiled  example,  from 
the  Frari  at  Venice,  is  the  third  in  Plate  II.,  and  a  quatrefoil 
from  Salisbury  the  eighth.  It  is  rare,  however,  to  find  in  Gothic 
architecture  shafts  of  this  family  composed  of  a  large  number  of 
foils,  because  multifoiled  shafts  are  seldom  true  grouped  shafts, 
but  are  rather  canaliculated  conditions  of  massy  piers.  The  re- 
presentatives of  this  family  may  be  considered  as  the  quatrefoil 
on  the  Gothic  side  of  the  Alps  ;  and  the  Egyptian  multifoiled 
shaft  on  the  south,  approximating  to  the  general  type,  b,  Fig. 
XYI. 

§  xvi.  Exactly  opposed  to  this  great  family  is  that  of  shafts  which 
have  concave  curves  instead  of  convex  on  each  of  their  sides  ;  but 


!>0 


VIII.    THE  SHAFT. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


these  are  not,  properly  speaking, 
grouped  shafts  ai  all,  and  their  pro- 
per place  is  among  decorated  piers  ; 
only  they  must  be  named  here  in 
order  to  mark  their  exact  opposi- 
tion to  the  foiled  system.  In  their 
simplest  form,  represented  by  e, 
Fig.  XVI. ,  they  have  no  representa- 
tives in  good  architecture,  being 
evidently  weak  and  meagre  ;  but 
approximations  to  them  exist  in 
late  Gothic,  as  in  the  vile  cathe- 
dral of  Orleans,  and  in  modern 
cast-iron  shafts.  In  their  fully  de- 
veloped form  they  are  the  Greek 
Doric,  #,  Fig.  XVI. ,  and  occur  in 
caprices  of  the  Romanesque  and 
Italian  Gothic :  <#,  Fig.   XVI.,   is 

from  the  Duomo  of  Monza. 

§  xvn.  2.  Between  c3  and  d3  of  Fig.  XIV.  there  may  be  evi- 
dently another  condition,  represented  at  6,  Plate  II.,  (p.  97.),  and 
formed  by  the  insertion  of  a  central  shaft  within  the  four  external 
ones.  This  central  shaft  we  may  suppose  to  expand  in  propor- 
tion to  the  weight  it  has  to  carry.  If  the  external  shafts  expand 
in  the  same  proportion,  the  entire  form  remains  unchanged ;  but 
if  they  do  not  expand,  they  may  (1)  be  pushed  out  by  the  expand- 
ing shaft,  or  (2)  be  gradually  swallowed  up  in  its  expansion,  as 
at  4,  Plate  II.  If  they  are  pushed  out,  they  are  removed  farther 
from  each  other  by  every  increase  of  the  central  shaft;  and 
others  may  then  be  introduced  in  the  vacant  spaces  ;  giving,  on 
the  plan,  a  central  orb  with  an  ever  increasing  host  of  satellites, 
10,  Plate  II. ;  the  satellites  themselves  often  varying  in  size,  and 
perhaps  quitting  contact  with  the  central  shaft.  Suppose  them 
in  any  of  their  conditions  fixed,  while  the  inner  shaft  expands, 
and  they 'will  be  gradually  buried   in  it,  forming  more  compli- 


construction.  VIII.    THE    SHAFT.  97 

catecl  conditions  of  4,  Plate  II.  The  combinations  are  thus  alto- 
gether infinite,  even  supposing  the  central  shaft  to  be  circular 
only;  but  their  infinity  is  multiplied  by  many  other  infinities 
when  the  central  shaft  itself  becomes  square  or  crosslet  on  the 
section,  or  itself  multifoiled  (8,  Plate  II.)  with  satellite  shafts 
eddying  about  its  recesses  and  angles,  in  every  possible  relation 
of  attraction.  Among  these  endless  conditions  of  change,  the 
choice  of  the  architect  is  free,  this  only  being  generally  noted  : 
that,  as  the  whole  value  of  such  piers  depends,  first,  upon  their 
being  wisely  fitted  to  the  weight  above  them,  and,  secondly, 
upon  their  all  working  together :  and  one  not  failing  the  rest, 
perhaps  to  the  ruin  of  all,  he  must  never  multiply  shafts  without 
visible  cause  in  the  disposition  of  members  superimposed  *  :  and 
in  his  multiplied  group  he  should,  if  possible,  avoid  a  marked 
separation  between  the  large  central  shaft  and  its  satellites  ;  for 
if  this  exist,  the  satellites  will  either  appear  useless  altogether,  or 
else,  which  is  worse,  they  will  look  as  if  they  were  meant  to  keep 
the  central  shaft  together  by  wiring  or  caging  it  in ;  like  iron 
rods  set  round  a  supple  cylinder, — a  fatal  fault  in  the  piers  of 
Westminster  Abbey,  and,  in  a  less  degree,  in  the  noble  nave  of 
the  cathedral  of  Bourges. 

§  xvni.  While,  however,  we  have  been  thus  subdividing  or 
assembling  our  shafts,  how  far  has  it  been  possible  to  retain  their 
curved  or  tapered  outline  ?  So  long  as  they  remain  distinct  and 
equal,  however  close  to  each  other,  the  independent  curvature 
may  evidently  be  retained.  But  when  once  they  come  in  contact, 
it  is  equally  evident  that  a  column,  formed  of  shafts  touching  at 
the  base  and  separate  at  the  top,  would  appear  as  if  in  the  very 
act  of  splitting  asunder.  Hence,  in  all  the  closely  arranged 
groups,  and  especially  those  with  a  central  shaft,  the  tapering  is 
riflced ;  and  with  less  cause  for  regret,  because  it  was  a  pro- 

*  How  far  this  condition  limits  the  system  of  shaft  grouping  we  shall  see  presently. 
The  reader  must  remember,  that  we  at  present  reason  respecting  shafts  in  the  ab- 
stract only. 

7 


98  VUL.  THE   SHAFT.  construction. 

vision  against  subsidence  or  distortion,  which  cannol  now  take 
place  with  the  separate  members  of  the  group.  Evidently,  the 
work,  it'  sale  at  all,  must  be  executed  with  far  greater  accuracy 

and  stability  when  its  supports  are  so  delicately  arranged,  than 
would  be  implied  by  such  precaution.  In  grouping  shafts,  there- 
lore,  a  true  perpendicular  line  is,  in  nearly  all  cases,  given  to  the 
pier  ;  and  the  reader  will  anticipate  that  the  two  schools,  which 
we  have  already  found  to  be  distinguished,  the  one  by  its  perpen- 
dicular and  pieced  shafts,  and  the  other  by  its  curved  and  block 
shafts,  will  be  found  divided  also  in  their  employment  of  grouped 
shafts ; — it  is  likely  that  the  idea  of  grouping,  however  suggested, 
will  be  fully  entertained  and  acted  upon  by  the  one,  but  hesi- 
tatingly by  the  other  ;  and  that  we  shall  find,  on  the  one  hand, 
buildings  displaying  sometimes  massy  piers  of  small  stones,  some- 
times clustered  piers  of  rich  complexity,  and  on  the  other,  more 
or  less  regular  succession  of  block  shafts,  each  treated  as  entirely 
independent  of  those  around  it. 

§  xix.  Farther,  the  grouping  of  shafts  once  admitted,  it  is  proba- 
ble that  the  complexity  and  richness  of  such  arrangements  would 
recommend  them  to  the  eye,  and  induce  their  frequent,  even 
their  unnecessary  introduction  ;  so  that  weight  which  might  have 
been  borne  by  a  single  pillar,  would  be  in  preference  supported 
by  four  or  Hve.  And  if  the  stone  of  the  country,  whose  frag- 
mentary character  first  occasioned  the  building  and  piecing  of 
the  large  pier,  were  yet  in  beds  consistent  enough  to  supply 
shafts  of  very  small  diameter,  the  strength  and  simplicity  of  such 
a  construction  might  justify  it,  as  well  as  its  grace.  The  fact, 
however,  is  that  the  charm  which  the  multiplication  of  line  j)os- 
sesses  for  the  eye  has  always  been  one  of  the  chief  ends  of  the 
work  in  the  grouped  schools;  and  that,  so  far  from  employing 
the  grouped  piers  in  order  to  the  introduction  of  very  slender 
block  shafts,  the  most  common  form  in  which  such  priers  occur  is 
that  of  a  solid  jointed  shaft,  each  joint  being  separately  cut  into 
the  contour  of  the  group  required. 

§xx.  A\re  have  hitherto  supposed  that  all  grouped  or  clustered 


CONSTRUCTION.  VIII.    THE    SHAFT.  99 

shafts  have  been  the  result  or  the  expression  of  an  actual  gather- 
ing and  binding  together  of  detached  shafts.  This  is  not,  how- 
ever, always  so  :  for  some  clustered  shafts  are  little  more  than 
solid  piers  channelled  on  the  surface,  and  their  form  appears  to 
be  merely  the  development  of  some  longitudinal  furrowing  or 
striation  on  the  original  single  shaft.  That  clustering  or  striation, 
whichever  we  choose  to  call  it,  is  in  this  case  a  decorative  feature, 
and  to  be  considered  under  the  head  of  decoration. 

§  xxi.  Jt  must  be  evident  to  the  reader  at  a  glance,  that  the 
real  serviceableness  of  any  of  these  grouped  arrangements  must 
depend  upon  the  relative  shortness  of  the  shafts,  and  that,  when 
the  whole  pier  is  so  lofty  that  its  minor  members  become  mere 
reeds  or  rods  of  stone,  those  minor  members  can  no  longer  be 
charged  with  any  considerable  weight.  And  the  fact  is,  that  in 
the  most  complicated  Gothic  arrangements,  when  the  pier  is  tall 
and  its  satellites  stand  clear  of  it,  no  real  work  is  given  them  to 
do,  and  they  might  all  be  removed  without  endangering  the 
building.  They  are  merely  the  expression  of  a  great  consistent 
system,  and  are  in  architecture  what  is  often  found  in  animal 
anatomy, — a  bone,  or  process  of  a  bone,  useless,  under  the 
ordained  circumstances  of  its  life,  to  the  particular  animal  in 
which  it  is  found,  and  slightly  developed,  but  yet  distinctly  exist- 
ent, and  representing,  for  the  sake  of  absolute  consistency,  the 
same  bone  in  its  appointed,  and  generally  useful,  place,  either  in 
the  skeletons  of  all  animals,  or  in  the  genus  to  which  the  animal 
itself  belongs. 

§  xxn.  Farther :  as  it  is  not  easy  to  obtain  pieces  of  stone 
Long  enough  for  these  supplementary  shafts  (especially  as  it  is 
always  unsafe  to  lay  a  stratified  stone  wdth  its  beds  upright)  they 
have  been  frequently  composed  of  two  or  more  short  shafts  set 
upon  each  other,  and  to  conceal  the  unsightly  junction,  a  fiat 
stone  has  been  interposed,  carved  into  certain  mouldings,  which 
have  the  appearance  of  a  ring  on  the  shaft.  JSTow  observe  :  the 
whole  pier  was  the  gathering  of  the  wdiole  wall,  the  base  gathe 
into  base,  the  veil  into  the  shaft,  and  the  string  courses  <>i"  the 


100  VIII.    THE    SHAFT. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


veil  gather  into  these  rings ;  and  when  this  is  clearly  expressed, 
and  the  rings  do  indeed  correspond  with  the  string  courses  of 
the  wall  veil,  they  are  perfectly  admissible  and  even  beautiful ; 
but  otherwise,  and  occurring,  as  they  do  in  the  shafts  of  West- 
minster, in  the  middle  of  continuous  lines,  they  are  but  sorry 
make-shifts,  and  of  late,  since  gas  has  been  invented,  have  be- 
come especially  offensive  from  their  unlucky  resemblance  to  the 
joints  of  gas-pipes,  or  common  water-pipes.  There  are  two  leaden 
ones,  for  instance,  on  the  left  hand  as  one  enters  th%  abbey  at 
Poet's  Corner,  with  their  solderings  and  funnels  looking  exactly 
like  rings  and  capitals,  and  most  disrespectfully  mimicking  the 
shafts  of  the  abbey,  inside. 

Thus  far  we  have  traced  the  probable  conditions  of  shaft 
structure  in  pure  theory  ;  I  shall  now  lay  before  the  reader  a 
brief  statement  of  the  facts  of  the  thing  in  time  past  and  present. 

§  xxm.  In  the  earliest  and  grandest  shaft  architecture  which 
we  know,  that  of  Egypt,  we  have  no  grouped  arrangements, 
properly  so  called,  but  either  single  and  smooth  shafts,  or  richly 
reeded  and  furrowed  shafts,  which  represent  the  extreme  con- 
ditions of  a  complicated  group  bound  together  to  sustain  a  single 
mass ;  and  are  indeed,  without  doubt,  nothing  else  than  imitations 
of  bundles  of  reeds,  or  of  clusters  of  the  lotus*  :  but  in  these 
shafts  there  is  merely  the  idea  of  a  group,  not  the  actual  func- 
tion or  structure  of  a  group  ;  they  are  just  as  much  solid  and 
simple  shafts  as  those  which  are  smooth,  and  merely  by  the 
method  of  their  decoration  present  to  the  eye  the  image  of  a 
richly  complex  arrangement. 

§  xxrv.  After  these  we  have  the  Greek  shaft,  less  in  scale,  and 
losing  all  suggestion  or  purpose  of  suggestion  of  complexity,  its 
so-called  flirtings  being,  visibly  as  actually,  an  external  decora- 
tion. 

§  xxv.  The  idea  of  the  shaft  remains  absolutely  single  in  the 
Eoman  and  Byzantine  mind;    but  true  grouping  begins   in 

*  The  capitals  being  formed  by  the  flowers,  or  by  a  representation  of  the  bulging 
out  of  the  reeds  at  the  top.  under  the  weight  of  the  architrave. 


11. 


3 


■■'  'Wfc.'K  „  ' 


^wllliii'iln v/ny 
m 


lit 


|fi 


iP'  H2fipr  ^ 


®  if  fit® 


ifeft 


/!•& 


k* 


-■■•■:)■■■■'  ;> - -_': , ..  . __L_ 


"  ^^K® 


IF 


A 


,  -c- 


IP 


^  -.-7^ 


>K 


n 


lb 


J  Ruskin. 


Ackerman  Lith  379  Broadway  N  Y 


Pfang   of  Pi  er$ 


construction.  VIII.    THE   SHAFT.  101 

Christian  architecture  by  the  placing  of  two  or  more  separate 
shafts  side  by  side,  each  having  its  own  work  to  do  ;  then  three 
or  four,  still  with  separate  work ;  then,  by  such  steps  as  those 
above  theoretically  pursued,  the  number  of  the  members  increases, 
while  they  coagulate  into  a  single  mass ;  and  we  have  finally  a 
shaft  apparently  composed  of  thirty,  forty,  fifty,  or  more  distinct 
members  ;  a  shaft  which,  in  the  reality  of  its  service,  is  as  much 
a  single  shaft  as  the  old  Egyptian  one ;  but  which  diners  from 
the  Egyptian  in  that  all  its  members,  how  many  soever,  have 
each  individual  work  to  do,  and  a  separate  rib  of  arch  or  roof  to 
carry :  and  thus  the  great  Christian  truth  of  distinct  services  of 
the  individual  soul  is  typified  in  the  Christian  shaft ;  and  the  old 
Egyptian  servitude  of  the  multitudes,  the  servitude  inseparable 
from  the  children  of  Ham,  is  typified  also  in  that  ancient  shaft 
of  the  Egyptians,  which  in  its  gathered  strength  of  the  river 
reeds,  seems,  as  the  sands  of  the  desert  drift  over  its  ruin,  to  be 
intended  to  remind  us  for  ever  of  the  end  of  the  association  of 
the  wicked.  "Can  the  rush  grow  up  without  mire,  or  the  flag 
grow  without  water? — So  are  the  paths  of  all  that  forget  God; 
and  the  hypocrite's  hope  shall  perish." 

§  xxvi.  Let  the  reader  then  keep  this  distinction  of  the  three 
systems  clearly  in  his  mind  :  Egyptian  system,  an  apparent  clus- 
ter supporting  a  simple  capital  and  single  weight ;  Greek  and 
Roman  system,  single  shaft,  single  weight ;  Gothic  system,  divi- 
ded shafts,  divided  weight :  at  first  actually  and  simply  divided, 
at  last  apparently  and  infinitely  divided ;  so  that  the  fully 
formed  Gothic  shaft  is  a  return  to  the  Egyptian,  but  the  weight 
is  divided  in  the  one  and  undivided  in  the  other. 

§  xxvii.  The  transition  from  the  actual  to  the  apparent  cluster, 
in  the  Gothic,  is  a  question  of  the  most  curious  interest ;  I  have 
thrown  together  the  shaft  sections  in  Plate  II.  to  illustrate  it, 
and  exemplify  what  has  been  generally  stated  above.* 

*  I  have  not  been  at  the  pains  to  draw  the  complicated  piers  in  this  plate  with  abso- 
lute exactitude  to  the  scale  of  each :  they  are  accurate  enough  for  their  purpose  :  those 
of  them  respecting  which  we  shall  have  farther  question,  will  be  given  on  a  much 
larger  scale. 


102  VIII.     THE    SHAFT.  CONSTRUCTION. 

1.  The  earliest,  the  most  frequent,  perhaps  the  most  beautiful 
of  all  the  groups,  is  also  the  simplest ;  the  two  shafts  arranged 
as  at  ~b  or  <?,  (Fig.  XIY.)  above,  bearing  an  oblong  mass,  and  sub- 
stituted for  the  still  earlier  structure  $,  Fig.  XIY.  In  Plate 
XVII.  (Chap.  XXVII.)  are  three  examples  of  the  transition  : 
the  one  on  the  left,  at  the  top,  is  the  earliest  single-shafted 
arrangement,  constant  in  the  rough  Romanesque  windows ;  a 
huge  hammer-shaped  capital  being  employed  to  sustain  the 
thickness  of  the  wall.  It  was  rapidly  superseded  by  the  double 
shaft,  as  on  the  right  of  it ;  a  very  early  example  from  the  clois- 
ters of  the  Duomo,  Verona.  Beneath,  is  a  most  elaborate  and 
perfect  one  from  St.  Zeno  of  Verona,  where  the  group  is  twice 
complicated,  two  shafts  being  used,  both  with  quatrefoil  sec- 
tions. The  plain  double  shaft,  however,  is  by  far  the  most  fre- 
quent, both  in  the  Northern  and  Southern  Gothic,  but  for  the 
most  part  early  ;  it  is  very  frequent  in  cloisters,  and  in  the  sin- 
gular one  of  St.  Michael's  Mount,  Normandy,  a  small  pseudo-ar- 
cade runs  along  between  the  pairs  of  shafts,  a  miniature  aisle. 
The  group  is  employed  on  a  magnificent  scale,  but  ill  propor- 
tioned, for  the  main  piers  of  the  apse  of  the  cathedral  of  Coutan- 
ces,  its  purpose  being  to  conceal  one  shaft  behind  the  other,  and 
make  it  appear  to  the  spectator  from  the  nave  as  if  the  apse 
were  sustained  by  single  shafts,  of  inordinate  slenderness.  The 
attempt  is  ill-judged,  and  the  result  unsatisfactory. 

§  xxviii.  2.  When  these  pairs  of  shafts  come  near  each  other, 
as  frequently  at  the  turnings  of  angles  (Fig.  XVIL),  the  quad- 
ruple group  results,  b  2,  Fig.  XIV.,  of  which  the 
Fig.  XVII.      Lombardic  sculptors  were  excessively  fond,  usually 

#  o  o  ty*nS  ^ie  sna^s  together  in  their  centre,  in  a  lover's 

#  0  m    knot.     They  thus  occur  in  Plate  V.,  from  the  Bro- 

letto  of  Como ;  at  the  angle  of  St.  Michele  of  Lucca, 
Plate  XXI. ;  and  in  the  balustrade  of  St.  Mark's. 
This   is  a  group,  however,  which  I  have  never 
seen  used  on  a  large  scale.* 

#  The  largest  I  remember  support  a  monument  in  St.  Zeno  of  Verona :  they  are  of 
red  marble,  some  ten  or  twelve  feet  high. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


VIII.    THE   SHAFT. 


103 


Fig.   XVIII. 


§  xxix.  3.  Such  groups,  consolidated  by  a  small  square  in  their 
centre,  form  the  shafts  of  St.  Zeno,  just  spoken 
of,  and  figured  in  Plate  XVII. ,  which  are  among 
the  most  interesting  pieces  of  work  I  know  in 
Italy.  I  give  their  entire  arrangement  here  at 
the  side,  Fig.  XYIII. :  both  shafts  have  the  same 
section,  but  one  receives  a  half  turn  as  it  as- 
cends, giving  it  an  exquisite  spiral  contour :  the 
plan  of  their  bases,  with  their  plinth,  is  given  at 
2,  Plate  II. ;  and  note  it  carefully,  for  it  is  an 
epitome  of  all  that  we  observed  above,  respecting 
the  oblique  and  even  square.  It  was  asserted 
that  the  oblique  belonged  to  the  north,  the  even 
to  the  south  :  we  have  here  the  northern  Lom- 
bardic  nation  naturalised  in  Italy,  and,  behold, 
the  oblique  and  even  quatrefoil  linked  together ; 
not  confused,  but  actually  linked  by  a  bar  of 
stone,  as  seen  in  Plate  XYIL,  under  the  capitals. 

4.  Next  to  these,  observe  the  two  groups  of  five  shafts  each 
5  and  6,  Plate  II.,  one  oblique,  the  other  even.  Both  are  from 
upper  stories  ;  the  oblique  one  from  the  triforium  of  Salisbury : 
the  even  one  from  the  upper  range  of  shafts  in  the  facade  of  St. 
Mark's  at  Venice.* 

§  xxx.  Around  these  central  types  are  grouped,  in  Plate  II., 
four  simple  examples  of  the  satellitic  cluster,  all  of  the  Northern 
Gothic  :  4,  from  the  Cathedral  of  Amiens ;  7,  from  that  of  Lyons 
(nave  pier) ;  8,  the  same  from  Salisbury;  10,  from  the  porch  of 
Notre  Dame,  Dijon,  having  satellites  of  three  magnitudes  :  9  is 
one  of  the  piers  between  the  doors  of  the  same  church,  with 
shafts  of  four  magnitudes,  and  is  an  instance  of  the  confusion  of 
mind  of  the  Northern  architects  between  piers  proper  and  jamb 
mouldings  (noticed  farther  in  the  next  chapter,  §  xxxi.) :  for  this 
fig.  9.,  which  is  an  angle  at  the  meeting  of  two  jambs,  is  treated 


*  The  effect  of  this  last  is  given  in  Plate  VI.  of  the  folio  series. 


104  VIII.    TIIE    SIIAFT.  CONSTRUCTION. 

like  a  rich  independent  shaft,  and  the  figure  below,  12,  which  is 
half  of  a  trne  shaft,  is  treated  like  a  meeting  of  jambs. 

All  these  four  examples  belonging  to  the  oblique  or  Northern 
system,  the  curious  trefoil  plan,  3,  lies  between  the  two,  as  the 
double  quatrefoil  next  it  unites  the  two.  The  trefoil  is  from  the 
Frari,  Venice,  and  has  a  richly  worked  capital  in  the  Byzantine 
manner, — an  imitation,  I  think,  of  the  Byzantine  work  by  the 
Gothic  builders  :  1  is  to  be  compared  with  it,  being  one  of  the 
earliest  conditions  of  the  cross  shaft,  from  the  atrium  of  St.  Am- 
brogio  at  Milan.  13  is  the  nave  pier  of  St.  Michele  at  Pavia, 
showing  the  same  condition  more  fully  developed :  and  11  an- 
other nave  pier  from  Vienne,  on  the  Rhone,  of  far  more  distinct 
Roman  derivation,  for  the  flat  pilaster  is  set  to  the  nave,  and  is 
fluted  like  an  antique  one.  12  is  the  grandest  development  I 
have  ever  seen  of  the  cross  shaft,  with  satellite  shafts  in  the 
nooks  of  it :  it  is  half  of  one  of  the  great  western  piers  of  the 
cathedral  of  Bourges,  measuring  eight  feet  each  side,  thirty-two 
round.*  Then  the  one  below  (15)  is  half  of  a  nave  pier  of  Rouen 
Cathedral,  showing  the  mode  in  which  such  conditions  as  that 
of  Dijon  (9)  and  that  of  Bourges  (12)  were  fused  together  into 
forms  of  inextricable  complexity ;  (inextricable  I  mean  in  the 
irregularity  of  proportion  and  projection,  for  all  of  them  are 
easily  resolvable  into  simple  systems  in  connection  with  the  roof 
ribs).  This  pier  of  Rouen  is  a  type  of  the  last  condition  of  the 
good  Gothic ;  from  this  point  the  small  shafts  begin  to  lose  shape, 
and  run  into  narrow  fillets  and  ridges,  projecting  at  the  same 
time  farther  and  farther  in  weak  tongue-like  sections,  as 
described  in  the  "  Seven  Lamps."  I  have  only  here  given  one 
example  of  this  family,  an  unimportant  but  sufficiently  charac- 
teristic one  (16),  from  St.  Gervais  of  Falaise.     One  side  of  the 

*  The  entire  development  of  this  cross  system  in  connection  with  the  vaulting  ribs, 
has  been  most  clearly  explained  by  Professor  Willis  (Architecture  of  Mid.  Ages, 
Chap.  IV.) ;  and  I  strongly  recommend  every  reader  who  is  inclined  to  take  pains 
in  the  matter,  to  read  that  chapter.  I  have  been  contented,  in  my  own  text,  to  pur- 
sue the  abstract  idea  of  shaft  form. 


CONSTRUCTION.  VIII.    THE    SHAFT.  105 

nave  of  that  church  is  Norman,  the  other  Flamboyant,  and  the 
two  piers  14  and  16  stand  opposite  each  other.  It  would  be 
useless  to  endeavour  to  trace  farther  the  fantasticism  of  the  later 
Gothic  shafts ;  they  become  mere  aggregations  of  mouldings 
very  sharply  and  finely  cut,  their  bases  at  the  same  time  running 
together  in  strange  complexity  and  their  capitals  diminishing  and 
disappearing.  Some  of  their  conditions,  which,  in  their  rich 
striation,  resemble  crystals  of  beryl,  are  very  massy  and  grand ; 
others,  meagre,  harsh,  or  effeminate  in  themselves,  are  redeemed 
by  richness  and  boldness  of  decoration ;  and  I  have  long  had  it 
in  my  mind  to  reason  out  the  entire  harmony  of  this  French 
Flamboyant  system,  and  fix  its  types  and  possible  power.  But 
this  inquiry  is  foreign  altogether  to  our  present  purpose,  and  we 
shall  therefore  turn  back  from  the  Flamboyant  to  the  Norman 
side  of  the  Falaise  aisle,  resolute  for  the  future  that  all  shafts  of 
which  we  may  have  the  ordering,  shall  be  permitted,  as  with 
wisdom  we  may  also  permit  men  or  cities,  to  gather  themselves 
into  companies,  or  constellate  themselves  into  clusters,  but  not  to 
fuse  themselves  into  mere  masses  of  nebulous  aggregation. 


106 


CHAPTER  IX. 


THE    CAPITAL. 


§  i.  The  reader  will  remember  that  in  Chap.  YII.  §  v.  it  was 
said  that  the  cornice  of  the  wall,  being  cut  to  pieces  and  gathered 
together,  formed  the  capital  of  the  column.  We  have  now  to 
follow  it  in  its  transformation. 

We  must,  of  course,  take  our  simplest  form  or  root  of  cornices 
(#,  in  Fig.  V.,  above).  We  will  take  X  and  Y  there,  and  we 
must  necessarily  gather  them  together  as  we  did  Xb  and  Yb  in 
Chap.  YII.  Look  back  to  the  tenth  paragraph  of  Chap.  YII., 
read  or  glance  it  over  again,  substitute  X  and  Y  for  Xb  and  Yb, 
read  capital  for  base,  and,  as  we  said  that  the  capital  was  the 
hand  of  the  pillar,  while  the  base  was  its  foot,  read  also  fingers 
for  toes  ;  and  as  you  look  to  the  plate,  Fig.  XII.,  turn  it  upside 
down.  Then  7i,  in  Fig.  XII.,  becomes  now  your  best  general 
form  of  block  capital,  as  before  of  block  base. 

§  ii.  You  will  thus  have  a  perfect  idea  of  the  analogies  between 
base  and  capital;  our  farther  inquiry  is  into  their  differences. 
You  cannot  but  have  noticed  that  when  Fig.  XII.  is  turned  up- 
side down,  the  square  stone  (Y)  looks  too  heavy  for  the  support- 
ing stone  (X) ;  and  that  in  the  profile  of  cornice  (a  of  Fig.  Y-) 
the  proportions  are  altogether  different.  You  will  feel  the  fitness 
of  this  in  an  instant  when  you  consider  that  the  principal  func- 
tion of  the  sloping  part  in  Fig.  XII.  is  as  a  prop  to  the  pillar  to 
keep  it  from  slipping  aside  /  but  the  function  of  the  sloping 
stone  in  the  cornice  and  capital  is  to  carry  weight  above.  The 
thrust  of  the  slope  in  the  one  case  should  therefore  be  lateral,  in 
the  other  upwards. 

§  hi.  We  will,  therefore,  take  the  two  figures,  e  and  h  of 


CONSTRUCTION. 


IX.    THE   CAPITAL. 


107 


Fig.  XII.,  and  make  this  change  in  them  as  we  reverse  them, 
using  now  the  exact  profile  of  the  cornice  a, — the  father  of 
cornices ;  and  we  shall  thus  have  a  and  &,  Fig.  XIX. 

Both  of  these  are 
sufficiently  ugly,  the 
reader  thinks  ;  so  do 
I ;  but  we  will  mend 


them  before  we  have 
done  with  them  :  that 
at  a  is  assuredly  the 
ugliest, — like  a  tile  on 
a  flower-pot.  It  is, 
nevertheless,  the  fa- 
ther of  capitals ;  be- 
ing the  simplest  con- 
dition of  the  gathered 
father  of  cornices. 
But  it  is  to  be  observ- 
ed that  the  diameter 
of  the  shaft  here  is 
arbitrarily  assumed 
to  be  small,  in  order 
more  clearly  to  show 
the  general  relations 
of  the  sloping  stone 
to  the  shaft  and  up- 
per stone;  and  this 
smallness  of  the  shaft 
diameter  is  inconsistent  with  the  serviceableness  and  beauty  of 
the  arrangement  at  #,  if  it  were  to  be  realised  (as  we  shall  see 
presently) ;  but  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  its  central  character, 
as  the  representative  of  every  species  of  possible  capital ;  nor  is 
its  tile  and  flower-pot  look  to  be  regretted,  as  it  may  remind  the 
reader  of  the  reported  origin  of  the  Corinthian  capital.  The 
stones  of  the  cornice,  hitherto  called  X  and  Y,  receive,  now  that 


108  IX.   THE   CAPITAL. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


they  form  the  capital,  each  a  separate  name ;  the  sloping  stone 
is  called  the  Bell  of  the  capital,  and  that  laid  above  it,  the  Abacus. 
Abucus  means  a  board  or  tile :  I  wish  there  were  an  English 
word  for  it,  but  I  fear  there  is  no  substitution  possible,  the  term 
having  been  long  fixed,  and  the  reader  will  find  it  convenient  to 
familiarise  himself  with  the  Latin  one. 

§  iv.  The  form  of  base,  e  of  Fig.  XII.,  which  corresponds  to  this 
first  form  of  capital,  «,  was  said  to  be  objectionable  only  because 
it  looked  insecure ;  and  the  spurs  were  added  as  a  kind  of  pledge 
of  stability  to  the  eye.  But  evidently  the  projecting  corners  of 
the  abacus  at  $,  Fig.  XIX.,  are  actually  insecure ;  they  may  break 
off,  if  great  weight  be  laid  upon  them.  This  is  the  chief  reason  of 
the  ugliness  of  the  form ;  and  the  spurs  in  h  are  now  no  mere 
pledges  of  apparent  stability,  but  have  very  serious  practical  use 
in  supporting  the  angle  of  the  abacus.  If,  even  with  the  added 
spur,  the  support  seems  insufficient,  we  may  fill  up  the  crannies 
between  the  spurs  and  the  bell,  and  we  have  the  form  c. 

Thus  #,  though  the  germ  and  type  of  capitals,  is  itself  (except 
under  some  peculiar  conditions)  both  ugly  and  insecure  ;  o  is  the 
first  type  of  capitals  which  carry  light  weight ;  c,  of  capitals 
which  carry  excessive  weight. 

§  v.  I  fear,  however,  the  reader  may  think  he  is  going  slightly 
too  fast,  and  may  not  like  having  the  capital  forced  upon  him 
out  of  the  cornice  ;  but  would  prefer  inventing  a  capital  for  the 
shaft  itself,  without  reference  to  the  cornice  at  all.  "We  will  do 
so  then ;   though  we  shall  come  to  the  same  result. 

The  shaft,  it  will  be  remembered,  has  to  sustain  the  same 
weight  as  the  long  piece  of  wall  which  was  concentrated  into  the 
shaft ;  it  is  enabled  to  do  this  both  by  its  better  form  and  better 
knit  materials ;  and  it  can  carry  a  greater  weight  than  the  space 
at  the  top  of  it  is  adapted  to  receive.  The  first  point,  therefore, 
is  to  expand  this  space  as  far  as  possible,  and  that  in  a  form 
more  convenient  than  the  circle  for  the  adjustment  of  the  stones 
above.  In  general  the  square  is  a  more  convenient  form  than 
any  other ;  but  the  hexagon  or  octagon  is  sometimes  better  fitted 


CONSTRUCTION. 


IX.    THE   CAPITAL. 


109 


Fig.  XX. 


© 


3 


^^B 


for  masses  of  work  which  divide  in  six 
or  eight  directions.  Then  our  first  im- 
pulse would  be  to  put  a  square  or  hexag- 
onal stone  on  the  top  of  the  shaft,  pro- 
jecting as  far  beyond  it  as  might  be  safe- 
ly ventured  ;  as  at  $,  Fig.  XX.  This  is 
the  abacus.  Our  next  idea  would  be  to 
put  a  conical  shaped  stone  beneath  this 
abacus,  to  support  its  outer  edge,  as  at  b. 
This  is  the  bell. 

§  vi.  *Now  the  entire  treatment  of  the 
capital  depends  simply  on  the  manner  in 
which  this  bell  stone  is  prepared  for  fit- 
ting the  shaft  below  and  the  abacus  above. 
Placed  as  at  «,  in  Fig.  XIX.,  it  gives  us 

the  simplest  of  possible  forms  ;  with  the  spurs  added,  as  at  5,  it 
gives  the  germ  of  the  richest  and  most  elaborate  forms  :  but 
there  are  two  modes  of  treatment  more  dexterous  than  the  one, 
and  less  elaborate  than  the  other,  which  are  of  the  highest  pos- 
sible importance, — modes  in  which  the  bell  is  brought  to  its  pro- 
per form  by  truncation. 

§  vii.  Let  d  and/",  Fig.  XIX.,  be  two  bell-stones  ;  d  is  part  of 
a  cone  (a  sugar-loaf  upside  down,  with  its  point  cut  off) ;  f  part 
of  a  four-sided  pyramid.  Then,  assuming  the  abacus  to  be 
square,  d  will  already  fit  the  shaft,  but  has  to  be  chiselled  to  fit 
the  abacus ;  f  will  already  fit  the  abacus,  but  has  to  be  chiselled 
to  fit  the  shaft. 

From  the  broad  end  of  d  chop  or  chisel  off,  in  four  vertical 
planes,  as  much  as  will  leave  its  head  an  exact  square. 
The  vertical  cuttings  will  form  curves  on  the  sides  of  the  cone 
(curves  of  a  curious  kind,  which  the  reader  need  not  be  troubled 
to  examine),  and  we  shall  have  the  form  at  <?,  which  is  the  root 
of  the  greater  number  of  Norman  capitals. 

From  f  cut  off  the  angles,  beginning  at  the  corners  of  the 
square  and  widening  the  truncation  downwards,  so  as  to  give  the 


110  IX.   THE   CAPITAL.  construction. 

form  at  g,  where  the  base  of  the  bell  -is  an  octagon,  and  its  top 
remains  a  square.  A  very  slight  rounding  away  of  the  angles  of 
the  octagon  at  the  base  of  g  will  enable  it  to  fit  the  circular  shaft 
closely  enough  for  all  practical  purposes,  and  this  form,  at  g,  is 
the  root  of  nearly  all  Lombardic  capitals. 

If,  instead  of  a  square,  the  head  of  the  bell  were  hexagonal  or 
octagonal,  the  operation  of  cutting  would  be  the  same  on  each 
angle ;  but  there  would  be  produced,  of  course,  six  or  eight 
curves  on  the  sides  of  <?,  and  twelve  or  sixteen  sides  to  the  base 
ofg. 

§  vin.  The  truncations  in  e  and  g  may  of  course  be  executed 
on  concave  or  convex  forms  of  d  and//  but  e  is  usually  worked 

on  a  straight-sided  bell,  and  the  truncation  of 
Fig.  XXI.  g  0ften  becomes  concave  while  the  bell  re- 

mains straight ;  for  this  simple  reason, — that 
the  sharp  points  at  the  angles  of  <7,  being 
somewhat  difficult  to  cut,  and  easily  broken 
off,  are  usually  avoided  by  beginning  the 
truncation  a  little  way  down  the  side  of  the 
bell,  and  then  recovering  the  lost  ground  by 
a  deeper  cut  inwards,  as  here,  Fig.  XXI. 
This  is  the  actual  form  of  the  capitals  of  the  balustrades  of  St. 
Mark's :  it  is  the  root  of  all  the  Byzantine  Arab  capitals,  and  of 
all  the  most  beautiful  capitals  in  the  world,  whose  function  is  to 
express  lightness. 

§  ix.  We  have  hitherto  proceeded  entirely  on  the  assumption 
that  the  form  of  cornice  which  was  gathered  together  to  produce 
the  capital  was  the  root  of  cornices,  a  of  Fig.  Y.  But  this,  it  will 
be  remembered,  was  said  in  §  vi.  of  Chap.  YI.  to  be  especially 
characteristic  of  southern  work,  and  that  in  northern  and  wet 
climates  it  took  the  form  of  a  dripstone. 

Accordingly,  in  the  northern  climates,  the  dripstone  gathered 
together  forms  a  peculiar  northern  capital,  commonly  called  the 
Early  English*,  owing  to  its  especial  use  in  that  style. 

*  Appendix  19.:  "Early  English  Capitals." 


CONSTRUCTION. 


IX.    THE   CAPITAL. 


Ill 


There  would  have  been  no  absurdity  in  this  if  shafts  were 
always  to  be  exposed  to  the  weather ;  but  in  Gothic  construc- 
tions the  most  important  shafts  are  in  the  inside  of  the  building. 
The  dripstone  sections  of  their  capitals  are  therefore  unnecessary 
and  ridiculous. 

§  x.  They  are,  however,  much  worse  than  unnecessary. 

The  edge  of  the  dripstone,  being  undercut,  has  no  bearing 
power,  and  the  capital  fails,  therefore,  in  its  own  principal  func- 
tion; and  besides  this,  the  undercut 
contour  admits  of  no  distinctly  visible 
decoration ;  it  is,  therefore,  left  utterly 
barren,  and  the  capital  looks  as  if  it 
had  been  turned  in  a  lathe.  The  Early 
English  capital  has,  therefore,  the  three 
greatest  faults  that  any  design  can  have : 
(1)  it  fails  in  its  own  proper  purpose, 
that  of  support ;  (2)  it  is  adapted  to  a 
purpose  to  which  it  can  never  be  put, 
that  of  keeping  off  rain;  (3)  it  cannot 
be  decorated. 

The  Early  English  capital  is,  there- 
fore, a  barbarism  of  triple  grossness, 
and  degrades  the  style  in  which  it  is 
found,  otherwise  very  noble,  to  one  of 
second-rate  order. 

§  xi.  Dismissing,  therefore,  the  Early 
English  capital  as  deserving  no  place 
in  our  system,  let  us  reassemble  in  one 
view  the  forms  which  have  been  legiti- 
mately developed,  and  which  are  to 
become  hereafter  subjects  of  decoration. 
To  the  forms  a,  &,  and  <?,  Fig.  XIX.,  we 
must  add  the  two  simplest  truncated 
forms  e  and  g,  Eig.  XIX.,  putting  their 
abaci  on  them  (as  we  considered  their 


X! 


112 


IX.   THE   CAPITAL. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


contours  in  the  bells  only),  and  we  shall  have  the  live  forms 
now  given  in  parallel  perspective  in  Fig.  XXII.,  which  are  the 
roots  of  all  good  capitals  existing,  or  capable  of  existence,  and 
whose  variations,  infinite  and  a  thousand  times  infinite,  are  all 
produced  by  introduction  of  various  curvatures  into  their  con- 
tours, and  the  endless  methods  of  decoration  superinduced  on 
such  curvatures. 

§  xii.  There  is,  however,  a  kind  of  variation,  also  infinite, 
which  takes  place  in  these  radical  forms,  before  they  receive 
either  curvature  or  decoration.  This  is  the  variety  of  propor- 
tion borne  by  the  different  lines  of  the  capital  to  each  other, 
and  to  the  shafts.  This  is  a  structural  question,  at  present  to  be 
considered  as  far  as  is  possible. 

§  xni.  All  the  five  capitals  (which  are  indeed  five  orders  with 
legitimate  distinction ;  very  different,  however,  from  the  five 
orders  as  commonly  understood,)  may  be  represented  by  the 
same  profile,  a  section  through  the  sides  of  #,  5,  <#,  and  0,  or 
through  the  angles  of  <?,  Fig.  XXII.  This  jDrofile  we  will  put  on 
the  top  of  a  shaft,  as  at  A,  Fig.  XXIIL,  which  shaft  we  will 

Fig.  XXIIL 


suppose  of  equal  diameter  above  and  below  for  the  sake  of 
greater  simplicity :  in  this  simplest  condition,  however,  relations 


construction.  IX.    THE   CAPITAL.  113 

of  proportion  exist  between  five  quantities,  any  one,  or  any  two, 
or  any  three,  or  any  four  of  which  may  change,  irrespective  of 
the  others.    These  five  quantities  are : 

1.  The  height  of  the  shaft,  ab  / 

2.  Its  diameter,  be* 

3.  The  length  of  slope  of  bell,  b  d  ; 

4.  The  inclination  of  this  slope,  or  angle  cb  d  / 

5.  The  depth  of  abacus,  d  e. 

For  every  change  in  any  one  of  these  quantities  we  have  a  new 
proportion  of  capital :  five  infinities,  supposing  change  only  in 
one  quantity  at  a  time  :  infinity  of  infinities  in  the  sum  of  pos- 
sible changes. 

It  is,  therefore,  only  possible  to  note  the  general  laws  of 
change ;  every  scale  of  pillar,  and  every  weight  laid  upon 
it,  admitting,  within  certain  limits,  a  variety  out  of  which  the 
architect  has  his  choice;  but  yet  fixing  limits  which  the  pro- 
portion becomes  ugly  when  it  approaches,  and  dangerous  when 
it  exceeds.  But  the  inquiry  into  this  subject  is  too  difficult 
for  the  general  reader,  and  I  shall  content  myself  with  proving 
four  laws,  easily  understood  and  generally  applicable ;  for  proof 
of  which  if  the  said  reader  care  not,  he  may  miss  the  next  four 
paragraphs  without  harm. 

§  xiv.  1.  The  more  slender  the  shaft,  the  greater,  proportion- 
ally, may  be  the  projection  of  the  abacus.  For,  looking  back  to 
Fig.  XXIIL,  let  the  height  a  b  be  fixed,  the  length  d  b,  the  angle 
d  b  c,  and  the  depth  d  e.  Let  the  single  quantity  b  c  be  variable, 
let  B  be  a  capital  and  shaft  which  are  found  to  be  perfectly  safe 
in  proportion  to  the  weight  they  bear,  and  let  the  weight  be 
equally  distributed  over  the  whole  of  the  abacus.  Then  this 
weight  may  be  represented  by  any  number  of  equal  divisions, 
suppose  four,  as  I,  m,  n,  r,  of  brickwork  above,  of  which  each 
division  is  one  fourth  of  the  whole  weight ;  and  let  this  weight 
be  placed  in  the  most  trying  way  on  the  abacus,  that  is  to  say, 
let  the  masses  I  and  r  be  detached  from  m  and  n,  and  bear  with 
their  full  weight  on  the  outside  of  the  capital.     We  assume,  in 

8 


114  IX.    THE  CAPITAL.  construction. 

B,  that  the  width  of  abacus  ef  is  twice  as  great  as  that  of  the 
shaft,  b  c,  and  on  these  conditions  we  assume  the  capital  to  be 
safe. 

But  b  c  is  allowed  to  be  variable.  Let  it  become  b2c2  at  C, 
which  is  a  length  representing  about  the  diameter  of  a  shaft 
containing  half  the  substance  of  the  shaft  B,  and,  therefore,  able 
to  sustain  not  more  than  half  the  weight  sustained  by  B.  But 
the  slope  b  d  and  depth  d  e  remaining  unchanged,  we  have  the 
capital  of  C,  which  we  are  to  load  with  only  half  the  weight  of 
Z,  m,  w,  r,  i.  e.  with  I  and  r  alone.  Therefore  the  weight  of  I  and 
r,  now  represented  by  the  masses,  Z2>  ^2?  *s  distributed  over  the 
whole  of  the  capital.  But  the  weight  r  was  adequately  sup- 
ported by  the  projecting  piece  of  the  first  capital  hfc:  much 
more  is  it  now  adequately  supported  by  i  h2  f2  c2 .  Therefore, 
if  the  capital  of  B  was  safe,  that  of  C  is  more  than  safe.  Now 
in  B  the  length  ef  was  only  twice  be;  but  in  C,  e2f2  will  be 
found  more  than  twice  that  of  b2  c2 .  Therefore,  the  more  slen- 
der the  shaft,  the  greater  may  be  the  proportional  excess  of  the 
abacus  over  its  diameter. 

§  xv.  2.  The  smaller  the  scale  of  the  building,  the  greater 
may  be  the  excess  of  the  abacus  over  the  diameter  of  the  shaft. 
This  principle  requires,  I  think,  no  very  lengthy  proof:  the 
reader  can  understand  at  once  that  the  cohesion  and  strength  of 
stone  which  can  sustain  a  small  projecting  mass,  will  not  sustain 
a  vast  one  overhanging  in  the  same  proportion.  A  bank  even 
of  loose  earth,  six  feet  high,  will  sometimes  overhang  its  base  a 
foot  or  two,  as  you  may  see  any  day  in  the  gravelly  banks  of  the 
lanes  of  ITampstead  :  but  make  the  bank  of  gravel,  equally  loose, 
six  hundred  feet  high,  and  see  if  you  can  get  it  to  overhang  a 
hundred  or  two !  much  more  if  there  be  weight  above  it  in- 
creased in  the  same  proportion.  Hence,  let  any  capital  be  given, 
whose  projection  is  just  safe,  and  no  more,  on  its  existing  scale ; 
increase  its  proportions  every  way  equally,  though  ever  so  little, 
and  it  is  unsafe  ;  diminish  them  equally,  and  it  becomes  safe  in 
the  exact  degree  of  the  diminution. 


'CONSTRUCTION. 


IX.     THE    CAPITAL. 


115 


Let,  then,  the  quantity  e  d,  and  angle  d  b  c,  at  A  of  Fig. 
XXIII.,  be  invariable,  and  let  the  length  d  b  vary :  then  we 
shall  have  such  a  series  of  forms  as  may  be  represented  by  a,  &,  c, 

Fig.  XXIV. 


V 


Fig.  XXV. 


Fig.  XXIV.,  of  which  a  is  a  proportion  for  a  colossal  building, 
b  for  a  moderately  sized  building,  while  c  could  only  be  admitted 
on  a  very  small  scale  indeed. 

§  xvi.  3.     The  greater  tlie  excess  of abacus ,  the  steeper  must  be 
the  slope  of  the  bell,  the  shaft  diameter  being  constant. 

This  will  evidently  follow  from  the  considerations  in  the  last 
paragraph  ;  supposing  only  that,  instead  of  the  scale  of  shaft  and 
capital  varying  together,  the  scale  of  the  capital  varies  alone. 
For  it  will  then  still  be  true,  that,  if  the 
projection  of  the  capital  be  just  safe  on  a 
given  scale,  as  its  excess  over  the  shaft  di- 
ameter increases,  the  projection  will  be 
unsafe,  if  the  slope  of  the  bell  remain  con- 
stant. But  it  may  be  rendered  safe  by 
making  this  slope  steeper,  and  so  increas- 
ing its  supporting  power. 

Thus  let  the  capital  a,  Fig.  XX Y.,  be 
just  safe.  Then  the  capital  5,  in  which 
the  slope  is  the  same  but  the  excess  great- 
er, is  unsafe.  But  the  capital  c,  in  which, 
though  the  excess  equals  that  of  &,  the 
steepness  of  the  supporting  slope  is  in- 
creased, will  be  as  safe  as  5,  and  probably 
as  strong  as  a* 

*  In  this  case,  the  "Weight  borne  is  supposed  to  increase  as  the  abacus  widens ;  the 


1 

a 

/ 

i 

I 

\^ 

y^ 

b 



!                                     _J 

\ 

c 

/ 

116  IX.    THE   CAPITAJL.  construction. 

§  xvn.  4.  The  steeper  the  slope  of  the  hell,  the  thinner  may  oe 
the  abacus. 

The  use  of  the  abacus  is  eminently  to  equalise  the  pres- 
sure over  the  surface  of  the  bell,  so  that  the  weight  may 
not  by  any  accident  be  directed  exclusively  upon  its  edges. 
In  proportion  to  the  strength  of  these  edges,  this  function 
of  the  abacus  is  superseded,  and  these  edges  are  strong  in 
proportion  to  the  steepness  of  the  slope.  Thus,  in  Fig.  XXVL, 
the  bell  at  a  would  carry  weight  safely  enough  without  any 

abacus ;    but  that   at   e  would  not :    it 
g"  '  would  probably  have  its  edges  broken  off. 

7        V        j    The  abacus  superimposed  might  be  on  a 
I  \     /      very  thin,  little  more  than  formal,  as  at 

g  L  &  /  hut  on  c  must  be  thick,  as  at  d. 

§  xviii.  These  four  rules  are  all  that 

are  necessary  for  general  criticism  ;  and 

k         /    observe  that  these  are  only  semi-impera- 


a 


d 


tive, — rules  of  permission,  not  of  com- 
pulsion. Thus,  Law  1.  asserts  that  the 
slender  shaft  may  have  greater  excess  of  capital  than  the  thick 
shaft ;  but  it  need  not,  unless  the  architect  chooses ;  his  thick 
shafts  must  have  small  excess,  but  his  slender  ones  need  not 
have  large.  So  Law  2.  says,  that  as  the  building  is  smaller,  the 
excess  may  be  greater  ;  but  it  need  not,  for  the  excess  which  is 
safe  in  the  large  is  still  safer  in  the  small.  So  Law  3.  says  that 
capitals  of  great  excess  must  have  steep  slopes ;  but  it  does  not 
say  that  capitals  of  small  excess  may  not  have  steep  slopes  also, 
if  we  choose.  And  lastly,  Law  4.  asserts  the  necessity  of  the 
thick  abacus  for  the  shallow  bell ;  but  the  steep  bell  may  have  a 
thick  abacus  also. 

§  xix.  It  will  be  found,  however,  that  in  practice  some  confes- 
sion of  these  laws  will  always  be  useful,  and  especially  of  the 
two  first.    The  eye  always  requires,  on  a  slender  shaft,  a  more 

illustration  would  have  been  clearer  if  I  had  assumed  the  breadtji  of  abacus  to  be  con- 
stant, and  that  of  the  shaft  to  vary. 


CONSTRUCTION.  IX.     THE    CAPITAL.  117 

spreading  capital  than  it  does  on  a  massy  one,  and  a  bolder  mass 
of  capital  on  a  small  scale  than  on  a  large.  And,  in  the  applica- 
tion of  the  first  rule,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  a  shaft  becomes  slen- 
der either  by  diminntion  of  diameter  or  increase  of  height ;  that 
either  mode  of  change  presupposes  the  weight  above  it  diminish- 
ed, and  requires  an  expansion  of  abacus.  I  know  no  mode  of 
spoiling  a  noble  building  more  frequent  in  actual  practice  than 
the  imposition  of  flat  and  slightly  expanded  capitals  on  tall 
shafts. 

§  xx.  The  reader  must  observe,  also,  that,  in  the  demonstra- 
tion of  the  four  laws,  I  always  assumed  the  weight  above  to  be 
given.  By  the  alteration  of  this  weight,  therefore,  the  architect 
has  it  in  his  power  to  relieve,  and  therefore  alter,  the  forms  of 
his  capitals.  By  its  various  distribution  on  their  centres  or 
edges,  the  slope  of  their  bells  and  thickness  of  abaci  will  be  af- 
fected also  ;  so  that  he  has  countless  expedients  at  his  command 
for  the  various  treatment  of  his  design.  lie  can  divide  his 
weights  among  more  shafts  ;  he  can  throw  them  in  different 
places  and  different  directions  on  the  abaci ;  he  can  alter  slope 
of  bells  or  diameter  of  shafts  ;  he  can  use  spurred  or  plain  bells, 
thin  or  thick  abaci ;  and  all  these  changes  admitting  of  infinity 
in  their  degrees,  and  infinity  a  thousand  times  told  in  their  re- 
lations :  and  all  this  without  reference  to  decoration,  merely  with 
the  five  forms  of  block  capital ! 

§  xxi.  In  the  harmony  of  these  arrangements,  in  their  •  fitness, 
unity,  and  accuracy,  lies  the  true  'proportion  of  every  building, 
— proportion  utterly  endless  in  its  infinities  of  change,  with  un- 
changed beauty.  And  yet  this  connexion  of  the  frame  of  their 
building  into  one  harmony  has,  I  believe,  never  been  so  much  as 
dreamed  of  by  architects.  It  has  been  instinctively  done  in  some 
degree  by  many,  empirically  in  some  degree  by  many  more ; 
thoughtfully  and  thoroughly,  I  believe,  by  none. 

§  xxii.  We  have  hitherto  considered  the  abacus  as  necessarily 
a  separate  stone  from  the  bell:  evidently,  however,  the  strength 
of  the  capital  will  be  undiminished  if  both  are  cut  out  of  one 


118 


IX.    THE   CAPITAL. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


block.  This  is  actually  the  case  in  many  capitals,  especially 
those  on  a  small  scale ;  and  in  others  the  detached  upper  stone 
is  a  mere  representative  of  the  abacus,  and  is  much  thinner  than 
the  form  of  the  capital  requires,  while  the  true  abacus  is  united 
with  the  bell,  and  concealed  by  its  decoration,  or  made  part  of  it. 

§  xxiii.  Farther.  We  have  hitherto  considered  bell  and  abacus 
as  both  derived  from  the  concentration  of  the  cornice.  But  it 
must  at  once  occur  to  the  reader,  that  the  projection  of  the  under 
stone  and  the  thickness  of  the  upper,  which  are  quite  enough  for 
the  work  of  the  continuous  cornice,  may  not  be  enough  always, 
or  rather  are  seldom  likely  to  be  so,  for  the  harder  work  of  the 
capital.  Both  may  have  to  be  deepened  and  expanded  :  but  as 
this  would  cause  a  want  of  harmony  in  the  parts,  when  they 
occur  on  the  same  level,  it  is  better  in  such  case  to  let  the  entire 
cornice  form  the  abacus  of  the  capital,  and  to  put  a  deep  capital 
bell  beneath  it. 

§  xxiv.  The  reader  will  understand  both  arrangements  instantly 
by  two  examples.     Fig.  XXVII.  represents  two  windows,  more 

than  usually  beautiful  examples 


Fig.  XXVII. 


of  a  very  frequent  Venetian  form. 
Here  the  deep  cornice  or  string 
course  which  runs  along  the  wall 
of  the  house  is  quite  strong 
enough  for  the  work  of  the  capi- 
tals of  the  slender  shafts :  its 
own  upper  stone  is  therefore 
also  theirs ;  its  own  lower  stone, 
by  its  revolution  or  concentration, 
forms  their  bells :  but  to  mark 
the  increased  importance  of  its 
function  in  so  doing,  it  receives 
decoration,  as  the  bell  of  the 
capital,  which  it  did  not  receive 
as  the  under  stone  of  the  cor- 
nice. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


IX.    THE   CAPITAL. 


119 


In  Fig.  XXVIIL,  a  little  bit  of  the  church  of  Santa  Fosca 
at  Torcello,  the  cornice  or  string  course,  which  goes  round  every 

Fig.  XXVIII. 


part  of  the  church,  is  not  strong  enough  to  form  the  capitals  of 
the  shafts.  It  therefore  forms  their  abaci  only ;  and  in  order 
to  mark  the  diminished  importance  of  its  function,  it  ceases  to 
receive,  as  the  abacus  of  the  capital,  the  decoration  which  it 
received  as  the  string  course  of  the  wall. 

This  last  arrangement  is  of  great  frequency  in  Venice,  occur- 
ring most  characteristically  in  St.  Mark's  :  and  in  the  Gothic  of 
St.  John  and  Paul  we  find  the  two  arrangements  beautifully 
united,  though  in  great  simplicity;  the  string  courses  of  the 
walls  form  the  capitals  of  the  shafts  of  the  traceries,  and  the 
abaci  of  the  vaulting  shafts  of  the  apse. 

§  xxv.  We  have  hitherto  spoken  of  capitals  of  circular  shafts 
only  :  those  of  square  piers  are  more  frequently  formed  by  the 
cornice  only  ;  otherwise  they  are  like  those  of  circular  piers, 
without  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  base  of  the  bell  with  its 
head. 

§  xxvi.  "When  two  or  more  shafts  are  grouped  together,  their 
capitals  are  usually  treated  as  separate,  until  they  come  into 
actual  contact.    If  there  be  any  awkwardness  in  the  junction, 


120  IX.    THE   CAPITAL.  construction. 

it  is  concealed  by  the  decoration,  and  one  abacus  serves,  in  most 
cases,  for  all.  The  double  group,  Fig.  XXVIL,  is  the  simplest 
possible  type  of  the  arrangement.  In  the  richer  Northern 
Gothic  groups  of  eighteen  or  twenty  shafts  cluster  together,  and 
sometimes  the  smaller  shafts  crouch  under  the  capitals  of  the 
larger,  and  hide  their  heads  in  the  crannies,  with  small  nominal 
abaci  of  their  own,  while  the  larger  shafts  carry  the  serviceable 
abacus  of  the  whole  pier,  as  in  the  nave  of  Rouen.  There  is, 
however,  evident  sacrifice  of  sound  principle  in  this  system,  the 
smaller  abaci  being  of  no  use.  They  are  the  exact  contrary  of 
the  rude  early  abacus  at  Milan,  given  in  Plate  XVII.  There 
one  poor  abacus  stretched  itself  out  to  do  all  the  work:  here 
there  are  idle  abaci  getting  up  into  corners  and  doing  none. 

§  xxvii.  Finally,  we  have  considered  the  capital  hitherto 
entirely  as  an  expansion  of  the  bearing  power  of  the  shaft,  sup- 
posing the  shaft  composed  of  a  single  stone.  But,  evidently,  the 
capital  has  a  function,  if  possible,  yet  more  important,  when  the 
shaft  is  composed  of  small  masonry.  It  enables  all  that  masonry 
to  act  together,  and  to  receive  the  pressure  from  above  collect- 
ively and  with  a  single  strength.  And  thus,  considered  merely 
as  a  large  stone  set  on  the  top  of  the  shaft,  it  is  a  feature  of  the 
highest  architectural  importance,  irrespective  of  its  expansion, 
which  indeed  is,  in  some  very  noble  capitals,  exceedingly  small. 
And  thus  every  large  stone  set  at  any  important  point  to  reas- 
semble the  force  of  smaller  masonry  and  prepare  it  for  the  sus- 
taining of  weight,  is  a  capital  or  "  head"  stone  (the  true  meaning 
of  the  word),  whether  it  project  or  not.  Thus  at  6,  in  Plate  IV., 
the  stones  which  support  the  thrust  of  the  brickwork  are 
capitals,  which  have  no  projection  at  all ;  and  the  large  stones 
in  the  window  above  are  capitals  projecting  in  one  direction 
only. 

§  xxviii.  The  reader  is  now  master  of  all  he  need  know  re- 
specting construction  of  capitals ;  and  from  what  has  been  laid 
before  him,  must  assuredly  feel  that  there  can  never  be  any  new 
system  of  architectural  forms  invented  ;  but  that  all  vertical  sup- 


construction.  IX.    THE   CAPITAL.  121 

port  must  be,  to  the  end  of  time,  best  obtained  by  shafts  and 
capitals.  It  has  been  so  obtained  by  nearly  every  nation  of 
builders,  with  more  or  less  refinement  in  the  management  of  the 
details ;  and  the  later  Gothic  builders  of  the  North  stand  almost 
alone  in  their  effort  to  dispense  with  the  natural  development  of 
the  shaft,  and  banish  the  capital  from  their  compositions. 

They  were  gradually  led  into  this  error  through  a  series  of 
steps  which  it  is  not  here  our  business  to  trace.  But  they  may 
be  generalised  in  a  few  words. 

§  xxix.  All  classical  architecture,  and  the  Romanesque  which 
is  legitimately  descended  from  it,  is  composed  of  bold  indepen- 
dent shafts,  plain  or  fluted,  with  bold  detached  capitals,  forming 
arcades  or  colonnades  where  they  are  needed;  and  of  walls 
whose  apertures  are  surrounded  by  courses  of  parallel  lines 
called  mouldings,  which  are  continuous  round  the  apertures,  and 
have  neither  shafts  nor  capitals.  The  shaft  system  and  mould- 
ing system  are  entirely  separate. 

The  Gothic  architects  confounded  the  two.  They  clustered  the 
shafts  till  they  looked  like  a  group  of  mouldings.  They  shod  and 
capitaled  the  mouldings  till  they  looked  like  a  group  of  shafts. 
So  that  a  pier  became  merely  the  side  of  a  door  or  window 
rolled  up,  and  the  side  of  the  window  a  pier  unrolled  (vide  last 
Chapter,  §  xxx.),  both  being  composed  of  a  series  of  small  shafts, 
each  with  base  and  capital.  The  architect  seemed  to  have  whole 
mats  of  shafts  at  his  disposal,  like  the  rush  mats  which  one  puts 
under  cream  cheese.  If  he  wanted  a  great  pier  he  rolled  up  the 
mat ;  if  he  wanted  the  side  of  a  door  he  spread  out  the  mat : 
and  now  the  reader  has  to  add  to  the  other  distinctions  between 
the  Egyptian  and  the  Gothic  shaft,  already  noted  in  §  xxvi.  of 
Chap.  VIIL,  this  one  more — the  most  important  of  all — that 
while  the  Egyptian  rush  cluster  has  only  one  massive  capital 
altogether,  the  Gothic  rush  mat  has  a  separate  tiny  capital  to 
every  several  rusli. 

§  xxx.  The  mats  were  gradually  made  of  finer  rushes,  until  it 
became  troublesome  to  give  each  rush  its  capital.     In  fact,  when 


122  IX.    THE   CAPITAL.  construction. 

the  groups  of  shafts  became  excessively  complicated,  the  expan- 
sion of  their  small  abaci  was  of  no  use  :  it  was  dispensed  with 
altogether,  and  the  mouldings  of  pier  and  jamb  ran  up  continu- 
ously into  the  arches. 

This  condition,  though  in  many  respects  faulty  and  false,  is  yet 
the  eminently  characteristic  state  of  Gothic  :  it  is  the  definite 
formation  of  it  as  a  distinct  style,  owing  no  farther  aid  to  classi- 
cal models ;  and  its  lightness  and  complexity  render  it,  when 
well  treated,  and  enriched  with  Flamboyant  decoration,  a  very 
glorious  means  of  picturesque  effect.  It  is,  in  fact,  this  form  of 
Gothic  which  commends  itself  most  easily  to  the  general  mind, 
and  which  has  suggested  the  innumerable  foolish  theories  about 
the  derivation  of  Gothic  from  tree  trunks  and  avenues,  which 
have  from  time  to  time  been  brought  forward  by  persons  igno- 
rant of  the  history  of  architecture. 

§  xxxi.  When  the  sense  of  picturesqueness,  as  well  as  that  of 
justness  and  dignity,  had  been  lost,  the  spring  of  the  continuous 
mouldings  was  replaced  by  what  Professor  Willis  calls  the  Dis- 
continuous impost ;  which,  being  a  barbarism  of  the  basest  and 
most  painful  kind,  and  being  to  architecture  what  the  setting  of 
a  saw  is  to  music,  I  shall  not  trouble  the  reader  to  examine.  For 
it  is  not  in  my  plan  to  note  for  him  all  the  various  conditions  of 
error,  but  only  to  guide  him  to  the  appreciation  of  the  right ; 
and  I  only  note  even  the  true  Continuous  or  Flamboyant  Gothic 
because  this  is  redeemed  by  its  beautiful  decoration,  afterwards 
to  be  considered.  For,  as  far  as  structure  is  concerned,  the  mo- 
ment the  capital  vanishes  from  the  shaft,  that  moment  we  are  in 
error  :  all  good  Gothic  has  true  capitals  to  the  shafts  of  its  jambs 
and  traceries,  and  all  Gothic  is  debased  the  instant  the  shaft  van- 
ishes. It  matters  not  how  slender,  or  how  small,  or  how  low,  the 
shaft  may  be  :  wherever  there  is  indication  of  concentrated  verti- 
cal support,  then  the  capital  is  a  necessary  termination.  I  know 
how  much  Gothic,  otherwise  beautiful,  this  sweeping  principle 
condemns ;  but  it  condemns  not  altogether.  We  may  still  take 
delight  in  its  lovely  proportions,  its  rich  decoration,  or  its  elastic 


construction.  X.   THE   CAPITAL.  123 

and  reedy  moulding:  but  be  assured,  wherever  shafts,  or  any 
approximations  to  the  forms  of  shafts,  are  employed,  for  what- 
ever office,  or  on  whatever  scale,  be  it  in  jambs,  or  piers,  or 
balustrades,  or  traceries,  without  capitals,  there  is  a  defiance  of 
the  natural  laws  of  construction  ;  and  that,  wherever  such  exam- 
ples are  found  in  ancient  buildings,  they  are  either  the  experi- 
ments of  barbarism,  or  the  commencements  of  decline. 


124: 


CHAPTER    X. 


THE   AKCH   LINE. 


§  i.  "We  have  seen  in  the  last  section  how  our  means  of  ver- 
tical support  may,  for  the  sake  of  economy  both  of  space  and 
material,  be  gathered  into  piers  or  shafts,  and  directed  to  the 
sustaining  of  particular  points.  The  next  question  is  how  to 
connect  these  points  or  tops  of  shafts  with  each  other,  so  as  to  be 
able  to  Jay  on  them  a  continuous  roof.  This  the  reader,  as 
before,  is  to  favour  me  by  finding  out  for  himself,  under  these 
following  conditions. 

Let  s,  «§,  Fig.  XXIX.  (on  next  page),  be  two  shafts,  with  their 
capitals  ready  prepared  for  their  work ;  and  $,  &,  &,  and  <?,  <?,  c, 
be  six  stones  of  different  sizes,  one  very  long  and  large,  and  two 
smaller,  and  three  smaller  still,  of  which  the  reader  is  to  choose 
which  he  likes  best,  in  order  to  connect  the  tops  of  the  shafts. 

I  suppose  he  will  first  try  if  he  can  lift  the  great  stone  $,  and 
if  he  can,  he  will  put  it  very  simply  on  the  tops  of  the  two 
pillars,  as  at  A. 

Yery  well  indeed:  he  has  done  already  what  a  number  of 
Greek  architects  have  been  thought  very  clever  for  having  done. 
But  suppose  he  cannot  lift  the  great  stone  $,  or  suppose  I  will 
not  give  it  him,  but  only  the  two  smaller  stones  at  5,  5  •  he  will 
doubtless  try  to  put  them  up,  tilted  against  each  other,  as  at  d. 
Yery  awkward  this ;  worse  than  card-house  building.  But  if  he 
cuts  off  the  corners  of  the  stones,  so  as  to  make  each  of  them  of 
the  form  e,  they  will  stand  up  very  securely,  as  at  B. 

But  suppose  he  cannot  lift  even  these  less  stones,  but  can  raise 
those  at  <?,  <?,  e.  Then,  cutting  each  of  them  into  the  form  at  e, 
he  will  doubtless  set  them  up  as  vXf. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


X.    THE   AECH   LINE. 


125 


§  n.  This  last  arrangement  looks  a  little  dangerous.  Is  there 
not  a  chance  of  the  stone  in  the  middle  pushing  the  others  out, 
or  tilting  them  up  and  aside,  and  slipping  down  itself  between 


Fig.  XXIX. 


1 


7 


them?  There  is  such  a  chance:  and  if  by  somewhat  altering 
the  form  of  the  stones,  we  can  diminish  this  chance,  all  the 
better.  I  must  say  "  we  "  now,  for  perhaps  I  may  have  to  help 
the  reader  a  little. 

The  danger  is,  observe,  that  the  midmost  stone  at  /  pushes 


126  X.    THE   ARCH   LINE. 


CONSTRUCTION- 


out  the  side  ones  :  then  if  we  can  give  the  side  ones  such  a  shape 
as  that,  left  to  themselves,  they  would  fall  heavily  forward,  they 
will  resist  this  push  out  by  their  weight,  exactly  in  proportion  to 
their  own  particular  inclination  or  desire  to  tumble  in.  Take 
one  of  them  separately,  standing  up  as  at  g  *  it  is  just  possible  it 
may  stand  up  as  it  is,  like  the  Tower  of  Pisa :  but  we  want  it  to 
fall  forward.  Suppose  we  cut  away  the  parts  that  are  shaded  at 
li  and  leave  it  as  at  i,  it  is  very  certain  it  cannot  stand  alone 
now,  but  will  fall  forward  to  our  entire  satisfaction. 

Farther :  the  midmost  stone  at  f  is  likely  to  be  troublesome 
chiefly  by  its  weight,  pushing  down  between  the  others ;  the 
more  we  lighten  it  the  better :  so  we  will  cut  it  into  exactly  the 
same  shape  as  the  side  ones,  chiselling  away  the  shaded  parts, 
as  at  h.  We  shall  then  have  all  the  three  stones  &,  £,  m,  of  the 
same  shape ;  and  now  putting  them  together,  we  have,  at  C, 
what  the  reader,  I  doubt  not,  will  perceive  at  once  to  be  a  much 
more  satisfactory  arrangement  than  that  at/l 

§  hi.  We  have  now  got  three  arrangements ;  in  one  using  only 
one  piece  of  stone,  in  the  second  two,  and  in  the  third  three. 
The  first  arrangement  has  no  particular  name,  except  the  "  hori- 
zontal :"  but  the  single  stone  (or  beam,  it  may  be,)  is  called  a 
lintel ;  the  second  arrangement  is  called  a  "  Gable ;"  the  third 
an  "  Arch." 

We  might  have  used  pieces  of  wood  instead  of  stone  in  all 
these  arrangements,  with  no  difference  in  plan,  so  long  as  the 
beams  were  kept  loose,  like  the  stones ;  but  as  beams  can  be 
securely  nailed  together  at  the  ends,  we  need  not  trouble  our- 
selves so  much  about  their  shape  or  balance,  and  therefore  the 
plan  at  f  is  a  peculiarly  wooden  construction  (the  reader  will 
doubtless  recognise  in  it  the  profile  of  many  a  farm-house  roof) : 
and  again,  because  beams  are  tough,  and  light,  and  long,  as 
compared  with  stones,  they  are  admirably  adapted  for  the  con- 
structions at  A  and  B,  the  plain  lintel  and  gable,  while  that  at 
C  is,  for  the  most  part,  left  to  brick  and  stone. 

§  iv.  But  farther.    The  constructions,  A,  B,  and  C,  though 


CONSTRUCTION.  X.    THE   AECH   LINE.  127 

very  conveniently  to  be  first  considered  as  composed  of  one,  two, 
and  three  pieces,  are  by  no  means  necessarily  so.  When  we 
have  once  cut  the  stones  of  the  arch  into  a  shape  like  that  of  &, 
Z,  and  m,  they  will  hold  together,  whatever  their  number,  place, 
or  size,  as  at  n  /  and  the  great  value  of  the  arch  is,  that  it  per- 
mits small  stones  to  be  used  with  safety  instead  of  large  ones, 
which  are  not  always  to  be  had.  Stones  cut  into  the  shape  of  &, 
Z,  and  m,  whether  they  be  short  or  long  (I  have  drawn  them  all 
sizes  at  n  on  purpose),  are  called  Youssoirs ;  this  is  a  hard,  ugly 
French  name ;  but  the  reader  will  perhaps  be  kind  enough  to 
recollect  it;  it  will  save  us  both  some  trouble:  and  to  make 
amends  for  this  infliction,  I  will  relieve  him  of  the  term  hey  stone. 
One  voussoir  is  as  much  a  keystone  as  another;  only  people 
usually  call  the  stone  which  is  last  put  in  the  keystone ;  and  that 
one  happens  generally  to  be  at  the  top  or  middle  of  the  arch. 

§  v.  Not  only  the  arch,  but  even  the  lintel,  may  be  built  of 
many  stones  or  bricks.  The  reader  may  see  lintels  built  in  this 
way  over  most  of  the  windows  of  our  brick  London  houses,  and 
so  also  the  gable :  there  are,  therefore,  two  distinct  questions  re- 
specting each  arrangement ; — First,  what  is  the  line,  or  direction 
of  it,  which  gives  it  its  strength?  and,  secondly,  what  is  the 
manner  of  masonry  of  it,  which  gives  it  its  consistence  ?  The 
first  of  these  I  shall  consider  in  this  Chapter  under  the  head  of 
the  Arch  Line,  using  the  term  arch  as  including  all  manner  of 
construction  (though  we  shall  have  no  trouble  except  about 
curves);  and  in  the  next  Chapter  I  shall  consider  the  second, 
under  the  head,  Arch  Masonry. 

§  vi.  Now  the  arch  line  is  the  ghost  or  skeleton  of  the  arch ; 
or  rather  it  is  the  spinal  marrow  of  the  arch,  and  the  voussoirs 
are  the  vertebra?,  which  keep  it  safe  and  sound,  and  clothe  it. 
This  arch  line  the  architect  has  first  to  conceive  and  shape  in  his 
mind,  as  opposed  to,  or  having  to  bear,  certain  forces  which  will 
try  to  distort  it  this  way  and  that ;  and  against  which  he  is  first 
to  direct  and  bend  the  line  itself  into  as  strong  resistance  as  he 
may,  and  then,  with  his  voussoirs  and  what  else  he  can,  to  guard 


128  X.   THE   ARCH   LINE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


it,  and  help  it,  and  keep  it  to  its  duty  and  in  its  shape.  So  the 
arch  line  is  the  moral  character  of  the  arch,  and  the  adverse 
forces  are  its  temptations ;  and  the  voussoirs,  and  what  else 
we  may  help  it  with,  are  its  armour  and  its  motives  to  good 
conduct. 

§  vii.  This  moral  character  of  the  arch  is  called  by  architects 
its  "  Line  of  Resistance."  There  is  a  great  deal  of  nicety  in 
calculating  it  with  precision,  just  as  there  is  sometimes  in  finding 
out  very  precisely  what  is  a  man's  true  line  of  moral  conduct : 
but  this,  in  arch  morality  and  in  man  morality,  is  a  very  simple 
and  easily  to  be  understood  principle, — that  if  either  arch  or  man 
expose  themselves  to  their  special  temptations  or  adverse  forces, 
outside  of  the  vonssoirs  or  proper  and  appointed  armour,  both 
will  fall.  An  arch  whose  line  of  resistance  is  in  the  middle  of 
its  vonssoirs  is  perfectly  safe :  in  proportion  as  the  said  line  runs 
near  the  edge  of  its  voussoirs,  the  arch  is  in  danger,  as  the  man 
is  who  nears  temptation ;  and  the  moment  the  line  of  resistance 
emerges  out  of  the  voussoirs  the  arch  falls. 

§  vni.  There  are,  therefore,  properly  speaking,  two  arch  lines. 
One  is  the  visible  direction  or  curve  of  the  arch,  which  may 
generally  be  considered  as  the  under  edge  of  its  voussoirs,  and 
which  has  often  no  more  to  do  with  the  real  stability  of  the  arch, 
than  a  man's  apparent  conduct  has  with  his  heart.  The  other 
line,  which  is  the  line  of  resistance,  or  line  of  good  behaviour, 
may  or  may  not  be  consistent  with  the  outward  and  apparent 
curves  of  the  arch ;  but  if  not,  then  the  security  of  the  arch 
depends  simply  upon  this,  whether  the  voussoirs  which  assume 
or  pretend  to  the  one  line  are  wide  enough  to  include  the  other. 

§  ix.  Now  when  the  reader  is  told  that  the  line  of  resistance 
varies  with  every  change  either  in  place  or  quantity  of  the 
weight  above  the  arch,  he  will  see  at  once  that  we  have  no 
chance  of  arranging  arches  by  their  moral  characters :  we  can 
only  take  the  apparent  arch  line,  or  visible  direction,  as  a  ground 
of  arrangement.  We  shall  consider  the  possible  or  probable 
forms  or  contours  of  arches  in  the  present  Chapter,  and  in  the 


CONSTRUCTION. 


X.   THE   ARCH   LINE. 


129 


a 


succeeding  one  the  forms  of  voussoir  and  other  help  which  may 
best  fortify  these  visible  lines  against  every  temptation  to  lose 
their  consistency. 

§  x.  Look  back  to  Fig.  XXIX.  Evidently  the  abstract  or 
ghost  line  of  the  arrangement  at  A  is  a  plain  horizontal  line,  as 
here  at  a,  Fig.  XXX.  The  abstract  line  of  the  arrangement  at 
B,  Fig.  XXIX.,  is  composed  of  two  straight  lines  set  against 
each  other,  as  here  at  I.  The  abstract  line  of  C,  Fig.  XXIX.,  is 
a  curve  of  some  kind,  not 

at    present     determined,  Flg- xxx- 

suppose  c,  Fig.  XXX. 
Then,  as  h  is  two  of  the 
straight  lines  at  #,  set  up 
against  each  other,  we 
may  conceive  an  arrange- 
ment, <#,  made  up  of  two 
of  the  curved  lines  at  <?, 
set  against  each  other. 
This  is  called  a  pointed 
arch,  which  is  a  contradiction  in  terms :  it  ought  to  be  called  a 
curved  gable ;  but  it  must  keep  the  name  it  has  got. 

]STow  #,  5,  c,  d,  Fig.  XXX.,  are  the  ghosts  of  the  lintel,  the 
gable,  the  arch,  and  the  pointed  arch.  "With  the  poor  lintel  ghost 
we  need  trouble  ourselves  no  farther ;  there  are  no  changes  in 
him :  but  there  is  much  variety  in  the  other  three,  and  the  method 
of  their  variety  will  be  best  discerned  by  studying  h  and  d,  as 
subordinate  to  and  connected  with  the  simple  arch  at  c. 

§  xi.  Many  architects,  especially  the  worst,  have  been  very 
curious  in  designing  out  of  the  way  arches, — elliptical  arches, 
and  four-centred  arches,  so  called,  and  other  singularities.  The 
good  architects  have  generally  been  content,  and  we  for  the 
present  will  be  so,  with  God's  arch,  the  arch  of  the  rainbow 
and  of  the  apparent  heaven,  and  which  the  sun  shapes  for  us  as  it 
sets  and  rises.  Let  us  watch  the  sun  for  a  moment  as  it  climbs : 
when  it  is  a  quarter  up,  it  will  give  us  the  arch  a.  Fig.  XXXI. ; 

9 


ISO 


X.   THE   AECH   LINE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


when  it  is  half  up,  5,  and  when  three  quarters  up,  6.  There  will 
be  an  infinite  number  of  arches  between  these,  but  we  will  take 
these  as  sufficient  representees  of  all.  Then  a  is  the  low  arch, 
I  the  central  or  pure  arch,  c  the  high  arch,  and  the  rays  of  the 
sun  would  have  drawn  for  us  their  voissoirs. 

§  xn.  We  will  take  these  several  arches  successively,  and 
fixing  the  top  of  each  accurately,  draw  two  right  lines  thence  to 
its  base,  d,  e,  /,  Fig.  XXXI.  Then  these  lines  give  us  the 
relative  gables  of  each  of  the  arches ;  d  is  the  Italian  or  southern 
gable,  e  the  central  gable,/ the  Gothic  gable. 

Fig.  XXXI. 


^ 


§  xni.  "We  will  again  take  the  three  arches  with  their  gables  in 
succession,  and  on  each  of  the  sides  of  the  gable,  between  it  and 
the  arch,  we  will  describe  another  arch,  as  at  g,  h,  i.  Then  the 
curves  so  described  give  the  pointed  arches  belonging  to  each  of 
the  round  arches ;  g,  the  flat  pointed  arch,  A,  the  central  pointed 
arch,  and  %  the  lancet  pointed  arch. 

§  xrv.  If  the  radius  with  which  these  intermediate  curves  are 


construction.  X.   THE   ARCH   LINE.  131 

drawn  be  the  base  of  y,  the  last  is  the  equilateral  pointed  arch, 
one  of  great  importance  in  Gothic  work.  But  between  the  gable 
and  circle,  in  all  the  three  figures,  there  are  an  infinite  number  of 
pointed  arches,  describable  with  different  radii ;  and  the  three 
round  arches,  be  it  remembered,  are  themselves  representatives 
of  an  infinite  number,  passing  from  the  flattest  conceivable  curve, 
through  the  semicircle  and  horseshoe,  up  to  the  full  circle. 

The  central  and  the  last  group  are  the  most  important.  The 
central  round,  or  semicircle,  is  the  Roman,  the  Byzantine,  and 
Norman  arch ;  and  its  relative  pointed  includes  one  wide  branch 
of  Gothic.  The  horseshoe  round  is  the  Arabic  and  Moorish 
arch,  and  its  relative  pointed  includes  the  whole  range  of  Arabic 
and  lancet,  or  Early  English  and  French  Gothics.  I  mean  of 
course  by  the  relative  pointed,  the  entire  group  of  which  the 
equilateral  arch  is  the  representative.  Between  it  and  the  outer 
horseshoe,  as  this  latter  rises  higher,  the  reader  will 
find,  on  experiment,  the  great  families  of  what  may  1§" 
be  called  the  horseshoe  pointed, — curves  of  the 
highest  importance,  but  which  are  all  included, 
with  English  lancet,  under  the  term,  relative  point- 
ed of  the  horseshoe  arch. 

§  xv.  The  groups  above  described  are  all  formed  of  circular 
arcs,  and  include  all  truly  useful  and  beautiful  arches  for  ordinary 
work.  I  believe  that  singular  and  complicated  curves  are  made 
use  of  in  modern  engineering,  but  with  these  the  general  reader 
can  have  no  concern :  the  Ponte  della  Trinita  at  Florence  is  the 
most  graceful  instance  I  know  of  such  structure ;  the  arch  made 
use  of  being  very  subtle,  and  approximating  to  the  low  ellipse  ; 
for  which,  in  common  work,  a  barbarous  pointed  arch,  called 
four  centred,  and  composed  of  bits  of  circles,  is  substituted  by  the 
English  builders.  The  high  ellipse,  I  believe,  exists  in  eastern 
architecture.  I  have  never  myself  met  with  it  on  a  large  scale  ; 
but  it  occurs  in  the  niches  of  the  later  portions  of  the  Ducal 
palace  at  Venice,  together  with  a  singular  hyperbolic  arch,  a  in 


132  X.    TIIE   ARCH   LINE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Fig.  XXXIII.,  to  be  described  hereafter  :  with  such  caprices  we 
are  not  here  concerned. 

§  xvi.  We  are,  however,  concerned  to  notice  the  absurdity  of 
another  form  of  arch,  which,  with  the  four-centred,  belongs  to 
the  English  perpendicular  Gothic. 

Taking  the  gable  of  any  of  the  groups  in  Fig.  XXXI. ,  (suppose 
the  equilateral),  here  at  5,  in  Fig.  XXXIII.,  the  dotted  line  repre- 

Fig.  XXXIII. 


senting  the  relative  pointed  arch,  we  may  evidently  conceive  an 
arch  formed  by  reversed  curves  on  the  inside  of  the  gable,  as 
here  shown  by  the  inner  curved  lines.  I  imagine  the  reader  by 
this  time  knows  enough  of  the  nature  of  arches  to  understand 
that,  whatever  strength  or  stability  was  gained  by  the  curve  on 
the  outside  of  the  gable,  exactly  so  much  is  lost  by  curves  on  the 
inside.  The  natural  tendency  of  such  an  arch  to  dissolution  by 
its  own  mere  weight  renders  it  a  feature  of  detestable  ugliness, 
wherever  it  occurs  on  a  large  scale.  It  is  eminently  characteristic 
of  Tudor  work,  and  it  is  the  profile  of  the  Chinese  roof;  (I  say 
on  a  large  scale,  because  this,  as  well  as  all  other  capricious 
arches,  may  be  made  secure  by  their  masonry  when  small,  but 
not  otherwise).  Some  allowable  modifications  of  it  will  be  no- 
ticed in  the  chapter  on  Hoofs. 

§  xvn.  There  is  only  one  more  form  of  arch  which  we  have  to 
notice.  When  the  last  described  arch  is  used,  not  as  the  prin- 
cipal arrangement,  but  as  a  mere  heading  to  a  common  pointed 
arch,  we  have  the  form  c,  Fig.  XXXIII.  Now  this  is  better  than 
the  entirely  reversed  arch  for  two  reasons  :  first,  less  of  the  line 
is  weakened  by  reversing;  secondly,  the  double  curve  lias  a  very 
high  aesthetic  value,  not  existing  in  the  mere  segments  of  circles. 


construction.  X.    THE   ARCH   LINE.  133 

For  these  reasons  arches  of  this  kind  are  not  only  admissible, 
but  even  of  great  desirableness,  when  their  scale  and  masonry 
render  them  secure,  but  above  a  certain  scale  they  are  altogether 
barbarous ;  and,  with  the  reversed  Tudor  arch,  wantonly  em- 
ployed, are  the  characteristics  of  the  worst  and  meanest  schools 
of  architecture,  past  or  present. 

This  double  curve  is  called  the  Ogee  ;  it  is  the  profile  of  many 
German  leaden  roofs,  of  many  Turkish  domes  (there  more  ex- 
cusable, because  associated  and  in  sympathy  with  exquisitely 
managed  arches  of  the  same  line  in  the  walls  below),  of  Tudor 
turrets,  as  in  Henry  the  Seventh's  Chapel,  and  it  is  at  the  bottom 
or  top  of  sundry  other  blunders  all  over  the  world. 

§  xviii.  The  varieties  of  the  ogee  curve  are  infinite,  as  the 
reversed  portion  of  it  may  be  engrafted  on  every  other  form,  of 
arch,  horseshoe,  round,  or  pointed.  Whatever  is  generally  worthy 
of  note  in  these  varieties,  and  in  other  arches  of  caprice,  we  shall 
best  discover  by  examining  their  masonry  ;  for  it  is  by  their  good 
masonry  only  that  they  are  rendered  either  stable  or  beautiful. 
To  this  question,  then,  let  us  address  ourselves. 


134: 


CHAPTER  XI. 


THE   AECH   MASONRY. 


§  i.  On  the  subject  of  the  stability  of  arches,  volumes  have  been 
written  and  volumes  more  are  required.  The  reader  will  not, 
therefore,  expect  from  me  any  very  complete  explanation  of  its 
conditions  within  the  limits  of  a  single  chapter.  But  that  which 
is  necessary  for  him  to  know  is  very  simple  and  very  easy ;  and 
yet,  I  believe,  some  part  of  it  is  very  little  known,  or  noticed. 

We  must  first  have  a  clear  idea  of  what  is  meant  by  an  arch. 
It  is  a  curved  shell  of  firm  materials,  on  whose  back  a  burden  is 
to  be  laid  of  loose  materials.  So  far  as  the  materials  above  it 
are  not  loose,  but  themselves  hold  together,  the  opening  below 
is  not  an  arch,  but  an  excavation.  Note  this  difference  very 
carefully.  If  the  King  of  Sardinia  tunnels  through  the  Mont 
Cenis,  as  he  proposes,  he  will  not  require  to  build  a  brick  arch 
under  his  tunnel  to  carry  the  weight  of  the  Mont  Cenis  :  that 
would  need  scientific  masonry  indeed.  The  Mont  Cenis  will 
carry  itself,  by  its  own  cohesion,  and  a  succession  of  invisible 
granite  arches,  rather  larger  than  the  tunnel.  But  when  Mr. 
Brunei  tunnelled  the  Thames  bottom,  he  needed  to  build  a  brick 
arch  to  carry  the  six  or  seven  feet  of  mud  and  the  weight  of 
water  above.     That  is  a  type  of  all  arches  proper. 

§  n.  Now  arches,  in  practice,  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  two. 
So  far  as  their  masonry  above  is  Mont-Cenisian,  that  is  to  say, 
colossal  in  comparison  of  them,  and  granitic,  so  that  the  arch  is 
a  mere  hole  in  the  rock  substance  of  it,  the  form  of  the  arch  is 
of  no  consequence  whatever :  it  may  be  rounded,  or  lozenged, 
or  ogee'd,  or  anything  else  ;  and  in  the  noblest  architecture 
there  is  always  some  character  of  this  kind  given  to  the  masonry. 


construction.  XI.   THE   ARCH   MASONRY.  135 

It  is  independent  enough  not  to  care  about  the  holes  cut  in  it, 
and  does  not  subside  into  them  like  sand.  But  the  theory  of 
arches  does  not  presume  on  any  such  condition '  of  things ;  it 
allows  itself  only  the  shell  of  the  arch  proper ;  the  vertebrae, 
carrying  their  marrow  of  resistance;  and,  above  this  shell,  it 
assumes  the  wall  to  be  in  a  state  of  flux,  bearing  down  on  the 
arch,  like  water  or  sand,  with  its  whole  weight.  And  farther, 
the  problem  which  is  to  be  solved  by  the  arch  builder  is  not 
merely  to  carry  this  weight,  but  to  carry  it  with  the  least  thick- 
ness of  shell.  It  is  easy  to  carry  it  by  continually  thickening 
your  voussoirs  :  if  you  have  six  feet  depth  of  sand  or  gravel  to 
carry,  and  you  choose  to  employ  granite  voussoirs  six  feet  thick, 
no  question  but  your  arch  is  safe  enough.  But  it  is  perhaps 
somewhat  too  costly :  the  thing  to  be  done  is  to  carry  the  sand 
or  gravel  with  brick  voussoirs,  six  inches  thick,  or,  at  any  rate, 
with  the  least  thickness  of  voussoir  which  will  be  safe ;  and  to  do 
this  requires  peculiar  arrangement  of  the  lines  of  the  arch.  There 
are  many  arrangements,  useful  all  in  their  way,  but  we  have 
only  to  do,  in  the  best  architecture,  with  the  simplest  and  most 
easily  understood.  We  have  first  to  note  those  which  regard 
the  actual  shell  of  the  arch,  and  then  we  shall  give  a  few  exam- 
ples of  the  superseding  of  such  expedients  by  Mont-Cenisian 
masonry. 

§  in.  What  we  have  to  say  will  apply  to  all  arches,  but  the 
central  pointed  arch  is  the  best  for  general  illustration,  Let  <z, 
Plate  III.,  be  the  shell  of  a  pointed  arch  with  loose  loading 
above ;  and  suppose  you  find  that  shell  not  quite  thick  enough ; 
and  that  the  weight  bears  too  heavily  on  the  top  of  the  arch,  and 
is  likely  to  break  it  in  :  you  proceed  to  thicken  your  shell,  but 
need  you  thicken  it  all  equally  ?  Not  so  ;  you  would  only  waste 
your  good  voussoirs.  If  you  have  any  common  sense  you  will 
thicken  it  at  the  top,  where  a  Mylodon's  skull  is  thickened  for 
the  same  purpose  (and  some  human  skulls,  I  fancy),  as  at  h. 
The  pebbles  and  gravel  above  will  now  shoot  off  it  right  and 


136  XI.    THE   ARCH   MASONEY. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


left,  as  the  bullets  do  oft'  a  cuirassier's  breastplate,  and  will  have 
no  chance  of  beating  it  in. 

If  still  it  be  not  strong  enough,  a  farther  addition  may  be 
made,  as  at  <?,  now  thickening  the  voussoirs  a  little  at  the  base 
also.  But  as  this  may  perhaps  throw  the  arch  inconveniently 
high,  or  occasion  a  waste  of  voussoirs  at  the  top,  we  may  employ 
another  expedient. 

§  iv.  I  imagine  the  reader's  common  sense,  if  not  his  previous 
knowledge,  will  enable  him  to  understand  that  if  the  arch  at  a, 
Plate  III.,  burst  in  at  the  top,  it  must  burst  out  at  the  sides.  Set 
up  two  pieces  of  pasteboard,  edge  to  edge,  and  press  them  down 
with  your  hand,  and  you  will  see  them  bend  out  at  the  sides. 
Therefore,  if  you  can  keep  the  arch  from  starting  out  at  the 
points  p,  p,  it  cannot  curve  in  at  the  top,  put  what  weight  on  it 
you  will,  unless  by  sheer  crushing  of  the  stones  to  fragments. 

§  v.  Now  you  may  keep  the  arch  from  starting  out  at  p  by 
loading  it  at  p,  putting  more  weight  upon  it  and  against  it  at 
that  point ;  and  this,  in  practice,  is  the  way  it  is  usually  done. 
But  we  assume  at  present  that  the  weight  above  is  sand  or  water, 
quite  unmanageable,  not  to  be  directed  to  the  points  we  choose  ; 
and  in  practice,  it  may  sometimes  happen  that  we  cannot  put 
weight  upon  the  arch  at  p.  We  may  perhaps  want  an  opening 
above  it,  or  it  may  be  at  the  side  of  the  building,  and  many  other 
circumstances  may  occur  to  hinder  us. 

§  vi.  But  if  we  are  not  sure  that  we  can  put  weight  above  it, 
we  are  perfectly  sure  that  we  can  hang  weight  under  it.  You 
may  always  thicken  your  shell  inside,  and  put  the  weight  upon 
it  as  at  x  a?,  in  d,  Plate  III.  Not  much  chance  of  its  bursting 
out  at  p,  now,  is  there  ? 

§  vii.  Whenever,  therefore,  an  arch  has  to  bear  vertical  pres- 
sure, it  will  bear  it  better  when  its  shell  is  shaped  as  at  h  or  d, 
than  as  at  a :  h  and  d  are,  therefore,  the  types  of  arches  built  to 
resist  vertical  pressure,  all  over  the  world,  and  from  the  begin- 
ning of  architecture  to  its  end.  None  others  can  be  compared 
with  them :  all  are  imperfect  except  these. 


ill 


57 


«5 


Arrii    .ViUsonri) 


construction.  XI.   THE   AKCH   MASONRY.  137 

The  added  projections  at  x  x,  in  d,  are  called  Cusps,  and  they 
are  the  very  soul  and  life  of  the  best  northern  Gothic  ;  yet  never 
thoroughly  understood  nor  found  in  perfection,  except  in  Italy, 
the  northern  builders  working  often,  even  in  the  best  times,  with 
the  vulgar  form  at  a. 

The  form  at  b  is  rarely  found  in  the  north  :  its  perfection  is  in 
the  Lombardic  Gothic ;  and  branches  of  it,  good  and  bad  accord- 
ing to  their  use,  occur  in  Saracenic  work. 

§  vin.  The  true  and  perfect  cusp  is  single  only.  But  it  was 
probably  invented  (by  the  Arabs  ?)  not  as  a  constructive,  but  a 
decorative  feature,  in  pure  fantasy  ;  and  in  early  northern  work 
it  is  only  the  application  to  the  arch  of  the  foliation,  so  called,  of 
penetrated  spaces  in  stone  surfaces,  already  enough  explained  in 
the  "  Seven  Lamps,"  Chap.  III.,  p.  85.  et  seq.  It  is  degraded  in 
dignity,  and  loses  in  usefulness,  exactly  in  proportion  to  its  mul- 
tiplication on  the  arch.  In  later  architecture,  especially  English 
Tudor,  it  is  sunk  into  dotage,  and  becomes  a  simple  excrescence, 
a  bit  of  stone  pinched  up  out  of  the  arch,  as  a  cook  pinches  the 
paste  at  the  edge  of  a  pie. 

§  ix.  The  depth  and  place  of  the  cusp,  that  is  to  say,  its  exact 
application  to  the  shoulder  of  the  curve  of  the  arch,  varies  with 
the  direction  of  the  weight  to  be  sustained.  I  have  spent  more 
than  a  month,  and  that  in  hard  work  too,  in  merely  trying  to 
get  the  forms  of  cusps  into  perfect  order :  whereby  the  reader 
may  guess  that  I  have  not  space  to  go  into  the  subject  now  ;  but 
I  shall  hereafter  give  a  few  of  the  leading  and  most  perfect 
examples,  with  their  measures  and  masonry. 

§  x.  The  reader  now  understands  all  that  he  need  about  the 
shell  of  the  arch,  considered  as  an  united  piece  of  stone. 

I  [e  has  next  to  consider  the  shape  of  the  voussoirs.  This,  as 
much  as  is  required,  he  will  be  able  best  to  comprehend  by  a 
few  examples ;  by  which  I  shall  be  able  also  to  illustrate,  or 
rather  which  will  force  me  to  illustrate,  some  of  the  methods  of 
Mont-Cenisian  masonry,  which  were  to  be  the  second  part  of 
our  subject. 


138  XI.    THE   ARCn   MASONRY. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


§  xi.  1  and  2,  Plate  IV.,  are  two  cornices ;  1  from  St.  Antonio, 
Padua ;  2,  from  the  Cathedral  of  Sens.  I  want  them  for  cor- 
nices ;  but  I  have  put  them  in  this  plate  because,  though  their 
arches  are  filled  up  behind,  and  are  in  fact  mere  blocks  of  stone 
with  arches  cut  into  their  faces,  they  illustrate  the  constant 
masonry  of  small  arches,  both  in  Italian  and  Northern  Roman- 
esque, but  especially  Italian,  each  arch  being  cut  out  of  its  own 
proper  block  of  stone  :  this  is  Mont-Cenisian  enough,  on  a  small 
scale. 

3  is  a  window  from  Carnarvon  Castle,  and  very  primitive  and 
interesting  in  manner, — one  of  its  arches  being  of  one  stone, 
the  other  of  two.  And  here  we  have  an  instance  of  a  form  of 
arch  which  would  be  barbarous  enough  on  a  large  scale,  and  of 
many  pieces  ;  but  quaint  and  agreeable  thus  massively  built. 

4  is  from  a  little  belfry  in  a  Swiss  village  above  Yevay ; 
one  fancies  the  window  of  an  absurd  form,  seen  in  the  distance, 
but  one  is  pleased  with  it  on  seeing  its  masonry.  It  could  hardly 
be  stronger. 

§  xii.  These  then  are  arches  cut  of  one  block.  The  next  step 
is  to  form  them  of  two  pieces,  set  together  at  the  head  of  the 
arch.  6,  from  the  Eremitani,  Padua,  is  very  quaint  and  primi- 
tive in  manner  :  it  is  a  curious  church  altogether,  and  has  some 
strange  traceries  cut  out  of  single  blocks.  One  is  given  in  the 
"  Seven  Lamps,"  Plate  VII.,  in  the  left-hand  corner  at  the  bot- 
tom. 

7,  from  the  Frari,  Venice,  very  firm  and  fine,  and  admirably 
decorated,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter.  5,  the  simple  two-pieced 
construction,  wrought  with  the  most  exquisite  proportion  and 
precision  of  workmanship,  as  is  everything  else  in  the  glorious 
church  to  which  it  belongs,  SanFermo  of  Verona.  The  addition 
of  the  top  piece,  which  completes  the  circle,  does  not  affect  the 
plan  of  the  beautiful  arches,  with  their  simple  and  perfect  cusps  ; 
but  it  is  highly  curious,  and  serves  to  show  how  the  idea  of  the 
cusp  rose  out  of  mere  foliation.  The  whole  of  the  architecture 
of  this  church  may  be  characterised  as  exhibiting  the  maxima  of 


Ait  IS    fflatfonnj 


construction.  XI.    THE   AECH   MASONRY.  139 

simplicity  in  construction,  and  perfection  in  workmanship, — a 
rare  unison  :  for,  in  general,  simple  designs  are  rudely  worked, 
and  as  the  builder  perfects  his  execution,  he  complicates  his  plan. 
Nearly  all  the  arches  of  San  Fermo  are  two-pieced. 

§  xni.  We  have  seen  the  construction  with  one  and  two  pieces  : 
a  and  &,  Fig.  8.  Plate  IV.,  are  the  general  types  of  the  con- 
struction with  three  pieces,  uncusped  and  cusped ;  c  and  d  with 
five  pieces,  uncusped  and  cusped.  Of  these  the  three-pieced  con- 
struction is  of  enormous  importance,  and  must  detain  us  some 
time.  The  five-pieced  is  the  three-pieced  with  a  joint  added  on 
each  side,  and  is  also  of  great  importance.  The  four-pieced, 
which  is  the  two-pieced  with  added  joints,  rarely  occurs,  and 
need  not  detain  us. 

§  xiv.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  first  working  out  the 
principle  of  the  arch,  we  composed  the  arch  of  three  pieces. 
Three  is  the  smallest  number  which  can  exhibit  the  res! ^principle 
of  arch  masonry,  and  it  may  be  considered  as  representative  of 
all  arches  built  on  that  principle  ;  the  one  and  two-pieced  arches 
being  microscopic  Mont-Cenisian,  mere  caves  in  blocks  of  stone, 
or  gaps  between  two  rocks  leaning  together. 

But  the  three-pieced  arch  is  properly  representative  of  all; 
and  the  larger  and  more  complicated  constructions  are  merely 
produced  by  keeping  the  central  piece  for  what  is  called  a 
keystone,  and  putting  additional  joints  at  the  sides.  Now  so 
long  as  an  arch  is  pure  circular  or  pointed,  it  does  not  matter 
how  many  joints  or  voussoirs  you  have,  nor  where  the  joints  are  ; 
nay,  you  may  joint  your  keystone  itself,  and  make  it  two-pieced. 
But  if  the  arch  be  of  any  bizarre  form,  especially  ogee,  the 
joints  must  be  in  particular  places,  and  the  masonry  simple,  or  it 
will  not  be  thoroughly  good  and  secure  ;  and  the  fine  schools  of 
the  ogee  arch  have  only  arisen  in  countries  where  it  was  the 
custom  to  build  arches  of  few  pieces. 

§  xv.  The  typical  pure  pointed  arch  of  Venice  is  a  five-pieced 
arch,  with  its  stones  in  three  orders  of  magnitude,  the  longest 
being  the  lowest,  as  at  b2 ,  Plate  III.     If  the  arch  be  very  large,  a 


140  XI.   THE   ARCH   MASONEY. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


fourth  order  of  magnitude  is  added,  as  at  a2 .  The  portals  of  the 
palaces  of  Venice  have  one  or  other  of  these  masonries,  almost 
without  exception.  Now,  as  one  piece  is  added  to  make  a  larger 
door,  one  piece  is  taken  away  to  make  a  smaller  one,  or  a  window, 
and  the  masonry  type  of  the  Yenetian  Gothic  window  is  conse- 
quently three-pieced,  c2 . 

§  xvi.  The  reader  knows  already  where  a  cusp  is  useful.  It  is 
wanted,  he  will  remember,  to  give  weight  to  those  side  stones,  and 
draw  them  inwards  against  the  thrust  of  the  top  stone.  Take 
one  of  the  side  stones  of  c2  out  for  a  moment,  as  at  d.  Now  the 
proper  place  of  the  cusp  upon  it  varies  with  the  weight  which  it 
bears  or  requires  ;  but  in  practice  this  nicety  is  rarely  observed ; 
the  place  of  the  cusp  is  almost  always  determined  by  aesthetic 
considerations,  and  it  is  evident  that  the  variations  in  its  place 
may  be  infinite.  Consider  the  cusp  as  a  wave  passing  up  the 
side  stone  from  its  bottom  to  its  top ;  then  you  will  have  the  suc- 
cession of  forms  from  e  to  g,  (Plate  III.),  with  infinite  degrees  of 
transition  from  each  to  each ;  but  of  which  you  may  take  6,  f, 
and  <7,  as  representing  three  great  families  of  cusped  arches. 
Use  e  for  your  side  stones,  and  you  have  an  arch  as  that  at  li  be- 
low, which  may  be  called  a  down-cusped  arch.  Use^/  for  the 
side  stone,  and  you  have  i,  which  may  be  called  a  mid-cusped 
arch.     Use  <7,  and  you  have  &,  an  up-cusped  arch. 

§  xvii.  The  reader  will  observe  that  I  call  the  arch  mid-cusped, 
not  when  the  cusped  point  is  in  the  middle  of  the  curve  of  the 
arch,  but  when  it  is  in  the  middle  of  the  side  piece,  and  also  that 
where  the  side  pieces  join  the  keystone  there  will  be  a  change, 
perhaps  somewhat  abrupt,  in  the  curvature. 

I  have  preferred  to  call  the  arch  mid-cusped  with  respect  to 
its  side  piece  than  with  respect  to  its  own  curve,  because  the 
most  beautiful  Gothic  arches  in  the  world,  those  of  the  Lombard 
Gothic,  have,  in  all  the  instances  I  have  examined,  a  form  more 
or  less  approximating  to  this  mid-cusped  one  at  i  (Plate  III.),  but 
having  the  curvature  of  the  cusp  carried  up  into  the  keystone,  as 
we  shall  see  presently :   where,  however,  the  arch  is  built  of 


construction.  XI.   THE   ARCH   MASONRY.  141 

many  voussoirs,  a  mid-cusped  arch  will  mean  one  which  has 
the  point  of  the  cusp  midway  between  its  own  base  and  apex. 

The  Gothic  arch  of  Yenice  is  almost  invariably  up-cusped,  as 
at  h.  The  reader  may  note  that,  in  both  down-cusped  and  up- 
cusped  arches,  the  piece  of  stone,  added  to  form  the  cusp,  is  of 
the  shape  of  a  scymitar,  held  down  in  the  one  case  and  up  in  the 
other. 

§  xvm.  Now,  in  the  arches  A,  ^,  &,  a  slight  modification  has 
been  made  in  the  form  of  the  central  piece,  in  order  that  it  may 
continue  the  curve  of  the  cusp.  This  modification  is  not  to  be 
given  to  it  in  practice  without  considerable  nicety  of  workman- 
ship ;  and  some  curious  results  took  place  in  Yenice  from  this 
difficulty. 

At  I  (Plate  III.)  is  the  shape  of  the  Yenetian  side  stone,  with 
its  cusp  detached  from  the  arch.  Nothing  can  possibly  be  better 
or  more  graceful,  or  have  the  weight  better  disposed  in  order  to 
cause  it  to  nod  forwards  against  the  keystone,  as  above  explained, 
Ch.  X.  §  ii.,  where  I  developed  the  whole  system  of  the  arch  from 
three  pieces,  in  order  that  the  reader  might  now  clearly  see  the 
use  of  the  weight  of  the  cusp. 

Now  a  Yenetian  Gothic  palace  has  usually  at  least  three  sto- 
ries ;  with  perhaps  ten  or  twelve  windows  in  each  story,  and  this 
on  two  or  three  of  its  sides,  requiring  altogether  some  hundred  to 
a  hundred  and  fifty  side  pieces. 

I  have  no  doubt,  from  observation  of  the  way  the  windows  are 
set  together,  that  the  side  pieces  were  carved  in  pairs,  like  hooks, 
of  which  the  keystones  were  to  be  the  eyes  ;  that  these  side  pieces 
were  ordered  by  the  architect  in  the  gross,  and  were  used  by  him 
sometimes  for  wider,  sometimes  for  narrower  windows  ;  bevelling 
the  two  ends  as  required,  fitting  in  keystones  as  he  best  could, 
and  now  and  then  varying  the  arrangement  by  turning  the  side 
pieces  upside  down. 

There  were  various  conveniences  in  this  way  of  working,  one 
of  the  principal  being  that  the  side  pieces  with  their  cusps 
were  always  cut  to  their  complete  form,  and  that  no  part  of  the 


142  XI.   THE   ARCH   MASONRY. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


cusp  was  carried  out  into  the  keystone,  which  followed  the  curve 
of  the  outer  arch  itself.  The  ornaments  of  the  cusp  might  thus 
be  worked  without  any  troublesome  reference  to  the  rest  of  the 
arch. 

§  xix.  Now  let  us  take  a  pair  of  side  pieces,  made  to  order,  like 
that  at  Z,  and  see  what  we  can  make  of  them.  "We  will  try  to  fit 
them  first  with  a  keystone  which  continues  the  curve  of  the  outer 
arch,  as  at  m.  This  the  reader  assuredly  thinks  an  ugly  arch. 
There  are  a  great  many  of  them  in  Venice,  the  ugliest  things 
there,  and  the  Venetian  builders  quickly  began  to  feel  them  so. 
What  could  they  do  to  better  them.  The  arch  at  m  has  a  central 
piece  of  the  form  r.  Substitute  for  it  a  piece  of  the  form  s,  and 
we  have  the  arch  at  n. 

§  xx.  This  arch  at  n  is  not  so  strong  as  that  at  m  ;  but,  built  of 
good  marble,  and  with  its  pieces  of  proper  thickness,  it  is  quite 
strong  enough  for  all  practical  purposes  on  a  small  scale.  I  have 
examined  at  least  two  thousand  windows  of  this  kind  and  of  the 
other  Venetian  ogees,  of  which  that  at  y  (in  which  the  plain  side- 
piece  d  is  used  instead  of  the  cusped  one)  is  the  simplest ;  and  I 
never  found  one,  even  in  the  most  ruinous  palaces  (in  which  they 
had  had  to  sustain  the  distorted  weight  of  falling  walls)  in  which 
the  central  piece  was  fissured;  and  this  is  the  only  daoger  to 
which  the  window  is  exposed ;  in  other  respects  it  is  as  strong  an 
arch  as  can  be  built. 

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  change  from  the  r  keystone 
to  the  s  keystone  was  instantaneous.  It  was  a  change  wrought 
out  by  many  curious  experiments,  which  we  shall  have  to  trace 
hereafter,  and  to  throw  the  resultant  varieties  of  form  into  their 
proper  groups. 

§  xxi.  One  step  more :  I  take  a  mid-cusped  side  piece  in  its 
block  form  at  t,  with  the  bricks  which  load  the  back  of  it.  Now, 
as  these  bricks  support  it  behind,  and  since,  as  far  as  the  use  of 
the  cusp  is  concerned,  it  matters  not  whether  its  weight  be  in 
marble  or  bricks,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  cutting  out 
some  of  the  marble,  as  at  u,  and  filling  up  the  sj)ace  with  bricks. 


V 


AcKerman.  lith  .319  Jlroadway  K-Y. 


Jtrrh  MaSonrp. 

BH01ETTO  OF  COM 0. 


t 


construction.  XI.   THE  AKCH  MASONRY.  143 

(  Why  we  should  take  a  fancy  to  do  this,  I  do  not  pretend  to  guess 
at  present ;  all  I  have  to  assert  is,  that,  if  the  fancy  should  strike 
us,  there  would  be  no  harm  in  it.)  Substituting  this  side  piece 
for  the  other  in  the  window  n,  we  have  that  at  w,  which  may, 
perhaps,  be  of  some  service  to  us  afterwards  :  here  we  have 
nothing  more  to  do  with  it  than  to  note  that,  thus  built,  and 
properly  backed  by  brickwork,  it  is  just  as  strong  and  safe  a 
form  as  that  at  n  ;  but  that  this,  as  well  as  every  variety  of  ogee 
arch,  depends  entirely  for  its  safety,  fitness,  and  beauty  on  the 
masonry  which  we  have  just  analysed  ;  and  that,  built  on  a  large 
scale,  and  with  many  voussoirs,  all  such  arches  would  be  unsafe 
and  absurd  in  general  architecture.  Yet  they  may  be  used  occa- 
sionally for  the  sake  of  the  exquisite  beauty  of  which  their  rich 
and  fantastic  varieties  admit,  and  sometimes  for  the  sake  of  an- 
other merit,  exactly  the  opposite  of  the  constructional  ones  we 
are  at  present  examining,  that  they  seem  to  stand  by  enchant- 
ment. 

§  xxii.  In  the  above  reasonings,  the  inclination  of  the  joints  of 
the  voussoirs  to  the  curves  of  the  arch  has  not  been  considered. 
It  is  a  question  of  much  nicety,  and  which  I  have  not  been  able 
as  yet  fully  to  investigate  :  but  the  natural  idea  of  the  arrange- 
ment of  these  lines  (which  in  round  arches  are  of  course  perpen- 
dicular to  the  curve)  would  be  that  every  voussoir  should  have 
the  lengths  of  its  outer  and  inner  arched  surface  in  the  same  pro- 
portion to  each  other.  Either  this  actual  law,  or  a  close  approx- 
imation to  it,  is  assuredly  enforced  in  the  best  Gothic  buildings. 

§  xxiii.  I  may  sum  up  all  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  reader  to 
keep  in  mind  of  the  general  laws  connected  with  this  subject,  by 
giving  him  an  example  of  each  of  the  two  forms  of  the  j)erfect 
Gothic  arch,  uncusped  and  cusped,  treated  with  the  most  simple 
and  magnificent  masonry,  and  partly,  in  both  cases,  Mont-Ceni- 
sian. 

The  first,  Plate  V.,  is  a  window  from  the  Broletto  of  Como. 
It  shows,  in  its  filling,  first,  the  single-pieced  arch,  carried  on 
groups  of  four  shafts,  and  a  single  slab  of  marble  filling  the 


144 


XI.   THE  ARCH   MASONRY. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


space  above,  and  pierced  with  a  quatrefoil  (Mont-Cenisian,  this), 
while  the  mouldings  above  are  each  constructed  with  a  separate 
system  of  voussoirs,  all  of  them  shaped,  I  think,  on  the  principle 
above  stated,  §  xxn.,  in  alternate  serpentine  and  marble ;  the 
outer  arch  being  a  noble  example  of  the  pure  uncusped  Gothic 
construction,  h  of  Plate  III. 

§  xxiv.  Fig.  XXXIV.  is  the  masonry  of  the  side  arch  of,  as 

Fig.  XXXIV. 


far  as  I  know  or  am  able  to  judge,  the  most  perfect  Gothic  sepul- 
chral monument  in  the  world,   the  foursquare   canopy   of  the 


construction.  XI.    THE   ARCH   MASONRY.  145 

(nameless  ?)*  tomb  standing  over  the  small  cemetery  gate  of  the 
Chnrch  of  St.  Anastasia  at  Yerona.  I  shall  have  frequent  occa- 
sion to  recur  to  this  monument,  and,  I  believe,  shall  be  able 
sufficiently  to  justify  the  terms  in  which  I  speak  of  it :  mean- 
while, I  desire  only  that  the  reader  should  observe  the  severity 
and  simplicity  of  the  arch  lines,  the  exquisitely  delicate  sugges- 
tion of  the  ogee  curve  in  the  apex,  and  chiefly  the  use  of  the 
cusp  in  giving  inward  weight  to  the  great  pieces  of  stone  on  the 
flanks  of  the  arch,  and  preventing  their  thrust  outwards  from 
being  severely  thrown  on  the  lowermost  stones.  The  effect  of 
this  arrangement  is,  that  the  whole  massy  canopy  is  sustained 
safely  by  four  slender  pillars  (as  will  be  seen  hereafter  in  the 
careful  plate  I  hope  to  give  of  it),  these  pillars  being  rather 
steadied  than  materially  assisted  against  the  thrust,  by  iron  bars, 
about  an  inch  thick,  connecting  them  at  the  heads  of  the  abaci ; 
a  feature  of  peculiar  importance  in  this  monument,  inasmuch  as 
we  know  it  to  be  part  of  the  original  construction,  by  a  beautiful 
little  Gothic  wreathed  pattern,  like  one  of  the  hems  of  garments 
of  Fra  Angelico,  running  along  the  iron  bar  itself.  So  carefully, 
and  so  far,  is  the  system  of  decoration  carried  out  in  this  pure 
and  lovely  monument,  my  most  beloved  throughout  all  the  length 
and  breadth  of  Italy ; — chief,  as  I  think,  among  all  the  sepul- 
chral marbles  of  a  land  of  mourning. 

*  At  least,  I  cannot  find  any  account  of  it  in  Maffei's  "Verona,"  nor  anywhere 
else,  to  be  depended  upon.  It  is,  I  doubt  not,  a  work  of  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth 
century.    Vide  Appendix  19 :  "  Tombs  at  St.  Anastasia." 


10 


140 


CHAPTER  XII. 


THE   ARCH   LOAD. 


Fig.  XXXV. 


§  i.  In  the  preceding  enquiry  we  have  always  supposed  either 
that  the  load  upon  the  arch  was  perfectly  loose,  as  of  gravel  or 
sand,  or  that  it  was  Mont-Cenisian,  and  formed  one  mass  with 
the  arch  voussoirs,  of  more  or  less  compactness. 

In  practice,  the  state  is  usually  something  between  the  two. 
Over  bridges  and  tunnels  it  sometimes  approaches  to  the  con- 
dition of  mere  dust  or  yield- 
ing earth ;  but  in  architecture 
it  is  mostly  firm  masonry, 
not  altogether  acting  with  the 
voussoirs,  yet  by  no  means 
bearing  on  them  with  per- 
fectly dead  weight,  but  lock- 
ing itself  together  above  them, 
and  capable  of  being  thrown 
into  forms  which  relieve  them, 
in  some  degree,  from  its  pres- 
sure. 

§  ii.  It  is  evident  that  if  we 
are  to  place  a  continuous  roof 
above  the  line  of  arches,  we 
must  first  fill  up  the  intervals 
between  them  on  the  tops  of 
the  columns.  We  have  at  pre- 
sent nothing  granted  us  but 
the  bare  masonry,  as  here  at 
a,  Fig.  XXXV.,  and  we  must  fill  up  the  intervals  between 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Xn.   THE   ARCH   LOAD. 


147 


Fig.  XXXVI. 


the  semicircle  so  as  to  obtain  a  level  line  of  support.  We  may 
first  do  this  simply  as 
at  5,  with  plain  mass  of 
wall;  so  laying  the  roof 
on  the  top,  which  is  the 
method  of  the  pure  By- 
zantine and  Italian  Ro- 
manesque. But  if  we  find 
too  much  stress  is  thus 
laid  on  the  arches,  we 
may  introduce  small 
second  shafts  on  the  top 
of  the  great  shaft,  $,  Fig. 
XXXVI. ,  which  may 
assist  in  carrying  the 
roof,  conveying  great 
part  of  its  weight  at  once 
to  the  heads  of  the  main 
shafts,  and  relieving  from 
its  pressure  the  centres  of 
the  arches. 

§  in.  The  new  shaft 
thus  introduced  may 
either  remain  lifted  on 
the  head  of  the  great 
shaft,  or  may  be  carried 
to  the  ground  in  front  of 
it,  or  through  it,  5,  Fig. 
XXXVI. ;  in  which  lat- 
ter case  the  main  shaft 
divides  into  two  or  more 
minor  shafts,  and  forms 
a  group  with  the  shaft  brought  down  from  above. 

§  iv.  When  this  shaft,  brought  from  roof  to  ground,  is  subor- 
dinate to  the  main  pier,  and  either  is  carried  down  the  face  of 


148  XII.   THE   ARCH   LOAD. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


it,  or  forms  no  large  part  of  the  group,  the  principle  is  Roman- 
esque or  Gothic,  &,  Fig.  XXXYI.  "When  it  becomes  a  bold 
central  shaft,  and  the  main  pier  splits  into  two  minor  shafts  on 
its  sides,  the  principle  is  Classical  or  Palladian,  <?,  Fig.  XXXYI. 
Which  latter  arrangement  becomes  absurd  or  unsatisfactory  in 
proportion  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  main  shaft  to  carry  the  roof 
without  the  help  of  the  minor  shafts  or  arch,  which  in  many 
instances  of  Palladian  work  look  as  if  they  might  be  removed 
without  danger  to  the  building. 

§  v.  The  form  a  is  a  more  pure  Northern  Gothic  type  than 
even  &,  which  is  the  connecting  link  between  it  and  the  classical 
type.  It  is  found  chiefly  in  English  and  other  northern  Gothic, 
and  in  early  Lombardic,  and  is,  I  doubt  not,  derived  as  above 
explained,  Chap.  I.  §  xxvn.  b  is  a  general  French  Gothic  and 
French  Romanesque  form,  as  in  great  purity  at  Valence. 

The  small  shafts  of  the  forms  a  and  &,  as  being  northern,  are 
generally  connected  with  steep  vaulted  roofs,  and  receive  for 
that  reason  the  name  of  vaulting  shafts. 

§  vi.  Of  these  forms  &,  Fig.  XXXV.,  is  the  purest  and  most 
sublime,  expressing  the  power  of  the  arch  most  distinctly.  All 
the  others  have  some  appearance  of  dovetailing  and  morticing  of 
timber  rather  than  stonework ;  nor  have  I  ever  yet  seen  a  single 
instance,  quite  satisfactory  of  the  management  of  the  capital  of 
the  main  shaft,  when  it  had  either  to  sustain  the  base  of  the 
vaulting  shaft,  as  in  #,  or  to  suffer  it  to  pass  through  it,  as  in  Z>, 
Fig.  XXXVI.  ISTor  is  the  bracket  which  frequently  carries  the 
vaulting  shaft  in  English  work  a  fitting  support  for  a  portion  of 
the  fabric  which  is  at  all  events  presumed  to  carry  a  considerable 
part  of  the  weight  of  the  roof. 

§  vii.  The  triangular  spaces  on  the  flanks  of  the  arch  are  called 
Spandrils,  and  if  the  masonry  of  these  should  be  found,  in  any 
of  its  forms,  too  heavy  for  the  arch,  their  weight  may  be  dimin- 
ished, while  their  strength  remains  the  same,  by  piercing  them 
with  circular  holes  or  lights.  This  is  rarely  necessary  in  ordinary 
architecture,  though  sometimes  of  great  use  in  bridges  and  iron 


construction.  XII.    THE   AECH   LOAD.  149 

roofs,  (a  succession  of  such  circles  may  be  seen,  for  instance,  in 
the  spandrils  at  the  Euston  Square  station) ;  but,  from  its  con- 
structional value,  it  becomes  the  best  form  in  which  to  arrange 
spandril  decorations,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter. 

§  vni.  The  height  of  the  load  above  the  arch  is  determined  by 
the  needs  of  the  building  and  possible  length  of  the  shaft ;  but 
with  this  we  have  at  present  nothing  to  do,  for  we  have  per- 
formed the  task  which  was  set  us.  We  have  ascertained,  as  it 
was  required  that  we  should  in  §  vi.  of  Chap.  III.,  (A),  the  con- 
struction of  walls ;  (B),  that  of  piers ;  (C),  that  of  piers  with 
lintels  or  arches  prepared  for  roofing.  We  have  next,  therefore, 
to  examine  (D)  the  structure  of  the  roof. 


150 


CHAPTEE  Xm. 


THE   EOOF. 


§  i.  Hitherto  our  enquiry  has  been  unembarrassed  by  any  con- 
siderations relating  exclusively  either  to  the  exterior  or  interior 
of  buildings.  But  it  can  remain  so  no  longer.  As  far  as  the 
architect  is  concerned,  one  side  of  a  wall  is  generally  the  same 
as  another;  but  in  the  roof  there  are  usually  two  distinct 
divisions  of  the  structure;  one,  a  shell,  vault,  or  flat  ceiling, 
internally  visible,  the  other,  an  upper  structure,  built  of  timber, 
to  protect  the  lower ;  or  of  some  different  form,  to  support  it. 
Sometimes,  indeed,  the  internally  visible  structure  is  the  real 
roof,  and  sometimes  there  are  more  than  two  divisions,  as  in  St. 
Paul's,  where  we  have  a  central  shell  with  a  mask  below  and 
above.  Still  it  will  be  convenient  to  remember  the  distinction 
between  the  part  of  the  roof  which  is  usually  visible  from  within, 
and  whose  only  business  is  to  stand  strongly,  and  not  fall  in, 
which  I  shall  call  the  Poof  Proper ;  and,  secondly,  the  upper 
roof,  which,  being  often  partly  supported  by  the  lower,  is  not  so 
much  concerned  with  its  own  stability  as  with  the  weather,  and 
is  appointed  to  throw  off  snow,  and  get  rid  of  rain,  as  fast  as 
possible,  which  I  shall  call  the  Poof  Mask. 

§  ii.  It  is,  however,  needless  for  me  to  engage  the  reader  in 
the  discussion  of  the  various  methods  of  construction  of  Poofs 
Proper,  for  this  simple  reason,  that  no  person  without  long  ex- 
perience can  tell  whether  a  roof  be  wisely  constructed  or  not ; 
nor  tell  at  all,  even  with  help  of  any  amount  of  experience,  with- 
out examination  of  the  several  parts  and  bearings  of  it,  very 
different  from  any  observation  possible  to  the  general  critic :  and 
more  than  this,  the  enquiry  would  be  useless  to  us  in  our  Yene- 


CONSTRUCTION.  XIII.     THE   ROOF. 


151 


tian  studies,  where  the  roofs  are  either  not  contemporary  with 
the  buildings,  or  flat,  or  else  vaults  of  the  simplest  possible  con- 
structions, which  have  been  admirably  explained  by  Willis  in 
his  "  Architecture  of  the  Middle  Ages,"  Chap.  YIL,  to  which  I 
may  refer  the  reader  for  all  that  it  would  be  well  for  him  to  know 
respecting  the  connexion  of  the  different  parts  of  the  vault  with 
the  shafts.  He  would  also  do  well  to  read  the  passages  on  Tudor 
vaulting,  pp.  185 — 193,  in  Mr.  Garbett's  rudimentary  Treatise 
on  Design,  before  alluded  to.*  I  shall  content  myself  therefore 
with  noting  one  or  two  points  on  which  neither  writer  has  had 
occasion  to  touch,  respecting  the  Roof  Mask. 

§  in.  It  was  said  in  §  v.  of  Chapter  III.  that  we  should  not 
have  occasion,  in  speaking  of  roof  construction,  to  add  materially 
to  the  forms  then  suggested.  The  forms  which  we  have  to  add 
are  only  those  resulting  from  the  other  curves  of  the  arch 
developed  in  the  last  chapter ;  that  is  to  say,  the  various  eastern 
domes  and  cupolas  arising  out  of  the  revolution  of  the  horseshoe 
and  ogee  curves,  together  with  the  well-known  Chinese  concave 
roof.  All  these  forms  are  of  course  purely  decorative,  the 
bulging  outline,  or  concave  surface,  being  of  no  more  use,  or 
rather  of  less,  in  throwing  off  snow  or  rain,  than  the  ordinary 
spire  and  gable ;  and  it  is  rather  curious,  therefore,  that  all  of 
them,  on  a  small  scale,  should  have  obtained  so  extensive  use  in 
Germany  and  Switzerland,  their  native  climate  being  that  of  the 
east,  where  their  purpose  seems  rather  to  concentrate  light  upon 
their  orbed  surfaces.  I  much  doubt  their  applicability,  on  a 
large  scale,  to  architecture  of  any  admirable  dignity  :  their  chief 
charm  is,  to  the  European  eye,  that  of  strangeness  ;  and  it  seems 
to  me  possible  that  in  the  east  the  bulging  form  may  be  also 
delightful,  from  the  idea  of  its  enclosing  a  volume  of  cool  air.  I 
enjoy  them  in  St.  Mark's,  chiefly  because  they  increase  the  fan- 
tastic and  unreal  character  of  St.  Mark's  Place ;  and  because 
they  appear  to  sympathise  with  an  expression,  common,  I  think, 

*  Appendix  17. 


152 


XIII.   THE   EOOF. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Fig.  XXXVII. 


to  all  the  buildings  of  that  group,  of  a  natural  buoyancy,  as  if 
they  floated  in  the  air  or  on  the  surface  of  the  sea.  But,  assured- 
ly, they  are  not  features  to  be  recommended  for  imitation.* 

§  iv.  One  form,  closely  connected  with  the  Chinese  concave, 
is,  however,  often  constructively  right, — the  gable  with  an  inward 

angle,  occurring  with  exquisitely  pictu- 
resque effect  throughout  the  domestic 
architecture  of  the  north,  especially 
Germany  and  Switzerland ;  the  lower 
slope  being  either  an  attached  external 
penthouse  roof,  for  protection  of  the 
wall,  as  in  Fig.  XXXYIL,  or  else  a 
kind  of  buttress  set  on  the  angle  of  the 
tower;  and  in  either  case  the  roof 
itself  being  a  simple  gable,  continuous 
beneath  it. 

§  v.  The  true  gable,  as  it  is  the 
simplest  and  most  natural,  so  I  esteem 
it  the  grandest  of  roofs  ;  whether  rising 
in  ridgy  darkness,  like  a  grey  slope  of 
slaty  mountains,  over  the  precipitous  walls  of  the  northern  cathe- 
drals, or  stretched  in  burning  breadth  above  the  white  and  square- 
set  groups  of  the  southern  architecture.  But  this  difference  be- 
tween its  slope  in  the  northern  and  southern  structure  is  a  matter 
of  far  greater  importance  than  is  commonly  supposed,  and  it  is 
this  to  which  I  would  especially  direct  the  reader's  attention. 

§  vi.  One  main  cause  of  it,  the  necessity"  of  throwing  off  snow 
in  the  north,  has  been  a  thousand  times  alluded  to  :  another  I  do 
not  remember  having  seen  noticed,  namely,  that  rooms  in  a  roof 


=*  I  do  not  speak  of  the  true  dome,  because  I  have  not  studied  its  construction 
enough  to  know  at  what  largeness  of  scale  it  begins  to  be  rather  a  tour  de  force  than 
a  convenient  or  natural  form  of  roof,  and  because  the  ordinary  spectator's  choice  among 
its  various  outlines  must  always  be  dependent  on  aesthetic  considerations  only,  and 
can  in  no  wise  be  grounded  on  any  conception  of  its  infinitely  complicated  structural 
principles. 


CONSTRUCTION.  XIII.     THE   ROOF.  153 

are  comfortably  habitable  in  the  north,  which  are  painful  sotto 
piomhi  in  Italy ;  and  that  there  is  in  wet  climates  a  natural  ten- 
dency in  all  men  to  live  as  high  as  possible,  out  of  the  damp  and 
mist.  These  two  causes,  together  with  accessible  quantities  of 
good  timber,  have  induced  in  the  north  a  general  steep  pitch  of 
gable,  which,  when  rounded  or  squared  above  a  tower,  becomes  a 
spire  or  turret ;  and  this  feature,  worked  out  with  elaborate  deco- 
ration, is  the  key-note  of  the  whole  system  of  aspiration,  so  called, 
which  the  German  critics  have  so  ingeniously  and  falsely  ascribed 
to  a  devotional  sentiment  pervading  the  Northern  Gothic :  I  en- 
tirely and  boldly  deny  the  whole  theory ;  our  cathedrals  were 
for  the  most  part  built  by  worldly  people,  who  loved  the  world, 
and  would  have  gladly  staid  in  it  for  ever  ;  whose  best  hope  was 
the  escaping  hell,  which  they  thought  to  do  by  building  cathe- 
drals, but  who  had  very  vague  conceptions  of  Heaven  in  general, 
and  very  feeble  desires  respecting  their  entrance  therein ;  and 
the  form  of  the  spired  cathedral  has  no  more  intentional  reference 
to  Heaven,  as  distinguished  from  the  flattened  slope  of  the  Greek 
pediment,  than  the  steep  gable  of  a  Norman  house  has,  as-  dis- 
tinguished from  the  flat  roof  of  a  Syrian  one.  We  may  now, 
with  ingenious  pleasure,  trace  such  symbolic  characters  in  the 
form ;  we  may  now  use  it  with  such  definite  meaning ;  but  we 
only  prevent  ourselves  from  all  right  understanding  of  history, 
by  attributing  much  influence  to  these  poetical  symbolisms  in 
the  formation  of  a  national  style.  The  human  race  are,  for  the 
most  part,  not  to  be  moved  by  such  silken  cords ;  and  the  chances 
of  damp  in  the  cellar,  or  of  loose  tiles  in  the  roof,  have,  unhap- 
pily, much  more  to  do  with  the  fashions  of  a  man's  house  build- 
ing than  his  ideas  of  celestial  happiness  or  angelic  virtue.  Asso- 
ciations of  affection  have  far  higher  power,  and  forms  which  can 
be  no  otherwise  accounted  for  may  often  be  explained  by  refer- 
ence to  the  natural  features  of  the  country,  or  to  anything  which 
habit  must  have  rendered  familiar,  and  therefore  delightful :  but 
the  direct  symbolisation  of  a  sentiment  is  a  weak  motive  with  all 
men,  and  far  more  so  in  the  practical  minds  of  the  north  than 


154  xm.    THE  ROOF. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


among  the  early  Christians,  who  were  assuredly  quite  as  heaven- 
ly-minded, when  they  built  basilicas,  or  cut  conchas  out  of  the 
catacombs,  as  were  ever  the  Norman  barons  or  monks. 

§  vii.  There  is,  however,  in  the  north  an  animal  activity  which 
materially  aided  the  system  of  building  begun  in  mere  utility, — 
an  animal  life,  naturally  expressed  in  erect  work,  as  the  languor 
of  the  south  in  reclining  or  level  work.  Imagine  the  difference 
between  the  action  of  a  man  urging  himself  to  his  work  in  a  snow 
storm,  and  the  inaction  of  one  laid  at  his  length  on  a  sunny  bank 
among  cicadas  and  fallen  olives,  and  you  will  have  the  key  to  a 
whole  group  of  sympathies  which  were  forcefully  expressed  in 
the  architecture  of  both  ;  remembering  always  that  sleep  would 
be  to  the  one  luxury,  to  the  other  death. 

§  viii.  And  to  the  force  of  this  vital  instinct  we  have  farther 
to  add  the  influence  of  natural  scenery;  and  chiefly  of  the 
groups  and  wildernesses  of  the  tree  which  is  to  the  German 
mind  what  the  olive  or  palm  is  to  the  southern,  the  spruce  fir. 
The  eye  which  has  once  been  habituated  to  the  continual  serra- 
tion of  the  pine  forest,  and  to  the  multiplication  of  its  infinite 
pinnacles,  is  not  easily  offended  by  the  repetition  of  similar  forms, 
nor  easily  satisfied  by  the  simplicity  of  flat  or  massive  outlines. 
Add  to  the  influence  of  the  j)ine,  that  of  the  poplar,  more  espe- 
cially in  the  valleys  of  France ;  but  think  of  the  spruce  chiefly, 
and  meditate  on  the  difference  of  feeling  with  which  the  North- 
man would  be  inspired  by  the  frost-work  wreathed  upon  its  glit- 
tering point,  and  the  Italian  by  the  dark  green  depth  of  sunshine 
on  the  broad  table  of  the  stone  pine*,  (and  consider  by  the  way 
whether  the  spruce  fir  be  a  more  heavenly-minded  tree  than 
those  dark  canopies  of  the  Mediterranean  isles). 

*  I  shall  not  be  thought  to  have  overrated  the  effect  of  forest  scenery  on  the  northern 
mind ;  but  I  was  glad  to  hear  a  Spanish  gentleman,  the  other  day,  describing,  together 
with  his  own,  the  regret  which  the  peasants  in  his  neighbourhood  had  testified  for  the 
loss  of  a  noble  stone  pine,  one  of  the  grandest  in  Spain,  which  its  proprietor  had  suf- 
fered to  be  cut  down  for  small  gain.  He  said  that  the  mere  spot  where  it  had  grown 
was  still  popularly  known  as  "  El  Pino." 


CONSTRUCTION.  XIII.     THE   ROOF.  155 

§  ix.  Circumstance  and  sentiment,  therefore,  aiding  each 
other,  the  steep  roof  becomes  generally  adopted,  and  delighted 
in,  throughout  the  north;  and  then,  with  the  t  gradual  exaggera- 
tion with  which  every  pleasant  idea  is  pursued  by  the  human 
mind,  it  is  raised  into  all  manner  of  peaks,  and  points,  and 
ridges ;  and  pinnacle  after  pinnacle  is  added  on  its  flanks,  and 
the  walls  increased  in  height,  in  proportion,  until  we  get  indeed 
a  very  sublime  mass,  but  one  which  has  no  more  principle  of 
religious  aspiration  in  it  than  a  child's  tower  of  cards.  What  is 
more,  the  desire  to  build  high  is  complicated  with  the  peculiar  love 
of  the  grotesque*  which  is  characteristic  of  the  north,  together 
with  especial  delight  in  multiplication  of  small  forms,  as  well  as 
in  exaggerated  points  of  shade  and  energy,  and  a  certain  degree  of 
consequent  insensibility  to  perfect  grace  and  quiet  truthfulness ; 
so  that  a  northern  architect  could  not  feel  the  beauty  of  the 
Elgin  marbles,  and  there  will  always  be  (in  those  who  have 
devoted  themselves  to  this  particular  school)  a  certain  incapacity 
to  taste  the  finer  characters  of  Greek  art,  or  to  understand  Titian, 
Tintoret,  or  Raphael :  whereas  among  the  Italian  Gothic  work- 
men, this  capacity  was  never  lost,  and  Nino  Pisano  and  Orcagna 
could  have  understood  the  Theseus  in  an  instant,  and  would  have 
received  from  it  new  life.  There  can  be  no  question  that  theirs 
was  the  greatest  school,  and  carried  out  by  the  greatest  men ; 
and  that  while  those  who  began  with  this  school  could  perfectly 
well  feel  Pouen  Cathedral,  those  who  study  the  Northern  Gothic 
remain  in  a  narrowed  field — one  of  small  pinnacles,  and  dots, 
and  crockets,  and  twitched  faces — and  cannot  comprehend  the 
meaning  of  a  broad  surface  or  a  grand  line.  Nevertheless  the 
northern  school  is  an  admirable  and  delightful  thing,  but  a  lower 
thing  than  the  southern.  The  Gothic  of  the  Ducal  Palace  of 
Venice  is  in  harmony  with  all  that  is  grand  in  all  the  world : 
that  of  the  north  is  in  harmony  with  the  grotesque  northern 
spirit  only. 

*  Appendix  8. 


156  xm.    THE  EOOF. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


§  x.  We  are,  however,  beginning  to  lose  sight  of  our  roof 
structure  in  its  spirit,  and  must  return  to  our  text.  As  the 
height  of  the  walls  increased,  in  sympathy  with  the  rise  of  the 
roof,  while  their  thickness  remained  the  same,  it  became  more 
and  more  necessary  to  support  them  by  buttresses ;  but — and 
this  is  another  point  that  the  reader  must  specially  note — it  is 
not  the  steep  roof  mask  which  requires  the  buttress,  but  the 
vaulting  beneath  it ;  the  roof  mask  being  a  mere  wooden  frame 
tied  together  by  cross  timbers,  and  in  small  buildings  often  put 
together  on  the  ground,  raised  afterwards,  and  set  on  the  walls 
like  a  hat,  bearing  vertically  upon  them  ;  and  farther,  I  believe 
in  most  cases  the  northern  vaulting  requires  its  great  array  of 
external  buttress,  not  so  much  from  any  peculiar  boldness  in  its 
own  forms,  as  from  the  greater  comparative  thinness  and  height 
of  the  walls,  and  more  determined  throwing  of  the  whole  weight 
of  the  roof  on  particular  points.  Now  the  connexion  of  the  in- 
terior framework  (or  true  roof)  with  the  buttress,  at  such  points, 
is  not  visible  to  the  spectators  from  without ;  but  the  relation  of 
the  roof  mask  to  the  top  of  the  wall  which  it  protects,  or  from 
which  it  springs,  is  perfectly  visible ;  and  it  is  a  point  of  so  great 
importance  in  the  effect  of  the  building,  that  it  will  be  well 
to  make  it  a  subject  of  distinct  consideration  in  the  following 
Chapter. 


157 


CHAPTER  XIY. 


THE    ROOF    CORNICE. 


§  i.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  Sixth  Chapter  we  paused 
(§  x.)  at  the  point  where  the  addition  of  brackets  to  the  ordinary 
wall  cornice  would  have  converted  it  into  a  structure  proj^er  for 
sustaining  a  roof.  Now  the  wall  cornice  was  treated  throughout 
our  enquiry  (compare  Chapter  YIL  §  v.)  as  the  capital  of  the 
wall,  and  as  forming,  by  its  concentration,  the  capital  of  the 
shaft.  But  we  must  not  reason  hack  from  the  capital  to  the 
cornice,  and  suppose  that  an  extension  of  the  principles  of  the 
capital  to  the  whole  length  of  the  wall,  will  serve  for  the  roof 
cornice ;  for  all  our  conclusions  respecting  the  capital  were  based 
on  the  supposition  of  its  being  adapted  to  carry  considerable 
weight  condensed  on  its  abacus :  but  the  roof  cornice  is,  in  most 
cases,  required  rather  to  project  boldly  than  to  carry  weight ; 
and  arrangements  are  therefore  to-  be  adopted  for  it  which  will 
secure  the  projection  of  large  surfaces  without  being  calculated 
to  resist  extraordinary  pressure.  This  object  is  obtained  by 
the  use  of  brackets  at  intervals,  which  are  the  peculiar  distinction 
of  the  roof  cornice. 

§  ii.  Roof  cornices  are  generally  to  be  divided  into  two  great 
families:  the  first  and  simplest,  those  which  are  composed 
merely  by  the  projection  of  the  edge  of  the  roof  mask  over  the 
wall,  sustained  by  such  brackets  or  spurs  as  may  be  necessary ; 
the  second,  those  which  provide  a  walk  round  the  edge  of  the 
roof,  and  which  require,  therefore,  some  stronger  support,  as 
well  as  a  considerable  mass  of  building  above  or  beside  the  roof 
mask,  and  a  parapet.  These  two  families  we  shall  consider  in 
succession. 


158  XIV.   THE   ROOF   CORNICE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


§  m.  1.  The  Eaved  Cornice.  We  may  give  it  this  name,  as 
represented  in  the  simplest  form  by  cottage  eaves.  It  is  used, 
however,  in  bold  projection,  both  in  north,  and  south,  and  east; 
its  use  being,  in  the  north,  to  throw  the  rain  well  away  from  the 
wall  of  the  building ;  in  the  south  to  give  it  shade ;  and  it  is 
ordinarily  constructed  of  the  ends  of  the  timbers  of  the  roof 
mask  (with  their  tiles  or  shingles  continued  to  the  edge  of  the 
cornice),  and  sustained  by  spurs  of  timber.  This  is  its  most 
picturesque  and  natural  form ;  not  inconsistent  with  great  splen- 
dour of  architecture  in  the  mediaeval  Italian  domestic  buildings, 
superb  in  its  mass  of  cast  shadow,  and  giving  rich  effect  to  the 
streets  of  Swiss  towns,  even  when  they  have  no  other  claim  to 
interest.  A  farther  value  is  given  to  it  by  its  waterspouts,  for 
in  order  to  avoid  loading  it  with  weight  of  water  in  the  gutter  at 
the  edge,  where  it  would  be  a  strain  on  the  fastenings  of  the 
pipe,  it  has  spouts  of  discharge  at  intervals  of  three  or  four  feet, 
■ — rows  of  magnificent  leaden  or  iron  dragons'  heads,  full  of 
delightful  character,  except  to  any  person  passing  along  the 
middle  of  the  street  in  a  heavy  shower.  I  have  had  my  share 
of  their  kindness  in  my  time,  but  owe  them  no  grudge ;  on  the 
contrary,  much  gratitude  for  the  delight  of  their  fantastic  out- 
line on  the  calm  blue  sky,  when  they  had  no  work  to  do  but 
to  open  their  iron  mouths  and  pant  in  the  sunshine. 

§  iv.  When,  however,  light  is  more  valuable  than  shadow,  or 
when  the  architecture  of  the  wall  is  too  fair  to  be  concealed,  it 
becomes  necessary  to  draw  the  cornice  into  narrower  limits ;  a 
change  of  considerable  importance,  in  that  it  permits  the  gutter, 
instead  of  being  of  lead  and  hung  to  the  edge  of  the  cornice,  to 
be  of  stone,  and  supported  by  brackets  in  the  wall,  these  brackets 
becoming  proper  recipients  of  after  decoration  (and  sometimes 
associated  with  the  stone  channels  of  discharge,  called  gargoyles, 
which  belong,  however,  more  properly  to  the  other  family  of 
cornices).  The  most  perfect  and  beautiful  example  of  this  kind 
of  cornice  is  the  Venetian,  in  which  the  rain  from  the  tiles  is 
received  in  a  stone  gutter  supported  by  small  brackets,  delicately 


construction.  XIV.   THE  EOOF  CORNICE.  159 

moulded,  and  having  its  outer  lower  edge  decorated  with  the 
English  dogtooth  moulding,  whose  sharp  zigzag  mingles  richly 
with  the  curved  edges  of  the  tiling.  I  know  no  cornice  more 
beautiful  in  its  extreme  simplicity  and  serviceableness. 

§  v.  The  cornice  of  the  Greek  Doric  is  a  condition  of  the  same 
kind,  in  which,  however,  there  are  no  brackets,  but  useless 
appendages  hung  to  the  bottom  of  the  gutter  (giving,  however, 
some  impression  of  support  as  seen  from  a  distance),  and  de- 
corated with  stone  symbolisms  of  raindrops.  The  brackets  are 
not  allowed,  because  they  would  interfere  with  the  sculpture, 
which  in  this  architecture  is  put  beneath  the  cornice ;  and  the 
overhanging  form  of  the  gutter  is  nothing  more  than  a  vast 
dripstone  moulding,  to  keep  the  rain  from  such  sculpture  :  its 
decoration  of  guttse,  seen  in  silver  points  against  the  shadow,  is 
pretty  in  feeling,  with  a  kind  of  continual  refreshment  and  re- 
membrance of  rain  in  it ;  but  the  whole  arrangement  is  awkward 
and  meagre,  and  is  only  endurable  when  the  eye  is  quickly  drawn 
away  from  it  to  sculpture. 

§  vi.  In  later  cornices,  invented  for  the  Greek  orders,  and  farther 
developed  by  the  Romans,  the  bracket  appears  in  true  importance, 
though  of  barbarous  and  effeminate  outline :  and  gorgeous 
decorations  are  applied  to  it,  and  to  the  various  horizontal 
mouldings  which  it  carries,  some  of  them  of  great  beauty,  and 
of  the  highest  value  to  the  medieval  architects  who  imitated 
them.  But  a  singularly  gross  mistake  was  made  in  the  distri- 
bution of  decoration  on  these  rich  cornices,  (I  do  not  know  when 
first,  nor  does  it  matter  to  me  or  to  the  reader,)  namely,  the 
charging  with  ornament  the  under  surface  of  the  cornice  between 
the  brackets,  that  is  to  say,  the  exact  piece  of  the  whole  edifice, 
from  top  to  bottom,  where  ornament  is  least  visible.  I  need 
hardly  say  much  respecting  the  wisdom  of  this  procedure, 
excusable  only  if  the  whole  building  were  covered  with  ornament ; 
but  it  is  curious  to  see  the  way  in  which  modern  architects  have 
copied  it,  even  when  they  had  little  enough  ornament  to  spare. 
For  instance,  I  suppose  few  persons  look  at  the  Athenseuin  Club- 


160  XIV.    THE   ROOF   CORNICE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


house  without  feeling  vexed  at  the  meagreness  and  meanness 
of  the  windows  of  the  ground  floor :  if,  however,  they  look  up 
under  the  cornice,  and  have  good  eyes,  they  will  perceive  that 
the  architect  has  reserved  his  decorations  to  put  between  the 
brackets ;  and  by  going  up  to  the  first  floor  and  out  on  the 
gallery,  they  may  succeed  in  obtaining  some  glimpses  of  the 
designs  of  the  said  decorations. 

§  vii.  Such  as  they  are,   or  were,  these  cornices  were  soon 
considered  essential  parts  of  the  "  order"  to  which  they  belonged ; 
and  the  same  wisdom  which  endeavoured  to  fix  the  proportions 
of  the  orders,  appointed  also  that  no  order  should  go  without  its 
cornice.    The  reader  has  probably  heard  of  the  architectural 
division  of  superstructure  into  architrave,  frieze,  and  cornice ; 
parts  which  have  been  appointed  by  great  architects  to  all  their 
work,  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  great  rhetoricians  have  ordained 
that  every  speech  shall  have  an  exordium,  and  narration,  and 
peroration.    The  reader  will  do  well  to  consider  that  it  may  be 
sometimes  just  as  possible  to  carry  a  roof,  and  get  rid  of  rain, 
without  such  an  arrangement,  as  it  is  to  tell  a  plain  fact  with- 
out an  exordium  or  peroration:  but  he  must  very  absolutely 
consider  that  the  architectural  peroration  or  cornice  is  strictly 
and  sternly  limited  to  the  end  of  the  wall's  speech, — that  is, 
to  the  edge  of  the  roof ;   and  that  it  has  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  shafts  nor  the  orders  of  them.     And  he  will  then  be  able 
fully  to  enjoy  the  farther  ordinance  of  the  late  Eoman  and 
Renaissance  architects,  who,  attaching  it  to  the  shaft  as  if  it  were 
part  of  its  shadow,  and  having  to  employ  their  shafts  often  in 
places  where  they  came  not  near  the  roof,  forthwith  cut  the  roof- 
cornice  to  pieces  and  attached  a  bit  of  it  to  every  column; 
thenceforward  to  be  carried  by  the  unhappy  shaft  wherever  it 
went,  in  addition  to  any  other  work  on  which  it  might  happen  to 
be  employed.     I  do  not  recollect  among  any  living  beings,  except 
Renaissance  architects,  any  instance  of  a  parallel  or  comparable 
stupidity :  but  one  can  imagine  a  savage  getting  hold  of  a  piece 
of  one  of  our  iron  wire  ropes,  with  its  rings  upon  it  at  intervals 


construction.  XIV.    THE  ROOF  CORNICE.  161 

to  bind  it  together,  and  pulling  the  wires  asunder  to  apply  them 
to  separate  purposes  ;  but  imagining  there  was  magic  in  the  ring 
that  bound  them,  and  so  cutting  that  to  pieces  also,  and  fastening 
a  little  bit  of  it  to  every  wire. 

§  viii.  Thus  much  may  serve  us  to  know  respecting  the  first 
family  of  wall  cornices.  The  second  is  immeasurably  more 
important,  and  includes  the  cornices  of  all  the  best  buildings  in 
the  world.  It  has  derived  its  best  form  from  mediaeval  military 
architecture,  which  imperatively  required  two  things ;  first,  a 
parapet  which  should  permit  sight  and  offence,  and  afford  defence 
at  the  same  time;  and  secondly,  a  projection  bold  enough  to 
enable  the  defenders  to  rake  the  bott6m  of  the  wall  with  falling 
bodies  ;  projection  which,  if  the  wall  happened  to  slope  inwards, 
required  not  to  be  small.  The  thoroughly  magnificent  forms  of 
cornice  thus  developed  by  necessity  in  military  buildings,  were 
adopted,  with  more  or  less  of  boldness  or  distinctness,  in  domestic 
architecture,  according  to  the  temper  of  the  times  and  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  individual — decisively  in  the  baron's  house, 
imperfectly  in  the  burgher's  :  gradually  they  found  their  way  into 
ecclesiastical  architecture,  under  wise  modifications  in  the  early 
cathedrals,  with  infinite  absurdity  in  the  imitations  of  them ;  dimi- 
nishing in  size  as  their  original  purpose  sank  into  a  decorative 
one,  until  we  find  battlements,  two-and-a-quarter  inches  square, 
decorating  the  gates  of  the  Philanthropic  Society. 

§  ix.  There  are,  therefore,  two  distinct  features  in  all  cornices 
of  this  kind ;  first,  the  bracket,  now  become  of  enormous  im- 
portance and  of  most  serious  practical  service  ;  the  second,  the 
parapet :  and  these  two  features  we  shall  consider  in  succession, 
and  in  so  doing,  shall  learn  all  that  it  is  needful  for  us  to  know, 
not  only  respecting  cornices,  but  respecting  brackets  in  general, 
and  balconies. 

§  x.  1.  The  Bracket.  In  the  simplest  form  of  military  cornice, 
the  brackets  are  composed  of  two  or  more  long  stones,  supporting 
each  other  in  gradually  increasing  projection,  with  roughly  round- 
ed ends,  Fig.  XXXVHL,  and  the  parapet  is  simply  a  low  wall  car- 

11 


162 


XIV.    THE  ROOF   CORNICE. 


CONSTRUCTION, 


Fiff.  XXXVIII. 


ried  on  the  ends  of  these,  leaving,  of  course,  behind,  or  within  it, 

a  hole  between  each  bracket  for  the  conve- 
nient dejection  of  hot  sand  and  lead.  This 
form  is  best  seen,  I  think,  in  the  old  Scotch 
castles :  it  is  very  grand,  bnt  has  a  giddy- 
look,  and  one  is  afraid  of  the  whole  thing 
toppling  off  the  wall.  The  next  step  was  to 
deepen  the  brackets,  so  as  to  get  them 
propped  against  a  great  depth  of  the  main 
rampart,  and  to  have  the  inner  ends  of  the 
stones  held  b y  a  greater  weight  of  that  main 
wall  above  ;  while  small  arches  were  thrown 
from  bracket  to  bracket  to  carry  the  parapet 
wall  more  securely.  This  is  the  most  perfect  form  of  cornice, 
completely  satisfying  the  eye  of  its  security,  giving  full  protection 
to  the  wall,  and  applicable  to  all  architecture,  the  interstices  be- 
tween the  brackets  being  filled  up,  when  one  does  not  want  to 
throw  boiling  lead  on  any  body  below,  and  the  projection  being 
always  delightful,  as  giving  greater  command  and  view  of  the 
building,  from  its  angles,  to  those  walking  on  the  rampart.  And 
as,  in  military  buildings,  there  were  usually  towers  at  the  angles 
(round  which  the  battlements  swept)  in  order  to  flank  the  walls, 
so  often  in  the  translation  into  civil  or  ecclesiastical  architecture, 
a  small  turret  remained  at  the  angle,  or  a  more  bold  projection  of 
balcony,  to  give  larger  prospect  to  those  upon  the  rampart.  This 
cornice,  perfect  in  all  its  parts,  as  arranged  for  ecclesiastical  archi- 
tecture, and  exquisitely  decorated,  is  the  one  employed  in  the 
duomo  of  Florence  and  campanile  of  Giotto,  of  which  I  have 
already  spoken  as,  I  suppose,  the  most  perfect  architecture  in  the 
world. 

§  xi.  In  less  important  positions  and  on  smaller  edifices,  this 
cornice  diminishes  in  size,  while  it  retains  its  arrangement,  and 
at  last  we  find  nothing  but  the  spirit  and  form  of  it  left ;  the  real 
practical  purpose  having  ceased,  and  arch,  brackets  and  all, 
being  cut  out  of  a  single  stone.     Thus  we  find  it  used  in  early 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XIV.   THE   ROOF   CORNICE. 


163 


Fig.  XXXIX. 


buildings  throughout  the  whole  of  the  north  and  south  of  Europe, 
in  forms  sufficiently  represented  by  the  two  examples  in  Plate 
IV. :  1,  from  St.  Antonio,  Padua ;  2,  from  Sens  in  France. 

§  xii.  I  wish,  however,  at  present  to  fix  the  reader's  attention 
on  the  form  of  the  bracket  itself ;  a  most  important  feature  in 
modern  as  well  as  ancient  architecture.  The  first 
idea  of  a  bracket  is  that  of  a  long  stone  or  piece 
of  timber  projecting  from  the  wall,  as  #,  Fig. 
XXXIX.,  of  which  the  strength  depends  on  the 
toughness  of  the  stone  or  wood,  and  the  stability 
on  the  weight  of  wall  above  it  (unless  it  be  the  end 
of  a  main  beam).  But  let  it  be  supposed  that  the 
structure  at  #,  being  of  the  required  projection,  is 
found  too  weak :  then  we  may  strengthen  it  in 
one  of  three  ways ;  (1)  by  putting  a  second  or 
third  stone  beneath  it,  as  at  h  /  (2)  by  giving  it  a 
spur,  as  at  cj  (3)  by  giving  it  a  shaft  and  another 
bracket  below,  cl  /  the  great  use  of  this  arrange- 
ment being  that  the  lowermost  bracket  has  the 
help  of  the  weight  of  the  shaft-length  of  wall 
above  its  insertion,  which  is,  of  course,  greater 

than  the  weight  of  the  small  shaft :  and  then  the 

l.  \ 

lower  bracket  may  be   farther  helped  by  the     f  §V 

structure  at  h  or  c. 

§  xiii.  Of  these  structures,  a  and  c  are  evidently  adapted 
especially  for  wooden  buildings ;  b  and  d  for  stone  ones ;  the  last, 
of  course,  susceptible  of  the  richest  decoration,  and  superbly  em- 
ployed in  the  cornice  of  the  cathedral  of  Monza :  but  all  are 
beautiful  in  their  way,  and  are  the  means  of,  I  think,  nearly  half 
the  picturesqueness  and  power  of  mediseval  building ;  the  forms 
h  and  c  being,  of  course,  the  most  frequent :  $,  when  it  occurs, 
being  usually  rounded  off,  as  at  <z,  Fig.  XL. ;  5,  also,  as  in  Fig. 
XXXVIII. ,  or  else  itself  composed  of  a  single  stone  cut  into  the 
form  of  the  group  b  here,  Fig.  XL.,  or  plain,  as  at  <?,  which  is 
also  the  proper  form  ■  of  the  brick  bracket,  when  stone  is  not  to 


164 


XIV.   THE  K00F  COENICE. 


CONSTRUCTION 


Fig.  XL.     ])e  had.    The  reader  will  at  once  perceive  that  the 
form  cl  is  a  barbarism  (unless  when  the  scale  is  small 
and  the  weight  to  be  carried  exceedingly  light) :  it 
is   of  course,   therefore,  a  favorite  form  with  the 
Renaissance  architects ;  and  its  introduction  is  one 
of  the  first  corruptions  of  the  Yenetian  architecture. 
§  xiv.  There  is  one  point  necessary  to  be  noticed, 
though  bearing  on  decoration  more  than  construction, 
before  we  leave  the  subject  of  the  bracket.     The 
whole  power  of  the  construction  depends  upon  the 
stones  being  well  let  into  the  wall ;  and  the  first 
function  of  the  decoration  should  be  to  give  the  idea  of  this  in- 
sertion, if  possible  ;  at  all  events,  not  to  contradict  this  idea.    If 
the  reader  will  glance  at  any  of  the  brackets  used  in  the  ordinary 
architecture  of  London,  he  will  find  them  of  some  such 
Fig.  XLI.  character  as  Fig.  XLI. ;  not  a  bad  form  in  itself,  but 
exquisitely  absurd  in  its  curling  lines,  which  give  the 
idea  of  some  writhing  suspended  tendril,  instead  of  a 
stiff  support,  and  by  their  careful  avoidance  of  the  wall 
make  the  bracket  look  pinned  on,  and  in  constant  dan- 
(01     ger  of  sliding   down.     This  is,   also,   a   Classical  and 

Renaissance  decoration. 
§  xv.  2.  The  Parapet.  Its  forms  are  fixed  in  military  archi- 
tecture by  the  necessities  of  the  art  of  war  at  the  time  of  build- 
ing, and  are  always  beautiful  wherever  they  have  been  really 
thus  fixed  ;  delightful  in  the  variety  of  their  setting,  and  in  the 
quaint  darkness  of  their  shot-holes,  and  fantastic  changes  of  ele- 
vation and  outline.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  the  swiftly 
discerned  difference  between  the  masculine  irregularity  of  such 
true  battlements,  and  the  formal  pitifulness  of  those  which  are 
set  on  modem  buildings  to  give  them  a  military  air, — as  on  the 
jail  at  Edinburgh. 

§  xvi.  Respecting  the  parapet  for  mere  safeguard  upon  build- 
ings not  military,  there  are  just  two  fixed  laws.  It  should  be 
pierced,  otherwise  it  is  not  recognised  from  below  for  a  parapet 


construction.  XIV.   THE  ROOF  CORNICE.  165 

at  all,  and  it  should  not  be  in  the  form  of  a  battlement,  especially 
in  church  architecture. 

The  most  comfortable  heading  of  a  true  parapet  is  a  plain  level 
on  which  the  arm  can  be  rested,  and  along  which  it  can  glide. 
Any  jags  or  elevations  are  disagreeable  ;  the  latter,  as  interrupt- 
ing the  view  and  disturbing  the  eye,  if  they  are  higher  than  the 
arm,  the  former,  as  opening  some  aspect  of  danger  if  they  are 
much  lower ;  and  the  inconvenience,  therefore,  of  the  battle- 
mented  form,  as  well  as  the  worse  than  absurdity,  the  bad  feeling, 
of  the  appliance  of  a  military  feature  to  a  church,  ought  long  ago 
to  have  determined  its  rejection.  Still  (for  the  question  of  its 
picturesque  value  is  here  so  closely  connected  with  that  of  its 
practical  use,  that  it  is  vain  to  endeavour  to  discuss  it  separately) 
there  is  a  certain  agreeablenes?  in  the  way  in  which  the  jagged 
outline  dovetails  the  shadow  of  the  slated  or  leaded  roof  into  the 
top  of  the  wall,  which  may  make  the  use  of  the  battlement 
excusable  where  there  is  a  difficulty  in  managing  some  unvaried 
line,  and  where  the  expense  of  a  pierced  parapet  cannot  be  en- 
countered: but  remember  always,  that  the  value  of  the  battle- 
ment consists  in  its  letting  shadow  into  the  light  of  the  wall,  or 
vice  versa,  when  it  comes  against  light  sky,  letting  the  light  of 
the  sky  into  the  shade  of  the  wall ;  but  that  the  actual  outline  of 
the  parapet  itself,  if  the  eye  be  arrested  upon  this,  instead  of 
upon  the  alternation  of  shadow,  is  as  ugly  a  succession  of  line  as 
can  by  any  possibility  be  invented.  Therefore,  the  battlemented 
parapet  may  only  be  used  where  this  alternation  of  shade  is  cer- 
tain to  be  shown,  under  nearly  all  conditions  of  effect ;  and  where 
the  lines  to  be  dealt  with  are  on  a  scale  which  may  admit 
battlements  of  bold  and  manly  size.  The  idea  that  a  battlement 
is  an  ornament  anywhere,  and  that  a  miserable  and  diminutive 
imitation  of  castellated  outline  will  always  serve  to  fill  up  blanks 
and  Gothicise  unmanageable  spaces,  is  one  of  the  great  idiocies 
of  the  present  day.  A  battlement  is  in  its  origin  a  piece  of  wall 
large  enough  to  cover  a  man's  body,  and  however  it  may  be 
decorated,  or  pierced,  or  finessed  away  into  traceries,  as  long  as 


166  XIV.   THE   ROOF  COENICE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


so  much  of  its  outline  is  retained  as  to  suggest  its  origin,  so  long 
its  size  must  remain  undiminished.  To  crown  a  turret  six  feet 
high  with  chopped  battlements  three  inches  wide,  is  children's 
Gothic  :  it  is  one  of  the  jDaltry  falsehoods  for  which  there  is  no 
excuse,  and  part  of  the  system  of  using  models  of  architecture 
to  decorate  architecture,  which  we  shall  hereafter  note  as  one  of 
the  chief  and  most  destructive  follies  of  the  Renaissance* ;  and 
in  the  present  day  the  practice  may  be  classed  as  one  which  dis- 
tinguishes the  architects  of  whom  there  is  no  hope,  who  have 
neither  eye  nor  head  for  their  work,  and  who  must  pass  their 
lives  in  vain  struggles  against  the  refractory  lines  of  their  own 
buildings. 

§  xvn.  As  the  only  excuse  for#the  battlemented  parapet  is  its 
alternation  of  shadow,  so  the  only  fault  of  the  natural  or  level 
parapet  is  its  monotony  of  line.  This  is,  however,  in  practice, 
almost  always  broken  by  the  pinnacles  of  the  buttresses,  and  if 
not,  may  be  varied  by  the  tracery  of  its  penetrations.  The 
forms  of  these  evidently  admit  every  kind  of  change;  for  a 
stone  parapet,  however  pierced,  is  sure  to  be  strong  enough  for 
its  purpose  of  protection,  and,  as  regards  the  strength  of  the 
building  in  general,  the  lighter  it  is  the  better.  More  fantastic 
forms  may,  therefore,  be  admitted  in  a  parapet  than  in  any  other 
architectural  feature,  and  for  most  services,  the  Flamboyant 
parapets  seem  to  me  preferable  to  all  others ;  especially  when 
the  leaden  roofs  set  off  by  points  of  darkness  the  lace-like  in- 
tricacy of  penetration.  These,  however,  as  well  as  the  forms 
usually  given  to  Renaissance  balustrades  (of  which,  by  the  bye, 

*  Not  of  Renaissance  alone :  the  practice  of  modelling  buildings  on  a  minute  scale 
for  niches  and  tabernacle-work  has  always  been  more  or  less  admitted,  and  I  suppose 
authority  for  diminutive  battlements  might  be  gathered  from  the  Gothic  of  almost 
every  period,  as  well  as  for  many  other  faults  and  mistakes :  no  Gothic  school  having 
ever  been  thoroughly  systematised  or  perfected,  even  in  its  best  times.  But  that  a 
mistaken  decoration  sometimes  occurs  among  a  crowd  of  noble  ones,  is  no  more  an  ex- 
cuse for  the  habitual — far  less,  the  exclusive — use  of  such  a  decoration,  than  the  acci- 
dental or  seeming  misconstructions  of  a  Greek  chorus  are  an  excuse  for  a  schoolboy's 
ungrammatical  exercise. 


construction.  XIV.   THE  ROOF   CORNICE.  167 

the  best  piece  of  criticism  I  know  is  the  sketch  in  "  David  Cop- 
perfield  "  of  the  personal  appearance  of  the  man  who  stole  Jip), 
and  the  other  and  finer  forms  invented  by  Panl  Veronese  in 
his  architectural  backgrounds,  together  with  the  pure  columnar 
balustrade  of  Venice,  must  be  considered  as  altogether  decora- 
tive features. 

§  xviii.  So  also  are,  of  course,  the  jagged  or  crown-like  finish- 
ings of  walls  employed  where  no  real  parapet  of  protection  is 
desired ;  originating  in  the  defences  of  outworks  and  single  walls : 
these  are  used  much  in  the  east  on  walls  surrounding  unroofed 
courts.  The  richest  examples  of  such  decoration  are  Arabian ; 
and  from  Cairo  they  seem  to  have  been  brought  to  Venice.  It 
is  probable  that  few  of  my  readers,  however  familiar  the  general 
form  of  the  Ducal  Palace  may  have  been  rendered  to  them  by 
innumerable  drawings,  have  any  distinct  idea  of  its  roof,  owing 
to  the  staying  of  the  eye  on  its  superb  parapet,  of  which  we  shall 
give  account  hereafter.  In  most  of  the  Venetian  cases  the  para- 
pets which  surround  roofing  are  very  sufficient  for  protection, 
except  that  the  stones  of  which  they  are  composed  appear  loose 
and  infirm :  but  their  purpose  is  entirely  decorative ;  every  wall, 
whether  detached  or  roofed,  being  indiscriminately  fringed  with 
Arabic  forms  of  parapet,  more  or  less  Gothicised,  according  to 
the  lateness  of  their  date. 

I  think  there  is  no  other  point  of  importance  requiring  illustra- 
tion respecting  the  roof  itself,  or  its  cornice :  but  this  Venetian 
form  of  ornamental  parapet  connects  itself  curiously,  at  the 
angles  of  nearly  all  the  buildings  on  which  it  occurs,  with  the 
pinnacled  system  of  the  north,  founded  on  the  structure  of  the 
buttress.  This,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  to  be  the  subject  of  the 
fifth  division  of  our  inquiry. 


1GS 


CHAPTER  XV. 


THE   BUTTKESS. 


§  i.  We  have  hitherto  supposed  ourselves  concerned  with  the 
support  of  vertical  pressure  only ;  and  the  arch  and  roof  have 
been  considered  as  forms  of  abstract  strength,  without  reference 
to  the  means  by  which  their  lateral  pressure  was  to  be  resisted. 
Few  readers  will  need  now  to  be  reminded,  that  every  arch  or 
gable  not  tied  at  its  base  by  beams  or  bars,  exercises  a  lateral 
pressure  upon  the  walls  which  sustain  it, — pressure  which  may, 
indeed,  be  met  and  sustained  by  increasing  the  thickness  of  the 
wall  or  vertical  piers,  and  which  is  in  reality  thus  met  in  most 
Italian  buildings,  but  may,  with  less  expenditure  of  material, 
and  with  (perhaps)  more  graceful  effect,  be  met  by  some  particu- 
lar application  of  the  provisions  against  lateral  pressure  called 
Buttresses.     These,  therefore,  we  are  next  to  examine. 

§  ii.  Buttresses  are  of  many  kinds,  according  to  the  character 
and  direction  of  the  lateral  forces  they  are  intended  to  resist. 
But  their  first  broad  division  is  into  buttresses  which  meet  and 
break  the  force  before  it  arrives  at  the  wall,  and  buttresses  which 
stand  on  the  lee  side  of  the  wall,  and  prop  it  against  the  force. 

The  lateral  forces  which  walls  have  to  sustain  are  of  three 
distinct  kinds :  dead  weight,  as  of  masonry  or  still  water ;  moving 
weight,  as  of  wind  or  running  water ;  and  sudden  concussion,  as 
of  earthquakes,  explosions,  &c. 

Clearly,  dead  weight  can  only  be  resisted  by  the  buttress  act- 
ing as  a  prop ;  for  a  buttress  on  the  side  of,  or  towards  the 
weight,  would  only  add  to  its  effect.  This,  then,  forms  the  first 
great  class  of  buttressed  architecture ;  lateral  thrusts,  of  roofing 
or  arches,  being  met  by  props  of  masonry  outside — the  thrust 


construction.  XV.   THE  BUTTEESS.  169 

from  within,  the  prop  without ;  or  the  crushing  force  of  water  on 
a  ship's  side  met  by  its  cross  timbers — the  thrust  here  from  with- 
out the  wall,  the  prop  within. 

Moving  weight  may,  of  course,  be  resisted  by  the  prop  on  the 
lee  side  of  the  wall,  but  is  often  more  effectually  met,  on  the 
side  which  is  attacked,  by  buttresses  of  peculiar  forms,  cunning 
buttresses,  which  do  not  attempt  to  sustain  the  weight,  but  yparry 
it,  and  throw  it  oft"  in  directions  clear  of  the  wall. 

Thirdly :  concussions  and  vibratory  motion,  though  in  reality 
only  supported  by  the  prop  buttress,  must  be  provided  for  by 
buttresses  on  both  sides  of  the  wall,  as  their  direction  cannot  be 
foreseen,  and  is  continually  changing. 

"We  shall  briefly  glance  at  these  three  systems  of  buttressing ; 
but  the  two  latter  being  of  small  importance  to  our  present 
purpose,  may  as  well  be  dismissed  first. 

§  in.  1.  Buttresses  for  guard  against  moving  weight  and  set 
towards  the  weight  they  resist. 

The  most  familiar  instance  of  this  kind  of  buttress  we  have 
in  the  sharp  piers  of  a  bridge,  in  the  centre  of  a  powerful  stream, 
which  divide  the  cm-rent  on  their  edges,  and  throw  it  to  each 
side  under  the  arches.  A  ship's  bow  is  a  buttress  of  the  same 
kind,  and  so  also  the  ridge  of  a  breastplate,  both  adding  to  the 
strength  of  it  in  resisting  a  cross  blow,  and  giving  a  better  chance 
of  a  bullet  glancing  aside.  In  Switzerland,  projecting  buttresses 
of  this  kind  are  often  built  round  churches,  heading  up  hill,  to 
divide  and  throw  off  the  avalanches.  The  various  forms  given 
to  piers  and  harbour  quays,  and  to  the  bases  of  lighthouses,  in 
order  to  meet  the  force  of  the  waves,  are  all  conditions  of  this 
kind  of  buttress.  Rut  in  works  of  ornamental  architecture  such 
buttresses  are  of  rare  occurrence ;  and  I  merely  name  them  in 
order  to  mark  their  place  in  our  architectural  system,  since  in 
the  investigation  of  our  present  subject  we  shall  not  meet  with  a 
single  example  of  them,  unless  sometimes  the  angle  of  the  foun- 
dation of  a  palace  set  against  the  sweep  of  the  tide,  or  the 
wooden  piers  of  some  canal  bridge  quivering  in  its  current. 


170  XV.   THE  BUTTRESS. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


§  iy.  2.  Buttresses  for  guard  against  vibratory  motion. 

The  whole  formation  of  this  kind  of  buttress  resolves  itself  into 
mere  expansion  of  the  base  of  the  wall,  so  as  to  make  it  stand 
steadier,  as  a  man  stands  with  his  feet  apart  when  he  is  likely  to 
lose  his  balance.  This  approach  to  a  pyramidal  form  is  also  of 
great  use  as  a  guard  against  the  action  of  artillery ;  that  if  a 
stone  or  tier  of  stones  be  battered  out  of  the  lower  portions  of 
the  wall,  the  whole  upper  part  may  not  topple  over  or  crumble 
down  at  once.  Various  forms  of  this  buttress,  sometimes  applied 
to  particular  points  of  the  wall,  sometimes  forming  a  great  sloping 
rampart  along  its  base,  are  frequent  in  buildings  of  countries  ex- 
posed to  earthquake.  They  give  a  peculiarly  heavy  outline  to 
much  of  the  architecture  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  and  they  are 
of  the  form  in  which  strength  and  solidity  are  first  naturally 
sought,  in  the  slope  of  the  Egyptian  wall.  The  base  of  Guy's 
Tower  at  Warwick  is  a  singularly  bold  example  of  their  military 
use;  and  so,  in  general,  bastion  and  rampart  profiles,  where, 
however,  the  object  of  stability  against  a  shock  is  complicated 
with  that  of  sustaining  weight  of  earth  in  the  rampart  behind. 

§  v.  3.  Prop  buttresses  against  dead  weight. 

This  is  the  group  with  which  we  have  principally  to  do ;  and 
a  buttress  of  this  kind  acts  in  two  ways,  partly  by  its  weight  and 
partly  by  its  strength.  It  acts  by  its  weight  when  its  mass  is  so 
great  that  the  weight  it  sustains  cannot  stir  it,  but  is  lost  upon  it, 
buried  in  it,  and  annihilated  :  neither  the  shape  of  such  a  buttress 
nor  the  cohesion  of  its  materials  are  of  much  consequence ;  a 
heap  of  stones  or  sandbags,  laid  up  against  the  wall,  will  answer 
as  well  as  a  built  and  cemented  mass. 

But  a  buttress  acting  by  its  strength  is  not  of  mass  sufficient 
to  resist  the  weight  by  mere  inertia  ;  but  it  conveys  the  weight 
through  its  body  to  something  else  which  is  so  capable  ;  as,  for 
instance,  a  man  leaning  against  a  door  with  his  hands,  and  prop- 
ping himself  against  the  ground,  conveys  the  force  which  would 
open  or  close  the  door  against  him  through  his  body  to  the 
ground.     A  buttress  acting  in  this  way  must  be  of  perfectly 


construction.  XV.   THE   BUTTRESS.  171 

coherent  materials,  and  so  strong  that  though  the  weight  to  be 
borne  conld  easily  move  it,  it  cannot  break  it :  this  kind  of  but- 
tress may  be  called  a  conducting  buttress.  Practically,  however, 
the  two  modes  of  action  are  always  in  some  sort  united.  Again, 
the  weight  to  be  borne  may  either  act  generally  on  the  whole 
wall  surface,  or  with  excessive  energy  on  particular  points  :  when 
it  acts  on  the  whole  wall  surface,  the  whole  wall  is  generally  sup- 
ported ;  and  the  arrangement  becomes  a  continuous  rampart,  as 
a  dyke,  or  bank  of  reservoir. 

§  vi.  It  is,  however,  very  seldom  that  lateral  force  in  architec- 
ture is  equally  distributed.  In  most  cases  the  weight  of  the 
roof,  or  the  force  of  any  lateral  thrust,  are  more  or  less  confined 
to  certain  points  and  directions.  In  an  early  state  of  architec- 
tural science  this  defmiteness  of  direction  is  not  vet  clear,  and  it 
is  met  by  uncertain  application  of  mass  or  strength  in  the  but- 
tress, sometimes  by  mere  thickening  of  the  wall  into  square  piers, 
which  are  partly  piers,  partly  buttresses,  as  in  Norman  keeps 
and  towers.  But  as  science  advances,  the  weight  to  be  borne  is 
designedly  and  decisively  thrown  upon  certain  points ;  the  direc- 
tion and  degree  of  the  forces  which  are  then  received  are  exactly 
calculated,  and  met  by  conducting  buttresses  of  the  smallest  pos- 
sible dimensions ;  themselves,  in  their  turn,  supported  by  verti- 
cal buttresses  acting  by  weight,  and  these  perhaps,  in  their  turn, 
by  another  set  of  conducting  buttresses  :  so  that,  in  the  best  ex- 
amples of  such  arrangements,  the  weight  to  be  borne  may  be 
considered  as  the  shock  of  an  electric  fluid,  which,  by  a  hundred 
different  rods  and  channels,  is  divided  and  carried  away  into  the 
ground. 

§  vn.  In  order  to  give  greater  weight  to  the  vertical  buttress 
piers  which  sustain  the  conducting  buttresses,  they  are  loaded 
with  pinnacles,  which,  however,  are,  I  believe,  in  all  the  build- 
ings in  which  they  become  very  prominent,  merely  decorative  : 
they  are  of  some  use,  indeed,  by  their  weight ;  but  if  this  were 
all  for  which  they  were  put  there,  a  few  cubic  feet  of  lead  would 
much  more  securely  answer  the  purpose,  without  any  danger 


172  XV.   THE  BUTTEESS.  construction. 

from  exposure  to  wind.  If  the  reader  likes  to  ask  any  Gothic 
architect  with  whom  he  may  happen  to  be  acquainted,  to  sub- 
stitute a  lump  of  lead  for  his  pinnacles,  he  will  see  by  the  ex- 
pression of  his  face  how  far  he  considers  the  pinnacles  decorative 
members.  In  the  work  which  seems  to  me  the  great  type  of 
simple  and  masculine  buttress  structure,  the  apse  of  Beauvais, 
the  pinnacles  are  altogether  insignificant,  and  are  evidently  added 
just  as  exclusively  to  entertain  the  eye  and  lighten  the  aspect  of 
the  buttress,  as  the  slight  shafts  which  are  set  on  its  angles; 
while  in  other  very  noble  Gothic  buildings  the  pinnacles  are  in- 
troduced as  niches  for  statues,  without  any  reference  to  construc- 
tion at  all :  and  sometimes  even,  as  in  the  tomb  of  Can  Signorio 
at  Verona,  on  small  piers  detached  from  the  main  building. 

§  viii.  I  believe,  therefore,  that  the  development  of  the  pinnacle 
is  merely  a  part  of  the  general  erectness  and  picturesqueness  of 
northern  work  above  alluded  to ;  and  that,  if  there  had  been  no 
other  place  for  the  pinnacles,  the  Gothic  builders  would  have 
put  them  on  the  tops  of  their  arches  (they  often  did  on  the  tops 
of  gables  and  pediments),  rather  than  not  have  had  them  ;  but 
the  natural  position  of  the  jDinnacle  is,  of  course,  where  it  adds 
to,  rather  than  diminishes,  the  stability  of  the  building ;  that  is 
to  say,  on  its  main  wall  piers  and  the  vertical  piers  of  the  but- 
tresses. And  thus  the  edifice  is  surrounded  at  last  by  a  complete 
company  of  detached  piers  and  pinnacles,  each  sustaining  an 
inclined  prop  against  the  central  wall,  and  looking  something 
like  a  band  of  giants  holding  it  up  with  the  butts  of  their  lances. 
This  arrangement  would  imply  the  loss  of  an  enormous  space  of 
ground,  but  the  intervals  of  the  buttresses  are  usually  walled  in 
below,  and  form  minor  chapels. 

§  ix.  The  science  of  this  arrangement  has  made  it  the  subject 
of  much  enthusiastic  declamation  among  the  Gothic  architects, 
almost  as  unreasonable,  in  some  respects,  as  the  declamation  of 
the  Renaissance  architects  respecting  Greek  structure.  The  fact 
is,  that  the  whole  northern  buttress  system  is  based  on  the  grand 
requirement  of  tall  windows  and  vast  masses  of  light  at  the  end 


CONSTRUCTION.  XV.   THE   BUTTRESS.  173 

of  the  apse.  In  order  to  gain  this  quantity  of  light,  the  piers 
between  the  windows  are  diminished  in  thickness  until  they  are 
far  too  weak  to  bear  the  roof,  and  then  sustained  by  external 
buttresses.  In  the  Italian  method  the  light  is  rather  dreaded 
than  desired,  and  the  wall  is  made  wide  enough  between  the 
windows  to  bear  the  roof,  and  so  left.  In  fact,  the  simplest  ex- 
pression of  the  difference  in  the  systems  is,  that  a  northern  apse 
is  a  southern  one  with  its  inter-fenestrial  piers  set  edgeways. 
Thus,  a,  Fig.  XLIL,  is  the  general  idea  of  the  southern  apse ; 

Fig.  XLIL 


L 


take  it  to  pieces,  and  set  all  its  piers  edgeways,  as  at  5,  and  you 
have  the  northern  one.  You  gain  much  light  for  the  interior, 
but  you  cut  the  exterior  to  pieces,  and  instead  of  a  bold  rounded 
or  polygonal  surface,  ready  for  any  kind  of  decoration,  you  have 
a  series  of  dark  and  damp  cells,  which  no  device  that  I  have  yet 
seen  has  succeeded  in  decorating  in  a  perfectly  satisfactory 
manner.  If  the  system  be  farther  carried,  and  a  second  or  third 
order  of  buttresses  be  added,  the  real  fact  is  that  we  have  a 
building  standing  on  two  or  three  rows  of  concentric  piers,  with 
the  roof  off  the  whole  of  it  except  the  central  circle,  and  only 
ribs  left,  to  cany  the  weight  of  the  bit  of  remaining  roof  in  the 
middle  ;  and  after  the  eye  has  been  accustomed  to  the  bold  and 
simple  rounding  of  the  Italian  apse,  the  skeleton  character  of  the 
disposition  is  painfully  felt.  After  spending  some  months  in 
Venice,  I  thought  Bourges  Cathedral  looked  exactly  like  a  half- 
built  ship  on  its  shores.  It  is  useless,  however,  to  dispute 
respecting  the  merits  of  the  two  systems  :  both  arc  noble  in  their 


174  XV.   THE   BUTTRESS. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


place ;  the  Northern  decidedly  the  most  scientific,  or  at  least 
involving  the  greatest  display  of  science,  the  Italian  the  calmest 
and  purest,  this  having  in  it  the  sublimity  of  a  calm  heaven  or 
a  windless  noon,  the  other  that  of  a  mountain  flank  tormented 
by  the  north  wind,  and  withering  into  grisly  furrows  of  alternate 
chasm  and  crag. 

§  x.  If  I  have  succeeded  in  making  the  reader  understand  the 
veritable  action  of  the  buttress,  he  will  havevno  difficulty  in  de- 
termining its  fittest  form.  lie  has  to  deal  with  two  distinct 
kinds ;  one,  a  narrow  vertical  pier,  acting  principally  by  its 
weight,  and  crowned  by  a  pinnacle  ;  the  other,  commonly  called 
a  Flying  buttress,  a  cross  bar  set  from  such  a  pier  (when  detached 
from  the  building)  against  the  main  wall.  This  latter,  then,  is  to 
be  considered  as  a  mere  prop  or  shore,  and  its  use  by  the  Gothic 
architects  might  be  illustrated  by  the  supposition  that  we  were 
to  build  all  our  houses  with  walls  too  thin  to  stand  without 
wooden  props  outside,  and  then  to  substitute  stone  props  for 
wooden  ones.  I  have  some  doubts  of  the  real  dignity  of  such  a 
proceeding,  but  at  all  events  the  merit  of  the  form  of  the  flying 
buttress  depends  on  its  faithfully  and  visibly  performing  this 
somewhat  humble  office ;  it  is,  therefore,  in  its  purity,  a  mere 
sloping  bar  of  stone,  with  an  arch  beneath  it  to  carry  its  weight, 
that  is  to  say,  to  prevent  the  action  of  gravity  from  in  any  wise 
deflecting  it,  or  causing  it  to  break  downwards  under  the  lateral 
thrust ;  it  is  thus  found .  quite  simple  in  Notre  Dame  of  Paris, 
and  in  the  Cathedral  of  Beauvais,  while  at  Cologne  the  sloping 
bars  are  pierced  with  quatrefoils,  and  at  Amiens  with  traceried 
arches.  Both  seem  to  me  effeminate  and  false  in  principle  ;  not, 
of  course,  that  there  is  any  occasion  to  make  the  flying  buttress 
heavy,  if  a  light  one  will  answer  the  purpose  ;  but  it  seems  as  if 
some  security  were  sacrificed  to  ornament.  At  Amiens  the 
arrangement  is  now  seen  to  great  disadvantage,  for  the  early 
traceries  have  been  replaced  by  base  flamboyant  ones,  utterly 
weak  and  despicable.  Of  the  degradations  of  the  original  form 
which  took  place  in  after  times,  I  have  spoken  at  p.  35.  of  the 
"  Seven  Lamps." 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XV.   THE  BUTTEESS.  175 


§  xi.  The  form  of  the  common  buttress  must  be  familiar  to  the 
eye  of  every  reader,  sloping  if  low,  and  thrown  into  successive 
steps  if  they  are  to  be  carried  to  any  considerable  height.  There 
is  much  dignity  in  them  when  they  are  of  essential  service ;  but 
even  in  their  best  examples,  their  awkward  angles  are  among  the 
least  manageable  features  of  the  Northern  Gothic,  and  the  whole 
organisation  of  its  system  was  destroyed  by  their  unnecessary 
and  lavish  application  on  a  diminished  scale  ;  until  the  buttress 
became  actually  confused  with  the  shaft,  and  we  find  strangely 
crystallised  masses  of  diminutive  buttress  applied,  for  merely 
vertical  support,  in  the  northern  tabernacle  work ;  while  in  some 
recent  copies  of  it  the  principle  has  been  so  far  distorted  that  the 
tiny  buttressings  look  as  if  they  carried  the  superstructure  on  the 
points  of  their  pinnacles,  as  in  the  Cranmer  memorial  at  Oxford. 
Indeed,  in  most  modern  Gothic,  the  architects  evidently  consider 
buttresses  as  convenient  breaks  of  blank  surface,  and  general 
apologies  for  deadness  of  wall.  They  stand  in  the  place  of  ideas, 
and  I  think  are  supposed  also  to  have  something  of  the  odour 
of  sanctity  about  them  ;  otherwise  one  hardly  sees  why  a  ware- 
house seventy  feet  high  should  have  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  a 
chapel,  which  one  can  just  get  into  with  one's  hat  off,  should 
have  a  bunch  of  them  at  every  corner;  and  worse  than  this, 
they  are  even  thought  ornamental  when  they  can  be  of  no  possi- 
ble use ;  and  these  stupid  penthouse  outlines  are  forced  upon  the 
eye  in  every  species  of  decoration :  in  St.  Margaret's  Chapel, 
West  Street,  there  are  actually  a  couple  of  buttresses  at  the  end 
of  every  pew. 

§  xii.  It  is  almost  impossible,  in  consequence  of  these  unwise 
repetitions  of  it,  to  contemplate  the  buttress  without  some  degree 
of  prejudice ;  and  I  look  upon  it  as  one  of  the  most  justifiable 
causes  of  the  unfortunate  aversion  with  which  many  of  our  best 
architects  regard  the  whole  Gothic  school.  It  may,  however, 
always  be  regarded  with  respect,  when  its  form  is  simple  and  its 
service  clear ;  but  no  treason  to  Gothic  can  be  greater  than  the 
use  of  it  in  indolence  or  vanity,  to  enhance  the  intricacies  of. 
structure,  or  occupy  the  vacuities  of  design. 


176 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 


FOEM    OF    APERTURE. 


§  i.  We  have  now,  in  order,  examined  the  means  of  raising  walls 
and  sustaining  roofs,  and  we  have  finally  to  consider  the  struc- 
ture of  the  necessary  apertures  in  the  wall  veil,  the  door  and 
window ;  respecting  which  there  are  three  main  points  to  be  con- 
sidered. 

1.  The  form  of  the  aperture,  i.  e.,  its  outline,  its  size,  and  the 

forms  of  its  sides. 

2.  The  filling  of  the  aperture,  i.  <?.,  valves  and  glass,  and  their 

holdings. 

3.  The  protection  of  the  aperture,  and  its  appliances,  i.  e., 

canopies,  porches,  and  balconies.     We  shall  examine  these 
in  succession. 

§  ii.  1.  The  form  of  the  aperture  :  and  first  of  doors.  We  will, 
for  the  present,  leave  out  of  the  question  doors  and  gates  in  un- 
roofed walls,  the  forms  of  these  being  very  arbitrary,  and  confine 
ourselves  to  the  consideration  of  doors  of  entrance  into  roofed 
buildings.  Such  doors  will,  for  the  most  part,  be  at,  or  near,  the 
base  of  the  building ;  except  when  raised  for  purposes  of  defence, 
as  in  the  old  Scotch  border  towers,  and  our  own  Martello  towers, 
or,  as  in  Switzerland,  to  permit  access  in  deep  snow,  or  when 
stairs  are  carried  up  outside  the  house  for  convenience  or  mag- 
nificence. But  in  most  cases,  whether  high  or  low,  a  door  may 
be  assumed  to  be  considerably  lower  than  the  apartments  or 
buildings  into  which  it  gives  admission,  and  therefore  to  have 
some  height  of  wall  above  it,  whose  weight  must  be  carried  by 
•the  heading  of  the  door.    It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  best 


construction.  XVI.   FOKH   OF   APERTURE.  177 

heading  must  be  an  arch,  because  the  strongest,  and  that  a 
square-headed  door  must  be  wrong,  unless  under  Mont  Cenisian 
masonry ;  or  else,  unless  the  top  of  the  door  be  the  roof  of  the 
building,  as  in  low  cottages.  And  a  square-headed  door  is  just 
so  much  more  wrong  and  ugly  than  a  connexion  of  main  shafts 
by  lintels,  as  the  weight  of  wall  above  the  door  is  likely  to  be 
greater  than  that  above  the  main  shafts.  Thus,  while  I  admit 
the  Greek  general  forms  of  temple  to  be  admirable  in  their  kind, 
I  think  the  Greek  door  always  offensive  and  unmanageable. 

§  in.  We  have  it  also  determined  by  necessity,  that  the  aper- 
tures shall  be  at  least  above  a  man's  height,  with  perpendicular 
sides  (for  sloping  sides  are  evidently  unnecessary,  and  even  in- 
convenient, therefore  absurd)  and  level  threshold ;  and  this  aper- 
ture we  at  present  suppose  simply  cut  through  the  wall  without 
any  bevelling  of  the  jambs.  Such  a  door,  wide  enough  for  two 
persons  to  pass  each  other  easily,  and  with  such  fillings  or  valves 
as  we  may  hereafter  find  expedient,  may  be  fit  enough  for  any 
building  into  which  entrance  is  required  neither  often,  nor  by 
many  persons  at  a  time.  But  when  entrance  and  egress  are  con- 
stant, or  required  by  crowds,  certain  further  modifications  must 
take  place. 

§  iv.  When  entrance  and  egress  are  constant,  it  may  be  sup- 
posed that  the  valves  will  be  absent 
or  unfastened, — that  people  will  be 
passing  more  quickly  than  when  the 
entrance  and  egress   are  unfrequent, 
and  that  the  square  angles  of  the  wall 
will  be  inconvenient  to  such  quick 
passers  through.     It  is  evident,  there- 
fore, that  what  would  be  done  in  time, 
for  themselves,  by  the  passing  multi- 
tude, should  be  done  for  them  at  once  by  the  architect ;  and  that 
these  angles,  which  would  be  worn  away  by  friction,  should  at 
once  be  bevelled  off,  or,  as  it  is  called,  splayed,  and  the  most 
12 


178  XVI.   FOEM   OF   APEETUEE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


contracted  part  of  the  aperture  made  as  short  as  possible,  so  that 
the  plan  of  the  entrance  should  become  as  at  a,  Fig.  XLIII. 

§  v.  Farther.  As  persons  on  the  outside  may  often  approach 
the  door  or  depart  from  it,  heside  the  building,  so  as  to  turn  aside 
as  they  enter  or  leave  the  door,  and  therefore  touch  its  jamb,  but, 
on  the  inside,  will  in  almost  every  case  approach  the  door,  or 
depart  from  it  in  the  direct  line  of  the  entrance  (people  generally 
wsiXkhigforwa/rd  when  they  enter  a  hall,  court,  or  chamber  of 
any  kind,  and  being  forced  to  do  so  when  they  enter  a  passage), 
it  is  evident  that  the  bevelling  may  be  very  slight  on  the  inside, 
but  should  be  large  on  the  outside,  so  that  the  plan  of  the  aper- 
ture should  become  as  at  Z>,  fig.  XLIII.  Farther,  as  the  bevelled 
wall  cannot  conveniently  carry  an  unbevelled  arch,  the  door  arch 
must  be  bevelled  also,  and  the  aperture,  seen  from  the  outside, 
will  have  somewhat  the  aspect  of  a  small  cavern  diminishing 
towards  the  interior. 

§  vi.  If,  however,  beside  frequent  entrance,  entrance  is  required 
for  multitudes  at  the  same  time,  the  size  of  the  aperture  either 
must  be  increased,  or  other  apertures  must  be  introduced.  It 
may,  in  some  buildings,  be  optional  with  the  architect  whether  he 
shall  give  many  small  doors,  or  few  large  ones  ;  and  in  some,  as 
theatres,  amphitheatres,  and  other  places  where  the  crowd  are  apt 
to  be  impatient,  many  doors  are  by  far  the  best  arrangement  of 
•the  two.  Often,  however,  the  purposes  of  the  building,  as  when 
it  is  to  be  entered  by  processions,  or  where  the  crowd  must 
usually  enter  in  one  direction,  require  the  large  single  entrance  ; 
and  (for  here  again  the  sesthetic  and  structural  laws  cannot  be 
separated)  the  expression  and  harmony  of  the  building  require, 
in  nearly  every  case,  an  entrance  of  largeness  proportioned  to  the 
multitude  which  is  to  meet  within.  Nothing  is  more  unseemly 
than  that  a  great  multitude  should  find  its  way  out  and  in,  as 
ants  and  wasps  do,  through  holes  ;  and  nothing  more  undignified 
than  the  paltry  doors  of  many  of  our  English  cathedrals,  which 
look  as  if  they  were  made,  not  for  the  open  egress,  but  for  the 
surreptitious  drainage  of  a  stagnant  congregation.     Besides,  the 


construction.  XVI.   FOKM   OF  APERTUKE.  179 

expression  of  the  church  door  should  lead  us,  as  far  as  possible, 
to  desire  at  least  the  western  entrance  to  be  single,  partly  because 
no  man  of  right  feeling  would  willingly  lose  the  idea  of  unity  and 
fellowship  in  going  up  to  worship,  which  is  suggested  by  the  vast 
single  entrance ;  partly  because  it  is  at  the  entrance  that  the  most 
serious  words  of  the  building  are  always  addressed,  by  its  sculp- 
tures or  inscriptions,  to  the  worshipper ;  and  it  is  well  that  these 
words  should  be  spoken  to  all  at  once,  as  by  one  great  voice,  not 
broken  up  into  weak  repetitions  over  minor  doors. 

In  practice  the  matter  has  been,  I  suppose,  regulated  almost 
altogether  by  convenience,  the  western  doors  being  single  in 
small  churches,  while  in  the  larger  the  entrances  become  three  or 
five,  the  central  door  remaining  always  principal,  in  consequence 
of  the  fine  sense  of  composition  which  the  mediaeval  builders 
never  lost.  These  arrangements  have  formed  the  noblest  build- 
ings in  the  world.  Yet  it  is  worth  observing*  how  perfect  in  its 
simplicity  the  single  entrance  may  become,  when  it  is  treated 
as  in  the  Duomo  and  St.  Zeno  of  Verona,  and  other  such  early 
Lombard  churches,  having  noble  porches,  and  rich  sculptures 
grouped  around  the  entrance. 

§  vn.  However,  whether  the  entrances  be  single,  triple,  or 
manifold,  it  is  a  constant  law  that  one'  shall  be  principal,  and 
all  shall  be  of  size  in  some  degree  proportioned  to  that  of  the 
building.  And  this  size  is,  of  course,  chiefly  to  be  expressed  in 
width,  that  being  the  only  useful  dimension  in  a  door  (except  for 
pageantry,  chairing  of  bishops  and  waving  of  banners,  and  other 

*  And  worth  questioning,  also,  whether  the  triple  porch  has  not  been  associated 
..  with  Romanist  views  of  mediatorship ;  the  Redeemer  being  represented  as  presiding 
over  the  central  door  only,  and  the  lateral  entrances  being  under  the  protection  of 
saints,  while  the  Madonna  almost  always  has  one  or  both  of  the  transepts.  But  it 
would  be  wrong  to  press  this,  for,  in  nine  cases  out  often,  the  architect  has  been  merely 
influenced  in  his  placing  of  the  statues  by  an  artist's  desire  of  variety  in  their  forms 
and  dress  ;  and  very  naturally  prefers  putting  a  canonisation  over  one  door,  a  martyr- 
dom over  another,  and  an  assumption  over  a  third,  to  repeating  a  crucifixion  or  a  judg- 
ment above  all.  The  architect's  doctrine  is  only,  therefore,  to  be  noted  with  indis- 
putable reprobation  when  the  Madonna  gets  possession  of  the  main  door. 


• 


180  XVI.  FOEM  OF  APEKTUKE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


such  vanities,  not,  I  hope,  after  this  century,  much  to  be  regarded 
in  the  building  of  Christian  temples) ;  but  though  the  width  is  the 
only  necessary  dimension,  it  is  well  to  increase  the  height  also  in 
some  proportion  to  it,  in  order  that  there  may  be  less  weight  of 
wall  above,  resting  on  the  increased  span  of  the  arch.  This  is, 
however,  so  much  the  necessary  result  of  the  broad  curve  of  the 
arch  itself,  that  there  is  no  structural  necessity  of  elevating  the 
jamb ;  and  I  believe  that  beautiful  entrances  might  be  made  of 
every  span  of  arch,  retaining  the  jamb  at  little  more  than  a 
man's  height,  until  the  sweep  of  the  curves  became  so  vast  that 
the  small  vertical  line  became  a  part  of  them,  and  one  entered 
into  the  temple  as  under  a  great  rainbow. 

§  viii.  On  the  other  hand,  the  jamb  may  be  elevated  indefinitely, 
so  that  the  increasing  entrance  retains  at  least  the  proportion  of 
width  it  had  originally ;  say  4  ft.  by  7  ft.  5  in.  But  a  less  propor- 
tion of  width  than  this  has  always  a  meagre,  inhospitable,  and  un- 
gainly look,  except  in  military  architecture,  where  the  narrowness 
of  the  entrance  is  necessary,  and  its  height  adds  to  its  grandeur, 
as  between  the  entrance  towers  of  our  British  castles.  This  law 
however,  observe,  applies  only  to  true  doors,  not  to  the  arches  of 
porches,  which  may  be  of  any  proportion,  as  of  any  number,  being 
in  fact  intercolumniations,  not  doors ;  as  in  the  noble  example  of 
the  west  front  of  Peterborough,  which,  in  spite  of  the  destructive 
absurdity  of  its  central  arch  being  the  narrowest,  would  still,  if 
the  paltry  porter's  lodge,  or  gatehouse,  or  turnpike,  or  whatever 
it  is,  were  knocked  out  of  the  middle  of  it,  be  the  noblest  west 
front  in  England. 

§  ix.  Farther,  and  finally.  In  proportion  to  the  height  and 
size  of  the  building,  and  therefore  to  the  size  of  its  doors,  will  be 
the  thickness  of  its  walls,  especially  at  the  foundation,  that  is  to 
say,  beside  the  doors  ;  and  also  in  proportion  to  the  numbers  of  a 
crowd  will  be  the  unruliness  and  pressure  of  it.  Hence,  partly  in 
necessity  and  partly  in  prudence,  the  splaying  or  chamfering  of 
the  jamb  of  the  larger  door  will  be  deepened,  and,  if  possible, 
made  at  a  larger  angle  for  the  large  door  than  for  the  small  one ; 


o 


construction.  XVI.   FORM   OF  APERTURE.  181 

so  that  the  large  door  will  always  be  encompassed  by  a  visible 
breadth  of  jamb  proportioned  to  its  own  magnitude.  The  de- 
corative value  of  this  feature  we  shall  see  hereafter. 

§  x.  The  second  kind  of  apertures  we  have  to  examine  are 
those  of  windows. 

Window  apertures  are  mainly  of  two  kinds ;  those  for  outlook, 
and  those  for  inlet  of  light,  many  being  for  both  purposes,  and 
either  purpose,  or  both,  combined  in  military  architecture  with 
those  of  offence  and  defence.  But  all  window  apertures,  as  com- 
pared with  door  apertures,  have  almost  infinite  licence  of  form 
and  size  :  they  may  be  of  any  shape,  from  the  slit  or  cross  slit  to 
the  circle* ;  of  any  size,  from  the  loophole  of  the  castle  to  the 
pillars  of  light  of  the  cathedral  apse.  Yet,  according  to  their 
place  and  purpose,  one  or  two  laws  of  fitness  hold  respecting 
them,  which  let  us  examine  in  the  two  classes  of  windows  succes- 
sively, but  without  reference  to  military  architecture,  which 
here,  as  before,  we  may  dismiss  as  a  subject  of  separate  science, 
only  noticing  that  windows,  like  all  other  features,  are  always 
delightful,  if  not  beautiful,  when  their  position  and  shape  have 
indeed  been  thus  necessarily  determined,  and  that  many  of  their 
most  picturesque  forms  have  resulted  from  the  requirements  of 
war.  We  should  also  find  in  military  architecture  the  typical 
forms  of  the  two  classes  of  outlet  and  inlet  windows  in  their 
utmost  development ;  the  greatest  sweep  of  sight  and  range  of 
shot  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  fullest  entry  of  light  and  air  on 
the  other,  being  constantly  required  at  the  smallest  possible  aper- 
tures. Our  business,  however,  is  to  reason  out  the  laws  for  our- 
selves, not  to  take  the  examples  as  we  find  them. 

§  xi.  1.  Outlook  apertures.  For  these  no  general  outline  is 
determinable  by  the  necessities  or  inconveniences  of  outlooking, 
excej)t  only  that  the  bottom  or  sill  of  the  windows,  at  whatever 

*  The  arch  heading  is  indeed  the  best  where  there  is  much  incumbent  weight, 
but  a  window  frequently  has  very  little  weight  above  it,  especially  when  placed  high, 
and  the  arched  form  loses  light  in  a  low  room  :  therefore  the  square-headed  window  is 
admissible  where  the  square-headed  door  is  not. 


182  XVI.   FOEM   OF  APERTUKE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


height,  should  be  horizontal,  for  the  convenience  of  leaning  on  it, 
or  standing  on  it  if  the  window  be  to  the  ground.  The  form  of 
the  upper  part  of  the  window  is  quite  immaterial,  for  all  win- 
dows allow  a  greater  range  of  sight  when  they  are  approached 
than  that  of  the  eye  itself:  it  is  the  approachability  of  the 
window,  that  is  to  say,  the  annihilation  of  the  thickness  of  the 
wall,  which  is  the  real  point  to  be  attended  to.  If,  therefore,  the 
aperture  be  inaccessible,  or  so  small  that  the  thickness  of  the  wall 
cannot  be  entered,  the  wall  is  to  be  bevelled*  on  the  outside,  so 
as  to  increase  the  range  of  sight  as  far  as  possible ;  if  the  aperture 
can  be  entered,  then  bevelled  from  the  point  to  which  entrance 
is  possible.  The  bevelling  will,  if  possible,  be  in  every  direction, 
that  is  to  say,  upwards  at  the  top,  outwards  at  the  sides,  and 
downwards  at  the  bottom,  but  essentially  downwards  /  the  earth 
and  the  doings  upon  it  being  the  chief  object  in  outlook  windows, 
except  of  observatories ;  and  where  the  object  is  a  distinct  and 
special  view  downwards,  it  will  be  of  advantage  to  shelter  the  eye 
as  far  as  possible  from  the  rays  of  light  coming  from  above,  and 
the  head  of  the  window  may  be  left  horizontal,  or  even  the  whole 
aperture  sloped  outwards,  as  the  slit  in  a  letter-box  is  inwards. 

The  best  windows  for  outlook  are,  of  course,  oriels  and  bow 
windows,  but  these  are  not  to  be  considered  under  the  head  of 
apertures  merely ;  they  are  either  balconies  roofed  and  glazed, 
and  to  be  considered  under  the  head  of  external  appliances,  or 
they  are  each  a  story  of  an  external  semi-tower,  having  true 
aperture  windows  on  each  side  of  it. 

§  xn.  2.  Inlet  windows.  These  windows  may,  of  course,  be  of 
any  shape  and  size  whatever,  according  to  the  other  necessities 
of  the  building,  and  the  quantity  and  direction  of  light  desired, 
their  purjDOse  being  now  to  throw  it  in  streams  on  particular  lines 
or  spots  ;  now  to  diffuse  it  everywhere ;  sometimes  to  introduce 
it  in  broad  masses,  tempered  in  strength,  as  in  the.  cathedral 
coloured   window;    sometimes   in   starry  showers   of  scattered 

=*  I  do  not  like  the  sound  of  the  word  "  splayed ;"  I  always  shall  use  "  bevelled" 
instead. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XVI.   FOEM   OF  APEETUEE.  183 


brilliancy,  like  the  apertures  in  the  roof  of  an  Arabian  bath : 
perhaps  the  most  beautiful  of  all  forms  being  the  rose,  which  has 
in  it  the  unity  of  both  characters,  and  sympathy  with  that  of 
the  source  of  light  itself.  It  is  noticeable,  however,  that  while 
both  the  circle  and  pointed  oval  are  beautiful  - 

.  Fig.  XLIV. 

window  forms,  it  would  be  very  painful  to  cut 
either  of  them  in  half  and  connect  them  by  ver- 
tical lines,  as  in  Fig.  XLIY.  The  reason  is,  I 
believe,  that  so  treated,  the  upper  arch  is  not 
considered  as  connected  with  the  lower,  and 
forming  an  entire  figure,  but  as  the  ordinary  arch  roof  of  the 
aperture,  and  the  lower  arch  as  an  arch  floor,  equally  unneces- 
sary and  unnatural.  Also,,  the  elliptical  oval  is  generally  an 
unsatisfactory  form,  because  it  gives  the  idea  of  useless  trouble 
in  building  it,  though  it  occurs  quaintly  and  pleasantly  in  the 
former  windows  of  France:  I  believe  it  is  also  objectionable 
because  it  has  an  indeterminate,  slippery  look,  like  that  of  a 
bubble  rising  through  a  fluid.  It,  and  all  elongated  forms,  are 
still  more  objectionable  placed  horizontally,  because  this  is  the 
weakest  position  they  can  structurally  have ;  that  is  to  say,  less 
light  is  admitted,  with  greater  loss  of  strength  to  the  building, 
than  by  any  other  form.  If  admissible  anywhere,  it  is  for  the 
sake  of  variety  at  the  top  of  the  building,  as  the  flat  parallelo- 
gram sometimes  not  ungracefully  in  Italian  Renaissance. 

§  xiii.  The  question  of  bevelling  becomes  a  little  more  com- 
plicated in  the  inlet  than  the  outlook  window,  because  the  mass 
or  quantity  of  light  admitted  is  often  of  more  consequence  than 
its  direction,  and  often  vice  versa  /  and  the  outlook  window  is 
supposed  to  be  approachable,  which  is  far  from  being  always  the 
case  with  windows  for  light,  so  that  the  bevelling  which  in  the 
outlook  window  is  chiefly  to  open  range  of  sight,  is  in  the  inlet  a 
means  not  only  of  admitting  the  light  in  greater  quantity,  but  of 
directing  it  to  the  spot  on  which  it  is  to  fall.  But,  in  general, 
the  bevelling  of  the  one  window  will  reverse  that  of  the  other ; 
for,  first,  no  natural  light  will  strike  on  the  inlet  window  from 


184  XVI.   FOEM   OF  APEETUEE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


beneath,  unless  reflected  light,  which  is  (I  believe)  injurious  to 
the  health  and  the  sight ;  and  thus,  while  in  the  outlook  window 
the  outside  bevel  downwards  is  essential,  in  the  inlet  it  would 
be  useless :  and  the  sill  is  to  be  flat,  if  the  window  be  on  a  level 
with  the  spot  it  is  to  light ;  and  sloped  downwards  within,  if 
above  it.  Again,  as  the  brightest  rays  of  light  are  the  steepest, 
the  outside  bevel  upwards  is  as  essential  in  the  roof  of  the  inlet 
as  it  was  of  small  importance  in  that  of  the  outlook  window. 

§  xiv.  On  the  horizontal  section  the  aperture  will  expand  in- 
ternally, a  somewhat  larger  number  of  rays  being  thus  reflected 
from  the  jambs ;  and  the  aperture  being  thus  the  smallest  pos- 
sible outside,  this  is  the  favorite  military  form  of  inlet  window, 
always  found  in  magnificent  development  in  the  thick  walls  of 
mediaeval  castles  and  convents.  Its  effect  is  tranquil,  but  cheer- 
less and  dungeon-like  in  its  fullest  development,  owing  to  the 
limitation  of  the  range  of  sight  in  the  outlook,  which,  if  the 
window  be  unapproachable,  reduces  it  to  a  mere  point  of  light. 
A  modified  condition  of  it,  with  some  combination  of  the  outlook 
form,  is  probably  the  best  for  domestic  buildings  in  general 
(which,  however,  in  modem  architecture,  are  unhappily  so  thin 
walled,  that  the  outline  of  the  jambs  becomes  a  matter  almost  of 
indifference),  it  being  generally  noticeable  that  the  depth  of 
recess  which  I  have  observed  to  be  essential  to  nobility  of  exter- 
nal effect  has  also  a  certain  dignity  of  expression,  as  appearing 
to  be  intended  rather  to  admit  light  to  persons  quietly  occupied 
in  their  homes,  than  to  stimulate  or  favour  the  curiosity  of 
idleness. 


185 


CHAPTER  XYII. 


FILLING   OF   APERTFEE. 


§  i.  Thus  far  we  have  been  concerned  with  the  outline  only  of 
the  aperture :  we  were  next,  it  will  be  remembered,  to  consider 
the  necessary  modes  of  filling  it  with  valves  in  the  case  of  the 
door,  or  with  glass  or  tracery  in  that  of  the  window. 

1.  Fillings  of  doors.  We  concluded,  in  the  previous  Chapter, 
that  doors  in  buildings  of  any  importance  or  size  should  have 
headings  in  the  form  of  an  arch.  This  is,  however,  the  most  in- 
convenient form  we  could  choose,  as  respects  the  fitting  of  the 
valves  of  the  doorway ;  for  the  arch-shaped  head  of  the  valves 
not  only  requires  considerable  nicety  in  fitting  to  the  arch,  but 
adds  largely  to  the  weight  of  the  door, — a  double  disadvantage, 
straining  the  hinges  and  making  it  cumbersome  in  opening. 
And  this  inconvenience  is  so  much  perceived  by  the  eye,  that  a 
door  valve  with  a  pointed  head  is  always  a  disagreeable  object. 
It  becomes,  therefore,  a  matter  of  true  necessity  so  to  arrange  the 
doorway  as  to  admit  of  its  being  fitted  with  rectangular  valves. 

§  ii.  Now,  in  determining  the  form  of  the  aperture,  we  sup- 
posed the  jamb  of  the  door  to  be  of  the  utmost  height  required 
for  entrance.  The  extra  height  of  the  arch  is  unnecessary  as  an 
opening,  the  arch  being  required  for  its  strength  only,  not  for 
its  elevation.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  why  it  should  not 
be  barred  across  by  a  horizontal  lintel,  into  which  the  valves 
may  be  fitted,  and  the  triangular  or  semicircular  arched  space 
above  the  lintel  may  then  be  permanently  closed,  as  we  choose, 
either  with  bars,  or  glass,  or  stone. 

This  is  the  form  of  all  good  doors,  without  exception,  over  the 
whole  world  and  in  all  ages,  and  no  other  can  ever  be  invented, 


186  XVII.   FILLING   OF  APEETUEE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


§  in.  Iii  the  simplest  doors  the  cross  lintel  is  of  wood  only,  and 
glass  or  bars  occupy  the  space  above,  a  very  frequent  form  in 
Venice.  In  more  elaborate  doors  the  cross  lintel  is  of  stone,  and 
the  filling  sometimes  of  brick,  sometimes  of  stone,  very  often  a 
grand  single  stone  being  used  to  close  the  entire  space  :  the  space 
thus  filled  is  called  the  Tympanum.  In  large  doors  the  cross 
lintel  is  too  long  to  bear  the  great  incumbent  weight  of  this  stone 
filling  without  support ;  it  is,  therefore,  carried  by  a  pier  in  the 
centre  ;  and  two  valves  are  used,  fitted  to  the  rectangular  spaces 
on  each  side  of  the  pier.  In  the  most  elaborate  examples  of  this 
condition,  each  of  these  secondary  doorways  has  an  arch  heading, 
a  cross  lintel,  and  a  triangular  filling  or  tympanum  of  its  own, 
all  subordinated  to  the  main  arch  above. 

§  iv.  2.  Fillings  of  windows. 

When  windows  are  large,  and  to  be  filled  with  glass,  the  sheet 
of  glass,  however  constructed,  whether  of  large  panes  or  small 
fragments,  requires  the  support  of  bars  of  some  kind,  either  of 
wood,  metal,  or  stone.  Wood  is  inapplicable  on  a  large  scale, 
owing  to  its  destructibility  ;  very  fit  for  door-valves,  which  can 
be  easily  refitted,  and  in  which  weight  would  be  an  inconven- 
ience, but  very  unfit  for  window-bars,  which,  if  they  decayed, 
might  let  the  whole  window  be  blown  in  before  their  decay  was 
observed,  and  in  which  weight  would  be  an  advantage,  as  offer- 
ing more  resistance  to  the  wind.    ^ 

Iron  is,  however,  fit  for  window-bars,  and  there  seems  no  con- 
structive reason  why  we  should  not  have  iron  traceries,  as  well 
as  iron  pillars,  iron  churches,  and  iron  steeples.  But  I  have,  in 
the  "  Seven  Lamps,"  given  reasons  for  not  considering  such 
structures  as  architecture  at  all. 

The  window-bars  must,  therefore,  be  of  stone,  and  of  stone  only. 

§  v.  The  purpose  of  the  window  being  always  to  let  in  as  much 
light,  and  command  as  much  View,  as  possible,  these  bars  of  stone 
are  to  be  made  as  slender  and  as  few  as  they  can  be,  consistently 
with  their  due  strength. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XVII.   FILLING   OF   APERTURE.  187 


Let  it  be  required  to  support  the  breadth  of  glass,  a  &,  Fig. 
XLV.      The  tendency  of   the 
glass  sustaining  any  force,  as  of 
wind  from  without,  is  to  bend  a     ____     h 

into   an   arch  inwards,   m   the  c 

dotted  line,  and  break  in  the  I-     o     o     B 

centre.  It  is  to  be  supported, 
therefore,  by  the  bar  put  in  its 
centre,  e. 

But  this  central  bar,  c,  may 
not  be  enough,  and  the  spaces  a 
<?,  c  5,  may  still  need  support. 
The  next  step  will  be  to  put  two 
bars  instead  of  one,  and  divide 
the  window  into  three  spaces  as  at  d. 

But  this  may  still  not  be  enough,  and  the  window  may  need 
three  bars.  Now  the  greatest  stress  is  always  on  the  centre  of 
the  window.  If  the  three  bars  are  equal  in  strength,  as  at  e,  the 
central  bar  is  either  too  slight  for  its  work,  or  the  lateral  bars 
too  thick  for  theirs.  Therefore,  we  must  slightly  increase  the 
thickness  of  the  central  bar,  and  diminish  that  of  the  lateral 
ones,  so  as  to  obtain  the  arrangement  at  f  7i.  If  the  window 
enlarge  farther,  each  of  the  spaces  f  g^  g  A,  is  treated  &s  the 
original  space  a  5,  and  we  have  the  groups  of  bars  h  and  I. 

So  that,  whatever  the  shape  of  the  window,  whatever  the 
direction  and  number  of  the  bars,  there  are  to  be  central  or  main 
bars  ;  second  bars  subordinated  to  them ;  third  bars  subordinated 
to  the  second,  and  so  on  to  the  number  required.  This  is  called 
the  subordination  of  tracery,  a  system  delightful  to  the  eye  and 
mind,  owing  to  its  anatomical  framing  and  unity,  and  to  its 
expression  of  the  laws  of  good  government  in  all  fragile  and 
unstable  things.  All  tracery,  therefore,  which  is  not  subor- 
dinated, is  barbarous,  in  so  far  as  this  part  of  its  structure  is 
concerned. 

§  vi.  The  next  question  will  be  the  direction  of  the  bars.    The 


188  XVII.   FILLING   OF  APERTURE; 


CONSTRUCTION. 


reader  will  understand  at  once,  without  any  laborious  proof,  that 
a  given  area  of  glass,  supported  by  its  edges,  is  stronger  in  its 
resistance  to  violence  when  it  is  arranged  in  a  long  strip  or  band 
than  in  a  square ;  and  that,  therefore,  glass  is  generally  to  be 
arranged,  especially  in  windows  on  a  large  scale,  in  oblong  areas  : 
and  if  the  bars  so  dividing  it  be  placed  horizontally,  they  will 
have  less  power  of  supporting  themselves,  and  will  need  to  be 
thicker  in  consequence,  than  if  placed  vertically.  As  far,  there- 
fore, as  the  form  of  the  window  permits,  they  are  to  be  vertical. 

§  vii.  But  even  when  so  placed,  they  cannot  be  trusted  to 
support  themselves  beyond  a  certain  height,  but  will  need  cross 
bars  to  steady  them.  Cross  bars  of  stone  are,  therefore,  to  be 
introduced  at  necessary  intervals,  not  to  divide  the  glass,  but  to 
support  the  upright  stone  bars.  The  glass  is  always  to  be  divided 
longitudinally  as  far  as  possible,  and  the  upright  bars  which 
divide  it  supported  at  proper  intervals.  However  high  the 
window,  it  is  almost  impossible  that  it  should  require  more  than 
two  cross  bars. 

§  viii.  It  may  sometimes  happen  that  when  tall  windows  are 
placed  very  close  to  each  other  for  the  sake  of  more  light,  the 
masonry  between  them  may  stand  in  need,  or  at  least,  be  the 
better  of,  some  additional  support.  The  cross  bars  of  the  win- 
dows may  then  be  thickened,  in  order  to  bond  the  intermediate 
piers  more  strongly  together,  and  if  this  thickness  aj>pear  ungain- 
ly, it  may  be  modified  by  decoration. 

§  ix.  We  have  thus  arrived  at  the  idea  of  a  vertical  frame-work 
of  subordinated  bars,  supported  by  cross  bars  at  the  necessary 
intervals,  and  the  only  remaining  question  is  the  method  of  in- 
sertion into  the  aperture.  "Whatever  its  form,  if  we  merely  let 
the  ends  of  the  bars  into  the  voussoirs  of  its  heading,  the  least 
settlement  of  the  masonry  would  distort  the  arch,  or  push  up 
some  of  its  voussoirs,  or  break  the  window  bars,  or  push  them 
aside.  Evidently  our  object  should  be  to  connect  the  window 
bars  among  themselves,  so  framing  them  together  that  they  may 
give  the  utmost  possible  degree  of  support  to  the  whole  window 


construction.  XVII.   FILLING  OF  APERTURE.  189 

head  in  case  of  any  settlement.  But  we  know  how  to  do  this 
already  :  our  window  bars  are  nothing  but  small  shafts.  Capital 
them ;  throw  small  arches  across  between  the  smaller  bars,  large 
arches  over  them  between  the  larger  bars,  one  comprehensive 
arch  over  the  whole,  or  else  a  horizontal  lintel,  if  the  window 
havfe  a  flat  head ;  and  we  have  a  complete  system  of  mutual 
support,  independent  of  the  aperture  head,  and  yet  assisting  to 
sustain  it,  if  need  be.  But  we  want  the  spandrils  of  this  arch 
system  to  be  themselves  as  light,  and  to  let  as  much  light  through 
them,  as  possible  :  and  we  know  already  how  to  pierce  them, 
(Chap.  XII.  §  vil).  We  pierce  them  with  circles  ;  and  we  have, 
if  the  circles  are  small  and  the  stonework  strong,  the  traceries  of 
Giotto  and  the  Pisan  school ;  if  the  circles  are  as  large  as  possible 
and  the  bars  slender,  those  which  I  have  already  figured  and 
described  as  the  only  perfect  traceries  of  the  Northern  Gothic* 
The  varieties  of  their  design  arise  partly  from  the  different  size 
of  window  and  consequent  number  of  bars ;  partly  from  the 
different  heights  of  their  pointed  arches,  as  well  as  the  various 
positions  of  the  window  head  in  relation  to  the  roof,  rendering 
one  or  another  arrangement  better  for  dividing  the  light,  and 
partly  from  aesthetic  and  expressional  requirements,  which, 
within  certain  limits,  may  be  allowed  a  very  important  influence : 
for  the  strength  of  the  bars  is  ordinarily  so  much  greater  than  is 
absolutely  necessary,  that  some  portion  of  it  may  be  gracefully 
sacrificed  to  the  attainment  of  variety  in  the  plans  of  tracery — 
a  variety  which,  even  within  its  severest  limits  is  perfectly  end- 
less ;  more  especially  in  the  pointed  arch,  the  proportion  of  the 
tracery  being  in  the  round  arch  necessarily  more  fixed. 

§  x.  The  circular  window  furnishes  an  exception  to  the  common 
law,  that  the  bars  shall  be  vertical  through  the  greater  part  of 
their  length  :  for  if  they  were  so,  they  could  neither  have  secure 
perpendicular  footing,  nor  secure  heading,  their  thrust  being 
perpendicular  to  the  curve  of  the  voussoirs  only  in  the  centre  of 

*  "  Seven  Lamps,"  p.  53. 


190  XVII.    FILLING   OF  APERTURE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


the  window. ;  therefore,  a  small  circle,  like  the  axle  of  a  wheel, 
is  put  into  the  centre  of  the  window,  large  enough  to  give  foot- 
ing to  the  necessary  number  of  radiating  bars ;  and  the  bars  are 
arranged  as  spokes,  being  all  of  course  properly  capitaled  and 
arch-headed.  This  is  the  best  form  of  tracery  for  circular  win- 
dows, naturally  enough  called  wheel  windows  when  so  filled. 

§  xi.  ]Now,  I  wish  the  reader  especially  to  observe  that'  we 
have  arrived  at  these  forms  of  perfect  Gothic  tracery  without  the 
smallest  reference  to  any  practice  of  any  school,  or  to  any  law  of 
authority  whatever.  They  are  forms  having  essentially  nothing 
whatever  to  do  either  with  Goths  or  Greeks.  They  are  eternal 
forms,  based  on  laws  of  gravity  and  cohesion  ;  and  no  better,  nor 
any  others  so  good,  will  ever  be  invented,  so  long  as  the  present 
laws  of  gravity  and  cohesion  subsist. 

§  xn.  It  does  not  at  all  follow  that  this  group  of  forms  owes 
its  origin  to  any  such  course  of  reasoning  as  that  which  has  now 
led  us  to  it.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  not  the  smallest  doubt 
that  tracery  began,  partly,  in  the  grouping  of  windows  together 
(subsequently  enclosed  within  a  large  arch*),  and  partly  in  the 
fantastic  penetrations  of  a  single  slab  of  stone  under  the  arch,  as 
the  circle  in  Plate  Y.  above.  The  perfect  form  seems  to  have 
been  accidentally  struck  in  passing  from  experinient  on  the  one 
side,  to  affectation  on  the  other ;  and  it  was  so  far  from  ever 
becoming  systematised,  that  I  am  aware  of  no  type  of  tracery 
for  which  a  less  decided  preference  is  shown  in  the  buildings  in 
which  it  exists.  The  early  pierced  traceries  are  multitudinous 
and  perfect  in  their  kind, — the  late  Flamboyant,  luxuriant  in 
detail,  and  lavish  in  quantity, — but  the  perfect  forms  exist  in 
comparatively  few  churches,  generally  in  portions  of  the  church 
only,  and  are  always  connected,  and  that  closely,  either  with  the 

*  On  the  north  side  of  the  nave  of  the  cathedral  of  Lyons,  there  is  an  early  French 
window,  presenting  one  of  the  usual  groups  of  foliated  arches  and  circles,  left,  as  it  were, 
loose,  without  any  enclosing  curve.  The  effect  is  very  painful.  This  remarkable 
window  is  associated  with  others  of  the  common  form. 


construction.  XVII.    FILLING   OF   APERTURE.  191 

massy  forms  out  of  which  they  have  emerged,  or  with  the  ener- 
vated types  into  which  they  are  instantly  to  degenerate. 

§>  xin.  Nor  indeed  are  we  to  look  upon  them  as  in  all  points 
superior  to  the  more  ancient  examples.  We  have  above  con- 
ducted our  reasoning  entirely  on  the  supposition  that  a  single 
aperture  is  given,  which  it  is  the  object  to  fill  with  glass,  dimi- 
nishing the  power  of  the  light  as  little  as  possible.  But  there 
are  many  cases,  as  in  triforium  and  cloister  lights,  in  which  glazing 
is  not  required ;  in  which,  therefore,  the  bars,  if  there  be  any, 
must  have  some  more  important  function  than  that  of  merely 
holding  glass,  and  in  which  their  actual  use  is  to  give  steadiness 
and  tone,)  as  it  were,  to  the  arches  and  walls  above  and  beside 
them  ;  or  to  give  the  idea  of  protection  to  those  who  pass  along 
the  triforium,  and  of  seclusion  to  those  who  walk  in  the  cloister. 
Much  thicker  shafts,  and  more  massy  arches,  may  be  properly  em- 
ployed in  work  of  this  kind  ;  and  many  groups  of  such  tracery  will 
be  found  resolvable  into  true  colonnades,  with  the  arches  in  pairs, 
or  in  triple  or  quadruple  groups,  and  with  small  rosettes  pierced 
above  them  for  light.  All  this  is  just  as  right  in  its  place,  as  the 
glass  tracery  is  in  its  own  function,  and  often  much  more  grand. 
But  the  same  indulgence  is  not  to  be  shown  to  the  affectations 
which  succeeded  the  developed  forms.  Of  these  there  are  three 
principal  conditions  :  the  Flamboyant  of  France,  the  Stump 
tracery  of  Germany,  and  the  Perpendicular  of  England. 

§  xiv.  Of  these  the  first  arose,  by  the  most  delicate  and 
natural  transitions,  out  of  the  perfect  school.  It  was  an  en- 
deavour to  introduce  more  grace  into  its  lines,  and  more  change 
into  its  combinations  ;  and  the  aesthetic  results  are  so  beautiful 
that  for  some  time  after  the  right  road  had  been  left,  the  aber- 
ration was  more  to  be  admired  than  regretted.  The  final  con- 
ditions became  fantastic  and  effeminate,  but,  in  the  country 
where  they  had  been  invented,  never  lost  their  peculiar  grace 
until  they  were  replaced  by  the  Renaissance.  The  copies  of  the 
school  in  England  and  Italy  have  all  its  faults  and  none  of  its 
beauties  ;   in  France,  whatever  it  lost  in  method  or  in  majesty, 


192  XVII.   FILLING   OF   APERTURE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


it  gained  in  fantasy :  literally  Flamboyant,  it  breathed  away  its 
strength  into  the  air ;  but  there  is  not  more  difference  be- 
tween the  commonest  doggrel  that  ever  broke  prose  into  uftin- 
telligibility,  and  the  burning  mystery  of  Coleridge,  or  spirituality 
of  Elizabeth  Barrett,  than  there  is  between  the  dissolute  dulness 
of  English  Flamboyant,  and  the  flaming  undulations  of  the 
wreathed  lines  of  delicate  stone,  that  confuse  themselves  with  the 
clouds  of  every  morning  sky  that  brightens  above  the  valley  of 
the  Seine. 

§  xv.  The  second  group  of  traceries,  the  intersectional  or 
German  group,  may  be  considered  as  including  the  entire  range 
of  the  absurd  forms  which  were  invented  in  order  to  display 
dexterity  in  stone-cutting  and  ingenuity  in  construction.  They 
express  the  peculiar  character  of  the  German  mind,  which  cuts 
the  frame  of  every  truth  joint  from  joint,  in  order  to  prove  the 
edge  of  its  instruments ;  and,  in  all  cases,  prefers  a  new  or  a 
strange  thought  to  a  good  one,  and  a  subtle  thought  to  a  useful 
one.  The  point  and  value  of  the  German  tracery  consists  prin- 
cipally in  turning  the  features  of  good  traceries  upside  down,  and 
cutting  them  in  two  where  they  are  properly  continuous.  To 
destroy  at  once  foundation  and  membership,  and  suspend  every- 
thing in  the  air,  keeping  out  of  sight,  as  far  as  possible,  the 
evidences  of  a  beginning  and  the  probabilities  of  an  end,  are  the 
main  objects  of  German  architecture,  as  of  modern  German 
divinity. 

§  xvi.  This  school,  has,  however,  at  least  the  merit  of  ingenuity. 
Not  so  the  English  Perpendicular,  though  a  very  curious  school 
also  in  its  way.  In  the  course  of  the  reasoning  which  led  us  to 
the  determination  of  the  perfect  Gothic  tracery,  we  were  induced 
successively  to  reject  certain  methods  of  arrangement  as  weak, 
dangerous,  or  disagreeable.  Collect  all  these  together,  and  prac- 
tise them  at  once,  and  you  have  the  English  Perpendicular. 

As  thus.  You  find,  in  the  first  place  (§  v.),  that  your  tracery 
bars  are  to  be  subordinated,  less  to  greater  ;  so  you  take  a  group 
of,  suppose,  eight,  which  you  make  all  exactly  equal,  giving  you 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XVII.    FILLING   OF   APERTUKE. 


193 


nine  equal  spaces  in  the  window,  as  at  A,  Fig.  XLYI.  You 
found,  in  the  second  place  (§  vil),  that  there  was  no  occasion  for 
more  than  two  cross  bars  ;  so  you  take  at  least  four  or  five  (also 
represented  at  A,  Fig.  XLYI.),  also  carefully  equalised,  and  set 
at  equal  spaces.  You  found,  in  the  third  place  (§  viii.),  that 
these  bars  were  to  be  strengthened,  in  order  to  support  the  main 
piers ;  you  will  therefore  cut  the  ends  off  the  uppermost,  and  the 
fourth  into  three  pieces  (as  also  at  A.)  In  the  fourth  place,  you 
found  (§  ix.)  that  you  were  never  to  run  a  vertical  bar  into  the 


Fig.  XLVI. 


.  1    __  _ 

1 

™__ 


A 


arch  head ;  so  you  run  them  all  into  it  (as  at  B,  Fig.  XLYI.) : 
and  this  last  arrangement  will  be  useful  in  two  ways,  for  it  will 
not  only  expose  both  the  bars  and  the  archivolt  to  an  apparent 
probability  of  every  species  of  dislocation  at  any  moment,  but 
it  will  provide  you  with  two  pleasing  interstices  at  the  flanks,  in 
the  shape  of  carving-knives,  a,  5,  which,  by  throwing  across 
the  curves  c,  d,  you  may  easily  multiply  into  four ;  and  these, 
as  you  can  put  nothing  into  their  sharp  tops,  will  afford  you  a 
more  than  usually  rational  excuse  for  a  little  bit  of  Germanism, 
in  filling  them  with  arches  upside  down,  0,  f.     You  will  now 

13 


19tt  XVII.    FILLING   OF   APERTUEE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


have  left  at  your  disposal  two  and  forty  similar  interstices, 
which,  for  the  sake  of  variety,  yon  will  proceed  to  fill  with  two 
and  forty  similar  arches  :  and,  as  you  were  told  that  the  moment 
a  bar  received  an  arch  heading,  it  was  to  be  treated  as  a  shaft  and 
capitalled,  you  will  take  care  to  give  your  bars  no  capitals  nor 
bases,  but  to  run  bars,  foliations  and  all,  well  into  each  other, 
after  the  fashion  of  cast-iron,  as  at  C.  You  have  still  two  tri- 
angular spaces  occurring  in  an  important  part  of  your  window, 
g  <7,  which,  as  they  are  very  conspicuous,  and  you  cannot  make 
them  uglier  than  they  are,  you  will  do  wisely  to  let  alone  : — and 
you  will  now  have  the  west  window  of  the  cathedral  of  Win- 
chester, a  very  perfect  example  of  English  Perpendicular.  Nor 
do  I  think  that  you  can,  on  the  whole,  better  the  arrangement, 
unless,  perhaps,  by  adding  buttresses  to  some  of  the  bars,  as  is 
done  in  the  cathedral  of  Gloucester  ;  these  buttresses  having  the 
double  advantage  of  darkening  the  window  when  seen  from 
within,  and  suggesting,  when  it  is  seen  from  without,  the  idea  of 
its  being  divided  by  two  stout  party  walls,  with  a  heavy  thrust 
against  the  glass. 

§  xvn.  Thus  far  we  have  considered  the  plan  of  the  tracery 
only :  we  have  lastly  to  note  the  conditions  under  which  the  glass 
is  to  be  attached  to  the  bars ;  and  the  sections  of  the  bars  them- 
selves. 

These  bars  we  have  seen,  in  the  perfect  form,  are  to  become 
shafts  ;  but,  supposing  the  object  to  be  the  admission  of  as  much 
light  as  possible,  it  is  clear  that  the  thickness  of  the  bar  ought 
to  be  chiefly  in  the  depth  of  the  window,  and  that  by  increasing 
the  depth  of  the  bar  we  may  diminish  its  breadth :  clearly, 
therefore,  we  should  employ  the  double  group  of  shafts,  5,  of  Fig. 
XI V.,  setting  it  edgeways  in  the  window  :  but  as  the  glass  would 
then  come  between  the  two  shafts,  we  must  add  a  member  into 
which  it  is  to  be  fitted,  as  at «,  Fig.  XLYII.,  and  uniting  these  three 
members  together  in  the  simplest  way,  with  a  curved  instead 
of  a  sharp  recess  behind  the  shafts,  we  have  the  section  &,  the 
perfect,  but  simplest  type  of  the  main  tracery  bars  in  good  Gothic. 


CONSTRUCTION.  XVII.    FILLING   OF   APERTURE.  195 

In  triforium  and  cloister  tracery,  which  has  no     Fig-   XLVll. 
glass  to  hold,  the  central  member  is  omitted,  and 
we  have  either  the  pure  double  shaft,  always  the 
most  graceful,  or  a  single  and  more  massy  shaft, 
which  is  the  simpler  and  more  usual  form. 

§  xviii.  Finally :  there  is  an  intermediate  arrangement  be- 
tween the  glazed  and  the  open  tracery,  that  of  the  domestic 
traceries  of  Venice.  Peculiar  conditions,  hereafter  to  be 
described,  require  the  shafts  of  these  traceries  to  become  the 
main  vertical  supports  of  the  floors  and  walls.  Their  thickness 
is  therefore  enormous ;  and  yet  free  egress  is  required  between 
them  (into  balconies)  which  is  obtained  by  doors  in  their  lattice 
glazing.  To  prevent  the  inconvenience  and  ugliness  of  driving 
the  hinges  and  fastenings  of  them  into  the  shafts,  and  having  the 
play  of  the  doors  in  the  intervals,  the  entire  glazing  is  thrown 
behind  the  pillars,  and  attached  to  their  abaci  and  bases  with 
iron.  It  is  thus  securely  sustained  by  their  massy  bulk,  and 
leaves  their  symmetry  and  shade  undisturbed. 

§  xix.  The  depth  at  which  the  glass  should  be  placed  in  win- 
dows without  traceries  will  generally  be  fixed  by  the  forms  of 
their  bevelling,  the  glass  occupying  the  narrowest  interval :  but 
when  its  position  is  not  thus  fixed,  as  in  many  London  houses,  it 
is  to  be  remembered  that  the  deeper  the  glass  is  set  (the  wall 
being  of  given  thickness),  the  more  light  will  enter,  and  the 
clearer  the  prospect  will  be  to  a  person  sitting  quietly  in  the  cen- 
tre of  the  room  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  farther  out  the  glass  is  set, 
the  more  convenient  the  window  will  be  for  a  person  rising  and 
looking  out  of  it.  The  one,  therefore,  is  an  arrangement  for  the 
idle  and  curious,  who  care  only  about  what  is  going  on  upon  the 
earth :  the  other  for  those  who  are  willing  to  remain  at  rest,  so 
that  they  have  free  admission  of  the  light  of  Heaven.  This 
might  be  noted  as  a  curious  expressional  reason  for  the  necessity 
(of  which  no  man  of  ordinary  feeling  would  doubt  for  a  moment) 
of  a  deep  recess  in  the  window,  on  the  outside,  to  all  good  or 
architectural  effect :  still,  as  there  is  no  reason  why  people  should 


196  XVII.   FILLING   OF   APERTURE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


be  made  idle  by  having  it  in  their  power  to  look  out  of  window, 
and  as  the  slight  increase  of  light  or  clearness  of  view  in  the 
centre  of  a  room,  is  more  than  balanced  by  the  loss  of  space, 
and  the  greater  chill  of  the  nearer  glass  and  ontside  air,  we  can, 
I  fear,  allege  no  other  structural  reason  for  the  picturesque 
external  recess,  than  the  expediency  of  a  certain  degree  of  pro- 
tection, for  the  glass,  from  the  brightest  glare  of  sunshine,  and 
heaviest  rush  of  rain. 


197 


CHAPTEE  XVIII. 


PROTECTION   OF   APERTURE. 


§  i.  We  have  hitherto  considered  the  aperture  as  merely  pierced 
in  the  thickness  of  the  walls ;  and  when  its  masonry  is  simple 
and  the  fillings  of  the  aperture  are  unimportant,  it  may  well  re- 
main so.  But  when  the  fillings  are  delicate  and  of  value,  as  in 
the  case  of  coloured  glass,  finely  wrought  tracery,  or  sculpture, 
such  as  we  shall  often  find  occupying  the  tympanum  of  door- 
ways, some  protection  becomes  necessary  against  the  run  of  the 
rain  down  the  walls,  and  back  by  the  bevel  of  the  aperture  to 
the  joints  or  surface  of  the  fillings. 

§  ii.  The  first  and  simplest  mode  of  obtaining  this  is  by  chan- 
nelling the  jambs  and  arch  head ;  and  this  is  the  chief  practical 
service  of  aperture  mouldings,  which  are  otherwise  entirely 
decorative.  But  as  this  very  decorative  character  renders  them 
unfit  to  be  made  channels  for  rain  water,  it  is  well  to  add  some 
external  roofing  to  the  aperture,  which  may  protect  it  from  the 
run  of  all  the  rain,  except  that  which  necessarily  beats  into  its 
own  area.  This  protection,  in  its  most  usual  form,  is  a  mere 
dripstone  moulding  carried  over  or  round  the  head  of  the  aper- 
ture. But  this  is,  in  reality,  only  a  contracted  form  of  a  true 
roof,  projecting  from  the  wall  over  the  aperture  ;  and  all  pro- 
tections of  apertures  whatsoever  are  to  be  conceived  as  portions 
of  small  roofs,  attached  to  the  wall  behind  ;  and  supported  by 
it,  so  long  as  their  scale  admits  of  their  being  so  with  safety,  and 
afterwards  in  such  manner  as  may  be  most  expedient.  The  pro- 
per forms  of  these,  and  modes  of  their  support,  are  to  be  the 
subject  of  our  final  enquiry. 


198 


XVni.  PEOTECTION  OF  APEETUEE. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Fig.   XLVIII. 


in.  Bespecting  their  proper  form  we  need  not  stay  long  in 
doubt.  A  steep  gable  is  evidently  the  best  for 
throwing  oif  rain ;  even  a  low  gable  being  better 
than  a  high  arch.  Flat  roofs,  therefore,  may 
only  be  used  when  the  nature  of  the  building 
renders  the  gable  unsightly  ;  as  when  there  is 
not  room  for  it  between  the  stories ;  or  when 
the  object  is  rather  shade  than  protection  from 
rain,  as  often  in  verandahs  and  balconies.  But 
for  general  service  the  gable  is  the  proper  and 
jjl  natural  form,  and  may  be  taken  as  representa- 
tive of  the  rest.  Then  this  gable  may  either 
project  unsupported  from  the  wall,  a,  Fig. 
XLVIII.,  or  be  carried  by  brackets  or  sjuirs,  &, 
or  by  walls  or  shafts,  <?,  which  shafts  or  walls 
may  themselves  be,  in  windows,  carried  on  a 
sill ;  and  this,  in  its  turn,  supported  by  brack- 
ets or  spurs.  We  shall  glance  at  the  applications 
of  each  of  these  forms  in  order. 

§  iv.  There  is  not  much  variety  in  the  case 
of  the  first,  a,  Fig.  XLVIII.  In  the  Cumber- 
land and  border  cottages  the  door  is  generally  protected  by  two 
pieces  of  slate  arranged  in  a  gable,  giving  the  purest  possible 
type  of  the  first  form.  In  elaborate  architecture  such  a  projec- 
tion hardly  ever  occurs,  and  in  large  architecture  cannot  with 
safety  occur,  without  brackets  ;  but  by  cutting  away  the  greater 
part  of  the  projection,  we  shall  arrive  at  the  idea  of  a  plain 
gabled  cornice,  of  which  a  perfect  example  will  be  found  in 
Plate  VII.  of  the  folio  series.  With  this  first  complete  form  we 
may  associate  the  rude,  single,  projecting,  pent-house  roof;  im- 
perfect, because  either  it  must  be  level  and  the  water  lodge  lazily 
upon  it,  or  throw  off  the  drip  upon  the  persons  entering. 

§  v.  2.  5,  Fig.  XLVIII.     This  is  a  most  beautiful  and  natural 
type,  and  is  found  in  all  good  architecture,  from  the  highest  to  the 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XVIII.    PROTECTION   OF   APERTURE. 


199 


most  humble :  it  is  a  frequent  form  of  Fig.  XLIX. 

cottage  door,  more  especially  when 
carried  on  spurs,  being  of  peculiarly 
easy  construction  in  wood  :  as  applied 
to  large  architecture,  it  can  evidently 
be  built,  in  its  boldest  and  simplest 
form,  either  of  wood  only,  or  on  a 
scale  which  will  admit  of  its  sides 
being  each  a  single  slab  of  stone.  If 
so  large  as  to  require  jointed  masonry, 
the  gabled  sides  will  evidently  re- 
quire support,  and  an  arch  must  be 
thrown  across  under  them,  as  in  Fig.  XLIX.,  from  Fiesole. 

If  we  cut  the  projection  gradually  down,  we  arrive  at  the  com- 
mon Gothic  gable  dripstone  carried  on  small  brackets,  carved 
into  bosses,  heads,  or  some  other  ornamental  form  ;  the  sub-arch 
in  such  case  being  useless,  is  removed  or  coincides  with  the  arch 
head  of  the  aperture. 

§  vi.  3.  c,  Fig.  XL VIII.  Substituting  walls  or  pillars  for  the 
brackets,  we  may  carry  the  projection  as  far  out  as  we  choose, 
and  form  the  perfect  porch,  either  of  the  cottage  or  village 
church,  or  of  the  cathedral.  As  we  enlarge  the  structure,  how- 
ever, certain  modifications  of  form  become  necessary,  owing  to 
the  increased  boldness  of  the  required  supporting  arch.  For,  as 
the  lower  lines  of  the  gabled  roof  and  of  the  arch  cannot  coin- 
cide, we  have  necessarily  above  the  shafts  one  of  the  two  forms 
a  or  J,  in  Fig.  L.,  of  which  the  latter  is  clearly  the  best,  re- 
Fig.  L. 


200  XVIII.    PROTECTION   OF   APEETUEE.  construction. 

quiring  less  masonry  and  shorter  roofing;  and  when  the  arch 
becomes  so  large  as  to  cause  a  heavy  lateral  thrust,  it  may  be- 
come necessary  to  provide  for  its  farther  safety  by  pinnacles,  c. 

This  last  is  the  perfect  type  of  aperture  protection.  None 
other  can  ever  be  invented  so  good.  It  is  that  once  employed 
by  Giotto  in  the  cathedral  of  Florence,  and  torn  down  by  the 
proveditore,  Benedetto  Uguccione,  to  erect  a  Renaissance  front 
instead ;  and  another  such  has  been  destroyed,  not  long  since,  in 
Yenice,  the  porch  of  the  church  of  St.  Apollinare,  also  to  put  up 
some  Renaissance  upholstery :  for  Renaissance,  as  if  it  were  not 
nuisance  enough  in  the  mere  fact  of  its  own  existence,  appears 
invariably  as  a  beast  of  prey,  and  founds  itself  on  the  ruin  of  all 
that  is  best  and  noblest.  Many  such  porches,  however,  happily 
still  exist  in  Italy,  and  are  among  its  principal  glories. 

§  vn.  When  porches  of  this  kind,  carried  by  walls,  are  placed 
close  together,  as  in  cases  where  there  are  many  and  large 
entrances  to  a  cathedral  front,  they  would,  in  their  general  form, 
leave  deep  and  uncomfortable  intervals,  in  which  damp  would 
lodge  and  grass  grow ;  and  there  would  be  a  painful  feeling  in 
approaching  the  door  in  the  midst  of  a  crowd,  as  if  some  of  them 
might  miss  the  real  doors,  and  be  driven  into  the  intervals,  and 
embayed  there.  Clearly  it  will  be  a  natural  and  right  expedient, 
in  such  cases,  to  open  the  walls  of  the  porch  wider,  so  that  they 
may  correspond  in  slope,  or  nearly  so,  with  the  bevel  of  the  door- 
way, and  either  meet  each  other  in  the  intervals,  or  have  the 
said  intervals  closed  up  with  an  intermediate  wall,  so  that  nobody 
may  get  embayed  in  them.  The  porches  will  thus  be  united,  and 
form  one  range  of  great  open  gulphs  or  caverns,  ready  to  receive 
all  comers,  and  direct  the  current  of  the  crowd  into  the  narrower 
entrances.  As  the  lateral  thrust  of  the  arches  is  now  met  by 
each  other,  the  pinnacles,  if  there  were  any,  must  be  removed, 
and  waterspouts  placed  between  each  arch  to  discharge  the 
double  drainage  of  the  gables.  This  is  the  form  of  all  the  noble 
northern  porches,  without  exception,  best  represented  by  that  of 
Rheims. 


construction.  XVIII.    PROTECTION   OF   APERTURE.  201 

§  viii.  Contracted  conditions  of  the  pinnacled  porch  are  beauti- 
fully used  in  the  doors  of  the  cathedral  of  Florence ;  and  the 
entire  arrangement,  in  its  most  perfect  form,  as  adapted  to 
window  protection  and  decoration,  is  applied  by  Giotto  with  in- 
conceivable exquisiteness  in  the  windows  of  the  campanile ;  those 
of  the  cathedral  itself  being  all  of  the  same  type.  Various 
singular  and  delightful  conditions  of  it  are  applied  in  Italian 
domestic  architecture  (in  the  Broletto  of  Monza  very  quaintly), 
being  associated  with  balconies  for  speaking  to  the  people,  and 
passing  into  pulpits.  In  the  north  we  glaze  the  sides  of  such 
projections,  and  they  become  bow- windows,  the  shape  of  roofing 
being  then  nearly  immaterial  and  very  fantastic,  often  a  conical 
cap.  All  these  conditions  of  window  protection,  being  for  real 
service,  are  endlessly  delightful  (and  I  believe  the  beauty  of  the 
balcony,  protected  by  an  open  canopy  supported  by  light  shafts, 
never  yet  to  have  been  properly  worked  out).  But  the  Re- 
naissance architects  destroyed  all  of  them,  and  introduced  the 
magnificent  and  witty  Roman  invention  of  a  model  of  a  Greek 
pediment,  with  its  cornices  of  monstrous  thickness,  bracketed  up 
above  the  window.  The  horizontal  cornice  of  the  pediment  is 
thus  useless,  and  of  course,  therefore,  retained ;  the  protection  to 
the  head  of  the  window  being  constructed  on  the  principle  of  a 
hat  with  its  crown  sewn  up.  But  the  deep  and  dark  triangular 
cavity  thus  obtained  affords  farther  opportunity  for  putting 
ornament  out  of  sight,  of  which  the  Renaissance  architects  are 
not  slow  to  avail  themselves. 

A  more  rational  condition  is  the  complete  pediment  with  a 
couple  of  shafts,  or  pilasters,  carried  on  a  bracketed  sill ;  and  the 
windows  of  this  kind,  which  have  been  well  designed,  are 
perhaj^s  the  best  things  which  the  Renaissance  schools  have 
produced:  those  of  Whitehall  are,  in  their  way,  exceedingly 
beautiful ;  and  those  of  the  Palazzo  Ricardi  at  Florence,  in  their 
simplicity  and  sublimity,  are  scarcely  unworthy  of  their  reputed 
designer,  Michael  Angelo. 


202 


CHAPTER    XIX. 


SUPEKIMPOSITION". 


§  i.  The  reader  has  now  some  knowledge  of  every  feature  of  all 
possible  architecture.  Whatever  the  nature  of  the  building 
which  may  be  submitted  to  his  criticism,  if  it  be  an  edifice  at  all, 
if  it  be  anything  else  than  a  mere  heap  of  stones,  like  a  pyramid 
or  breakwater,  or  than  a  large  stone  hewn  into  shajDe,  like  an 
obelisk,  it  will  be  instantly  and  easily  resolvable  into  some  of  the 
parts  which  we  have  been  hitherto  considering :  its  pinnacles 
will  separate  themselves  into  their  small  shafts  and  roofs ;  its 
supporting  members  into  shafts  and  arches,  or  walls  penetrated 
by  apertures  of  various  shape,  and  supported  by  various  kinds 
of  buttresses.  Respecting  each  of  these  several  features  I  am 
certain  that  the  reader  feels  himself  prepared,  by  understanding 
their  plain  function,  to  form  something  like  a  reasonable  and 
definite  judgment,  whether  they  be  good  or  bad ;  and  this  right 
judgment  of  parts  will,  in  most  cases,  lead  him  to  just  reverence 
or  condemnation  of  the  whole. 

§  ii.  The  various  modes  in  which  these  parts  are  capable 
of  combination,  and  the  merits  of  buildings  of  different  form 
and  expression,  are  evidently  not  reducible  into  lists,  nor  to 
be  estimated  by  general  laws.  The  nobility  of  each  building 
depends  on  its  special  fitness  for  its  own  purposes ;  and  these 
purposes  vary  with  every  climate,  every  soil,  and  every  national 
custom :  nay,  there  were  never,  probably,  two  edifices  erected  in 
which  some  accidental  difference  of  condition  did  not  require 
some  difference  of  plan  or  of  structure;  so  that,  respecting 
plan  and  distribution  of  parts,  I  do  not  hope  to  collect  any  uni- 
versal law  of  right ;  but  there  are  a  few  points  necessary  to  be 


CONSTRUCTION.  XIX.    SUPERIMPOSITION.  203 

noticed  respecting  the  means  by  which  height  is  attained  in 
buildings  of  various  plans,  and  the  expediency  and  methods 
of  superimposition  of  one  story  or  tier  of  architecture  above 
another. 

§  in.  For,  in  the  preceding  enquiry,  I  have  always  supposed 
either  that  a  single  shaft  would  reach  to  the  top  of  the  building, 
or  that  the  farther  height  required  might  be  added  in  plain  wall 
above  the  heads  of  the  arches ;  whereas  it  may  often  be  rather 
expedient  to  complete  the  entire  lower  series  of  arches,  or  finish 
the  lower  wall,  with  a  bold  string  course  or  cornice,  and  build 
another  series  of  shafts,  or  another  wall,  on  the  top  of  it. 

§  iv.  This  superimposition  is  seen  in  its  simplest  form  in  the 
interior  shafts  of  a  Greek  temple  ;  and  it  has  been  largely  used 
in  nearly  all  countries  where  buildings  have  been  meant  for  real 
service.  Outcry  has  often  been  raised  against  it,  but  the  thing 
is  so  sternly  necessary  that  it  has  always  forced  itself  into  accept- 
ance ;  and  it  would,  therefore,  be  merely  losing  time  to  refute 
the  arguments  of  those  who  have  attempted  its  disparagement. 
Thus  far,  however,  they  have  reason  on  their  side,  that  if  a 
building  can  be  kept  in  one  grand  mass,  without  sacrificing  either 
its  visible  or  real  adaptation  to  its  objects,  it  is  not  well  to  divide 
it  into  stories  until  it  has  reached  proportions  too  large  to  be 
justly  measured  by  the  eye.  It  ought  then  to  be  divided  in 
order  to  mark  its  bulk ;  and  decorative  divisions  are  often  possi- 
ble, which  rather  increase  than  destroy  the  expression  of  general 
unity. 

§  v.  Superimposition,  wisely  practised,  is  of  two  kinds,  direct- 
ly contrary  to  each  other,  of  weight  on  lightness,  and  of  lightness 
on  weight ;  while  the  superimposition  of  weight  on  weight,  or 
lightness  on  lightness,  is  nearly  always  wrong. 

1.  Weight  on  lightness  :  I  do  not  say  weight  on  weakness. 
The  superimposition  of  the  human  body  on  its  limbs  I  call 
weight  on  lightness :  the  superimposition  of  the  branches  on  a 
tree  trunk  I  call  lightness  on  weight :  in  both  cases  the  support 
is  fully  adequate  to  the  work,  the  form  of  support  being  regu- 


204  XIX.    SUPERIMPOSITION. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


lated  by  the  differences  of  requirement.  Nothing  in  architecture 
is  half  so  painful  as  the  apparent  want  of  sufficient  support  when 
the  weight  above  is  visibly  passive :  for  all  buildings  are  not 
passive ;  some  seem  to  rise  by  their  own  strength,  or  float  by 
their  own  buoyancy ;  a  dome  requires  no  visibility  of  support, 
one  fancies  it  supported  by  the  air.  But  passive  architecture 
without  help  for  its  passiveness  is  unendurable.  In  a  lately 
built  house,  No.  86.  in  Oxford  Street,  three  huge  stone  pillars  in 
the  second  story  are  carried  apparently  by  the  edges  of  three 
sheets  of  plate  glass  in  the  first.  I  hardly  know  anything  to 
match  the  painfulness  of  this  and  some  other  of  our  shop  struc- 
tures, in  which  the  iron-work  is  concealed  ;  nor,  even  when  it  is 
apparent,  can  the  eye  ever  feel  satisfied  of  their  security,  when 
built,  as  at  present,  with  fifty  or  sixty  feet  of  wall  above  a  rod 
of  iron  not  the  width  of  this  page. 

§  vi.  The  proper  forms  of  this  superimposition  of  weight  on 
lightness  have  arisen,  for  the  most  part,  from  the  necessity  or 
desirableness,  in  many  situations,  of  elevating  the  inhabited  por- 
tions of  buildings  considerably  above  the  ground  level,  especially 
those  exposed  to  damp  or  inundation,  and  the  consequent  aban- 
donment of  the  ground  story  as  unserviceable,  or  else  the  sur- 
render of  it  to  public  purposes.  Thus,  in  many  market  and 
town  houses,  the  ground  story  is  left  open  as  a  general  place  of 
sheltered  resort,  and  the  enclosed  apartments  raised  on  pillars. 
In  almost  all  warm  countries  the  luxury,  almost  the  necessity,  of 
arcades  to  protect  the  passengers  from  the  sun,  and  the  desirable- 
ness of  large  space  in  the  rooms  above  lead  to  the  same  construc- 
tion. Throughout  the  Venetian  islet  group,  the  houses  seem  to 
have  been  thus,  in  the  first  instance,  universally  built ;  all  the 
older  palaces  appearing  to  have  had  the  rez  de  chaussee  perfect- 
ly open,  the  upper  parts  of  the  palace  being  sustained  on  mag- 
nificent arches,  and  the  smaller  houses  sustained  in  the  same 
manner  on  wooden  piers,  still  retained  in  many  of  the  cortiles, 
and  exhibited  characteristically  throughout  the  main  street  of 
Murano.    As  ground  became  more  valuable  and  house-room 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XIX.    SUPERIMPOSITIOIST.  205 


more  scarce,  these  ground-floors  were  enclosed  with  wall  veils 
between  the  original  shafts,  and  so  remain ;  but  the  type  of  the 
structure  of  the  entire  city  is  given  in  the  Ducal  Palace. 

§  vii.  To  this  kind  of  superimposition  we  owe  the  most  pic- 
turesque street  effects  throughout  the  world,  and  the  most  grace- 
ful, as  well  as  the  most  grotesque,  buildings,  from,  the  many- 
shafted  fantasy  of  the  Alhambra  (a  building  as  beautiful  in  dis- 
position as  it  is  base  in  ornamentation)  to  the  four-legged 
stolidity  of  the  Swiss  Chalet  *  :  nor  these  only,  but  great  part  of 
the  effect  of  our  cathedrals,  in  which,  necessarily,  the  close  tri- 
forium  and  clerestory  walls  are  superimposed  on  the  nave  piers ; 
perhaps  with  most  majesty  where  with  greatest  simplicity,  as  in 
the  old  basilican  types,  and  the  noble  cathedral  of  Pisa. 

§  viii.  In  order  to  the  delightfulness  and  security  of  all  such 
arrangements,  this  law  must  be  observed : — that  in  proportion  to 
the  height  of  wall  above  them,  the  shafts  are  to  be  short.  You 
may  take  your  given  height  of  wall,  and  turn  any  quantity  of 
that  wall  into  shaft  that  you  like ;  but  you  must  not  turn  it  all 
into  tall  shafts,  and  then  put  more  wall  above.  Thus,  having  a 
house  five  stories  high,  you  may  turn  the  lower  story  into  shafts, 
and  leave  the  four  stories  in  wall ;  or  the  two  lower  stories  into 
shafts,  and  leave  three  in  wall ;  but,  whatever  you  add  to  the 
shaft,  you  must  take  from  the  wall.  Then  also,  of  course,  the 
shorter  the  shaft  the  thicker  will  be  its  proportionate,  if  not  its 
actual,  diameter.  In  the  Ducal  Palace  of  Yenice  the  shortest 
shafts  are  always  the  thickest. f 

§  ix.  The  second  kind  of  superimposition,  lightness  on  weight, 
is,  in  its  most  necessary  use,  of  stories   of  houses   one  upon 

*  I  have  spent  much  of  my  life  among  the  Alps ;  but  I  never  pass,  without 
some  feeling  of  new  surprise,  the  Chalet,  standing  on  its  four  pegs  (each  topped  with 
a  fiat  stone) ,  balanced  in  the  fury  of  Alpine  winds.  It  is  not,  perhaps,  generally 
known  that  the  chief  use  of  the  arrangement  is  not  so  much  to  raise  the  building 
above  the  snow,  as  to  get  a  draught  of  wind  beneath  it,  which  may  prevent  the  drift 
from  rising  against  its  sides. 

t  Appendix  20. :  "  Shafts  of  the  Ducal  Palace." 


206  XIX.    SUPEEIMPOSITION. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


another,  where,  of  course,  wall  veil  is  required  in  the  lower 
ones,  and  has  to  support  wall  veil  above,  aided  by  as  much  of 
shaft  structure  as  is  attainable  within  the  given  limits.  The 
greatest,  if  not  the  only,  merit  of  the  Roman  and  Renaissance 
Venetian  architects  is  their  graceful  management  of  this  kind 
of  superimposition ;  sometimes  of  complete  courses  of  external 
arches  and  shafts  one  above  the  other ;  sometimes  of  apertures 
with  intermediate  cornices  at  the  levels  of  the  floors,  and  large 
shafts  from  top  to  bottom  of  the  building ;  always  observing 
that  the  upper  stories  shall  be  at  once  lighter  and  richer  than  the 
lower  ones.  The  entire  value  of  such  buildings  depends  upon 
the  perfect  and  easy  expression  of  the  relative  strength  of  the 
stories,  and  the  unity  obtained  by  the  varieties  of  their  propor- 
tions, while  yet  the  fact  of  superimposition  and  separation  by 
floors  is  frankly  told. 

§  x.  In  churches  and  other  buildings  in  which  there  is  no 
separation  by  floors,  another  kind  of  pure  shaft  superimposition 
is  often  used,  in  order  to  enable  the  builder  to  avail  himself  of 
short  and  slender  shafts.  It  has  been  noted  that  these  are  often 
easily  attainable,  and  of  precious  materials,  when  shafts  large 
enough  and  strong  enough  to  do  the  work  at  once,  could  not  be 
obtained  except  at  unjustifiable  expense,  and  of  coarse  stone. 
The  architect  has  then  no  choice  but  to  arrange  his  work  in 
successive  stories  ;  either  frankly  completing  the  arch  work  and 
cornice  of  each,  and  beginning  a  new  story  above  it,  which  is 
the  honester  and  nobler  way,  or  else  tying  the  stories  together 
by  supplementary  shafts  from  floor  to  roof, — the  general  prac- 
tice of  the  Northern  Gothic,  and  one  which,  unless  most  grace- 
fully managed,  gives  the  look  of  a  scaffolding,  with  cross-poles 
tied  to  its  uprights,  to  the  whole  clerestory  wall.  The  best 
method  is  that  which  avoids  all  chance  of  the  upright  shafts 
being  supposed  continuous,  by  increasing  their  number  and 
changing  their  places  in  the  upper  stories,  so  that  the  whole 
work  branches  from  the  ground  like  a  tree.  This  is  the  super- 
imposition  of  the  Byzantine  and  the  Pisan  Romanesque ;  the 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XIX.    SUPERIMPOSITION.  207 


most  beautiful  examples  of  it  being,  I  think,  the  Southern  por- 
tico of  St.  Mark's,  the  church  of  S.  Giovanni  at  Pistoja,  and  the 
apse  of  the  cathedral  of  Pisa.  In  Eenaissance  work  the  two 
principles  are  equally  distinct,  though  the  shafts  are  (I  think) 
always  one  above  the  other.  The  reader  may  see  one  of  the  best 
examples  of  the  separately  superimposed  story  in  Whitehall 
(and  another  far  inferior  in  St.  Paul's),  and  by  turning  himself 
round  at  Whitehall  may  compare  with  it  the  system  of  connect- 
ing shafts  in  the  Treasury ;  though  this  is  a  singularly  bad  exam- 
ple, the  window  cornices  of  the  first  floor  being  like  shelves  in  a 
cupboard,  and  cutting  the  mass  of  the  building  in  two,  in  spite 
of  the  pillars. 

§  xi.  But  this  super  imposition  of  lightness  on  weight  is  still, 
more  distinctly  the  system  of  many  buildings  of  the  kind  which 
I  have  above  called  Architecture  of  Position,  that  is  to  say, 
architecture  of  which  the  greater  part  is  intended  merely  to 
keep  something  in  a  peculiar  position ;  as  in  light-houses,  and 
many  towers  and  belfries.  The  subject  of  spire  and  tower 
architecture,  however,  is  so  interesting  and  extensive,  that  I 
have  thoughts  of  writing  a  detached  essay  upon  it,  and,  at  all 
events,  cannot  enter  upon  it  here  :  but  this  much  is  enough  for 
the  reader  to  note  for  our  present  purpose,  that,  although  many 
towers  do  in  reality  stand  on  piers  or  shafts,  as  the  central 
towers  of  cathedrals,  yet  the  expression  of  all  of  them,  and  the 
real  structure  of  the  best  and  strongest,  are  the  elevation  of 
gradually  diminishing  weight  on  massy'  or  even  solid  foundation. 
Nevertheless,  since  the  tower  is  in  its  origin  a  building  for 
strength  of  defence,  and  faithfulness  of  watch,  rather  than 
splendour  of  aspect,  its  true  expression  is  of  just  so  much 
diminution  of  weight  upwards  as  may  be  necessary  to  its  fully 
balanced  strength,  not  a  jot  more.  There  must  be  no  light- 
headedness in  your  noble  tower :  impregnable  foundation,  wrath- 
ful crest,  with  the  vizor  down,  and  the  dark  vigilance  seen 
through  the  clefts  of  it ;  not  the  filigree  crown  or  embroidered 
cap.    No  towers  are  so  grand  as  the  square  browed  ones,  with 


208  XIX.    STTPEKIMPOSnTO]*. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


massy  cornices  and  rent  battlements :  next  to  these  come  the 
fantastic  towers,  with  their  various  forms  of  steep  roof ;  the  best, 
not  the  cone,  bnt  the  plain  gable  thrown  very  high ;  last  of  all 
in  my  mind  (of  good  towers),  those  with  spires  or  crowns,  though 
these,  of  course,  are  fittest  for  ecclesiastical  purposes,  and  capa- 
ble of  the  richest  ornament.  The  paltry  four  or  eight  pinnacled 
things  we  call  towers  in  England  (as  in  York  Minster),  are  mere 
confectioner's  Gothic,  and  not  worth  classing. 

§  xn.  But,  in  all  of  them,  this  I  believe  to  be  a  point  of  chief 
necessity, — that  they  shall  seem  to  stand,  and  shall  verily  stand, 
in  their  own  strength;  not  by  help  of  buttresses  nor  artful 
balancings  on  this  side  and  on  that.  Your  noble  tower  must 
need  no  help,  must  be  sustained  by  no  crutches,  must  give  place 
to  no  suspicion  of  decrepitude.  Its  office  may  be  to  withstand 
war,  look  forth  for  tidings,  or  to  point  to  heaven :  but  it  must 
have  in  its  own  walls  the  strength  to  do  this ;  it  is  to  be  itself  a 
bulwark,  not  to  be  sustained  by  other  bulwarks ;  to  rise  and  look 
forth,  "  the  tower  of  Lebanon  that  looketh  toward  Damascus," 
like  a  stern  sentinel,  not  like  a  child  held  up  in  its  nurse's  arms. 
A  tower  may,  indeed,  have  a  kind  of  buttress,  a  projection,  or 
subordinate  tower  at  each  of  its  angles  ;  but  these  are  to  its 
main  body  like  the  satellites  to  a  shaft,  joined  with  its  strength, 
and  associated  in  its  uprightness,  part  of  the  tower  itself:  exactly 
in  the  proportion  in  which  they  lose  their  massive  unity  with  its 
body,  and  assume  the  form  of  true  buttress  walls  set  on  its  angles, 
the  tower  loses  its  dignity. 

§  xiii.  These  two  characters,  then,  are  common  to  all  noble 
towers,  however  otherwise  different  in  purpose  or  feature, — the 
first,  that  they  rise  from  massy  foundation  to  lighter  summits, 
frownino"  with  battlements  perhaps,  but  yet  evidently  more  pierced 
and  thinner  in  wall  than  beneath,  and,  in  most  ecclesiastical  ex- 
amples, divided  into  rich  open  work :  the  second,  that  whatever 
the  form  of  the  tower,  it  shall  not  appear  to  stand  by  help  of 
buttresses.  It  follows  from  the  first  condition,  as  indeed  it  would 
have  followed  from  ordinary  aesthetic  requirements,  that  we  shall 


J  tUrsl'ii 


nrrgg  i:t  i  omgrg 


WIT  XTTTT  ATT 


A'l'eiman.li.tt7 . ■isEioaiwav  -;  - 


construction.  XIX.  .SUPEKIMPOSITION.  209 

have  continual  variation  in  the  arrangements  of  the  stories,  and 
the  larger  number  of  apertures  towards  the  top, — a  condition 
exquisitely  carried  out  in  the  old  Lombardic  towers,  in  which, 
however  small  they  may  be,  the  number  of  apertures  is  always 
regularly  increased  towards  the  summit ;  generally  one  window 
in  the  lowest  stories,  two  in  the  second,  then  three,  five,  and  six ; 
often,  also,  one,  two,  four,  and  six,  with  beautiful  symmetries  of 
placing,  not  at  present  to  our  purpose.  We  may  sufficiently 
exemplify  the  general  laws  of  tower  building  by  placing  side  by 
side,  drawn  to  the  same  scale,  a  mediaeval  tower,  in  which  most 
of  them  are  simply  and  unaffectedly  observed,  and  one  of  our 
own  modern  towers,  in  which  every  one  of  them  is  violated,  in 
mall  space,  convenient  for  comparison.     (Plate  VI.) 

§  xiv.  The  old  tower  is  that  of  St.  Mark's  at  Venice,  not  a 
very  perfect  example,  for  its  top  is  Renaissance,  but  as  good 
Renaissance  as  there  is  in  Yenice  ;  and  it  is  fit  for  our  present 
purpose,  because  it  owes  none  of  its  effect  to  ornament.  It  is 
built  as  simply  as  it  well  can  be  to  answer  its  purpose  :  no  but- 
tresses ;  no  external  features  whatever,  except  some  huts  at  the 
base,  and  the  loggia,  afterwards  built,  which,  on  purpose,  I  have 
not  drawn ;  one  bold  square  mass  of  brickwork ;  double  walls, 
with  an  ascending  inclined  plane  between  them,  with  apertures 
as  small  as  possible,  and  these  only  in  necessary  places,  giving 
just  the  light  required  for  ascending  the  stair  or  slope,  not  a  ray 
more  ;  and  the  weight  of  the  whole  relieved  only  by  the  double 
pilasters  on  the  sides,  sustaining  small  arches  at  the  top  of  the 
mass,  each  decorated  with  the  scallop  or  cockle  shell,  presently 
to  be  noticed  as  frequent  in  Renaissance  ornament,  and  here,  for 
once,  thoroughly  well  applied.  Then,  when  the  necessary  height 
is  reached,  the  belfry  is  left  open,  as  in  the  ordinary  Romanesque 
campanile,  only  the  shafts  more  slender,  but  severe  and  simple, 
and  the  whole  crowned  by  as  much  spire  as  the  tower  would 
carry,  to  render  it  more  serviceable  as  a  landmark.  The 
arrangement  is  repeated  in  numberless  campaniles  throughout 
Italy. 

14 


210  XIX.   SUPEREVIPOSITIOX.  construction. 

§  xv.  The  one  beside  it  is  one  of  those  of  the  lately  built 
college  at  Edinburgh.  I  have  not  taken  it  as  worse  than  many 
others  (just  as  I  have  not  taken  the  St.  Mark's  tower  as  better 
than  many  others) ;  but  it  happens  to  compress  our  British  sys- 
tem of  tower  building  into  small  space.  The  Venetian  tower 
rises  350  feet",  and  has  no  buttresses,  though  built  of  brick ; 
the  British  tower  rises  121  feet,  and  is  built  of  stone,  but  is  sup- 
posed to  be  incapable  of  standing  without  two  huge  buttresses 
on  each  angle.  The  St.  Mark's  tower  has  a  high  sloping  roof, 
but  carries  it  simply,  requiring  no  pinnacles  at  its  angles ;  the 
British  tower  has  no  visible  roof,  but  has  four  pinnacles  for  mere 
ornament.  The  Venetian  tower  has  its  lightest  part  at  the  top, 
and  is  massy  at  the  base  ;  the  British  tower  has  its  lightest  part 
at  the  base,  and  shuts  up  its  windows  into  a  mere  arrowslit  at 
the  top.  What  the  tower  was  built  for  at  all  must  therefore,  it 
seems  to  me,  remain  a  mystery  to  every  beholder  ;  for  surely  no 
studious  inhabitant  of  its  upper  chambers  will  be  conceived  to  be 
pursuing  his  employments  by  the  light  of  the  single  chink  on 
each  side ;  and,  had  it  been  intended  for  a  belfry,  the  sound  of 
its  bells  would  have  been  as  effectually  prevented  from  getting 
out,  as  the  light  from  getting  in. 

§  xvi.  In  connexion  with  the  subject  of  towers  and  of  super- 
imposition,  one  other  feature,  not  conveniently  to  be  omitted 
from  our  house-building,  requires  a  moment's  notice, — the  stair- 
case. 

In  modern  houses  it  can  hardly  be  considered  an  architectural 
feature,  and  is  nearly  always  an  ugly  one,  from  its  being  appa- 
rently without  support.  And  here  I  may  not  unfitly  note  the 
important  distinction,  which  perhaps  ought  to  have  been  dwelt 
upon  in  some  places  before  now,  between  the  marvellous  and 
the  perilous  in  apparent  construction.    There  are  many  edifices 

*  I  have  taken  Professor  Willis's  estimate ;  there  being  discrepancy  among  various 
statements.  I  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  measure  the  height  myself,  the  building  being 
one  which  does  not  come  within  the  range  of  our  future  inquiries ;  and  its  exact  dimen- 
sions, even  here,  are  of  no  importance  as  respects  the  question  at  issue. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


XIX.    SUPERIMPOSITION.  211 


which  are  awful  or  admirable  in  their  height,  and  lightness,  and 
boldness  of  form,  respecting  which,  nevertheless,  we  have  no 
fear  that  they  should  fall.  Many  a  mighty  dome  and  aerial  aisle 
and  arch  may  seem  to  stand,  as  I  said,  by  miracle,  but  by  sted- 
fast  miracle  notwithstanding ;  there  is  no  fear  that  the  miracle 
should  cease.  We  have  a  sense  of  inherent  power  in  them,  or, 
at  all  events,  of  concealed  and  mysterious  provision  for  their 
safety.  But  in  leaning  towers,  as  of  Pisa  or  Bologna,  and  in 
much  minor  architecture,  passive  architecture,  of  modern  times, 
we  feel  that  there  is  but  a  chance  between  the  building  and 
destruction ;  that  there  is  no  miraculous  life  in  it,  which  ani- 
mates it  into  security,  but  an  obstinate,  perhaps  vain,  resistance 
to  immediate  clanger.  The  appearance  of  this  is  often  as  strong 
in  small  things  as  in  large ;  in  the  sounding-boards  of  pulpits,  for 
instance,  when  sustained  by  a  single  pillar  behind  them,  so  that 
one  is  in  dread,  during  the  whole  sermon,  of  the  preacher  being 
crushed  if  a  single  nail  should  give  way ;  and  again,  the  modern 
geometrical  unsupported  staircase.  There  is  great  disadvantage, 
also,  in  the  arrangement  of  this  latter,  when  room  is  of  value ; 
and  excessive  ungracefulness  in  its  awkward  divisions  of  the 
passage  walls,  or  windows.  In  mediaeval  architecture,  where 
there  was  need  of  room,  the  staircase  was  spiral,  and  enclosed 
generally  in  an  exterior  tower,  which  added  infinitely  to  the 
picturesque  effect  of  the  building ;  nor  was  the  stair  itself  steeper 
nor  less  commodious  than  the  ordinary  compressed  straight  stair- 
case of  a  modern  dwelling-house.  Many  of  the  richest  towers  of 
domestic  architecture  owe  their  origin  to  this  arrangement.  In 
Italy  the  staircase  is  often  in  the  open  air,  surrounding  the  inte- 
rior court  of  the  house,  and  giving  access  to  its  various  galleries 
or  loggias :  in  this  case  it  is  almost  always  supported  by  bold 
shafts  and  arches,  and  forms  a  most  interesting  additional  feature 
of  the  cortile,  but  presents  no  peculiarity  of  construction  re- 
quiring our  present  examination. 

We  may  here,  therefore,  close  our  inquiries  into  the  subject  of 
construction ;  nor  must  the  reader  be  dissatisfied  with  the  sim- 


212  XIX.    SUPEEIMPOSITTON. 


CONSTRUCTION, 


plicity  or  apparent  barrenness  of  their  present  results.  He  will 
find,  when  he  begins  to  apply  them,  that  they  are  of  more  value 
than  they  now  seem ;  but  I  have  studiously  avoided  letting  myself 
be  drawn  into  any"  intricate  question,  because  I  wished  to  ask 
from  the  reader  only  so  much  attention  as  it  seemed  that  even 
the  most  indifferent  would  not  be  unwilling  to  pay  to  a  subject 
which  is  hourly  becoming  of  greater  practical  interest.  Evidently 
it  would  have  been  altogether  beside  the  purpose  of  this  essay  to 
have  entered  deeply  into  the  abstract  science,  or  closely  into  the 
mechanical  detail,  of  construction :  both  have  been  illustrated  by 
writers  far  more  capable  of  doing  so  than  I,  and  may  be  studied 
at  the  reader's  discretion ;  all  that  has  been  here  endeavoured  was 
the  leading  him  to  appeal  to  something  like  definite  principle,  and 
refer  to  the  easily  intelligible  laws  of  convenience  and  necessity, 
whenever  he  found  his  judgment  likely  to  be  overborne  by 
authority  on  the  one  hand,  or  dazzled  by  novelty  on  the  other. 
If  he  has  time  to  do  more,  and  to  follow  out  in  all  their  brilliancy 
the  mechanical  inventions  of  the  great  engineers  and  architects 
of  the  day,  I,  in  some  sort,  envy  him,  but  must  part  company  with 
him :  for  my  way  lies  not  along  the  viaduct,  but  down  the  quiet 
valley  which  its  arches  cross,  nor  through  the  tunnel,  but  up  the 
hill-side  which  its  cavern  darkens,  to  see  what  gifts  Nature  will 
give  us,  and  with  what  imagery  she  will  fill  our  thoughts,  that 
the  stones  we  have  ranged  in  rude  order  may  now  be  touched 
with  life  ;  nor  lose  for  ever,  in  their  hewn  nakedness,  the  voices 
they  had  of  old,  when  the  valley  streamlet  eddied  round  them  in 
palpitating  light,  and  the  winds  of  the  hill-side  shook  over  them 
the  shadows  of  the  fern. 


213 


CHAPTER  XX. 


THE    MATERIAL    OF    ORNAMENT. 


§  i.  "We  enter  now  on  the  second  division  of  our  subject.  We 
have  no  more  to  do  with  heavy  stones  and  hard  lines  ;  we  are 
going  to  be  happy  :  to  look  round  in  the  world  and  discover  (in 
a  serious  manner  always  however,  and  under  a  sense  of  respon- 
sibility) what  we  like  best  in  it,  and  to  enjoy  the  same  at  our 
leisure  :  to  gather  it,  examine  it,  fasten  all  we  can  of  it  into  im- 
perishable forms,  and  put  it  where  we  may  see  it  for  ever. 

This  it  is  to  decorate  architecture. 

§  ii.  There  are,  therefore,  three  steps  in  the  process  :  first,  to 
find  out  in  a  grave  manner  what  we  like  best ;  secondly,  to  put 
as  much  of  this  as  we  can  (which  is  little  enough)  into  form ; 
thirdly,  to  put  this  formed  abstraction  into  a  proper  place. 

And  we  have  now,  therefore,  to  make  these  three  inquiries  in 
succession  :  first,  what  we  like,  or  what  is  the  right  material  of 
ornament ;  then  how  we  are  to  present  it,  or  its  right  treatment ; 
then,  where  we  are  to  put  it,  or  its  right  place.  I  think  I  can 
answer  that  first  inquiry  in  this  Chapter,  the  second  inquiry  in 
the  next  Chapter,  and  the  third  I  shall  answer  in  a  more  diffusive 
manner,  by  taking  up  in  succession  the  several  parts  of  archi- 
tecture above  distinguished,  and  rapidly  noting  the  kind  of 
ornament  fittest  for  each. 

§  hi.  I  said  in  Chapter  II.  §  xrv.,  that  all  noble  ornamentation 
was  the  expression  of  man's  delight  in  God's  work.  This  implied 
that  there  was  an  ^'^noble  ornamentation,  which  was  the  expres- 
sion of  man's  delight  in  his  own.  There  is  such  a  school,  chiefly 
degraded  classic  and  Renaissance,  in  which  the  ornament  is  com- 
posed of  imitations   of  things  made  by  man.     I  think,  before 


214  XX.   THE   MATERIAL    OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

inquiring  what  we  like  best  of  God's  work,  we  had  better  get 
rid  of  all  this  imitation  of  man's,  and  be  quite  sure  we  do  not 
like  that. 

§  iv.  We  shall  rapidly  glance,  then,  at  the  material  of  decora- 
tion hence  derived.  And  now  I  cannot,  as  I  before  have  done 
respecting  construction,  convince  the  reader  of  one  thing  being 
wrong,  and  another  right.  I  have  confessed  as  much  again  and 
again  ;  I  am  now  only  to  make  appeal  to  him,  and  cross-question 
him,  whether  he  really  does  like  things  or  not.  If  he  likes  the 
ornament  on  the  base  of  the  column  of  the  Place  Vendome,  com- 
posed of  Wellington  boots  and  laced  frock  coats,  I  cannot  help  it ; 
I  can  only  say  I  differ  from  him,  and  don't  like  it.  And  if, 
therefore,  I  speak  dictatorially,  and  say  this  is  base,  or  degraded, 
or  ugly,  I  mean  only  that  I  believe  men  of  the  longest  experience 
in  the  matter  would  either  think  it  so,  or  would  be  prevented 
from  thinking  it  so  only  by  some  morbid  condition  of  their  minds  ; 
and  I  believe  that  the  reader,  if  he  examine  himself  candidly, 
will  usually  agree  in  my  statements. 

§  v.  The  subjects  of  ornament  found  in  man's  work  may  pro- 
perly fall  into  four  heads  :  1.  Instruments  of  art,  agriculture,  and 
war;  armour,  and  dress  ;  2.  Drapery;  3.  Shipping;  4.  Architec- 
ture itself. 

1.  Instruments,  armour,  and  dress. 

The  custom  of  raising  trophies  on  pillars,  and  of  dedicating 
arms  in  temples,  appears  to  have  first  suggested  the  idea  of 
employing  them  as  the  subjects  of  sculptural  ornament :  thence- 
forward, this  abuse  has  been  chiefly  characteristic  of  classical 
architecture,  whether  true  or  Renaissance.  Armour  is  a  noble 
thing  in  its  proper  service  and  subordination  to  the  body ;  so  is 
an  animal's  hide,  on  its  back  ;  but  a  heap  of  cast  skins,  or  of  shed 
armour,  is  alike  unworthy  of  all  regard  or  imitation.  We  owe 
much  true  sublimity,  and  more  of  delightful  picturesqueness,  to 
the  introduction  of  armour  both  in  painting  and  sculpture :  in 
poetry  it  is  better  still, — Homer's  undressed  Achilles  is  less 
grand  than  his  crested  and  shielded  Achilles,  though  Phidias 


decoration.  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF   OENAMENT.  215 

would  rather  have  had  him  naked :  in  all  mediaeval  painting,  arms, 
like  all  other  parts  of  costume,  are  treated  with  exquisite  care  and 
delight ;  in  the  designs  of  Leonardo,  Kaffaelle,  and  Perugino,  the 
armour  sometimes  becomes  almost  too  conspicuous  from  the  rich 
and  endless  invention  bestowed  upon  it ;  while  Titian  and  Rubens 
seek  in  its  flash,  what  the  Milanese  and  Perugian  sought  in  its 
form,  sometimes  subordinating  heroism  to  the  light  of  the  steel, 
while  the  great  designers  wearied  themselves  in  its  elaborate 
fancy. 

But  all  this  labor  was  given  to  the  living,  not  the  dead 
armour;  to  the  shell  with  its  animal  in  it,  not  the  cast  shell 
of  the  beach ;  and  even  so,  it  was  introduced  more  sparingly  by 
the  good  sculptors  than  the  good  painters ;  for  the  former  felt, 
and  with  justice,  that  the  painter  had  the  power  of  conquering 
the  over  prominence  of  costume  by  the  expression  and  colour  of 
the  countenance,  and  that  by  the  darkness  of  the  eye,  and  glow 
of  the  cheek,  he  could  always  conquer  the  gloom  and  the  flash  of 
the  mail ;  but  they  could  hardly,  by  any  boldness  or  energy  of 
the  marble  features,  conquer  the  forwardness  and  conspicuous- 
ness  of  the  sharp  armorial  forms.  Their  armed  figures  were 
therefore  almost  always  subordinate,  their  principal  figures 
draped  or  naked,  and  their  choice  of  subject  was  much  influ- 
enced by  this  feeling  of  necessity.  But  the  Renaissance  sculp- 
tors displayed  the  love  of  a  Camilla  for  the  mere  crest  and 
plume.  Paltry  and  false  alike  in  every  feeling  of  their  narrowed 
minds,  they  attached  themselves,  not  only  to  costume  without 
the  person,  but  to  the  pettiest  details  of  the  costume  itself.  They 
could  not  describe  Achilles,  but  they  could  describe  his  shield  ; 
a  shield  like  those  of  dedicated  spoil,  without  a  handle,  never  to 
be  waved  in  the  face  of  war.  And  then  we  have  helmets  and 
lances,  banners  and  swords,  sometimes  with  men  to  hold  them, 
sometimes  without ;  but  always  chiselled  with  a  tailor-like  love 
of  the  chasing  or  the  embroidery, — show  helmets  of  the  stage, 
no  Vulcan  work  on  them,  no  heavy  hammer  strokes,  no  Etna 
fire  in  the  metal  of  them,  nothing  but  pasteboard  crests  and  high, 


216  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

feathers.  And  these,  cast  together  in  disorderly  heaps,  or  grin- 
ning vacantly  over  keystones,  form  one  of  the  leading  decora- 
tions of  Renaissance  architecture,  and  that  one  of  the  best ;  for 
helmets  and  lances,  however  loosely  laid,  are  better  than  violins, 
and  pipes,  and  books  of  music,  which  were  another  of  the  Palla- 
dian  and  Sansovinian  sources  of  ornament.  Supported  by  an- 
cient authority,  the  abuse  soon  became  a  matter  of  pride,  and 
since  it  was  easy  to  copy  a  heap  of  cast  clothes,  but  difficult  to 
manage  an  arranged  design  of  human  figures,  the  indolence  of 
architects  came  to  the  aid  of  their  affectation,  until  by  the 
moderns  we  find  the  practice  carried  out  to  its  most  interesting 
results,  and,  as  above  noted,  a  large  pair  of  boots  occupying  the 
principal  place  in  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  base  of  the  Colonne 
Vendome. 

§  vi.  A  less  offensive,  because  singularly  grotesque,  example 
of  the  abuse  at  its  height,  occurs  in  the  Hotel  des  Invalides, 
where  the  dormer  windows  are  suits  of  armour  down  to  the 
bottom  of  the  corslet,  crowned  by  the  helmet,  and  with  the 
window  in  the  middle  of  the  breast. 

Instruments  of  agriculture  and  the  arts  are  of  less  frequent 
occurrence,  except  in  hieroglyphics  and  other  work,  where  they 
are  not  employed  as  ornaments,  but  represented  for  the  sake  of 
accurate  knowledge,  or  as  symbols.  Wherever  they  have  pur- 
pose of  this  kind,  they  are  of  course  perfectly  right ;  but  they 
are  then  part  of  the  building's  conversation,  not  conducive  to  its 
beauty.  The  French  have  managed,  with  great  dexterity,  the 
representation  of  the  machinery  for  the  elevation  of  their  Luxor 
obelisk,  now  sculptured  on  its  base. 

§  vn.  2.  Drapery.  I  have  already  spoken  of  the  error  of 
introducing  drapery,  as  such,  for  ornament,  in  the  "Seven 
Lamps."  I  may  here  note  a  curious  instance  of  the  abuse  in  the 
-church  of  the  Jesuiti  at  Venice  (Renaissance).  On  first  entering 
you  suppose  that  the  church,  being  in  a  poor  quarter  of  the  city, 
has  been  somewhat  meanly  decorated  by  heavy  green  and  white 
curtains  of  an  ordinary  upholsterer's  pattern :  on  looking  closer, 


decoration.  XX.    THE   MATERIAL    OF   ORNAMENT.  217 

they  are  discovered  to  be  of  marble,  with  the  green  pattern  in- 
laid. Another  remarkable  instance  is  in  a  piece  of  not  altogether 
unworthy  architecture  at  Paris  (Rue  Rivoli),  where  the  columns 
are  supposed  to  be  decorated  by  images  of  handkerchiefs  tied  in 
a  stout  knot  round  the  middle  of  them.  This  shrewd  invention 
bids  fair  to  become  a  new  order.  Multitudes  of  massy  curtains 
and  various  upholstery,  more  or  less  in  imitation  of  that  of  the 
drawing-room,  are  carved  and  gilt,  in  wood  or  stone,  about  the 
altars  and  other  theatrical  portions  of  Romanist  churches ;  but 
from  these  coarse  and  senseless  vulgarities  we  may  well  turn,  in 
all  haste,  to  note,  with  respect  as  well  as  regret,  one  of  the  errors 
of  the  great  school  of  Niccolo  Pisano, — an  error  so  full  of  feeling 
as  to  be  sometimes  all  but  redeemed,  and  altogether  forgiven, — 
the  sculpture,  namely,  of  curtains  around  the  recumbent  statues 
upon  tombs,  curtains  which  angels  are  represented  as  withdraw- 
ing, to  gaze  upon  the  faces  of  those  who  are  at  rest.  For  some 
time  the  idea  was  simply  and  slightly  expressed,  and  though 
there  was  always  a  painfulness  in  finding  the  shafts  of  stone, 
which  were  felt  to  be  the  real  supporters  of  the  canopy,  repre- 
sented as  of  yielding  drapery,  yet  the  beauty  of  the  angelic 
figures,  and  the  tenderness  of  the  thought,  disarmed  all  animad- 
version. But  the  scholars  of  the  Pisani,  as  usual,  caricatured 
when  they  were  unable  to  invent;  and  the  quiet  curtained 
canopy  became  a  huge  marble  tent,  with  a  pole  in  the  centre  of 
it.  Thus  vulgarised,  the  idea  itself  soon  disappeared,  to  make 
room  for  urns,  torches,  and  weepers,  and  the  other  modern 
paraphernalia  of  the  churchyard. 

§  viii.  3.  Shipping.  I  have  allowed  this  kind  of  subject  to 
form  a  separate  head,  owing  to  the  importance  of  rostra  in  Ro- 
man  decoration,  and  to  the  continual  occurrence  of  naval  subjects 
in  modern  monumental  bas-relief.  Mr.  Fergusson  says,  some- 
what doubtfully,  that  he  perceives  a  "  hind  of  beauty"  in  a  ship : 
I  say,  without  any  manner  of  doubt,  that  a  ship  is  one  of  the 
loveliest  things  man  ever  made,  and  one  of  the  noblest ;  nor  do 
I  know  any  lines,  out  of  divine  work,  so  lovely  as  those  of  the 


218  XX.    THE   MATEEIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

head  of  a  ship,  or  even  as  the  sweep  of  the  timbers  of  a  small 
boat,  not  a  race  boat,  a  mere  floating  chisel,  but  a  broad,  strong, 
sea  boat,  able  to  breast  a  wave  and  break  it :  and  yet,  with  all 
this  beauty,  ships  cannot  be  made  subjects  of  sculpture.  No  one 
pauses  in  particular  delight  beneath  the  pediments  of  the  Ad- 
miralty ;  nor  does  scenery  of  shipping  ever  become  prominent 
in  bas-relief  without  destroying  it :  witness  the  base  of  the  Nelson 
pillar.  It  may  be,  and  must  be  sometimes,  introduced  in  severe 
subordination  to  the  figure  subject,  but  just  enough  to  indicate 
the  scene;  sketched  in  the  lightest  lines  on  the  background; 
never  with  any  attempt  at  realisation,  never  with  any  equality  to 
the  force  of  the  figures,  unless  the  whole  purpose  of  the  subject 
be  picturesque.  I  shall  explain  this  exception  presently,  in 
sjDeaking  of  imitative  architecture. 

§  ix.  There  is  one  piece  of  a  ship's  fittings,  however,  which 
may  be  thought  to  have  obtained  acceptance  as  a  constant  ele- 
ment of  architectural  ornament, — the  cable :  it  is  not,  however, 
the  cable  itself,  but  its  abstract  form,  a  group  of  twisted  lines 
(which  a  cable  only  exhibits  in  common  with  many  natural 
objects),  which  is  indeed  beautiful  as  an  ornament.  Make  the 
resemblance  complete,  give  to  the  stone  the  threads  and  charac- 
ter of  the  cable,  and  you  may,  perhaps,  regard  the  sculpture  with 
curiosity,  but  never  more  with  admiration.  Consider  the  effect 
of  the  base  of  the  statue  of  King  "William  IV.  at  the  end  of 
London  Bridge. 

.  §  x.  4.  Architecture  itself.  The  erroneous  use  of  armour,  or 
dress,  or  instruments,  or  shipping,  as  decorative  subject,  is 
almost  exclusively  confined  to  bad  architecture — Roman  or  Re- 
naissance.    But  the  false  use  of  architecture  itself,  as  an  orna- 

« 

ment  of  architecture  is  conspicuous  even  in  the  mediaeval  work 
of  the  best  times,  and  is  a  grievous  fault  in  some  of  its  noblest 
examples. 

It  is,  therefore,  of  great  importance  to  note  exactly  at  what 
point  this  abuse  begins,  and  in  what  it  consists. 

§  xi.  In  all  bas-relief,  architecture  may  be  introduced  as  an 


decoration.  XX.    THE   MATERIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  219 

explanation  of  the  scene  in  which  the  figures  act ;  but  with  more 
or  less  prominence  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  importance  of  the 
figures. 

The  metaphysical  reason  of  this  is,  that  where  the  figures  are 
of  great  value  and  beauty,  the  mind  is  supposed  to  be  engaged 
wholly  with  them ;  and  it  is  an  impertinence  to  disturb  its  con- 
templation of  them  by  any  minor  features  whatever.  As  the 
figures  become  of  less  value,  and  are  regarded  with  less  inten- 
sity, accessary  subjects  may  be  introduced,  such  as  the  thoughts 
may  have  leisure  for. 

Thus,  if  the  figures  be  as  large  as  life,  and  complete  statues,  it 
is  gross  vulgarity  to  carve  a  temple  above  them,  or  distribute 
them  over  sculptured  rocks,  or  lead  them  up  steps  into  pyramids  : 
I  need  hardly  instance  Canova's  works*,  and  the  Dutch  pulpit 
groups,  with  fishermen,  boats,  and  nets,  in  the  midst  of  church 
naves. 

If  the  figures  be  in  bas-relief,  though  as  large  as  life,  the  scene 
may  be  explained  by  lightly  traced  outlines  :  this  is  admirably 
done  in  the  Ninevite  marbles. 

If  the  figures  be  in  bas-relief,  or  even  alto-relievo,  but  less 
than  life,  and  if  their  purpose  is  rather  to  enrich  a  space  and 
produce  picturesque  shadows,  than  to  draw  the  thoughts  en- 
tirely to  themselves,  the  scenery  in  which  they  act  may  become 
prominent.  The  most  exquisite  examples  of  this  treatment  are 
the  gates  of  Ghiberti.  What  would  that  Madonna  of  the  Annun- 
ciation be,  without  the  little  shrine  into  which  she  shrinks  back  ? 
But  all  mediaeval  work  is  full  of  delightful  examples  of  the 
same  kind  of  treatment :  the  gates  of  hell  and  of  paradise  are 
important  pieces,  both  of  explanation  and  effect,  in  all  early 
representations  of  the  last  judgment,  or  of  the  descent  into  Hades. 
The  keys  of  St.  Peter,  and  the  crushing  flat  of  the  devil  under 
his  own  door,  when  it  is  beaten  in,  would  hardly  be  understood 

*  The  admiration  of  Canova  I  hold  to  be  one  of  the  most  deadly  s)^mptoms  in  the 
civilisation  of  the  upper  classes  in  the  present  century. 


220  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF   OENAMENT.  decoration. 

without  the  respective  gateways  above.  The  best  of  all  the  -later 
capitals  of  the  Ducal  Palace  of  Venice  depends  for  great  part  of 
its  value  on  the  richness  of  a  small  campanile,  which  is  pointed 
to  proudly  by  a  small  emperor  in  a  turned-up  hat,  who,  the 
legend  informs  us,  is  "  Kuma  Pompilio,  imperador,  edifichador 
di  tempi  e  chiese." 

§  xii.  Shipping  may  be  introduced,  or  rich  fancy  of  vestments, 
crowns,  and  ornaments,  exactly  on  the  same  conditions  as  archi- 
tecture ;  and  if  the  reader  will  look  back  to  my  definition  of  the 
picturesque  in  the  "Seven  Lamps,"  he  will  see  why  I  said, 
above,  that  they  might  only  be  prominent  when  the,  purpose  of 
the  subject  was  partly  picturesque ;  that  is  to  say,  when  the 
mind  is  intended  to  derive  part  of  its  enjoyment  from  the  para- 
sitical qualities  or  accidents  of  the  thing,  not  from  the  heart  of 
the  thing  itself. 

And  thus,  while  we  must  regret  the  flapping  sails  in  the  death 
of  Nelson  in  Trafalgar  Square,  we  may  yet  most  heartily  enjoy 
the  sculpture  of  a  storm  in  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  tomb  of 
St.  Pietro  Martire  in  the  church  of  St.  Eustorgio  at  Milan,  where 
the  grouping  of  the  figures  is  most  fancifully  complicated  by  the 
under-cut  cordage  of  the  vessel. 

§  xiii.  In  all  these  instances,  however,  observe  that  the  per- 
mission to  represent  the  human  work  as  an  ornament,  is  con- 
ditional on  its  being  necessary  to  the  representation  of  a  scene,  or 
explanation  of  an  action.  On  no  terms  whatever  could  any  such 
subject  be  independently  admissible. 

Observe,  therefore,  the  use  of  manufacture  as  ornament  is — 

1.  "With  heroic  figure  sculpture,  not  admissible  at  all. 

2.  With  picturesque  figure  sculpture,  admissible  in  the  degree 

of  its  picturesqueness. 

3.  Without  figure  sculpture,  not  admissible  at  all. 

So  also  in  painting :  Michael  Angelo,  in  the  Sistine  Chapel, 
would  not  have  willingly  painted  a  dress  of  figured  damask  or  of 


decoration.  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  221 

watered  satin :   his  was  heroic  painting,  not  admitting  acces- 
saries. 

Tintoret,  Titian,  Yeronese,  Enbens,  and  Vandyck,  would  be 
very  sorry  to  part  with  their  figured  stuffs  and  lustrous  silks ; 
and  sorry,  observe,  exactly  in  the  degree  of  their  picturesque 
feeling.  Should  not  we  also  be  sorry  to  have  Bishop  Ambrose 
without  his  vest,  in  that  picture  of  the  National  Gallery  ? 

But  I  think  Vandyck  would  not  have  liked,  on  the  other  hand? 
the  vest  without  the  bishop.  I  much  doubt  if  Titian  or  Yeronese, 
would  have  enjoyed  going  into  Waterloo  House,  and  making 
studies  of  dresses  upon  the  counter. 

§  xiv.  So,  therefore,  finally,  neither  architecture  nor  any  other 
human  work  is  admissible  as  an  ornament,  except  in  subordina- 
tion to  figure  subject.  And  this  law  is  grossly  and  painfully 
violated  by  those  curious  examples  of  Gothic,  both  early  and 
late,  in  the  north,  (but  late,  I  think,  exclusively,  in  Italy,)  in 
which  the  minor  features  of  the  architecture  were  composed  of 
small  models  of  the  larger :  examples  which  led  the  way  to  a 
series  of  abuses  materially  affecting  the  life,  strength,  and  noble- 
ness of  the  Northern  Gothic, — abuses  which  no  Ninevite,  nor 
Egyptian,  nor  Greek,  nor  Byzantine,  nor  Italian  of  the  earlier 
ages  would  have  endured  for  an  instant,  and  which  strike  me 
with  renewed  surprise  whenever  I  pass  beneath  a  portal  of 
thirteenth  century  Northern  Gothic,  associated  as  they  are  with 
manifestations  of  exquisite  feeling  and  power  in  other  directions. 
The  porches  of  Bourges,  Amiens,  Notre  Dame  of  Paris,  and 
Notre  Dame  of  Dijon,  may  be  noted  as  conspicuous  in  error : 
small  models  of  feudal  towers  with  diminutive  windows  and  bat- 
tlements, of  cathedral  spires  with  scaly  pinnacles,  mixed  with 
temple  pediments  and  nondescript  edifices  of  every  kind,  are 
crowded  together  over  the  recess  of  the  niche  into  a  confused 
fool's  cap  for  the  saint  below.  Italian  Gothic  is  almost  entirely 
free  from  the  taint  of  this  barbarism  until  the  Kenaissance  period, 
when  it  becomes  rampant  in  the  cathedral  of  Como  and  Certosa 
of  Pavia ;  and  at  Yenice  we  find  the  Eenaissance  churches  deco- 


222  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

rated  with  models  of  fortifications  like  those  in  the  Repository  at 
"Woolwich,  or  inlaid  with  mock  arcades  in  pseudo-perspective, 
copied  from  gardeners'  paintings  at  the  ends  of  conservatories. 

§  xv.  I  conclude,  then,  with  the  reader's  leave,  that  all  ornament 
is  base  which  takes  for  its  subject  human  work,  that  it  is  utterly 
base, — painful  to  every  rightly-toned  mind,  without  perhaps  im- 
mediate sense  of  the  reason,  but  for  a  reason  palpable  enough 
when  we  do  think  of  it.  For  to  carve  our  own  work,  and  set  it 
up  for  admiration,  is  a  miserable  self-complacency,  a  content- 
ment in  our  own  wretched  doings,  when  we  might  have  been 
looking  at  God's  doings.  And  all  noble  ornament  is  the  exact 
reverse  of  this.  It  is  the  expression  of  man's  delight  in  God's 
work. 

§  xvi.  For  observe,  the  function  of  ornament  is  to  make  you 
happy.  Now  in  what  are  you  rightly  happy  ?  Not  in  thinking 
of  what  you  have  done  yourself ;  not  in  your  own  pride ;  not 
your  own  birth ;  not  in  your  own  being,  or  your  own  will,  but 
in  looking  at  God ;  watching  what  He  does,  what  He  is ;  and 
obeying  His  law,  and  yielding  yourself  to  His  will. 

You  are  to  be  made  happy  by  ornaments  ;  therefore  they  must 
be  the  expression  of  all  this.  Not  copies  of  your  own  handiwork ; 
not  boastings  of  your  own  grandeur ;  not  heraldries  ;  not  king's 
arms,  nor  any  creature's  arms,  but  God's  arm,  seen  in  His  work. 
Not  manifestation  of  your  delight  in  your  own  laws,  or  your  own 
liberties,  or  your  own  inventions ;  but  in  divine  laws,  constant, 
daily,  common  laws  ; — not  Composite  laws,  nor  Doric  laws,  nor 
laws  of  the  ~Rve  orders,  but  of  the  Ten  Commandments. 

§  xvn.  Then  the  proper  material  of  ornament  will  be  whatever 
God  has  created ;  and  its  proper  treatment,  that  which  seems  in 
accordance  with  or  symbolical  of  His  laws.  And,  for  material, 
we  shall  therefore  have,  first,  the  abstract  lines  which  are  most 
frequent  in  nature ;  and  then,  from  lower  to  higher,  the  whole 
range  of  systematised  inorganic  and  organic  forms.  We  shall 
rapidly  glance  in  order  at  their  kinds  ;  and,  however  absurd  the 
elemental  division  of  inorganic  matter  by  the  ancients  may  seem 


decoration.  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  223 

to  the  modem  chemist,  it  is  one  so  grand  and  simple  for  arrange- 
ments of  external  appearances,  that  I  shall  here  follow  it ;  no- 
ticing first,  after  abstract  lines,  the  imitable  forms  of  the  fonr 
elements,  of  Earth,  Water,  Fire,  and  Air,  and  then  those  of 
animal  organisms.  It  may  be  convenient  to  the  reader  to  have 
the  order  stated  in  a  clear  succession  at  first,  thus : — 

1.  Abstract  lines. 

2.  Forms  of  Earth  (Crystals). 

3.  Forms  of  "Water  (Waves). 

4.  Forms  of  Fire  (Flames  and  Kays). 

5.  Forms  of  Air  (Clouds). 

6.  (Organic  forms.)     Shells. 

7.  Fish. 

8.  Reptiles  and  insects. 

9.  Vegetation  (A).     Stems  and  Trunks. 

10.  Vegetation  (B).     Foliage. 

11.  Birds. 

12.  Mammalian  animals  and  Man. 

It  may  be  objected  that  clouds  are  a  form  of  moisture,  not  of 
air.  They  are,  however,  a  perfect  expression  of  aerial  states  and 
currents,  and  may  sufficiently  well  stand  for  the  element  they 
move  in.  And  I  have  put  vegetation  apparently  somewhat  out 
of  its  place,  owing  to  its  vast  importance  as  a  means  of  decora- 
tion, and  its  constant  association  with  birds  and  men. 

§  xvni.  1.  Abstract  lines.  I  have  not  with  lines  named  also 
shades  and  colours,  for  this  evident  reason,  that  there  are  no  such 
things  as  abstract  shadows,  irrespective  of  the  forms  which  exhibit 
them,  and  distinguished  in  their  own  nature  from  each  other ;  and 
that  the  arrangement  of  shadows,  in  greater  or  less  quantity,  or 
in  certain  harmonical  successions,  is  an  affair  of  treatment,  not  of 
selection.  And  when  we  use  abstract  colours,  we  are  in  fact 
using  a  part  of  nature  herself, — using  a  quality  of  her  light, 
correspondent  with  that  of  the  air,  to  carry  sound ;  and  the  ar- 


224  XX.   THE   MATEEIAL   OF   OENAMENT.  decoration. 

rangement  of  colour  in  harmonious  masses  is  again  a  matter 
of  treatment,  not  selection.  Yet  even  in  this  separate  art  of 
colouring,  as  referred  to  architecture,  it  is  very  notable  that  the 
best  tints  are  always  those  of  natural  stones.  These  can  hardly  be 
wrong  ;  I  think  I  never  yet  saw  an  offensive  introduction  of  the 
natural  colours  of  marble  and  precious  stones,  unless  in  small 
mosaics,  and  in  one  or  two  glaring  instances  of  the  resolute  deter- 
mination to  produce  something  ugly  at  any  cost.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  have  most  assuredly  never  yet  seen  a  painted  building, 
ancient  or  modern,  which  seemed  to  me  quite  right. 

§  xix.  Our  first  constituents  of  ornament  will  therefore  be 
abstract  lines,  that  is  to  say,  the  most  frequent  contours  of 
natural  objects,  transferred  to  architectural  forms  when  it  is  not 
right  or  possible  to  render  such  forms  distinctly  imitative.  For 
instance^  the  line  or  curve  of  the  edge  of  a  leaf  may  be  accurately 
given  to  the  edge  of  a  stone,  without  rendering  the  stone  in  the 
least  like  a  leaf,  or  suggestive  of  a  leaf ;  and  this  the  more  fully, 
because  the  lines  of  nature  are  alike  in  all  her  works  ;  simpler  or 
richer  in  combination,  but  the  same  in  character ;  and  when  they 
are  taken  out  of  their  combinations  it  is  impossible  to  say  from 
which  of  her  works  they  have  been  borrowed,  their  universal 
property  being  that  of  ever-varying  curvature  in  the  most  subtle 
and  subdued  transitions,  with  peculiar  expressions  of  motion, 
elasticity,  or  dependence,  which  I  have  already  insisted  upon 
at  some  length  in  the  chapters  on  typical  beauty  in  "  Modern 
Painters."  But,  that  the  reader  may  here  be  able  to  compare 
them  for  himself  as  deduced  from  different  sources,  I  have  drawn, 
as  accurately  as  I  can,  on  the  opposite  plate,  some  ten  or  eleven 
lines  from  natural  forms  of  very  different  substances  and  scale  : 
the  first,  a  &,  is  in  the  original,  I  think,  the  most  beautiful  simple 
curve  I  have  ever  seen  in  my  life ;  it  is  a  curve  about  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  long,  formed  by  the  surface  of  a  small  glacier 
of  the  second  order,  on  a  spur  of  the  Aiguille  de  Blaitiere  (Cha- 
mouni).  I  have  merely  outlined  the  crags  on  the  right  of  it,  to 
show  their  sympathy  and  united  action  with  the  curve  of  the 


decoration.  XX.   THE   MATEEIAL   OF   OKNAMENT.  225 

glacier,  which  is  of  course  entirely  dependent  on  their  opposition 
to  its  descent ;  softened,  however,  into  unity  by  the  snow,  which 
rarely  melts  on  this  high  glacier  surface. 

The  line  d  c  is  some  mile  and  a  half  or  two  miles  long ;  it  is 
part  of  the  flank  of  the  chain  of  the  Dent  d'Oche  above  the  lake 
of  Geneva,  one  or  two  of  the  lines  of  the  higher  and  more  distant 
ranges  being  given  in  combination  with  it. 

A  is  a  line  about  four  feet  long,  a  branch  of  spruce  fir.  I  have 
taken  this  tree  because  it  is  commonly  supposed  to  be  stiff  and 
ungraceful ;  its  outer  sprays  are,  however,  more  noble  in  their 
sweep  than  almost  any  that  I  know :  but  this  fragment  is  seen  at 
great  disadvantage,  because  placed  upside  down,  in  order  that  the 
reader  may  compare  its  curvatures  with  c  d,  e  g,  and  i  k,  which 
are  all  mountain  lines ;  e  g,  about  ^.ve  hundred  feet  of  the  southern 
edge  of  the  Matterhorn ;  i  Jc,  the  entire  slope  of  the  Aiguille 
Bouchard,  from  its  summit  into  the  valley  of  Chamouni,  a  line 
some  three  miles  long  ;  I  m  is  the  line  of  the  side  of  a  willow  leaf 
traced  by  laying  the  leaf  on  the  paper ;  n  <?,  one  of  the  innumer- 
able groups  of  curves  at  the  lip  of  a  paper  Nautilus  ;  p,  a  spiral, 
traced  on  the  paper  round  a  Serpula  ;  q  r,  the  leaf  of  the  Alisma 
Plantago  with  its  interior  ribs,  real  size  ;  s  %  the  side  of  a  bay- 
leaf  ;  u  w,  of  a  salvia  leaf :  and  it  is  to  be  carefully  noted  that 
these  last  curves,  being  never  intended  by  nature  to  be  seen 
singly,  are  more  heavy  and  less  agreeable  than  any  of  the  others 
which  would  be  seen  as  independent  lines.  But  all  agree  in  their 
character  of  changeful  curvature,  the  mountain  and  glacier  lines 
only  excelling  the  rest  in  delicacy  and  richness  of  transition. 

§  xx.  Why  lines  of  this  kind  are  beautiful,  I  endeavoured  to 
show  in  the  "Modern  Painters;"  but  one  point,  there  omitted,  may 
be  mentioned  here, — that  almost  all  these  lines  are  expressive  of 
action  on  force  of  some  kind,  while  the  circle  is  a  line  of  limitation 
or  support.  In  leafage  they  mark  the  forces  of  its  growth  and 
expansion,  but  some  among  the  most  beautiful  of  them  are 
described  by  bodies  variously  in  motion,  or  subjected  to  force ; 
as  by  projectiles  in  the  air,  by  the  particles  of  water  in  a  gentle 
15 


226  XX.  THE  MATEEIAL   OF  OKNAMENT.  decoration. 

current,  by  planets  in  motion  in  an  orbit,  by  their  satellites,  if 
the  actual  path  of  the  satellite  in  space  be  considered  instead  of 
its  relation  to  the  planet ;  by  boats,  or  birds,  turning  in  the  water 
or  air,  by  clouds  in  various  action  upon  the  wind,  by  sails  in 
the  curvatures  they  assume  under  its  force,  and  by  thousands  of 
other  objects  moving  or  bearing  force.  In  the  Alisma  leaf,  q  r, 
the  lines  through  its  body,  which  are  of  peculiar  beauty,  mark 
the  different  expansions  of  its  fibres,  and  are,  I  think,  exactly  the 
same  as  those  which  would  be  traced  by  the  currents  of  a  river 
entering  a  lake  of  the  shape  of  the  leaf,  at  the  end  where  the  stalk 
is,  and  passing  out  at  its  point.  Circular  curves,  on  the  contrary, 
are  always,  I  think,  curves  of  limitation  or  support ;  that  is  to 
say,  curves  of  perfect  rest.  The  cylindrical  curve  round  the  stem 
of  a  plant  binds  its  fibres  together ;  while  the  ascent  of  the  stem 
is  in  lines  of  various  curvature :  so  the  curve  of  the  horizon  and 
of  the  apparent  heaven,  of  the  rainbow,  &c. :  and  though  the 
reader  might  imagine  that  the  circular  orbit  of  any  moving  body, 
or  the  curve  described  by  a  sling,  was  a  curve  of  motion,  he 
should  observe  that  the  circular  character  is  given  to  the  curve 
not  by  the  motion,  but  by  the  confinement :  the  circle  is  the 
consequence  not  of  the  energy  of  the  body,  but  of  its  being 
forbidden  to  leave  the  centre ;  and  whenever  the  whirling  or 
circular  motion  can  be  fully  impressed  on  it  we  obtain  instant 
balance  and  rest  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  the  circle. 

Hence  the  peculiar  fitness  of  the  circular  curve  as  a  sign  of 
rest,  and  security  of  support,  in  arches  ;  while  the  other  curves, 
belonging  especially  to  action,  are  to  be  used  in  the  more  active  • 
architectural  features — the  hand  and  foot  (the  capital  and  base), 
and  in  all  minor  ornaments  ;  more  freely  in  proportion  to  their 
independence  of  structural  conditions. 

§  xxi.  We  need  not,  however,  hope  to  be  able  to  imitate,  in 
general  work,  any  of  the  subtly  combined  curvatures  of  nature's 
highest  designing:  on  the  contrary,  their  extreme  refinement 
renders  them  unfit  for  coarse  service  or  material.  Lines  which 
are  lovely  in  the  pearly  film  of  the  Nautilus  shell,  are  lost  in  the 


DECORATION.  XX.    THE  MATEEIAL   OF   OKNAMENT.  227 

grey  roughness  of  stone  ;  and  those  which  are  sublime  in  the  blue 
of  far  away  hills,  are  weak  in  the  substance  of  incumbent  marble. 
Of  all  the  graceful  lines  assembled  on  Plate  VII.,  we  shall  do 
well  to  be  content  with  two  of  the  simplest.  We  will  take  one 
mountain  line  (<?,  g)  and  one  leaf  line  (u,  w\  or  rather  fragments 
of  them,  for  we  shall  perhaps  not  want  them  all.  I  will  mark 
off  from  u  w  the  little  bit  x  y,  and  from  e  g  the  piece  e  f\  both 
which  appear  to  me  likely  to  be  serviceable :  and  if  hereafter  we 
need  the  help  of  any  abstract  lines,  we  will  see  what  we  can  do 
with  these  only. 

§  xxn.  2.  Forms  of  Earth  (Crystals).    It  may  be  asked  why  I 
do  not  say  rocks  or  mountains  ?     Simply,  because  the  nobility  of 
these  depends,  first,  on  their  scale,  and,  secondly,  on  accident. 
Their  scale  cannot  be  represented,  nor  their  accident  system- 
atised.    No  sculptor  can  in  the  least  imitate  the  peculiar  cha- 
racter of  accidental  fracture  :  he  can  obey  or  exhibit  the  laws  of 
nature,  but  he  cannot  copy  the  felicity  of  her  fancies,  nor  follow 
the  steps  of  her  fury.    The  very  glory  of  a  mountain  is  in  the 
revolutions  which  raised  it  into  power,  and  the  forces  which 
are  striking  it  into  ruin.    But  we  want  no  cold  and  careful 
imitation  of  catastrophe ;    no  calculated  mockery  of  convul- 
sion; no  delicate  recommendation  of  ruin.    We  are  to  follow 
the  labour  of  Nature,  but  not  her  disturbance ;  to  imitate  what 
she  has  deliberately  ordained*,    not  what  she  has  violently 
suffered,  or  strangely  permitted.     The  only  uses,  therefore,  of 
rock  form  which  are  wise  in  the  architect,  are  its  actual  intro- 
duction (by  leaving  untouched  such  blocks  as  are  meant  for 
rough  service),  and  that  noble  use  of  the  general  examples  of 
mountain  structure  of  which  I  have  often  heretofore  spoken. 
Imitations  of  rock  form  have,  for  the  most  part,  been  confined 
to  periods  of  degraded  feeling  and  to  architectural  toys  or  pieces 
of  dramatic  effect, — the  Calvaries  and  holy  sepulchres  of  Ro- 
manism, or  the  grottoes  and  fountains  of  English  gardens.    They 

*  Thus  above,  I  adduced  for  the  architect's  imitation  the  appointed  stories  and  beds 
of  the  Matterhorn,  not  its  irregular  forms  of  crag  or  fissure. 


228  XX.    THE   MATEEIAL   OF   OKNAMENT.  DECORATION. 

were,  however,  not  unfrequent  in  medieval  bas-reliefs  ;  very 
curiously  and  elaborately  treated  by  Ghiberti  on  the  doors  of 
Florence,  and  in  religious  sculpture  necessarily  introduced  where- 
ever  the  life  of  the  anchorite  was  to  be  expressed.  They  were 
rarely  introduced  as  of  ornamental  character,  but  for  particular 
service  and  expression  ;  we  shall  see  an  interesting  example  in 
the  Ducal  Palace  at  Yenice. 

§  xxm.  But  against  crystalline  form,  which  is  the  completely 
systematised  natural  structure  of  the  earth,  none  of  these  objec- 
tions hold  good,  and,  accordingly,  it  is  an  endless  element  of 
decoration,  where  higher  conditions  of  structure  cannot  be  re- 
presented. The  four-sided  pyramid,  perhaps  the  most  frequent 
of  all  natural  crystals,  is  called  in  architecture  a  dogtooth ;  its 
use  is  quite  limitless,  and  always  beautiful :  the  cube  and  rhomb 
are  almost  equally  frequent  in  chequers  and  dentils ;  and  all 
mouldings  of  the  middle  Gothic  are  little  more  than  representa- 
tions of  the  canaliculated  crystals  of  the  beryl,  and  such  other 
minerals : 

§  xxiv.  Not  knowingly.  I  do  not  suppose  a  single  hint  was 
ever  actually  taken  from  mineral  form  ;  not  even  by  the  Arabs 
in  their  stalactite  pendants  and  vaults  :  all  that  I  mean  to  allege 
is,  that  beautiful  ornament,  wherever  found,  or  however  invented, 
is  always  either  an  intentional  or  unintentional  copy  of  some 
constant  natural  form  ;  and  that  in  this  particular  instance,  the 
pleasure  we  have  in  these  geometrical  figures  of  our  own  inven- 
tion, is  dependent  for  all  its  acuteness  on  the  natural  tendency 
impressed  on  us  by  our  Creator  to  love  the  forms  into  which  the 
•earth  He  gave  us  to  tread,  and  out  of  which  He  formed  our 
bodies,  knit  itself  as  it  was  separated  from  the  deep. 
§  xxv.  3.  Forms  of  Water  (Waves). 

The  reasons  which  prevent  rocks  from  being  used  for  orna- 
ment repress  still  more  forcibly  the  portraiture  of  the  sea.  Yet 
the  constant  necessity  of  introducing  some  representation  of 
water  in  order  to  explain  the  scene  of  events,  or  as  a  sacred  sym- 
bol, has  forced  the  sculptors  of  all  ages  to  the  invention  of  some 


decoration.  XX.   THE  MATEBIAL   OF   OKNAMENT.  229 

type  or  letter  for  it,  if  not  an  actual  imitation.  We  find  every 
degree  of  conventionalism  or  of  naturalism  in  these  types,  the 
earlier  being,  for  the  most  part,  thoughtful  symbols ;  the  later, 
awkward  attempts  at  portraiture.*  The  most  conventional  of  all 
types  is  the  Egyptian  zigzag,  preserved  in  the  astronomical  sign 
of  Aquarius  ;  but  every  nation,  with  any  capacities  of  thought, 
has  given,  in  some  of  its  work,  the  same  great  definition  of  open 
water,  as  "an  undulatory  thing  with  fish  in  it."  I  say  open 
water,  because  inland  nations  have  a  totally  different  conception 
of  the  element.  Imagine  for  an  instant  the  different  feelings  of 
an  husbandman  whose  hut  is  built  by  the  Rhine  or  the  Po,  and 
who  sees,  day  by  day,  the  same  giddy  succession  of  silent  power, 
the  same  opaque,  thick,  whirling,  irresistible,  labyrinth  of  rush- 
ing lines  and  twisted  eddies,  coiling  themselves  into  serpentine 
race  by  the  reedy  banks,  in  omne  volubilis  sevum, — and  the 
image  of  the  sea  in  the  mind  of  the  fisher  upon  the  rocks  of 
Ithaca,  or  by  the  Straits  of  Sicily,  who  sees  how,  day  by  day, 
the  morning  winds  come  coursing  to  the  shore,  every  breath  of 
them  with  a  green  wave  rearing  before  it ;  clear,  crisp,  ringing, 
merry-minded  waves,  that  fall  over  and  over  each  other,  laugh- 
ing like  children  as  they  near  the  beach,  and  at  last  clash  them- 
selves all  into  dust  of  crystal  over  the  dazzling  sweeps  of  sand. 
Fancy  the  difference  of  the  image  of  water  in  those  two  minds, 
and  then  compare  the  sculpture  of  the  coiling  eddies  of  the  Tigris 
and  its  reedy  branches  in  those  slabs  of  Nineveh,  with  the 
crested  curls  of  the  Greek  sea  on  the  coins  of  Camerina  or  Ta- 
rentum.  But  both  agree  in  the  undulatory  lines,  either  of  the 
currents  or  the  surface,  and  in  the  introduction  of  fish  as  explana- 
tory of  the  meaning  of  those  lines  (so  also  the  Egyptians  in  their 
frescos,  with  most  elaborate  realisation  of  the  fish).  There  is  a 
very  curious  instance  on  a  Greek  mirror  in  the  British  Museum, 
representing  Orion  on  the  sea ;  and  multitudes  of  examples  with 
dolphins  on  the  Greek  vases :   the  type  is  preserved  without 

*  Appendix  21. :  "  Ancient  Representations  of  Water," 


230  XX.   THE  MATERIAL  OF  OENAMENT.  decoration. 

alteration  in  mediaeval  painting  and  sculpture.  The  sea  in  that 
Greek  mirror  (at  least  400  b.  a),  in  the  mosaics  of  Torcello  and 
St.  Mark's,  on  the  font  of  St.  Frediano  at  Lucca,  on  the  gate  of 
the  fortress  of  St.  Michael's  Mount  in  Normandy,  on  the  Bayeux 
tapestry,  and  on  the  capitals  of  the  Ducal  Palace  at  Yenice 
(under  Arion  on  his  dolphin),  is  represented  in  a  manner  abso- 
lutely identical.  Giotto,  in  the  frescoes  of  Avignon,  has,  with 
his  usual  strong  feeling  for  naturalism,  given  the  best  example  I 
remember,  in  painting,  of  the  unity  of  the  conventional  system 
with  direct  imitation,  and  that  both  in  sea  and  river  ;  giving  in 
pure  blue  colour  the  coiling  whirlpool  of  the  stream,  and  the 
curled  crest  of  the  breaker.  But  in  all  early  sculptural  examples, 
both  imitation  and  decorative  effect  are  subordinate  to  easily  un- 
derstood symbolical  language ;  the  undulatory  lines  are  often 
valuable  as  an  enrichment  of  surface,  but  are  rarely  of  any 
studied  gracefulness.  One  of  the  best  examples  I  know  of  their 
expressive  arrangement  is  around  some  figures  in  a  spandril  at 
Bourges,  representing  figures  sinking  in  deep  sea  (the  deluge) : 
the  waved  lines  yield  beneath  the  bodies  and  wildly  lave  the  edge 
of  the  moulding,  two  birds,  as  if  to  mark  the  reverse  of  all  order 
of  nature,  lowest  of  all  sunk  in  the  depth  of  them.  In  later 
times  of  debasement,  water  began  to  be  represented  with  its 
waves,  foam,  &c.,  as  on  the  Vendramin  tomb  at  Yenice,  above 
cited  ;  but  even  there,  without  any  definite  ornamental  purpose, 
the  sculptor  meant  partly  to  explain  a  story,  partly  to  display 
dexterity  of  chiselling,  but  not  to  produce  beautiful  forms 
pleasant  to  the  eye.  The  imitation  is  vapid  and  joyless,  and  it 
has  often  been  matter  of  surprise  to  me  that  sculptors,  so  fond  of 
exhibiting  their  skill,  should  have  suffered  this  imitation  to  fall 
so  short,  and  remain  so  cold,— should  not  have  taken  more  pains 
to  curl  the  waves  clearly,  to  edge  them  sharply,  and  to  express, 
by  drillholes  or  other  artifices,  the  character  of  foam.  I  think 
in  one  of  the  Antwerp  churches  something  of  this  kind  is  done 
in  wood,  but  in  general  it  is  rare. 

§  xxvi.  4.  Forms  of  Fire  (Flames  and  Eays).    If  neither  the 


decoration.  XX.   THE  MATERIAL   OF  ORNAMENT.  231 

sea  nor  the  rock  can  be  imaged,  still  less  the  devouring  fire.  It 
has  been  symbolised  by  radiation  both  in  painting  and  sculpture, 
for  the  most  part  in  the  latter  very  unsuccessfully.  It  was  sug- 
gested to  me,  not  long  ago*,  that  zigzag  decorations  of  Norman 
architects  were  typical  of  light  springing  from  the  half-set  orb  of 
the  sun  ;  the  resemblance  to  the  ordinary  sun  type  is  indeed  re- 
markable, but  I  believe  accidental.  I  shall  give,  in  my  large 
plates,  two  curious  instances  of  radiation  in  brick  ornament 
above  arches,  but  I  think  these  also  without  any  very  luminous 
intention.  The  imitations  of  fire  in  the  torches  of  Cupids  and 
genii,  and  burning  in  tops  of  urns,  which  attest  and  represent 
the  mephitic  inspirations  of  the  seventeenth  century  in  most 
London  churches,  and  in  monuments  all  over  civilised  Europe, 
together  with  the  gilded  rays  of  Romanist  altars,  may  be  left  to 
such  mercy  as  the  reader  is  inclined  to  show  them. 

§  xxvii.  5.  Forms  of  Air  (Clouds).  Hardly  more  manageable 
than  flames,  and  of  no  ornamental  use,  their  majesty  being  in 
scale  and  colour,  and  inimitable  in  marble.  They  are  lightly 
traced  in  much  of  the  cinque  cento  sculpture ;  very  boldly  and 
grandly  in  the  strange  Last  Judgment  in  the  porch  of  St.  Maclou 
at  Rouen,  described  in  the  "Seven  Lamps."  But  the  most 
elaborate  imitations  are  altogether  of  recent  date,  arranged  in 
concretions  like  flattened  sacks,  forty  or  fifty  feet  above  the 
altars  of  continental  churches,  mixed  with  the  gilded  truncheons 
intended  for  sunbeams  above  alluded  to. 

§  xxviii.  6.  Shells.  I  place  these  lowest  in  the  scale  (after  inor- 
ganic forms)  as  being  moulds  or  coats  of  organism ;  not  them- 
selves organic.  The  sense  of  this,  and  of  their  being  mere 
emptiness  and  deserted  houses,  must  always  prevent  them,  how- 
ever beautiful  in  their  lines,  from  being  largely  used  in  ornamen- 
tation. It  is  better  to  take  the  line  and  leave  the  shell.  One 
form  indeed,  that  of  the  cockle,  has  been  in  all  ages  used  as  the 
decoration  of  half  domes,  which  were  named  conchas  from  their 

*  By  the  friend  to  whom  I  owe  Appendix  21. 


232  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

shell  form :  and  I  believe  the  wrinkled  lip  of  the  cockle,  so  used, 
to  have  been  the  origin,  in  some  parts  of  Europe  at  least,  of  the 
exuberant  foliation  of  the  round  arch.  The  scallop  also  is  a 
pretty  radiant  form,  and  mingles  well  with  other  symbols  when 
it  is  needed.  The  crab  is  always  as  delightful  as  a  grotesque, 
for  here  we  suppose  the  beast  inside  the  shell ;  and  he  sustains 
his  part  in  a  lively  manner  among  the  other  signs  of  the  zodiac, 
with  the  scorpion  ;  or  scattered  upon  sculptured  shores,  as  beside 
the  Bronze  Boar  of  Florence.  We  shall  find  him  in  a  basket  at 
Venice,  at  the  base  of  one  of  the  Piazzetta  shafts. 

§  xxix.  7.  Fish.  These,  as  beautiful  in  their  forms  as  they 
are  familiar  to  our  sight,  while  their  interest  is  increased  by 
their  symbolic  meaning,  are  of  great  value  as  material  of  orna- 
ment. Love  of  the  picturesque  has  generally  induced  a  choice 
of  some  supple  form  with  scaly  body  and  lashing  tail,  but  the  sim- 
plest fish  form  is  largely  employed  in  mediaeval  work.  We  shall 
find  the  plain  oval  body  and  sharp  head  of  the  Thunny  constantly 
at  Venice ;  and  the  fish  used  in  the  expression  of  sea-water,  or 
water  generally,  are  always  plain  bodied  creatures  in  the  best 
mediaeval  sculpture.  The  Greek  type  of  the  dolphin,  however, 
sometimes  but  slightly  exaggerated  from  the  real  outline  of  the 
Delphinus  Delphis*,  is  one  of  the  most  picturesque  of  animal 
forms  ;  and  the  action  of  its  slow  revolving  plunge  is  admirably 
caught  upon  the  surface  sea  represented  in  Greek  vases. 

§  xxx.  8.  Reptiles  and  Insects.  The  forms  of  the  serpent  and 
lizard  exhibit  almost  every  element  of  beauty  and  horror  in 
strange  combination ;  the  horror,  which  in  an  imitation  is  felt 
only  as  a  pleasurable  excitement,  has  rendered  them  favourite 
subjects  in  all  periods  of  art;  and  the  unity  of  both  lizard  and 
serpent  in  the  ideal  dragon,  the  most  picturesque  and  powerful 
of  all  animal  forms,  and  of  peculiar  symbolical  interest  to  the 

=*  One  is  glad  to  hear  from  Cuvier,  that  though  dolphins  in  general  are  "  les  plus 
carnassiers,  et,  proportion  gardee  avec  leur  taille,  les  plus  cruels  de  Pordre ;"  yet  that 
in  the  Delphinus  Delphis,  "  tout  1' organisation  de  son  cerveau  annonce  quHl  ne  doit  pas 
etre  depourvu  de  la  docilite  qivils"  (les  anciens)  "  lui  attribuaient." 


decoration.  XX.   THE   MATEKIAL   OF   OKNAMENT.  233 

Christian  mind,  is  perhaps  the  principal  of  all  the  materials  of 
mediaeval  picturesque  sculpture.  By  the  best  sculptors  it  is 
always  used  with  this  symbolic  meaning,  by  the  cinque  cento 
sculptors  as  an  ornament  merely.  The  best  and  most  natural 
representations  of  mere  viper  or  snake  are  to  be  found  interlaced 
among  their  confused  groups  of  meaningless  objects.  The  real 
power  and  horror  of  the  snake-head  has,  however,  beeu  rarely 
reached.  I  shall  give  one  example  from  Verona  of  the  twelfth 
century. 

Other  less  powerful  reptile  forms  are  not  unfrequent.  Small 
frogs,  lizards,  and  snails  almost  always  enliven  the  foregrounds 
and  leafage  of  good  sculpture.  The  tortoise  is  less  usually 
employed  in  groups.  Beetles  are  chiefly  mystic  and  colossal. 
Yarious  insects,  like  everything  else  in  the  world,  occur  in 
cinque  cento  work ;  grasshoppers  most  frequently.  We  shall 
see  on  the  Ducal  Palace  at  Yenice  an  interesting  use  of  the  bee. 

§  xxxi.  9.  Branches  and  stems  of  Trees.  I  arrange  these 
under  a  separate  head;  because,  while  the  forms  of  leafage 
belong  to  all  architecture,  and  ought  to  be  employed  in  it 
always,  those  of  the  branch  and  stem  belong  to  a  peculiar  imi- 
tative and  luxuriant  architecture,  and  are  only  applicable  at 
times.  Pagan  sculptors  seem  to  have  perceived  little  beauty  in 
the  stems  of  trees ;  they  were  little  else  than  timber  to  them ; 
and  they  preferred  the  rigid  and  monstrous  triglyph,  or  the 
fluted  coluirin,  to  a  broken  bough  or  gnarled  trunk.  But  with 
Christian  knowledge  came  a  peculiar  regard  for  the  forms  of 
vegetation,  from  the  root  upwards.  The  actual  representation 
of  entire  trees  required  in  many  scripture  subjects, — as  in  the 
most  frequent  of  Old  Testament  subjects,  the  Fall ;  and  again  in 
the  Drunkenness  of  ISToah,  the  Garden  Agony,  and  many  others, 
familiarised  the  sculptors  of  bas-relief  to  the  beauty  of  forms 
before  unknown;  while  the  symbolical  name  given  to  Christ 
by  the  Prophets,  "  the  Branch,"  and  the  frequent  expressions 
referring  to  this  image  throughout  every  scriptural  description 
of  conversion,  gave  an  especial  interest  to  the  Christian  mine 


234  XX.   THE  MATEEIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

to  this  portion  of  vegetative  structure.  For  some  time,  never- 
theless, the  sculpture  of  trees  was  confined  to  bas-relief;  but  it 
at  last  affected  even  the  treatment  of  the  main  shafts  in  Lombard 
Gothic  buildings, — as  in  the  western  facade  of  Genoa,  where 
two  of  the  shafts  are  represented  as  gnarled  trunks :  and  as  bas- 
relief  itself  became  more  boldly  introduced,  so  did  tree  sculpture, 
until  we  find  the  writhed  and  knotted  stems  of  the  vine  and  fig 
used  for  angle  shafts  on  the  Doge's  Palace,  and  entire  oaks  and 
appletrees  forming,  roots  and  all,  the  principal  decorative  sculp- 
tures of  the  Scala  tombs  at  Verona.  It  was  then  discovered  to 
be  more  easy  to  carve  branches  than  leaves ;  and,  much  helped 
by  the  frequent  employment  in  later  Gothic  of  the  "  Tree  of 
Jesse,"  for  traceries  and  other  purposes,  the  system  reached  full 
development  in  a  perfect  thicket  of  twigs,  which  form  the  richest 
portion  of  the  decoration  of  the  porches  of  Beauvais.  It  had 
now  been  carried  to  its  richest  extreme ;  men  wearied  of  it  and 
abandoned  it,  and  like  all  other  natural  and  beautiful  things,  it 
was  ostracised  by  the  mob  of  Renaissance  architects.  But  it  is 
interesting  to  observe  how  the  human  mind,  in  its  acceptance  of 
this  feature  of  ornament,  proceeded  from  the  ground,  and  fol- 
lowed, as  it  were,  the  natural  growth  of  the  tree.  It  began  with 
the  rude  and  solid  trunk,  as  at  Genoa ;  then  the  branches  shot 
out,  and  became  loaded  with  leaves ;  autumn  came,  the  leaves 
were  shed,  and  the  eye  was  directed  to  the  extremities  of 
the  delicate  branches; — the  Renaissance  frosts  came,  and  all 
perished. 

§  xxxii.  10.  Foliage,  Flowers,  and  Fruit.  It  is  necessary  to 
consider  these  as  separated  from  the  stems ;  not  only,  as  above 
noted,  because  their  separate  use  marks  another  school  of  archi- 
tecture, but  because  they  are  the  only  organic  structures  which 
are  capable  of  being  so  treated,  and  intended  to  be  so,  without 
strong  effort  of  imagination.  To  pull  animals  to  pieces,  and  use 
their  paws  for  feet  of  furniture,  or  their  heads  for  terminations 
of  rods  and  shafts,  is  usually  the  characteristic  of  feelingless 
schools ;  the  greatest  men  like  their  animals  whole.    The  head 


decoration.  XX.   THE   MATERIAL   OF  ORNAMENT.  235 

may,  indeed,  be  so  managed  as  to  look  emergent  from  the  stone, 
rather  than  fastened  to  it ;  and  wherever  there  is  throughout  the 
architecture  any  expression  of  sternness  or  severity  (severity  in 
its  literal  sense,  as  in  Romans,  xi.  22.),  such  divisions  of  the 
living  form  may  be  permitted ;  still,  you  cannot  cut  an  animal 
to  pieces  as  you  can  gather  a  flower  or  a  leaf.  These  were  in- 
tended for  our  gathering,  and  for  our  constant  delight :  wherever 
men  exist  in  a  perfectly  civilised  and  healthy  state,  they  have 
vegetation  around  them ;  wherever  their  state  approaches  that 
of  innocence  or  perfectness,  it  approaches  that  of  Paradise, — it 
is  a  dressing  of  garden.  And,  therefore,  where  nothing  else  can 
be  used  for  ornament,  vegetation  may ;  vegetation  in  any  form, 
however  fragmentary,  however  abstracted.  A  single  leaf  laid 
upon  the  angle  of  a  stone,  or  the  mere  form  or  framework  of  the 
leaf  drawn  upon  it,  or  the  mere  shadow  and  ghost  of  the  leaf, — 
the  hollow  "  foil "  cut  out  of  it, — possesses  a  charm  which 
nothing  else  can  replace ;  a  charm  not  exciting,  nor  demanding 
laborious  thought  or  sympathy,  but  perfectly  simple,  peaceful, 
and  satisfying. 

§  xxxiii.  The  full  recognition  of  leaf  forms,  as  the  general 
source  of  subordinate  decoration,  is  one '  of  the  chief  charac- 
teristics of  Christian  architecture;  but  the  two  roots  of  leaf 
ornament  are  the  Greek  acanthus,  and  the  Egyptian  lotus.* 
The  dry  land  and  the  river  thus  each  contributed  their  part ;  and 
all  the  florid  capitals  of  the  richest  Northern  Gothic  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  arrowy  lines  of  the  severe  Lombardic  capitals  on 
the  other,  are  founded  on  these  two  gifts  of  the  dust  of  Greece 
and  the  waves  of  the  Nile.  The  leaf  which  is,  I  believe,  called 
the  Persepolitan  water-leaf,  is  to  be  associated  with  the  lotus 
flower  and  stem,  as  the  origin  of  our  noblest  types  of  simple 

*  Vide  Wilkinson,  vol.  v.,  woodcut  No.  478,  fig.  8.  The  tamarisk  appears  after- 
wards to  have  given  the  idea  of  a  subdivision  of  leaf  more  pure  and  quaint  than  that  of 
the  acanthus.  Of  late  our  botanists  have  discovered,  in  the  "  Victoria  regia "  (sup- 
posing its  blossom  reversed),  another  strangely  beautiful  type  of  what  we  may  perhaps 
hereafter  find  it  convenient  to  call  Lily  capitals. 


236  XX.   THE  MATERIAL   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

capital ;  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  florid  leaves  of  the  dry 
land  are  nsed  most  by  the  Northern  architects,  while  the  water 
leaves  are  gathered  for  their  ornaments  by  the  parched  builders 
of  the  Desert. 

§  xxxiv.  Fruit  is,  for  the  most  part,  more  valuable  in  colour 
than  form  ;  nothing  is  more  beautiful  as  a  subject  of  sculpture  on 
a  tree  ;  but,  gathered  and  put  in  baskets,  it  is  quite  possible  to 
have  too  much  of  it.  We  shall  find  it  so  used  very  dextrously 
on  the  Ducal  Palace  of  Venice,  there  with  a  meaning  which 
rendered  it  right  and  necessary  ;  but  the  Renaissance  architects 
address  themselves  to  spectators  who  care  for  nothing  but 
feasting,  and  suppose  that  clusters  of  pears  and  pineapples  are 
visions  of  which  their  imagination  can  never  weary,  and  above 
which  it  will  never  care  to  rise.  I  am  no  advocate  for  image- 
worship,  as  I  believe  the  reader  will  elsewhere  sufficiently  find  ; 
but  I  am  very  sure  that  the  Protestantism  of  London  would  have 
found  itself  quite  as  secure  in  a  cathedral  decorated  with  statues 
of  good  men,  as  in  one  hung  round  with  bunches  of  ribston 
pippins. 

§  xxxv.  11.  Birds.  The  perfect  and  simple  grace  of  bird  form, 
in  general,  has  rendered  it  a  favourite  subject  with  early  sculptors, 
and  with  those  schools  which  loved  form  more  than  action  ;  but 
the  difficulty  of  expressing  action,  where  the  muscular  markings 
are  concealed,  has  limited  the  use  of  it  in  later  art.  Half  the 
ornament,  at  least,  in  Byzantine  architecture,  and  a  third  of  that 
of  Lombardic,  is  composed  of  birds,  either  pecking  at  fruit  or 
flowers,  or  standing  on  either  side  of  a  flower  or  vase,  or  alone, 
as  generally  the  symbolical  peacock.  But  how  much  of  our 
general  sense  of  grace  or  power  of  motion,  of  serenity,  peaceful- 
ness,  and  spirituality,  we  owe  to  these  creatures,  it  is  impossible 
to  conceive ;  their  wings  supplying  us  with  almost  the  only  means 
of  representation  of  spiritual  motion  which  we  possess,  and  with 
an  ornamental  form  of  which  the  eye  is  never  weary,  however 
meaninglessly  or  endlessly  repeated  ;  whether  in  utter  isolation, 
or  associated  with  the  bodies  of  the  lizard,  the  horse,  the  lion, 


• 


decoration.  XX.   THE   MATEEIAL    OF   ORNAMENT.  237 

or  the  man.     The  heads  of  the  birds  of  prey  are  always  beautiful, 
and  used  as  the  richest  ornaments  in  all  ages. 

§  xxxvi.  12.  Quadrupeds  and  Men.  Of  quadrupeds  the  horse 
has  received  an  elevation  into  the  primal  rank  of  sculptural 
subject,  owing  to  his  association  with  men.  The  full  value  of 
other  quadruped  forms  has  hardly  been  perceived,  or  worked  for, 
in  late  sculpture ;  and  the  want  of  science  is  more  felt  in  these 
subjects  than  in  any  other  branches  of  early  work.  The  greatest 
richness  of  quadruped  ornament  is  found  in  the  hunting  sculpture 
of  the  Lombards  ;  but  rudely  treated,  (the  most  noble  examples 
of  treatment  being  the  lions  of  Egypt,  the  Nine vite  bulls,  and  the 
mediseval  griffins).  Quadrupeds  of  course  form  the  noblest 
subjects  of  ornament  next  to  the  human  form ;  this  latter,  the 
chief  subject  of  sculpture,  being  sometimes  the  end  of  architecture 
rather  than  its  decoration. 

We  have  thus  completed  the  list  of  the  materials  of  archi- 
tectural decoration,  and  the  reader  may  be  assured  that  no  effort 
has  ever  been  successful  to  draw  elements  of  beauty  from  any 
other  sources  than  these.  Such  an  effort  was  once  resolutely 
made.  It  was  contrary  to  the  religion  of  the  Arab  to  introduce 
any  animal  form  into  his  ornament ;  but  although  all  the  radiance 
of  colour,  all  the  refinements  of  proportion,  and  all  the  intricacies 
of  geometrical  design  were  open  to  him,  he  could  not  produce 
any  noble  work  without  %x±tahstr action  of  the  forms  of  leafage,  to 
be  used  in  his  capitals,  and  made  the  ground  plan  of  his  chased 
ornament.  But  I  have  above  noted  that  colouring  is  an  entirely 
distinct  and  independent  art ;  and  in  the  "  Seven  Lamps"  we 
saw  that  this  art  had  most  power  when  practised  in  arrange- 
ments of  simple  geometrical  form:  the  Arab,  therefore,  lay 
under  no  disadvantage  in  colouring,  and  he  had  all  the  noble 
elements  of  constructive  and  proportional  beauty  at  his  command  : 
he  might  not  imitate  the  sea-shell,  but  he  could  build  the  dome. 
The  imitation  of  radiance  by  the  variegated  voussoir,  the  ex- 
pression of  the  sweep  of  the  desert  by  the  barred  red  lines  upon 
the  wall,  the  starred  inshedding  of  light  through  his  vaulted  roof, 


238  XX.  THE  MATERIAL  OF  ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

and  all  the  endless  fantasy  of  abstract  line*,  were  still  in  the 
power  of  his  ardent  and  fantastic  spirit.  Much  he  achieved ;  and 
yet  in  the  effort  of  his  overtaxed  invention,  restrained  from  its 
proper  food,  he  made  his  architecture  a  glittering  vacillation  of 
undisciplined  enchantment,  and  left  the  lustre  of  its  edifices  to 
wither  like  a  startling  dream,  whose  beauty  we  may  indeed  feel, 
and  whose  instruction  we  may  receive,  but  must  smile  at  its  in- 
consistency, and  mourn  over  its  evanescence. 

*  Appendix  22. :  "  Arabian  Ornamentation." 


239 


CHAPTEE  XXI. 


TKEATMENT    OP    OKNAMENT. 


§  i.  We  now  know  where  we  are  to  look  for  subjects  of  decora- 
tion.  The  next  question  is,  as  the  reader  must  remember,  how  to 
treat  or  express  these  subjects. 

There  are  evidently  two  branches  of  treatment :  the  first  being 
the  expression,  or  rendering  to  the  eye  and  mind,  of  the  thing  it- 
self; and  the  second,  the  arrangement  of  the  things  so  expressed : 
both  of  these  being  quite  distinct  from  the  placing  of  the  orna- 
ment in  proper  parts  of  the  building.  For  instance,  suppose  we 
take  a  vine-leaf  for  our  subject.  The  first  question  is,  how  to 
cut  the  vine-leaf?  Shall  we  cut  its  ribs  and  notches  on  the  edge, 
or  only  its  general  outline  ?  and  so  on.  Then,  how  to  arrange 
the  vine-leaves  when  we  have  them ;  whether  symmetrically,  or 
at  random ;  or  unsymmetrically,  yet  within  certain  limits  ?  All 
these  I  call  questions  of  treatment.  Then,  whether  the  vine- 
leaves  so  arranged  are  to  be  set  on  the  capital  of  a  pillar  or  on 
its  shaft,  I  call  a  question  of  place. 

§  n.  So,  then,  the  questions  of  mere  treatment  are  twofold : 
how  to  express,  and  how  to  arrange.  And  expression  is  to  the 
mind  or  to  the  sight.  Therefore,  the  inquiry  becomes  really 
threefold : — 

1.  How  ornament  is  to  be  expressed  with  reference  to  the 
mind. 

2.  How  ornament  is  to  be  expressed  with  reference  to  the 
sight. 

3.  How  ornament  is  to  be  arranged  with  reference  to  both. 


240  XXI.   TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

§  in.  (1.)  How  is  ornament  to  be  treated  with  reference  to  the 
mind? 

If,  to  produce  a  good  or  beautiful  ornament,  it  were  only 
necessary  to  produce  a  perfect  piece  of  sculpture,  and  if  a  well- 
cut  group  of  flowers  or  animals  were  indeed  an  ornament  where- 
ever  it  might  be  placed,  the  work  of  the  architect  would  be 
comparatively  easy.  Sculpture  and  architecture  would  become 
separate  arts  ;  and  the  architect  would  order  so  many  pieces  of 
such  subject  and  size  as  he  needed,  without  troubling  himself 
with  any  questions  but  those  of  disposition  and  proj:)ortion.  But 
this  is  not  so.  No  perfect  piece  either  of  painting  or  sculpture  is 
an  architectural  ornament  at  all,  except  in  that  vague  sense  in 
which  any  beautiful  thing  is  said  to  ornament  the  place  it  is  in. 
Thus  we  say  that  pictures  ornament  a  room  ;  but  we  should  not 
thank  an  architect  who  told  us  that  his  design,  to  be  complete, 
required  a  Titian  to  be  put  in  one  corner  of  it,  and  a  Yelasquez 
in  the  other  ;  and  it  is  just  as  unreasonable  to  call  perfect  sculp- 
ture, niched  in,  or  encrusted  on  a  building,  a  portion  of  the 
ornament  of  that  building,  as  it  would  be  to  hang  pictures  by 
way  of  ornament  on  the  outside  of  it.  It  is  very  possible  that 
the  sculptured  work  may  be  harmoniously  associated  with  the 
building,  or  the  building  executed  with  reference  to  it ;  but  in 
this  latter  case  the  architecture  is  subordinate  to  the  sculpture, 
as  in  the  Medicean  chapel,  and  I  believe  also  in  the  Parthenon. 
And  so  far  from  the  perfection  of  the  work  conducing  to  its 
ornamental  purpose,  we  may  say,  with  entire  security,  that  its 
perfection,  in  some  degree,  unfits  it  for  its  purpose,  and  that  no 
absolutely  complete  sculpture  can  be  decoratively  right.  We  have 
a  familiar  instance  in  the  flower-work  of  St.  Paul's,  which  is  pro- 
bably, in  the  abstract,  as  perfect  flower  sculpture  as  could  be  pro- 
duced at  the  time  ;  and  which  is  just  as  rational  an  ornament  of 
the  building  as  so  many  valuable  Yan  Huy sums,  framed  and 
glazed,  and  hung  up  over  each  window. 

§  iv.  The  especial  condition  of  true  ornament  is,  that  it  be  beau- 
tiful in  its  place,  and  nowhere  else,  and  that  it  aid  the  effect  of 


decoration.  XXI.    TREATMENT    OF   ORNAMENT.  241 

every  portion  of  the  building  over  which  it  has  influence  ;  that 
it  does  not,  by  its  richness,  make  other  parts  bald,  or,  by  its 
delicacy,  make  other  parts  coarse.  Every  one  of  its  qualities 
has  reference  to  its  place  and  use :  and  it  is  fitted  for  its  service 
fty  what  would  he  faults  and  deficiencies  if  it  had  no  especial 
duty.  Ornament,  the  servant,  is  often  formal,  where  sculpture, 
the  master,  would  have  been  free ;  the  servant  is  often  silent 
where  the  master  would  have  been  eloquent ;  or  hurried,  where 
the  master  would  have  been  serene. 

§  v.  How  far  this  subordination  is  in  different  situations  to  be 
expressed,  or  how  far  it  may  be  surrendered,  and  ornament,  the 
servant,  be  permitted  to  have  independent  will ;  and  by  what 
means  the  subordination  is  best  to  be  exj)ressed  when  it  is  re- 
quired, are  by  far  the  most  difficult  questions  I  have  ever  tried 
to  work,  out  respecting  any  branch  of  art ;  for,  in  many  of  the 
examples  to  which  I  look  as  authoritative  in  their  majesty  of 
effect,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  whether  the  abstraction  or 
imperfection  of  the  sculpture  was  owing  to  the  choice,  or  the 
incapacity  of  the  workman  ;  and  if  to  the  latter,  how  far  the 
result  of  fortunate  incapacity  can  be  imitated  by  prudent  self-re- 
straint. The  reader,  I  think,  will  understand  this  at  once  by 
considering  the  effect  of  the  illuminations  of  an  old  missal.  In 
their  bold  rejection  of  all  principles  of  perspective,  light  and 
shade,  and  drawing,  they  are  infinitely  more  ornamental  to  the 
page,  owing  to  the  vivid  opposition  of  their  bright  colours  and 
quaint  lines,  than  if  they  had  been  drawn  by  Da  Yinci  himself : 
and  so  the  Arena  chapel  is  far  more  brightly  decorated  by  the 
archaic  frescoes  of  Giotti,  than  the  Stanze  of  the  Yatican  are  by 
those  of  Raffaelle.  But  how  far  it  is  possible  to  recur  to  such 
archaicism,  or  to  make  up  for  it  by  any  voluntary  abandonment 
of  power,  I  cannot  as  yet  venture  in  any  wise  to  determine. 

§  vi.  So,  on  the  other  hand,  in  many  instances  of  finished  work 
in  which  I  find  most  to  regret  or  to  reprobate,  I  can  hardly  dis- 
tinguish what  is  erroneous  in  principle  from  what  is  vulgar  in 
execution.     For  instance,  in  most  Romanesque  churches  of  Italy, 
16 


242  XXI.    TREATMENT    OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

the  porches  are  guarded  by  gigantic  animals,  lions  or  griffins,  of 
admirable  severity  of  design  ;  yet,  in  many  cases,  of  so  rnde 
workmanship,  that  it  can  hardly  be  determined  how  much  of  this 
severity  was  intentional, — how  much  involuntary  :  in  the  cathe- 
dral of  Genoa  two  modern  lions  have,  in  imitation  of  this  ancient 
custom,  been  placed  on  the  steps  of  its  west  front ;  and  the 
Italian  sculptor,  thinking  himself  a  marvellous  great  man  because 
he  knew  what  lions  were  really  like,  has  copied  them,  in  the 
menagerie,  with  great  success,  and  produced  two  hairy  and  well- 
whiskered  beasts,  as  like  to  real  lions  as  he  could  possibly  cut 
them.  One  wishes  them  back  in  the  menagerie  for  his  pains ; 
but  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  far  the  offence  of  their  presence  is 
owing  to  the  mere  stupidity  and  vulgarity  of  the  sculpture,  and 
how  far  we  might  have  been  delighted  with  a  realisation,  carried 
to  nearly  the  same  length  by  Ghiberti  or  Michael  Angelo.  (I 
say  nearly,  because  neither  Ghiberti  nor  Michael  Angelo  would 
ever  have  attempted,  or  permitted,  entire  realisation,  even  in 
independent  sculpture.) 

§  vii.  In  spite  of  these  embarrassments,  however,  some  few 
certainties  may  be  marked  in  the  treatment  of  past  architecture, 
and  secure  conclusions  deduced  for  future  practice.  There  is 
first,  for  instance,  the  assuredly  intended  and  resolute  abstraction 
of  the  Mnevite  and  Egyptian  sculptors.  The  men  who  cut  those 
granite  lions  in  the  Egyptian  room  of  the  British  Museum,  and 
who  carved  the  calm  faces  of  those  Ninevite  kings,  knew  much 
more,  both  of  lions  and  kings,  than  they  chose  to  express.  Then 
there  is  the  Greek  system,  in  which  the  human  sculpture  is  per- 
fect, the  architecture  and  animal  sculpture  is  subordinate  to  it, 
and  the  architectural  ornament  severely  subordinated  to  this 
again,  so  as  to  be  composed  of  little  more  than  abstract  lines : 
and,  finally,  there  is  the  peculiarly  mediaeval  system,  in  which 
the  inferior  details  are  carried  to  as  great  or  greater  imitative 
perfection  as  the  higher  sculpture;  and  the  subordination  is 
chiefly  effected  by  symmetries  of  arrangement,  and  quaintnesses 


decoration.  XXI.    TREATMENT    OF   OENAMENT.  243 

of  treatment,  respecting  which  it  is  difficult  to  say  how  far  they 
resulted  from  intention,  and  how  far  from  incapacity. 

§  yiii.  Eow  of  these  systems,  the  Ninevite  and  Egyptian  are 
altogether  opposed  to  modern  habits  of  thought  and  action  ;  they 
are  sculptures  evidently  executed  under  absolute  authorities, 
physical  and  mental,  such  as  cannot  at  present  exist.  The  Greek 
system  presupposes  the  possession  of  a  Phidias ;  it  is  ridiculous 
to  talk  of  building  in  the  Greek  manner ;  you  may  build  a  Greek 
shell  or  box,  such  as  the  Greek  intended  to  contain  sculpture, 
but  you  have  not  the  sculpture  to  put  in  it.  Find  your  Phidias 
first,  and  your  new  Phidias  will  very  soon  settle  all  your  archi- 
tectural difficulties  in  very  unexpected  ways  indeed  ;  but  until 
you  find  him,  do  not  think  yourselves  architects  while  you  go  on 
copying  those  poor  subordinations,  and  secondary  and  tertiary 
orders  of  ornament,  which  the  Greek  put  on  the  shell  of  his 
sculpture.  Some  of  them,  beads,  and  dentils,  and  such  like,  are 
as  good  as  they  can  be  for  their  work,  and  you  may  use  them 
for  subordinate  work  still ;  but  they  are  nothing  to  be  proud  of, 
especially  when  you  did  not  invent  them  :  and  others  of  them  are 
mistakes  and  impertinences  in  the  Greek  himself,  such  as  his  so- 
called  honeysuckle  ornaments  and  others,  in  which  there  is  a 
starched  and  dull  suggestion  of  vegetable  form,  and  yet  no  real 
resemblance  nor  life,  for  the  conditions  of  them  result  from  his 
own  conceit  of  himself,  and  ignorance  of  the  plrysical  sciences. 
and  want  of  relish  for  common  nature,  and  vain  fancy  that  he 
could  improve  everything  he  touched,  and  that  he  honoured  it 
by  taking  it  into  his  service :  by  freedom  from  which  conceits 
the  true  Christian  architecture  is  distinguished, — not  by  points 
to  its  arches. 

§  ix.  There  remains,  therefore,  only  the  medieval  system,  in 
which  I  think,  generally,  more  completion  is  permitted  (though 
this  often  because  more  was  possible)  in  the  inferior  than  in  the 
higher  portions  of  ornamental  subject.  Leaves,  and  birds,  and 
lizards  are  realised,  or  nearly  so ;  men  and  quadrupeds  formalised. 
For,  observe,  the  smaller  and  inferior  subject  remains  subordi- 


2M  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

nate,  however  richly  finished  ;  hut  the  human  sculpture  can  only 
be  subordinate  by  being  imperfect.  The  realisation  is,  however, 
in  all  cases,  dangerous  except  under  most  skilful  management, 
and  the  abstraction,  if  true  and  noble,  is  almost  always  more 
delightful.* 

§  x.  "What,  then,  is  noble  abstraction  ?  It  is  taking  first  the 
essential  elements  of  the  thing  to  be  represented,  then  the  rest  in 
the  order  of  importance  (so  that  wherever  we  pause  we  shall 
always  have  obtained  more  than  we  leave  behind),  and  using  any 
expedient  to  impress  what  we  want  upon  the  mind,  without 
caring  about  the  mere  literal  accuracy  of  such  expedient.  Sup- 
pose, for  instance,  we  have  to  represent  a  peacock  :  now  a  pea- 
cock has  a  graceful  neck,  so  has  a  swan ;  it  has  a  high  crest,  so 
has  a  cockatoo ;  it  has  a  long  tail,  so  has  a  bird  of  Paradise.  But 
the  whole  spirit  and  power  of  peacock  is  in  those  eyes  of  the  tail. 
It  is  true,  the  argus  pheasant,  and  one  or  two  more  birds,  have 
something  like  them,  but  nothing  for  a  moment  comparable  to 
them  in  brilliancy :  express  the  gleaming  of  the  blue  eyes  through 
the  plumage,  and  you  have  nearly  all  you  want  of  peacock,  but 
without  this,  nothing;  and  yet  those  eyes  are  not  in  relief;  a 
rigidly  true  sculpture  of  a  peacock's  form  could  have  no  eyes, — 
nothing  but  feathers.  Here,  then,  enters  the  stratagem  of  sculp- 
ture ;  you  must  cut  the  eyes  in  relief,  somehow  or  another  ;  see 
how  it  is  done  in  the  peacock  on  the  opposite  page ;  it  is  so  done 
by  nearly  all  the  Byzantine  sculptors  :  this  particular  peacock  is 
meant  to  be  seen  at  some  distance  (how  far  off  I  know  not,  for  it 
is  an  interpolation  in  the  building  where  it  occurs,  of  which 
more  hereafter),  but  at  all  events  at  a  distance  of  thirty  or  forty 
feet ;  I  have  put  it  close  to  you  that  you  may  see  plainly  the 
rude  rings  and  rods  which  stand  for  the  eyes  and  quills,  but  at 
the  just  distance  their  effect  is  perfect. 

§  xi.  And  the  simplicity  of  the  means  here  employed  may 
help  us,  both  to  some  clear  understanding  of  the  spirit  of  Nine- 

*  Vide  "  Seven  Lamps,"  Chap.  IV.  §  34. 


vjit, 


3.Kusk 


Ar.kenuan  1  i.T>i .379  .Broadway N'T. 


Decoration  luj  3>i3k§. 


PALAZZO    Di:i    BADOARI     PAPv.TE  CIPAZZI . 


decoration.  XXI.    TREATMENT    OF   ORNAMENT.  245 

vite  and  Egyptian  work,  and  to  some  perception  of  the  kind  of 
enfantillage  or  archaicism  to  which  it  may  be  possible,  even  in 
days  of  advanced  science,  legitimately  to  return.  The  architect 
lias  no  right,  as  we  said  before,  to  require  of  us  a  picture  of 
Titian's  in  order  to  complete  his  design ;  neither  has  he  the 
right  to  calculate  on  the  co-operation  of  perfect  sculptors,  in  sub- 
ordinate capacities.  Far  from  this ;  his  business  is  to  dispense 
with  such  aid  altogether,  and  to  devise  such  a  system  of  ornament 
as  shall  be  capable  of  execution  by  uninventive  and  even  unin- 
telligent workmen ;  for  supposing  that  he  required  noble  sculp- 
ture for  his  ornament,  how  far  would  this  at  once  limit  the  num- 
ber and  the  scale  of  possible  buildings  ?  Architecture  is  the 
work  of  nations  ;  but  we  cannot  have  nations  of  great  sculptors. 
Every  house  in  every  street  of  every  city  ought  to  be  good  archi- 
tecture, but  we  cannot  have  Flaxman  or  Thorwaldsen  at  work 
upon  it :  nor,  even  if  we  chose  only  to  devote  ourselves  to  our 
public  buildings,  could  the  mass  and  majesty  of  them  be  great, 
if  we  required  all  to  be  executed  by  great  men  ;  greatness  is  not 
to  be  had  in  the  required  quantity.  Giotto  may  design  a  cam- 
panile, but  he  cannot  carve  it ;  he  can  only  carve  one  or  two  of 
the  bas-reliefs  at  the  base  of  it.  And  with  every  increase  of  your 
fastidiousness  in  the  execution  of  your  ornament,  you  diminish 
the  possible  number  and  grandeur  of  your  buildings.  Do  not 
think  you  can  educate  your  workmen,  or  that  the  demand  for 
perfection  will  increase  the  supply :  educated  imbecility  and 
finessed  foolishness  are  the  worst  of  all  imbecilities  and  foolish- 
nesses ;  and  there  is  no  free-trade  measure  which  will  ever  lower 
the  price  of  brains, — there  is  no  California  of  common  sense. 
Exactly  in  the  degree  in  which  you  require  your  decoration  to  be 
wrought  by  thoughtful  men,  you  diminish  the  extent  and  num- 
ber of  architectural  works.  Your  business  as  an  architect,  is  to 
calculate  only  on  the  co-operation  of  inferior  men,  to  think  for 
them,  and  to  indicate  for  them  such  expressions  of  your  thoughts 
as  the  weakest  capacity  can  comprehend  and  the  feeblest  hand 
can  execute.     This  is  the  definition  of  the  purest  architectural 


246  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

abstractions.  They  are  the  deep  and  laborious  thoughts  of  the 
greatest  men,  put  into  such  easy  letters  that  they  can  be  written 
by  the  simplest.  They  are  expressions  of  tlie  mind  of  manhood 
by  the  hands  of  childhood. 

§  xii.  And  now  suppose  one  of  those  old  Kinevite  or  Egyptian 
builders,  with  a  couple  of  thousand  men — mud-bred,  onion-eating 
creatures — under  him,  to  be  set  to  work,  like  so  many  ants,  on 
his  temple  sculptures.  What  is  he  to  do  with  them  ?  He  can 
put  them  through  a  granitic  exercise  of  current  hand  ;  he  can 
teach  them  all  how  to  curl  hair  thoroughly  into  croche-coeurs,  as 
you  teach  a  bench  of  school-boys  how  to  shape  pothooks  ;  he  can 
teach  them  all  how  to  draw  long  eyes  and  straight  noses,  and 
how  to  copy  accurately  certain  well-defined  lines.  Then  he  fits 
his  own  great  design  to  their  capacities  ;  he  takes  out  of  king, 
or  lion,  or  god,  as  much  as  was  expressible  by  croche-coeurs  and 
granitic  pothooks  ;  he  throws  this  into  noble  forms  of  his  own 
•imagining,  and  having  mapped  out  their  lines  so  that  there  can 
be  no  possibility  of  error,  sets  his  two  thousand  men  to  work 
upon  them,  with  a  will,  and  so  many  onions  a  day. 

§  xni.  I  said  those  times  cannot  now  return.  We  have,  with 
Christianity,  recognised  the  individual  value  of  every  soul ;  and 
there  is  no  intelligence  so  feeble  but  that  its  single  ray  may  in 
some  sort  contribute  to  the  general  light.  This  is  the  glory  of 
Gothic  architecture,  that  every  jot  and  tittle,  every  j>oint  and 
niche  of  it,  affords  room,  fuel,  and  focus  for  individual  fire.  But 
you  cease  to  acknowledge  this,  and  you  refuse  to  accept  the  help 
of  the  lesser  mind,  if  you  require  the  work  to  be  all  executed  in 
a  great  manner.  Your  business  is  to  think  out  all  of  it  nobly,  to 
dictate  the  expression  of  it  as  far  as  your  dictation  can  assist  the 
less  elevated  intelligence ;  then  to  leave  this,  aided  and  taught 
as  far  as  may  be,  to  its  own  simple  act  and  effort ;  and  to  rejoice 
in  its  simplicity  if  not  in  its  power,  and  in  its  vitality  if  not  in 
its  science. 

§  xiv.  We  have,  then,  three  orders  of  ornament,  classed 
according  to  the  degrees  of  correspondence  of  the  executive  and 


decoration.  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   OENAMENT.  247 

conceptive  minds.  We  have  the  servile  ornament,  in  which  the 
executive  is  absolutely  subjected  to  the  inventive, — the  ornament 
of  the  great  Eastern  nations,  more  especially  Hamite,  and  all 
pre-Christian,  yet  thoroughly  noble  in  its  submissiveness.  Then 
we  have  the  mediaeval  system,  in  which  the  mind  of  the  inferior 
workman  is  recognised,  and  has  full  room  for  action,  but  is 
guided  and  ennobled  by  the  ruling  mind.  This  is  the  truly 
Christian  and  only  perfect  system.  Finally,  we  have  ornaments 
expressing  the  endeavour  to  equalise  the  executive  and  inventive, 
— endeavour  which  is  Renaissance  and  revolutionary,  and  de- 
structive of  all  noble  architecture. 

§  xv.  Thus  far,  then,  of  the  incompleteness  or  simplicity  of 
execution  necessary  in  architectural  ornament,  as  referred  to  the 
mind.  ISText  we  have  to  consider  that  which  is  required  when  it 
is  referred  to  the  sight,  and  the  various  modifications  of  treat- 
ment which  are  rendered  necessary  by  the  variation  of  its  dis- 
tance from  the  eye.  I  say  necessary  :  not  merely  expedient  or 
economical.  It  is  foolish  to  carve  what  is  to  be  seen  forty  feet 
off  with  the  delicacy  which  the  eye  demands  within  two  yards  ; 
not  merely  because  such  delicacy  is  lost  in  the  distance,  but  be- 
cause it  is  a  great  deal  worse  than  lost : — the  delicate  work  has 
actually  worse  effect  in  the  distance  than  rough  work.  This  is  a 
fact  well  known  to  painters,  and,  for  the  most  part,  acknowledged 
by  the  critics  of  painting,  namely,  that  there  is  a  certain  distance 
for  which  a  picture  is  painted  ;  and  that  the  finish,  which  is  de- 
lightful if  that  distance  be  small,  is  actually  injurious  if  the  dis- 
tance be  great:  and,  moreover,  that  there  is  a  particular  method 
of  handling  which  none  but  consummate  artists  reach,  which  has 
its  effects  at  the  intended  distance,  and  is  altogether  hieroglyphi- 
cal  and  unintelligible  at  any  other.  This,  I  say,  is  acknowledged 
in  painting,  but  it  is  not  practically  acknowledged  in  architecture ; 
nor  until  my  attention  was  specially  directed  to  it,  had  I  myself  any 
idea  of  the  care  with  which  this  great  question  was  studied  by 
the  mediaeval  architects.  On  my  first  careful  examination  of  the 
capitals  of  the  upper  arcade  of  the  Ducal  Palace  at  Venice,  I 


248  XXI.   TEEATMENT   OF   OENAMENT.  decoration. 

was  induced,  by  their  singular  inferiority  of  workmanship,  to 
suppose  them  posterior  to  those  of  the  lower  arcade.  It  was  not 
till  I  discovered  that  some  of  those  which  I  thought  the  worst 
above,  were  the  best  when  seen  from  below,  that  I  obtained  the 
key  to  this  marvellous  system  of  adaptation  ;  a  system  which  I 
afterwards  found  carried  out  in  every  building  of  the  great  times 
which  I  had  opportunity  of  examining. 

§  xvi.  There  are  two  distinct  modes  in  which  this  adaptation 
is  effected.  In  the  first,  the  same  designs  which  are  delicately 
worked  when  near  the  eye,  are  rudely  cut,  and  have  far  fewer 
details  when  they  are  removed  from  it.  In  this  method  it  is  not 
always  easy  to  distinguish  economy  from  skill,  or  slovenliness 
from  science.  But,  in  the  second  method,  a  different  kind  of 
design  is  adopted,  composed  of  fewer  parts  and  of  simpler  lines, 
and  this  is  cut  with  exquisite  precision.  This  is  of  course  the 
higher  method,  and  the  more  satisfactory  proof  of  purpose  ;  but 
an  equal  degree  of  imperfection  is  found  in  both  kinds  when 
they  are  seen  close  :  in  the  first,  a  bald  execution  of  a  perfect 
design  ;  in  the  second,  a  baldness  of  design  with  perfect  execu- 
tion. And  in  these  very  imperfections  lies  the  admirableness 
of  the  ornament. 

§  xvn.  It  may  be  asked  whether,  in  advocating  this  adaptation 
to  the  distance  of  the  eye,  I  obey  my  adopted  rule  of  observance 
of  natural  law.  Are  not  all  natural  things,  it  may  be  asked,  as 
lovely  near  as  far  away  ?  Nay,  not  so.  Look  at  the  clouds,  and 
watch  the  delicate  sculpture  of  their  alabaster  sides,  and  the 
rounded  lustre  of  their  magnificent  rolling.  They  are  meant  to 
be  beheld  far  away ;  they  were  shaped  for  their  place,  high  above 
your  head ;  approach  them,  and  they  fuse  into  vague  mists,  or 
whirl  away  in  fierce  fragments  of  thunderous  vapour.  Look 
at  the  crest  of  the  Alp,  from  the  far-away  plains  over  which  its 
light  is  cast,  whence  human  souls  have  communion  with  it  by 
their  myriads.  The  child  looks  up  to  it  in  the  dawn,  and  the 
husbandman  in  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  and  the  old 
man  in  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  and  it  is  to  th&m  all  as  the 


decoration.  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  249 

celestial  city  on  the  world's  horizon ;  dyed  with  the  depth  of 
heaven,  and  clothed  with  the  calm  of  eternity.  There  was  it  set, 
for  holy  dominion,  by  Him  who  marked  for  the  sun  his  journey, 
and  bade  the  moon  know  her  going  down.  It  was  built  for  its 
place  in  the  far-off  sky ;  approach  it,  and  as  the  sound  of  the 
voice  of  man  dies  away  about  its  foundations,  and  the  tide  of 
human  life,  shallowed  upon  the  vast  aerial  shore,  is  at  last  met 
by  the  Eternal  "  Here  shall  thy  waves  be  stayed,"  the  glory  of 
its  aspect  fades  into  blanched  fearfulness;  its  purple  walls  are 
rent  into  grisly  rocks,  its  silver  fretwork  saddened  into  wasting 
snow ;  the  storm-brands  of  ages  are  on  its  breast,  the  ashes  of  its 
own  ruin  lie  solemnly  on  its  white  raiment. 

Nor  in  such  instances  as  these  alone,  though  strangely  enough, 
the  discrepancy  between  apparent  and  actual  beauty  is  greater 
in  proportion  to  the  unapproachableness  of  the  object,  is  the  law 
observed.  For  every  distance  from  the  eye  there  is  a  peculiar 
kind  of  beauty,  or  a  different  system  of  lines  of  form ;  the  sight 
of  that  beauty  is  reserved  for  that  distance,  and  for  that  alone. 
If  you  approach  nearer,  that  kind  of  beauty  is  lost,  and  another 
succeeds,  to  be  disorganised  and  reduced  to  strange  and  incom- 
prehensible means  and  appliances  in  its  turn.  If  you  desire  to 
perceive  the  great  harmonies  of  the  form  of  a  rocky  mountain, 
you  must  not  ascend  upon  its  sides.  All  is  there  disorder  and 
accident,  or  seems  so ;  sudden  starts  of  its  shattered  beds  hither 
and  thither ;  ugly  struggles  of  unexpected  strength  from  under 
the  ground ;  fallen  fragments,  toppling  one  over  another  into 
more  helpless  fall.  Retire  from  it,  and,  as  your  eye  commands 
it  more  and  more,  as  you  see  the  ruined  mountain  world  with  a 
wider  glance,  behold !  dim  sympathies  begin  to  busy  themselves 
in  the  disjointed  mass ;  line  binds  itself  into  stealthy  fellowship 
with  line  ;  group  by  group,  the  helpless  fragments  gather  them- 
selves into  ordered  companies  ;  new  captains  of  hosts  and  masses 
of  battalions  become  visible,  one  by  one,  and  far  away  answers 
of  foot  to  foot,  and  of  bone  to  bone,  until  the  powerless  chaos  is 


250  XXI.    TEEATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

seen  risen  up  with  girded  loins,  and  not  one  piece  of  all  the 
unregarded  heap  could  now  be  spared  from  the  mystic  whole. 

§  xviii.  'Now  it  is  indeed  true  that  where  nature  loses  one 
kind  of  beauty,  as  you  approach  it,  she  substitutes  another ;  this 
is  worthy  of  her  infinite  power :  and,  as  we  shall  see,  art  can 
sometimes  follow  her  even  in  doing  this ;  but  all  I  insist  upon  at 
present  is,  that  the  several  eifects  of  nature  are  each  worked 
with  means  referred  to  a  particular  distance,  aud  producing 
their  effect  at  that  distance  only.  Take  a  singular  and  marked 
instance :  When  the  sun  rises  behind  a  ridge  of  pines,  and  those 
pines  are  seen  from  a  distance  of  a  mile  or  two,  against  his 
light,  the  whole  form  of  the  tree,  trunk,  branches,  and  all,  be- 
comes one  frostwork  of  intensely  brilliant  silver,  which  is  relieved 
against  the  clear  sky  like  a  burning  fringe,  for  some  distance  on 
either  side  of  the  sun.*  Now  suppose  that  a  person  who  had 
never  seen  pines  were,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  to  see  them 
under  this  strange  aspect,  and,  reasoning  as  to  the  means  by 
which  such  effect  could  be  produced,  laboriously  to  approach  the 
eastern  ridge,  how  would  he  be  amazed  to  find  that  the  fiery 
spectres  had  been  produced  by  trees  with  swarthy  and  grey 
trunks,  and  dark  green  leaves  !  We,  in  our  simplicity,  if  we  had 
been  required  to  produce  such  an  appearance,  should  have  built 
up  trees  of  chased  silver,  with  trunks  of  glass,  and  then  been 
grievously  amazed  to  find  that,  at  two  miles  off,  neither  silver  nor 
glass  were  any  more  visible  ;  but  nature  knew  better,  and  pre- 
pared for  her  fairy  work  with  the  strong  branches  and  dark 
leaves,  in  her  own  mysterious  wTay. 

*  Shakspeare  and  Wordsworth  (I  think  they  only)  have  noticed  this.     Shakspeare, 
in  Richard  II. : — 

"  But  when,  from  under  this  terrestrial  ball, 
He  fires  the  proud  tops  of  the  eastern  pines." 

And  Wordsworth,  in  one  of  his  minor  poems,  on  leaving  Italy  : 

"  My  thoughts  become  bright  like  yon  edging  of  pines 
On  the  steep's  lofty  verge — how  it  blackened  the  air  ! 
But,  touched  from  behind  by  the  sun,  it  now  shines 
With  threads  that  seem  part  of  his  own  silver  hair." 


decoration.  XXI.    TKEATMEXT   OF   OKNAMENT,  251 

§  xix.  ]STow  this  is  exactly  what  you  have  to  do  with  your  good 
ornament.  It  may  be  that  it  is  capable  of  being  approached,  as 
well  as  likely  to  be  seen  far  away,  and  then  it  ought  to  have 
microscopic  qualities,  as  the  pine  leaves  have,  which  will  bear 
approach.  But  your  calculation  of  its  purpose  is  for  a  glory  to 
be  produced  at  a  given  distance  ;  it  may  be  here,  or  may  be  there, 
but  it  is  a  given  distance ;  and  the  excellence  of  the  ornament 
depends  upon  its  fitting  that  distance,  and  being  seen  better  there 
than  anywhere  else,  and  having  a  particular  function  and  form 
which  it  can  only  discharge  and  assume  there.  You  are  never 
to  say  that  ornament  has  great  merit  because  "  you  cannot  see 
the  beauty  of  it  here  ;"  but,  it  has  great  merit  because  "  you  can 
see  its  beauty  here  onlyP  And  to  give  it  this  merit  is  just  about 
as  difficult  a  task  as  I  could  well  set  you.  I  have  above  noted 
the  two  ways  in  which  it  is  done :  the  one,  being  merely  rough 
cutting,  may  be  passed  over ;  the  other,  which  is  scientific  alter- 
ation of  design,  falls,  itself,  into  two  great  branches,  Simplifica- 
tion and  Emphasis. 

A  word  or  two  is  necessary  on  each  of  these  heads. 

§  xx.  When  an  ornamental  work  is  intended  to  be  seen  near, 
if  its  composition  be  indeed  fine,  the  subdued  and  delicate  por- 
tions of  the  design  lead  to,  and  unite,  the  energetic  parts,  and 
those  energetic  p;Hs  form  with  the  rest  a  whole,  in  which  their 
own  immediate  relations  to  each  other  are  not  perceived.  Re- 
move this  design  to  a  distance,  and  the  connecting  delicacies 
vanish,  the  energies  alone  remain,  now  either  disconnected  alto- 
gether, or  assuming  with  each  other  new  relations,  which,  not 
having  been  intended  by  the  designer,  will  probably  be  painful. 
There  is  a  like,  and  a  more  palpable,  effect,  in  the  retirement  of 
a  band  of  music  in  which  the  instruments  are  of  very  unequal 
powers  ;  the  fluting  and  fifeing  expire,  the  drumming  remains, 
and  that  in  a  painful  arrangement,  as  demanding  something 
which  is  unheard.  In  like  manner,  as  the  designer  at  arm's 
length  removes  or  elevates  his  work,  fine  gradations,  and 
roundings,  and  incidents,  vanish,  and  a  totally  unexpected  ar- 


252  XXI.   TEEATMENT   OF   OENAMENT.  decoration. 

rangement  is  established  between  the  remainder  of  the  markings, 
certainly  confused,  and  in  all  probability  painful. 

§  xxi.  The  art  of  architectural  design  is  therefore,  first,  the 
preparation  for  this  beforehand,  the  rejection  of  all  the  delicate 
passages  as  worse  than  useless,  and  the  fixing  the  thought  upon 
the  arrangement  of  the  features  which  will  remain  visible  far 
away.  Nor  does  this  always  imply  a  diminution  of  resource ; 
for,  while  it  may  be  assumed  as  a  law  that  fine  modulation  of 
surface  in  light  becomes  quickly  invisible  as  the  object  retires, 
there  are  a  softness  and  mystery  given  to  the  harder  markings, 
which  enable  them  to  be  safely  used  as  media  of  expression. 
There  is  an  exquisite  example  of  this  use,  in  the  head  of  the 
Adam  of  the  Ducal  Palace.  It  is  only  at  the  height  of  17  or  18 
feet  above  the  eye  ;  nevertheless,  the  sculptor  felt  it  was  no  use 
to  trouble  himself  about  drawing  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  or  the 
lines  of  the  lips,  delicately,  at  that  distance  ;  his  object  has  been 
to  mark  them  clearly,  and  to  prevent  accidental  shadows  from 
concealing  them,  or  altering  their  expression.  The  lips  are  cut 
thin  and  sharp,  so  that  their  line  cannot  be  mistaken,  and  a  good 
deep  drill-hole  struck  into  the  angle  of  the  mouth ;  the  eye  is 
anxious  and  questioning,  and  one  is  surprised,  from  below,  to 
perceive  a  kind  of  darkness  in  the  iris  of  it,  neither  like  colour, 
nor  like  a  circular  furrow.  The  expedient  can  only  be  dis- 
covered by  ascending  to  the  level  of  the  head  ;  it  is  one  which 
would  have  been  quite  inadmissible  except  in  distant  work, 
six  drill-holes  cut  into  the  iris,  round  a  central  one  for  the  pupil. 

§  xxn.  By  just  calculation,  like  this,  of  the  means  at  our  dis- 
posal, by  beautiful  arrangement  of  the  prominent  features,  and 
by  choice  of  different  subjects  for  different  places,  choosing  the 
broadest  forms  for  the  farthest  distance,  it  is  possible  to  give  the 
impression,  not"  only  of  perfection,  but  of  an  exquisite  delicacy, 
to  the  most  distant  ornament.  And  this  is  the  true  sign  of  the 
right  having  been  done,  and  the  utmost  possible  power  attained : 
— The  spectator  should  be  satisfied  to  stay  in  his  place,  feeling 
the  decoration,  wherever  it  may  be,  equally  rich,  full,  and  lovely : 


decoration.  XXI.   TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  253 

not  desiring  to  climb  the  steeples  in  order  to  examine  it,  but 
sure  that  he  has  it  all,  where  he  is.  Perhaps  the  capitals  of  the 
cathedral  of  Genoa  are  the  best  instances  of  absolute  perfection 
in  this  kind  :  seen  from  below,  they  appear  as  rich  as  the  frosted 
silver  of  the  Strada  degli  Orefici ;  and  the  nearer  you  approach 
them,  the  less  delicate  they  seem. 

§  xxm.  This  is,  however,  not  the  only  mode,  though  the  best, 
in  which  ornament  is  adapted  for  distance.  The  other  is  empha- 
sis,— the  unnatural  insisting  upon  explanatory  lines,  where  the 
subject  would  otherwise  become  unintelligible.  It  is  to  be  re- 
membered that,  by  a  deep  and  narrow  incision,  an  architect  has 
the  power,  at  least  in  sunshine,  of  drawing  a  black  line  on  stone, 
just  as  vigorously  as  it  can  be  drawn  with  chalk  on  grey  paper ; 
and  that  he  may  thus,  wherever  and  in  the  degree  that  he  chooses, 
substitute  chalk  sketching  for  sculpture.  They  are  curiously 
mingled  by  the  Romans.  The  bas-reliefs  on  the  Arc  d'Orange 
are  small,  and  would  be  confused,  though  in  bold  relief,  if  they 
depended  for  intelligibility  on  the  relief  only ;  but  each  figure  is 
outlined  by  a  strong  incision  at  its  edge  into  the  background,  and 
all  the  ornaments  on  the  armour  are  simply  drawn  with  incised 
lines,  and  not  cut  out  at  all.  A  similar  use  of  lines  is  made  by 
the  Gothic  nations  in  all  their  early  sculpture,  and  with  delicious 
effect.  Now,  to  draw  a  mere  pattern — as,  for  instance,  the  bear- 
ings of  a  shield — with  these  simple  incisions,  would,  I  suppose, 
occupy  an  able  sculptor  twenty  minutes  or  half  an  hour ;  and 
the  pattern  is  then  clearly  seen,  under  all  circumstances  of  light 
and  shade  ;  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  it,  and  no  missing  it. 
To  carve  out  the  bearings  in  due  and  finished  relief  would  occupy 
a  long  summer's  day,  and  the  results  would  be  feeble  and  indeci- 
pherable in  the  best  lights,  and  in  some  lights  totally  and  hope- 
lessly invisible,  ignored,  non-existent.  Now  the  Renaissance 
architects,  and  our  modern  ones,  despise  the  simple  expedient  of 
the  rough  Roman  or  barbarian.  They  do  not  care  to  be  under- 
stood. They  care  only  to  speak  finely,  and  be  thought  great  ora- 
tors, if  one  could  only  hear  them.     So  I  leave  you  to  choose  be- 


254  XXI.   TKEATMENT   OF   OKNAMENT.  decoration. 

tween  the  old  men,  who  took  minutes  to  tell  things  plainly,  and 
the  modern  men,  who  take  days  to  tell  them  unintelligibly. 

§  xxiv.  All  expedients  of  this  kind,  both  of  simplification  and 
energy,  for  the  expression  of  details  at  a  distance  where  their 
actual  forms  would  have  been  invisible,  but  more  especially  this 
linear  method,  I  shall  call  Proutism  ;  for  the  greatest  master  of 
the  art  in  modern  times  has  been  Samuel  Prout.  He  actually 
takes  up  buildings  of  the  later  times  in  which  the  ornament  has 
been  too  refined  for  its  place,  and  translates  it  into  the  energised 
linear  ornament  of  earlier  art :  and  to  this  power  of  taking  the 
life  and  essence  of  decoration,  and  putting  it  into  a  perfectly  in- 
telligible form,  when  its  own  fulness  would  have  been  confused, 
is  owing  to  the  especial  power  of  his  drawings.  Nothing  can  be 
more  closely  analogous  than  the  method  with  which  an  old  Lom- 
bard uses  his  chisel,  and  that  with  which  Prout  uses  the  reed- 
pen  ;  and  we  shall  see  presently  farther  correspondence  in  their 
feeling  about  the  enrichment  of  luminous  surfaces. 

§  xxv.  Now,  all  that  has  been  hitherto  said  refers  to  ornament 
whose  distance  is  fixed,  or  nearly  so  ;  as  when  it  is  at  any  con- 
siderable height  from  the  ground,  supposing  the  spectator  to  de- 
sire to  see  it,  and  to  get  as  near  it  as  he  can.  But  the  distance 
of  ornament  is  never  fixed  to  the  general  spectator.  The  tower 
of  a  cathedral  is  bound  to  look  well,  ten  miles  oif,  or  -Rvq  miles, 
or  half  a  mile,  or  within  fifty  yards.  The  ornaments  of  its  top 
have  fixed  distances,  compared  with  those  of  its  base  ;  but  quite 
unfixed< distances  in  their  relation  to  the  great  world:  and  the 
ornaments  of  the  base  have  no  fixed  distance  at  all.  They  are 
bound  to  look  well  from  the  other  side  of  the  cathedral  close,  and 
to  look  equally  well,  or  better,  as  we  enter  the  cathedral  door. 
How  are  we  to  manage  this  ? 

§  xxvi.  As  nature  manages  it.  I  said  above,  §  xvn.,  that  for 
every  distance  from  the  eye  there  was  a  different  system  of  form 
in  all  natural  objects  :  this  is  to  be  so  then  in  architecture.  The 
lesser  ornament  is  to  be  grafted  on  the  greater,  and  third  or 
fourth  orders  of  ornaments  upon  this  again,  as  need  may  be,  until 


decoration.  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   OKNAMENT.  255 

• 

we  reach  the  limits  of  possible  sight;  each  order  of  ornament 

being  adapted  for  a  different  distance  :  first,  for  example,  the 

great  masses, — the  buttresses  and  stories  and  black  windows  and 

broad  cornices  of  the  tower,  which  give  it  make,  and  organism, 

as  it  rises  over  the  horizon,  half  a  score  of  miles  away  :  then  the 

... 
traceries  and  shafts  and  pinnacles,  which  give  it  richness  as  we 

approach :  then  the  niches  and  statues  and  knops  and  flowers, 

which  we  can  only  see  when  we  stand  beneath  it.      At  this 

third  order  of  ornament,  we  may  pause,  in  the  upper  portions ; 

but  on  the  roofs  of  the  niches,  and  the  robes  of  the  statues,  and 

the  rolls  of  the  mouldings,  comes  a  fourth  order  of  ornament,  as 

delicate  as  the  eye  can  follow,  when  any  of  these  features  may  be 

approached. 

§  xxvii.  All  good  ornamentation  is  thus  arborescent,  as  it  were, 
one  class  of  it  branching  out  of  another  and  sustained  by  it ; 
and  its  nobility  consists  in  this,  that  whatever  order  or  class  of 
it  we  may  be  contemplating,  we  shall  find  it  subordinated  to  a 
greater,  simpler,  and  more  powerful ;  and  if  we  then  contemplate 
the  greater  order,  we  shall  find  it  again  subordinated  to  a 
greater  still ;  until  the  greatest  can  only  be  quite  grasped  by 
retiring  to  the  limits  of  distance  commanding  it. 

And  if  this  subordination  be  not  complete,  the  ornament  is 
bad  :  if  the  figurings  and  chasings  and  borclerings  of  a  dress  be 
not  subordinated  to  the  folds  of  it, — if  the  folds  are  not  subor- 
dinate to  the  action  and  mass  of  the  figure, — if  this  action  and 
mass  not  to  the  divisions  of  the  recesses  and  shafts  among  which 
it  stands, — if  these  not  to  the  shadows  of  the  great  arches  and 
buttresses  of  the  whole  building,  in  each  case  there  is  error ; 
much  more  if  all  be  contending  with  each  other  and  striving  for 
attention  at  the  same  time. 

§  xxviii.  It  is  nevertheless  evident,  that,  however  jjerfect  this 
distribution,  there  cannot  be  orders  adapted  to  every  distance  of 
the  spectator.  Between  the  ranks  of  ornament  there  must  always 
be  a  bold  separation ;  and  there  must  be  many  intermediate  dis- 
tances, where  we  are  too  far  off  to  see  the  lesser  rank  clearly,  and 


256  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  decoration. 

yet  too  near  to  grasp  the  next  higher  rank  wholly :  and  at  all 
these  distances  the  spectator  will  feel  himself  ill-placed,  and  will 
desire  to  go  nearer  or  farther  away.  This  must  be  the  case  in  all 
noble  work,  natural  or  artificial.  It  is  exactly  the  same  with 
respect  to  Rouen  cathedral  or  the  Mont  Blanc.  We  like  to  see 
them  from  the  other  side  of  the  Seine,  or  of  the  lake  of  Geneva ; 
from  the  Marche  aux  Fleurs,  or  the  Valley  of  Chamouni; 
from  the  parapets  of  the  apse,  or  the  crags  of  the  Montague  de 
la  Cote :  but  there  are  intermediate  distances  which  dissatisfy  us 
in  either  case,  and  from  which  one  is  in  haste  either  to  advance 
or  to  retire. 

§xxix.  Directly  opposed  to  this  ordered,  disciplined,  well 
officered,  and  variously  ranked  ornament,  this  type  of  divine,  and 
therefore  of  all  good  human  government,  is  the  democratic  orna- 
ment, in  which  all  is  equally  influential,  and  has  equal  office  and 
authority ;  that  is  to  say,  none  of  it  any  office  nor  authority,  but 
a  life  of  continual  struggle  for  independence  and  notoriety,  or  of 
gambling  for  chance  regards.  The  English  perpendicular  work 
is  by  far  the  worst  of  this  kind  that  I  know ;  its  main  idea,  or 
decimal  fraction  of  an  idea,  being  to  cover  its  walls  with  dull, 
successive,  eternity  of  reticulation,  to  fill  with  equal  foils  the  equal 
interstices  between  the  equal  bars,  and  charge  the  interminable 
blanks  with  statues  and  rosettes,  invisible  at  a  distance,  and 
uninteresting  near. 

The  early  Lombardic,  Veronese,  and  Norman  work  is  the 
exact  reverse  of  this  ;  being  divided  first  into  large  masses,  and 
these  masses  covered  with  minute  chasing  and  surface  work, 
which  fill  them  with  interest,  and  yet  do  not  disturb  nor  divide 
their  greatness.  The  lights  are  kept  broad  and  bright,  and  yet 
are  found  on  near  approach  to  be  charged  with  intricate  design. 
This,  again,  is  a  part  of  the  great  system  of  treatment  which  I 
shall  hereafter  call  "  Proutism ;"  much  of  what  is  thought 
mannerism  and  imperfection  in  Prout's  work,  being  the  result  of 
his  determined  resolution  that  minor  details  shall  never  break  up 
his  large  masses  of  light. 


decoration.  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  257 

§  xxx.  Such  are  the  main  principles  to  be  observed  in  the 
adaptation  ©f  ornament  to  the  sight.  "We  have  lastly  to  inquire 
by  what  method,  and  in  what  quantities,  the  ornament,  thus 
adapted  to  mental  contemplation,  and  prepared  for  its  physical 
position,  may  most  wisely  be  arranged.  I  think  the  method  ' 
ought  first  to  be  considered,  and  the  quantity  last;  for  the 
adviseable  quantity  depends  upon  the  method. 

§  xxxi.  It  was  said  above,  that  the  proper  treatment  or 
arrangement  of  ornament  was  that  which  expressed  the  laws  and 
ways  of  Deity.  Now,  the  subordination  of  visible  orders  to  each 
other,  just  noted,  is  one  expression  of  these.  But  there  may  also 
— must  also — be  a  subordination  and  obedience  of  the  parts  of 
each  order  to  some  visible  law,  out  of  itself,  but  having  reference 
to  itself  only  (not  to  any  upper  order) :  some  law  which  shall  not 
oppress,  but  guide,  limit,  and  sustain. 

In  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  second  volume  of  "  Modern 
Painters,"  the  reader  will  find  that  I  traced  one  part  <?f  the 
beauty  of  God's  creation  to  the  expression  of  a  5^Z/-restrained 
liberty :  that  is  to  say,  the  image  of  that  perfection  of  divine 
action,  which,  though  free  to  work  in  arbitrary  methods,  works 
always  in  consistent  methods,  called  by  us  Laws. 

Now,  correspondingly,  we  find  that  when  these  natural  objects 
are  to  become  subjects  of  the  art  of  man,  their  perfect  treatment 
is  an  image  of  the  perfection  of  human  action :  a  voluntary  sub- 
mission to  divine  law. 

It  was  suggested  to  me  but  lately,  by  the  friend  to  whose 
originality  of  thought  I  have  before  expressed  my  obligations, 
Mr.  Newton,  that  the  Greek  pediment,  with  its  enclosed  sculptures, 
represented  to  the  Greek  mind  the  law  of  Fate,  confining  human 
action  within  limits  not  to  be  overpassed.  I  do  not  believe  the 
Greeks  ever  distinctly  thought  of  this  ;  but  the  instinct  of  all  the 
human  race,  since  the  world  began,  agrees  in  some  expression  of 
such  limitation  as  one  of  the  first  necessities  of  good  ornament.* 

*  Some  valuable  remarks  on  this  subject  will  be  found  in  a  notice  of  the  "  Seven 
Lamps"  in  the  British  Quarterly  for  August,  1849.  I  think,  however,  thAvriter 
attaches  too  great  importance  to  one  out  of  many  ornamental  necessities. 

17 


258  XXI.   TEEATMENT   OF   OKNAMENT.  decoration. 

And  this  expression  is  heightened,  rather  'than  diminished,  when 
some  portion  of  the  design  slightly  breaks  the  law  ta$ which  the 
rest  is  subjected  ;  it  is  like  expressing  the  nse  of  miracles  in  the 
divine  government ;  or,  perhaps,  in  slighter  degrees,  the  relaxing 
of  a  law,  generally  imperative,  in  compliance  with  some  more 
imperative  need — the  hungering  of  David.  How  eagerly  this 
special  infringement  of  a  general  law  was  sometimes  sought  by 
the  mediseval  workmen,  I  shall  be  frequently  able  to  point  out 
to  the  reader ;  but  I  remember  just  now  a  most  curious  instance, 
in  an  archivolt  of  a  house  in  the  Corte  del  Eemer  close  to  the 
Hialto  at  Yenice.  It  is  composed  of  a  wreath  of  flower- work — a 
constant  Byzantine  design — with  an  animal  in  each  coil ;  the 
whole  enclosed  between  two  fillets.  Each  animal,  leaping  or 
eating,  scratching  or  biting,  is  kept  nevertheless  strictly  within 
its  coil,  and  between  the  fillets.  Not  the  shake  of  an  ear,  not  the 
tip  of  a  tail,  overpasses  this  appointed  line,  through  a  series  of 
some  five-and-twenty  or  thirty  animals  ;  until,  on  a  sudden,  and 
by  mutual  consent,  two  little  beasts  (not  looking,  for  the  rest, 
more  rampant  than  the  others),  one  on  each  side,  lay  their  small 
paws  across  the  enclosing  fillet  at  exactly  the  same  point  of  its 
course,  and  thus  break  the  continuity  of  its  line.  Two  ears  of 
corn,  or  leaves,  do  the  same  thing  in  the  mouldings  round  the 
northern  door  of  the  Baptistery  at  Florence. 

§  xxxn.  Observe,  however,  and  this  is  of  the  utmost  possible 
importance,  that  the  value  of  this  type  does  not  consist  in  the 
mere  shutting  of  the  ornament  into  a  certain  space,  but  in  the 
acknowledgment  hy  the  ornament  of  the  fitness  of  the  limitation ; 
— of  its  own  perfect  willingness  to  submit  to  it ;  nay,  of  a  predis- 
position in  itself  to  fall  into  the  ordained  form,  without  any  direct 
expression  of  the  command  to  do  so ;  an  anticipation  of  the 
authority,  and  an  instant  and  willing  submission  to  it,  in  every 
fibre  and  spray :  not  merely  willing^  but  happy  submission,  as 
being  pleased  rather  than  vexed  to  have  so  beautiful  a  law 
suggested  to  it,  and  one  which  to  follow  is  so  justly  in  accord- 
ance with  its  own  nature.     You  must  not  cut  out  a  branch  of 


DECORATION.  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  259 

hawthorn  as  it  grows,  and  rale  a  triangle  round  it,  and  suppose 
that  it  is  then  submitted  to  law.  Not  a  bit  of  it.  It  is  only  put 
in  a  cage,  and  will  look  as  if  it  must  get  out,  for  its  life,  or  wither 
in  the  confinement.  But  the  spirit  of  triangle  must  be  put  into 
the  hawthorn.  It  must  suck  in  isoscelesism  with  its  sap.  Thorn 
and  blossom,  leaf  and  spray,  must  grow  with  an  awful  sense  of 
triangular  necessity  upon  them,  for  the  guidance  of  which  they  are 
to  be  thankful,  and  to  grow  all  the  stronger  and  more  gloriously. 
And  though  there  may  be  a  transgression  here  and  there,  and  an 
adaptation  to  some  other  need,  or  a  reaching  forth  to  some  other 
end  greater  e\*en  than  the  triangle,  yet  this  liberty  is  to  be 
always  accepted  under  a  solemn  sense  of  special  permission ;  and 
when  the  full  form  is  reached  and  the  entire  submission  expressed, 
and  every  blossom  has  a  thrilling  sense  of  its  responsibility  down 
into  its  tiniest  stamen,  you  may  take  your  terminal  line  away 
if  you  will.  No  need  for  it  any  more.  The  commandment  is 
written  on  the  heart  of  the  thing. 

§  xxxin.  Then,  besides  this  obedience  to  external  law,  there 
is  the  obedience  to  internal  headship,  which  constitutes  the  unity 
of  ornament,  of  which  I  think  enough  has  been  said  for  my 
present  purpose  in  the  chapter  on  Unity  in  the  second  vol.  of 
"  Modern  Painters."  But  I  hardly  know  whether  to  arrange  as 
an  expression  of  a  divine  law,  or  a  representation  of  a*  physical 
fact,  the  alternation  of  shade  with  light  which,  in  equal  succes- 
sion, forms  one  of  the  chief  elements  of  continuous  ornament,  and 
in  some  peculiar  ones,  such  as  dentils  and  billet  mouldings,  is  the 
source  of  their  only  charm.  The  opposition  of  good  and  evil,  the 
antagonism  of  the  entire  human  system  (so  ably  worked  out  by 
Lord  Lindsay),  the  alternation  of  labour  with  rest,  the  mingling 
of  life  with  death,  or  the  actual  physical  fact  of  the  division  of 
light  from  darkness,  and  of  the  falling  and  rising  of  night  and 
day,  are  all  typified  or  represented  by  these  chains  of  shade  and 
light,  of  which  the  eye  never  wearies,  though  their  true  meaning 
may  never  occur  to  the  thoughts. 

§  xxxrv.  The  next   question  respecting  the  arrangement  of 


260  XXI.    TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  DECORATION. 

ornament  is  one  closely  connected  also  with,  its  quantity.  The 
system  of  creation  is  one  in  which  "  God's  creatures  leap  not,  but 
express  a  feast,  where  all  the  guests  sit  close,  and  nothing  wants." 
It  is  also  a  feast,  where  there  is  nothing  redundant.  So,  then,  in 
distributing  our  ornament,  there  must  never  be  any  sense  of  gap 
or  blank,  neither  any  sense  of  there  being  a  single  member,  or 
fragment  of  a  member,  which  could  be  spared.  Whatever  has 
nothing  to  do,  whatever  could  go  without  being  missed,  is  not 
ornament;  it  is  deformity  and  encumbrance.  Away  with  it. 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  care  must  be  taken  either  to  diffuse  the 
ornament  which  we  permit,  in  due  relation  over  Uhe  whole  build- 
ing, or  so  to  concentrate  it,  as  never  to  leave  a  sense  of  its  having 
got  into  knots,  and  curdled  upon  some  points,  and  left  the  rest  of 
the  building  whey.  It  is  very  difficult  to  give  the  rules,  or  analyse 
the  feelings,  which  should  direct  us  in  this  matter:  for  some 
shafts  may  be  carved  and  others  left  unfinished,  and  that  with 
advantage  ;  some  windows  may  be  jewelled  like  Aladdin's,  and 
one  left  plain,  and  still  with  advantage ;  the  door  or  doors,  or  a 
single  turret,'  or  the  whole  western  facade  of  a  church,  or  the 
apse  or  transept,  may  be  made  special  subjects  of  decoration, 
and  the  rest  left  plain,  and  still  sometimes  with  advantage.  But 
in  all  such  cases  there  is  either  sign  of  that  feeling  which  I  advo- 
cated in  the  First  Chapter  of  the  "  Seven  Lamps,"  the  desire  of 
rather  doing  some  portion  of  the  building  as  we  would  have  it, 
and  leaving  the  rest  plain,  than  doing  the  whole  imperfectly  ;  or 
else  there  is  choice  made  of  some  important  feature,  to  which,  as 
more  honourable  than  the  rest,  the  decoration  is  confined.  The 
evil  is  when,  without  system,  and  without  preference  of  the  nobler 
members,  the  ornament  alternates  between  sickly  luxuriance  and 
sudden  blankness.  In  many  of  our  Scotch  and  English  abbeys, 
especially  Melrose,  this  is  painfully  felt ;  but  the  worst  instance 
I  have  ever  seen  is  the  window  in  the  side  of  the  arch  under  the 
Wellington  statue,  next  St.  George's  Hospital.  In  the  first  place, 
a  window  has  no  business  there  at  all ;  in  the  second,  the  bars  of 
the  window  are  not  the  proper  place  for  decoration,  especially 


decoration.  XXI.   TREATMENT   OF   ORNAMENT.  261 

wavy  decoration,  which  one  instantly  fancies  of  cast  iron ;  in  the 
third,  the  richness  of  the  ornament  is  a  mere  patch  and  eruption 
upon  the  wall,  and  one  hardly  knows  whether  to  be  most  irri- 
tated at  the  affectation  of  severity  in  the  rest,  or  at  the  vain  luxu- 
riance of  the  dissolute  parallelogram. 

§  xxxv.  Finally,  as  regards  quantity  of  ornament,  I  have  al- 
ready said,  again  and  again,  you  cannot  have  too  much  if  it  be 
good ;  that  is,  if  it  be  thoroughly  united  and  harmonised  by  the 
laws  hitherto  insisted  upon.  But  you  may  easily  have  too  much 
if  you  have  more  than  you  have  sense  to  manage.  For  with  every 
added  order  of  ornament  increases  the  difficulty  of  discipline.  It 
is  exactly  the  same  as  in  war :  you  cannot,  as  an  abstract  law, 
have  too  many  soldiers,  but  you  may  easily  have  more  than  the 
country  is  able  to  sustain,  or  than  your  generalship  is  competent 
to  command.  And  every  regiment  which  you  cannot  manage 
will,  on  the  day  of  battle,  be  in  your  way,  and  encumber  the 
movements  it  is  not  in  disposition  to  sustain. 

§  xxxvi.  As  an  architect,  therefore,  you  are  modestly  to  measure 
your  capacity  of  governing  ornament.  Remember,  its  essence, — 
its  being  ornament  at  all,  consists  in  its  being  governed.  Lose 
your  authority  over  it,  let  it  command  you,  or  lead  you,  or  dic- 
tate to  you  in  any  wise,  and  it  is  an  offence,  an  incumbrance, 
and  a  dishonour.  And  it  is  always  ready  to  do  this  ;  wild  to  get 
the  bit  in  its  teeth,  and  rush  forth  on  its  own  devices.  Measure, 
therefore,  your  strength ;  and  as  long  as  there  is  no  chance  of 
mutiny,  add  soldier  to  soldier,  battalion  to  battalion  ;  but  be  as- 
sured that  all  are  heartily  in  the  cause,  and  that  there  is  not  one 
of  whose  position  you  are  ignorant,  or  whose  service  you  could 
spare. 


262 


CHAPTEE  XXII. 


THE   ANGLE. 


§  i.  We  have  now  examined  the  treatment  and  specific  kinds  of 
ornament  at  our  command.  We  have  lastly  to  note  the  fittest 
places  for  their  disposal.  Not  but  that  all  kinds  of  ornament  are 
used  in  all  places ;  but  there  are  some  parts  of  the  building, 
which,  without  ornament,  are  more  painful  than  others,  and 
some  which  wear  ornament  more  gracefully  than  others ;  so  that, 
although  an  able  architect  will  always  be  finding  out  some  new 
and  unexpected  modes  of  decoration,  and  fitting  his  ornament 
into  wonderful  places  where  it  is  least  expected,  there  are,  never- 
theless, one  or  two  general  laws  which  may  be  noted  respecting 
every  one  of  the  parts  of  a  building,  laws  not  (except  a  few) 
imperative,  like  those  of  construction,  but  yet  generally  expe- 
dient, and  good  to  be  understood,  if  it  were  only  that  we  might 
enjoy  the  brilliant  methods  in  which  they  are  sometimes  broken. 
I  shall  note,  however,  only  a  few  of  the  simplest ;  to  trace  them 
into  their  ramifications,  and  class  in  due  order  the  known  or 
possible  methods  of  decoration  for  each  part  of  a  building,  would 
alone  require  a  large  volume,  and  be,  I  think,  a  somewhat  use- 
less work ;  for  there  is  often  a  high  pleasure  in  the  very  unex- 
pectedness of  the  ornament,  which  would  be  destroyed  by  too 
elaborate  an  arrangement  of  its  kinds. 

*§  ii.  I  think  that  the  reader  must,  by  this  time,  so  thoroughly 
understand  the  connection  of  the  parts  of  a  building,  that  I  may 
class  together,  in  treating  of  decoration,  several  parts  which  I 
kept  separate  in  speaking  of  construction.  Thus,  I  shall  put 
under  one  head  (a)  the  base  of  the  wall  and  of  the  shaft ;  then 
(b)  the  wall  veil  and  shaft  itself;  then  (c)  the  cornice  and  capital; 


DECORATION. 


XXII.    THE   ANGLE.  263 


then  (d)  the  jamb  and  archivolt,  including  the  arches  both  over 
shafts  and  apertures,  and  the  jambs  of  apertures,  which  are 
closely  connected  with  their  archivolts ;  finally  (e)  the  roof,  in- 
cluding the  real  roof,  and  the  minor  roofs  or  gables  of  pinnacles 
and  arches.  I  think,  under  these  divisions,  all  may  be  arranged 
which  is  necessary  to  be  generally  stated ;  for  tracery  decorations 
or  aperture  fillings  are  but  smaller  forms  of  application  of  the 
arch,  and  the  cusps  are  merely  smaller  spandrils ;  while  but- 
tresses have,  as  far  as  I  know,  no  specific  ornament.  The  best 
are  those  which  have  least ;  and  the  little  they  have  resolves  itself 
into  pinnacles,  which  are  common  to  other  portions  of  the  build- 
ing, or  into  small  shafts,  arches,  and  niches,  of  still  more  general 
applicability.  We  shall  therefore  have  only  five  divisions  to 
examine  in  succession,  from  foundation  to  roof. 

§  in.  But  in  the  decoration  of  these  several  parts,  certain  mi- 
nor conditions  of  ornament  occur  which  are  of  perfectly  general 
application.  For  instance,  whether  in  archivolts,  jambs,  or  but- 
tresses, or  in  square  piers,  or  at  the  extremity  of  the  entire  build- 
ing, we  necessarily  have  the  awkward  (moral  or  architectural) 
feature,  the  corner.  How  to  turn  a  corner  gracefully  becomes, 
therefore,  a  perfectly  general  question  ;  to  be  examined  without 
reference  to  any  particular  part  of  the  edifice. 

§  iv.  Again,  the  furrows  and  ridges  by  which  bars  of  parallel 
light  and  shade  are  obtained,  whether  these  are  employed  in 
arches,  or  jambs,  or  bases,  or  cornices,  must  of  necessity  present 
one  or   more    of 

six  forms :  square  Fig.  LI. 

■projection,  a  (Fig.Hin 

LI),    or     square1  r^   !  ^  V-1,  jrTi" 

recess,    &,    sharp         a  I  c  d  e  f 

projection,    c,   or 

sharp  recess,  d,  curved  projection,  <?,  or  curved  recess,/.  What 
odd  curves  the  projection  or  recess  may  assume,  or  how  these 
different  conditions  may  be  mixed  and  run  into  one  another,  is 


264 


XXII.   THE  ANGLE.  decoration. 


not  our  present  business.  "We  note  only  the  six  distinct  kinds 
or  types. 

]STow,  when  these  ridges  or  furrows  are  on  a  small  scale  they 
often  themselves  constitute  all  the  ornament  required  for  larger 
features,  and  are  left  smooth  cut ;  but  on  a  very  large  scale  they 
are  apt  to  become  insipid,  and  they  require  a  sub-ornament  of 
their  own,  the  consideration  of  which  is,  of  course,  in-great  part, 
general,  and  irrespective  of  the  place  held  by  the  mouldings 
in  the  building  itself :  which  consideration  I  think  we  had'  better 
undertake  first  of  all. 

§  v.  But  before  we  come  to  particular  examination  of  these 
minor  forms,  let  us  see  how  far  we  can  simplify  it.  Look  back 
to  Fig.  LI.,  above.  There  are  distinguished  in  it  six  forms  of 
moulding.  Of  these,  c  is  nothing  but  a  small  corner ;  but,  for 
convenience  sake,  it  is  better  to  call  it  an  edge,  and  to  consider 
its  decoration  together  with  that  of  the  member  #,  which  is 
called  a  fillet ;  while  e,  which  I  shall  call  a  roll  (because  I  do  not 
choose  to  assume  that  it  shall  be  only  of  the  semicircular  section 
here  given),  is  also  best  considered  together  with  its  relative  re- 
cess, f  j  and  because  the  shape  of  a  recess  is  of  no  great  conse- 
quence, I  shall  class  all  the  three  recesses  together,  and  we  shall 
thus  have  only  three  subjects  for  separate  consideration : — 

1.  The  Angle. 

2.  The  Edge  and  Fillet. 

3.  The  Boll  and  Eecess. 

§  vi.  There  are  two  other  general  forms  which  may  probably 
occur  to  the  reader's  mind,  namely,  the  ridge  (as  of  a  roof), 
which  is  a  corner  laid  on  its  back,  or  sloping, — a  supine  corner, 
decorated  in  a  very  different  manner  from  a  stiff  upright  corner : 
and  the  point,  which  is  a  concentrated  corner,  and  has  wonder- 
fully elaborate  decorations  all  to  its  insignificant  self,  finials,  and 
spikes,  and  I  know  not  what  more.  But  both  these  conditions- 
are  so  closely  connected  with  roofs  (even  the  cusp  finial  being  a 


decoration.  XXII.   THE   ANGLE.  265 

kind  of  pendant  to  a  small  roof),  that  I  think  it  better  to  class 
them  and  their  ornament  under  the  head  of  roof  decoration,  to- 
gether with  the  whole  tribe  of  crockets  and  bosses  ;  so  that  we 
shall  be  here  concerned  only  with  the  three  subjects  above  dis- 
tinguished :  and,  first,  the  corner  or  Angle. 

§  vii.  The  mathematician  knows  there  are  many  kinds  of 
angles ;  but  the  one  we  have  principally  to  deal  with  now,  is 
that  which  the  reader  may  very  easily  conceive  as  the  corner  of 
a  square  house,  or  square  anything.  It  is  of  course  the  one  of 
most  frequent  occurrence ;  and  its  treatment,  once  understood, 
may,  with  slight  modification,  be  referred  to  other  corners, 
sharper  or  blunter,  or  with  curved  sides. 

§  vin.  Evidently  the  first  and  roughest  idea  which  would  occur 
to  any  one  who  found  a  corner  troublesome,  would  be  to  cut  it 
off.  This  is  a  very  summary  and  tyrannical  proceeding,  some- 
what barbarous,  yet  advisable  if  nothing  else  can  be  done :  an 
amputated  corner  is  said  to  be  chamfered.  It  can,  however, 
evidently  be  cut  off  in  three  ways  :  1.  with  a  concave  cut,  a  / 
2.  with  a  straight  cut,  b  /  3.  with  a 
convex  cut,  <?,  Fig.  LIL  Fis-  LIL 

The  first  two  methods,  the  most 
violent  and  summary,  have  the  ap- 
parent disadvantage  that  we  get  by 
them, — two  corners  instead  of  one ;     a  b  c 

much  milder  corners,  however,  and  with  a  different  light  and 
shade  between  them  ;  so  that  both  methods  are  often  very  expe- 
dient. You  may  see  the  straight  chamfer  (b)  on  most  lamp  posts, 
and  pillars  at  railway  stations,  it  being  the  easiest  to  cut :  the 
concave  chamfer  requires  more  care,  and  occurs  generally  in 
well  finished  but  simple  architecture, — very  beautifully  in  the 
small  arches  of  the  Broletto  of  Como,  Plate  Y. ;  and  the  straight 
chamfer  in  architecture  of  every  kind,  very  constantly  in  Nor- 
man cornices  and  arches,  as  in  fig.  2,  Plate  IY.,  at  Sens. 

§  ix.  The  third,  or  convex  chamfer,  as  it  is  the  gentlest  mode 
of  treatment,  so  (as  in  medicine  and  morals)  it  is  very  generally 


■ap::,iii|;i-:i!i3ji| 


yjllii!:1!::*1"' 


266 


XXII.   THE   ANGLE. 


DECORATION. 


the  best.  For  while  the  two  other  methods  produce  two  corners 
instead  of  one,  this  gentle  chamfer  does  verily  get  rid  of  the  cor- 
ner altogether,  and  substitutes  a  soft  curve  in  its  place. 

But  it  has,  in  the  form  above  given,  this  grave  disadvantage, 
that  it  looks  as  if  the  corner  had  been  rubbed  or  worn  off, 
blunted  by  time  and  weather,  and  in  want  of  sharpening  again. 
A  great  deal  often  depends,  and  in  such  a  case  as  this,  every- 
thing depends,  on  the  Voluntariness  of  the  ornament.  The  work 
of  time  is  beautiful  on  surfaces,  but  not  on  edges  intended  to  be 
sharp.  Even  if  we  needed  them  blunt,  we  should  not  like  them 
blunt  on  compulsion  ;  so,  to  show  that  the  bluntness  is  our  own 
ordaining,  we  will  put  a  slight  incised  line  to  mark  off  the  round- 
ing, and  show  that  it  goes  no  farther  than  we  choose.  We  shall 
thus  have  the  section  a,  Fig.  LIIL  ;  and  this  mode  of  turning  an 

Fig.  LIIL 


angle  is  one  of  the  very  best  ever  invented.  By  enlarging  and 
deepening  the  incision,  we  get  in  succession  the  forms  &,  c,  d ; 
and  by  describing  a  small  equal  arc  on  each  of  the  sloping  lines 
of  these  figures,  we  get  e,  y,  g,  li. 

§  x.  I  do  not  know  whether  these  mouldings  are  called  by 
architects  chamfers  or  beads  ;  but  I  think  lead  a  bad  word  for  a 
continuous  moulding,  and  the  proper  sense  of  the  word  chamfer 


DECORATION. 


XXII.   THE   ANGLE, 


267 


is  fixed  by  Spenser  as  descriptive  not  merely  of  truncation,  but 
of  trench  or  furrow  : — 

"  Tho  gin  you,  fond  flies,  the  cold  to  scorn, 
And,  crowing  in  pipes  made  of  green  corn, 
You  thinken  to  be  lords  of  the  year ; 
But  eft  when  ye  count  you  freed  from  fear, 
Comes  the  breme  winter  with  chamfred  brows, 
Full  of  wrinkles  and  frosty  furrows." 


So  I  shall  call  the  above  mouldings  beaded  chamfers,  when 
there  is  any  chance  of  confusion  with  the  plain  chamfer,  a  or  5, 
of  Fig.  LII. :  and  when  there  is  no  such  chance,  I  shall  use  the 
word  chamfer  only. 

§  xi.  Of  those  above  given,  h  is  the  constant  chamfer  of  Venice, 

and  a  of  Yerona  :  a  being  the  grandest  and  best,  and  having  a 

peculiar  precision  and  quaint- 

Fig.  LIV. 
ness  of  effect  about  it.      I 

found  it  twice  in  Yenice,  used 
on  the  sharp  angle,  as  at  a 
and  5,  Fig.  LIV.,  a  being 
from  the  angle  of  a  house  on 
the  Rio  San  Zulian,  and  h 
from  the  windows  of  the 
church  of  San  Stefano. 

§  xn.  There  is,  however, 
evidently  another  variety  of 
the  chamfers,  f  and  g,  Fig. 
LIIL,  formed  by  an  unbro- 
ken curve  instead  of  two 
curves,  as  <?,  Fig.  LIY. ;  and 
when  this,  or  the  chamfer  d, 
Fig.  Lin.,  is  large,  it  is  im- 
possible to  say  whether  they  have  been  derived  from  the  incised 
angle,  or  from  small  shafts  set  in  a  nook,  as  at  <?,  Fig.  LIV.,  or 
in  the  hollow  of  the  curved  chamfer,  as  d.  Fig.  LIY.     In  general, 


268 


XXII.    THE   ANGLE. 


DECORATION. 


however,  the  shallow  chamfers,  «,  5,  e,  and '  f,  Fig.  LIIL,  are 
peculiar  to  southern  work ;  and  may  be  assumed  to  have  been 
derived  from  the  incised  angle,  while  the  deep  chamfers,  <?,  d, 
g,  A,  are  characteristic  of  northern  work,  and  may  be  partly 
derived  or  imitated  from  the  angle  shaft ;  while,  with  the  usual 
extravagance  of  the  northern  architects,  they  are  cut  deeper  and 
deeper  until  we  arrive  at  the  condition y,  Fig.  LIY.,  which  is  the 
favourite  chamfer  at  Bourges  and  Bayeux,  and  in  other  good 
French  work. 

I  have  placed  in  the  Appendix*  a  figure  belonging  to  this 
subject,  but  which  cannot  interest  the  general  reader,  showing 
the  number  of  possible  chamfers  with  a  roll  moulding  of  given 
size. 

§  xiii.  If  we  take  the  plain  chamfer,  5,  of  Fig.  LIL,  on  a  large 

scale,   as  at  0,   Fig.  LV.,   and  bead  both  its  edges,   cutting 

away  the  parts  there  shaded,  we  shall  have  a  form  much  used  in 

richly  decorated  Gothic,  both  in  England  and  Italy.     It  might 

be  more  simply  described  as  the  chamfer  a  of  Fig.  LIL,  with  an 

incision  on  each  edge ;  but 
Fig.  LV.  . 

the  part  here    shaded  is 

often  worked  into  orna- 
mental forms,  not  being 
entirely  cut  away. 

§  xiv.  Many  other  mould- 
ings, which  at  first  sight 
a  h  appear  very  elaborate,  are 

nothing  more  than  a  chamfer,  with  a  series  of  small  echoes  of  it 
on  each  side,  dying  away  with  a  ripple  on  the  surface  of  the  wall, 
as  in  5,  Fig.  LV.,  from  Coutances  :  (observe,  here  the  white  part 
is  the  solid  stone,  the  shade  is  cut  away). 

Chamfers  of  this  kind  are  used  on  a  small  scale  and  in  delicate 
work :  the  coarse  chamfers  are  found  on  all  scales  :  f  and  g. 
Fig.  LIIL,  in  Yenice,  form  the  great  angles  of  almost  every 


*  Appendix  23. :    "  Varieties  of  Chamfer." 


decoration.  XXII.   THE   ANGLE.  269 

Gothic  palace ;  the  roll  being  a  foot  or  a  foot  and  a  half  round, 
and  treated  as  a  shaft,  with  a  caj3ital  and  fresh  base  at  every 
story,  while  the  stones  of  which  it  is  composed  form  alternate 
quoins  in  the  brick-work  beyond  the  chamfer  curve.  I  need 
hardly  say  how  much  nobler  this  arrangement  is  than  a  common 
quoined  angle ;  it  gives  a  finish  to  the  aspect  of  the  whole  pile 
attainable  in  no  other  way.  And  thus  much  may  serve  concern- 
ing angle  decoration  by  chamfer. 


- 


270 


CHAPTEK    XXIII. 


THE   EDGE   AND    FILLET. 


§  i.  The  decoration  of  the  angle  by  various  forms  of  chamfer  and 
bead,  as  above  described,  is  the  quietest  method  we  can  employ ; 
too  quiet,  when  great  energy  is  to  be  given  to  the  moulding,  and 
impossible,  when,  instead  of  a  bold  angle,  we  have  to  deal  with  a 
small  projecting  edge,  like  c  in  Fig.  LI.  In  such  cases  we  may 
employ  a  decoration,  far  ruder  and  easier  in  its  simplest  conditions 
than  the  bead,  far  more  effective  when  not  used  in  too  great 
profusion ;  and  of  which  the  complete  developments  are  the 
source  of  mouldings  at  once  the  most  picturesque  and  most 
serviceable  which  the  Gothic  builders  invented. 

§  ii.  The  gunwales  of  the  Venetian  heavy  barges  being  liable  to 
somewhat  rough  collision  with  each  other,  and  with  the  walls  of 
the  streets,  are  generally  protected  by  a  piece  of  timber,  which  pro- 
jects in  the  form  of  the  fillet,  0,  Fig.  LI. ;  but  which,  like  all  other 
fillets,  may,  if  we  so  choose,  be  considered  as  composed  of  two 
angles  or  edges,  which  the  natural  and  most  wholesome  love  of  the 
Venetian  boatmen  for  ornament,  otherwise  strikingly  evidenced 
by  their  painted  sails  and  glittering  flag-vanes,  will  not  suffer 
to  remain  wholly  undecorated.  The  rough  service  of  these 
timbers,  however,  will  not  admit  of  rich  ornament,  and  the  boat- 
builder  usually  contents  himself  with  cutting  a  series  of  notches 
in  each  edge,  one  series  alternating  with  the  other,  as  represented 
at  1,  Plate  IX. 

§  in.  In  that  simple  ornament,  not  as  confined  to  Venetian 
boats,  but  as  representative  of  a  general  human  instinct  to  hack 
at  an  edge,  demonstrated  by  all  school-boys  and  all  idle  possessors 
of  penknives  or  other  cutting  instruments  on  both  sides  of  the 


, 


( jbin  Diraration 


decoration.  XXIII.    THE   EDGE   AND   FILLET.  271 

Atlantic  ; — in  that  rude  Venetian  gunwale,  I  say,  is  the  germ  of 
all  the  ornament  which  has  touched,  with  its  rich  successions  of 
angular  shadow,  the  portals  and  archivolts  of  nearly  every  early 
building  of  importance,  from  the  North  Cape  to  the  Straits  of 
Messina.  ]STor  are  the  modifications  of  the  first  suggestion  intri- 
cate. All  that  is  generic  in  their  character  may  be  seen  on 
Plate  IX.  at  a  glance. 

§  iv.  Taking  a  piece  of  stone  instead  of  timber,  and  enlarging 
the  notches,  until  they  meet  each  other,  we  have  the  condition  2, 
which  is  a  moulding  from  the  tomb  of  the  Doge  Andrea  Dandolo, 
in  St.  Mark's.  Now,  considering  this  moulding  as  composed  of 
two  decorated  edges,  each  edge  will  be  reduced,  by  the  -meeting 
of  the  notches,  to  a  series  of  four-sided  pyramids,  (as  marked  off 
by  the  dotted  lines),  which,  the  notches  here  being  shallow,  will 
be  shallow  pyramids ;  but  by  deepening  the  notches,  we  get 
them  as  at  3,  with  a  profile  0,  more  or  less  steep.  This  moulding 
I  shall  always  call  "  the  plain  dogtooth ;"  it  is  used  in  profusion 
in  the  Venetian  and  Veronese  Gothic,  generally  set  with  its 
front  to  the  spectator,  as  here  at  3 ;  but  its  effect  may  be  much 
varied  by  placing  it  obliquely,  (4,  and  profile  as  at  b) ;  or  with 
one  side  horizontal,  (5,  and  profile  e).  Of  these  three  conditions, 
3  and  5  are  exactly  the  same  in  reality,  only  differently  placed ; 
but  in  4  the  pyramid  is  obtuse,  and  the  inclination  of  its  base 
variable,  the  upper  side  of  it  being  always  kept  vertical.  It  is 
comparatively  rare.  Of  the  three,  the  last,  5,  is  far  the  most 
brilliant  in  effect,  giving  in  the  distance  a  zigzag  form  to  the  high 
light  on  it,  and  a  full  sharp  shadow  below.  The  use  of  this 
shadow  is  sufficiently  seen  by  fig.  7  in  this  plate,  (the  arch  on 
the  left,  the  number  beneath  it),  in  which  these  levelled  dogteeth, 
with  a  small  interval  between  each,  are  employed  to  set  off  by 
their  vigour  the  delicacy  of  floral  ornament  above.  This  arch  is 
the  side  of  a  niche  from  the  tomb  of  Can  Signorio  della  Scala,  at 
Verona ;  and  the  value,  as  well  as  the  distant  expression  of  its 
dogtooth,  may  be  seen  by  referring  to  Prout's  beautiful  drawing 
of  this  tomb  in  his  "  Sketches  in  France  and  Italy."    I  have 


272  XXIII.  THE  EDGE  AND  EILLET.  decoration. 

before  observed  that  this  artist  never  fails  of  seizing  the  true  and 
leading  expression  of  whatever  he  touches :  he  has  made  this 
ornament  the  leading  feature  of  the  niche,  expressing  it,  as  in 
distance  it  is  only  expressible,  by  a  zigzag. 

§  v.  The  reader  may  perhaps  be  surprised  at  my  speaking  so 
highly  of  this  drawing,  if  he  take  the  pains  to  compare  Prout's 
symbolism  of  the  work  on  the  niche  with  the  facts  as  they  stand 
here  in  Plate  IX.  But  the  truth  is  that  Prout  has  rendered  the 
effect  of  the  monument  on  the  mind  of  the  passer-by ; — the  effect 
it  was  intended  to  have  on  every  man  who  turned  the  corner  of 
the  street  beneath  it :  and  in  this  sense  there  is  actually  more 
truth  and  likeness*  in  Prout's  translation  than  in  my  fac-simile, 
made  diligently  by  peering  into  the  details  from  a  ladder.  I  do 
not  say  that  all  the  symbolism  in  Prout's  Sketch  is  the  best  pos- 
sible; but  it  is  the  best  which  any  architectural  draughtsman 
has  yet  invented;  and  in  its  application  to  special  subjects  it 
alwavs  shows  curious  internal  evidence  that  the  sketch  has  been 
made  on  the  spot,  and  that  the  artist  tried  to  draw  what  he  saw, 
not  to  invent  an  attractive  subject.  I  shall  notice  other  instances 
of  this  hereafter. 

§  vi.  The  dogtooth,  employed  in  this  simple  form,  is,  however, 
rather  a  foil  for  other  ornament,  than  itself  a  satisfactory  or  gen- 
erally available  decoration.  It  is,  however,  easy  to  enrich  it  as 
we  choose :  taking  up  its  simple  form  at  3,  and  describing  the 
arcs  marked  by  the  dotted  lines  upon  its  sides,  and  cutting  a 
small  triangular  cavity  between  them,  we  shall  leave  its  ridges 
somewhat  rudely  representative  of  four  leaves,  as  at  8,  which  is 
the  section  and  front  view  of  one  of  the  Venetian  stone  cornices 
described  above,  Chap.  XIY.,  §  iv.,  the  figure  8  being  here  put 
in  the  hollow  of  the  gutter.  The  dogtooth  is  put  on  the  outer 
lower  truncation,  and  is  actually  in  position  as  iig.  5 ;  but  being 
always  looked  up  to,  is  to  the  spectator  as  3,  and  always  rich  and 

*  I  do  not  here  speak  of  artistical  merits,  but  the  play  of  the  light  among  the  lower 
shafts  is  also  singularly  beautiful  in  this  sketch  of  Prout's,  and  the  character  of  the  wild 
and  broken  leaves,  half  dead,  on  the  stone  of  the  foreground. 


DECORATION. 


XXIII.    THE   EDGE   AND   FILLET.  273 


effective.     The  dogteeth  are  perhaps  most  frequently  expanded 
to  the  width  of  fig.  9. 

§  vii.  As  in  nearly  all  other  ornaments  previously  described, 
so  in  this, — we  have  only  to  deepen  the  Italian  cutting,  and  we 
shall  get  the  Northern  type.  If  we  make  the  original  pyramid 
somewhat  steeper,  and  instead  of  lightly  incising,  cut  it  through, 
so  as  to  have  the  leaves  held  only  by  their  points  to  the  base,  we 
shall  have  the  English  dogtooth ;  somewhat  vulgar  in  its  piquan- 
cy, when  compared  with  French  mouldings  of  a  similar  kind.* 
It  occurs,  I  think,  on  one  house  in  Venice,  in  the  Campo  St. 
Polo ;  but  the  ordinary  moulding,  with  light  incisions,  is  frequent 
in  archivolts  and  architraves,  as  well  as  in  the  roof  cornices. 

§  viii.  This  being  the  simplest  treatment  of  the  pyramid,  fig. 
10,  from  the  refectory  of  Wenlock  Abbey,  is  an  example  of  the 
simplest  decoration  of  the  recesses  or  inward  angles  between  the 
pyramids ;  that  is  to  say,  of  a  simple  hacked  edge  like  one  of 
those  in  fig.  2,  the  cuts  being  taken  up  and  decorated  instead  of 
the  points.  Each  is  worked  into  a  small  trefoiled  arch,  with  an 
incision  round  it  to  mark  its  outline,  and  another  slight  incision 
above,  expressing  the  angle  of  the  first  cutting.  I  said  that  the 
teeth  in  fig.  7  had  in  distance  the  effect  of  a  zigzag :  in  fig.  10 
this  zigzag  effect  is  seized  upon  and  developed,  but  with  the 
easiest  and  roughest  work;  the  angular  incision  being  a  mere 
limiting  line,  like  that  described  in  §  ix.  of  the  last  chapter.  But 
hence  the  farther  steps  to  every  condition  of  Norman  ornament 
are  self-evident.  I  do  not  say  that  all  of  them  arose  from  deve- 
lopment of  the  dogtooth  in  this  manner,  many  being  quite  inde- 
pendent inventions  and  uses  of  zigzag  lines ;  still,  they  may  all 
be  referred  to  this  simple  type  as  their  root  and  representative, 
that  is  to  say,  the  mere  hack  of  the  Venetian  gunwale,  with  a 
limiting  line  following  the  resultant  zigzag. 

§  ix.  Fig.  11  is  a  singular  and  much  more  artificial  condition, 
cast  in  brick,  from  the  church  of  the  Frari,  and  given  here  only 

*  Vide  the  "Seven  Lamps,"  p.  122. 
18 


274 


XXIII.   THE   EDGE   AND   FILLET. 


DECORATION. 


Fig.  LVI. 


for  future  reference.  Fig.  12,  resulting  from  a  fillet  with,  the 
cuts  on  each  of  its  edges  interrupted  by  a  bar,  is  a  frequent  Vene- 
tian moulding,  and  of  great  value ;  but  the  plain  or  leaved  dog- 
teeth have  been  the  favourites,  and  that  to  such  a  degree,  that 
even  the  Renaissance  architects  took  them  up ;  and  the  best  bit 
of  Renaissance  design  in  Venice,  the  side  of  the  Ducal  Palace 
next  the  Bridge  of  Sighs,  owes  great  part  of  its  splendour  to  its 
foundation,  faced  with  large  flat  dogteeth,  each  about  a  foot  wide 
in  the  base,  with  their  points  truncated,  and  alternating  with 
cavities  which  are  their  own  negatives  or  casts. 

§  x.  One  other  form  of  the  dogtooth  is  of  great  importance  in 
northern  architecture,  that  produced  by  oblique  cuts  slightly 
curved,  as  in  the  margin,  Fig.  LVI.  It  is  suscep- 
tible of  the  most  fantastic  and  endless  decoration,; 
each  of  the  resulting  leaves  being,  in  the  early 
porches  of  Rouen  and  Lisieux,  hollowed  out  and 
worked  into  branching  tracery  :  and  at  Bourges, 
for  distant  effect,  worked  into  plain  leaves,  or  bold 
bony  processes  with  knobs  at  the  points,  and  near 
the  spectator,  into  crouching  demons  and  broad 
winged  owls,  and  other  fancies  and  intricacies,  in- 
numerable and  inexpressible. 

§  xi.  Thus  much  is  enough  to  be  noted  respecting 
edge  decoration.  We  were  next  to  consider  the 
fillet.  Professor  Willis  has  noticed  an  ornament, 
which  he  has  called  the  Venetian  dentil,  as  "  the  most  universal 
ornament  in  its  own  district  that  ever  I  met  with  ;"  but  has  not 
noticed  the  reason  for  its  frequency.  It  is  nevertheless  highly 
interesting. 

The  whole  early  architecture  of  Venice  is  architecture  of  in- 
crustation :  this  has  not  been  enough  noticed  in  its  peculiar  rela- 
tion to  that  of  the  rest  of  Italy.  There  is,  indeed,  much  incrusted 
architecture  throughout  Italy,  in  elaborate  ecclesiastical  work, 
but  there  is  more  which  is  frankly  of  brick,  or  thoroughly  of 
stone.     But  the  Venetian  habitually  incrusted  his  work  with 


DECORATION. 


XXIII.    THE   EDGE   AND    FILLET. 


275 


nacre ;  he  built  his  houses,  even  the  meanest,  as  if  he  had  been 
a  shell-fish, — -roughly  inside,  mother-of-pearl  on  the  surface  :  he 
was  content,  perforce,  to  gather  the  clay  of  the  Brenta  banks, 
and  bake  it  into  brick  for  his  substance  of  wall ;  but  he  overlaid 
it  with  the  wealth  of  ocean,  with  the  most  precious  foreign 
marbles.  Yon  might  fancy  early  Yenice  one  wilderness  of 
brick,  which  a  petrifying  sea  had  beaten  upon  till  it  coated  it 
with  marble :  at  first  a  dark  city — washed  white  by  the  sea 
foam.  And  I  told  you  before  that  it  was  also  a  city  of  shafts 
and  arches,  and  that  its  dwellings  were  raised  upon  continuous 
arcades,  among  which  the  sea  waves  wandered.  Hence  the 
thoughts  of  its  builders  were  early  and  constantly  directed  to  the 
incrustation  of  arches. 

§  xii.  In  Fig.  LYII.  I  have  given  two  of  these  Byzantine 
stilted  arches :  the  one  on  the  right,  «,  as  they  now  too  often 
appear,   in    its    bare   brick- 


work; that  on  the  left,  with 

liter- 
defensive    ar- 


Fie.  LVII. 


its  alabaster  covering, 


n,  TTT/V 


ally    marble 

mour,  rivetted  together  in 
pieces,  which  follow  the  con- 
tours  of  the  building.     Now 


on  the  wall,  these  pieces  are  — 
mere  flat  slabs  cut  to  the 
arch  outline ;  but  under  the  soffit  of  the  arch  the  marble  mail  is 
curved,  often  cut  singularly  thin,  like  bent  tiles,  and  fitted  toge- 
ther so  that  the  pieces  would  sustain  each  other  even  without 
rivets.  It  is  of  course  desirable  that  this  thin  sub-arch  of  marble 
should  project  enough  to  sustain  the  facing  of  the  wall ;  and  the 
reader  will  see,  in  Fig.  LYIL,  that  its  edge  forms  a  kind  of  nar- 
row band  round  the  arch  (5),  a  band  which  the  least  enrichment 
would  render  a  valuable  decorative  feature.  Now  this  band  is,  of 
course,  if  the  soffit-pieces  project  a  little  beyond  the  face  of  the 
wall-pieces,  a  mere  fillet,  like  the  wooden  gunwale  in  Plate  IX. ; 
and  the  question  is,  how  to  enrich  it  most  wisely.     It  might 


276 


XXIII.    THE    EDGE    AND    FILLET. 


DECORATION. 


Fig.  LVIII. 


easily  have  been  dog-toothed,  but  the  Byzantine  architects  had 
not  invented  the  dogtooth,  and  would  not  have  used  it  here,  if 
they  had ;  for  the  dogtooth  cannot  be  employed  alone,  especially 
on  so  principal  an  angle  as  this  of  the  main  arches,  without 
giving  to  the  whole  building  a  peculiar  look,  which  I  can  no 
otherwise  describe  than  as  being  to  the  eye,  exactly  what  untem- 
pered  acid  is  to  the  tongue.  The  mere  dogtooth  is  an  acid  mould- 
ing, and  can  only  be  used "  in  certain  mingling  with  others,  to 
give  them  piquancy ;  never  alone.  What,  then,  will  be  the  next 
easiest  method  of  giving  interest  to  the  fillet  ? 

§  xiii.  Simply  to  make  the  incisions  square  instead  of  sharp, 
and  to  leave  equal  intervals  of  the  square  edge  between  them. 
Fig.  LYIII.  is  one  of  the  curved  pieces  of 
arch  armour,  with  its  edge  thus  treated ;  one 
side  only  being  done  at  the  bottom,  to  show 
the  simplicity  and  ease  of  the  work.  This 
ornament  gives  force  and  interest  to  the  edge 
of  the  arch,  without  in  the  least  diminishing 
its  quietness.  Nothing  was  ever,  nor  could 
be  ever  invented,  fitter  for  its  purpose,  or 
more  easily  cut.  From  the  arch  it  therefore 
found  its  way  into  every  position  where  the 
edge  of  a  piece  of  stone  projected,  and  became, 
from  its  constancy  of  occurrence  in  the  latest 
Gothic  as  well  as  the  earliest  Byzantine,  most 
truly  deserving  of  the  name  of  the  "  Yenetian 
Dentil."  Its  complete  intention  is  now,  how- 
ever, only  to  be  seen  in  the  pictures  of  Gentile 
Bellini  and  Yittor  Carpaccio ;  for,  like  most 
of  the  rest  of  the  mouldings  of  Yenetian 
buildings,  it  was  always  either  gilded  or 
painted — often  both,  gold  being  laid  on  the 
faces  of  the  dentils,  and  their  recesses  coloured  alternately  red 
and  blue. 

§  xiv.  Observe,  however,  that  the  reason  above  given  for  the 


DECORATION. 


XXIII.    THE   EDGE   AND   FILLET.  277 


universality  of  this  ornament  was  by  no  means  the  reason  of  its 
invention.  The  Venetian  dentil  is  a  particular  application  (con- 
sequent on  the  incrusted  character  of  Venetian  architecture)  of 
the  general  idea  of  dentil,  which  had  been  originally  given  by 
the  Greeks,  and  realised  both  by  them  and  by  the  Byzantines  in 
many  laborious  forms,  long  before  there  was  need  of  them  for 
arch  armour ;  and  the  lower  half  of  Plate  IX.  will  give  some 
idea  of  the  conditions  which  occur  in  the  Romanesque  of  Venice, 
distinctly  derived  from  the  classical  dentil ;  and  of  the  gradual 
transition  to  the  more  convenient  and  simple  type,  the  running- 
hand  dentil,  which  afterwards  became  the  characteristic  of  Vene- 
tian Gothic.  No  13.*  is  the  common  dentiled  cornice,  which 
occurs  repeatedly  in  St.  Mark's  ;  and,  as  late  as  the  thirteenth 
century,  a  reduplication  of  it  forming  the  abaci  of  the  capitals  of 
the  Piazzetta  shafts.  Pig.  15  is  perhaps  an  earlier  type ;  perhaps 
only  one  of  more  careless  workmanship,  from  a  Byzantine  ruin 
in  the  Pio  di  Ca'  Foscari :  and  it  is  interesting  to  compare  it 
with  fig.  11  from  the  cathedral  of  Vienne,  in  South  France.  Fig. 
17,  from  St.  Mark's,  and  18,  from  the  apse  of  Murano,  are  two 
very  early  examples,  in  which  the  future  true  Venetian  dentil  is 
already  developed  in  method  of  execution,  though  the  object  is 
still  only  to  imitate  the  classical  one ;  and  a  rude  imitation  of  the 
bead  is  joined  with  it  in  fig.  17.  No.  16  indicates  two  examples 
of  experimental  forms  :  the  uppermost  from  the  tomb  of  Mastino 
della  Scala,  at  Verona  ;  the  lower  from  a  door  in  Venice,  I  be- 
lieve, of  the  thirteenth  century  :  19  is  a  more  frequent  arrange- 
ment, chiefly  found  in  cast  brick,  and  connecting  the  dentils  with 
the  dogteeth :  20  is  a  form  introduced  richly  in  the  later  Gothic, 
but  of  rare  occurrence  until  the  latter  half  of  the  thirteenth  cen- 
tury. I  shall  call  it  the  gabled  dentil.  It  is  found  in  the  greatest 
profusion  in  sepulchral  Gothic,  associated  with  several  slight 
variations  from  the  usual  dentil  type,  of  which  No.  21,  from  the 
tomb  of  Pietro  Cornaro,  may  serve  as  an  example. 

*  The  sections  of  all  the  mouldings  are  given  on  the  right  of  each  ;  the  part  which 
is  constantly  solid  being  shaded,  and  that  which  is  cut  into  dentils  left  in  open  line. 


278  XXIII.   THE   EDGE   AND   FILLET.  decoration. 

§  xv.  All  the  forms  given  in  Plate  IX.  are  of  not  unfrequent 
occurrence :  varying  much  in  size  and  depth,  according  to  the 
expression  of  the  work  in  which  they  occur ;  generally  increasing 
in  size  in  late  work  (the  earliest  dentils  are  seldorn  more  than  an 
inch  or  an  inch  and  a  half  long  :  the  fully  developed  dentil  of 
the  later  Gothic  is  often  as  much  as  four  or  five  in  length,  by 
one  and  a  half  in  breadth) ;  but  they  are  all  somewhat  rare,  com- 
pared to  the  true  or  armour  dentil,  above  described.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  one  or  two  unique  conditions,  which  will 
be  noted  in  the  buildings  where  they  occur.*  The  Ducal  Palace 
furnishes  three  anomalies  in  the  arch,  dogtooth,  and  dentil :  it 
has  a  hyperbolic  arch,  as  noted  above,  Chap.  X.,  §  XV. ;  it  has 
a  double-fanged  dogtooth  in  the  rings  of  the  spiral  shafts  on  its 
angles ;  and,  finally,  it  has  a  dentil  with  concave  sides,  of  which 
the  section  and  two  of  the  blocks,  real  size,  are  given  in  Plate 
XIY.  The  labour  of  obtaining  this  difficult  profile  has,  how- 
ever, been  thrown  away  ;  for  the  effect  of  the  dentil  at  ten  feet 
distance  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  the  usual  form  :  and  the 
reader  may  consider  the  dogtooth  and  dentil  in  that  plate  as 
fairly  representing  the  common  use  of  them  in  the  Yenetian 
Gothic. 

§  xvi.  I  am  aware  of  no  other  form  of  fillet  decoration  requir- 
ing notice  :  in  the  Northern  Gothic,  the  fillet  is  employed  chiefly 
to  give  severity  or  flatness  to  mouldings  supposed  to  be  too  much 
rounded,  and  is  therefore  generally  plain.  It  is  itself  an  ugly 
moulding,  and,  when  thus  employed,  is  merely  a  foil  for  others, 
of  which,  however,  it  at  last  usurped  the  place,  and  became  one 
of  the  most  painful  features  in  the  debased  Gothic  both  of  Italy 
and  the  North. 

*  As,  however,  we  shall  not  probably  be  led  either  to  Bergamo  or  Bologna,  I  may 
mention  here  a  curiously  rich  use  of  the  dentil,  entirely  covering  the  foliation  and 
tracery  of  a  niche  on  the  outside  of  the  duomo  of  Bergamo;  and  a  roll,  entirely  in- 
crusted,  as  the  handle  of  a  mace  often  is  with  nails,  with  massy  dogteeth  or  nail-heads, 
on  the  door  of  the  Pepoli  palace  of  Bologna. 


279 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


THE    ROLL   AND   RECESS. 


§  i.  I  have  classed  these  two  means  of  architectural  effect 
together,  because  the  one  is  in  most  cases  the  negative  of  the 
other,  and  is  used  to  relieve  it  exactly  as  shadow  relieves  light ; 
recess  alternating  with  roll,  not  only  in  lateral,  but  in  successive 
order ;  not  merely  side  by  side  with  each  other,  but  interrupted 
the  one  by  the  other  in  their  own  lines.  A  recess  itself  has 
properly  no  decoration  ;  but  its  depth  gives  value  to  the  decora- 
tion which  flanks,  encloses,  or  interrupts  it,  and  the  form  which 
interrupts  it  best  is  the  roll. 

§  ii.  I  use  the  word  roll  generally  for  any  mouldings  which 
present  to  the  eye  somewhat  the  appearance  of  being  cylin- 
drical, and  look  like  round  rods.  When  upright,  they  are  in 
appearance,  if  not  in  fact,  small  shafts ;  and  are  a  kind  of  bent 
shaft,  even  when  used  in  archi volts  and  traceries  ; — when  hori- 
zontal, they  confuse  themselves  with  cornices,  and  are,  in  fact, 
generally  to  be  considered  as  the  best  means  of  drawing  an 
architectural  line  in  any  direction,  the  soft  curve  of  their  side 
obtaining  some  shadow  at  nearly  all  times  of  the  day,  and  that 
more  tender  and  grateful  to  the  eye  than  can  be  obtained  either 
by  an  incision  or  by  any  other  form  of  projection. 

§  in.  Their  decorative  power  is,  however,  too  slight  for  rich 
work,  and  they  frequently  require,  like  the  angle  and  the  fillet, 
to  be  rendered  interesting  by  subdivision  or  minor  ornament  of 
their  own.  "When  the  roll  is  small,  this  is  effected,  exactly  as  in 
the  case  of  the  fillet,  by  cutting  pieces  out  of  it ;  giving  in  the 
simplest  results  what  is  called  the  Norman  billet  moulding :  and 
when  the  cuts  are  given  in  couples,  and  the  pieces  rounded  into 


280  XXIV.   THE   EOLL   AND  RECESS.  decoration. 

spheres  and  almonds,  we  have  the  ordinary  Greek  bead,  both  of 
them  too  well  known  to  require  illustration.  The  Norman  billet 
we  shall  not  meet  with  in  Venice  ;  the  bead  constantly  occurs  in 
Byzantine,  and  of  course  in  Renaissance  work.  In  Plate  IX., 
fig.  IT,  there  is  a  remarkable  example  of  its  early  treatment, 
where  the  cuts  in  it  are  left  sharp. 

§  iv.  But  the  roll,  if  it  be  of  any  size,  deserves  better  treat- 
ment. Its  rounded  surface  is  too  beautiful  to  be  cut  away  in 
notches  ;  and  it  is  rather  to  be  covered  with  flat  chasing  or  inlaid 
patterns.  Thus  ornamented,  it  gradually  blends  itself  with  the 
true  shaft,  both  in  the  Romanesque  work  of  the  North,  and  in 
the  Italian  connected  schools ;  and  the  patterns  used  for  it  are 
those  used  for  shaft  decoration  in  general. 

§  v.  But,  as  alternating  with  the  recess,  it  has  a  decoration 
jjeculiar  to  itself.  We  have  often,  in  the  preceding  chapters, 
noted  tbe  fondness  of  the  Northern  builders  for  deep  shade  and 
hollo wness  in  their  mouldings ;  and  in  the  second  chapter  of  the 
"  Seven  Lamps,"  the  changes  are  described  which  reduced  the 
massive  roll  mouldings  of  the  early  G-othic  to  a  series  of  recesses, 
separated  by  bars  of  light.  The  shape  of  these  recesses  is  at 
present  a  matter  of  no  importance  to  us  :  it  was,  indeed,  endlessly 
varied ;  but  needlessly,  for  the  value  of  a  recess  is  in  its  dark- 
ness, and  its  darkness  disguises  its  form.  But  it  was  not  in  mere 
wanton  indulgence  of  their  love  of  shade  that  the  Flamboyant 
builders  deepened  the  furrows  of  their  mouldings :  they  had 
found  a  means  of  decorating  those  furrows  as  rich  as  it  was 
expressive,  and  the  entire  framework  of  their  architecture  was 
designed  with  a  view  to  the  effect  of  this  decoration ;  where  the 
ornament  ceases,  the  framework  is  meagre  and  mean :  but  the 
ornament  is,  in  the  best  examples  of  the  style,  unceasing. 

§  vi.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  ornament  formed  by  the  ghosts  or 
anatomies  of  the  old  shafts,  left  in  the  furrows  which  had 
taken  their  place.  Every  here  and  there,  a  fragment  of  a  roll  or 
shaft  is  left  in  the  recess  or  furrow: — a  billet-moulding  on  a 
huge  scale,  but  a  billet-moulding  reduced  to  a  skeleton  ;  for  the 


DECORATION. 


XXIV.   THE   KOLL   AND    KECESS.  281 


fragments  of  roll  are  cut  hollow,  and  worked  into  mere  entan- 
glement of  stony  fibres,  with  the  gloom  of  the  recess  shown 
through  them.  These  ghost  rolls,  forming  sometimes  pedestals, 
sometimes  canopies,  sometimes  covering  the  whole  recess  with 
an  arch  of  tracery,  beneath  which  it  runs  like  a  tunnel,  are  the 
peculiar  decorations  of  the  Flamboyant  Gothic. 

§  vii.  Now  observe,  in  all  kinds  of  decoration,  we  must  keep 
carefully  under  separate  heads,  the  consideration  of  the  changes 
wrought  in  the  mere  physical  form,  and  in  the  intellectual  pur- 
pose of  ornament.  The  relations  of  the  canopy  to  the  statue  it 
shelters,  are  to  be  considered  altogether  distinctly  from  those  of 
the  canopy  to  the  building  which  it  decorates.  In  its  earliest 
conditions  the  canopy  is  partly  confused  with  representations 
of  miniature  architecture:  it  is  sometimes  a  small  temple  or 
gateway,  sometimes  an  honorary  addition  to  the  pomp  of  a 
saint,  a  covering  to  his  throne,  or  to  his  shrine ;  and  this  canopy 
is  often  expressed  in  bas-relief  (as  in  painting),  without  much 
reference  to  the  great  requirements  of  the  building.  At  other 
times  it  is  a  real  protection  to  the  statue,  and  is  enlarged  into  a 
complete  pinnacle,  carried  on  proper  shafts,  and  boldly  roofed. 
But  in  the  late  northern  system  the  canopies  are  neither  ex- 
pressive nor  protective.  They  are  a  kind  of  stone  lace-work, 
required  for  the  ornamentation  of  the  building,  for  which  the 
statues  are  often  little  more  than  an  excuse,  and  of  which  the 
physical  character  is,  as  above  described,  that  of  ghosts  of 
departed  shafts. 

§  viii.  There  is,  of  course,  much  rich  tabernacle  work  which 
will  not  come  literally  under  this  head,  much  which  is  strag- 
gling or  flat  in  its  plan,  connecting  itself  gradually  with  the 
ordinary  forms  of  independent  shrines  and  tombs ;  but  the 
general  idea  of  all  tabernacle  work  is  marked  in  the  common 
phrase  of  a  "  niche,"  that  is  to  say  a  hollow  intended  for  a 
statue,  and  crowned  by  a  canopy ;  and  this  niche  decoration 
only  reaches  its  full  development  when  the  Flamboyant  hollows 
are  cut  deepest,  and  when  the  manner  and  spirit  of  sculpture 


2S2  XXIV.    THE   EOLL    AND    RECESS. 


DECORATION. 


had  so  much  lost  their  purity  and  intensity  that  it  became 
desirable  to  draw  the  eye  away  from  the  statue  to  its  covering, 
so  that  at  last  the  canopy  became  the  more  important  of  the  two, 
and  is  itself  so  beautiful  that  we  are  often  contented  with  archi- 
tecture from  which  profanity  has  struck  the  statues,  if  only  the 
canopies  are  left ;  and  consequently,  in  our  modern  ingenuity, 
even  set  up  canopies  where  we  have  no  intention  of  setting 
statues. 

§  ix.  It  is  a  pity  that  thus  we  have  no  really  noble  example 
of  the  effect  of  the  statue  in  the  recesses  of  architecture :  for  the 
Flamboyant  recess  was  not  so  much  a  preparation  for  it  as  a 
gulf  which  swallowed  it  up.  When  statues  were  most  earnestly 
designed,  they  were  thrust  forward  in  all  kinds  of  places,  often 
in  front  of  the  pillars,  as  at  Amiens,  awkwardly  enough,  but 
with  manly  respect  to  the  purpose  of  the  figures.  The  Flam- 
boyant hollows  yawned  at  their  sides,  the  statues  fell  back  into 
them,  and  nearly  disappeared,  and  a  flash  of  flame  in  the  shape 
of  a  canopy  rose  as  they  expired. 

§  x.  I  do  not  feel  myself  capable  at  present  of  speaking  with 
perfect  justice  of  this  niche  ornament  of  the  north,  my  late 
studies  in  Italy  having  somewhat  destroyed  my  sympathies  with 
it.  But  I  once  loved  it  intensely,  and  will  not  say  anything  to 
depreciate  it  now,  save  only  this,  that  while  I  have  studied  long 
at  Abbeville,  without  in  the  least  finding  that  it  made  me  care 
less  for  Verona,  I  never  remained  long  in  Yerona  without  feel- 
ing some  doubt  of  the  nobility  of  Abbeville. 

§  xi.  Recess  decoration  by  leaf  mouldings  is  constantly  and 
beautifully  associated  in  the  north  with  niche  decoration,  but 
requires  no  special  notice,  the  recess  in  such  cases  being  used 
merely  to  give  value  to  the  leafage  by  its  gloom,  and  the 
difference  between  such  conditions  and  those  of  the  south  being 
merely  that  in  the  one  the  leaves  are  laid  across  a  hollow,  and 
in  the  other  over  a  solid  surface  ;  but  in  neither  of  the  schools 
exclusively  so,  each  in  some  degree  intermingling  the  method  of 
the  other. 


decoration.  XXIV.    THE   ROLL   AND    RECESS.  283 

§  xii.  Finally  the  recess  decoration  by  the  ball  flower  is  very 
definite  and  characteristic,  found,  I  believe,  chiefly  in  English 
work.  It  consists  merely  in  leaving  a  small  boss  or  sphere, 
fixed,  as  it  were,  at  intervals  in  the  hollows ;  such  bosses  being 
afterwards  carved  into  roses,  or  other  ornamental  forms,  and 
sometimes  lifted  quite  np  out  of  the  hollow,  on  projecting  pro- 
cesses, like  vertebrae,  so  as  to  make  them  more  conspicuous,  as 
throughout  the  decoration  of  the  cathedral  of  Bourges. 

The  value  of  this  ornament  is  chiefly  in  the  spotted  character 
which  it  gives  to  the  lines  of  mouldings  seen  from  a  distance. 
It  is  very  rich  and  delightful  when  not  used  in  excess ;  but  it 
would  satiate  and  weary  the  eye  if  it  were  ever  used  in  general 
architecture.  The  spire  of  Salisbury,  and  of  St.  Mary's  at  Ox- 
ford, are  agreeable  as  isolated  masses;  but  if  an  entire  street 
were  built  with  this  spotty  decoration  at  every  casement,  we 
could  not  traverse  it  to  the  end  without  disgust.  It  is  only 
another  example  of  the  constant  aim  at  piquancy  of  effect  which 
characterised  the  northern  builders  ;  an  ingenious  but  somewhat 
vulgar  effort  to  give  interest  to  their  grey  masses  of  coarse 
stone,  without  overtaxing  their  powers  either  of  invention  or 
execution.  We  will  thank  them  for  it  without  blame  or  praise 5 
and  pass  on, 


284 


CHAPTEE  XXV. 

THE   BASE. 

§  i.  We  know  now  as  much  as  is  needful  respecting  the  methods 
of  minor  and  universal  decoration,  which  were  distinguished  in 
Chapter  XXII.,  §  in.,  from  the  ornament  which  has  special  rela- 
tion to  particular  parts.  This  local  ornament,  which,  it  will  be 
remembered,  we  arranged  in  §  n.  of  the  same  chapter  under 
five  heads,  we  have  next,  under  those  heads,  to  consider.  And, 
first,  the  ornament  of  the  bases,  both  of  walls  and  shafts. 

It  was  noticed  in  our  account  of  the  divisions  of  a  wall,  that 
there  was  something  in  those  divisions  like  the  beginning,  the 
several  courses,  and  the  close  of  a  human  life.  And  as,  in  all 
well-conducted  lives,  the  hard  work,  and  roughing,  and  gaining 
of  strength  comes  first,  the  honour  or  decoration  in  certain  inter- 
vals during  their  course,  but  most  of  all  in  their  close,  so,  in 
general,  the  base  of  the  wall,  which  is  its  beginning  of  labour, 
will  bear  least  decoration,  its  body  more,  especially  those  epochs 
of  rest  called  its  string  courses ;  but  its  crown  or  cornice  most 
of  all.  Still,  in  some  buildings,  all  these  are  decorated  richly, 
though  the  last  most ;  and  in  others,  when  the  base  is  well  pro- 
tected and  yet  conspicuous,  it  may  properly  receive  even  more 
decoration  than  other  parts. 

§  ii.  Now,  the  main  things  to  be  expressed  in  a  base  are  its 
levelness  and  evenness.  We  cannot  do  better  than  construct  the 
several  members  of  the  base,  as  developed  in  Fig.  II.,  p.  56., 
each  of  a  different  coloured  marble,  so  as  to  produce  marked 
level  bars  of  colour  all  along  the  foundation.  This  is  exquisitely 
done  in  all  the  Italian  elaborate  wall  bases  ;  that  of  St.  Anasta- 
sia  at  Yerona  is  one  of  the  most  perfect  existing,  for  play  of 


DECORATION.  XXV.    THE    BASE.  285 

colour;  that  of  Giotto's  campanile  is  on  the  whole  the  most 
beautifully  finished.  Then,  on  the  vertical  portions,  #,  &,  <?,  we 
may  put  what  patterns  in  mosaic  we  please,  so  that  they  be  not 
too  rich ;  but  if  we  choose  rather  to  have  sculpture  (or  must 
have  it  for  want  of  stones  to  inlay),  then  observe  that  all  sculp- 
ture on  bases  must  be  in  panels,  or  it  will  soon  be  worn  away, 
and  that  a  plain  panelling  is  often  good  without  any  other  orna- 
ment. The  member  &,  which  in  St.  Mark's  is  subordinate,  and 
0,  which  is  expanded  into  a  seat,  are  both  of  them  decorated 
with  simple  but  exquisitely-finished  panelling,  in  red  and  white 
or  green  and  white  marble ;  and  the  member  e  is  in  bases  of  this 
kind  very  valuable,  as  an  expression  of  a  firm  beginning  of  the 
substance  of  the  wall  itself.  This  member  has  been  of  no  ser- 
vice to  us  hitherto,  and  was  unnoticed  in  the  chapters  on  con- 
struction ;  but  it  was  expressed  in  the  figure  of  the  wall  base, 
on  account  of  its  great  value  when  the  foundation  is  of  stone 
and  the  wall  of  brick  (coated  or  not).  In  such  cases  it  is  always 
better  to  add  the  course  <?,  above  the  slope  of  the  base,  than  ab- 
ruptly to  begin  the  common  masonry  of  the  wall. 

§  in.  It  is,  however,  with  the  member  d,  or  Xb,  that  we  are 
most  seriously  concerned  ;  for  this  being  the  essential  feature  of 
all  bases,  and  the  true  preparation  for  the  wall  or  shaft,  it  is 
most  necessary  that  here,  if  anywhere,  we  should  have  full  ex- 
pression of  levelness  and  precision  ;  and  farther,  that,  if  possible, 
the  eye  should  not  be  suffered  to  rest  on  the  points  of  junction 
of  the  stones,  which  would  give  an  effect  of  instability.  Both 
these  objects  are  accomplished  by  attracting  the  eye  to  two  rolls, 
separated  by  a  deep  hollow,  in  the  member  d  itself.  The  bold 
projections  of  their  mouldings  entirely  prevent  the  attention 
from  being  drawn  to  the  joints  of  the  masonry,  and  besides  form 
a  simple  but  beautifully  connected  group  of  bars  of  shadow, 
which  express,  in  their  perfect  parallelism,  the  absolute  level- 
ness of  the  foundation. 

§  iv.  I  need  hardly  give  any  perspective  drawing  of  an  ar- 
rangement which  must  be  perfectly  familiar  to  the  reader,  as 


286  XXV.    THE   BASE. 


DECOKATION. 


occurring  under  nearly  every  column  of  the  too  numerous  classi- 
cal buildings  all  over  Europe.  But  I  may  name  the  base  of  the 
Bank  of  England  as  furnishing  a  very  simple  instance  of  the 
group,  with  a  square  instead  of  a  rounded  hollow,  both  forming 
the  base  of  the  wall,  and  gathering  into  that  of  the  shafts  as 
they  occur ;  while  the  bases  of  the  pillars  of  the  facade  of  the 
British  Museum  are  as  good  examples  as  the  reader  can  study 
on  a  larger  scale. 

§  v.  I  believe  this  group  of  mouldings  was  first  invented  by 
the  Greeks,  and  it  has  never  been  materially  improved,  as  far  as 
its  peculiar  purpose  is  concerned*  ;  the  classical  attempts  at  its 
variation  being  the  ugliest :  one,  the  using  a  single  roll  of  larger 
size,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  Duke  of  York's  column,  which  there- 
fore looks  as  if  it  stood  on  a  large  sausage,  (the  Monument  has 
the  same  base,  but  more  concealed  by  pedestal  decoration) :  an- 
other, the  using  two  rolls  without  the  intermediate  cavetto, — 
a  condition  hardly  less  awkward,  and  which  may  be  studied  to 
advantage  in  the  wall  and  shaftbases  of  the  Athenseum  Club- 
house :  and  another,  the  introduction  of  what  are  called  fillets 
between  the  rolls,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  pillars  of  Hanover 
Chapel,  Begent  Street,  which  look,  in  consequence,  as  if  they 
were  standing  upon  a  pile  of  pewter  collection-plates.  But  the 
only  successful  changes  have  been  mediaeval ;  and  their  nature 
will  be  at  once  understood  by  a  glance  at  the  varieties  given  on 
the  opposite  page.  It  will  be  well  first  to  give  the  buildings  in 
which  they  occur,  in  order. 


*  Another  most  important  reason  for  the  peculiar  sufficiency  and  value  of  this  base, 
especially  as  opposed  to  the  bulging  forms  of  the  single  or  double  roll,  without  the 
cavetto,  has  been  suggested  by  the  writer  of  the  Essay  on  the  Esthetics  of  Gothic 
Architecture  in  the  British  Quarterly  for  August,  1849  : — "  The  Attic  base  recedes  at 
the  point  where,  if  it  suffered  from  superincumbent  weight,  it  would  bulge  out.7' 


* 


X 


J  Buskin 


AckermanLith  ST).jUroax3way  B -T 


ProfiU|   of  Ba$e 


DECORATION. 


XXV.    THE   BASE. 


287 


1.  Santa  Fosca,  Torcello. 

2.  North  transept,  St.  Mark's,  Venice. 

3.  Nave,  Torcello. 

4.  Nave,  Torcello. 

5.  South  transept,  St.  Mark's. 

6.  Northern    portico,    upper  shafts,    St. 

Mark's. 

7.  Another  of  the  same  group. 

8.  Cortile  of  St.  Ambrogio,  Milan. 

9.  Nave-shafts,  St.  Michele,  Pavia. 

10.  Outside     wall     base,     St.     Mark's, 

Venice. 

11.  Fondaco  de'  Turchi,  Venice. 

12.  Nave,  Vienne,  France. 

13.  Fondaco  de'  Turchi,  Venice. 


14.  Ca'  Giustiniani,  Venice. 

15.  Byzantine  fragment,  Venice. 

16.  St.  Mark's,  upper  colonnade. 

17.  Ducal  Palace,  Venice  (windows). 

18.  Ca'  Falier,  Venice. 

19.  St.  Zeno,  Verona. 

20.  San  Stefano,  Venice. 

21.  Ducal  Palace,  Venice,  (windows). 

22.  Nave,  Salisbury. 

23.  Santa  Fosca,  Torcello. 

24.  Nave,  Lyons  Cathedral. 

25.  Notre  Dame,  Dijon. 

26.  Nave,  Bourges  Cathedral. 

27.  Nave,  Mortain  (Normandy) . 

28.  Nave,  Rouen  Cathedral. 


§  vi.  Eighteen  out  of  the  twenty-eight  varieties  are  Venetian, 
being  bases  to  which  I  shall  have  need  of  future  reference  ;  but 
the  interspersed  examples,  8,  9,  12,  and  19,  from  Milan,  Pavia^ 
Vienne  (France),  and  Verona,  show  the  exactly  correspondent 
conditions  of  the  Romanesque  base  at  the  period,  throughout  the 
centre  of  Europe.  The  last  five  examples  show  the  changes 
effected  by  the  French  Gothic  architects  :  the  Salisbury  base  (22) 
I  have  only  introduced  to  show  its  dulness  and  vulgarity  beside 
them ;  and  23,  from  Torcello,  for  a  special  reason,  in  that  place. 

§  vn.  The  reader  will  observe  that  the  two  bases,  8  and  9, 
from  the  two  most  important  Lombardic  churches  of  Italy,  St. 
Ambrogio  of  Milan  and  St.  Michele  of  Pavia,  mark  the  charac- 
ter of  the  barbaric  base  founded  on  pure  Roman  models,  some- 
times approximating  to  such  models  very  closely  ;  and  the  varie- 
ties 10,  11,  13,  16  are  Byzantine  types,  also  founded  on  Roman 
models.  But  in  the  bases  1  to  7  inclusive,  and,  still  more  char- 
acteristically, in  23  below,  there  is  evidently  an  original  element, 
a  tendency  to  use  the  fillet  and  hollow  instead  of  the  roll,  which 
is  eminently  Gothic ;  which  in  the  base  3  reminds  one  even  of 
Flamboyant  conditions,  and  is  excessively  remarkable  as  occur- 
ring in  Italian  work  certainly  not  later  than  the  tenth  century, 
taking  even  the  date  of  the  last  rebuilding  of  the  Duomo  of  Tor- 


288  XXV.    THE   BASE. 


DECORATION. 


cello,  though.  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  consider  these  bases  por- 
tions of  the  original  church.  And  I  have  therefore  put  the  base 
23  among  the  Gothic  group  to  which  it  has  so  strong  relation- 
ship, though,  on  the  last  supposition,  five  centuries  older  than  the 
earliest  of  the  five  terminal  examples  ;  and  it  is  still  more 
remarkable  because  it  reverses  the  usual  treatment  of  the  lower 
roll,  which  is  in  general  a  tolerably  accurate  test  of  the  age  of  a 
base,  in  the  degree  of  its  projection.  Thus,  in  the  examples  2, 
3,  4,  5,  9,  10,  12,  the  lower  roll  is  hardly  rounded  at  all,  and  dia- 
metrically opposed  to  the  late  Gothic  conditions,  24  to  28,  in 
which  it  advances  gradually,  like  a  wave  preparing  to  break,  and 
at  last  is  actually  seen  curling  over  with  the  long-backed  rush  of 
surf  upon  the  shore.  Yet  the  Torcello  base  resembles  these 
Gothic  ones  both  in  expansion  beneath  and  in  depth  of  cavetto 
above. 

§  viii.  There  can  be  no  question  of  the  ineffable  superiority  of 
these  Gothic  bases,  in  grace  of  profile,  to  any  ever  invented  by 
the  ancients.  But  they  have  all  two  great  faults  :  They  seem,  in 
the  first  place,  to  have  been  designed  without  sufficient  reference 
to  the  necessity  of  their  being  usually  seen  from  above ;  their 
grace  of  profile  cannot  be  estimated  when  so  seen,  and  their 
excessive  expansion  gives  them  an  apjDearance  of  flatness  and 
separation  from  the  shaft,  as  if  they  had  splashed  out  under  its 
pressure :  in  the  second  place,  their  cavetto  is  so  deeply  cut  that 
it  has  the  appearance  of  a  black  fissure  between  the  members 
of  the  base  ;  and  in  the  Lyons  and  Bourges  shafts,  24  and  26,  it 
is  impossible  to  conquer  the  idea  suggested  by  it,  that  the  two 
stones  above  and  below  have  been  intended  to  join  close,  but  that 
some  pebbles  have  got  in  and  kept  them  from  fitting;  one  is 
always  expecting  the  pebbles  to  be  crushed,  and  the  shaft  to 
settle  into  its  place  with  a  thunder-clap. 

§  ix.  For  these  reasons,  I  said  that  the  profile  of  the  pure 
classic  base  had  hardly  been  materially  improved;  but  the 
various  conditions  of  it  are  beautiful  or  commonplace,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  variety  of  proportion  among  their  lines  and  the 


DECORATION. 


XXV.    THE   BASE. 


289 


delicacy  of  their  curvatures  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  expression  of 
characters  like  those  of  the  abstract  lines  in  Plate  VII. 

The  five  best  profiles  in  Plate  X.  are  10,  17,  19,  20,  21 ;  10 
is  peculiarly  beautiful  in  the  opposition  between  the  bold  pro- 
jection of  its  upper  roll,  and  the  delicate  leafy  curvature  of  its 
lower ;  and  this  and  21  may  be  taken  as  nearly  perfect  types, 
the  one  of  the  steep,  the  other  of  the  expansive  basic  profiles. 
The  characters  of  all,  however,  are  so  dependent  upon  their 
place  and  expression,  that  it  is  unfair  to  judge  them  thus 
separately ;  and  the  precision  of  curvature  is  a  matter  of  so 
small  consequence  in  general  effect,  that  we  need  not  here  pursue 
the  subject  farther. 

§  x.  We  have  thus  far,  however,  considered  only  the  lines  of 
moulding  in  the  member  Xb,  whether  of  wail  or  shaft  base.  But 
the  reader  will  remember 
that  in  our  best  shaft  base, 
in  Fig.  XII.  (p.  79),  certain 
props  or  spurs  wrere  ap- 
plied to  the  slope  of  X  b ; 
but  now  that  X  b  is  divided 
into  these  delicate  mould- 


Fig.  LIX. 


ings,  we  cannot  conveni- 
ently apply  the  spur  to  its 
irregular  profile  ;  we  must 
be  content  to  set  it  against 
the  lower  roll.  Let  the 
upper  edge  of  this  lower 
roll  be  the  curved  line  here, 
a,  d,  e,  6,  Fig.  LIX.,  and  c  the  angle  of  the  square  plinth  pro- 
jecting beneath  it.  Then  the  spur,  applied  as  we  saw  in  Chap. 
TIL,  will  be  of  some  such  form  as  the  triangle  c  e  d,  Fig. 
LIX. 

§  xi.  Now  it  has  just  been  stated  that  it  is  of  small  importance 
whether  the  abstract  lines  of  the  profile  of  a  base  moulding  be 
fine  or  not,  because  we  rarely  stoop  down  to  look  at  them.     But 

19 


290 


XXV.    THE   BASE. 


DECORATION. 


this  triangular  spur  is  nearly  always  seen  from  above,  and 
the  eye  is  drawn  to  it  as  one  of  the  most  important  features  of 
the  whole  base ;  therefore  it  is  a  point  of  immediate  necessity 
to  substitute  for  its  harsh  right  lines  (c  d,  c  e)  some  curve 
of  noble  abstract  character. 

§  xii.  I  mentioned,  in  speaking  of  the  line  of  the  salvia  leaf 
at  p.  218.,  that  I  had  marked  off  the  portion  of  it,  x  y,  because 
I  thought  it  likely  to  be  generally  useful  to  us  afterwards  ;  and 
I  promised  the  reader  that  as  he  had  built,  so  he  should  decorate 
his  edifice  at  his  own  free  will.  If,  therefore,  he  likes  the  above 
triangular  spur,  c  d  <?,  by  all  means  let  him  keep  it ;  but  if  he  be 
on  the  whole  dissatisfied  with  it,  I  may  be  permitted,  perhaps, 
to  advise  him  to  set  to  work  like  a  tapestry  bee,  to  cut  off  the 
little  bit  of  line  of  salvia  leaf  x  y,  and  try  how  he  can  best 
substitute  it  for  the  awkward  lines  c  d  c  e.  He  may  try  it  any 
way  that  he  likes  ;  but  if  he  puts  the  salvia  curvature  inside  the 
present  lines,  he  will  find  the  spur  looks  weak,  and  I  think  he 
will  determine  at  last  on  placing  it  as  I  have  done  at  c  d:  c  e. 
Fig.  LX.     (If  the  reader  will  be  at  the  pains  to  transfer  the 


Fig.  LX. 


salvia  leaf  line  with  tracing  paper,  he  will  find  it  accurately  used 
in  this  figure.)  Then  I  merely  add  an  outer  circular  line  to 
represent  the  outer  swell  of  the  roll  against  which  the  spur  is 


J  Ruskin 


Ackerman  Lith   379,  Eioadwaylf.y. 


PFani  of  BaibS. 


DECORATION.  XXV.    THE    BASE.  291 

set,  and  I  put  another  such  spur  to  the  opposite  corner  of  the 
square,  and  we  have  the  half  base,  Fig.  LX.,  which  is  a  general 
type  of  the  best  Gothic  bases  in  existence,  being  very  nearly 
that  of  the  upper  shafts  of  the  Ducal  Palace  of  Yenice.  In  those 
shafts  the  quadrant  a  5,  or  the  upper  edge  of  the  lower  roll,  is 
2  feet  1|  inches  round,  and  the  base  of  the  spur  d  e,  is  10 
inches  ;  the  line  d  e  being  therefore  to  a  h  as  10  to  25 1.  In 
Fig.  LX.  it  is  as  10  to  24,  the  measurement  being  easier  and  the 
type  somewhat  more  generally  representative  of  the  best,  i.  e. 
broadest,  spurs  of  Italian  Gothic. 

§  xiii.  Now,  the  reader  is  to  remember,  there  is  nothing  ma- 
gical in  salvia  leaves  :  the  line  I  take  from  them  happened  merely 
to  fall  conveniently  on  the  page,  and  might  as  well  have  been 
taken  from  anything  else  ;  it  is  simply  its  character  of  gradated 
curvature  which  fits  it  for  our  use.  On  Plate  XL,  opposite,  I 
have  given  plans  of  the  spurs  and  quadrants  of  twelve  Italian 
and  three  Northern  bases ;  these  latter,  (13)  from  Bourges, 
(14)  from  Lyons,  (15)  from  Pouen,  are  given  merely  to  show 
the  Northern  disposition  to  break  up  bounding  lines,  and  lose 
breadth  in  picturesqueness.  These  Northern^bases  look  the 
prettiest  in  this  plate,  because  this  variation  of  the  outline 
is  nearly  all  the  ornament  they  have,  being  cut  very  rudely; 
but  the  Italian  bases  above  them  are  merely  prepared  by 
their  simple  outlines  for  far  richer  decoration  at  the  next  step, 
as  we  shall  see  presently.  The  Northern  bases  are  to  be  noted 
also  for  another  grand  error  :  the  projection  of  the  roll  beyond 
the  square  plinth,  of  which  the  corner  is  seen,  in  various  degrees 
of  advancement,  in  the  three  examples.  13  is  the  base  whose 
profile  is  No.  26  in  Plate  X. ;  11  is  24  in  the  same  plate  ;  and 
15  is  28. 

§  xiv.  The  Italian  bases  are  the  following ;  all,  except  7  and 
10,  being  Venetian :  1  and  2,  upper  colonnade,  St.  Mark's ;  3, 
Ca'  Falier ;  4,  lower  colonnade,  and  5,  transept,  St.  Mark's  ;  0, 
from  the  Church  of  St.  John  and  Paul ;  7,  from  the  tomb  near 
St.  Anastasia,  Verona,  described  above  (p.  145.) ;  8  and  9,  Fon- 


292  XXV.   THE   BASE. 


DECORATION. 


daco  de'  Turchi,  Venice ;  10,  tomb  of  Can  Mastino  della  Scala, 
Verona ;  11,  San  Stefano,  Venice ;  12,  Ducal  Palace,  Venice,  up- 
per colonnade.  The  ]STos.  3,  8,  9,  11  are  the  bases  whose  profiles 
are  respectively,  Nos.  18,  11,  13,  and  20  in  Plate  X.  The  fiat 
surfaces  of  the  basic  plinths  are  here  shaded ;  and  in  the  lower 
corner  of  the  square  occupied  by  each  quadrant  is  put,  also 
shaded,  the  central  profile  of  each  spur,  from  its  root  at  the  roll 
of  the  base  to  its  point ;  those  of  Nos.  1  and  2  being  conjectural, 
for  their  spurs  were  so  rude  and  ugly,  that  I  took  no  note  of 
their  profiles :  but  they  would  probably  be  as  here  given.  As 
these  bases,  though  here,  for  the  sake  of  comparison,  reduced 
within  squares  of  equal  size,  in  reality  belong  to  shafts  of  very 
different  size,  9  being  some  six  or  seven  inches  in  diameter,  and 
6,  three  or  four  feet,  the  proportionate  size  of  the  roll  varies 
accordingly,  being  largest,  as  in  9,  where  the  base  is  smallest ; 
and  in  6  and  12  the  leaf  profile  is  given  on  a  larger  scale  than 
the  plan,  or  its  character  could  not  have  been  exhibited. 

§  xv.  Now,  in  all  these  spurs,  the  reader  will  observe  that  the 
narrowest  are  for  the  most  part  the  earliest.  ~No.  2,  from  the 
upper  colonnad^of  St.  Mark's,  is  the  only  instance  I  ever  saw  of 
the  double  spur,  as  transitive  between  the  square  and  octagon 
plinth ;  the  truncated  form,  1,  is  also  rare  and  very  ugly. 
K"os.  3,  4,  5,  7,  and  9  are  the  general  conditions  of  the 
Byzantine  spur ;  8  is  a  very  rare  form  of  plan  in  Byzantine 
work,  but  proved  to  be  so  by  its  rude  level  profile ;  while  7,  on 
the  contrary,  Byzantine  in  plan,  is  eminently  Gothic  in  the 
profile.  9  to  12  are  from  formed  Gothic  buildings,  equally 
refined  in  their  profile  and  plan. 

§  xvi.  The  character  of  the  profile  is  indeed  much  altered  by 
the  accidental  nature  of  the  surface  decoration ;  but  the  import- 
ance of  the  broad  difference  between  the  raised  and  flat  profile 
will  be  felt  on  glancing  at  the  examples  1  to  6  in  Plate  XII. 
The  three  upper  examples  are  the  Romanesque  types,  which 
occur  as  parallels  with  the  Byzantine  types,  1  to  3  of  Plate  XL 
Their  plans  would  be  nearly  the  same ;  but  instead  of  resem- 


Xhcaratian  oiH&£t£. 


Jujjeaajui,  Iitk=c;Ta  isro  adv/ny^T 


DECORATION.  XXV.    THE   BASE.  293 

bling  flat  leaves,  they  are  literally  spurs,  or  claws,  as  high,  as 
they  are  broad;  and  the  third,  from  St.  Michele  of  Pavia, 
appears  to  be  intended  to  have  its  resemblance  to  a  claw  en- 
forced by  the  transverse  fillet.  1  is  from  St.  Ambrogio,  Milan ; 
2  from  Yienne,  France.  The  4th  type,  Plate  XII.,  almost  like 
the  extremity  of  a  man's  foot,  is  a  Byzantine  form  (perhaps 
worn  on  the  edges),  from  the  nave  of  St.  Mark's ;  and  the  two 
next  show  the  unity  of  the  two  principles,  forming  the  perfect 
Italian  Gothic  types, — 5,  from  the  tomb  of  Can  Signorio  clella 
Scala,  Yerona ;  6,  from  San  Stefano,  Yenice  (the  base  11  of 
Plate  XI.  in  perspective).  The  two  other  bases,  10  and  12  of 
Plate  XI.,  are  conditions  of  the  same  kind,  showing  the  varieties 
of  rise  and  fall  in  exquisite  modulation ;  the  10th,  a  type  more 
frequent  at  Yerona  than  Yenice,  in  which  the  spur  profile  over- 
laps the  roll,  instead  of  rising  out  of  it,  and  seems  to  hold  it 
down,  as  if  it  were  a  ring  held  by  sockets.  This  is  a  character 
found  both  in  early  and  late  work :  a  kind  of  band,  or  fillet, 
appears  to  hold,  and  even  compress,  the  centre  of  the  roll  in  the 
base  of  one  of  the  crypt  shafts  of  St.  Peter's,  Oxford,  which  has 
also  spurs  at  its  angles ;  and  long  bands  flow  over  the  base  of 
the  angle  shaft  of  the  Ducal  Palace  of  Yenice,  next  the  Porta 
della  Carta. 

§  xvii.  When  the  main  contours  of  the  base  are  once  deter- 
mined, its  decoration  is  as  easy  as  it  is  infinite.  I  have  merely 
given,  in  Plate  XII.,  three  examples  to  which  I  shall  need  to 
refer,  hereafter.  !N"o.  9  is  a  very  early  and  curious  one;  the 
decoration  of  the  base  6  in  Plate  XI.,  representing  a  leaf  turned 
over  and  flattened  down ;  or,  rather,  the  idea  of  the  turned  leaf, 
worked  as  well  as  could  be  imagined  on  the  flat  contour  of  the 
spur.  Then  10  is  the  perfect,  but  simplest  possible  develop- 
ment of  the  same  idea,  from  the  earliest  bases  of  the  upper 
colonnade  of  the  Ducal  Palace,  that  is  to  say,  the  bases  of  the 
sea  facade ;  and  7  and  8  are  its  lateral  profile  and  transverse 
section.  Finally,  11  and  12  are  two  of  the  spurs  of  the  later 
shafts  of  the  same  colonnade  on  the  Piazzetta  side  (No.  12  of 


294  XXV.    THE   BASE. 


DECORATION. 


Plate  XI.).  "No.  11  occurs  on  one  of  these  shafts  only,  and  is 
singularly  beautiful.  I  suspect  it  to  be  earlier  than  the  other, 
which  is  the  characteristic  base  of  the  rest  of  the  series,  and 
already  shows  the  loose,  sensual,  ungoverned  character  of  fif- 
teenth century  ornament  in  the  dissoluteness  of  its  rolling. 

§  xvm.  I  merely  give  these  as  examples  ready  to  my  hand, 
and  necessary  for  future  reference;  not  as  in  anywise  repre- 
sentative of  the  variety  of  the  Italian  treatment  of  the  general 
contour,  far  less  of  the  endless  caprices  of  the  North.  The  most 
beautiful  base  I  ever  saw,  on  the  whole,  is  a  Byzantine  one  in 
the  Baptistery  of  St.  Mark's,  in  which  the  spur  profile  approx- 
imates to  that  of  "No.  10  in  Plate  XL ;  but  it  is  formed  by  a 
cherub,  who  sweeps  downwards  on  the  wing.  His  two  wings, 
as  they  half  close,  form  the  upper  part  of  the  spur,  and  the  rise 
of  it  in  the  front  is  formed  by  exactly  the  action  of  Alichino, 
swooping  on  the  pitch  lake ;  "  quei  drizzo,  volando,  suso  il 
petto."  But  it  requires  noble  management  to  confine  such  a 
fancy  within  such  limits.  The  greater  number  of  the  best  bases 
are  formed  of  leaves ;  and  the  reader  may  amuse  himself  as  he 
will  by  endless  inventions  of  them,  from  types  which  he  may 
gather  among  the  weeds  at  the  nearest  roadside.  The  value  of 
the  vegetable  form  is  especially  here,  as  above  noted,  Chap. 
XX.,  §  xxxii.,  its  capability  of  unity  with  the  mass  of  the  base, 
and  of  being  suggested  by  few  lines ;  none  but  the  Northern 
Gothic  architects  are  able  to  introduce  entire  animal  forms  in 
this  position  with  perfect  success.  There  is  a  beautiful  instance 
at  the  north  door  of  the  west  front  of  Pouen ;  a  lizard  pausing 
and  curling  himself  round  a  little  in  the  angle ;  one  expects  him 
the  next  instant  to  lash  round  the  shaft  and  vanish :  and  we 
may  with  advantage  compare  this  base  with  those  of  the  Re- 
naissance Scuola  di  San  Pocco*  at  Venice,  in  which  the  archi- 

*  I  have  put  in  Appendix  24.,  "  Rennaissance  Bases,"  my  memorandum  written 
respecting  this  building  on  the  spot.  But  the  reader  had  better  delay  referring  to  it, 
until  we  have  completed  our  examination  of  ornaments  in  shafts  and  capitals. 


DECORATION.  XXV.    THE    BASE.  295 

tect,  imitating  the  mediaeval  bases,  which  he  did  not  understand, 
has  put  an  elephant,  four  inches  high,  in  the  same  position. 

§  xix.  I  have  not  in  this  chapter  spoken  at  all  of  the  profiles 
which  are  given  in  Northern  architecture  to  the  projections  of 
the  lower  members  of  the  base,  b  and  c  in  Fig.  II.,  nor  of  the 
methods  in  which  both  these,  and  the  rolls  of  the  mouldings  in 
Plate  X.,  are  decorated,  especially  in  Roman  architecture,  with 
superadded  chainwork  or  chasing  of  various  patterns.  Of  the 
first  I  have  not  spoken,  because  I  shall  have  no  occasion  to 
allude  to  them  in  the  following  essay ;  nor  of  the  second,  be- 
cause I  consider  them  barbarisms.  Decorated  rolls  and  deco- 
rated ogee  profiles,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  base  of  the  Arc  de 
l'Etoile  at  Paris,  are  among  the  richest  and  farthest  refinements 
of  decorative  appliances  ;  and  they  ought  always  to  be  reserved 
for  jambs,  cornices,  and  archivolts.:  if  you  begin  with  them  in 
the  base,  you  have  no  power  of  refining  your  decorations  as  you 
ascend,  and,  which  is  still  worse,  you  put  your  most  delicate 
work  on  the  jutting  portions  of  the  foundation,—- the  very  por- 
tions which  are  most  exposed  to  abrasion.  The  best  expression 
of  a  base  is  that  of  stern  endurance, — the  look  of  being  able  to 
bear  roughing ;  or,  if  the  whole  building  is  so  delicate  that 
no  one  can  be  expected  to  treat  even  its  base  with  unkind- 
ness*,  then  at  least  the  expression  of  quiet,  prefatory  simplicity. 
The  angle  spur  may  receive  such  decoration  as  we  have  seen, 
because  it  is  one  of  the  most  important  features  in  the  whole 
building ;  and  the  eye  is  always  so  attracted  to  it  that  it  cannot 
be  in  rich  architecture  left  altogether  blank ;  the  eye  is  stayed 
upon  it  by  its  position,  but  glides,  and  ought  to  glide,  along 
the  basic  rolls  to  take  measurement  of  their  length :  and  even 
with  all  this  added  fitness,  the  ornament  of  the  basic  spur  is 
best,  in  the  long  run,  when  it  is  boldest  and  simplest.  The  base 
above  described,  §  xviii.,  as  the  most  beautiful  I  ever  saw,  was 
not  for  that  reason  the  best  I  ever  saw :  beautiful  in  its  place,  in 

*  Appendix  25. :  "  Romanist  Decoration  of  Bases." 


296  XXV.   THE  BASE. 


DECORATION. 


a  quiet  corner  of  a  Baptistery  sheeted  with  jasper  and  alabaster, 
it  would  have  been  utterly  wrong,  nay,  even  offensive,  if  used  in 
sterner  work,  or  repeated  along  a  whole  colonnade.  The  base 
"No.  10  of  Plate  XII.  is  the  richest  with  which  I  was  ever  per- 
fectly satisfied  for  general  service ;  and  the  basic  spurs  of  the 
building  which  I  have  named  as  the  best  Gothic  monument 
in  the  world,  (p.  144.),  have  no  ornament  upon  them  whatever. 
The  adaptation,  therefore,  of  rich  cornice  and  roll  mouldings  to 
the  level  and  ordinary  lines  of  bases,  whether  of  walls  or  shafts, 
I  hold  to  be  one  of  the  worst  barbarisms  which  the  "Roman  and 
Renaissance  architects  ever  committed;  and  that  nothing  can 
afterwards  redeem  the  effeminacy  and  vulgarity  of  the  buildings 
in  which  it  prominently  takes  place. 

§  xx.  I  have  also  passed  over,  without  present  notice,  the 
fantastic  bases  formed  by  couchant  animals,  which  sustain 
many  Lombardic  shafts.  The  pillars  they  support  have  inde- 
pendent bases  of  the  ordinary  kind;  and  the  animal  form 
beneath  is  less  to  be  considered  as  a  true  base  (though  often 
exquisitely  combined  with  it,  as  in  the  shaft  on  the  south-west 
angle  of  the  cathedral  of  Genoa)  than  as  a  piece  of  sculpture, 
otherwise  necessary  to  the  nobility  of  the  building,  and  deriving 
its  value  from  its  special  positive  fulfilment  of  expressional  pur- 
poses, with  which  we  have  here  no  concern.  As  the  embodi- 
ment of  a  wild  superstition,  and  the  representation  of  superna- 
tural powers,  their  appeal  to  the  imagination  sets  at  utter 
defiance  all  judgment  based  on  ordinary  canons  of  law;  and 
the  magnificence  of  their  treatment  atones,  in  nearly  every  case, 
for  the  extravagance  of  their  conception.  I  should  not  admit 
this  appeal  to  the  imagination,  if  it  had  been  made  by  a  nation 
in  whom  the  powers  of  body  and  mind  had  been  languid ;  but 
by  the  Lombard,  strong  in  all  the  realities  of  human  life,  we 
need  not  fear  being  led  astray:  the  visions  of  a  distempered 
fancy  are  not  indeed  permitted  to  replace  the  truth,  or  set  aside 
the  laws  of  science  :  but  the  imagination  which  is  thoroughly 


DECORATION. 


XXV.    THE   BASE.  297 


under  the  command  of  the  intelligent  will*,  has  a  dominion 
indiscernible  by  science,  and  illimitable  by  law ;  and  we  may 
acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  Lombardic  gryphons  in  the 
mere  splendour  of  their  presence,  without  thinking  idolatry  an 
excuse  for  mechanical  misconstruction,  or  dreading  to  be  called 
upon,  in  other  cases,  to  admire  a  systemless  architecture,  because 
it  may  happen  to  have  sprung  from  an  irrational  religion. 

*  In  all  tbe  wildness  of  the  Lombardic  fancy  (described  in  Appendix  8.),  this  com- 
mand of  the  will  over  its  action  is  as  distinct  as  it  is  stern.  The  fancy  is,  in  the  early 
work  of  the  nation,  visibly  diseased ;  but  never  the  will,  nor  the  reason, 


298 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


THE   WALL   VEIL   AND   SHAFT. 


§  i.  No  subject  has  been  more  open  ground  of  dispute  among 
architects  than  the  decoration  of  the  wall  veil,  because  no  deco- 
ration appeared  naturally  to  grow  out  of  its  construction ;  nor 
could  any  curvatures  be  given  to  its  surface  large  enough  to  pro- 
duce much  impression  on  the  eye.  It  has  become,  therefore,  a 
kind  of  general  field  for  experiments  of  various  effects  of  surface 
ornament,  or  has  been  altogether  abandoned  to  the  mosaicist  and 
fresco  painter.  But  we  may  perhaps  conclude,  from  what  was 
advanced  in  the  Fifth  Chapter,  that  there  is  one  kind  of  decora- 
tion which  will,  indeed,  naturally  follow  on  its  construction.  For 
it  is  perfectly  natural  that  the  different  kinds  of  stone  used  in  its 
successive  courses  should  be  of  different  colours ;  and  there  are 
many  associations  and  analogies  which  metaphysically  justify  the 
introduction  of  horizontal  bands  of  colour,  or  of  light  and  shade. 
They  are,  in  the  first  place,  a  kind  of  expression  of  the  growth  or 
age  of  the  wall,  like  the  rings  in  the  wood  of  a  tree  ;  then  they 
are  a  farther  symbol  of  the  alternation  of  light  and  darkness, 
which  was  above  noted  as  the  source  of  the  charm  of  many  in- 
ferior mouldings :  again,  they  are  valuable  as  an  expression  of 
horizontal  space  to  the  imagination,  space  of  which  the  conception 
is  opposed,  and  gives  more  effect  by  its  opposition,  to  the  en- 
closing power  of  the  wall  itself,  (this  I  spoke  of  as  probably  the 
great  charm  of  these  horizontal  bars  to  the  Arabian  mind)  :  and 
again  they  are  valuable  in  their  suggestion  of  the  natural  courses 
of  rocks,  and  beds  of  the  earth  itself.  *  And  to  all  these  powerful 
imaginative  reasons  we  have  to  add  the  merely  ocular  charm  of 
interlineal  opposition  of  colour ;  a  charm  so  great,  that  all  the 


decoration.  XXVI.   THE   WALL   VEIL   AND   SHAFT.  299 

best  colourists,  without  a  single  exception,  depend  upon  it  for 
the  most  piquant  of  their  pictorial  effects,  some  vigorous  mass  of 
alternate  stripes  or  bars  of  colour  being  made  central  in  all  their 
richest  arrangements.  The  whole  system  of  Tintoret's  great  pic- 
ture of  the  Miracle  of  St.  Mark  is  poised  on  the  bars  of  blue, 
which  cross  the  white  turban  of  the  executioner. 

§  ii.  There  are,  therefore,  no  ornaments  more  deeply  sugges- 
tive in  their  simplicity  than  these  alternate  bars  of  horizontal 
colours  ;  nor  do  I  know  any  buildings  more  noble  than  those  of 
the  Pisan  Romanesque,  in  which  they  are  habitually  employed ; 
and  certainly  none  so  graceful,  so  attractive,  so  enduringly  de- 
lightful in  their  nobleness.  Yet,  of  this  pure  and  graceful  orna- 
mentation, Professor  Willis  says,  "  a  practice  more  destructive  of 
architectural  grandeur  can  hardly  be  conceived:  and  modern 
architects  have  substituted  for  it  the  ingenious  ornament  of  which 
the  reader  has  had  one  specimen  above,  Fig.  III.,  p.  60,  and  with 
which  half  the  large  buildings  in  London  are  disfigured,  or  else 
traversed  by  mere  straight  lines,  as,  for  instance,  the  back  of  the 
Bank.  The  lines  on  the  Bank  may,  perhaps,  be  considered 
typical  of  accounts  ;  but  in  general  the  walls,  if  left  destitute  of 
them,  would  have  been  as  much  fairer  than  the  walls  charged 
with  them,  as  a  sheet  of  white  paper  is  than  the  leaf  of  a  ledger. 
But  that  the  reader  may  have  free  liberty  of  judgment  in  this 
matter,  I  place  two  examples  of  the  old  and  the  Renaissance 
ornament  side  by  side  on  the  opposite  page.  That  on  the  right 
is  Romanesque,  from  St.  Pietro  of  Pistoja ;  that  on  the  left, 
modern  English,  from  the  Arthur  Club-house,  St.  James's  Street. 

§  in.  But  why,  it  will  be  asked,  should  the  lines  which  mark 
the  division  of  the  stones  be  wrong  when  they  are  chiselled,  and 
right  when  they  are  marked  by  colour?  First,  because  the 
colour  separation  is  a  natural  one.  You  build  with  different 
kinds  of  stone,  of  which,  probably,  one  is  more  costly  than 
another  ;  which  latter,  as  you  cannot  construct  your  building  of 
it  entirely,  you  arrange  in  conspicuous  bars.  But  the  chiselling 
of  the  stones  is  a  wilful  throwing  away  of  time  and  labour  in  de- 


300  XXVI.   THE  WALL  VEIL  AND  SHAFT.  decoration. 

facing  the  building :  it  costs  much  to  hew  one  of  those  monstrous 
blocks  into  shape ;  and,  when  it  is  done,  the  building  is '  weaker 
than  it  was  before,  by  just  as  much  stone  as  has  been  cut  away 
from  its  joints.  And,  secondly,  because,  as  I  have  repeatedly 
urged,  straight  lines  are  ugly  things  as  lines,  but  admirable  as 
limits  of  coloured  spaces ;  and  the  joints  of  the  stones,  which 
are  painful  in  proportion  to  their  regularity,  if  drawn  as  lines, 
are  perfectly  agreeable  when  marked  by  variations  of  hue. 

§  iv.  What  is  true  of  the  divisions  of  stone  by  chiselling,  is 
equally  true  of  divisions  of  bricks  by  pointing.  Nor,  of  course, 
is  the  mere  horizontal  bar  the  only  arrangement  in  which  the 
colours  of  brickwork  or  masonry  can  be  gracefully  disposed.  It 
is  rather  one  which  can  only  be  employed  with  advantage  when 
the  courses  of  stone  are  deep  and  bold.  When  the  masonry  is 
small,  it  is  better  to  throw  its  colours  into  chequered  patterns. 
We  shall  have  several  interesting  examples  to  study  in  Yenice 
besides  the  well-known  one  of  the  Ducal  Palace.  The  town  of 
Moulins,  in  France,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  on  this  side 
the  Alps  for  its  chequered  patterns  in  bricks.  The  church  of 
Christchurch,  Streatham,  lately  built,  though  spoiled  by  many 
grievous  errors,  (the  ironwork  in  the  campanile  being  the  gross- 
est), yet  affords  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  a  means  of  obtain- 
ing some  idea  of  the  variety  of  effects  which  are  possible  with  no 
other  material  than  brick. 

§  v.  We  have  yet  to  notice  another  effort  of  the  Renaissance 
architects  to  adorn  the  blank  spaces  of  their  walls  by  what  is 
called  Rustication.  There  is  sometimes  an  obscure  trace  of  the 
remains  of  the  imitation  of  something  organic  in  this  kind  of 
work.  In  some  of  the  better  French  eighteenth  century  build- 
ings it  has  a  distinctly  floral  character,  like  a  final  degradation 
of  Flamboyant  leafage;  and  some  of  our  modern  English  archi- 
tects appear  to  have  taken  the  decayed  teeth  of  elephants  for 
their  type  ;  but,  for  the  most  part,  it  resembles  nothing  so  much 
as  worm  casts  ;  nor  these  with  any  precision.  If  it  did,  it  would 
not  bring  it  within  the  sphere  of  our  properly  imitative  orna- 


decoration.  XXVI.   THE   WALL   VEIL   AND   SHAFT.  301 

mentation.  I  thought  it  unnecessary  to  warn  the  reader  that  he 
was  not  to  copy  forms  of  refuse  or  corruption ;  and  that, 
while  he  might  legitimately  take  the  worm  or  the  reptile  for  a 
subject  of  imitation,  he  was  not  to  study  the  worm  cast  or  cop- 
rolite. 

§  vi.  It  is,  however,  I  believe,  sometimes  supposed  that  rus- 
tication gives  an  appearance  of  solidity  to  foundation  stones.  Not 
so ;  at  least  to  any  one  who  knows  the  look  of  a  hard  stone.  You 
may,  by  rustication,  make  your  good  marble  or  granite  look  like 
wet  slime,  honeycomed  by  sand-eels,  or  like  half-baked  tufo 
covered  with  slow  exudation  of  stalactite,  or  like  rotton  claystone 
coated  with  concretions  of  its  own  mud ;  but  not  like  the  stones 
of  which  the  hard  world  is  built.  Do  not  think  that  nature 
rusticates  her  foundations.  Smooth  sheets  of  rock,  glistening  like 
sea  waves,  and  that  ring  under  the  hammer  like  a  brazen 
bell, — that  is  her  preparation  for  first  stories.  She  does  rus- 
ticate sometimes  :  crumbly  sandstones,  with  their  ripple-marks 
filled  with  red  mud ;  dusty  limestones,  which  the  rains  wash 
into  labyrinthine  cavities ;  spongy  lavas,  which  the  volcano 
blast  drags  hither  and  thither  into  ropy  coils  and  bubbling 
hollows ;— these  she  rusticates,  indeed,  when  she  wants  to  make 
oyster-shells  and  magnesia  of  them ;  but  not  when  she  needs 
to  lay  foundations  with  them.  Then  she  seeks  the  polished 
surface  and  iron  heart,  not  rough  looks  and  incoherent  sub- 
stance. 

§  vii.  Of  the  richer  modes  of  wall  decoration  it  is  impossible 
to  institute  any  general  comparison  ;  they  are  quite  infinite,  from 
mere  inlaid  geometrical  figures  up  to  incrustations  of  elaborate 
bas-relief.  The  architect  has  perhaps  more  licence  in  them,  and 
more  power  of  producing  good  effect  with  rude  design  than  in 
any  other  features  of  the  building;  the  chequer  and  hatchet 
work  of  the  Normans  and  the  rude  bas-reliefs  of  the  Lombards 
being  almost  as  satisfactory  as  the  delicate  panelling  and  mosaic 
of  the  Duomo  of  Florence.  But  this  is  to  be  noted  of  all  good 
wall  ornament,  that  it  retains  the  expression  of  firm  and  massive 


302  XXVI.    THE   WALL   VEIL   AXD   SHAFT.  DECORATION. 

substance,  and  of  broad  surface,  and  that  architecture  insl&ntly 
declined  when  linear  design  was  substituted  for  massive,  and  the 
sense  of  weight  of  wall  was  lost  in  a  wilderness  of  upright  or 
undulating  rods.  Of  the  richest  and  most  delicate  wall  veil 
decoration  by  inlaid  work,  as  practised  in  Italy  from  the  twelfth 
to  the  fifteenth  century,  I  have  given  the  reader  two  characteris- 
tic examples  in  Plates  XX.  and  XXI. 

§  viii.  There  are,  however,  three  spaces  in  which  the  wall  veil, 
peculiarly  limited  in  shape,  was  always  felt  to  be  fitted  for  sur- 
face decoration  of  the  most  elaborate  kind  ;  and  in  these  spaces 
are  found  the  most  majestic  instances  of  its  treatment,  even 

to  late  periods.     One  of 
lg*       *  a  these    is     the    spandril 

space,  or  the  filling  be- 
between  any  two  arches, 
commonly  of  the  shape 
«,  Fig.  LXI. ;  the  half  of 
which,  or  the  flank  filling 


/ 


a  h 


of  any  arch,  is  called  a  spandril.  In  Chapter  XYIL,  on  Filling 
of  Apertures,  the  reader  will  find  another  of  these  spaces  noted, 
called  the  tympanum,  and  commonly  of  the  form  &,  Fig.  LXI. : 
and  finally,  in  Chapter  XVIII. ,  he  will  find  the  third  space 
described,  that  between  an  arch  and  its  protecting  gable,  ap- 
proximating generally  to  the  form  c,  Fig.  LXI. 

§  ix.  The  methods  of  treating  these  spaces  might  alone 
furnish  subject  for  three  very  interesting  essays  ;  but  I  shall 
only  note  the  most  essential  points  respecting  them. 

(1.)  The  Spandril.  It  was  observed  in  Chapter  XIL,  that  this 
portion  of  the  arch  load  might  frequently  be  lightened  with  great 
advantage  by  piercing  it  with  a  circle,  or  with  a  group  of  circles ; 
and  the  roof  of  the  Euston  Square  railroad  station  was  adduced 
as  an  example.  One  of  the  spandril  decorations  of  Bayeux 
Cathedral  is  given  in  the  "  Seven  Lamps,"  Plate  YII.  fig.  4. 
It  is  little  more  than  one  of  these  Euston  Square  spandrils,  with 
its  circles  foliated. 


> 


*, 


I 


decoration.  XXVI.   THE   WALL   VEIL   AND   SHAFT.  303 

Sometimes  the  circle  is  entirely  pierced ;  at  other  times  it  is 
merely  suggested  by  a  mosaic  or  light  tracery  on  the  wall 
surface,  as  in  the  plate  opposite,  which  is  one  of  the  spandrils  of 
the  Ducal  Palace  at  Venice.  It  was  evidently  intended  that  all 
the  spandrils  of  this  building  should  be  decorated  in  this  manner, 
but  only  two  of  them  seem  to  have  been  completed.* 

§  x.  The  other  modes  of  spandril  filling  may  be  broadly  reduced 
to  four  heads.  1.  Free  figure  sculpture,  as  in  the  Chapter-house 
of  Salisbury,  and  very  superbly  along  the  west  front  of  Bourges, 
the  best  Gothic  spandrils  I  know.  2.  Radiated  foliage,  more  or 
less  referred  to  the  centre,  or  to  the  bottom  of  the  spandril  for  its 
origin  ;  single  figures  with  expanded  wings  often  answering  the 
same  purpose.  3.  Trefoils ;  and  4.,  ordinary  wall  decoration 
continued  into  the  spandril  space,  as  in  Plate  XIII.,  above,  from 
St.  Pietro  at  Pistoja,  and  in  Westminster  Abbey.  The  Re- 
naissance architects  introduced  spandril  fillings  composed  of 
colossal  human  figures  reclining  on  the  sides  of  the  arch,  in  pre- 
carious lassitude  ;  but  these  cannot  come  under  the  head  of  wall 
veil  decoration. 

§  xi.  (2.)  The  Tympanum.  It  was  noted  that,  in  Gothic  ar- 
chitecture, this  is  for  the  most  part  a  detached  slab  of  stone, 
having  no  constructional  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  building. 
The  plan  of  its  sculpture  is  therefore  quite  arbitrary ;  and,  as  it 
is  generally  in  a  conspicuous  position,  near  the  eye,  and  above 
the  entrance,  it  is  almost  always  charged  with  a  series  of  rich 
figure  sculptures,  solemn  in  feeling  and  consecutive  in  subject. 
It  occupies  in  Christian  sacred  edifices  very  nearly  the  po- 
sition of  the  pediment  in  Greek  sculpture.  This  latter  is  itself 
a  kind  of  tympanum,  and  charged  with  sculpture  in  the  same 
manner. 

§  xii.  (3.)  The  Gable.  The  same  principles  apply  to  it  which 
have  been  noted  respecting  the  spandril,,  with  one  more  of  some 
importance.    The  chief  difficulty  in  treating  a  gable  lies  in  the 

*  Vide  end  of  Appendix  20. 


30tt  XXVI.   THE   WALL   VEIL   AND   SHAFT.  decoration. 

excessive  sharpness  of  its  upper  point.  It  may,  indeed,  on 
its  outside  apex,  receive  a  finial ;  but  the  meeting  of  the  inside 
lines  of  its  terminal  mouldings  is  necessarily  both  harsh  and 
conspicuous,  unless  artificially  concealed.  The  most  beauti- 
ful victory  I  have  ever  seen  obtained  over  this  difficulty 
was  by  placing  a  sharp  shield,  its  point,  as  usual,  downwards,  at 
the  apex  of  the  gable,  which  exactly  reversed  the  offensive 
lines,  yet  without  actually  breaking  them  ;  the  gable  being  com- 
pleted behind  the  shield.  The  same  thing  is  done  in  the 
Northern  and  Southern  Gothic :  in  the  porches  of  Abbeville  and 
the  tombs  of  Verona. 

§  xiii.  I  believe  there  is  little  else  to  be  noted  of  general  laws 
of  ornament  respecting  the  wall  veil.  We  have  next  to  consider 
its  concentration  in  the  shaft. 

Now  the  principal  beauty  of  a  shaft  is  its  perfect  projDortion  to 
its  work, — its  exact  expression  of  necessary  strength.  If  this 
has  been  truly  attained,  it  will  hardly  need,  in  some  cases  hardly 
bear,  more  decoration  than  is  given  to  it  by  its  own  round- 
ing and  taper  curvatures ;  for,  if  we  cut  ornaments  in  in- 
taglio on  its  surface,  we  weaken  it ;  if  we  leave  them  in 
relief,  we  overcharge  it,  and  the  sweep  of  the  line  from  its  base 
to  its  summit,  though  deduced  in  Chapter  VIIL,  from  necessities 
of  construction,  is  already  one  of  gradated  curvature,  and  of  high 
decorative  value. 

§  xiv.  It  is,  however,  carefully  to  be  noted,  that  decorations 
are  admissible  on  colossal  and  on  diminutive  shafts,  which 
are  wrong  upon  those  of  middle  size.  For,  when  the  shaft  is 
enormous,  incisions  or  sculpture  on  its  sides  (unless  colossal 
also),  do  not  materially  interfere  with  the  sweep  of  its  curve,  nor 
diminish  the  efficiency  of  its  sustaining  mass.  And  if  it  be 
diminutive,  its  sustaining  function  is  comparatively  of  so  small 
importance,  the  injurious  results  of  failure  so  much  less,  and  the 
relative  strength  and  cohesion  of  its  mass  so  much  greater,  that 
it  may  be  suffered  in  the  extravagancies  of  ornament  or  outline 
which  would  be  unendurable  in  a  shaft  of  middle  size,  and  im- 


decoration.  XXVI.    THE   WALL   VEIL    AND   SHAFT.  305 

possible  in  one  of  colossal.  Thus,  the  shafts  drawn  in  Plate 
XIII.,  of  the  "Seven  Lamps,"  though  given  as  examples  of  ex- 
travagance, are  yet  pleasing  in  the  general  effect  of  the  arcade 
they  support ;  being  each  some  six  or  seven  feet  high.  But  they 
would  have  been  monstrous,  as  well  as  unsafe,  if  they  had  been 
sixty  or  seventy. 

§  xv.  Therefore,  to  determine  the  general  rule  for  shaft  deco- 
ration, we  must  ascertain  the  proportions  representative  of  the 
mean  bulk  of  shafts  :  they  might  easily  be  calculated  from  a  suf- 
ficient number  of  examples,  but  it  may  perhaps  be  assumed,  for 
our  present  general  purpose,  that  the  mean  standard  would  be  of 
some  twenty  feet  in  height,  by  eight  or  nine  in  circumference  : 
then  this  will  be  the  size  on  which  decoration  is  most  difficult 
and  dangerous :  and  shafts  become  more  and  more  fit  subjects 
for  decoration,  as  they  rise  farther  above  or  fall  farther  beneath 
it,  until  very  small  and  very  vast  shafts  will  both  be  found  to 
look  blank  unless  they  receive  some  chasing  or  imagery  ;  blank, 
whether  they  support  a  chair  or  table  on  the  one  side,  or  sustain 
a  village  on  the  ridge  of  an  Egyptian  architrave  on  the  other. 

§  xvi.  Of  the  various  ornamentation  of  colossal  shafts,  there 
are  no  examples  so  noble  as  the  Egyptian ;  these  the  reader  can 
study  in  Mr.  Robert's  work  on  Egypt  nearly  as  well,  I  imagine, 
as  if  he  were  beneath  their  shadow,  one  of  their  chief  merits,  as 
examples  of  method,  being  the  perfect  decision  and  visibility  of 
their  designs  at  the  necessary  distance  :  contrast  with  these  the 
incrustations  of  bas-relief  on  the  Trajan  pillar,  much  interfering 
with  the  smooth  lines  of  the  shaft,  and  yet  themselves  untracea- 
ble, if  not  invisible. 

§  xvii.  On  shafts  of  middle  size,  the  only  ornament  which  has 
ever  been  accepted  as  right,  is  the  Doric  fluting,  which,  indeed, 
gave  the  effect  of  a  succession  of  unequal  lines  of  shade,  but 
lost  much  of  the  repose  of  the  cylindrical  gradation.  The  Co- 
rinthian fluting,  which  is  a  mean  multiplication  and  deepening 
of  the  Doric,  with  a  square  instead  of  a  sharp  ridge  between 
each  hollow,  destroyed  the  serenity  of  the  shaft  altogether,  and 
20 


306  XXVI.    THE   WALL   VEIL   AXD   SHAFT.  decoration. 

is  always  rigid  and  meagre.  Both  are,  in  fact,  wrong  in  princi- 
ple ;  they  are  an  elaborate  weakening-  of  the  shaft,  exactly  op- 
posed (as  above  shown)  to  the  ribbed  form,  which  is  the  result  of 
a  group  of  shafts  bound  together,  and  which  is  especially  beauti- 
ful when  special  service  is  given  to  each  member. 

§  xviii.  On  shafts  of  inferior  size,  every  species  of  decoration 
may  be  wisely  lavished,  and  in  any  quantity,  so  only  that  the 
form  of  the  shaft  be  clearly  visible.  This  I  hold  to  be  absolutely 
essential,  and  that  barbarism  begins  wherever  the  sculpture  is 
either  so  bossy,  or  so  deeply  cut,  as  to  break  the  contour  of  the 
shaft,  or  compromise  its  solidity.  Thus,  in  Plate  XXI.  (Appen- 
dix 8.),  the  richly  sculptured  shaft  of  the  lower  story  has  lost  its 
dignity  and  definite  function,  and  become  a  shapeless  mass,  inju- 
rious to  the  symmetry  of  the  building,  though  of  some  value  as 
adding  to  its  imaginative  and  fantastic  character.  Had  all  the 
shafts  been  like  it,  the  facade  would  have  been  entirely  spoiled  ; 
the  inlaid  pattern,  on  the  contrary,  which  is  used  on  the  shortest 
shaft  of  the  upper  story,  adds  to  its  preciousness  without  inter- 
fering with  its  purpose,  and  is  every  way  delightful,  as  are  all 
the  inlaid  shaft  ornaments  of  this  noble  church,  (another  exam- 
ple of  them  is  given  in  Plate  XII.  of  the  "  Seven  Lamps").  The 
same  rule  would  condemn  the  Caryatid  ;  which  I  entirely  agree 
with  Mr.  Fergusson  in  thinking  (both  for  this  and  other  reasons) 
one  of  the  chief  errors  of  the  Greek  schools  ;  and,  more  deci- 
sively still,  the  Renaissance  inventions  of  shaft  ornament,  almost 
too  absurd  and  too  monstrous  to  be  seriously  noticed,  which  con- 
sist in  leaving  square  blocks  between  the  cylinder  joints,  as  in 
the  portico  of  No.  1.  Regent  Street,  and  many  other  buildings 
in  London  ;  or  in  rusticating  portions  of  the  shafts,  or  wrapping 
fleeces  about  them,  as  at  the  entrance  of  Burlington  House,  in 
Piccadilly  ;  or  tying  drapery  round  them  in  knots,  as  in  the  new 
buildings  above  noticed  (Chap.  XX.  §  vil),  at  Paris.  But,  with- 
in the  limits  thus  defined,  there  is  no  feature  capable  of  richer 
decoration  than  the  shaft ;  the  most  beautiful  examples  of  all  I 

*  Vide,  however,  their  defence  in  the  Essay  above  quoted,  p.  275. 


DECORATION. 


XXVI.    THE   WALL    VEIL   AND   SHAFT. 


307 


have  seen,  are  the  slender  pillars,  encrusted  with  arabesques, 
which  flank  the  portals  ol  the  Baptistery  and  Duomo  at  Pisa, 
and  some  others  of  the  Pisan  and  Lucchese  churches  ;  but  the 
varieties  of  sculpture  and  inlaying,  with  which  the  small  Ro- 
manesque shafts,  whether  Italian  or  Northern,  are  adorned  when 
they  occupy  important  positions,  are  quite  endless,  and  nearly 
all  admirable.  Mr.  Digby  "Wyatt  has  given  a  beautiful  example 
of  inlaid  work  so  employed,  from  the  cloisters  of  the  Lateran,  in 
his  work  on  early  mosaic ;  an  example  which  unites  the  surface 
decoration  of  the  shaft  with  the  adoption  of  the  spiral  contour. 
This  latter  is  often  all  the  decoration  which  is  needed,  and  none 
can  be  more  beautiful ;  it  has  been  spoken  against,  like  many 
other  good  and  lovely  things,  because  it  has  been  too  often  used 
in  extravagant  degrees,  like  the  well-known  twisting  of  the  pil- 
lars in  Raffaelle's  "  Beautiful  gate."  But  that  extravagant  condi- 
tion was  a  Renaissance  barbarism  :  the  old  Romanesque  builders 
kept  their  spirals  slight  and  pure  ;  often,  as  in  the  example  from 
St.  Zeno,  in  Plate  XVII.  below,  giving  only  half  a  turn  from  the 
base  of  the  shaft  to  its  head,  and  nearly  always  observing  what  I 
hold  to  be  an  imperative  law,  that  no  twisted  shaft  shall  be  single, 
but  composed  of  at  least  two  distinct  members,  twined  with 
each  other.  I  suppose  they  followed  their 
own  right  feeling  in  doing  this,  and  had 
never  studied  natural  shafts  ;  but  the  type 
they  might  have  followed  was  caught  by  one 
of  the  few  great  painters  who  were  not  af- 
fected by  the  evil,  influence  of  the  fifteenth 
century,  Benozzo  G-ozzoli,  who,  in  the  fres- 
coes of  the  Ricardi  Palace,  among  stems  of 
trees  for  the  most  part  as  vertical  as  stone 
shafts,  has  suddenly  introduced  one  of  the 
shape  given  in  Fig.  LXII.  Many  forest 
trees  present,  in  their  accidental  contortions, 
types  of  most  complicated  spiral  shafts,  the 
plan    being   originally   of   a   grouped   shaft 


Fig.  LXII. 


308  XXVI.    THE    WALL   VEIL    AND    SHAFT.  DECORATION. 


rising  from  several  roots  ;  nor,  indeed,  will  the  reader  ever  find 
models  for  every  kind  of  shaft  decoration,  so  graceful  or  so  gor- 
geous, as  he  will  find  in  the  great  forest  aisle,  where  the  strength 
of  the  earth  itself  seems  to  rise  from  the  roots  into  the  vaulting  ; 
but  the  shaft  surface,  barred  as  it  expands  with  rings  of  ebony 
and  silver,  is  fretted  with  traceries  of  ivy,  marbled  with  purple 
moss,  veined  with  grey  lichen,  and  tesselated,  by  the  rays  of  the 
rolling  heaven,  with  flitting  fancies  of  blue  shadow  and  burning 
gold. 


309 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 


THE    CORNICE   AND    CAPITAL. 


§  i.  TnEEE  are  no  features  to  which  the  attention  of  architects 
has  been  more  laboriously  directed,  in  all  ages,  than  these 
crowning  members  of  the  wall  and  shaft ;  and  it  would  be  vain 
to  endeavour,  within  any  moderate  limits,  to  give  the  reader  any 
idea  of  the  various  kinds  of  admirable  decoration  which  have 
been  invented  for  them.  But,  in  proportion  to  the  effort  and 
straining  of  the  fancy,  have  been  the  extravagances  into  which 
it  has  occasionally  fallen;  and  while  it  is  utterly  impossible 
severally  to  enumerate  the  instances  either  of  its  success  or  its 
error,  it  is  very  possible  to  note  the  limits  of  the  one  and  the 
causes  of  the  other.  This  is  all  that  we  shall  attempt  in  the 
present  chapter,  tracing  first  for  ourselves,  as  in  previous  in- 
stances, the  natural  channels  by  which  invention  is  here  to  be 
directed  or  confined,  and  afterwards  remarking  the  places  where, 
in  real  practice,  it  has  broken  bounds. 

§  ii.  The  reader  remembers,  I  hope,  the  main  points  respecting 
the  cornice  and  capital,  established  above  in  the  Chapters  on 
Construction.  Of  these  I  must,  however,  recapitulate  thus 
much : — 

1.  That  both  the  cornice  and  capital  are,  with  reference  to  the 
slope  of  their  profile  or  bell,  to  be  divided  into  two  great  orders ; 
in  one  of  which  the  ornament  is  convex,  and  in  the  other  concave. 
(Ch.  VL,  §v.) 

2.  That  the  capital,  with  reference  to  the  method  of  twisting 
the  cornice  round  to  construct  it,  and  to  unite  the  circular  shaft 
with  the  square  abacus,  falls  into  five  general  forms,  represented 
in  Fig.  XXII.  p.  111. 


310  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND    CAPITAL.  decoration. 

3.  That  the  most  elaborate  capitals  were  formed  by  true  or 
simple  capitals  with  a  common  cornice  added  above  their  abacus. 
(Ch.  IX.,  §  xxiv.) 

We  have  then,  in  considering  decoration,  first  to  observe  the 
treatment  of  the  two  great  orders  of  the  cornice ;  then  their 
gathering  into  the  five  of  the  capital ;  then  the  addition  of  the 
secondary  cornice  to  the  capital  when  formed. 

§  in.  The  two  great  orders  or  families  of  cornice  were  above 
distinguished  in  Fig.  V.,  p.  66.',  and  it  was  mentioned  in  the 
same  place  that  a  third  family  arose  from  their  combination. 
We  must  deal  with  the  two  great  opposed  groups  first. 

They  were  distinguished  in  Fig.  V.  by  circular  curves  drawn 
on  opposite  sides  of  the  same  line.  But  we  now  know  that  in 
these  smaller  features  the  circle  is  usually  the  least  interesting 
curve  that  we  can  use ;  and  that  it  will  be  well,  since  the  capital 
and  cornice  are  both  active  in  their  expression,  to  use  some  of 
the  more  abstract  natural  lines.  We  will  go  back,  therefore,  to 
our  old  friend  the  salvia  leaf;  and  taking  the  same  piece  of  it  we 
had  before,  x  y,  Plate  YIL,  we  will  apply  it  to  the  cornice  line  ; 
first  within  it,  giving  the  concave  cornice,  then  without,  giving 
the  convex  cornice.  In  all  the  figures,  a,  5,  <?,  d,  Plate  XV.,  the 
dotted  line  is  at  the  same  slope,  and  represents  an  average  profile 
of  the  roof  of  cornices  (a.  Fig.  V.,  p.  66.) ;  the  curve  of  the 
salvia  leaf  is  applied  to  it  in  each  case,  first  with  its  roundest 
curvature  up,  then  with  its  roundest  curvature  down  ;  and  we 
have  thus  the  two  varieties,  a  and  5,  of  the  concave  family,  and 
c  and  d,  of  the  convex  family. 

§  iv.  These  four  profiles  will  represent  all  the  simple  cornices 
in  the  world ;  represent  them,  I  mean,  as  central  types  :  for  in 
any  of  the  profiles  an  infinite  number  of  slopes  may  be  given  to 
the  dotted  line  of  the  root  (which  in  these  four  figures  is  always 
at  the  same  angle) ;  and  on  each  of  these  innumerable  slopes  an 
innumerable  variety  of  curves  may  be  fitted,  from  every  leaf  in 
the  forest,  and  every  shell  on  the  shore,  and  every  movement  of 
the  human  fingers  and  fancy  ;  therefore,  if  the  reader  wishes  to 


XV. 


\ 

v. 

v. 

k 


\\ 


4  V_ 


II 


i "nruir r-  ProfifcS 


:  i  rman  Lirti    ■  ■' 


decoration.  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE    AND    CAPITAL.  311 

obtain  something  like  a  numerical  representation  of  the  number 
of  possible  and  beautiful  cornices  which  may  be  based  upon  these 
four  types  or  roots,  and  among  which  the  architect  has  leave  to 
choose  according  to  the  circumstances  01  his  building  and  the 
method  of  its  composition,  let  him  set  down  a  figure  1  to  begin 
with,  and  write  ciphers  after  it  as  fast  as  he  can,  without  stop- 
ping, for  an  hour. 

§  v.  None  of  the  types  are,  however,  found  in  perfection  of 
curvature,  except  in  the  best  work.  Very  often  cornices  are 
worked  with  circular  segments,  (with  a  noble,  massive  effect,  for 
instance,  in  St.  Michele  of  Lucca),  or  with  rude  approximation  to 
finer  curvature,  especially  #,  Plate  XV.,  which  occurs  often  so 
small  as  to  render  it  useless  to  take  much  pains  upon  its  curve. 
It  occurs  perfectly  pure  in  the  condition  represented  by  1  of  the 
series  1 — 6,  in  Plate  XV.,  on  many  of  the  Byzantine  and  early 
Gothic  buildings  of  Venice ;  in  more  developed  form  it  becomes 
the  profile  of  the  bell  of  the  capital  in  the  later  Venetian  Gothic, 
and  in  much  of  the  best  Northern  Gothic.  It  also  represents  the 
Corinthian  capital,  in  which  the  curvature  is  taken  from  the  bell 
to  be  added  in  some  excess  to  the  nodding  leaves.  It  is  the  most 
graceful  of  all  simple  profiles  of  cornice  and  capital. 

§  vi.  1)  is  a  much  rarer  and  less  manageable  type ;  for  this 
evident  reason,  that  while  a  is  the  natural  condition  of  a  line 
rooted  and  strong  beneath,  but  bent  out  by  superincumbent 
weight,  or  nodding  over  in  freedom,  h  is  yielding  at  the  base  and 
rigid  at  the  summit.  It  has,  however,  some  exquisite  uses,  espe- 
cially in  combination,  as  the  reader  may  see  by  glancing  in  ad- 
vance at  the  inner  line  of  the  profile  14  in  Plate  XV. 

§  vii.  c  is  the  leading  convex  or  Doric  type,  as  a  is  the  leading 
concave  or  Corinthian.  Its  relation  to  the  best  Greek  Doric  is 
exactly  what  the  relation  of  a  is  to  the  Corinthian ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  curvature  must  be  taken  from  the  straighter  limb  of  the 
curve  and  added  to  the  bolder  bend,  giving  it  a  sudden  turn  in- 
wards  (as  in  the  Corinthian  a  nod  outwards),  as  the  reader  may 
see  in  the  capital  of  the  Parthenon  in  the  British  Museum,  where 


312  XXVII.   THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

the  lower  limb  of  the  curve  is  all  hut  a  right  line.*  But  these 
Doric  and  Corinthian  lines  are  mere  varieties  of  the  great  fami- 
lies which  are  represented  by  the  central  lines  a  and  <?,  including 
not  only  the  Doric  capital,  but  all  the  small  cornices  formed  by  a 
slight  increase  of  the  curve  of  <?,  which  are  of  so  frequent  occur- 
rence in  Greek  ornaments. 

§  vin.  d  is  the  Christian  Doric,  which  I  said  (Chap.  I.  §  xx.) 
was  invented  to  replace  the  antique :  it  is  the  representative  of 
the  great  Byzantine  and  Gorman  families  of  convex  cornice  and 
capital,  and,  next  to  the  profile  «,  the  most  important  of  the 
four,  being  the  best  profile  for  the  convex  capital,  as  a  is  for  the 
concave  ;  a  being  the  best  expression  of  an  elastic  line  inserted 
vertically  in  the  shaft,  and  d  of  an  elastic  line  inserted  horizon- 
tally and  rising  to  meet  vertical  pressure. 

If  the  reader  will  glance  at  the  arrangements  of  boughs  of  trees, 
lie  will  find  them  commonly  dividing  into  these  two  families,  a 
and  d:  they  rise  out  of  the  trunk  and  nod  from  it  as  $,  or  they 
spring  with  sudden  curvature  out  from  it,  and  rise  into  sympathy 
with  it,  as  at  d  y  but  they  only  accidentally  display  tendencies 
to  the  lines  l>  or  c.  Boughs  which  fall  as  they  spring  from  the 
tree  also  describe  the  curve  d  in  the  plurality  of  instances,  but 
reversed  in  arrangement ;  their  junction  with  the  stem  being  at 
the  top  of  it,  their  sprays  bending  out  into  rounder  curvature. 

§  ix.  These  then  being  the  two  primal  groups,  we  have  next  to 
note  the  combined  group,  formed  by  the  concave  and  convex 
lines  joined  in  various  proportions  of  curvature,  so  as  to  form  to- 
gether the  reversed  or  ogee  curve,  represented  in  one  of  its  most 
beautiful  states  by  the  glacier  line  «,  on  Plate  VII.  I  would 
rather  have  taken  this  line  than  any  other  to  have  formed  my 
third  group  of  cornices  by,  but  as  it  is  too  large,  and  almost  too 
delicate,  we  will  take  instead  that  of  the  Matterhorn  side,  e  f, 
Plate  VII.  For  uniformity's  sake  I  keep  the  slope  of  the  dotted 
line  the  same  as  in  the  primal  forms  ;  and  applying  this  Matter- 

*  In  very  early  Doric  it  was  an  absolute  right  line ;  and  that  capital  is  therefore 
derived  from  the  pure  cornice  root,  represented  by  the  dotted  line. 


decoration.  XXVII.   THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  313 

horn  curve  in  its  four  relative  positions  to  that  line,  I  have  the 
types  of  the  four  cornices  or  capitals  of  the  third  family,  e:  f,  g,  7?, 
on  Plate  XV. 

These  are,  however,  general  types  only  thus  far,  that  their  line 
is  composed  of  one  short  and  one  long  curve,  and  that  they  repre- 
sent the  four  conditions  of  treatment  of  every  such  line  ;  namely, 
the  longest  curve  concave  in  e  and ./,  and  convex  in  g  and  li  •  and 
the  point  of  contrary  flexure  set  high  in  e  and  g,  and  low  in  f 
and  h.  The  relative  depth  of  the  arcs,  or  nature  of  their  curva- 
ture, cannot  be  taken  into  consideration  without  a  complexity  of 
system  which  my  space  does  not  admit. 

Of  the  four  types  thus  constituted,  e  and  f  are  of  great  im- 
portance ;  the  other  two  are  rarely  used,  having  an  appearance 
of  weakness  in  consequence  of  the  shortest  curve  being  concave : 
the  profiles  e  and  y,  when  used  for  cornices,  have  usually  a 
fuller  sweep  and  somewhat  greater  equality  between  the  bran- 
ches of  the  curve ;  but  those  here  given  are  better  represen- 
tatives of  the  structure  applicable  to  capitals  and  cornices  indif- 
ferently. 

§  x.  "Very  often,  in  the  farther  treatment  of  the  profiles  e  or  y, 
another  limb  is  added  to  their  curve  in  order  to  join  it  to  the 
upper  or  lower  members  of  the  cornice  or  capital.  I  do  not  con- 
sider this  addition  as  forming  another  family  of  cornices,  because 
the  leading  and  effective  part  of  the  curve  is  in  these,  as  in  the 
others,  the  single  ogee  ;  and  the  added  bend  is  merely  a  less 
abrupt  termination  of  it  above  or  below  :  still  this  group  is  of  so 
great  importance  in  the  richer  kinds  of  ornamentation  that  we 
must  have  it  sufficiently  represented.  We  shall  obtain  a  type 
of  it  by  merely  continuing  the  line  of  the  Matterhorn  side,  of 
which  before  Ave  took  only  a  fragment.  The  entire  line  e  to  g  on 
Plate  VII.  is  evidently  composed  of  three  curves  of  unequal 
lengths,  which  if  we  call  the  shortest  1,  the  intermediate  one  2, 
and  the  longest  3,  are  there  arranged  in  the  order  1,  3,  2,  count- 
ing upwards.  But  evidently  we  might  also  have  had  the  ar- 
rangements 1,  2,  3,  and  2,  1,  3,  giving  us  three  distinct  lines, 


314  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

altogether  independent  of  position,  which  being  applied  to  one 
general  dotted  slope  will  each  give  four  cornices,  or  twelve  alto- 
gether. Of  these  the  six  most  important  are  those  which  have 
the  shortest  curve  convex :  they  are  given  in  light  relief  from  h 
to  p,  Plate  XV.,  and,  by  turning  the  page  upside  down,  the  other 
six  will  be  seen  in  dark  relief,  only  the  little  upright  bits  of 
shadow  at  the  bottom  are  not  to  be  considered  as  parts  of  them, 
being  only  admitted  in  order  to  give  the  complete  profile  of  the 
more  important  cornices  in  light. 

§  xi.  In  these  types,  as  in  e  andy,  the  only  general  condition 
is,  that  their  line  shall  be  composed  of  three  curves  of  different 
lengths  and  different  arrangements  (the  depth  of  arcs  and  radius 
of  curvatures  being  unconsidered).  They  are  arranged  in  three 
couples,  each  couple  being  two  positions  of  the  same  entire  line ; 
so  that  numbering  the  component  curves  in  order  of  magnitude 
and  counting  upwards,  they  will  read — 

rC    J.,  ^,  o, 

I  3,  2,  1, 
m  1,  3,  2, 

n  2,  3,  1, 

o  2,  1,  3, 
p  3,  1,  2. 

m  and  n,  which  are  the  Matterliom  line,  are  the  most  beautiful 
and  important  of  all  the  twelve  ;  h  and  I  the  next ;  o  and  p  are 
used  only  for  certain  conditions  of  flower  carving  on  the  surface. 
The  reverses  (dark)  of  Jc  and  I  are  also  of  considerable  service  ; 
the  other  four  hardly  ever  used  in  good  work. 

§  xii.  If  we  were  to  add  a  fourth  curve  to  the  component 
series,  we  should  have  forty-eight  more  cornices  :  but  there  is  no 
use  in  pursuing  the  system  further,  as  such  arrangements  are 
very  rare  and  easily  resolved  into  the  simpler  types  with  certain 
arbitrary  additions  fitted  to  their  special  place ;  and,  in  most 
cases,  distinctly  separate  from  the  main  curve,  as  in  the  inner 


XVJ 


ell  U  u 


DECORATION.  XXVII.    THE    CORNICE   AND    CAPITAL.  315 

line  of  ]STo.  14,  which  is  a  form  of  the  type  e,  the  longest  curve, 
i.  e.  the  lowest,  having  deepest  curvature,  and  each  limb  opposed 
by  a  short  contrary  curve  at  its  extremities,  the  convex  limb  by 
a  concave,  the  concave  by  a  convex. 

§  xin.  Such,  then,  are  the  great  families  of  profile  lines  into 
which  all  cornices  and  capitals  may  be  divided  ;  but  their  best 
examples  unite  two  such  profiles  in  a  mode  which  we  cannot 
understand  till  we  consider  the  further  ornament  with  which  the 
profiles  are  charged.  And  in  doing  this  we  must,  for  the  sake  of 
clearness,  consider,  first  the  nature  of  the  designs  themselves, 
and  next  the  mode  of  cutting  them. 

§  xiv.  In  Plate  XVI.,  opposite,  I  have  thrown  together  a  few 
of  the  most  characteristic  mediaeval  examples  of  the  treatment 
of  the  simplest  cornice  profiles  :  the  uppermost,  a,  is  the  pure 
root  of  cornices  from  St.  Mark's.  The  second,  d,  is  the  Christian 
Doric  cornice,  here  lettered  d  in  order  to  avoid  confusion,  its 
profile  being  d  of  Plate  XV.  in  bold  development,  and  here  seen 
on  the  left  hand  side,  truly  drawn,  though  filled  up  with  the 
ornament  to  show  the  mode  in  which  the  angle  is  turned.  This 
is  also  from  St.  Mark's.  The  third,  5,  is  b  of  Plate  XV.,  the 
pattern  being  inlaid  in  black  because  its  office  was  in  the  interior 
of  St.  Mark's,  where  it  was  too  dark  to  see  sculptured  ornament 
at  the  required  distance.  (The  other  two  simple  profiles,  a  and  c 
of  Plate  XV.,  would  be  decorated  in  the  same  manner,  but  re- 
quire no  example  here,  for  the  profile  a  is  of  so  frequent  occur- 
rence that  it  will  have  a  page  to  itself  alone  in  the  next  volume  ; 
and  c  may  be  seen  over  nearly  every  shop  in  London,  being  that 
of  the  common  Greek  egg  cornice.)  The  fourth,  e  in  Plate 
XVI.,  is  a  transitional  cornice,  passing  from  Byzantine  into  Ve- 
netian Gothic  :  f  is  a  fully  developed  Venetian  Gothic  cornice 
founded  on  Byzantine  traditions  ;  and  g  the  perfect  Lombardic- 
Gothic  cornice,  founded  on  the  Pisan  Romanesque  traditions, 
and  strongly  marked  with  the  noblest  Northern  element,  the 
Lombardic  vitality  restrained  by  classical  models.  I  consider  it 
a  perfect  cornice,  and  of  the  highest  order. 


316  XXVII.   THE  CORNICE  AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

§  xv.  Now  in  the  design  of  this  series  of  ornaments  there  are  two 
main  points  to  be  noted ;  the  first,  that  they  all,  except  &,  are 
distinctly  rooted  in  the  lower  part  of  the  cornice,  and  spring  to 
the  top.  This  arrangement  is  constant  in  all  the  best  cornices 
and  capitals  ;  and  it  is  essential  to  the  expression  of  the  support- 
ing power  of  both.  It  is  exactly  opposed  to  the  system  of  run- 
ning cornices  and  handed*  capitals,  in  which  the  ornament  flows 
along  them  horizontally,  or  is  twined  round  them,  as  the  mould- 
ings are  in  the  early  English  capital,  and  the  foliage  in  many 
decorated  ones.  Such  cornices  have  arisen  from  a  mistaken  ap- 
pliance of  the  running  ornaments,  which  are  proper  to  archi volts, 
jambs,  &c,  to  the  features  which  have  definite  functions  of  sup- 
port. A  tendril  may  nobly  follow  the  outline  of  an  arch,  but 
must  not  creep  along  a  cornice,  nor  swathe  or  bandage  a  capi- 
tal ;  it  is  essential  to  the  expression  of  these  features  that  their 
ornament  should  have  an  elastic  and  upward  spring ;  and  as 
the  proper  profile  for  the  curve  is  that  of  a  tree  bough,  as  we 
saw  above,  so  the  proper  arrangement  of  its  farther  ornament  is 
that  which  best  expresses  rooted  and  ascendant  strength  like 
that  of  foliage. 

There  are  certain  very  interesting  exceptions  to  the  rule  (we 
shall  see  a  curious  one  presently) ;  and  in  the  carrying  out  of  the 
rule  itself,  we  may  see  constant  licences  taken  by  the  great  de- 
signers, and  momentary  violations  of  it,  like  those  above  spoken 
of,  respecting  other  ornamental  laws — violations  which  are  for 
our  refreshment,  and  for  increase  of  delight  in  the  general  ob- 
servance ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  peculiar  beauties  of  the  cornice 
<7,  which,  rooting  itself  in  strong  central  clusters,  suffers  some  of 
its  leaves  to  fall  languidly  aside,  as  the  drooping  outer  leaves  of 
a  natural  cluster  do  so  often ;  but  at  the  very  instant  that  it  does 
this,   in  order  that  it  may  not  lose  any  of  its  expression   of 

*  The  word  banded  is  used  by  Professor  Willis  in  a  different  sense  ;  which  I  would 
respect,  by  applying  it  in  his  sense  always  to  the  Impost,  and  in  mine  to  the  capital 
itself.  (This  note  is  not  for  the  general  reader,  who  need  not  trouble  himself  about 
the  matter.) 


decoration.  XXVII.   THE   CORNICE   AND    CAPITAL.  317 

strength,  a  fruit-stalk  is  thrown  up  above  the  languid  leaves,  ab- 
solutely vertical,  as  much  stiffer  and  stronger  than  the  rest  of  the 
plant  as  the  falling  leaves  are  weaker.  Cover  this  with  your 
finger,  and  the  cornice  falls  to  pieces,  like  a  bouquet  which  has 
been  untied. 

§  xvi.  There  are  some  instances  in  which,  though  the  real  ar- 
rangement is  that  of  a  running  stem,  throwing  off  leaves  up  and 
down,  the  positions  of  the  leaves  give  nearly  as  much  elasticity 
and  organisation  to  the  cornice,  as  if  they  had  been  rightly  root- 
ed ;  and  others,  like  5,  where  the  reversed  portion  of  the  orna- 
ment is  lost  in  the  shade,  and  the  general  expression  of  strength 
is  got  by  the  lower  member.     This  cornice  will,  nevertheless,  be 
felt  at  once  to  be  inferior  to  the  rest ;  and  though  we  may  often 
be  called  upon  to  admire  designs  of  these  kinds,  which  would 
have  been  exquisite  if  not  thus  misplaced,  the  reader  will  find 
that  they  are  both  of  rare  occurrence,  and  significative  of  de- 
clining style ;  while  the  greater  mass  of  the  banded  capitals  are 
heavy  and  valueless,  mere  aggregations  of  confused  sculpture, 
swathed  round  the  extremity  of  the  shaft,  as  if  one  had  dipped 
it  into  a  mass  of  melted  ornament,  as  the  glass-blower  does  his 
blow-pipe  into  the  metal,  and  brought  up  a  quantity  adhering 
glutinously  to  its  extremity.     We  have  many  capitals  of  this 
kind  in  England  :  some  of  the  worst  and  heaviest  in  the  choir  of 
York.    The  later  capitals  of  the  Italian  Gothic  have  the  same 
kind  of  effect,  but  owing  to  another  cause  :  for  their  structure 
is  quite  pure,  and  based  on  the  Corinthian  type :  and  it  is  the 
branching  form  of  the  heads  of  the  leaves  which  destroys  the 
effect  of  their  organisation.     On  the  other  hand,  some  of  the 
Italian  cornices  which  are  actually  composed  by  running  ten- 
drils, throwing  off  leaves  into  oval  interstices,  are  so  massive  in 
their  treatment,  and  so  marked  and  firm  in  their  vertical  and 
arched  lines,  that  they  are  nearly  as  suggestive  of  support  as  if 
they  had  been  arranged  on  the  rooted  system.     A  cornice  of  this 
kind  is  used  in  St.  Michele  of  Lucca  (Plate  VI.  in  the  "  Seven 
Lamps,"  and  XXL  here),  and  with  exquisite  propriety  ;  for  that 


318  XXVII.   THE   COKXICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

cornice  is  at  once  a  crown  to  the  story  beneath  it  and  a  founda- 
tion to  that  which  is  above  it,  and  therefore  unites  the  strength 
and  elasticity  of  the  lines  proper  to  the  cornice  with  the  submis- 
sion and  prostration  of  those  proper  to  the  foundation. 

§  xvii.  This,  then,  is  the  first  point  needing  general  notice  in 
the  designs  in  Plate  XVI.     The  second  is  the  difference  between 
the  freedom  of  the  Northern  and  the  sophistication  of  the  classi- 
cal cornices,  in  connection  with  what  has  been  advanced  in  Ap- 
pendix 8.     The  cornices,  #,  d,  and  5,  are  of  the  same  date,  but 
they  show  a  singular  difference  in  the  workman's  temper :  that 
at  b  is  a  simple  copy  of  a  classical  mosaic  ;  and  many  carved  cor- 
nices occur,  associated  with  it,  which  are,  in  like  manner,  mere 
copies  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  egg  and  arrow  mouldings.     But 
the  cornices  a  and  d  are  copies  of  nothing  of  the  kind  :  the  idea 
of  them  has  indeed  been  taken  from  the   Greek  honeysuckle 
ornament,  but  the  chiselling  of  them  is  in  no  wise  either  Greek, 
or  Byzantine,  in  temper.     The  Byzantines  were  languid  copyists  : 
this  work  is  as  energetic  as  its  original ;  energetic,  not  in  the 
quantity  of  work,  but  the  spirit  of  it :  an  indolent  man,  forced 
into  toil,  may  cover  large  spaces  with  evidence  of  his  feeble  ac- 
tion, or  accumulate  his  dulness  into  rich  aggregation  of  trouble, 
but  it  is  gathered  weariness  still.     The  man  who  cut  those  two 
uppermost  cornices  had  no  time  to  spare ;  did  as  much  cornice 
as  he  could  in  half  an  hour  ;  but  would  not  endure  the  slightest 
trace  of  error  in  a  curve,  or  of  bluntness  in  an  edge.     His  work 
is  absolutely  unreproveable  ;  keen,  and  true,  as  Nature's  own ; 
his  entire  force  is  in  it,  and  fixed  on  seeing  that  every  line  of  it 
shall  be  sharp  and  right :  the  faithful  energy  is  in  him  :  we  shall 
see  something  come  of  that  cornice  :  The  fellow  who  inlaid  the 
other  (J),  will  stay  where  he  is  for  ever ;  and  when  he  has  inlaid 
one  leaf  up,  will  inlay  another  down, — and  so  undulate  up  and 
clown  to  all  eternity  :  but  the  man  of  a  and  d  will  cut  his  way 
forward,  or  there  is  no  truth  in  handicrafts,  nor  stubbornness  in 
stone. 

§  xvm.  But  there  is  something  else  noticeable  in  those  two 


decoration.  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  319 

cornices,  besides  the  energy  of  them :  as  opposed  either  to  &,  or 
the  Greek  honeysuckle  or  egg  patterns,  they  are  natural  designs. 
The  Greek  egg  and  arrow  cornice  is  a  nonsense  cornice,  very 
noble  in  its  lines,  but  utterly  absurd  in  meaning.  Arrows  have 
had  nothing  to  do  with  eggs  (at  least  since  Leda's  time),  neither 
are  the  so-called  arrows  like  arrows,  nor  the  eggs  like  eggs,  nor 
the  honeysuckles  like  honeysuckles ;  they  are  all  convention- 
alised into  a  monotonous  successiveness  of  nothing, — pleasant  to 
the  eye,  useless  to  the  thought.  But  those  Christian  cornices 
are,  as  far  as  may  be,  suggestive ;  there  is  not  the  tenth  of  the 
work  in  them  that  there  is  in  the  Greek  arrows,  but,  as  far  as 
that  work  will  go,  it  has  consistent  intention  ;  with  the  fewest 
possible  incisions,  and  those  of  the  easiest  shape,  they  suggest 
the  true  image,  of  clusters  of  leaves,  each  leaf  with  its  central 
depression  from  root  to  point,  and  that  distinctly  visible  at 
almost  any  distance  from  the  eye,  and  in  almost  any  light. 

§  xix.  Here,  then,  are  two  great  new  elements  visible ;  energy 
and  naturalism  : — Life,  with  submission  to  the  laws  of  God,  and 
love  of  his  works ;  this  is  Christianity,  dealing  with  her  classical 
models.  Now  look  back  to  what  I  said  in  Chap.  I.  §  xx.  of  this 
dealing  of  hers,  and  invention  of  the  new  Doric  line ;  then  to 
what  is  above  stated  (§  vin.)  respecting  that  new  Doric,  and  the 
boughs  of  trees ;  and  now  to  the  evidence  in  the  cutting  of  the 
leaves  on  the  same  Doric  section,  and  see  how  the  whole  is 
beginning  to  come  together. 

§  xx.  We  said  that  something;  would  come  of  these  two  cor- 
nices,  a  and  d.  In  e  and  f  we  see  that  something  has  come  of 
them :  e  is  also  from  St.  Mark's,  and  one  of  the  earliest  examples 
in  Yenice  of  the  transition  from  the  Byzantine  to  the  Gothic 
cornice.  It  is  already  singularly  developed ;  flowers  have  been 
added  between  the  clusters  of  leaves,  and  the  leaves  themselves 
curled  over :  and  observe  the  well-directed  thought  of  the  sculp- 
tor in  this  curling ; — the  old  incisions  are  retained  below,  and 
their  excessive  rigidity  is  one  of  the  proofs  of  the  earliness  of  the 
cornice ;  but  those  incisions  now  stand  for  the  under  surface  of 
the  leaf;  and  behold,  when  it  turns  over,  on  the  top  of  it  you  see 


320  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

true  ribs.  Look  at  the  upper  and  under  surface  of  a  cabbage- 
leaf,  and  see  what  quick  steps  we  are  making. 

§  xxi.  The  fifth  example  (f)  was  cut  in  1347;  it  is  from  the 
tomb  of  Marco  Giustiniani,  in  the  church  of  St.  John  and  Paul, 
and  it  exhibits  the  character  of  the  central  Venetian  Gothic  fully 
developed.  The  lines  are  all  now  soft  and  undulatory,  though 
elastic ;  the  sharp  incisions  have  become  deeply-gathered  folds ; 
the  hollow  of  the  leaf  is  expressed  completely  beneath,  and  its 
edges  are  touched  with  light,  and  incised  into  several  lobes,  and 
their  ribs  delicately  drawn  above.  (The  flower  between  is  only 
accidentally  absent ;  it  occurs  in  most  cornices  of  the  time.) 

But  in  both  these  cornices  the  reader  will  notice  that  while 
the  naturalism  of  the  sculpture  is  steadily  on  the  increase,  the 
classical  formalism  is  still  retained.  The  leaves  are  accurately 
numbered,  and  sternly  set  in  their  places ;  they  are  leaves  in 
office,  and  dare  not  stir  nor  wave.  They  have  the  shapes  of 
leaves,  but  not  the  functions ;  "  having  the  form  of  knowledge, 
but  denying  the  power  thereof."     What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ? 

§  xxn.  Look  back  to  the  xxxnird  paragraph  of  the  first  chap- 
ter, and  you  will  see  the  meaning  of  it.  Those  cornices  are 
the  Venetian  Ecclesiastical  Gothic ;  the  Christian  element  strug- 
gling with  the  Formalism  of  the  Papacy, — the  Papacy  being 
entirely  heathen  in  all  its  principles.  That  officialism  of  the 
leaves  and  their  ribs  means  Apostolic  succession,  and  I  don't 
know  how  much  more,  and  is  already  preparing  for  the  transi- 
tion to  old  Heathenism  again,  and  the  Renaissance.* 

=*  The  Renaissance  period  being  one  of  return  to  formalism  on  the  one  side,  of  utter 
licentiousness  on  the  other,  so  that  sometimes,  as  here,  I  have  to  declare  its  lifelessness, 
at  other  times  (Chap.  XXV.,  §  xvn.)  its  lasciviousness.  There  is,  of  course,  no 
contradiction  in  this :  but  the  reader  might  well  ask  how  I  knew  the  change  from 
the  base  11  to  the  base  12,  in  Plate  XII.,  to  be  one  from  temperance  to  luxury; 
and  from  the  cornice  /  to  the  cornice  g,  in  Plate  XVI.,  to  be  one  from  formalism  to 
vitality.  I  know  it,  both  by  certain  internal  evidences,  on  which  I  shall  have  to  dwell 
at  length  hereafter,  and  by  the  context  of  the  works  of  the  time.  But  the  outward 
signs  might  in  both  ornaments  be  the  samet  distinguishable  only  as  signs  of  opposite 
tendencies  by  the  event  of  both.  The  blush  of  shame  cannot  always  be  told  from  the 
blush  of  indignation. 


decoration.  XXVII.    THE   COENICE   AND   CAPITAL.  321 

§  xxiii.  Now  look  to  the  last  cornice  (g).  That  is  Protest- 
antism,— a  slight  touch  of  Dissent,  hardly  amounting  to  schism, 
in  those  falling  leaves,  but  true  life  in  the  whole  of  it.  The 
forms  all  broken  through,  and  sent  heaven  knows  where,  but 
the  root  held  fast ;  and  the  strong  sap  in  the  branches ;  and, 
best  of  all,  good  fruit  ripening  and  opening  straight  towards 
heaven,  and  in  the  face  of  it,  even  though  some  of  the  leaves  lie 
in  the  dust. 

Now,  observe.  The  cornice  f  represents  Heathenism  and 
Papistry,  animated  by  the  mingling  of  Christianity  and  nature. 
The  good  in  it,  the  life  of  it,  the  veracity  and  liberty  of  it,  such 
as  it  has,  are  Protestantism  in  its  heart ;  the  rigidity  and  sap- 
lessness  are  the  Pomanism  of  it.  It  is  the  mind  of  Fra  Angelico 
in  the  monk's  dress, — Christianity  before  the  Eeformation.  The 
cornice  g  has  the  Lombardic  life  element  in  its  fulness,  with 
only  some  colour  and  shape  of  Classicalism  mingled  with  it — the 
good  of  Classicalism ;  as  much  method  and  Formalism  as  are 
consistent  with  life,  and  fitting  for  it:  The  continence  within 
certain  border  lines,  the  unity  at  the  root,  the  simplicity  of 
the  great  profile, — all  these  are  the  healthy  classical  elements 
retained :  the  rest  is  reformation,  new  strength,  and  recovered 
liberty. 

§  xxiv.  There  is  one  more  point  about  it  especially  noticeable. 
The  leaves  are  thoroughly  natural  in  their  general  character,  but 
they  are  of  no  particular  species  :  and  after  being  something  like 
cabbage-leaves  in  the  beginning,  one  of  them  suddenly  becomes 
an  ivy-leaf  in  the  end.     Now  I  don't  know  what  to  say  of  this. 
I  know  it,  indeed,  to  be  a  classical  character ; — it  is  eminently 
characteristic  of  Southern  work ;  and  markedly  distinctive  of  it 
from  the  Northern  ornament,  which  would  have  been  oak,  or 
ivy,  or  apple,  but  not  anything,  nor  two  things  in  one.     It  is,  I 
repeat,  a  clearly  classical  element ;  but  whether  a  good  or  bad 
element,  I  am  not  sure ; — whether  it  is  the  last  trace  of  Centaur- 
ism  and  other  monstrosity  dying  away ;  or  whether  it  has  a 
figurative  purpose,  legitimate  in  architecture  (though  never  in 

21 


322  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND  CAPITAL.  decoration. 

painting),  and  has  been  rightly  retained  by  the  Christian  sculp- 
tor, to  express  the  working  of  that  spirit  which  grafts  one  nature 
upon  another,  and  discerns  a  law  in  its  members  warring  against 
the  law  of  its  mind. 

§  xxv.  These,  then,  being  the  points  most  noticeable  in  the 
spirit  both  of  the  designs  and  the  chiselling,  we  have  now  to 
return  to  the  question  proposed  in  §  xiii.,  and  observe  the  modi- 
fications of  form  of  profile  which  resulted  from  the  changing 
contours  of  the  leafage ;  for  up  to  §  xiii.,  we  had,  as  usual,  con- 
sidered the  possible  conditions  of  form  in  the  abstract ; — the 
modes  in  which  they  have  been  derived  from  each  other  in 
actual  practice  require  to  be  followed  in  their  turn.  How  the 
Greek  Doric  or  Greek  ogee  cornices  were  invented  is  not  easy  to 
determine,  and,  fortunately,  is  little  to  our  present  purpose ;  for 
the  mediaeval  ogee  cornices  have  an  independent  development 
of  their  own,  from  the  first  type  of  the  concave  cornice  a  in 
Plate  XV. 

§  xxvi.  That  cornice  occurs,  in  the  simplest  work,  perfectly 
pure,  but  in  finished  work  it  was  quickly  felt  that  there  was  a 

meagreness  in  its  junction  with  the 
Fig.  LXIII.  wall  beneath  it,  where  it  was  set  as 

here  at  #,  Fig.  LXIII.,  which  could 

only  be  conquered  by  concealing 

such  junction  in  a  bar  of  shadow. 

There  were  two  ways   of  getting 
BJffir  Bf§  U   this  bar:  one  by  a  projecting  roll 

at  the  foot  of  the  cornice  (5,  Fig. 

LXIIL),  the  other  by  slipping  the 
whole  cornice  a  little  forward  (c,  Fig.  LXIIL).  From  these  two 
methods  arise  two  groups  of  cornices  and  capitals,  which  we 
shall  pursue  in  succession. 

§  xxvii.  First  group.  "With  the  roll  at  the  base,  (£,  Fig. 
LXIIL).  The  chain  of  its  succession  is  represented  from  1 
to  6,  in  Plate  XY. :  1  and  2  are  the  steps  already  gained,  as  in 
Fig.  LXIII. ;  and  in  them  the  profile  of  cornice  used  is  a  of 


decoration.  XXVII.    THE    CORNICE    AND    CAPITAL.  323 

Plate  XY.,  or  a  refined  condition  of  1)  of  Fig.  Y.,  p.  66.  above. 
Now,  keeping  the  same  refined  profile,  substitute  the  condition  of 
it,  f  of  Fig.  Y.  (and  there  accounted  for),  above  the  roll  here, 
and  you  have  3,  Plate  XY.  This  superadded  abacus  was  in- 
stantly felt  to  be  harsh  in  its  projecting  angle  ;  but  you  know 
what  to  do  with  an  angle  when  it  is  harsh.  Use  your  simplest 
chamfer  on  it  (a  or  &,  Fig.  LIIL,  page  266.  above),  but  on  the 
visible  side  only,  and  you  have  Hg.  4,  Plate  XY.,  (the  top  stone 
being  made  deeper  that  you  may  have  room  to  chamfer  it).  Now 
this  fig.  4  is  the  profile  of  Lombardic  and  Yenetian  early  capitals 
and  cornices,  by  tens  of  thousands  ;  and  it  continues  into  the  late 
Yenetian  Gothic,  with  this  only  difference,  that  as  time  advances, 
the  vertical  line  at  the  top  of  the  original  cornice  begins  to  slope 
outwards,  and  through  a  series  of  years  rises  like  the  hazel  wand 
in  the  hand  of  a  diviner  : — but  how  slowly  !  a  stone  dial  which 
marches  but  45  degrees  in  three  centuries,  and  through  the  inter- 
mediate condition  5  arrives  at  6,  and  so  stays. 

In  tracing  this  chain  I  have  kept  all  the  profiles  of  the  same 
height  in  order  to  make  the  comparison  more  easy ;  the  depth 
chosen  is  about  intermediate  between  that  which  is  customary 
in  cornices  on  the  one  hand,  which  are  often  a  little  shorter,  and 
capitals  on  the  other,  which  are  often  a  little  deeper.*  And  it 
is  to  be  noted  that  the  profiles  5  and  6  establish  themselves 
in  capitals  chiefly,  while  4  is  retained  in  cornices  to  the  latest 
times. 

=*  The  reader  must  always  remember  that  a  cornice,  in  becoming  a  capital,  must,  if 
not  originally  bold  and  deep,  have  depth  added  to  its  profile,  in  order  to  reach  the  just 
proportion  of  the  lower  member  of  the  shaft  head ;  and  that  therefore  the  small  Greek 
egg  cornices  are  utterly  incapable  of  becoming  capitals  till  they  have  totally  changed 
their  form  and  depth.  The  Renaissance  architects,  who  never  obtained  hold  of  a 
right  principle  but  they  made  it  worse  than  a  wrong  one  by  misapplication,  caught 
the  idea  of  turning  the  cornice  into  a  capital,  but  did  not  comprehend  the  necessity 
of  the  accompanying  change  of  depth.  Hence  we  have  pilaster  heads  formed  of  small 
egg  cornices,  and  that  meanest  of  all  mean  heads  of  shafts,  the  coarse  Roman  Doric 
profile  chopped  into  a  small  egg  and  arrow  moulding,  both  which  may  be  seen  dis- 
figuring half  the  buildings  in  London. 


324  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL. 


DECORATION. 


§  xxvm.  Second  group  (<?,  Fig.  LXIIL).      If  the  lower  angle, 
which  was  quickly  felt  to  be  hard,  be  rounded  off,  we  have  the 

form  a,  Fig.  LXIY.  The  front  of  the 
curved  line  is  then  decorated,  as  we 
have  seen  ;  and  the  termination  of  the 
decorated  surface  marked  by  an  in- 
cision, as  in  an  ordinary  chamfer,  as  at 
_        h  here.      This  I  believe  to  have  been 

Py— ;■  til  i  mi  I1 

&  W  the  simple  origin  of  most  of  the  Vene- 

tian ogee  cornices  ;  but  they  are  far- 
ther complicated  by  the  curves  given  to  the  leafage  which  flows 
over  them.     In  the  ordinary  Greek  cornices,  and  in  a  and  d  of 
Plate  XYL,  the  decoration  is  incised  from  the  outside  profile, 
without  any  suggestion  of  an  interior  surface  of  a  different  con- 
tour.    But  in  the  leaf  cornices  which  follow,  the  decoration  is  re- 
presented as  overlaid  on  one  of  the  early  profiles,  and  has  ano- 
ther outside  contour  of  its  own  ;  which  is,  indeed,  the  true  profile 
of  the  cornice,  but  beneath  which,  more  or  less,  the  simpler  pro- 
file is  seen  or  suggested,  which  terminates  all  the  incisions  of  the 
chisel.     This  under  profile  will  often  be  found  to  be  some  condi- 
tion of  the  type  a  or  5,  Fig.  LXIY. ;  and  the  leaf  profile  to  be 
another  ogee  with  its  fullest  curve  up  instead  of  down,  lapping 
over  the  cornice  edge  above,  so  that  the  entire  profile  might  be 
considered  as  made  up  of  two  ogee  curves  laid,  like  packed  her- 
rings, head  to  tail.     Figures  8  and  9  of  Plate  XY.  exemplify  this 
arrangement.     Fig.  7  is  a  heavier  contour,  doubtless  composed 
in  the  same  manner,  but  of  which  I  had  not  marked  the  inner- 
most profile,  and  which  I  have  given  here  only  to  complete  the 
series  which,  from  7  to  12  inclusive,  exemplifies  the  gradual  re- 
striction of  the  leaf  outline,  from  its  boldest  projection  in  the  cor- 
nice to  its  most  modest  service  in  the  capital.     This  change, 
however,  is  not  one  which  indicates  difference  of  age,  but  merely 
of  office  and  position  :  the  cornice  7  is  from  the  tomb  of  the  Doge 
Andrea  Dandolo  (1350)  in  St.  Mark's,  8  from  a  canopy  over  a 
door  of  about  the  same  period,  9  from  the  tomb  of  the  Dogaressa 


decoration.  XXVII.    TIIE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  325 

Agnese  Venier  (1411),  10  from  that  of  Pietro  Cornaro  (1361)*, 
and  11  from  that  of  Andrea  Morosini  (1347),  all  in  the  church  of 
San  Giov.  and  Paola,  all  these  being  cornice  profiles ;  and, 
finally,  12  from  a  capital  of  the  Ducal  Palace,  of  fourteenth  cen- 
tury work. 

§  xxix.  Now  the  reader  will  doubtless  notice  that  in  the  three 
examples,  10  to  12,  the  leaf  has  a  different  contour  from  that  of 
7,  8,  or  9.  .  This  difference  is  peculiarly  significant.  I  have 
always  desired  that  the  reader  should  theoretically  consider  the 
capital  as  a  concentration  of  the  cornice ;  but  in  practice  it  often 
happens  that  the  cornice  is,  on  the  contrary,  an  unrolled  capital; 
and  one  of  the  richest  early  forms  of  the  Byzantine  cornice  (not 
given  in  Plate  XV.,  because  its  separate  character  and  import- 
ance require  examination  apart)  is  nothing  more  than  an  unrolled 
continuation  of  the  lower  range  of  acanthus  leaves  on  the  Co- 
rinthian capital.  From  this  cornice  others  appear  to  have  been 
derived,  like  e  in  Plate  XVI.,  in  which  the  acanthus  outline  has 
become  confused  with  that  of  the  honeysuckle,  and  the  rosette  of 
the  centre  of  the  Corinthian  capital  introduced  between  them; 
and  thus  their  forms  approach  more  and  more  to  those  derived 
from  the  cornice  itself.  Now  if  the  leaf  has  the  contour  of  10, 
11,  or  12,  Plate  XV.,  the  profile  is  either  actually  of  a  capital,  or 
of  a  cornice  derived  from  a  capital ;  while,  if  the  leaf  have  the 
contour  of  7  or  8,  the  profile  is  either  actually  of  a  cornice  or  of 
a  capital  derived  from  a  cornice.  Where  the  Byzantines 
use  the  acanthus,  the  Lombards  use  the  Persepolitan  water- 
leaf;  but  the  connection  of  the  cornices  and  capitals  is  exactly 
the  same. 

§  xxx.  Thus  far,  however,  we  have  considered  the  characters 
of  profile  which  are  common  to  the  cornice  and  capital  both.  We 
have  now  to  note  what  farther  decorative  features  or  peculiarities 
belong  to  the  capital  itself,  or  result  from  the  theoretical  ga- 
thering of  the  one  into  the  other. 

*  I  have  taken  these  dates  roughly  from  Selvatico ;  their  absolute  accuracy,  to  with- 
in a  year  or  two,  is  here  of  no  importance. 


326  XXVII.   THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

Look  back  to  Fig.  XXII.,  p.  111.  The  five  types  there  given, 
represented  the  Hve  different  methods  of  concentration  of  the 
root  of  cornices,  a  of  Fig.  V .  Now,  as  many  profiles  of  cornices 
as  were  developed  in  Plate  XY.  from  this  cornice  root,  there  re- 
presented by  the  dotted  slope,  so  many  may  be  applied  to  each 
of  the  Hyq  types  in  Fig.  XXIL, — applied  simply  in  a  and  5,  bnt 
with  farther  modifications,  necessitated  by  their  truncations  or 
spurs,  in  <?,  d,  and  e. 

Then,  these  cornice  profiles  having  been  so  applied  in  such 
length  and  slope  as  is  proper  for  capitals,  the  farther  condition 
comes  into  effect  described  in  Chapter  IX.  §  xxiv.,  and  any  one 
of  the  cornices  in  Plate  XY.  may  become  the  abacas  of  a  capital 
formed  out  of  any  other,  or  out  of  itself.  The  infinity  of  forms 
thus  resultant  cannot,  as  may  well  be  supposed,  be  exhibited  or 
catalogued  in  the  space  at  present  permitted  to  us :  but  the 
reader,  once  master  of  the  principle,  will  easily  be  able  to  inves- 
tigate for  himself  the  syntax  of  all  examples  that  may  occur  to  him, 
and  I  shall  only  here,  as  a  kind  of  exercise,  put  before  him  a  few 
of  those  which  he  will  meet  with  most  frequently  in  his  Yenetian 
enquiries,  or  which  illustrate  points,  not  hitherto  touched  upon, 
in  the  disposition  of  the  abacus. 

§  xxxi.  In  Plate  XYII.  the  capital  at  the  top,  on  the  left  hand, 
is  the  rudest  possible  gathering  of  the  plain  Christian  Doric 
cornice,  d  of  Plate  XY.  The  shaft  is  octagonal,  and  the  capital 
is  not  cut  to  fit  it,  but  is  square  at  the  base  ;  and  the  curve  of  its 
profile  projects  on  two  of  its  sides  more  than  on  the  other  two, 
so  as  to  make  the  abacus  oblong,  in  order  to  carry  an  oblong  mass 
of  brickwork,  dividing  one  of  the  upper  lights  of  a  Lombard 
campanile  at  Milan.  The  awkward  stretching  of  the  brickwork, 
to  do  what  the  capital  ought  to  have  done,  is  very  remarkable. 
There  is  here  no  second  superimposed  abacus. 

§  xxxii.  The  figure  on  the  right  hand,  at  the  top,  shows  the 
simple  but  perfect  fulfillment  of  all  the  requirements  in  which 
the  first  example  fails.  The  mass  of  brickwork  to  be  carried  is 
exactly  the  same  in  size  and  shape ;  but  instead  of  being  trusted 


wu 


EusJja 


Ack  .'im  an  ItA"1  tf)  Bio  adw  aylJ  i 


CJapitat/. 

CONCAVE   LlRo'liP. 


DECORATION. 


XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND    CAPITAL. 


327 


to  a  single  shaft,  it  has  two  of  smaller  area  (compare  Chap.  YIII. 
§  xiii.)  and  all  the  expansion  necessary  is  now  gracefully  attained 
by  their  united  capitals,  hewn  out  of  one  stone.  Take  the  section 
of  these  capitals  through  their  angle,  and  nothing  can  be  simpler 
or  purer ;  it  is  composed  of  2,  in  Plate  XV.,  used  for  the  capital 
itself,  with  c  of  Fig.  LXIII.  used  for  the  abacus  ;  the  reader 
could  hardly  have  a  neater  little  bit  of  syntax  for  a  first  lesson. 
If  the  section  be  taken  through  the  side  of  the  bell,  the  capital 
profile  is  the  root  of  cornices,  a  of  Fig.  V,  with  the  added  roll. 
This  capital  is  somewhat  remarkable  in  having  its  sides  perfectly 
straight,  some  slight  curvature  being  usual  on  so  bold  a  scale ; 
but  it  is  all  the  better  as  a  first  example,  the  method  of  reduction 
being  of  order  <#,  in  Fig.  XXII.  p.  111.,  and  with  a  concave  cut, 
as  in  Fig.  XXI.  p.  110.  These  two  capitals  are  from  the  cloister 
of  the  duomo  of  Yerona. 

§  xxxiii.  The  lowermost  figure  in  Plate  XVII.  represents  an 
exquisitely  finished  example  of  the  same  type,  from  St.  Zeno  of 
Verona.  Above,  at  2,  in  Plate  II.,  the  plan  of  the  shafts  was 
given,  but  I  inadvertently  reversed  their  position :  in  comparing 
that  plan  with  Plate  XVIL,  Plate  II.  must  be  held  upside  down. 
The  capitals,  with  the  band  connecting  them,  are  all  cut  out  of 
one  block  ;  their  profile  is  an  adaptation  of  4  of  Plate  XV.,  with 
a  plain  headstone  superimposed.  Their  method  of  reduction  is 
that  of  order  d  in  Fig.  XXIL,  but  the  peculiarity  of  treatment  of 

Fig.  LXV. 


328  XXVII.   THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

their  truncation  is  highly  interesting.  Fig.  LXV.  represents  the 
plans  of  the  capitals  at  the  base,  the  shaded  parts  being  the  bells : 
the  open  line,  the  roll  with  its  connecting  band.  The  bell  of  the 
one,  it  will  be  seen,  is  the  exact  reverse  of  that  of  the  other  :  the 
angle  truncations  are,  in  both,  curved  horizontally  as  well  as  up- 
rightly ;  but  their  curve  is  convex  in  the  one,  and  in  the  other 
concave.  Plate  XVII.  will  show  the  effect  of  both,  with  the  far- 
ther incisions,  to  the  same  depth,  on  the  flank  of  the  one  with 
the  concave  truncation,  which  join  with  the  rest  of  its  singularly 
bold  and  keen  execution  in  giving  the  impression  of  its  rather 
having  been  cloven  into  its  form  by  the  sweeps  of  a  sword,  than 
by  the  dull  travail  of  a  chisel.  Its  workman  was  proud  of  it,  as 
well  he  might  be :  he  has  written  his  name  upon  its  front  (I 
would  that  more  of  his  fellows  had  been  as  kindly  vain),  and  the 
goodly  stone  proclaims  for  ever,  adaminus  de  sancto  giorgio  me 

FECIT. 

§  xxxiv.  The  reader  will  easily  understand  that  the  graceful- 
ness of  this  kind  of  truncation,  as  he  sees  it  in  Plate  XVIL,  soon 
suggested  the  idea  of  reducing  it  to  vegetable  outline,  and  laying 
four  healing  leaves,  as  it  were,  upon  the  wounds  which  the  sword 
had  made.  These  four  leaves,  on  the  truncations  of  the  capital, 
correspond  to  the  four  leaves  which  we  saw,  in  like  manner,  ex- 
tend themselves  over  the  spurs  of  the  base,  and,  as  they  increase 
in  delicacy  of  execution,  form  one  of  the  most  lovely  groups  of 
capitals  which  the  Gothic  workmen  ever  invented  ;  represented 
by  two  perfect  types  in  the  capitals  of  the  Piazzetta  columns  of 
Yenice.  But  this  pure  group  is  an  isolated  one ;  it  remains  in 
the  first  simplicity  of  its  conception  far  into  the  thirteenth  centu- 
ry, while  around  it  rise  up  a  crowd  of  other  forms,  imitative  of 
the  old  Corinthian,  and  in  which  other  and  younger  leaves  spring 
up  in  luxuriant  growth  among  the  primal  four.  The  varieties  of 
their  grouping  we  shall  enumerate  hereafter :  one  general  char- 
acteristic of  them  all  must  be  noted  here. 

§  xxxv.  The  reader  has  been  told  repeatedly*  that  there  are 

*  Chap.  I.  §  xix.j  Appendix  7. :  and  Chap.  VI.  §  v. 


decoration.  XXVII.   THE   COENICE   AND    CAPITAL.  329 

two,  and  only  two,  real  orders  of  capitals,  originally  represented 
by  the  Corinthian  and  the  Doric  ;  and  distinguished  by  the  con- 
cave or  convex  contours  of  their  bells,  as  shown  by  the  dotted 
lines  at  e,  Fig.  Y.,  p.  66.  And  hitherto,  respecting  the  capital, 
we  have  been  exclusively  concerned  with  the  methods  in  which 
these  two  families  of  simple  contours  have  gathered  themselves 
together,  and  obtained  reconciliation  to  the  abacus  above,  and 
the  shaft  below.  But  the  last  paragraph  introduces  us  to  the 
surface  ornament  disposed  upon  these,  in  the  chiselling  of  which 
the  characters  described  above,  §  xxvm.,  which  are  but  feebly 
marked  in  the  cornice,  boldly  distinguish  and  divide  the  families 
of  the  capital. 

§  xxxvi.  Whatever  the  nature  of  the  ornament  be,  it  must 
clearly  have  relief  of  some  kind,  and  must  present  projecting  sur- 
faces separated  by  incisions.  But  it  is  a  very  material  question 
whether  the  contour,  hitherto  broadly  considered  as  that  of  the 
entire  bell,  shall  be  that  of  the  outside  of  the  projecting  and  re- 
lieved ornaments,  or  of  the  bottoms  of  the  incisions  which  divide 
them ;  whether,  that  is  to  say,  we  shall  first  cut  out  the  bell  of 
our  capital  quite  smooth,  and  then  cut  farther  into  it,  with  inci- 
sions, which  shall  leave  ornamental  forms  in  relief,  or  whether, 
in  originally  cutting  the  contour  of  the  bell,  we  shall  leave  pro- 
jecting bits  of  stone,  which  we  may  afterwards  work  into  the  re- 
lieved ornament. 

§  xxxvii.  Now,  look  back  to  Fig.  V.,  p.  66.  Clearly,  if  to 
ornament  the  already  hollowed  profile,  5,  we  cut  deep  incisions 
into  it,  we  shall  so  far  weaken  it  at  the  top,  that  it  will  nearly 
lose  all  its  supporting  powder.  Clearly,  also,  if  to  ornament  the 
already  bulging  profile  c  we  were  to  leave  projecting  pieces  of 
stone  outside  of  it,  we  should  nearly  destroy  all  its  relation  to  the 
original  sloping  line  X,  and  produce  an  unseemly  and  ponderous 
mass,  hardly  recognizable  as  a  cornice  profile.  It  is  evident,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  we  can  afford  to  cut  into  this  profile  without 
fear  of  destroying  its  strength,  and  that  we  can  afford  to  leave 
projections  outside  of  the  other,  without  fear  of  destroying  its 


330  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

lightness.  Such  is,  accordingly,  the  natural  disposition  of  the 
sculpture,  and  the  two  great  families  of  capitals  are  therefore  dis- 
tinguished, not  merely  by  their  concave  and  convex  contours, 
but  by  the  ornamentation  being  left  outside  the  bell  of  the  one, 
and  cut  into  the  bell  of  the  other ;  so  that,  in  either  case,  the 
ornamental  portions  will  fall  between  the  dotted  lines  at  £,  Fig. 
V.,  and  the  pointed  oval,  or  vesica  piscis,  which  is  traced  by 
them,  may  be  called  the  Limit  of  ornamentation. 

§  xxxvin.  Several  distinctions  in  the  quantity  and  style  of  the 
ornament  must  instantly  follow  from  this  great  distinction  in  its 
position.  First,  in  its  quantity.  For,  observe :  since  in  the  Doric 
profile,  <?,  of  Fig.  V.,  the  contour  itself  is  to  be  composed  of  the 
surface  of  the  ornamentation,  this  ornamentation  must  be  close 
and  united  enough  to  form,  or  at  least  suggest,  a  continuous 
surface ;  it  must,  therefore,  be  rich  in  quantity  and  close  in 
aggregation  ;  otherwise  it  will  destroy  the  massy  character  of  the 
profile  it  adorns,  and  approximate  it  to  its  opposite,  the  concave. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  ornament  left  projecting  from  the  con- 
cave, must  be  sparing  enough,  and  dispersed  enough,  to  allow 
the  concave  bell  to  be  clearly  seen  beneath  it ;  otherwise  it  will 
choke  up  the  concave  profile,  and  approximate  it  to  its  opposite, 
the  convex. 

§  xxxix.  And,  secondly,  in  its  style.  For,  clearly,  as  the  sculp- 
tor of  the  concave  profile  must  leave  masses  of  rough  stone  pre- 
pared for  his  outer  ornament,  and  cannot  finish  them  at  once, 
but  must  complete  the  cutting  of  the  smooth  bell  beneath  first, 
and  then  return  to  the  projecting  masses  (for  if  he  were  to  finish 
these  latter  first,  they  would  assuredly,  if  delicate  or  sharp,  be 
broken  as  he  worked  on  ;  since,  I  say,  he  must  work  in  this  fore- 
seeing and  predetermined  method,  he  is  sure  to  reduce  the  system 
of  his  ornaments  to  some  definite  symmetrical  order  before  he 
begins  ;  and  the  habit  of  conceiving  beforehand  all  that  he  has 
to  do,  will  probably  render  him  not  only  more  orderly  in  its  ar- 
rangement, but  more  skilful  and  accurate  in  its  execution,  than 
if  he  could  finish  all  as  he  worked  on.     On  the  other  hand,  the 


decoration.  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  331 

sculptor  of  the  convex  profile  has  its  smooth  surface  laid  before 
him,  as  a  piece  of  paper  on  which  he  can  sketch  at  his  pleasure ; 
the  incisions  he  makes  in  it  are  like  touches  of  a  dark  pencil ; 
and  he  is  at  liberty  to  rove  over  the  surface  in  perfect  freedom, 
with  light  incisions  or  with  deep  ;  finishing  here,  suggesting 
there,  or  perhaps  in  places  leaving  the  surface  altogether  smooth. 
It  is  ten  to  one,  therefore,  but  that,  if  he  yield  to  the  temptation, 
he  becomes  irregular  in  design,  and  rude  in  handling ;  and  we 
shall  assuredly  find  the  two  families  of  capitals  distinguished,  the 
one  by  its  symmetrical,  thoroughly  organised,  and  exquisitely 
executed  ornament,  the  other  by  its  rambling,  confused,  and 
rudely  chiselled  ornament :  But,  on  the  other  hand,  while  we 
shall  often  have  to  admire  the  disciplined  precision  of  the  one, 
and  as  often  to  regret  the  irregular  rudeness  of  the  other,  we 
shall  not  fail  to  find  balancing  qualities  in  both.  The  severity  of 
the  disciplinarian  capital  represses  the  power  of  the  imagination ; 
it  gradually  degenerates  into  Formalism;  and  the  indolence 
which  cannot  escape  from  its  stern  demand  of  accurate  workman- 
ship, seeks  refuge  in  copyism  of  established  forms,  and  loses  it- 
self at  last  in  lifeless  mechanism.  The  licence  of  the  other, 
though  often  abused,  permits  full  exercise  to  the  imagination : 
the  mind  of  the  sculptor,  unshackled  by  the  niceties  of  chiselling, 
wanders  over  its  orbed  field  in  endless  fantasy ;  and,  when  gene- 
rous as  well  as  powerful,  repays  the  liberty  which  has  been 
granted  to  it  with  interest,  by  developing  through  the  utmost 
wildness  and  fulness  of  its  thoughts,  an  order  as  much  more 
noble  than  the  mechanical  symmetry  of  the  opponent  school,  as 
the  domain  which  it  regulates  is  vaster. 

§  xl.  And  now  the  reader  shall  judge  whether  I  had  not 
reason  to  cast  aside  the  so-called  Five  orders  of  the  Renaissance 
architects,  with  their  volutes  and  fillets,  and  to  tell  him  that 
there  were  only  two  real  orders,  and  that  there  could  never  be 
more.*    For  we  now  find  that  these  two  great  and  real  orders 

*  Chap.  I.,  §  xix. 


332  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND   CAPITAL.  decoration. 

are  representative  of  the  two  great  influences  which  must  for 
ever  divide  the  heart  of  man :  the  one  of  Lawful  Discipline, 
with  its  perfection  and  order,  but  its  danger  of  degeneracy  into 
Formalism ;  the  other  of  Lawful  Freedom,  with  its  vigour  and 
variety,  but  its  danger  of  degeneracy  into  Licentiousness. 

§  xli.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  give  any  illustrations  here  of  the 
most  elaborate  developments  of  either  order ;  they  will  be  better 
given  on  a  larger  scale :  but  the  examples  in  Plates  XVII.  and 
XVIII.  represent  the  two  methods  of  ornament  in  their  earliest 
appliance.  The  two  lower  capitals  in  Plate  XVII.  are  a  pure 
type  of  the  concave  school;  the  two  in  the  centre  of  Plate 
XVIIL,  of  the  convex.  At  the  top  of  Plate  XVIII.  are  two 
Lombardic  capitals  ;  that  on  the  left  from  Sta.  Sofia  at  Padua, 
that  on  the  right  from  the  cortile  of  St.  Ambrogio  at  Milan 
They  both  have  the  concave  angle  truncation ;  but  being  of  date 
prior  to  the  time  when  the  idea  of  the  concave  bell  was  deve- 
loped, they  are  otherwise  left  square,  and  decorated  with  the 
surface  ornament  characteristic  of  the  convex  school.  The  rela- 
tion of  the  designs  to  each  other  is  interesting ;  the  cross  being 
prominent  in  the  centre  of  each,  but  more  richly  relieved  in  that 
from  St.  Ambrogio.  The  two  beneath  are  from  the  southern 
portico  of  St.  Mark's;  the  shafts  having  been  of  different 
lengths,  and  neither,  in  all  probability,  originally  intended  for 
their  present  place,  they  have  double  abaci,  of  which  the  upper- 
most is  the  cornice  running  round  the  whole  facade.  The 
zigzagged  capital  is  highly  curious,  and  in  its  place  very  effective 
and  beautiful;  although  one  of  the  exceptions  which  it  was 
above  noticed  that  we  should  sometimes  find  to  the  law  stated 
in  §  xv.  above. 

§  xlii.  The  lower  capital,  which  is  also  of  the  true  convex 
school,  exhibits  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  spurred  type,  e 
of  Fig.  XXII.,  respecting  which  one  or  two  points  must  be 
noticed. 

If  we  were  to  take  up  the  plan  of  the  simple  spur,  represented 
at  e  in  Fig.  XXII.  p.  111.,  and  treat  it,  with  the  salvia  leaf,  as 


\  '  111 


t. 


I   _• 


W'!M».  i.r&  *f».i5#oad\vfcv  M  Y 


DECORATION. 


XXVII.    THE    COENICE   AND    CAPITAL. 


333 


Fie.  LXVI. 


we  did  the  spur  of  the  base,  we  should  have  for  the  head  of  our 
capital  a  plan  like  Fig.  LXYL,  which  is  actually  that  of  one  of 
the  capitals  of  the  Fondaco  de5 
Turchi  at  Venice;  with  this  only 
difference,  that  the  intermediate 
curves  between  the  spurs  would 
have  been  circular :  the  reason  they 
are  not  so,  here,  is  that  the  decora- 
tion, instead  of  being  confined  to 
the  spur,  is  now  spread  over  the 
whole  mass,  and  contours  are 
therefore  given  to  the  intermediate 
curves  which  fit  them  for  this  orna- 
ment;   the    inside    shaded    space 

being  the  head  of  the  shaft,  and  the  outer,  the  abacus.  The 
reader  has  in  Fig.  LXYL  a  characteristic  type  of  the  plans  of 
spurred  capitals,  generally  preferred  by  the  sculptors  of  the 
convex  school,  but  treated  with  infinite  variety,  the  spurs  often 
being  cut  into  animal  forms,  or  the  incisions  between  them  mul- 
tiplied, for  richer  effect;  and  in  our  own  Norman  capital  the 
type  c  of  Fig.  XXII.  is  variously  subdivided  by  incisions  on  its 
slope,  approximating  in  general  effect  to  many  conditions  of  the 
real  spurred  type,  <?,  but  totally  differing  from  them  in  principle. 
§  xliii.  The  treatment  of  the  spur  in  the  concave  school  is 
far  more  complicated,  being  borrowed  in  nearly  every  case  from 
the  original  Corinthian.  Its  plan  may  be 
generally  represenfed  by  Fig.  LXVII. 
The  spur  itself  is  carved  into  a  curling 
tendril  or  concave  leaf,  which  supports 
the  projecting  angle  of  a  four-sided  abacus, 
whose  hollow  sides  fall  back  behind  the 
bell,  and  have  generally  a  rosette  or  other 
ornament  in  their  centres.  The  mediaeval 
architects  often  put  another  square  abacus 
above  all,  as  represented  by  the  shaded 


Fig.  LXVII. 


334 


XXVII.    THE   COKNICE   AND    CAPITAL. 


DECORATION. 


Fig.  LXVIII. 


portion  of  Fig.  LXVIL,  and  some  massy  conditions  of  this  form, 
elaborately  ornamented,  are  very  beautiful;  but  it  is  apt  to 
become  rigid  and  effeminate,  as  assuredly  it  is  in  the  original 
Corinthian,  which  is  thoroughly  mean  and  meagre  in  its  upper 
tendrils  and  abacus. 

§  xliv.  The  lowest  capital  in  Plate  XVIII.  is  from  St.  Mark's, 
and  singular  in  having  double,  spurs  ;  it  is  therefore  to  be  com- 
pared with  the  doubly  spurred 
base,  also  from  St.  Mark's,  in 
Plate  XI.  In  other  respects 
it  is  a  good  example  of  the 
union  of  breadth  of  mass  with 
sublety  of  curvature,  which 
characterises  nearly  all  the 
spurred  capitals  of  the  convex 
school.  Its  plan  is  given  in 
Fig.  LXYIII. :  the  inner 
shaded  circle  is  the  head  of 
the  shaft ;  the  white  cross,  the 
bottom  of  the  capital,  which 
expands  itself  into  the  external  shaded  portions  at  the  .top. 
Each  spur,  thus  formed,  is  cut  like  a  ship's  bow,  with  the  Doric 
profile ;  the  surfaces  so  obtained  are  then  charged  with  arbores- 
cent ornament. 

§  xlv.  I  shall  not  here  farther  exemplify  the  conditions  of 
the  treatment  of  the  spur,  because  I  am  afraid  of  confusing  the 
reader's  mind,  and  diminishing  the  distinctness  of  his  concep- 
tion of  the  differences  between  the  two  great  orders,  which  it 
has  been  my  principal  object  to  develope  throughout  this  chap- 
ter. If  all  my  readers  lived  in  London,  I  could  at  once  fix  this 
difference  in  their  minds  by  a  simple,  yet  somewhat  curious 
illustration.  In  many  parts  of  the  west  end  of  London,  as,  for 
instance,  at  the  corners  of  Belgrave  Square,  and  the  north  side 
of  Grosvenor  Square,  the  Corinthian  capitals  of  newly-built 
houses  are  put  into  cages  of  wire.     The  wire  cage  is  the  exact 


decoration.  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND    CAPITAL.  335 

form  of  the  typical  capital  of  the  convex  school ;  the  Corinthian 
capital,  within,  is  a  finished  and  highly  decorated  example  of 
the  concave.  The  space  between  the  cage  and  capital  is  the 
limit  of  ornamentation. 

§  xlvi.  Those  of  my  readers,  however,  to  whom  this  illustra- 
tion is  inaccessible,  must  be  content  with  the  two  profiles,  13  and 
14,  on  Plate  XV.  If  they  will  glance  along  the  line  of  sections 
from  1  to  6,  they  will  see  that  the  profile  13  is  their  final  deve- 
lopment, with  a  superadded  cornice  for  its  abacus.  It  is  taken 
from  a  capital  in  a  very  important  ruin  of  a  palace,  near  the 
Hialto  of  Venice,  and  hereafter  to  be  described;  the  projection, 
outside  of  its  principal  curve,  is  the  profile  of  its  superadded 
leaf  ornamentation  ;  it  may  be  taken  as  one  of  the  simplest,  yet 
a  perfect  type  of  the  concave  group. 

§  xlvii.  The  profile  14  is  that  of  the  capital  of  the  main  shaft 
of  the  northern  portico  of  St.  Mark's,  the  most  finished  example 
I  ever  met  with  of  the  convex  family,  to  which,  in  spite  of  the 
central  inward  bend  of  its  profile,  it  is  marked  as  distinctly  be- 
longing, by  the  bold  convex  curve  at  its  root,  springing  from  the 
shaft  in  the  line  of  the  Christian  Doric  cornice,  and  exactly  re- 
versing the  structure  of  the  other  profile,  which  rises  from  the 
shaft,  like  a  palm  leaf  from  its  stem.  Farther,  in  the  profile  13, 
the  innermost  line  is  that  of  the  bell  ;  but  in  the  profile  14,  the 
outermost  line  is  that  of  the  bell,  and  the  inner  line  is  the  limit 
of  the  incisions  of  the  chisel,  in  undercutting  a  reticulated  veil 
of  ornament,  surrounding  a  flower  like  a  lily  ;  most  ingeniously, 
and,  I  hope,  justly,  conjectured  by  the  Marchese  Selvatico  to 
have  been  intended  for  an  imitation  of  the  capitals  of  the  tem- 
ple of  Solomon,  which  Hiram  made,  with  "  nets  of  checker  work, 
and  wreaths  of  chain  work  for  the  chapiters  that  were  on  the  top 
of  the  pillars  .  .  .  and  the  chapiters  that  were  upon  the  top  of 
the  pillars  were  of  lily  work  in  the  porch."  (1  Kings,  vii. 
17.  19.) 

§  xlviii.  On  this  exquisite  capital  there  is  imposed  an  abacus 
of  the  profile  with  which  we  began  our  investigation  long  ago, 


336  XXVII.    THE   CORNICE   AND    CAPITAL.  decoration. 

the  profile  a  of  Fig.  V.  This  abacus  is  formed  by  the  cornice 
already  given,  0,  of  Plate  XVI. :  and  therefore  we  have,  in  this 
lovely  Venetian  capital,  the  summary  of  the  results  of  our  inves- 
tigation, from  its  beginning  to  its  close :  the  type  of  the  first 
cornice ;  the  decoration  of  it,  in  its  emergence  from  the  classical 
models ;  the  gathering  into  the  capital ;  the  superimposition  of 
the  secondary  cornice,  and  the  refinement  of  the  bell  of  the 
capital  by  triple  curvature  in  the  two  limits  of  chiselling.  I 
cannot  express  the  exquisite  refinements  of  the  curves  on  the 
small  scale  of  Plate  XV. ;  I  will  give  them  more  accurately  in 
a  larger  engraving ;  but  the  scale  on  which  they  are  here  given 
will  not  prevent  the  reader  from  perceiving,  and  let  him  note  it 
thoughtfully,  that  the  outer  curve  of  the  noble  capital  is  the  one 
which  was  our  first  example  of  associated  curves  ;  that  I  have 
had  no  need,  throughout  the  whole  of  our  enquiry,  to  refer  to 
any  other  ornamental  line  than  the  three  which.  I  at  first  chose, 
the  simplest  of  those  which  Nature  set  by  ^aiice  before  me ; 
and  that  this  lily,  of  the  delicate  Venetian  marble,  has  but  been 
wrought,  by  the  highest  human  art,  into  the  same  line  which  the 
clouds  disclose,  when  they  break  from  the  rough  rocks  of  the 
flank  of  the  Matterhorn. 


<j3v      \  tfl 


^ 


P 


337 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


THE   ARCHIVOLT   AND    APERTURE. 


§  i.  If  the  windows  and  doors  of  some  of  our  best  northern 
Gothic  buildings  were  built  up,  and  the  ornament  of  their  archi- 
volts  concealed,  there  would  often  remain  little  but  masses  of 
dead  wall  and  unsightly  buttress ;  the  whole  vitality  of  the 
building  consisting  in  the  graceful  proportions  or  rich  mouldings 
of  its  apertures.  It  is  not  so  in  the  south,  where,  frequently, 
the  aperture  is  a  mere  dark  spot  on  the  variegated  wall ;  but 
there  the  column,  with  its  horizontal  or  curved  architrave, 
assumes  an  importance  of  another  kind,  equally  dependent  upon 
the  methods  of  lintel  and  archivolt  decoration.  These,  though 
in  their  richness  of  minor  variety  they  defy  all  exemplification, 
may  be  very  broadly  generalized. 

Of  the  mere  lintel,  indeed,  there  is  no  specific  decoration,  nor 
can  be  ;  it  has  no  organism  to  direct  its  ornament,  and  therefore 
may  receive  any  kind  and  degree  of  ornament,  according  to  its 
position.  In  a  Greek  temple,  it  has  meagre  horizontal  lines  ;  in 
a  Romanesque  church,  it  becomes  a  row  of  upright  niches,  with 
an  apostle  in  each  ;  and  may  become  anything  else  at  the  archi- 
tect's will,  But  the  arch-head  has  a  natural  organism,  which 
separates  its  ornament  into  distinct  families,  broadly  definable. 

§  ii.  In  speaking  of  the  arch-line  and  arch  masonry,  we  con- 
sidered the  arch  to  be  cut  straight  through  the  wall ;  so  that,  if 
half  built,  it  would  have  the  appearance  at  «,  Fig.  LXIX.  But 
in  the  chapter  on  Form  of  Apertures,  we  found  that  the  side  oi 
the  arch,  or  jamb  of  the  aperture,  might  often  require  to  be 
bevelled,  so  as  to  give  the  section  5,  Fig.  LXIX.  It  is  easily 
conceivable  that  when  two  ranges  of  voussoirs  were  used,  one 

22 


338 


XXVIII.   THE   ARCHIVOLT   AND   APERTUKE. 


DECORATION. 


% 


Fte.  LXIX. 


over  another,  it  would  be  easier  to  leave  those  beneath,  of  a 
smaller  diameter,  than  to  bevel  them  to  accurate 
junction  with  those  outside.  Whether  influenced 
by  this  facility,  or  by  decorative  instinct,  the 
early  northern  builders  often  substitute  for  the 
bevel  the  third  condition,  <?,  of  Fig.  LXIX. ;  so 
that,  of  the  three  forms  in  that  figure,  a  belongs 
principally  to  the  south,  c  to  the  north,  and  h 
indifferently  to  both. 

§  in.  If  the  arch  in  the  northern  building  be 
very  deep,  its  depth  will  probably  be  attained  by 
a  succession  of  steps,  like  that  in  g  j  and  the 
richest  results  of  northern  archivolt  decoration 
are  entirely  based  on  the  aggregation  of  the 
ornament  of  these  several  steps ;  while  those  of 
the  south  are  only  the  complete  finish  and  per- 
fection of  the  ornament  of  one.  In  this  orna- 
ment of  the  single  arch,  the  points  for  general 
note  are  very  few. 
§  iv.  It  was,  in  the  first  instance,  derived  from  the  classical 
architrave  *,  and  the  early  Romanesque  arches  are  nothing  but 
such  an  architrave,  bent  round.  The  horizontal  lines  of  the  latter 
become  semicircular,  but  their  importance  and  value  remain  ex- 
actly the  same ;  their  continuity  is  preserved  across  all  the  vous- 
soirs,  and  the  joints  and  functions  of  the  latter  are  studiously 
concealed.  As  the  builders  get  accustomed  to  the  arch,  and  love 
it  better,  they  cease  to  be  ashamed  of  its  structure  :  the  voussoirs 
begin  to  show  themselves  confidently,  and  fight  for  precedence 
with  the  architrave  lines  ;  and  there  is  an  entanglement  of  the 
two  structures,  in  consequence,  like  the  circular  and  radiating 
lines  of  a  cobweb,  until  at  last  the  architrave  lines  get  worsted, 


*  The  architrave  is  properly  the  horizontal  piece  of  stone  laid  across  the  tops 
of  the  pillars  in  Greek  buildings,  and  commonly  marked  with  horizontal  lines, 
obtained  by  slight  projections  of  its  surface,  while  it  is  protected  above,  in  the  richer 
orders,  by  a  small  cornice. 


decoration.  XXVIII.    THE   AKCHIYOLT   AND   APERTURE.  339 

and  driven  away  outside  of  the  voussoirs ;  being  permitted  to 
stay  at  all  only  on  condition  of  their  dressing  themselves  in 
mediaeval  costume,  as  in  the  plate  opposite. 

§  v.  In  other  cases,  however,  before  the  entire  discomfiture  of 
the  architrave,  a  treaty  of  peace  is  signed  between  the  adverse 
parties,  on  these  terms  :  That  the  architrave  shall  entirely  dis- 
miss its  inner  three  meagre  lines,  and  leave  the  space  of  them  to 
the  voussoirs,  to  display  themselves  after  their  manner;  but 
that,  in  return  for  this  concession,  the  architrave  shall  have 
leave  to  expand  the  small  cornice  which  usually  terminates  it 
(the  reader  had  better  look  at  the  original  form  in  that  of  the 
Erechtheum,  in  the  middle  of  the  Elgin  room  of  the  British 
Museum)  into  bolder  prominence,  and  even  to  put  brackets 
under  it,  as  if  it  were  a  roof  cornice,  and  thus  mark  with  a  bold 
shadow  the  terminal  line  of  the  voussoirs.  This  condition  is  seen 
in  the  arch  from  St.  Pietro  of  Pistoja,  Plate  XIII.,  above. 

§  vi.  If  the  Gothic  spirit  of  the  building  be  thoroughly  de- 
termined, and  victorious,  the  architrave  cornice  is  compelled 
to  relinquish  its  classical  form,  and  take  the  profile  of  a  Gothic 
cornice  or  dripstone  ;  while,  in  other  cases,  as  in  much  of  the 
Gothic  of  Yerona,  it  is  forced  to  disappear  altogether.  But  the 
voussoirs  then  concede,  on  the  other  hand,  so  much  of  their  dig- 
nity as  to  receive  a  running  ornament  of  foliage  or  animals,  like 
a  classical  frieze,  and  continuous  round  the  arch.  In  fact,  the 
contest  between  the  adversaries  may  be  seen  running  through  aH 
the  early  architecture  of  Italy  :  success  inclining  sometimes  to  the 
one,  sometimes  to  the  other,  and  various  kinds  of  truce  or  recon- 
ciliation being  effected  between  them  :  sometimes  merely  formal, 
sometimes  honest  and  affectionate,  but  with  no  regular  succession 
in  time.  The  greatest  victory  of  the  voussoir  is  to  annihilate  thp 
cornice,  and  receive  an  ornament  of  its  own  outline,  and  entirely 
limited  by  its  own  joints  :  and  yet  this  may  be  seen  in  the  very 
early  apse  of  Murano. 


340  XXYIII.    THE   ARCHTVOLT   AND   APERTURE.  decoration. 

§  vii.  The  most  usual  condition,  however, 
Fig.  LXX.  'g  ^^  unity  of  the  two  members  above  de- 

scribed, §  v.,  and  which  may  be  generally  re- 
presented by  the  archivolt  section  $,  Fig. 
||r  LXX. ;  and  from  this  descend  a  family  of 
Gothic  archivolts  of  the  highest  importance. 
For  the  cornice,  thus  attached  to  the  arch,  suf- 
fers exactly  the  same  changes  as  the  level  cor- 
nice, or  capital ;  receives,  in  due  time,  its  ela- 
borate ogee  profile  and  leaf  ornaments,  like 
fig.  8  or  9  of  Plate  XV. ;  and,  when  the  shaft 
loses  its  shape,  and  is  lost  in  the  later  Gothic 
jamb,  the  archivolt  has  influence  enough  to 
introduce  this  ogee  profile  in  the  jamb  also,  through  the  banded 
impost:  and  we  immediately  find  ourselves  involved  in  deep 
successions  of  ogee  mouldings  in  sides  of  doors  and  windows, 
which  never  would  have  been  thought  of,  but  for  the  obstinate 
resistance  of  the  classical  architrave  to  the  attempts  of  the  vous- 
soir  at  its  degradation  or  banishment. 

§  viii.  This,  then,  will  be  the  first  great  head  under  which  we 
shall  in  future  find  it  convenient  to  arrange  a  large  number  of 
archivolt  decorations.  It  is  the  distinctively  Southern  and 
Byzantine  form,  and  typically  represented  by  the  section  $,  of 
Fig.  LXX, :  and  it  is  susceptible  of  almost  every  species  of 
surface  ornament,  respecting  which  only  this  general  law  may 
be  asserted :  that,  while  the  outside  or  vertical  surface  may 
properly  be  decorated,  and  yet  the  soffit  or  under  surface  left 
plain,  the  soffit  is  never  to  be  decorated,  and  the  outer  surface 
left  plain.  Much  beautiful  sculpture  is,  in  the  best  Byzantine 
buildings,  half  lost  by  being  put  under  soffits  ;  but  the  eye  is  led 
to  discover  it,  and  even  to  demand  it,  by  the  rich  chasing  of  the 
outside  of  the  voussoirs.  It  would  have  been  an  hypocrisy  to 
carve  them  externally  only.  But  there  is  not  the  smallest  excuse 
for  carving  the  soffit,  and  not  the  outside ;  for,  in  that  case,  we 
approach  the  building  under  the  idea  of  its  being  perfectly  plain  ; 


DECORATION.  XXVIII.    THE   ARCHIVOLT    AND    APERTURE.  341 

we  do  not  look  for  the  soffit  decoration,  and,  of  course,  do  not 
see  it :  or,  if  we  do,  it  is  merely  to  regret  that  it  should  not  be  in 
a  better  place.  In  the  Renaissance  architects,  it  may,  perhaps, 
for  once,  be  considered  a  merit,  that  they  put  their  bad  decoration 
systematically  in  the  places  where  we  should  least  expect  it,  and 
can  seldomest  see  it : — Approaching  the  Scuola  di  San  Rocco, 
you  probably  will  regret  the  extreme  plainness  and  barrenness 
of  the  window  traceries ;  but,  if  you  will  go  very  close  to  the 
wall  beneath  the  windows,  you  may,  on  sunny  days,  discover  a 
quantity  of  panel  decorations  which  the  ingenious  architect  has 
concealed  under  the  soffits. 

The  custom  of  decorating  the  arch  soffit  with  panelling  is  a 
Roman  application  of  the  Greek  roof  ornament,  which,  whatever 
its  intrinsic  merit  (compare  Chap.  XXIX.  §  iv.)  may  rationally 
be  applied  to  waggon  vaults,  as  of  St.  Peter's,  and  to  arch  soffits 
under  which  one  walks.  But  the  Renaissance  architects  had  not 
wit  enough  to  reflect  that  people  usually  do  not  walk  through 
windows. 

§  ix.  So  far,  then,  of  the  Southern  archivolt :  In  Fig.  LXIX., 
above,  it  will  be  remembered  that  c  represents  the  simplest  form 
of  the  Northern.  In  the  farther  development  of  this,  which  we 
have  next  to  consider,  the  voussoirs,  in  consequence  of  their  own 
negligence  or  over-confidence,  sustain  a  total  and  irrecoverable 
defeat.  That  archivolt  is  in  its  earliest  conditions  perfectly  pure 
and  undecorated, — the  simplest  and  rudest  of  Gothic  forms.  Ne- 
cessarily, when  it  falls  on  the  pier,  and  meets  that  of  the  opposite 
arch,  the  entire  section  of  the  masonry  is  in  the  shape  of  a  cross, 
and  is  carried  by  the  crosslet  shaft,  which  we  above  stated  to  be 
distinctive  of  Northern  design.  I  am  more  at  a  loss  to  account 
for  the  sudden  and  fixed  development  of  this  type  of  archivolt 
than  for  any  other  architectural  transition  with  which  I  am 
acquainted.  But  there  it  is,  pure  and  firmly  established,  as  early 
as  the  building  of  St.  Michele  of  Pavia ;  and  we  have  thence- 
forward only  to  observe  what  comes  of  it. 

§  x.  We  find  it  first,  as  I  said,  perfectly  barren  ;    cornice  and 


342  XXVIII.    THE   ARCHIVOLT   AND   APERTURE.  decoration. 

architrave  altogether  ignored,  the  existence  of  such  things  prac- 
tically denied,  and  a  plain,  deep-cut  recess  with  a  single  mighty 
shadow  occupying  their  place.  The  voussoirs,  thinking  their 
great  adversary  utterly  defeated,  are  at  no  trouble  to  show  them- 
selves ;  visible  enough  in  both  the  upper  and  under  archi volts, 
they  are  content  to  wait  the  time  when,  as  might  have  been 
hoped,  they  should  receive  a  new  decoration  peculiar  to  them- 
selves. 

§  xi.  In  this  state  of  paralysis,  or  exj^ectation,  their  flank  is 
turned  by  an  insidious  chamfer.  The  edges  of  the  two  great 
blank  archivolts  are  felt  to  be  painfully  conspicuous  ;  all  the  four 
are  at  once  beaded  or  chamfered,  as  at  &,  Fig.  LXX. ;  a  rich 
group  of  deep  lines,  running  concentrically  with  the  arch,  is  the 
result  on  the  instant,  and  the  fate  of  the  voussoirs  is  sealed. 
They  surrender  at  once  without  a  struggle,  and  unconditionally ; 
the  chamfers  deepen  and  multiply  themselves,  cover  the  soffit, 
ally  themselves  with  other  forms  resulting  from  grouped  shafts 
or  traceries,  and  settle  into  the  inextricable  richness  of  the 
fully  developed  Gothic  jamb  and  arch ;  farther  complicated  in 
the  end  by  the  addition  of  niches  to  their  recesses,  as  above 
described. 

§  xii.  The  voussoirs,  in  despair,  go  over  to  the  classical  camp, 
in  hope  of  receiving  some  help  or  tolerance  from  their  former 
enemies.  They  receive  it  indeed :  but  as  traitors  should,  to  their 
own  eternal  dishonour.  They  are  sharply  chiselled  at  the  joints, 
or  rusticated,  or  cut  into  masks  and  satyrs'  heads,  and  so  set  forth 
and  pilloried  in  the  various  detestable  forms  of  which  the  simplest 
is  given  above  in  Plate  XIII.  (on  the  left) :  and  others  may  be 
seen  in  nearly  every  large  building  in  London,  more  especially 
in  the  bridges ;  and,  as  if  in  pure  spite  at  the  treatment  they 
had  received  from  the  archivolt,  they  are  now  not  content  with 
vigorously  showing  their  lateral  joints,  but  shape  themselves  into 
right-angled  steps  at  their  heads,  cutting  to  pieces  their  limiting 
line,  which  otherwise  would  have  had  sympathy  with  that  of 
the  arch,  and  fitting  themselves  to  their  new  friend,  the  Renais- 


decoration.  XXVIII.    THE   ARCHIVOLT   AND   APERTURE.  343 

sance  Ruled  Copy-book  wall.  It  had  been  better  they  had  died 
ten  times  over,  in  their  own  ancient  cause,  than  thus  prolonged 
their  existence. 

§  xiii.  We  bid  them  farewell  in  their  dishonour,  to  return  to 
our  victorious  chamfer.  It  had  not,  we  said,  obtained  so  easy  a 
conquest,  unless  by  the  help  of  certain  forms  of  the  grouped  shaft. 
The  chamfer  was  quite  enough  to  decorate  the  archivolts,  if  there 
were  no  more  than  two ;  but  if,  as  above  noticed  in  §  in.,  the 
archivolt  was  very  deep,  and  composed  of  a  succession  of  such 
steps,  the  multitude  of  chamferings  were  felt  to  be  weak  and 
insipid,  and  instead  of  dealing  with  the  outside  edges  of  the  archi- 
volts, the  group  was  softened  by  introducing  solid  shafts  in  their 
dark  inner  angles.  This,  the  manliest  and  best  condition  of  the 
early  northern  jamb  and  archivolt,  is  represented  in  section  at 
fig.  12  of  Plate  II. ;  and  its  simplest  aspect  in  Plate  V.,  from  the 
Broletto  of  Como, — an  interesting  example,  because  there  the 
voussoirs,  being  in  the  midst  of  their  above-described  southern 
contest  with  the  architrave,  were  better  prepared  for  the  flank 
attack  upon  them  by  the  shaft  and  chamfer,  and  make  a  noble 
resistance,  with  the  help  of  colour,  in  which  even  the  shaft  itself 
gets  slightly  worsted,  and  cut  across  in  several  places,  like  Gene- 
ral Zach's  column  at  Marengo. 

§  xiv.  The  shaft,  however,  rapidly  rallies,  and  brings  up  its 
own  peculiar  decorations  to  its  aid  ;  and  the  intermediate  archi- 
volts receive  running  or  panelled  ornamentst  ;dso,  until  we  reach 
the  exquisitely  rich  conditions  of  our  own  Norr^an  archivolts,  and 
of  the  parallel  Lombardic  designs,  such  as  the  entrance  of  the 
Duomo,  and  of  San  Fermo,  at  Verona.  This  change,  however, 
occupies  little  time,  and  takes  place  principally  in  doorways, 
owing  to  the  greater  thickness  of  wall,  and  depth  of  archivolt ; 
so  that  we  find  the  rich  shafted  succession  of  ornament,  in  the 
doorway  and  window  aperture,  associated  with  the  earliest  and 
rudest  double  archivolt,  in  the  nave  arches,  at  St.  Michele  of 
Pavia.  The  nave  arches,  therefore,  are  most  usually  treated  by 
the  chamfer,  and  the  voussoirs  are  there  defeated  much  sooner 


344:  XXVIII.   THE   ARCHIVOLT   AND    APERTURE.         decoration. 

than  by  the  shafted  arrangements,  which  they  resist,  as  we  saw, 
in  the  south  by  colour  ;  and  even  in  the  north,  though  forced  out 
of  their  own  shape,  they  take  that  of  birds'  or  monsters'  heads, 
which  for  some  time  peck  and  pinch  the  rolls  of  the  archivolt  to 
their  hearts'  content ;  while  the  Norman  zigzag  ornament  allies 
itself  with  them,  each  zigzag  often  restraining  itself  amicably 
between  the  joints  of  each  voussoir  in  the  ruder  work,  and  even 
in  the  highly  finished  arches,  distinctly  presenting  a  concentric 
or  sunlike  arrangement  of  lines  ;  so  much  so,  as  to  prompt  the 
conjecture,  above  stated,  Chap.  XX.  §  xxvi.,  that  all  such  orna- 
ments were  intended  to  be  typical  of  light  issuing  from  the  orb 
of  the  arch.  I  doubt  the  intention,  but  acknowledge  the  resem- 
blance ;  which  perhaps  goes  far  to  account  for  the  never-failing 
delightfulness  of  this  zigzag  decoration.  The  diminution  of  the 
zigzag,  as  it  gradually  shares  the  defeat  of  the  voussoir,  and  is 
at  last  overwhelmed  by  the  complicated,  railroad-like  fluency  of 
the  later  Gothic  mouldings,  is  to  me  one  of  the  saddest  sights  in 
the  drama  of  architecture. 

§  xv.  One  farther  circumstance  is  deserving  of  especial  note  in 
Plate  V.,  the  greater  depth  of  the  voussoirs  at  the  top  of  the 
arch.  This  has  been  above  alluded  to  as  a  feature  of  good  con- 
struction, Chap.  XI.  §  in. ;  it  is  to  be  noted  now  as  one  still  more 
valuable  in  decoration  :  for  when  we  arrive  at  the  deep  succes- 
sion of  concentric  archivolts,  with  which  northern  portals,  and 
many  of  the  associated  windows,  are  headed,  we  immediately 
find  a  difficulty  in  reconciling  the  outer  curve  with  the  inner.  If, 
as  is  sometimes  the  case,  the  width  of  the  group  of  archivolts  be 
twice  or  three  times  that  of  the  inner  aperture,  the  inner  arch 
may  be  distinctly  pointed,  and  the  outer  one,  if  drawn  with  con- 
centric arcs,  approximate  very  nearly  to  a  round  arch.  This  is 
actually  the  case  in  the  later  Gothic  of  Verona  ;  the  outer  line 
of  the  archivolt  having  a  hardly  perceptible  point,  and  ^very  in- 
ner arch  of  course  forming  the  point  more  distinctly,  till  the 
innermost  becomes  a  lancet.  By  far  the  nobler  method,  how- 
ever, is  that  of  the  pure  early  Italian  Gothic ;  to  make  every 


decoration.         XXVIII.   THE   AECHIVOLT   AND   APEETUEE.  345 

outer  arch  a  magnified  facsimile  of  the  innermost  one,  every 
arc  including  the  same  number  of  degrees,  but  degrees  of  a 
larger  circle.  The  result  is  the  condition  represented  in  Plate 
V.,  often  found  in  far  bolder  development ;  exquisitely  springy 
and  elastic  in  its  expression,  and  entirely  free  from  the  heaviness 
and  monotony  of  the  deep  northern  archi volts. 

§  xvi.  We  have  not  spoken  of  the  intermediate  form,  5,  of 
Fig.  LXIX.  (which  its  convenience  for  admission  of  light  has 
rendered  common  in  nearly  all  architectures),  because  it  has  no 
transitions  peculiar  to  itself:  in  the  north  it  sometimes  shares 
the  fate  of  the  outer  architrave,  and  is  channelled  into  longitudi- 
nal mouldings  ;  sometimes  remains  smooth  and  massy,  as  in 
military  architecture,  or  in  the  simpler  forms  of  domestic  and 
ecclesiastical.  In  Italy  it  receives  surface  decoration  like  the 
architrave,  but  has,  perhaps,  something  of  peculiar  expression  in 
being  placed  between  the  tracery  of  the  window  within,  and  its 
shafts  and  tabernacle  work  without,  as  in  the  Duomo  of 
Florence :  in  this  position  it  is  always  kept  smooth  in  surface, 
and  inlaid  (or  painted)  with  delicate  arabesques  ;  while  the  tra- 
cery and  the  tabernacle  work  are  richly  sculptured.  The  exam- 
ple of  its  treatment  by  coloured  voussoirs,  given  in  Plate  XIX., 
may  be  useful  to  the  reader  as  a  kind  of  central  expression  of 
the  aperture  decoration  of  the  pure  Italian  Gothic ; — aperture 
decoration  proper ;  applying  no  shaft  work  to  the  jambs,  but 
leaving  the  bevelled  opening  unenriched ;  using  on  the  outer 
archivolt  the  voussoirs  and  concentric  architrave  in  reconcile- 
ment (the  latter  having,  however,  some  connection  with  the 
Norman  zigzag) ;  and  beneath  them,  the  pure  Italian  two-pieced 
and  mid-cusped  arch,  with  rich  cusp  decoration.  It  is  a  Vero- 
nese arch,  probably  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  finished  with 
extreme  care;  the  red  portions  are  all  in  brick,  delicately  cast: 
and  the  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  whole  is  the  small  piece 
of  brick  inlaid  on  the  angle  of  each  stone  voussoir,  with  a  most 
just  feeling,  which  every  artist  will  at  once  understand,  that  the 
colour  ought  not  to  be  let  go  all  at  once. 


346  XXVIII.   THE   ARCHIVOLT   AND   APERTURE.         decoration. 

§  xvii.  We  have  traced  the  various  conditions  of  treatment  in 
the  archivolt  alone  ;  but,  except  in  what  has  been  said  of  the 
peculiar  expression  of  the  voussoirs,  we  might  throughout  have 
spoken  in  the  same  terms  of  the  jamb.  Even  a  parallel  to  the 
expression  of  the  voussoir  may  be  found  in  the  Lombardic  and 
Norman  divisions  of  the  shafts,  by  zigzags  and  other  transverse 
ornamentation,  which  in  the  end  are  all  swept  away  by  the 
eanaliculated  mouldings.  Then,  in  the  recesses  of  these  and  of 
the  archivolts  alike,  the  niche  and  statue  decoration  developes 
itself ;  and  the  vaulted  and  cavernous  apertures  are  covered  with 
incrustations  of  fretwork,  and  with  every  various  application  of 
foliage  to  their  fantastic  mouldings. 

§  xviii.  I  have  kept  the  inquiry  into  the  proper  ornament  of 
the  archivolt  wholly  free  from  all  confusion  with  the  questions 
of  beauty  in  tracery ;  for,  in  fact,  all  tracery  is  a  mere  multipli- 
cation and  entanglement  of  small  archivolts,  and  its  cusp  orna- 
ment is  a  minor  condition  of  that  proper  to  the  spandril.  It 
does  not  reach  its  completely  defined  form  until  the  jamb  and 
archivolt  have  been  divided  into  longitudinal  mouldings ;  and 
then  the  tracery  is  formed  by  the  innermost  group  of  the  shafts 
or  fillets,  bent  into  whatever  forms  or  foliations  the  designer  may 
choose ;  but  this  with  a  delicacy  of  adaptation  which  I  rather 
choose  to  illustrate  by  particular  examples,  of  which  we  shall 
meet  with  many  in  the  course  of  our  inquiry,  than  to  delay  the 
reader  by  specifying  here.  As  for  the  conditions  of  beauty  in 
the  disposition  of  the  tracery  bars,  I  see  no  hope  of  dealing  with 
the  subject  fairly  but  by  devoting,  if  I  can  find  time,  a  separate 
essay  to  it — which,  in  itself,  need  not  be  long,  but  would  involve, 
before  it  could  be  completed,  the  examination  of  the  whole  mass 
of  materials  lately  collected  by  the  indefatigable  industry  of  the 
English  architects  who  have  devoted  their  special  attention  to 
this  subject,  and  which  are  of  the  highest  value  as  illustrating 
the  chronological  succession  or  mechanical  structure  of  tracery, 
but  which,  in  most  cases,  touch  on  their  aesthetic  merits  inci- 
dentally only.     Of  works  of  this  kind,  by  far  the  best  I  have 


decoration.         XXVIII.   THE   AECHIVOLT   AND   APERTURE.  347 

met  with  is  Mr.  Edmund  Sharpe's,  on  Decorated  Windows,  which 
seems  to  me,  as  far  as  a  cursory  glance  can  enable  me  to  judge, 
to  exhaust  the  subject  as  respects  English  Gothic ;  and  which 
may  be  recommended  to  the  readers  who  are  interested  in  the 
subject,  as  containing  a  clear  and  masterly  enunciation  of  the 
general  principles  by  which  the  design  of  tracery  has  been  regu- 
lated, from  its  first  development  to  its  final  degradation. 


348 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

THE   ROOF. 

§  i.  The  modes  of  decoration  hitherto  considered,  have  been 
common  to  the  exteriors  and  interiors  of  all  noble  buildings ; 
and  we  have  taken  no  notice  of  the  various  kinds  of  ornament 
which  require  protection  from  weather,  and  are  necessarily  con- 
fined to  interior  work.  But  in  the  case  of  the  roof,  the  exterior 
and  interior  treatments  become,  as  we  saw  in  construction,  so 
also  in  decoration,  separated  by  broad  and  bold  distinctions. 
One  side  of  a  wall  is,  in  most  cases,  the  same  as  another,  and  if 
its  structure  be  concealed,  it  is  mostly  on  the  inside  ;  but,  in  the 
roof,  the  anatomical  structure,  out  of  which  decoration  should 
naturally  spring,  is  visible,  if  at  all,  in  the  interior  only :  so  that 
the  subject  of  internal  ornament  becomes  both  wide  and  impor- 
tant, and  that  of  external,  comparatively  subordinate. 

§  ii.  Now,  so  long  as  we  were  concerned  principally  with  the 
outside  of  buildings,  we  might  with  safety  leave  expressional 
character  out  of  the  question  for  the  time,  because  it  is  not  to  be 
expected  that  all  persons  who  pass  the  building,  or  see  it  from  a 
distance,  shall  be  in  the  temper  which  the  building  is  properly 
intended  to  induce ;  so  that  ornaments  somewhat  at  variance 
with  this  temper  may  often  be  employed  externally  without 
painful  effect.  But  these  ornaments  would  be  inadmissible  in 
the  interior,  for  those  who  enter  will  for  the  most  part  either  be 
in  the  proper  temper  which  the  building  requires,  or  desirous  of 
acquiring  it.  (The  distinction  is  not  rigidly  observed  by  the 
mediaeval  builders,  and  grotesques,  or  profane  subjects,  occur  in 
the  interior  of  churches,  in  bosses,  crockets,  capitals,  brackets, 
and  such  other  portions  of  minor  ornament :  but  we  do  not  find 


DECORATION.  XXIX.    THE    ROOF.  34:9 

the  interior  wall  covered  with  hunting  and  battle  pieces,  as  often 
the  Lombardic  exteriors.)  And  thus  the  interior  expression  of 
the  roof  or  ceiling  becomes  necessarily  so  various,  and  the  kind 
and  degree  of  fitting  decoration  so  dependent  upon  particular 
circumstances,  that  it  is  nearly  impossible  to  classify  its  methods, 
or  limit  its  application. 

§  in.  I  have  little,  therefore,  to  say  here,  and  that  touching 
rather  the  omission  than  the  selection  of  decoration,  as  far  as 
regards  interior  roofing.  Whether  of  timber  or  stone,  roofs  are 
necessarily  divided  into  surfaces,  and  ribs  or  beams  ; — surfaces, 
flat  or  carved ;  ribs,  traversing  these  in  the  directions  where 
main  strength  is  required ;  or  beams,  filling  the  hollow  of  the 
dark  gable  with  the  intricate  roof-tree,  or  supporting  the  flat 
ceiling.  Wherever  the  ribs  and  beams  are  simply  and  unaffect- 
edly arranged,  there  is  no  difficulty  about  decoration ;  the  beams 
may  be  carved,  the  ribs  moulded,  and  the  eye  is  satisfied  at  once ; 
but  when  the  vaulting  is  unribbed,  as  in  plain  waggon  vaults 
and  much  excellent  early  Gothic,  or  when  the  ceiling  is  fiat,  it 
becomes  a  difficult  question  how  far  their  surfaces  may  receive 
ornamentation  independent  of  their  structure.  I  have  never 
myself  seen  a  fiat  ceiling  satisfactorily  decorated,  except  by 
painting :  there  is  much  good  and  fanciful  panelling  in  old 
English  domestic  architecture,  but  it  always  is  in  some  degree 
meaningless  and  mean.  The  flat  ceilings  of  Venice,  as  in  the 
Scuola  di  San  Rocco  and  Ducal  Palace,  have  in  their  vast  pan- 
ellings some  of  the  noblest  paintings  (on  stretched  canvass) 
which  the  world  possesses  :  and  this  is  all  very  well  for  the 
ceiling  ;  but  one  would  rather  have  the  painting  in  a  better  place, 
especially  when  the  rain  soaks  through  its  canvass,  as  I  have 
seen  it  doing  through  many  a  noble  Tintoret.  On  the  whole,  flat 
ceilings  are  as  much  to  be  avoided  as  possible  ;  and,  when  neces- 
sary, perhaps  a  panelled  ornamentation  with  rich  coloured  pat- 
terns is  the  most  satisfying,  and  loses  least  of  valuable  labour. 
But  I  leave  the  question  to  the  reader's  thought,  being  myself 
exceedingly  undecided  respecting  it :  except  only  touching  one 


350  XXIX.    THE   ROOF. 


DECORATION. 


point — that  a  blank  ceiling  is  not  to  be  redeemed  by  a  decorated 
ventilator. 

§  iv.  I  have  a  more  confirmed  opinion,  however,  respecting 
the  decoration  of  curved  surfaces.  The  majesty  of  a  roof  is 
never,  I  think,  so  great,  as  when  the  eye  can  pass  undisturbed 
over  the  course  of  all  its  curvatures,  and  trace  the  dying  of  the 
shadows  along  its  smooth  and  sweeping  vaults.  And  I  would 
rather,  myself,  have  a  plain  ridged  Gothic  vault,  with  all  its 
rough  stones  visible,  to  keep  the  sleet  and  wind  out  of  a  cathe- 
dral aisle,  than  all  the  fanning  and  pendanting  and  foliation  that 
ever  bewildered  Tudor  weight.  But  mosaic  or  fresco  may  of 
course  be  used  as  far  as  we  can  afford  or  obtain  them  ;  for  these 
do  not  break  the  curvature.  Perhaps  the  most  solemn  roofs  in 
the  wTorld  are  the  apse  conchas  of  the  Romanesque  basilicas,  with 
their  golden  ground  and  severe  figures.  Exactly  opposed  to 
these  are  the  decorations  which  disturb  the  serenity  of  the  curve 
without  giving  it  interest,  like  the  vulgar  panelling  of  St.  Peter's 
and  the  Pantheon  ;  both,  I  think,  in  the  last  degree  detestable. 

§  v.  As  roofs  internally  may  be  divided  into  surfaces  and  ribs, 
externally  they  may  be  divided  into  surfaces,  and  points,  or  ridges ; 
these  latter  often  receiving  very  bold  and  distinctive  ornament. 
The  outside  surface  is  of  small  importance  in  central  Europe, 
being  almost  universally  low  in  slope,  and  tiled,  throughout  Spain, 
South  France,  and  North.  Italy  :  of  still  less  importance  where  it 
is  flat,  as  a  terrace  ;  as  often  in  South  Italy  and  the  East,  mingled 
with  low  domes :  but  the  larger  Eastern  and  Arabian  domes 
become  elaborate  in  ornamentation  :  I  cannot  speak  of  them  with 
confidence  ;  to  the  mind  of  an  inhabitant  of  the  north,  a  roof 
is  a  guard  against  wild  weather ;  not  a  surface  which  is  for  ever 
to  bask  in  serene  heat,  and  gleam  across  deserts  like  a  rising 
moon.  I  can  only  say,  that  I  have  never  seen  any  drawing  of  a 
richly  decorated  Eastern  dome  that  made  me  desire  to  see  the 
original. 

§  vi.  Our  own  northern  roof  decoration  is  necessarily  simple. 
Coloured  tiles  are  used  in  some  cases  with  quaint  effect ;  but  I 


DECORATION.  XXIX.    THE    ROOF.  351 

believe  the  dignity  of  the  building  is  always  greater  when  the 
roof  is  kept  in  an  undisturbed  mass,  opposing  itself  to  the 
variegation  and  richness  of  the  walls.  The  Italian  round  tile 
is  itself  decoration  enough,  a  deep  and  rich  fluting,  which  all 
artists  delight  in  ;  this,  however,  is  fitted  exclusively  for  low 
pitch  of  roofs.  On  steep  domestic  roofs,  there  is  no  ornament 
better  than  may  be  obtained  by  merely  rounding,  or  cutting 
to  an  angle,  the  lower  extremities  of  the  flat  tiles  or  shingles, 
as  in  Switzerland  :  thus  the  whole  surface  is  covered  with  an 
appearance  of  scales,  a  fish-like  defence  against  water,  at  once 
perfectly  simple,  natural,  and  effective  at  any  distance ;  and  the 
best  decoration  of  sloping  stone  roofs,  as  of  spires,  is  a  mere  copy 
of  this  scale  armour ;  it  enriches  every  one  of  the  spires  and 
pinnacles  of  the  cathedral  of  Coutances,  and  of  many  Norman 
and  early  Gothic  buildings.  Roofs  covered  or  edged  with  lead 
have  often  patterns  designed  upon  the  lead,  gilded  and  relieved 
with  some  dark  colour,  as  on  the  house  of  Jacques  Coeur  at 
Bourges ;  and  I  imagine  the  effect  of  this  must  have  been 
singularly  delicate  and  beautiful,  but  only  traces  of  it  now 
remain.  The  northern  roofs,  however,  generally  stand  in  little 
need  of  surface  decoration,  the  eye  being  drawn  to  the  fantastic 
ranges  of  their  dormer  windows,  and  to  the  finials  and  fringes  on 
their  points  and  ridges. 

§  vii.  Whether  dormer  windows  are  legitimately  to  be  classed 
as  decorative  features,  seems  to  me  to  admit  of  doubt.  The 
northern  spire  system  is  evidently  a  mere  elevation  and  ex- 
aggeration of  the  domestic  turret  with  its  look-out  windows, 
and  one  can  hardly  part  with  the  grotesque  lines  of  the  pro- 
jections, though  nobody  is  to  be  expected  to  live  in  the  spire  : 
but,  at  all  events,  such  windows  are  never  to  be  allowed 
in  places  visibly  inaccessible,  or  on  less  than  a  natural  and  ser- 
viceable scale. 

§  vni.  Under  the  general  head  of  roof-ridge  and  point  de- 
coration, we  may  include,  as  above  noted,  the  entire  race 
of  fringes,  finials,  and  crockets.     As  there  is  no  use  in  any  of 


352  XXIX.    THE   ROOF. 


DECORATION. 


these  things,  and  as  they  are  visible  additions  and  parasitical  por- 
tions of  the  structure,  more  caution  is  required  in  their  use  than 
in  any  other  features  of  ornament,  and  the  architect  and  spectator 
must  both  be  in  felicitous  humour  before  they  can  be  well  design- 
ed or  thoroughly  enjoyed.    They  are  generally  most  admirable 
where  the  grotesque  Northern  spirit  has  most  power  ;  and  I  think 
there  is  almost  always  a  certain  spirit  of  playfulness  in  them,  ad- 
verse to  the  grandest  architectural  effects,  or  at  least  to  be  kept 
in  severe  subordination  to  the  serener  character  of  the  jDrevalent 
lines.     But  as  they  are  opposed  to  the  seriousness  of  majesty  on 
the  one  hand,  so  they  are  to  the  weight  of  dulness  on  the  other ; 
and  I  know  not  any  features  which  make  the  contrast  between 
continental  domestic  architecture,  and  our  own,   more  humili- 
atingly  felt,  or  which  give  so  sudden  a  feeling  of  new  life  and 
delight,  when  we  pass  from  the  streets  of  London  to  those  of 
Abbeville  or  Rouen,  as  the  quaint  points  and  pinnacles  of  the 
roof  gables  and  turrets.     The  commonest  and  heaviest  roof  may 
be  redeemed  by  a  spike  at  the  end  of  it,  if  it  is  set  on  with  any 
spirit ;  but  the  foreign  builders  have  (or  had,  at  least)  a  peculiar 
feeling  in  this,  and  gave  animation  to  the  whole  roof  by  the 
fringe  of  its  back,  and  the  spike  on  its  forehead,  so  that  all  goes 
together,  like  the  dorsal  fins  and  spines  of  a  fish  :  but  our  spikes 
have  a  dull,  screwed  on,  look;  a  far-off  relationship  to  the  nuts 
of  machinery ;  and  our  roof  fringes  are  sure  to  look  like  fenders, 
as  if  they  were  meant  to  catch  ashes  out  of  the  London  smoke- 
clouds. 

§  ix.  Stone  finials  and  crockets  are,  I  think,  to  be  considered 
in  architecture,  what  points  and  flashes  of  light  are  in  the  colour 
of  painting,  or  of  nature.  There  are  some  landscapes  whose  best 
character  is  sparkling,  and  there  is  a  possibility  of  repose  in  the 
midst  of  brilliancy,  or  embracing  it, — as  on  the  fields  of  summer 
sea,  or  summer  land : 

"  Calm,  and  deep  peace,  on  this  high  wold, 
And  on  the  dews  that  drench  the  furze, 
And  on  the  silvery  gossamers, 
That  twinkle  into  green  and  gold." 


DECORATION.  XXIX.    THE    ROOF.  353 

And  there  are  colourists  who  can  keep  their  quiet  in  the  midst 
of  a  jewellery  of  light ;  but,  for  the  most  part,  it  is  better  to 
avoid  breaking  up  either  lines  or  masses  by  too  many  points, 
and  to  make  the  few  points  used  exceedingly  precious.  So 
the  best  crockets  and  finials  are  set,  like  stars,  alqng  the  lines, 
and  at  the  points,  which  they  adorn,  with  considerable  intervals 
between  them,  and  exquisite  delicacy  and  fancy  of  sculpture  in 
their  own  designs ;  if  very  small,  they  may  become  more  frequent, 
and  describe  lines  by  a  chain  of  points  :  but  their  whole  value 
is  lost  if  they  are  gathered  into  bunches  or  clustered  into  tassels 
and  knots ;  and  an  over-indulgence  in  them  always  marks  low- 
ness  of  school.  In  Yenice,  the  addition  of  the  finial  to  the  arch- 
head  is  the  first  sign  of  degradation ;  all  her  best  architecture  is 
entirely  without  either  crockets  or  finials  ;  and  her  ecclesiastical 
architecture  may  be  classed,  with  fearless  accuracy,  as  better  or 
worse,  in  proportion  to  the  diminution  or  expansion  of  the 
crocket.  The  absolutely  perfect  use  of  the  crocket  is  found,  I 
think,  in  the  tower  of  Giotto,  and  in  some  other  buildings  of  the 
Pisan  school.  In  the  North  they  generally  err  on  one  side  or 
other,  and  are  either  florid  and  huge,  or  mean  in  outline,  looking 
as  if  they  had  been  pinched  out  of  the  stone-work,  as  throughout 
the  entire  cathedral  of  Amiens  ;  and  are  besides  connected  with 
the  generally  spotty  system  which  has  been  spoken  of  under  the 
head  of  archivolt  decoration. 

§  x.  Employed,  however,  in  moderation,  they  are  among  the 
most  delightful  means  of  delicate  expression  ;  and  the  architect 
has  more  liberty  in  their  individual  treatment  than  in  any  other 
feature  of  the  building.  Separated  entirely  from  the  structural 
system,  they  are  subjected  to  no  shadow  of  any  other  laws  than 
those  of  grace  and  chastity ;  and  the  fancy  may  range  without 
rebuke,  for  materials  of  their  design,  through  the  whole  field  of 
the  visible  or  imaginable  creation. 

23 


354 


CHAPTER    XXX. 


THE   VESTIBULE. 


§  i.  I  have  hardly  kept  my  promise.  The  reader  has  decorated 
but  little  for  himself  as  yet ;  but  I  have  not  at  least,  attempted 
to  bias  his  judgment.  Of  the  simple  forms  of  decoration  which 
have  been  set  before  him,  he  has  always  been  left  free  to  choose ; 
and  the  stated  restrictions  in  the  methods  of  applying  them  have 
been  only  those  which  followed  on  the  necessities  of  construction 
previously  determined.  These  having  been  now  defined,  I  do 
indeed  leave  my  reader  free  to  build ;  and  with  what  a  freedom ! 
All  the  lovely  forms  of  the  universe  set  before  him,  whence  to 
choose,  and  all  the  lovely  lines  that  bound  their  substance  or 
guide  their  motion ;  and  of  all  these  lines, — and  there  are  my- 
riads of  myriads  in  every  bank  of  grass  and  every  tuft  of  forest; 
and  groups  of  them  divinely  harmonized,  in  the  bell  of  every 
flower,  and  in  every  several  member  of  bird  and  beast, — of  all 
these  lines,  for  the  principal  forms  of  the  most  important  mem- 
bers of  architecture,  I  have  used  but  Three  !  What,  therefore, 
must  be  the  infinity  of  the  treasure  in  them  all!  There  is 
material  enough  in  a  single  flower  for  the  ornament  of  a  score 
of  cathedrals :  but  suppose  we  were  satisfied  with  less  ex- 
haustive appliance,  and  built  a  score  of  cathedrals,  each  to 
illustrate  a  single  flower  ?  that  would  be  better  than  trying  to 
invent  new  styles,  I  think.  There  is  quite  difference  of  style 
enough,  between  a  violet  and  a  harebell,  for  all  reasonable 
purposes. 

§  ii.  Perhaps,  however,  even  more  strange  than  the  struggle  of 
our  architects  to  invent  new  styles,  is  the  way  they  commonly 
speak  of  this  treasure  of  natural  infinity.      Let  us  take  our 


XXX.    THE  VESTIBULE.  355 

patience  to  us  for  an  instant,  and  hear  one  of  them,  not  among 
the  least  intelligent : — 

"  It  is  not  true  that  all  natural  forms  are  beautiful.  We  may  hardly  be  able 
to  detect  this  in  Nature  herself;  but  when  the  forms  are  separated  from  the 
things,  and  exhibited  alone  (by  sculpture  or  carving),  we  then  see  that  they  are 
not  all  fitted  for  ornamental  purposes ;  and  indeed  that  very  few,  perhaps  none, 
are  so  fitted  without  correction.  Yes,  I  say  correction,  for  though  it  is  the  highest 
aim  of  every  art  to  imitate  nature,  this  is  not  to  be  done  by  imitating  any  natural 
form,  but  by  criticising  and  correcting  it,— criticising  it  by  Nature's  rules  gathered 
from  all  her  works,  but  never  completely  earned  out  by  her  in  any  one  work ; 
correcting  it,  by  rendering  it  more  natural,  i.  e.  more  conformable  to  the  general 
tendency  of  Nature,  according  to  that  noble  maxim  recorded  of  RafTaelle, '  that 
the  artist's  object  was  to  make  things  not  as  Nature  makes  them,  but  as  she 
would  make  them :'  as  she  ever  tries  to  make  them,  but  never  succeeds,  though 
her  aim  may  be  deduced  from  a  comparison  of  her  efforts ;  just  as  if  a  number 
of  archers  had  aimed  unsuccessfully  at  a  mark  upon  a  wall,  and  this  mark  were 
then  removed,  we  could  by  the  examination  of  their  arrow-marks  point  out  the 
most  probable  position  of  the  spot  aimed  at,  with  a  certainty  of  being  nearer  to 
it  than  any  of  their  shots."* 

§  in.  I  had  thought  that,  by  this  time,  we  had  done  with 
that  stale,  second-hand,  one-sided,  and  misunderstood  saying  of 
EafTaelle's;  or  that  at  least,  in  these  days  of  purer  Christian 
light,  men  might  have  begun  to  get  some  insight  into  the  mean- 
ing of  it :  KafTaelle  was  a  painter  of  humanity,  and  assuredly 
there  is  something  the  matter  with  humanity,  a  few  dovrebbe's, 
more  or  less,  wanting  in  it.  We  have  most  of  us  heard  of 
original  sin,  and  may  perhaps,  in  our  modest  moments,  conjec- 
ture that  we  are  not  quite  what  God,  or  nature,  would  have  us 
to  be.  Raffaelle  had  something  to  mend  in  Humanity :  I  should 
have  liked  to  have  seen  him  mending  a  daisy! — or  a  pease- 
blossom,  or  a  moth,  or  a  mustard  seed,  or  any  other  of  God's 
slightest  works.  If  he  had  accomplished  that,  one  might  have 
found  for  him  more  respectable  employment, — to  set  the  stars  in 
better  order,  perhaps,  (they  seem  grievously  scattered  as  they 
are,  and  to  be  of  all  manner  of  shapes  and  sizes, — except  the 

*  Garbett  on  Design,  p.  74. 


356  XXX.   THE   VESTIBULE. 


ideal  shape,  and  the  proper  size) ;  or  to  give  us  a  corrected  view 
of  the  ocean :  that,  at  least,  seems  a  very  irregular  and  improve- 
able  thing ;  the  very  fishermen  do  not  know,  this  day,  how  far  it 
will  reach,  driven  up  before  the  west  wind : — perhaps  Some  One 
else  does,  but  that  is  not  our  business.  Let  us  go  down  and 
stand  by  the  beach  of  it, — of  the  great  irregular  sea,  and  count 
whether  the  thunder  of  it  is  not  out  of  time.  One, — two : — here 
comes  a  well-formed  wave  at  last,  trembling  a  little  at  the  top, 
but,  on  the  whole,  orderly.  So,  crash  among  the  shingle,  and 
up  as  far  as  this  grey  pebble ;  now  stand  by  and  watch !  An- 
other : — Ah,  careless  wave !  why  couldn't  you  have  kept  your 
crest  on  ?  it  is  all  gone  away  into  spray,  striking  up  against  the 
cliffs  there — I  thought  as  much — missed  the  mark  by  a  couple 
of  feet !  Another : — How  now,  impatient  one !  couldn't  you 
have  waited  till  your  friend's  reflux  was  done  with,  instead  of 
rolling  yourself  up  with  it  in  that  unseemly  manner  ?  You  go 
for  nothing.  A  fourth,  and  a  goodly  one  at  last.  What  think 
we  of  yonder  slow  rise,  and  crystalline  hollow,  without  a  flaw  ? 
Steady,  good  wave;  not  so  fast,  not  so  fast;  where  are  you 
coming  to? — By  our  architectural  word,  this  is  too  bad;  two 
yards  over  the  mark,  and  ever  so  much  of  you  in  our  face 
besides ;  and  a  wave  which  we  had  some  hope  of,  behind  there, 
broken  all  to  pieces  out  at  sea,  and  laying  a  great  white  table- 
cloth of  foam  all  the  way  to  the  shore,  as  if  the  marine  gods  were 
to  dine  off  it !  Alas,  for  these  unhappy  arrow  shots  of  Nature  ; 
she  will  never  hit  her  mark  with  those  unruly  waves  of  hers,  nor 
get  one  of  them  into  the  ideal  shape,  if  we  wait  for  a  thousand 
years.  Let  us  send  for  a  Greek  architect  to  do  it  for  her.  He 
comes — the  great  Greek  architect,  with  measure  and  rule.  Will 
he  not  also  make  the  weight  for  the  winds  ?  and  weigh  out  the 
waters  by  measure  ?  and  make  a  decree  for  the  rain,  and  a  way 
for  the  lightning  of  the  thunder  ?  He  sets  himself  orderly  to  his 
work,  and  behold !  this  is  the  mark  of  nature,  and  this  is  the 
thing  into  which  the  great  Greek  architect  improves  the  sea — 


XXX.   THE   VESTIBULE.  357 


O&Xcma,  ddXarta :  Was  it  this,  then,  that  they  wept  to  see  from 
the  sacred  mountain — 'those  wearied  ones  ? 

§  iv.  But  the  sea  was  meant  to  be  irregular !  Yes,  and  were 
not  also  the  leaves,  and  the  blades  of  grass ;  and,  in  a  sort,  as  far 
as  may  be  without  mark  of  sin,  even  the  countenance  of  man  ? 
Or  would  it  be  pleasanter  and  better  to  have  us  all  alike,  and 
numbered  on  our  foreheads,  that  we  might  be  known  one  from 
the  other  ? 

§  v.  Is  there,  then,  nothing  to  be  done  by  man's  art?  Have 
we  only  to  copy,  and  again  copy,  for  ever,  the  imagery  of  the 
universe  ?  Not  so.  We  have  work  to  do  upon  it ;  there  is  not 
any  one  of  us  so  simple,  nor  so  feeble,  but  he  has  work  to  do 
upon  it.  But  the  work  is  not  to  improve,  but  to  explain.  This 
infinite  universe  is  unfathomable,  inconceivable,  in  its  whole ; 
every  human  creature  must  slowly  spell  out,  and  long  con- 
template, such  part  of  it  as  may  be  possible  for  him  to  reach ; 
then  set  forth  what  he  has  learned  of  it  for  those  beneath  him ; 
extricating  it  from  infinity,  as  one  gathers  a  violet  out  of  grass ; 
one  does  not  improve  either  violet  or  grass  in  gathering  it,  but 
one  makes  the  flower  visible ;  and  then  the  human  being  has 
to  make  its  power  upon  his  own  heart  visible  also,  and  to  give 
it  the  honour  of  the  good  thoughts  it  has  raised  up  in  him,  and 
to  write  upon  it  the  history  of  his  own  soul.  And  sometimes 
he  may  be  able  to  do  more  than  this,  and  to  set  it  in  strange 
lights,  and  display  it  in  a  thousand  ways  before  unknown :  ways 
specially  directed  to  necessary  and  noble  purposes,  for  which  he 
had  to  choose  instruments  out  of  the  wide  armoury  of  God.  All 
this  he  may  do :  and  in  this  he  is  only  doing  what  every  Chris- 
tian has  to  do  with  the  written,  as  well  as  the  created  word, 
"  righly  dividing  the  word  of  truth."  Out  of  the  infinity  of  the 
written  word,  he  has  also  to  gather  and  set  forth  things  new  and 


358  XXX.   THE   VESTIBULE. 

old,  to  choose  them  for  the  season  and  the  work  that  are  before 
him,  to  explain  and  manifest  them  to  others,  with  such  illustra- 
tion and  enforcement  as  may  be  in  his  power,  and  to  crown 
them  with  the  history  of  what,  by  them,  God  has  done  for  his 
soul.  And,  in  doing  this,  is  he  improving  the  Word  of  God  ? 
Just  such  difference  as  there  is  between  the  sense  in  which  a 
minister  may  be  said  to  improve  a  text,  to  the  people's  comfort, 
and  the  sense  in  which  an  atheist  might  declare  that  he  could 
improve  the  Book,  which,  if  any  man  shall  add  unto,  there  shall 
be  added  unto  him  the  plagues  that  are  written  therein;  just 
such  difference  is  there  between  that  which,  with  respect  to 
Nature,  man  is,  in  his  humbleness,  called  upon  to  do,  and  that 
which,  in  his  insolence,  he  imagines  himself  capable  of  doing. 

§  vi.  Have  no  fear,  therefore,  reader,  in  judging  between 
nature  and  art,  so  only  that  you  love  both.  If  you  can  love  one 
only,  then  let  it  be  Nature  ;  you  are  safe  with  her :  but  do  not 
then  attempt  to  judge  the  art,  to  which  you  do  not  care  to  give 
thought,  or  time.  But  if  you  love  both,  you  may  judge  between 
them  fearlessly ;  you  may  estimate  the  last,  by  its  making  you 
remember  the  first,  and  giving  you  the  same  kind  of  joy.  If,  in 
the  square  of  the  city,  you  can  find  a  delight,  finite,  indeed,  but 
pure  and  intense,  like  that  which  you  have  in  a  valley  among  the 
hills,  then  its  art  and  architecture  are  right ;  but  if,  after  fair 
trial,  you  can  find  no  delight  in  them,  nor  any  instruction  like 
that  of  nature,  I  call  on  you  fearlessly  to  condemn  them. 

We  are  forced,  for  the  sake  of  accumulating  our  power  and 
knowledge,  to  live  in  cities  :  but  such  advantage  as  we  have  in 
association  with  each  other  is  in  great  part  counterbalanced  by 
our  loss  of  fellowship  with  nature.  We  cannot  all  have  our  gar- 
dens now,  nor  our  pleasant  fields  to  meditate  in  at  eventide. 
Then  the  function  of  our  architecture  is,  as  far  as  may  be,  to  re- 
place these ;  to  tell  us  about  nature ;  to  possess  us  with  memories 
of  her  quietness ;  to  be  solemn  and  full  of  tenderness,  like  her, 
and  rich  in  portraitures  of  her ;  full  of  delicate  imagery  of  the 
flowers  we  can  no  more  gather,  and  of  the  living  creatures  now 


XXX.    THE   VESTIBULE.  359 

far  away  from  us  in  their  own  solitude.  If  ever  you  felt  or 
found  this  in  a  London  Street, — if  ever  it  furnished  you  with  one 
serious  thought,  or  one  ray  of  true  and  gentle  pleasure, — if  there 
is  in  your  heart  a  true  delight  in  its  grim  railings  and  dark  case- 
ments, and  wasteful  finery  of  shops,  and  feeble  coxcombry  of 
club-houses, — it  is  well :  promote  the  building  of  more  like  them. 
But  if  they  never  taught  you  anything,  and  never  made  you 
happier  as  you  passed  beneath  them,  do  not  think  they  have  any 
mysterious  goodness  nor  occult  sublimity.  Have  done  with  the 
wretched  affectation,  the  futile  barbarism,  of  pretending  to  en- 
joy :  for,  as  surely  as  you  know  that  the  meadow  grass,  meshed 
with  fairy  rings,  is  better  than  the  wood  pavement,  cut  into  hex- 
agons ;  and  as  surely  as  you  know  the  fresh  winds  and  sunshine 
of  the  upland  are  better  than  the  choke-damp  of  the  vault,  or  the 
gas-light  of  the  ball-room,  you  may  know,  as  I  told  you  that  you 
should,  that  the  good  architecture,  which  has  life,  and  truth,  and 
joy  in  it,  is  better  than  the  bad  architecture,  which  has  death, 
dishonesty,  and  vexation  of  heart  in  it,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  of  time. 

§  vn.  And  now  come  with  me,  for  I  have  kept  you  too  long 
from  your  gondola:  come  with  me,  on  an  autumnal  morning, 
through  the  dark  gates  of  Padua,  and  let  us  take  the  broad  road 
leading  towards  the  East. 

It  lies  level,  for  a  league  or  two,  between  its  elms,  and  vine 
festoons  full  laden,  their  thin  leaves  veined  into  scarlet  hectic, 
and  their  clusters  deepened  into  gloomy  blue  ;  then  mounts  an 
embankment  above  the  Brenta,  and  runs  between  the  river  and 
the  broad  plain,  which  stretches  to  the  north  in  endless  lines  of 
mulberry  and  maize.  The  Brenta  flows  slowly,  but  strongly  ;  a 
muddy  volume  of  yellowish-grey  water,  that  neither  hastens  nor 
slackens,  but  glides  heavily  between  its  monotonous  banks,  with 
here  and  there  a  short,  babbling  eddy  twisted  for  an  instant  into 
its  opaque  surface,  and  vanishing,  as  if  something  had  been 
dragged  into  it  and  gone  down.  Dusty  and  shadeless,  the  road 
fares  along  the  dyke  on  its  northern  side ;  and  the  tall  white 


360  XXX.   THE   VESTIBULE. 

tower  of  Dolo  is  seen  trembling  in  the  heat  mist  far  away,  and 
never  seems  nearer  than  it  did  at  first.  Presently  you  pass  one 
of  the  much  vaunted  "  villas  on  the  Brenta :"  a  glaring,  spectral 
shell  of  brick  and  stucco,  its  windows  with  painted  architraves 
like  picture-frames,  and  a  court-yard  paved  with  pebbles  in  front 
of  it,  all  burning  in  the  thick  glow  of  the  feverish  sunshine,  but 
fenced  from  the  high  road,  for  magnificence  sake,  with  goodly 
posts  and  chains  ;  then  another,  of  Kew  Gothic,  with  Chinese 
variations,  painted  red  and  green ;  a  third,  composed  for  the 
greater  part  of  dead-wall,  with  fictitious  windows  painted  upon 
it,  each  with  a  pea-green  blind,  and  a  classical  architrave  in  bad 
perspective  ;  and  a  fourth,  with  stucco  figures  set  on  the  top  of 
its  garden-wall :  some  antique,  like  the  kind  to  be  seen  at  the 
corner  of  the  K"ew  Road,  and  some  of  clumsy  grotesque  dwarfs, 
with  fat  bodies  and  large  boots.  This  is  the  architecture  to  which 
her  studies  of  the  Renaissance  have  conducted  modern  Italy. 

§  vni.  The  sun  climbs  steadily,  and  warms  into  intense  white 
the  walls  of  the'little  piazza  of  Dolo,  where  we  change  horses. 
Another  dreary  stage  among  the  now  divided  branches  of  the 
Brenta,  forming  irregular  and  half-stagnant  canals  ;  with  one  or 
two  more  villas  on  the  other  side  of  them,  but  these  of  the  old 
Venetian  type,  which  we  may  have  recognised  before  at  Padua, 
and  sinking  fast  into  utter  ruin,  black,  and  rent,  and  lonely,  set 
close  to  the  edge  of  the  dull  water,  with  what  were  once  small 
gardens  beside  them,  kneaded  into  mud,  and  with  blighted  frag- 
ments of  gnarled  hedges  and  broken  stakes  for  their  fencing ;  and 
here  and  there  a  few  fragments  of  marble  steps,  which  have  once 
given  them  graceful  access  from  the  water's  edge,  now  settling 
into  the  mud  in  broken  joints,  all  aslope,  and  slippery  with  green 
weed.  At  last  the  road  turns  sharply  to  the  north,  and  there  is 
an  open  space,  covered  with  bent  grass,  on  the  right  of  it :  but 
do  not  look  that  way. 

§  ix.  Five  minutes  more,  and  we  are  in  the  upper  room  of  the 
little  inn  at  Mestre,  glad  of  a  moment's  rest  in  shade.  The  table 
is  (always,  I  think)  covered  with  a  cloth  of  nominal  white  and 


XXX.    THE   VESTIBULE.  361 

perennial  grey,  with  plates  and  glasses  at  due  intervals,  and 
small  loaves  of  a  peculiar  white  bread,  made  with  oil,  and  more 
like  knots  of  flour  than  bread.  The  view  from  its  balcony  is  not 
cheerful :  a  narrow  street,  with  a  solitary  brick  church  and  bar- 
ren campanile  on  the  other  side  of  it;  and  some  conventual 
buildings,  with  a  few  crimson  remnants  of  fresco  about  their 
windows ;  and,  between  them  and  the  street,  a  ditch  with  some 
slow  current  in  it,  and  one  or  two  small  houses  beside  it,  one 
with  an  arbour  of  roses  at  its  door,  as  in  an  English  tea-garden ; 
the  air,  however,  about  us  having  in  it  nothing  of  roses,  but  a 
close  smell  of  garlic  and  crabs,  warmed  by  the  smoke  of  various 
stands  of  hot  chestnuts.  There  is  much  vociferation  also  going 
on  beneath  the  window  respecting  certain  wheelbarrows  which 
are  in  rivalry  for  our  baggage  ;  we  appease  their  rivalry  with 
our  best  patience,  and  follow  them  down  the  narrow  street. 

§  x.  We  have  but  walked  some  two  hundred  yards  when  we 
come  to  a  low  wharf  or  quay,  at  the  extremity  of  a  canal,  with 
long  steps  on  each  side  down  to  the  water,  which  latter  we  fancy 
for  an  instant  has  become  black  with  stagnation  ;  another  glance 
undeceives  us, — it  is  covered  with  the  black  boats  of  Venice. 
We  enter  one  of  them,  rather  to  try  if  they  be  real  boats  or  not, 
than  with  any  definite  purpose,  and  glide  away ;  at  first  feeling 
as  if  the  water  were  yielding  continually  beneath  the  boat  and 
letting  her  sink  into  soft  vacancy.  It  is  something  clearer  than 
any  water  we  have  seen  lately,  and  of  a  pale  green  ;  the  banks 
only  two  or  three  feet  above  it,  of  mud  and  rank  grass,  with  here 
and  there  a  stunted  tree ;  gliding  swiftly  past  the  small  casement 
of  the  gondola,  as  if  they  were  dragged  by  upon  a  painted  scene, 

Stroke  by  stroke  we  count  the  plunges  of  the  oar,  each  heaving 
up  the  side  of  the  boat  slightly  as  her  silver  beak  shoots  forward. 
We  lose  patience,  and  extricate  ourselves  from  the  cushions :  the 
sea  air  blows  keenly  by,  as  we  stand  leaning  on  the  roof  of  the 
floating  cell.  In  front,  nothing  to  be  seen  but  long  canal  and 
level  bank  ;  to  the  west,  the  tower  of  Mestre  is  lowering  fast,  and 
behind  it  there  have  risen  purple  shapes,  of  the  colour  of  dead 


362  XXX.   THE   VESTIBULE. 

rose-leaves,  all  round  the  horizon,  feebly  defined  against  the  af- 
ternoon sky, — the  Alps  of  Bassano.  Forward  still :  the  endless 
canal  bends  at  last,  and  then  breaks  into  intricate  angles  about 
some  low  bastions,  now  torn  to  |)ieces  and  staggering  in  ugly 
rents  towards  the  water, — the  bastions  of  the  fort  of  Malghera. 
Another  turn,  and  another  perspective  of  canal ;  but  not  inter- 
minable. The  silver  beak  cleaves  it  fast, — it  widens  :  the  rank 
grass  of  the  banks  sinks  lower,  and  lower,  and  at  last  dies  in 
tawny  knots  along  an  expanse  of  weedy  shore.  Over  it,  on  the 
right,  but  a  few  years  back,  we  might  have  seen  the  lagoon 
stretching  to  the  horizon,  and  the  warm  southern  sky  bending 
over  Malamocco  to  the  sea.  .Now  we  can  see  nothing  but  what 
seems  a  low  and  monotonous  dockyard  wall,  with  flat  arches  to 
let  the  tide  through  it ; — this  is  the  railroad  bridge,  conspicuous 
above  all  things.  But  at  the  end  of  those  dismal  arches  there 
rises,  out  of  the  wide  water,  a  straggling  line  of  low  and  confused 
brick  buildings,  which,  but  for  the  many  towers  which  are  min- 
gled among  them,  might  be  the  suburbs  of  an  English  manufac- 
turing town.  Four  or  five  domes,  pale,  and  apparently  at  a 
greater  distance,  rise  over  the  centre  of  the  line  ;  but  the  object 
which  first  catches  the  eye  is  a  sullen  cloud  of  black  smoke 
brooding  over  the  northern  half  of  it,  and  which  issues  from  the 
belfry  of  a  church. 
It  is  Venice. 


APPENDIX. 


1.   FOUNDATION   OF   VENICE. 

I  find  the  chroniclers  agree  in  fixing  the  year  421,  if  any  :  the  follow- 
ing sentence  from  De  Monaci  may  perhaps  interest  the  reader. 

"  God,  who  punishes  the  sins  of  men  by  war  sorrows,  and  whose  ways 
are  past  finding  out,  willing  both  to  save  the  innocent  blood,  and  that  a 
great  power,  beneficial  to  the  whole  world,  should  arise  in  a  spot  strange 
beyond  belief,  moved  the  chief  men  of  the  cities  of  the  Venetian  province, 
(which,  from  the  border  of  Pannonia,  extended  as  far  as  the  Adda,  a  river 
of  Lombardy),  both  in  memory  of  past,  and  in  dread  of  future  distress, 
to  establish  states  upon  the  nearer  islands  of  the  inner  gulphs  of  the 
Adriatic,  to  which,  in  the  last  necessity,  they  might  retreat  for  refuge. 
And  first  Galienus  de  Fontana,  Simon  de  Glauconibus,  and  Antonius 
Calvus,  or,  as  others  have  it,  Adalbertus  Falerius,  Thomas  Candiano, 
Comes  Daulus,  Consuls  of  Padua,  by  the  command  of  their  King  and  the 
desire  of  the  citizens,  laid  the  foundations  of  the  new  commonwealth, 
under  good  auspices,  on  the  island  of  the  Rialto,  the  highest  and  nearest 
to  the  mouth  of  the  deep  river  now  called  the  Brenta,  in  the  year  of  Our 
Lord,  as  many  writers  assure  us,  four  hundred  and  twenty-one,  on  the 
25th  day  of  March."*  • 

It  is  matter  also  of  very  great  satisfaction  to  know  that  Venice  was 
founded  by  good  Christians  :  "  La  qual  citade  e  stada  hedificada  da  veri 
e  boni  Christian! :"  which  information  I  found  in  the  MS.  copy  of  the 
Zancarol  Chronicle,  in  the  library  of  St.  Mark's. 

Finally,  the  conjecture  as  to  the  origin  of  her  name,  recorded  by  San- 
sovino,  will  be  accepted  willingly  by  all  who  love  Venice :  "  Fu  inter- 

*  Ed.  Venetis,  1758,  Lib.  I. 


364  appendix,  2,  3. 

pretato  da  alcuni,  che  questa  voce  Venetia  voglia  dire  VENI  ETIAM, 
cioe,  vieni  ancora,  e  ancora,  percioche  quante  volte  verrai,  sempre  vedrai 
miove  cose,  enuove  bellezze." 

2.  POWER   OF   THE   DOGES. 

The  best  authorities  agree  in  giving  the  year  697  as  that  of  the  elec- 
tion of  the  first  doge,  Paul  Luke  Anafeste.  He  was  elected  in  a  general 
meeting  of  the  commonalty,  tribunes,  and  clergy,  at  Heraclea,  "  divinis 
rebus  procuratis,"  as  usual,  in  all  serious  work,  in  those  times.  His  au- 
thority is  thus  defined  by  Sabellico,  who  was  not  likely  to  have  exagge- 
rated it : — "  Penes  quern  decus  omne  imperii  ac  majestas  esset :  cui  jus 
concilium  cogendi  quoties  de  republica  aliquid  referri  oporteret ;  qui  tribu- 
nos  annuos  in  singulas  insulas  legeret,  a  quibusad  Ducem  esset  provocatio. 
Cseterum,  si  quis  dignitatem,  ecclesiam,  sacerdotumve  cleri  populique 
suffragio  esset  adeptus,  ita  demum  id  ratum  haberetur  si  dux  ipse  auctor 
factus  esset."  (Lib.  I.)  The  last  clause  is  very  important,  indicating 
the  subjection  of  the  ecclesiastical  to  the  popular  and  ducal  (or  patrician) 
powers,  m  Inch,  throughout  her  career,  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
features  in  the  policy  of  Venice.  The  appeal  from  the  tribunes  to  the 
doge  is  also  important;  and  the  expression  "  decus  omne  imperii,"  if 
of  somewhat  doubtful  force,  is  at  least  as  energetic  as  could  have 
been  expected  from  an  historian  under  the  influence  of  the  Council  of 
Ten. 

3.  SERRAR   DEL   CONSIGLIO. 

The  date  of  the  decree  which  made  the  right  of  sitting  in  the  grand 
council  hereditary,  is  variously  given ;  the  Venetian  historians  themselves 
saying  as  little  as  they  can  about  it.  The  thing  was  evidently  not  ac- 
complished at  once,  several  decrees  following  in  successive  years  :  the 
Council  of  Ten  was  established  without  any  doubt  in  1310,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  conspiracy  of  Tiepolo.  The  Venetian  verse,  quoted  by 
Mutinelli  (Annali  Urbani  di  Venezia,  p.  153.),  is  worth  remembering  : 

"  Del  mille  tresento  e  diese 
A  mezzo  el  mese  delle  ceriese 
Bagiamcnte  passo  el  ponte 
E  per  esso  fo  fatto  el  Consegio  di  diese." 


APPENDIX,   4.  365 

The  reader  cannot  do  better  than  take  1297  as  the  date  of  the  begin- 
ning of  the  change  of  government,  and  this  will  enable  him  exactly  to 
divide  the  1100  years  from  the  election  of  the  first  doge  into  600  of  mon- 
archy and  500  of  aristocracy.  The  coincidence  of  the  numbers  is  some- 
what curious ;  697  the  date  of  the  establishment  of  the  government,  1297 
of  its  change,  and  1797  of  its  fall. 

4.   S.    PIETKO   DI   CASTELLO. 

It  is  credibly  reported  to  have  been  founded  in  the  seventh  century, 
and  (with  somewhat  less  of  credibility)  in  a  place  where  the  Trojans, 
conducted  by  Antenor,  had,  after  the  destruction  of  Troy,  built  "  un 
castello,  chiamato  prima  Troja,  poscia  Olivolo,  interpretato,  luogo  pieno." 
It  seems  that  St.  Peter  appeared  in  person  to  the  Bishop  of  Heraclea, 
and  commanded  him  to  found  in  his  honour,  a  church  in  that  spot  of  the 
rising  city  on  the  Rialto  :  "  ove  avesse  veduto  una  mandra  di  buoi  e  di 
pecore   pascolare   unitamente.     Questa  fu  la  prodigiosa  origine  della 
Chiesa  di  San  Pietro,  che  poscia,  o  rinovata,  o  ristaurata,  da  Orso  Par- 
ticipazio    IV  Vescovo  Olivolense,  divenne  la  Cattedrale   della   Nuova 
citta."     (Notizie  Storiche  delle  Chiese  e  Monasteri  di  Venezia.     Padua, 
1758.)     What  there  was  so  prodigious  in  oxen  and  sheep  feeding  toge- 
ther, we  need  St.  Peter,  I  think,  to  tell  us.     The  title  of  Bishop  of  Cas- 
tello was  first  taken  in  1091:  St.  Mark's  was  not  made  the  cathedral 
church  till  1807.     It  may  be  thought  hardly  fair  to  conclude  the  small 
importance  of  the  old  St.  Pietro  di  Castello  from  the  appearance  of  the 
wretched  modernisations  of  1620.     But  these  modernisations  are  spoken 
of  as  improvements  ;  and  I  find  no  notice  of  peculiar  beauties  in  the  older 
building,  either  in  the  work  above  quoted,  or  by  Sansovino ;  who  only 
says  that  when  it  was  destroyed  by  fire  (as  everything  in  Venice  was,  I 
think,  about  three  times  in  a  century),  in  the  reign  of  Vital  Michele,  it 
was  rebuilt  "with  good  thick  walls,  maintaining,  for  all  that,  the  order 
of  its  arrangement  taken  from  the  Greek  mode  of  building."     This  does 
not  seem  the  description  of  a  very  enthusiastic  effort  to  rebuild  a  highly 
ornate  cathedral.     The  present  church  is  among  the  least  interesting  in 
Venice  ;  a  wooden  bridge,  something  like  that  of  Battersea  on  a  small 
scale,  connects  its  island,  now  almost  deserted,  with  a  wretched  suburb 
of  the  city  behind  the  arsenal ;  and  a  blank  level  of  lifeless  grass,  rotted 


366  APPENDIX,    5. 

away  in  places  rather  than  trodden,  is  extended  before  its  mildewed 
facade  and  solitary  tower. 

5.   PAPAL   POWER   LN   VENICE. 

I  may  refer  the  reader  to  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  twenty-eighth 
book  of  Dam  for  some  account  of  the  restraints  to  which  the  Venetian 
clergy  were  subjected.  I  have  not  myself  been  able  to  devote  any  time 
to  the  examination  of  the  original  documents  bearing  on  this  matter,  but 
the  following  extract  from  a  letter  of  a  friend,  who  will  not  at  present 
permit  me  to  give  his  name,  but  who  is  certainly  better  conversant  with 
the  records  of  the  Venetian  State  than  any  other  Englishman,  will  be  of 
great  value  to  the  general  reader  : — 

"  In  the  year  1410,  or  perhaps  at  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
churchmen  were  excluded  from  the  Grand  Council  and  declared  ineligi- 
ble to  civil  employments;  and  in  the  same  year,  1410,  the  Council  of 
Ten,  witli  the  Giunta,  decreed  that  whenever  in  the  state's  councils  mat- 
ters concerning  ecclesiastical  affairs  were  being  treated,  all  the  kinsfolk 
of  Venetian  beneficed  clergymen  were  to  be  expelled  ;  and,  in  the  year 
1434,  the  relations  of  churchmen  were  declared  ineligible  to  the  post  of 
ambassador  at  Rome. 

"The  Venetians  never  gave  possession  of  any  see  in  their  territories  to 
bishops  unless  they  had  been  proposed  to  the  pope  by  the  senate,  which 
elected  the  patriarch,  who  was  supposed,  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  to  be  liable  to  examination  by  his  Holiness,  as  an  act  of  confir- 
mation of  installation ;  but  of  course,  everything  depended  on  the  rela- 
tive power  at  any  given  time  of  Rome  and  Venice :  for  instance,  a  few 
days  after  the  accession  of  Julius  II.,  in  1503,  he  requests  the  Signory, 
cap  in  hand,  to  allow  him  to  confer  the  archbishopric  of  Zara  on  a  de- 
pendant of  his,  one  Gpico,  the  Bishop  of  Famagosta.  Six  years  later, 
when  Venice  was  overwhelmed  by  the  leaguers  of  Cambrai,  that  furious 
pope  would  assuredly  have  conferred  Zara  on  Cipico  without  asking 
leave.  In  1608,  the  rich  Camaldolite  Abbey  of  Vangadizza,  in  the 
Polesine,  fell  vacant  through  the  death  of  Lionardo  Loredano,  in  whose 
family  it  had  been  since  some  while.  The  Venetian  ambassador  at 
Rome  received  the  news  on  the  night  of  the  28th  December ;  and,  on  the 
morrow,  requested  Paul  IV.  not  to  dispose  of  this  preferment  until  he 


appendix,  5.  367 

heard  from  the  senate.  The  pope  talked  of  '  poor  cardinals'  and  of  his 
nephew,  but  made  no  positive  reply  ;  and,  as  Francesco  Contarini  was 
withdrawing,  said  to  him ;  '  My  Lord  ambassador,  with  this  opportunity 
we  will  inform  you  that,  to  our  very  great  regret,  we  understand  that  the 
chiefs  of  the  Ten  mean  to  turn  sacristans;  for  they  order  the  parish 
priests  to  close  the  church  doors  at  the  Ave  Maria,  and  not  to  ring  the 
bells  at  certain  hours.  This  is  precisely  the  sacristan's  office  ;  we  don't 
know  why  their  lordships,  by  printed  edicts,  which  we  have  seen,  choose 
to  interfere  in  this  matter.  This  is  pure  and  mere  ecclesiastical  jurisdic- 
tion ;  and  even,  in  case  of  any  inconvenience  arising,  is  there  not  the 
patriarch,  who  is  at  any  rate  your  own ;  why  not  apply  to  him,  who 
could  remedy  these  irregularities  ?  These  are  matters  which  cause  us 
very  notable  displeasure ;  we  say  so  that  they  may  be  written  and 
known :  it  is  decided  by  the  councils  and  canons,  aud  not  uttered  by  us, 
that  whosoever  forms  any  resolve  against  the  ecclesiastical  liberty,  can- 
not do  so  without  incurring  censure :  and  in  order  that  Father  Paul 
[Bacon's  correspondent]  may  not  say  hereafter,  as  he  did  in  his  past 
writings,  that  our  predecessors  assented  either  tacitly  or  by  permission,  we 
declare  that  we  do  not  give  our  assent,  nor  do  we  approve  it ;  nay,  we 
blame  it,  and  let  this  be  announced  in  Venice,  so  that,  for  the  rest,  every 
one  may  take  care  of  his  own  conscience.  St.  Thomas  a  Becket,  whose 
festival  is  celebrated  this  very  day,  suffered  martyrdom  for  the  ecclesias- 
tical liberty ;  it  is  our  duty  likewise  to  support  and  defend  it.'  Conta- 
rini says  :  '  This  remonstrance  was  delivered  with  some  marks  of  anger, 
which  induced  me  to  tell  him  how  the  tribunal  of  the  most  excellent  the 
Lords  chiefs  of  the  Ten  is  in  our  country  supreme  ;  that  it  does  not  do 
its  business  unadvisedly,  or  condescend  to  unworthy  matters ;  and  that, 
therefore,  should  those  Lords  have  come  to  any  public  declaration  of 
their  will,  it  must  be  attributed  to  orders  anterior,  and  to  immemorial 
custom  and  authority ;  recollecting  that,  on  former  occasions  likewise, 
similar  commissions  were  given  to  prevent  divers  incongruities ;  where- 
fore an  upright  intention,  such  as  this,  ought  not  to  be  taken  in  any  other 
sense  than  its  own,  especially  as  the  parishes  of  Venice  were  in  her  own 
gift,'  &c.  &c.  The  pope  persisted  in  bestowing  the  abbacy  on  his  ne- 
phew, but  the  republic  would  not  give  possession,  and  a  compromise 
was  effected  by  its  being  conferred  on  the  Venetian  Matteo  Priuli,  who 
allowed  the  cardinal  five  thousand  ducats  per  annum  out  of  its  revenues. 


368  APPENDIX,    5. 

A  few  years  before  this,  this  very  same  pope  excommunicated  the  State, 
because  she  had  imprisoned  two  churchmen  for  heinous  crimes ;  the  strife 
lasted  for  more  than  a  year,  and  ended  through  the  mediation  of  Henry 
IV.,  at  whose  suit  the  prisoners  were  delivered  to  the  French  ambassa- 
dor, who  made  them  over  to  a  papal  commissioner. 

"  In  January,  1484,  a  tournament  was  in  preparation  on  St.  Mark's 
Square  :  some  murmurs  had  been  heard  about  the  distribution  of  the 
prizes  having  been  pre-arranged,  without  regard  to  the  'best  man.'  One 
of  the  chiefs  of  the  Ten  was  walking  along  Rialto  on  the  28th  January, 
when  a  young  priest,  twenty-two  years  old,  a  sword-cutler's  son,  and  a 
Bolognese,  and  one  of  Perugia,  both  men-at-arms  under  Robert  Sanso- 
verino,  fell  upon  a  clothier  with  drawn  weapons.  The  chief  of  the  Ten 
desired  they  might  be  seized,  but  at  the  moment  the  priest  escaped ; 
he  was  however,  subsequently  retaken,  and  in  that  very  evening  hanged 
by  torch-light  between  the  columns  with  the  two  soldiers.  Innocent 
VIII.  was  less  powerful  than  Paul  IV.;  Venice  weaker  in  1605  than 
in  1484. 

"  *  *  *  The  exclusion  from  the  Grand  Council,  whether  at  the  end  of 
the  fourteenth  or  commencement  of  the  following  century,  of  the  Vene- 
tian ecclesiastics,  (as  induced  either  by  the  republic's  acquisitions  on  the 
main  land  then  made,  and  which,  through  the  rich  benefices  they  em- 
braced, might  have  rendered  an  ambitious  churchman  as  dangerous  in 
the  Grand  Council  as  a  victorious  condottiere ;  or  from  dread  of  their 
allegiance  being  divided  between  the  church  and  their  country,  it  being 
acknowledged  that  no  man  can  serve  two  masters,)  did  not  render  them 
hostile  to  their  fatherland,  whose  interests  were,  with  very  few  excep- 
tions, eagerly  fathered  by  the  Venetian  prelates  at  Rome,  who,  in  their 
turn,  received  all  honour  at  Venice,  where  state  receptions  given  to 
cardinals  of  the  houses  of  Correr,  Grimani,  Cornaro,  Pisani,  Contarini, 
Zeno,  Delfmo,  and  others,  vouch  for  the  good  understanding  that  existed 
between  the  '  Papalists  '  and  their  countrymen.  The  Cardinal  Grimani 
was  instrumental  in  detaching  Julius  II.  from  the  league  of  Cambrai ; 
the  Cardinal  Cornaro  always  aided  the  State  to  obtain  anything  required 
of  Leo  X. ;  and,  both  before  and  after  their  times,  all  Venetians  that , 
had  a  seat  in  the  Sacred  College  were  patriots  rather  than  pluralists :  I 
mean  that  they  cared  more  for  Venice  than  for  their  benefices,  admitting 


APPENDIX,    5.  369 

thus  the  soundness  of  that  policy  which  denied  them  admission  into  the 
Grand  Council." 

To  this  interesting  statement,  I  shall  add,  from  the  twenty-eighth 
book  of  Daru,  two  passages,  well  deserving  consideration  by  us  English 
in  present  days : 

"  Pour  etre  parfaitement  assuree   contre  les  envahissements  de  la 

puissance  ecclesiastique,  Venise  commenca  par  lui  oter  tout  pretexte 

d'intervenir  dans  les  affaires  de  l'Etat ;  elle  resta  invariablement  fidele 

au  dogme.     Jamais  aucune  des  opinions  nouvelles  n'y  prit  la  moindre 

faveur ;  jamais  aucun  heresiarque  ne  sortit  de  Venise.     Les  conciles, 

les  disputes,  les  guerres  de  religion,  se  passerent  sans  qu'elle  y  prit 

jamais  la  moindre  part.     Inebranlable  dans  sa  foi,  elle  ne  fut  pas  moins 

invariable  dans  son  systeme  de  tolerance.     Non  seulement  ses  sujets  de 

la  religion  grecque  conserverent  l'exercice  de  leur  culte,  leurs  eveques 

et  leurs  pretres  ;  mais  les  Protestantes,  les  Armeniens,  les  Mahomitans, 

les  Juifs,  toutes  les  religions,  toutes  les  sectes  qui  se  trouvaient  dans 

Venise,  avaient  des  temples,  et  la  sepulture  dans  les  eglises  n'etait  point 

refuse  aux  heretiques.     Une  police  vigilante  s'appliquait  avec  le  meme 

soin  a  eteindre  les  discordes,  et  a  empecher  les  fanatiques  et  les  nova- 

teurs  de  troubler  l'Etat." 

******** 

"  Si  on  considere  que  c'est  dans  un  temps  oil  presque  toutes  les  nations 
tremblaient  devant  la  puissance  pontificate,  que  les  Venitiens  surent 
tenir  leur  clerge  dans  la  dependance,  et  braver  souvent  les  censures 
ecclesiastiques  et  les  interdits,  sans  encourir  jamais  aucun  reproche  sur 
la  purete  de  leur  foi,  on  sera  force  de  reconnaitre  que  cette  rejWiblique 
avait  devance  de  loin  les  autres  peuples  dans  cette  partie  de  la  science 
du  gouvernement.  La  fameuse  maxime,  '  Siamo  veneziani,  poi  chris- 
tian!,' n'etait  qu'une  formule  energique  qui  ne  prouvait  point  qu'ils  vou- 
lussent  placer  l'interet  de  la  religion  apres  celui  de  l'Etat,  mais  qui 
annoncait  leur  invariable  resolution  de  ne  pas  souffrir  qu'un  pouvoir 
etranger  portat  atteinte  aux  droits  de  la  republique. 

"  Dans  toute  la  duree  de  son  existence,  au  milieu  des  re  vers  comme 
dans  la  prosperite,  cet  inebranlable  gouvernement  ne  fit  qu'une  seule 
fois  des  concessions  a  la  cour  de  Rome,  et  ce  fut  pour  detacher  le  Pape 
Jules  II.  de  la  ligue  de  Cambrai. 

"  Jamais  il  ne  se  relacha  du  soin  de  tenir  le  clerge  dans  une  nullite 
24 


370  APPENDIX,     5. 

absolue  relativement  aux  affaires  politiques ;  on  peut  en  juger  par  la 
conduite  qui'l  tint  avec  l'ordre  religieux  le  plus  redoutable  et  le  plus 
accoutume  a  s'immiscer  dans  les  secrets  de  l'Etat  et  dans  les  interets 
temporels." 

The  main  points,  next  stated,  respecting  the  Jesuits  are,  that  the 
decree  which  permitted  their  establishment  in  Venice  required  formal 
renewal  every  three  years ;  that  no  Jesuit  could  stay  in  Venice  more 
than  three  years ;  that  the  slightest  disobedience  to  the  authority  of  the 
government  was  instantly  punished  by  imprisonment ;  that  no  Venetian 
could  enter  the  order  without  express  permission  from  the  government ; 
that  the  notaries  were  forbidden  to  sanction  any  testamentary  disposal 
of  property  to  the  Jesuits ;  finally,  that  the  heads  of  noble  families 
were  forbidden  to  permit  their  children  to  be  educated  in  the  Jesuits' 
colleges,  on  pain  of  degradation  from  their  rank. 

Now,  let  it  be  observed  that  the  enforcement  of  absolute  exclusion  of 
the  clergy  from  the  councils  of  the  state,  dates  exactly  from  the  period 
which  I  have  marked  for  the  commencement  of  the  decline  of  the  Vene- 
tian power.     The  Romanist  is  welcome  to  his  advantage  in  this  fact,  if 
advantage  it  be ;  for  I  do  not  bring  forward  the  conduct  of  the  senate  of 
Venice,  as  Daru  does,  by  way  of  an  example  of  the  general  science  of 
government.     The  Venetians  accomplished  therein  what  we  ridiculously 
call  a  separation  of  "  Church  and  State  "  (as  if  the  State  were  not,  in  all 
Christendom,  necessarily  also  the  Church*),  but  ought  to  call  a  separa- 
tion of  lay  and  clerical  officers.     I  do  not  point  out  this  separation  as 
subject  of  praise,  but  as  the  witness  borne  by  the  Venetians  against  the 
principres  of  the  Papacy.     If  they  were  to  blame,  in  yielding  to  their 
fear  of  the  ambitious  spirit  of  Rome  so  far  as  to  deprive  their  councils 
of  all  religious  element,  what  excuse  are  we  to  offer  for  the  state,  which, 
with  Lords  Spiritual  of  her  own  faith  already  in  her  senate,  permits  the 
polity  of  Rome  to  be  represented  by  lay  members  ?     To  have  sacrificed 
religion  to  mistaken  policy,  or  purchased  security  with  ignominy,  would 
have  been  no  new  thing  in  the  world's  history ;  but  to  be  at  once  im- 
pious and  impolitic,  and  seek  for  danger  through  dishonour,  was  reserved 
for  the  English  parliament  of  1829. 

I  am  glad  to  have  this  opportunity  of  referring  to,  and  farther  en- 

*  Compare  Appendix  12. 


APPENDIX,     5.  371 

forcing,  the  note  on  this  subject  which,  not  without  deliberation,  I 
appended  to  the  "  Seven  Lamps ;"  and  of  adding  to  it  the  following 
passage,  written  by  my  father  in  the  year  1839,  and  published  in  one  of 
the  journals  of  that  year : — a  passage  remarkable  as  much  for  its  intrinsic 
value,  as  for  having  stated,  twelve  years  ago,  truths  to  which  the  mind 
of  England  seems  but  now,  and  that  slowly,  awakening. 

"  We  hear  it  said,  that  it  cannot  be  merely  the  Roman  religion  that 
causes  the  difficulty  [respecting  Ireland],  for  we  were  once  all  Roman 
Catholics,  and  nations  abroad  of  this  faith  are  not  as  the  Irish.  It  is 
totally  overlooked,  that  when  we  were  so,  our  government  was  despotic, 
and  fit  to  cope  with  this  dangerous  religion,  as  most  of  the  Continental 
governments  yet  are.-  In  what  Roman  Catholic  state,  or  in  what  age  of 
Roman  Catholic  England,  did  we  ever  hear  of  such  agitation  as  now 
exists  in  Ireland  by  evil  men  taking  advantage  of  an  anomalous  state  of 
things — Roman  Catholic  ignorance  in  the  people,  Protestant  toleration 
in  the  Government  %  We  have  yet  to  feel  the  tremendous  difficulty  in 
which  Roman  Catholic  emancipation  has  involved  us.  Too  late  we  dis- 
cover that  a  Roman  Catholic  is  wholly  incapable  of  being  safely  con- 
nected with  the  British  constitution,  as  it  now  exists,  in  any  near  rela- 
tion. The  present  constitution  is  no  longer  fit  for  Catholics.  It  is  a 
creature  essentially  Protestant,  growing  with  the  growth,  and  strength- 
ening with  the  strength,  of  Protestantism.  So  entirely  is  Protestantism 
interwoven  with  the  whole  frame  of  our  constitution  and  laws,  that  I 
take  my  stand  on  this,  against  all  agitators  in  existence,  that  the  Roman 
religion  is  totally  incompatible  with  the  British  constitution.  We  have, 
in  trying  to  combine  them,  got  into  a  maze  of  difficulties ;  we  are  the 
worse,  and  Ireland  none  the  better.  It  is  idle  to  talk  of  municipal 
reform  or  popular  Lords  Lieutenant.  The  mild  sway  of  a  constitutional 
monarchy  is  not  strong  enough  for  a  Roman  Catholic  population.  The 
stern  soul  of  a  Republican  would  not  shrink  from  sending  half  the  mis- 
guided population  and  all  the  priests  into  exile,  and  planting  in  their 
place  an  industrious  Protestant  people.  But  you  cannot  do  this,  and 
you  cannot  convert  the  Irish,  nor  by  other  means  make  them  fit  to  wear 
the  mild  restraints  of  a  Protestant  Government.  It  was,  moreover,  a 
strange  logic  that  begot  the  idea  of  admitting  Catholics  to  administer 
any  part  of  our  laws  or  constitution.  It  was  admitted  by  all  that,  by 
the  very  act  of  abandoning  the  Roman  religion,  we  became  a  free  and 


372  APPENDIX,    5. 


enlightened  people.    It  was  only  by  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  that  slavish 
religion  that  we  attained  to  the  freedom  of  thought  which  has  advanced 
us  in  the  scale  of  society.     We  are  so  much  advanced  by  adopting  and 
adhering  to  a  reformed  religion,  that  to  prove  our  liberal  and  unpreju- 
diced views,  we  throw  down  the  barriers  betwixt  the  two  religions,  of 
which  the  one  is  the  acknowledged  cause  of  light  and  knowledge,  the 
other  the  cause  of  darkness  and  ignorance.     We  are  so  much  altered  to 
the  better  by  leaving  this  people  entirely,  and  giving  them  neither  part 
nor  lot  amongst  us,  that  it  becomes  proper  to  mingle  again  with  them. 
We  have  found  so  much  good  in  leaving  them,  that  we  deem  it  the  best 
possible  reason  for  returning  to  be  among  them.     No  fear  of  their 
Church  again  shaking  us,  with  all  our  light  and  knowledge.     It  is  true, 
the  most  enlightened  nations  fell  under  the  spell  of  her  enchantments, 
fell  into  total  darkness  and  superstition  ;  but  no  fear  of  us — we  are  too 
well  informed !     What  miserable  reasoning !  infatuated  presumption ! 
I  fear  me,  when  the  Roman  religion  rolled  her  clouds  of  darkness  over 
the  earlier  ages,  that  she  quenched  as  much  light,  and  knowledge,  and 
judgment  as  our  modern  Liberals  have  ever  displayed.     I  do  not  expect 
a  statesman  to  discuss  the  point  of  Transubstantiation  betwixt  Pro- 
testant and  Catholic,  nor  to  trace  the  narrow  lines  which  divide  Protest- 
ant sectarians  from  each  other ;  but  can  any  statesman  that  shall  have 
taken  even  a  cursory  glance  at  the  face  of  Europe,  hesitate  a  moment 
on  the  choice  of  the  Protestant  religion  1     If  he  unfortunately  knew 
nothing  of  its  being  the  true  one  in  regard  to  our  eternal  interests,  he  is 
at  least  bound  to  see  whether  it  be  not  the  best  for  the  worldly  pros- 
perity of  a  people.     He  may  be  but  moderately  imbued  with  pious  zeal 
for  the  salvation  of  a  kingdom,  but  at  least  he  will  be  expected  to  weigh 
the  comparative  merits  of  religion,  as  of  law  or  government ;  and  blind, 
indeed,  must  he  be  if  he  does  not  discern  that,  in  neglecting  to  cherish 
the  Protestant  faith,  or  in  too  easily  yielding  to  any  encroachments  on 
it,  he  is  foregoing  the  use  of  a  state  engine  more  powerful  than  all  the 
laws  which  the  uninspired  legislators  of  the  earth  have  ever  promulgated, 
in  promoting  the  happiness,  the  peace,  prosperity,  and  the  order,  the 
industry,  and  the  wealth,  of  a  people ;  in  forming  every  quality  valuable 
or  desirable  in  a  subject  or  a  citizen';  in  sustaining  the  public  mind  at 
that  point  of  education  and  information  that  forms  the  best  security  for 


X 

X 


33 


< 

<■_* 

V) 

t2^ 

1— 1 

p) 

rt 

? — . 

H 

a- 

«< 

tr 

r— - 

CE5 


APPENDIX,    6.  373 

the  state,  and  the  best  preservative  for  the  freedom  of  a  people,  whether 
religious  or  political." 

6.    KENNAISSANCE   OKNAMENTS. 

There  having  been  three  principal  styles  of  architecture  in  Venice,— 
the  Greek  or  Byzantine,  the  Gothic,  and  the  Renaissance,  it  will  be 
shown,  in  the  sequel,  that  the  Renaissance  itself  is  divided  into  three 
correspondent  families :  Renaissance  engrafted  on  Byzantine,  which  is 
earliest  and  best ;  Renaissance  engrafted  on  Gothic,  which  is  second, 
and  second  best ;  Renaissance  on  Renaissance,  which  is  double  dark- 
ness, and  worst  of  all.  The  palaces  in  which  Renaissance  is  engrafted 
on  Byzantine  are  those  noticed  by  Commynes :  they  are  characterised 
by  an  ornamentation  very  closely  resembling,  and  in  some  cases  identi- 
cal with,  early  Byzantine  work  ;  namely,  groups  of  coloured  marble 
circles  inclosed  in  interlacing  bands.  I  have  put  on  the  opposite  page 
one  of  these  ornaments,  from  the  Ca'  Trevisan,  in  which  a  most  curious 
and  delicate  piece  of  inlaid  design  is  introduced  into  a  band  which  is 
almost  exactly  copied  from  the  church  of  Theotocos  at  Constantinople, 
and  correspondent  with  others  in  St.  Mark's.  There  is  also  much  By- 
zantine feeling  in  the  treatment  of  the  animals,  especially  in  the  two 
birds  of  the  lower  compartment,  while  the  peculiar  curves  of  the  cinque 
cento  leafage  are  visible  in  the  leaves  above.  The  dove,  alighted,  with 
the  olive-branch  plucked  off,  is  opposed  to  the  raven  with  restless  ex- 
panded wings.  Beneath  are  evidently  the  two  sacrifices  "  of  every  clean 
fowl  and  of  every  clean  beast."  The  colour  is  given  with  green  and 
white  marbles,  the  dove  relieved  on  a  ground  of  greyish  green,  and  all 
is  exquisitely  finished. 

In  Plate  I.,  p.  13.,  the  upper  figure  is  from  the  same  palace  (Ca'  Tre- 
visan), and  it  is  very  interesting  in  its  proportions.  If  we. take  five 
circles  in  geometrical  proportion,  each  diameter  being  two-thirds  of  the 
diameter  next  above  it,  and  arrange  the  circles  so  proportioned,  in  con- 
tact with  each  other,  in  the  manner  shown  in  the  plate,  we  shall  find  that 
an  increase  quite  imperceptible  in  the  diameter  of  the  circles  in  the  angles, 
will  enable  us  to  inscribe  the  whole  in  a  square.  The  lines  so  described 
will  then  run  in  the  centre  of  the  white  bands.  I  cannot  be  certain  that 
this  is  the  actual  construction  of  the  Trevisan  design,  because  it  is  on  a 


374  APPENDIX,   7. 


I 


high  wall  surface,  where  I  could  not  get  at  its  measurements ;  but  I 
found  this  construction  exactly  coincide  with  the  lines  of  my  eye  sketch. 
The  lower  figure 'in  Plate  I.  is  from  the  front  of  the  Ca' Dario,  and  proba- 
bly struck  the  eye  of  Commynes  in  its  first  brightness.  Salvatico,  in- 
deed, considers  both  the  Ca'  Trevisan  (which  once  belonged  to  Bianca 
Cappello)  and  the  Ca'  Dario,  as  buildings  of  the  sixteenth  century.  I 
defer  the  discussion  of  the  question  at  present,  but  have,  I  believe,  suffi- 
cient reason  for  assuming  the  Ca'  Dario  to  have  been  built  about  1486, 
and  the  Ca'  Trevisan  not  much  later. 

7.  VARIETIES  OF  THE  OEDEES. 

Of  these  phantasms  and  grotesques,  one  of  some  general  importance 
is  that  commonly  called  Ionic,  of  which  the  idea  was  taken  (Vitruvius 
says)  from  a  woman's  hair,  curled ;  but  its  lateral  processes  look  more 
like  rams'  horns :  be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  a  mere  piece  of  agreeable  ex- 
travagance, and  if,  instead  of  rams'  horns,  you  put  ibex  horns,  or  cows' 
horns,  or  an  ass's  head  at  once,  you  will  have  ibex  orders,  or  ass  orders, 
or  any  number  of  other  orders,  one  for  every  head  or  horn.  You  may 
have  heard  of  another  order,  the  Composite,  which  is  Ionic  and  Corin- 
thian mixed,  and  is  one  of  the  worst  of  ten  thousand  forms  referable  to 
the  Corinthian  as  their  head  :  it  may  be  described  as  a  spoiled  Corinthian. 
And  you  may  have  also  heard  of  another  order,  called  Tuscan  (which  is 
no  order  at  all,  but  a  spoiled  Doric) :  and  of  another  called  Eoman  Do- 
ric, which  is  Doric  more  spoiled,  both  which  are  simply  among  the  most 
stupid  variations  ever  invented  upon  forms  already  known.  I  find  also 
in  a  French  pamphlet  upon  architecture*,  as  applied  to  shops  and  dwell- 
ing houses,  a  sixth  order,  the  "  Ordre  Francais,"  at  least  as  good  as  any 
of  the  three  last,  and  to  be  hailed  with  acclamation,  considering  whence 
it  comes,- there  being  usually  more  tendency  on  the  other  side  of  the 
channel  to  the  confusion  of  "  ordres  "  than  their  multiplication :  but  the 

*  L' Artiste  en  Batiments,  par  Louis  Berthaux :  Dijon,  1848.  My  printer  writes  at 
the  side  of  the  page  a  note,  which  I  insert  with  thanks : — "  This  is  not  the  first 
attempt  at  a  French  order.  The  writer  has  a  Treatise  by  Sebastian  Le  Clerc,  a  great 
man  in  his  generation,  which  contains  a  Roman  order,  a  Spanish  order,  which  the  in- 
ventor appears  to  think  very  grand,  and  a  new  French  order  nationalised  by  the  Gallic 
cock  crowing  and  clapping  its  wings  in  the  capital.'' 


APPENDIX,    8.  375 


reader  will  find  in  the  end  that  there  are  in  very  deed  only  two  orders, 
of  which  the  Greek,  Doric,  and  Corinthian  are  the  first  examples,  and 
they  not  perfect,  nor  in  anywise  sufficiently  representative  of  the  vast 
families  to  which  they  belong ;  but  being  the  first  and  the  best  known, 
they  may  properly  be  considered  as  the  types  of  the  rest.  The  essen- 
tial distinctions  of  the  two  great  orders  he  will  find  explained  in  §§  xxxv. 
and  xxxvi.  of  Chap.  XXVII. ,  and  in  the  passages  there  referred  to ;  but 
I  should  rather  desire  that  these  passages  might  be  read  in  the  order  in 
which  they  occur. 

8.     THE    NORTHERN    ENERGY. 

I  have  sketched  above,  in  the  First  Chapter,  the  great  events  of  archi- 
tectural history  in  the  simplest  and  fewest  words  I  could ;  but  this  in- 
draught of  the  Lombard  energies  upon  the  Byzantine  rest,  like  a  wild 
north  wind  descending  into  a  space  of  rarified  atmosphere,  and  encount- 
ered by  an  Arab  simoom  from  the  south,  may  well  require  from  us  some 
farther  attention ;  for  the  differences  in  all  these  schools  are  more  in  the 
degrees  of  their  impetuosity  and  refinement  (these  qualities  being,  in 
most  cases,  in  inverse  ratio,  yet  much  united  by  the  Arabs)  than  in  the 
style  of  the  ornaments  they  employ.  The  same  leaves,  the  same  ani- 
mals, the  same  arrangements,  are  used  by  Scandinavians,  ancient 
Britons,  Saxons,  Normans,  Lombards,  Romans,  Byzantines,  and  Arabi- 
ans ;  all  being  alike  descended  through  classic  Greece  from  Egypt  and 
Assyria,  and  some  from  Phoenicia.  The  belts  which  encompass  the 
Assyrian  bulls,  in  the  hall  of  the  British  Museum,  are  the  same  as  the 
belts  of  the  ornaments  found  in  Scandinavian  tumuli ;  their  method  of 
ornamentation  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  gate  of  Mycenae,  and  of  the 
Lombard  pulpit  of  St.  Ambrogio  of  Milan,  and  of  the  church  of  Theoto- 
cos  at  Constantinople :  the  essential  differences  among  the  great  schools 
are  their  differences  of  temper  and  treatment,  and  science  of  expression ; 
it  is  absurd  to  talk  of  Norman  ornaments,  and  Lombard  ornaments,  and 
Byzantine  ornaments,  as  formally  distinguished ;  but  there  is  irreconcile- 
able  separation  between  Arab  temper,  and  Lombard  temper,  and 
Byzantine  temper. 

Now,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  compare  the  three  schools,  it  ap- 
pears to  me  that  the  Arab  and  Lombard  are  both  distinguished  from  the 


376  APPENDIX,    8. 

Byzantine  by  their  energy  and  love  of  excitement,  but  the  Lombard 
stands  alone  in  his  love  of  jest :  Neither  an  Arab  nor  Byzantine  ever 
jests  in  his  architecture ;  the  Lombard  has  great  difficulty  in  ever  being 
thoroughly  serious ;  thus  they  represent  three  'conditions  of  humanity, 
one  in  perfect  rest,  the  Byzantine,  with  exquisite  perception  of  grace  and 
dignity ;  the  Arab,  with  the  same  perception  of  grace,  but  with  a  rest- 
less fever  in  his  blood ;  the  Lombard,  equally  energetic,  but  not  burning 
himself  away,  capable  of  submitting  to  law,  and  of  enjoying  jest.  But 
the  Arabian  feverishness  infects  even  the  Lombard  in  the  south,  showing 
itself,  however,  in  endless  invention,  with  a  refreshing  firmness  and  order 
directing  the  whole  of  it.  The  excitement  is  greatest  in  the  earliest 
times,  most  of  all  shown  in  St.  Michele  of  Pavia ;  and  I  am  strongly 
disposed  to  connect  much  of  its  peculiar  manifestations  with  the  Lom- 
bard's habits  of  eating  and  drinking,  especially  his  carnivorousness. 
The  Lombard  of  early  times  seems  to  have  been  exactly  what  a  tiger 
would  be,  if  you  could  give  him  love  of  a  joke,  vigorous  imagination, 
strong  sense  of  justice,  fear  of  hell,  knowledge  of  northern  mythology, 
a  stone  den,  and  a  mallet  and  chisel :  fancy  him  pacing  up  and  down 
in  the  said  den  to  digest  his  dinner,  and  striking  on  the  wall,  with  a  new 
fancy  in  his  head,  at  every  turn,  and  you  have  the  Lombardic  sculptor. 
As  civilisation  increases  the  supply  of  vegetables,  and  shortens  that  of. 
wild  beasts,  the  excitement  diminishes  ;  it  is  still  strong  in  the  thirteenth 
century  at  Lyons  and  Rouen  ;  it  dies  away  gradually  in  the  later  Gothic, 
and  is  quite  extinct  in  the  fifteenth  century. 

I  think  I  shall  best  illustrate  this  general  idea  by  simply  copying  the 
entries  in  my  diary  which  were  written  when,  after  six  months'  close 
study  of  Byzantine  work  in  Venice,  I  came  again  to  the  Lombard  work 
of  Verona  and  Pavia.  There  are  some  other  points  alluded  to  in  these 
entries  not  pertaining  to  the  matter  immediately  in  hand  ;  but  I  have 
left  them,  as  they  will  be  of  use  hereafter. 

"  (Verona.)  Comparing  the  arabesque  and  sculpture  of  the  Duomo 
here  with  St.  Mark's,  the  first  thing  that  strikes  one  is  the  low  relief,  the 
second,  the  greater  motion  and  spirit,  with  infinitely  less  grace  and 
science.  With  the  Byzantines,  however  rude  the  cutting,  every  line  is 
lovely,  and  the  animals  or  men  are  placed  in  any  attitudes  which  secure 
ornamental  effect,  sometimes  impossible  ones,  always  severe,  restrained, 
or  languid.     With  the  Romanesque  workmen  all  the  figures  show  the 


APPENDIX,    8.  377 

effort  (often  successful)  to  express  energetic  action;  hunting  chiefly, 
much  fighting,  and  both  spirited ;  some  of  the  dogs  running  capitally, 
straining  to  it,  and  the  knights  hitting  hard,  while  yet  the  faces  and 
drawing  are  in  the  last  degree  barbarous.  At  Venice  all  is  graceful, 
fixed,  or  languid ;  the  eastern  torpor  is  in  every  line, — the  mark  of  a 
school  formed  on  severe  traditions,  and  keeping  to  them,  and  never  like- 
ly or  desirous  to  rise  beyond  them,  but  with  an  exquisite  sense  of  beau- 
ty, and  much  solemn  religious  faith. 

"  If  the  Greek  outer  archivolt  of  St.  Mark's  is  Byzantine,  the  law  is 
somewhat  broken  by  its  busy  domesticity ;  figures  engaged  in  every 
trade,  and  in  the  preparation  of  viands  of  all  kinds  ;  a  crowded  kind  of 
London  Christmas  scene,  interleaved  (literally)  by  the  superb  balls  of 
leafage,  unique  in  sculpture  ;  but  even  this  is  strongly  opposed  to  the 
wild  war  and  chase  passion  of  the  Lombard.  Farther,  the  t  Lombard 
building  is  as  sharp,  precise,  and  accurate,  as  that  of  St.  Mark's  is  care- 
less. The  Byzantines  seem  to  have  been  too  lazy  to  put  their  stones 
together ;  and,  in  general,  my  first  impression  on  coming  to  Verona, 
after  four  months  in  Venice,  is  of  the  exquisitely  neat  masonry  and  per- 
fect feeling  here ;  a  style  of  Gothic  formed  by  a  combination  of  Lom- 
bard surface  ornament  with  Pisan  Gothic,  than  which  nothing  can  possi- 
bly be  more  chaste,  pure,  or  solemn." 

I  have  said  much  of  the  shafts  of  the  entrance  to  the  crypt  of  St. 
Zeno* ;  the  following  note  of  the  sculptures  on  the  archivolt  above  them 
is  to  our  present  purpose  : 

"  It  is  covered  by  very  light  but  most  effective  bas-reliefs  of  jesting 
subject : — two  cocks  carrying  on  their  shoulders  a  long  staff,  to  which  a 
fox  (?)  is  tied  by  the  legs,  hanging  down  between  them  :  the  strut  of  the 
foremost  cock,  lifting  one  leg  at  right  angles  to  the  other,  is  delicious. 
Then  a  stag  hunt,  with  a  centaur  horseman  drawing  a  bow ;  the  arrow 
has  gone  clear  through  the  stag's  throat,  and  is  sticking  there.  Several 
capital  hunts  with  dogs,  with  fruit  trees  between,  and  birds  in  them  ;  the 
leaves,  considering  the  early  time,  singularly  well  set,  with  the  edges 
outwards,  sharp,  and  deep  cut :  snails  and  frogs  filling  up  the  intervals, 
as  if  suspended  in  the  air,  with  some  saucy  puppies  on  their  hind  legs, 
two  or  three  nondescript  beasts ;  and,  finally,  on  the  centre  of  one  of 

*  The  lower  group  in  Plate  XVII. 


N 


373  APPENDIX,    8. 

the  arches  on  the  south  side,  an  elephant  and  castle, — a  very  strange 
elephant,  yet  cut  as  if  the  carver  had  seen  one." 

Observe  this  elephant  and  castle;  we  shall  meet  with  him  farther 
north. 

"  These  sculptures  of  St.  Zeno  are,  however,  quite  quiet  and  tame  com- 
pared with  those  of  St.  Michele  of  Pavia,  which  are  designed  also  in  a 
somewhat  gloomier  mood;  significative,  as  I  think,  of  indigestion. 
(Note  that  they  are  much  earlier  than  St.  Zeno  ;  of  the  seventh  century 
at  latest.  There  is  more  of  nightmare,  and  less  of  wit  in  them.)  Lord 
Lindsay  has  described  them  admirably,  but  has  not  said  half  enough  ; 
the  state  of  mind  represented  by  the  west  front  is  more  that  of  a  fever- 
ish dream,  than  resultant  from  any  determined  architectural  purpose,  or 
even  from  any  definite  love  and  delight  in  the  grotesque.  One  capital 
is  covered  with  a  mass  of  grinning  heads,  other  heads  grow  out  of  two 
bodies,  or  out  of  and  under  feet ;  the  creatures  are  all  fighting,  or  de- 
vouring, or  struggling  which  shall  be  uppermost,  and  yet  in  an  ineffec- 
tual way,  as  if  they  would  fight  for  ever,  and  come  to  no  decision. 
Neither  sphinxes  nor  centaurs  did  I  notice,  nor  a  single  peacock  (I  be- 
lieve peacocks  to  be  purely  Byzantine),  but  mermaids  with  two  tails 
(the  sculptor  having  perhaps  seen  double  at  the  time),  strange,  large 
fish,  apes,  stags,  (bulls  ?),  dogs,  wolves,  and  horses,  griffins,  eagles,  long- 
tailed  birds,  (cocks  ?),  hawks,  and  dragons,  without  end,  or  with  a  dozen 
of  ends,  as  the  case  may  be  ;  smaller  birds,  with  rabbits,  and  small  non- 
descripts, filling  the  friezes.  The  actual  leaf,  which  is  used  in  the  best 
Byzantine  mouldings  at  Venice,  occurs  in  parts  of  these  Pavian  designs. 
But  the  Lombard  animals  are  all  alive,  and  fiercely  alive  too,  all  impa- 
tience and  spring  :  the  Byzantine  birds  peck  idly  at  the  fruit,  and  the 
animals  hardly  touch  it  with  their  noses.  The  cinque  cento  birds  in 
Venice  hold  it  up  daintily,  like  train-bearers ;  the  birds  in  the  earlier 
Gothic  peck  at  it  hungrily  and  naturally  ;  but  the  Lombard  beasts  gripe 
at  it  like  tigers,  and  tear  it  off  with  writhing  lips  and  glaring  eyes.  They 
are  exactly  like  Jip  with  the  bit  of  geranium,  worrying  imaginary  cats 
in  it." 

The  notice  of  the  leaf  in  the  above  extract  is  important, — it  is  the 
vine-leaf;  used  constantly  both  by  Byzantines  and  Lombards,  but  by 
the  latter  with  especial  frequency,  though  at  this  time  they  were  hardly 
able  to  indicate  what  they  meant.     It  forms  the  most  remarkable  gene- 


appendix,  8.  379 


rality  of  the  St.  Michele  decoration ;  though,  had  it  not  luckily  been 
carved  on  the  facade,  twining  round  a  stake,  and  with  grapes,  I  should 
never  have  known  what  it  was  meant  for,  its  general  form  being  a  suc- 
cession of  sharp  lobes,  with  incised  furrows  to  the  point  of  each.  But 
it  is  thrown  about  in  endless  change  ;  four  or  five  varieties  of  it  might 
be  found  on  every  cluster  of  capitals :  and  not  content  with  this,  the 
Lombards  hint  the  same  form  even  in  their  griffin  wings.  They  love 
the  vine  very  heartily. 

In  St.  Michele  of  Lucca  we  have  perhaps  the  noblest  instance  in  Italy 
of  the  Lombard  spirit  in  its  later  refinement.  •  It  is  some  four  centuries 
later  than  St.  Michele  of  Pavia,  and  the  method  of  workmanship  is  alto- 
gether different.  In  the  Pavian  church,  nearly  all  the  ornament  is  cut 
in  a  coarse  sandstone,  in  bold  relief:  a  darker  and  harder  stone  (I 
think,  not  serpentine,  but  its  surface  is  so  disguised  by  the  lustre  of 
ages  that  I  could  not  be  certain)  is  used  for  the  capitals  of  the  western 
door,  which  are  especially  elaborate  in  their  sculpture; — two  devilish 
apes,  or  apish  devils,  I  know  not  which,  with  bristly  moustaches  and 
edgy  teeth,  half-crouching,  with  their  hands  impertinently  on  their 
knees,  ready  for  a  spit  or  a  spring  if  one  goes  near  them ;  but  all  is 
pure  bossy  sculpture ;  there  is  no  inlaying,  except  of  some  variegated 
tiles  in  the  shape  of  saucers  set  concave  (an  ornament  used  also  very 
gracefully  in  St.  Jacopo  of  Bologna) :  and  the  whole  surface  of  the 
church  is  enriched  with  the  massy  reliefs,  well  preserved  everywhere 
above  the  reach  of  human  animals,  but  utterly  destroyed  to  some  five 
or  six  feet  from  the  ground ;  worn  away  into  large  cellular  hollows  and 
caverns,  some  almost  deep  enough  to  render  the  walls  unsafe,  entirely 
owing  to  the  uses  to  which  the  recesses  of  the  church  are  dedicated  by 
the  refined  and  high-minded  Italians.  But  St.  Michele  of  Lucea  is 
wrought  entirely  in  white  marble  and  green  serpentine ;  there  is  hardly 
any  relieved  sculpture  except  in  the  capitals  of  the  shafts  and  cornices, 
and  all  the  designs  of  wall  ornament  are  inlaid  with  exquisite  precision 
— white  on  dark  ground;  the  ground  being  cut  out  and  filled  with 
serpentine,  the  figures  left  in  solid  marble.  The  designs  of  the  Pavian 
church  are  encrusted  on  the  walls ;  of  the  Lucchese,  incorporated  with 
them ;  small  portions  of  real  sculpture  being  introduced  exactly  where 
the  eye,  after  its  rest  on  the  flatness  of  the  wall,  will  take  most  delight 
in  the  piece  of  substantial  form.     The  entire  arrangement  is  perfect 


380  APPENDIX,    8. 

beyond  all  praise,  and  the  morbid  restlessness  of  the  old  designs  is  now 
appeased.  Geometry  seems  to  have  acted  as  a  febrifuge,  for  beautiful 
geometrical  designs  are  introduced  amidst  the  tumult  of  the  hunt ;  and 
there  is  no  more  seeing  double,  nor  ghastly  monstrosity  of  conception  ; 
no  more  ending  of  everything  in  something  else ;  no  more  disputing  for 
spare  legs  among  bewildered  bodies  ;  no  more  setting  on  of  heads 
wrong  side  foremost.  The  fragments  have  come  together :  we  are  out 
of  the  Inferno  with  its  weeping  down  the  spine ;  we  are  in  the  fair 
hunting-fields  of  the  Lucchese  mountains  (though  they  had  their  tears 
also), — with  horse,  and  hound,  and  hawk ;  and  merry  blast  of  the 
trumpet. — Very  strange  creatures  to  be  hunted,  in  all  truth ;  but  still 
creatures  with  a  single  head,  and  that  on  their  shoulders,  which  is  exactly 
the  last  place  in  the  Pavian  church  where  a  head  is  to  be  looked  for. 

My  good  friend  Mr.  Cockerell  wonders,  in  one  of  his  lectures,  why  I 
give  so  much  praise  to  this  "crazy  front  of  Lucca."  But  it  is  not 
crazy ;  not  by  any  means.  Altogether  sober,  in  comparison  with  the 
early  Lombard  work,  or  with  our  Norman.  Crazy  in  one  sense  it  is  : 
utterly  neglected,  to  the  breaking  of  its  old  stout  heart ;  the  venomous 
nights  and  salt  frosts  of  the  Marcmma  winters  have  their  way  with  it — 
"  Poor  Tom's  a  cold  !"  The  weeds  that  feed  on  the  marsh  air,  have 
twisted  themselves  into  its  crannies ;  the  polished  fragments  of  serpen- 
tine are  split  and  rent  out  of  their  cells,  and  lie  in  green  ruins  along  its 
ledges  ;  the  salt  sea  winds  have  eaten  away  the  fair  shafting  of  its  star 
window  into  a  skeleton  of  crumbling  rays.  It  cannot  stand  much 
longer ;  may  Heaven  only,  in  its  benignity,  preserve  it  from  restora- 
tion, and  the  sands  of  the  Serchio  give  it  honourable  grave. 

In  the  "  Seven  Lamps,"  Plate  VI.,  I  gave  a  faithful  drawing  of  one 
of  its  upper  arches,  to  which  I  must  refer  the  reader ;  for  there  is  a 
marked  piece  of  character  in  the  figure  of  the  horseman  on  the  left  of 
it.  And  in  making  this  reference,  I  would  say  a  few  words  about  those 
much  abused  plates  of  the  "  Seven  Lamps."  They  are  black,  they  are 
overbitten,  they  are  hastily  drawn,  they  are  coarse  and  disagreeable ; 
how  disagreeable  to  many  readers  I  venture  not  to  conceive.  But  their 
truth  is  carried  to  an  extent  never  before  attempted  in  architectural 
drawing.  It  does  not  in  the  least  follow  that  because  a  drawing  is 
delicate,  or  looks  careful,  it  has  been  carefully  drawn  from  the  thing 
represented  ;  in  nine  instances  out  of  ten,  careful  and  delicate  drawings 


XXI 


v-::;. 


In 


"r  lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll 


jiir  mis»k    / 


mm 


pi 


m 


I 


E  Hit  ' '  J 


lilil 


* 


|    4>      |      S>      *'     *      ®     'I'"     *    p  ■*»     *>    O  ♦■  ■»■  -O-     ■»■»'♦    <(>■♦"-*■    -♦>»-■»■   -»'  4»<l6»'»-»-   ♦■»♦■» 


■■■^^—^■^'■-7%^ 


V 


t.tt 


ffaHrVhl  D  eco  rati  an 


APPENDIX,    8.  381 

are  made  at  home.  It  is  not  so  easy  as  the  reader,  perhaps,  imagines, 
to  finish  a  drawing  altogether  on  the  spot,  especially  of  details  seventy 
feet  from  the  ground ;  and  any  one  who  will  try  the  position  in  which 
I  have  had  to  do  some  of  my  work — standing,  namely,  on  a  cornice  or 
window  sill,  holding  by  one  arm  round  a  shaft,  and  hanging  over  the 
street  (or  canal,  at  Venice),  with  my  sketch-book  supported  against  the 
wall  from  which  I  was  drawing,  by  my  breast,  so  as  to  leave  my  right 
hand  free — will  not  thenceforward  wonder  that  shadows  should  be  occa- 
sionally carelessly  laid  in,  or  lines  drawn  with  some  unsteadiness.  But, 
steady,  or  infirm,  the  sketches  of  which  those  plates  in  the  "  Seven 
Lamps  are  fac-similes,  were  made  from  the  architecture  itself,  and 
represent  that  architecture  with  its  actual  shadows  at  the  time  of  day  at 
which  it  was  drawn,  and  with  every  fissure  and  line  of  it  as  they  now 
exist ;  so  that  when  I  am  speaking  of  some  new  point,  which  perhaps 
the  drawing  was  not  intended  to  illustrate,  I  can  yet  turn  back  to  it 
with  perfect  certainty  that  if  anything  be  found  in  it  bearing  on  matters 
now  in  hand,  I  may  depend  upon  it  just  as  securely  as  if  I  had  gone 
back  to  look  again  at  the  building. 

It  is  necessary  that  my  readers  should  understand  this  thoroughly,  and 
I  did  not  before  sufficiently  explain  it ;  but  I  believe  I  can  show  them  the 
use  of  this  kind  of  truth,  now  that  we  are  again  concerned  with  this  front 
of  Lucca.  They  will  find  a  drawing  of  the  entire  front  in  Gaily  Knight's 
"  Architecture  of  Italy."  It  may  serve  to  give  them  an  idea  of  its  gene- 
ral disposition,  and  it  looks  very  careful  and  accurate  ;  but  every  bit  of 
the  ornament  on  it  is  drawn  out  of  the  artist's  head.  There  is  not  one  line 
of  it  that  exists  on  the  building.  The  reader  will  therefore,  perhaps, 
think  my  ugly  black  plate  of  somewhat  more  value,  upon  the  whole,  in 
its  rough  veracity,  than  the  other  in  its  delicate  fiction.* 

=*  One  of  the  upper  stories  is  also  in  Gaily  Knight's  plate  represented  as  merely 
banded,  and  otherwise  plain:  it  is,  in  reality,  covered  with  as  delicate  inlaying  as  the 
rest.  The  whole  front  is  besides  out  of  proportion,  and  out  of  perspective,  at  once  5 
and  yet  this  work  is  referred  to  as  of  authority,  by  our  architects.  Well  may  our  archi- 
tecture fall  from  its  place  among  the  fine  arts,  as  it  is  doing  rapidly ;  nearly  all  our 
works  of  value  being  devoted  to  the  Greek  architecture,  which  is  utterly  useless  to  us — 
or  worse.  One  most  noble  book,  however,  has  been  dedicated  to  our  English  abbeys, 
— Mr.  E.  Sharpens  "  Architectural  Parallels  " — almost  a  model  of  what  I  should  like 
to  see  done  for  the  Gothic  of  all  Europe. 


382  appendix,  8. 

As,  however,  I  made  a  drawing  of  another  part  of  the  church  some- 
what more  delicately,  and  as  I  do  not  choose  that  my  favourite  church 
should  suffer  in  honour  by  my  coarse  work,  I  have  had  this,  as  far  as 
might  be,  fac-similied  by  line  engraving  (Plate  XXL).  It  represents  the 
southern  side  of  the  lower  arcade  of  the  west  front ;  and  may  convey 
some  idea  of  the  exquisite  finish  and  grace  of  the  whole ;  but  the  old 
plate,  in  the  "  Seven  Lamps,"  gives  a  nearer  view  of  one  of  the  upper 
arches,  and  a  more  faithful  impression  of  the  present  aspect  of  the  work, 
and  especially  of  the  seats  of  the  horsemen ;  the  limb  straight,  and  well 
down  on  the  stirrup  (the  warrior's  seat,  observe,  not  the  jockey's),  with 
a  single  pointed  spur  on  the  heel.  The  bit  of  the  lower  cornice  under 
this  arch  I  could  not  see,  and  therefore  had  not  drawn  ;  it  was  supplied 
from  beneath  another  arch.  I  am  afraid,  however,  the  reader  has  lost 
the  thread  of  my  story  while  I  have  been  recommending  my  veracity  to 
him.  I  was  insisting  upon  the  healthy  tone  of  this  Lucca  work  as  com- 
pared with  the  old  spectral  Lombard  friezes.  The  apes  of  the  Pavian 
church  ride  without  stirrups,  but  all  is  in  good  order  and  harness  here  : 
civilisation  Jiad  done  its  work ;  there  was  reaping  of  corn  in  the  Val 
d'Arno,  though  rough  hunting  still  upon  its  hills.  But  in  the  north, 
though  a  century  or  two  later,  we  find  the  forests  of  the  Rhone,  and  its 
rude  limestone  cotes,  haunted  by  phantasms  still ;  (more  meat-eating, 
then,  I  think).  I  do  not  know  a  more  interesting  group  of  cathedrals 
than  that  of  Lyons,  Vienne,  and  Valencia :  a  more  interesting  indeed, 
generally,  than  beautiful ;  but  there  is  a  row  of  niches  on  the  west  front 
of  Lyons,  and  a  course  of  panelled  decoration  about  its  doors,  which  is, 
without  exception,  the  most  exquisite  piece  of  Northern  Gothic  I  ever 
beheld,  and  with  winch  I  know  nothing  that  is  even  comparable,  except 
the  work  of  the  north  transept  of  Rouen,  described  in  the  "  Seven 
Lamps,"  p.  159. ;  work  of  about  the  same  date,  and  exactly  the  same 
plan ;  quatrefoils  filled  with  grotesques,  but  somewhat  less  finished  in 
execution,  and  somewhat  less  wild  in  imagination.  I  wrote  down  hastily, 
and  in  their  own  course,  the  subjects  of  some  of  the  quatrefoils  of  Lyons ; 
of  which  I  here  give  the  reader  the  sequence  : — 

1.  Elephant  and  castle ;  less  graphic  than  the  St.  Zeno  one. 

2.  A  huge  head  walking  on  two  legs,  turned  backwards,  hoofed ;  the 

head  has  a  horn  behind,  with  drapery  over  it,  which  ends  in  an- 
other head. 


APPENDIX,    8.  383 

• 

3.  A  boar  hunt ;  the  boar  under  a  tree,  very  spirited. 

4.  A  bird  putting  its  head  between  its  legs  to  bite  its  own  tail,  which 

ends  in  a  head. 

5.  A  dragon  with  a  human  head  set  on  the  wrong  way. 

6.  St.  Peter  awakened  by  the  angel  in  prison ;  full  of  spirit,  the 

prison  picturesque,  with  a  trefoiled  arch,  the  angel  eager,  St. 
Peter  startled,  and  full  of  motion. 

7.  St.  Peter  led  out  by  the  angel. 

8.  The  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  ;  fish  and  all,  in  the  small  space. 

9.  A  large  leaf,  with  two  snails  rampant,  coming  out  of  nautilus 

shells,  with  grotesque  faces,  and  eyes  at  the  ends  of  their  horns. 

10.  A  man  with  an  axe,  striking  at  a  dog's  head,  which  comes  out  of  a 

nautilus  shell :  the  rim  of  the  shell  branches  into  a  stem  with  two 
large  leaves. 

11.  Martyrdom  of  St.  Sebastian;  his  body  very  full  of  arrows. 

12.  Beasts  coming  to  ark;  Noah  opening  a  kind  of  wicker  cage. 

13.  Noah  building  the  ark  on  shores. 

14.  A  vine  leaf  with  a  dragon's  head  and  tail,  the  one  biting  the 

other. 

15.  A  man  riding  a  goat,  catching  a  flying  devil. 

16.  An  eel  or  muraena  growing  into  a  bunch  of  flowers,  which  turns 

into  two  wings. 

17.  A  sprig  of  hazel,  with  nuts,  thrown  all  round  the  quatrefoil ;  with 

a  squirrel  in  centre,  apparently  attached  to  the  tree  only  by  its 
enormous  tail,  richly  furrowed  into  hair,  and  nobly  sweeping. 

18.  Four  hares  fastened  together  by  the  ears,  galloping  in  a  circle. 

Mingled  with  these  grotesques  are  many  sword  and  buckler  com- 
bats, the  bucklers  being  round  and  conical  like  a  hat ;  I  thought 
the  first  I  noticed,  carried  by  a  man  at  full  gallop  on  horseback, 
had  been  a  small  umbrella. 

This  list  of  subjects  may  sufficiently  illustrate  the  feverish  character  of 
the  Northern  Energy  ;  but  influencing  the  treatment  of  the  whole  there 
is  also  the  Northern  love  of  what  is  called  the  Grotesque,  a  feeling 
which  I  find  myself,  for  the  present,  quite  incapable  either  of  analysing 
or  defining,  though  we  all  have  a  distinct  idea  attached  to  the  word :  I 
shall  try,  however,  in  the  next  volume. 


384  appendix,  9,  10,  11. 

9.  wooden  churches  of  the  noeth. 

I  cannot  pledge  myself  to  this  theory  of  the  origin  of  the  vaulting 
shaft,  but  the  reader  will  find  some  interesting  confirmations  of  it  in 
Dahl's  work  on  the  wooden  churches  of  Norway.  The  inside  view  of 
the  church  of.Borgund  shows  the  timber  construction  of  one  shaft  run  up 
through  a  crossing  architrave,  and  continued  into  the  clerestory ;  while 
the  church  of  Urnes  is  in  the  exact  form  of  a  basilica ;  but  the  wall 
above  the  arches  is  formed  of  planks,  with  a  strong  upright  above  each 
capital.  The  passage  quoted  from  Stephen  Eddy's  Life  of  Bishop  Wil- 
frid, at  p.  86.  of  Churton's  "  Early  English  Church,"  gives  us  one  of  the 
transformations  or  petrifactions  of  the  wooden  Saxon  churches.  "  At 
Ripon  he  built  a  new  church  of  polished  stone,  with  columns  variously 
ornamented,  and  porches."  Mr.  Churton  adds :  "  It  was  perhaps  in  bad 
imitation  of  the  marble  buildings  he  had  seen  in  Italy,  that  he  washed 
the  walls  of  this  original  York  Minster,  and  made   them  '  whiter  than 


snow.' " 


10.   CHURCH   OF  ALEXANDRIA. 

The  very  cause  which  enabled  the  Venetians  to  possess  themselves  of 
the  body  of  St.  Mark,  was  the  destruction  of  the  church  by  the  caliph 
for  the  sake  of  its  marbles:  the  Arabs  and  Venetians,  though  bitter  ene- 
mies, thus  building  on  the  same  models  ;  these  in  reverence  for  the  de- 
stroyed church,  and  those  with  the  very  pieces  of  it.  In  the  somewhat 
prolix  account  of  the  matter  given  in  the  Notizie  Storiche  (above 
quoted)  the  main  points  are,  that  "  il  Califa  de'  Saraceni,  per  fabbricarsi 
un  Palazzo  presso  di  Babilonia,  aveva  ordinato  che  dalle  Chiese  d'  Cris- 
tiani  si  togliessero  i  piu  scelti  marmi ;"  and  that  the  Venetians,  "  videro 
sotto  i  loro  occhi  flagellarsi  crudelmente  un  Cristiano  per  aver  infrantc 
un  marmo."  I  heartily  wish  that  the  same  kind  of  punishment  were  en 
forced  to  this  day,  for  the  same  sin. 

11.    RENAISSANCE    LANDSCAPE. 

I  am  glad  here  to  re-assert  opinions  which  it  has  grieved  me  to> 
suspected  of  having  changed.    The  calmer  tone  of  the  second  volume:* 


APPENDIX,   11.  385 

"  Modern  Painters,"  as  compared  with  the  first,  induced,  I  believe,  this 
suspicion,  very  justifiably,  in  the  minds  of  many  of  its  readers.  The 
difference  resulted,  however,  from  the  simple  fact,  that  the  first  was 
written  in  great  haste  and  indignation,  for  a  special  purpose  and  time ; — 
the  second,  after  I  had  got  engaged,  almost  unawares,  in  inquiries  which 
could  not  be  hastily  nor  indignantly  pursued ;  my  opinions  remaining 
then,  and  remaining  now,  altogether  unchanged  on  the  subject  which  led 
me  into  the  discussion.  And  that  no  farther  doubt  of  them  may  be  en- 
tertained by  any  who  may  think  them  worth  questioning,  I  shall  here, 
once  for  all,  express  them  in  the  plainest  and  fewest  words  I  can.  I 
think  that  J.  M.  W.  Turner  is  not  only  the  greatest  (professed)  land- 
scape painter  who  ever  lived,  but  that  he  has  in  him  as  much  as  would 
have  furnished  all  the  rest  with  such  power  as  they  had  ;  and  that,  if  we 
put  Nicolo  Poussin,  Salvator,  and  our  own  Gainsborough  out  of  the 
group,  he  would  cut  up  into  Claudes,  Cuyps,  Kuysdaels,  and  such  others, 
by  uncounted  bunches.  I  hope  this  is  plainly  and  strongly  enough 
stated.  And  farther,  I  like  his  later  pictures,  up  to  the  year  1845,  the 
best ;  and  believe  that  those  persons  who  only  like  his  early  pictures  do 
not,  in  fact,  like  him  at  all.  They  do  not  like  that  which  is  essentially 
his.  They  like  that  in  which  he  resembles  other  men ;  which  he  had 
learned  from  Loutherbourg,  Claude,  or  Wilson :  that  which  is  indeed  his 
own,  they  do  not  care  for.  Not  that  there  is  not  much  of  his  own  in  his 
early  works ;  they  are  all  invaluable  in  their  way ;  but  those  persons 
who  can  find  no  beauty  in  his  strangest  fantasy  on  the  Academy  walls, 
cannot  distinguish  the  peculiarly  Tumeresque  characters  of  the  earlier 
pictures.  And,  therefore,  I  again  state  here,  that  I  think  his  pictures 
painted  between  the  years  1830  and  1845  his  greatest ;  and  that  his  en- 
tire power  is  best  represented  by  such  pictures  as  the  Temeraire,  the  Sun 
of  Venice  going  to  Sea,  and  others,  painted  exactly  at  the  time  when  the 
public  and  the  press  were  together  loudest  in  abuse  of  him. 

I  desire,  however,  the  reader  to  observe  that  I  said,  above,  professed 
landscape  painters,  among  whom,  perhaps,  I  should  hardly  have  put 
Gainsborough.  The  landscape  of  the  great  figure  painters  is  often  ma- 
jestic in  the  highest  degree,  and  Tintoret's  especially  shows  exactly  the 

25 


386  APPENDIX,    11. 

same  power  and  feeling  as  Turner's.     If  with 

Turner  I  were  to  rank  the  historical  painters  Turner.      Tintoret, 

as  landscapists,  estimating  rather  the  power  Massaccio. 

they  show,  than  the  actual  value  of  the  land-  John  Bellini, 

scape  they  produced,  I  should  class   those,  Albert  Durer. 

whose  landscapes  I  have  studied,  in  some  such  Giorgione. 

order  as  this  at  the  side  of  the  page  ; — asso-  Paul  Veronese, 

ciating  with  the  landscape  of  Perugino  that  of  Titian. 

Francia  and  Angelico,  and  the  other  severe  Kubens. 

painters  of  religious  subject.     I  have  put  Tur-  Correggio. 

ner  and  Tintoret  side  by  side,  not  knowing  Orcagna. 

which  is,  in  landscape,  the   greater ;    I  had  Benozzo  Gozzoli. 

nearly  associated  in  the  same  manner  the  no-  Giotto, 

ble  means  of  John  Bellini  and  Albert  Durer  ;  Raffaelle. 

but  Bellini  must  be  put  first,  for  his  profound  Perugino. 

religious  peace,  yet  not  separated  from  the 

other,  if  but  that  we  might  remember  his  kindness  to  him  in  Venice :  and 
it  is  well  we  should  take  note  of  it  here,  for  it  furnishes  us  with  a  most  in- 
teresting confirmation  of  what  was  said  in  the  text  respecting  the  position 
of  Bellini  as  the  last  of  the  religious  painters  of  Venice.  The  following 
passage  is  quoted  in  Jackson's  "  Essay  on  Wood-engraving,"  from  Albert 
Durer's  Diary : 

"  I  have  many  good  friends  among  the  Italians  who  warn  me  not  to 
eat  or  drink  with  their  painters,  of  whom  several  are  my  enemies,  and 
copy  my  picture  in  the  church,  and  others  of  mine,  wherever  they  can  find 
them,  and  yet  they  blame  them,  and  say  they  are  not  according  to  ancient 
art,  and  therefore  not  good.  Giovanni  Bellini,  however,  has  praised  me 
highly  to  several  gentlemen,  and  wishes  to  have  something  of  my  doing  : 
he  called  on  me  himself,  and  requested  that  I  would  paint  a  picture  for 
him,  for  which,  he  said,  he  would  pay  me  well.  People  are  all  surprised 
that  I  should  be  so  much  thought  of  by  a  person  of  his  reputation  :  he 
is  very  old,  but  is  still  the  best  painter  of  them  all." 

A  choice  little  piece  of  description  this,  of  the  Renaissance  painters, 
side  by  side  with  the  good  old  Venetian,  who  was  soon  to  leave  them  to 
their  own  ways.  The  Renaissance  men  are  seen  in  perfection,  envying, 
stealing,  and  lying,  but  without  wit  enough  to  lie  to  purpose. 

• 


APPENDIX,   12.  387 


12.   KOMANIST   MODEKN   AET. 

It  is  of  the  highest  importance,  in  these  days,  that  Romanism  should  be 
deprived  of  the  miserable  influence  which  its  pomp  and  picturesqueness 
have  given  it  over  the  weak  sentimentalism  of  the  English  people ;  I  call 
it  a  miserable  influence,  for  of  all  motives  to  sympathy  with  the  Church 
of  Rome,  this  I  unhesitatingly  class  as  the  basest :  I  can,  in  some  mea- 
sure, respect  the  other  feelings  which  have  been  the  beginnings  of  apos- 
tasy ;  I  can  respect  the  desire  for  unity  which  would  reclaim  the 
Romanist  by  love,  and  the  distrust  of  his  own  heart  which  subjects  the 
proselyte  to  priestly  power  ;  I  say  I  can  respect  these  feelings,  though  I 
cannot  pardon  unprincipled  submission  to  them,  nor  enough  wonder  at 
the  infinite  fatuity  of  the  unhappy  persons  whom  they  have  betrayed : — 
Fatuity,  self-inflicted,  and  stubborn  in  resistance  to  God's  Word  and 
man's  reason  ! — to  talk  of  the  authority  of  the  Church,  as  if  the  Church 
were  anything  else  than  the  whole  company  of  Christian  men,  or  were 
ever  spoken  of  in  Scripture*  as  other  than  a  company  to  be  taught  and 
fed,  not  to  teach  and  feed. — Fatuity !  to  talk  of  a  separation  of  Church 
and  State,  as  if  a  Christian  state,  and  every  officer  therein,  were 
not  necessarily  a  part  of  the  Churchf ,  and  as  if  any  state  officer  could  do 
his  duty  without  endeavouring  to  aid  and  promote  religion,  or  any  cle- 
rical officer  do  his  duty  without  seeking  for  such  aid  and  accepting  it : — 
Fatuity  !  to  seek  for  the  unity- of  a  living  body  of  truth  and  trust  in  God, 
with  a  dead  body  of  lies  and  trust  in  wood,  and  thence  to  expect  any- 
thing else  than  plague,  and  consumption  by  worms  undying,  for  both. 
Blasphemy  as  well  as  fatuity  !  to  ask  for  any  better  interpreter  of  God's 
Word  than  God,  or  to  expect  knowledge  of  it  in  any  other  way  than  the 
plainly  ordered  way :   if  any  man  will  do  he  shall  know.     But  of  all 

*  Except  in  the  single  passage  "  tell  it  unto  the  Church,"  which  is  simply  the  exten- 
sion of  what  had  been  commanded  before,  i.  e.,  tell  the  fault  first  "  between  thee  and 
him,"  then  taking  "  with  thee  one  or  two  more,"  then,  to  all  Christian  men  capable  of 
hearing  the  cause  :  if  he  refuse  to  hear  their  common  voice,  "  let  him  be  unto  thee  as 
an  heathen  man  and  publican :"     (But  consider  how  Christ  treated  both). 

f  One  or  two  remarks  on  this  subject,  some  of  which  I  had  intended  to  have  inserted 
here,  and  others  in  Appendix  5.,  I  have  arranged  in  more  consistent  order,  and  published 
in  a  separate  pamphlet,  "  Notes  on  the  Construction  of  Sheep-folds,"  for  the  conven- 
ience of  readers  interested  in  other  architecture  than  that  of  Venetian  palaces. 


388  APPENDIX,  12. 

these  fatuities,  the  basest  is  the  being  lured  into  the  Romanist  Church  by 
the  glitter  of  it,  like  larks  into  a  trap  by  brbken  glass ;  to  be  blown  into 
a  change  of  religion  by  the  whine  of  an  organ-pipe  ;  stitched  into  a  new 
creed  by  gold  threads  on  priests'  petticoats  ;  jangled  into  a  change  of 
conscience  by  the  chimes  of  a  belfry.  I  know  nothing  in  the  shape  of 
error  so  dark  as  this,  no  imbecility  so  absolute,  no  treachery  so  con- 
temptible. I  had  hardly  believed  that  it  was  a  thing  possible,  though 
vague  stories  had  been  told  me  of  the  effect,  on  some  minds,  of  mere 
scarlet  and  candles,  until  I  came  on  this  passage  in  Pugin's  "  Remarks 
on  articles  in  the  Rambler"  : — 

"  Those  who  have  lived  in  want  and  privation  are  the  best  qualified  to 
appreciate  the  blessings  of  plenty  ;  thus,  to  those  who  have  been  devout 
and  sincere  members  of  the  separated  portion  of  the  English  Church ; 
who  have  prayed,  and  hoped,  and  loved,  through  all  the  poverty  of  the 
maimed  rites  which  it  has  retained — to  them  does  the  realisation  of  all 
their  longing  desires  appear  truly  ravishing.  *  *  *  *  Oh !  then, 
what  delight !  what  joy  unspeakable !  when  one  of  the  solemn  piles  is 
presented  to  them,  in  all  its  pristine  life  and  glory ! — the  stoups  are  filled 
to  the  brim  ;  the  rood  is  raised  on  high ;  the  screen  glows  with  sacred 
imagery  and  rich  device  ;  the  niches  are  filled  ;  the  altar  is  replaced,  sus- 
tained by  sculptured  shafts,  the  relics  of  the  saints  repose  beneath, 
the  body  of  Our  Lord  is  enshrined  on  its  consecrated  stone  ;  the  lamps 
of  the  sanctuary  burn  bright ;  the  saintly  portraitures  in  the  glass  win- 
dows shine  all  gloriously  ;  and  the  albs  hang  in  the  oaken  ambries,  and 
the  cope  chests  are  filled  with  orphreyed  baudekins ;  and  pix  and  pax, 
and  chrismatory  are  there,  and  thurible,  and  cross." 

One  might  have  put  this  man  under  a  pix,  and  left  him,  one  should 
have  thought ;  but  he  has  been  brought  forward,  and  partly  received,  as 
an  example  of  the  effect  of  ceremonial  splendour  on  the  mind  of  a  great 
architect.  It  is  very  necessary,  therefore,  that  all  those  who  have  felt 
sorrow  at  this  should  know  at  once  that  he  is  not  a  great  architect,  but 
one  of  the  smallest  possible  or  conceivable  architects  ;  and  that  by  his 
own  account  and  setting  forth  of  himself.     Hear  him  : — 

"  I  believe,  as  regards  architecture,  few  men  have  been  so  unfortunate 
as  myself.  I  have  passed  my  life  in  thinking  of  fine  things,  studying 
fine  things,  designing  fine  things,  and  realising  very  poor  ones.  I  have 
never  had  the  chance  of  producing  a  single  fine  ecclesiastical  building, 


appendix,  12.  389 

except  my  own  church,  where  I  am  both  paymaster  and  architect ;  but 
.everything  else,  either  for  want  of  adequate  funds  or  injudicious 
interference  and  control,  or  some  other  contingency,  is  more  or  less  a 
failure.         *        *         * 

"  St.  George's  was  spoilt  by  the  very  instructions  laid  down  by  the 
committee,  that  it  was  to  hold  3000  people  on  the  floor  at  a  limited 
price ;  in  consequence,  height,  proportion,  everything,  was  sacrificed  to 
meet  these  conditions.  Nottingham  was  spoilt  by  the  style  being 
restricted  to  lancet, — a  period  well  suited  to  a  Cistercian  abbey  in 
a  secluded  vale,  but  very  unsuitable  for  the  centre  of  a  crowded 
town.         *         *         * 

"  Kirkham  was  spoilt  through  several  hundred  pounds  being  reduced 
on  the  original  estimate  ;  to  effect  this,  which  was  a  great  sum  in  pro- 
portion to  the  entire  cost,  the  area  of  the  church  was  contracted,  the 
walls  lowered,  tower  and  spire  reduced,  the  thickness  of  walls  dimin- 
ished, and  stone  arches  omitted."  (Remarks,  &c,  by  A.  Welby  Pugin  : 
Dolman,  1850.) 

Is  that  so  1  Phidias  can  niche  himself  into  the  corner  of  a  pediment, 
and  Raffaelle  expatiate  within  the  circumference  of  a  clay  platter  ;  but 
Pugin  is  inexpressible  in  less  than  a  cathedral  1  Let  his  ineffableness  be 
assured  of  this,  once  for  all,  that  no  difficulty  or  restraint  ever  happened 
to  a  man  of  real  power,  but  his  power  was  the  more  manifested  in  the 
contending  with,  or  conquering  it ;  and  that  there  is  no  field  so  small,  no 
cranny  so  contracted,  but  that  a  great  spirit  can  house  and  manifest  itself 
therein.  The  thunder  that  smites  the  Alp  into  dust,  can  gather  itself 
into  the  width  of  a  golden  wire.  Whatever  greatness  there  was  in  you, 
had  it  been  Buonaroti's  own,  you  had  room  enough  for  it  in  a  single 
niche :  you  might  have  put  the  whole  power  of  it  into  two  feet 
cube  of  Caen  stone.  St.  George's  was  not  high  enough  for  want  of 
money  %  But  was  it  want  of  money  that  made  you  put  that  blunt, 
overloaded,  laborious  ogee  door  into  the  side  of  it  ?  Was  it  for  lack 
of  funds  that  you  sunk  the  tracery  of  the  parapet  in  its  clumsy  zigzags  ? 
Was  it  in  parsimony  that  you  buried  its  paltry  pinnacles  in  that  erup- 
tion of  diseased  crockets  %  or  in  pecuniary  embarrassment  that  you  set 
up  the  belfry  foolscaps,  with  the  mimicry  of  dormer  windows,  which 
nobody  can  ever  reach  nor  look  out  of  %  Not  so,  but  in  mere  incapa- 
bility of  better  things. 


^ 


390  APPENDIX,    12. 

I  am  sorry  to  have  to  speak  thus  of  any  living  architect ;  and  there  is 
much  in  this  man,  if  he  were  rightly  estimated,  which  one  might  both 
regard  and  profit  by.  He  has  a  most  sincere  love  for  his  profession,  a 
heartily  honest  enthusiasm  for  pixes  and  piscinas ;  and  though  he  will 
never  design  so  much  as  a  pix  or  a  piscina  thoroughly  well,  yet  better 
than  most  of  the  experimental  architects  of  the  day.  Employ  him  by 
all  means,  but  on  small  work.  Expect  no  cathedrals  from  him ;  but  no 
one,  at  present,  can  design  a  better  finial.  That  is  an  exceedingly  beau- 
tiful one  over  the  western  door  of  St.  George's ;  and  there  is  some 
spirited  impishness  and  switching  of  tails  in  the  supporting  figures  at 
the  imposts.  Only  do  not  allow  his  good  designing  of  finials  to  be  em- 
ployed as  an  evidence  in  matters  of  divinity,  nor  thence  deduce  the 
incompatibility  of  Protestantism  and  art.  I  should  have  said  all  that  I 
have  said  above,  of  artistical  apostacy,  if  Giotto  had  been  now  living  in 
Florence,  and  if  art  were  still  doing  all  that  it  did  once  for  Eome.  But 
the  grossness  of  the  error  becomes  incomprehensible  as  well  as  unpar- 
donable, when  we  look  to  what  level  of  degradation  the  human  intellect 
has  sunk  at  this  instant  in  Italy.  So  far  from  Romanism  now  producing 
anything  greater  in  art,  it  cannot  even  preserve  what  has  been  given  to 
its  keeping.  I  know  no  abuses  of  precious  inheritance  half  so  grievous, 
as  the  abuse  of  all  that  is  best  in  art  wherever  the  Romanist  priesthood 
gets  possession  of  it.  It  amounts  to  absolute  infatuation.  The  noblest 
pieces  of  mediasval  sculpture  in  North  Italy,  the  two  griffins  at  the  cen- 
tral (west)  door  of  the  cathedral  of  Verona,  were  daily  permitted  to  be 
brought  into  service,  when  I  was  there  in  the  autumn  of  1849,  by  a 
washerwoman  living  in  the  Piazza,  who  tied  her  clothes-lines  to  their 
beaks  :  and  the  shafts  of  St.  Mark's  at  Venice  were  used  by  a  salesman 
of  common  caricatures  to  fasten  his  prints  upon  (Compare  Appendix 
25.)  ;  and  this  in  the  face  of  the  continually  passing  priests:  while  the 
quantity  of  noble  art  annually  destroyed  in  altarpieces  by  candle-drop- 
pings, or  perishing  by  pure  brutality  of  neglect,  passes  all  estimate.  I 
do  not  know,  as  I  have  repeatedly  stated,  how  far  the  splendour  of 
architecture,  or  other  art,  is  compatible  with  the  honesty  and  usefulness 
of  religious  service.  The  longer  I  live,  the  more  I  incline  to  severe 
judgment  in  this  matter,  and  the  less  I  can  trust  the  sentiments  excited 
by  painted  glass  and  coloured  tiles.  But  if  there  be  indeed  value  in 
such  things,  our  plain  duty  is  to  direct  our  strength  against  the  supersti- 


APPENDIX,    13.  391 

tion  which  has  dishonoured  them :  there  are  thousands  who  might  pos- 
sibly be  benefited  by  them,  to  whom  they  are  now  merely  an  offence, 
owing  to  their  association  with  idolatrous  ceremonies.  I  have  but  this 
exhortation  for  all  who  love  them, — not  to  regulate  their  creeds  by  their 
taste  in  colours,  but  to  hold  calmly  to  the  right,  at  whatever  present 
cost  to  their  imaginative  enjoyment ;  sure  that  they  will  one  day  find  in 
heavenly  truth  a  brighter  charm  than  in  earthly  imagery,  and  striving  to 
gather  stones  for  the  eternal  building,  whose  walls  shall  be  salvation, 
and  whose  gates  shall  be  praise. 

13.     me.  fergusson's  system. 

The  reader  may  at  first  suppose  this  division  of  the  attributes  of 
buildings  into  action,  voice,  and  beauty,  to  be  the  same  division  as  Mr. 
Fergusson's,  now  well  known,  of  their  merits,  into  technic,  aesthetic,  and 
phonetic. 

But  there  is  no  connection  between  the  two  systems ;  mine,  indeed, 
does  not  profess  to  be  a  system,  it  is  a  mere  arrangement  of  my  sub- 
ject, for  the  sake  of  order  and  convenience  in  its  treatment ;  but,  as  far 
as  it  goes,  it  differs  altogether  from  Mr.  Fergusson's,  in  these  two  fol- 
lowing respects : — 

The  action  of  a  building,  that  is  to  say  its  standing  or  consistence, 
depends  on  its  good  construction ;  and  the  first  part  of  the  foregoing 
volume  has  been  entirely  occupied  with  the  consideration  of  the  con- 
structive merit  of  buildings  :  but  construction  is  not  their  only  technical 
merit.  There  is  as  much  of  technical  merit  in  their  expression,  or  in 
their  beauty,  as  in  their  construction.  There  is  no  more  mechanical  or 
technical  admirableness  in  the  stroke  of  the  painter  who  covers  them 
with  fresco,  than  in  the  dexterity  of  the  mason  who  cements  their 
stones :  there  is  just  as  much  of  what  is  technical  in  their  beauty,  there- 
fore, as  in  their  construction  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  often  just 
as  much  intellect  shown  in  their  construction  as  there  is  in  either  their 
expression  or  decoration.  Now  Mr.  Fergusson  means  by  his  "  Pho- 
netic "  division,  whatever  expresses  intellect :  my  constructive  division, 
therefore,  includes  part  of  his  phonetic ;  and  my  expressive  and  deco- 
rative divisions  include  part  of  his  technical. 

Secondly,  Mr.  Fergusson  tries  to  make  the  same  divisions  fit  the  sub- 


392  APPENDIX,   13. 

jects  of  art,  and  art  itself;  and  therefore  talks  of  technic,  sesthetic,  and 
phonetic,  arts,  (or,  translating  the  Greek,  of  artful  arts,  sensitive  artsr 
and  talkative  arts ;  but  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  any  division  of  the 
arts,  I  have  to  deal  only  with  the  merits  of  buildings.  As,  however,  I 
have  been  led  into  reference  to  Mr.  Fergusson's  system,  I  would  fain 
say  a  word  or  two  to  effect  Mr.  Fergusson's  extrication  from  it.  I  hope 
to  find  in  him  a  noble  ally,  ready  to  join  with  me  in  war  upon  affec- 
tation, falsehood,  and  prejudice,  of  every  kind :  I  have  derived  much 
instruction  from  his  most  interesting  work,  and  I  hope  for  much  more 
from  its  continuation ;  but  he  must  disentangle  himself  from  his  system,, 
or  he  will  be  strangled  by  it :  never  was  anything  so  ingeniously  and 
hopelessly  wrong  throughout ;  the  whole  of  it  is  founded  on  a  confusion 
of  the  instruments  of  man  with  his  capacities. 
Mr.  Fergusson  would  have  us  take — 
"  First,  man's  muscular  action  or  power."  (Technics.) 
"  Secondly,  those  developments  of  sense  by  which  he  does  1 1  as  rnucfc 

as  by  his  muscles."     (^Esthetics.) 
"  Lastly,  his  intellect,  or  to  confine  this  more  correctly  to  its  external 

action,  his  power  of  speech  !  !  /"  (Phonetics.) 
Granting  this  division  of  humanity  correct,  or  sufficient,  the  writer 
then  most  curiously  supposes  that  he  may  arrange  the  arts  as  if  there 
were  some  belonging  to  each  division  of  man, — never  observing  that 
every  art  must  be  governed  by,  and  addressed  to,  one  division,  and 
executed  by  another ;  executed  by  the  muscular,  addressed  to  the  sen- 
sitive or  intellectual ;  and  that,  to  be  an  art  at  all,  it  must  have  in  it 
work  of  the  one,  and  guidance  from  the  other.  If,  by  any  lucky  acci- 
dent, he  had  been  led  to  arrange  the  arts,  either  by  their  objects,  and 
the  things  to  winch  they  are  addressed,  or  by  their  means,  and  the 
things  by  which  they  are  executed,  he  would  have  discovered  his  mis- 
take in  an  instant.     As  thus : — 

These  arts  are  addressed  to  the, — Muscles ! ! 

Senses, 
Intellect ; 
or  executed  by, — Muscles, 
Senses  !  ! 
Intellect. 
Indeed  it  is  true  that  some  of  the  arts  are  in  a  sort  addressed  to  the 


appendix,  13.  393 

muscles,  surgery  for  instance ;  but  this  is  not  among  Mr.  Fergusson's 
technic,  but  his  politic,  arts !  and  all  the  arts  may,  in  a  sort,  be  said  to 
be  performed  by  the  senses,  as  the  senses  guide  both  muscles  and  intel- 
lect in  their  work :  but  they  guide  them  as  they  receive  information, 
or  are  standards  of  accuracy,  but  not  as  in  themselves  capable  of  action. 
Mr.  Fergusson  is,  I  believe,  the  first  person  who  has  told  us  of  senses 
that  act  or  do,  they  having  been  hitherto  supposed  only  to  sustain  or 
perceive.  The  weight  of  error,  however,  rests  just  as  much  in  the  origi- 
nal division  of  man,  as  in  the  endeavour  to  fit  the  arts  to  it.  The  slight 
omission  of  the  soul  makes  a  considerable  difference  when  it  begins  to 
influence  the  final  results  of  the  arrangement. 

Mr.  Fergusson  calls  morals  and  religion  "Politick  arts"  (as  if  religion 
were  an  art  at  all !  or  as  if  both  were  not  as  necessary  to  individuals 
as  to  societies) ;  and  therefore,  forming  these  into  a  body  of  arts  by 
themselves,  leaves  the  rest  of  the  arts  to  do  without  the  soul  and  the 
moral  feeling  as  best  they  may.  Hence  "  expression,"  or  "  phonetics," 
is  of  intellect  only  (as  if  men  never  expressed  their  feelings!)-,  and  then, 
strangest  and  worst  of  all,  intellect  is  entirely  resolved  into  talking ! 
There  can  be  no  intellect  but  it  must  talk,  and  all  talking  must  be 
intellectual.  I  believe  people  do  sometimes  talk  without  understanding; 
and  I  think  the  world  would  fare  ill  if  they  never  understood  without 
talking.  The  intellect  is  an  entirely  silent  faculty,  and  has  nothing  to 
do  with  parts  of  speech  any  more  than  the  moral  part  has.  A  man  may 
feel  and  know  things  without  expressing  either  the  feeling  or  know- 
ledge ;  and  the  talking  is  a  muscular  mode  of  communicating  the  work- 
ings of  the  intellect  or  heart : — muscular,  whether  it  be  by  tongue  or  by 
sign,  or  by  carving  or  writing,  or  by  expression  of  feature ;  so  that  to 
divide  a  man  into  muscular  and  talking  parts,  is  to  divide  him  into  body 
in  general,  and  tongue  in  particular,  the  endless  confusion  resulting  from 
which  arrangement  is  only  less  marvellous  in  itself,  than  the  resolution 
with  which  Mr.  Fergusson  has  worked  through  it,  and  in  spite  of  it,  up 
to  some  very  interesting  and  suggestive  truths ;  although  starting  with  a 
division  of  humanity  which  does  not  in  the  least  raise  it  above  the  brute, 
for  a  rattlesnake  has  his  muscular,  aesthetic,  and  talking  part  as  much  as 
man,  only  he  talks  with  his  tail,  and  says,  "  I  am  angry  with  you,  and 
should  like  to  bite  you,"  more  laconically  and  effectively  than  any 
phonetic  biped  could,  were  he  so  minded.     And,  in  fact,  the  real  differ- 


394  APPENDIX,    13. 

ence  between  the  brute  and  man  is  not  so  much  that  the  one  has  fewer 
means  of  expression  than  the  other,  as  that  it  has  fewer  thoughts  to  ex- 
press, and  that  we  do  not  understand  its  expressions.  Animals  can  talk 
to  one  another  intelligibly  enough  when  they  have  any  thing  to  say,  and 
their  captains  have  words  of  command  just  as  clear  as  ours,  and  better 
obeyed.  We  have  indeed,  in  watching  the  efforts  of  an  intelligent 
animal  to  talk  to  a  human  being,  a  melancholy  sense  of  its  dumbness , 
but  the  fault  is  still  in  its  intelligence,  more  than  in  its  tongue.  It  has 
not  wit  enough  to  systematise  its  cries  or  signs,  and  form  them  into 
language. 

But  there  is  no  end  to  the  fallacies  and  confusions  of  Mr.  Fergusson's 
arrangement.  It  is  a  perfect  entanglement  of  gun-cotton,  and  explodes 
into  vacuity  wherever  one  holds  a  light  to  it.  I  shall  leave  him  to  do  so 
with  the  rest  of  it  for  himself,  and  should  perhaps  have  left  it  to  his  own 
handling  altogether,  but  for  the  intemperateness  of  the  spirit  with  which 
he  has  spoken  on  a  subject  perhaps  of  all  others  demanding  gentleness 
and  caution.  No  man  could  more  earnestly  have  desired  the  changes 
lately  introduced  into  the  system  of  the  University  of  Oxford  than  I  did 
myself:  no  man  can  be  more  deeply  sensible  than  I  of  grievous  failures 
in  the  practical  working  even  of  the  present  system  :  but  I  believe  that 
these  failures  may  be  almost  without  exception  traced  to  one  source,  the 
want  of  evangelical,  and  the  excess  of  rubrical,  religion  among  the 
tutors ;  together  with  such  rustinesses  and  stiffnesses  as  necessarily  attend 
the  continual  operation  of  any  intellectual  machine.  The  fault  is,  at  any 
rate,  far  less  in  the  system  than  in  the  imperfection  of  its  administration  ; 
and  had  it  been  otherwise,  the  terms  in  which  Mr.  Fergusson  speaks  of 
it  are  hardly  decorous  in  one  who  can  but  be  imperfectly  acquainted 
with  its  working.  They  are  sufficiently  answered  by  the  structure  of 
the  essay  in  which  they  occur ;  for  if  the  high  powers  of  mind  which  its 
author  possesses  had  been  subjected  to  the  discipline  of  the  schools,  he 
could  not  have  wasted  his  time  on  the  development  of  a  system  which 
their  simplest  formula3  of  logic  would  have  shown  him  to  be  untenable. 

Mr.  Fergusson  will,  however,  find  it  easier  to  overthrow  his  system 
than  to  replace  it.  Every  man  of  science  knows  the  difficulty  of  arrang- 
ing a  reasonable  system  of  classification,  in  any  subject,  by  any  one 
group  of  characters ;  and  that  the  best  classifications  are,  in  many  of 
their  branches,  convenient  rather  than  reasonable  :  so  that,  to  any  person 


APPENDIX,    13.  395 

who  is  really  master  of  his  subject,  many  different  modes  of  classifica- 
tion will  occur  at  different  times ;  one  of  which  he  will  use  rather  than 
another,  according  to  the  point  which  he  has  to  investigate.  I  need  only 
instance  the  three  arrangements  of  minerals,  by  their  external  characters , 
and  their  positive  or  negative  bases,  of  which  the  first  is  the  most  useful, 
the  second  the  most  natural,  the  third  the  most  simple ;  and  all  in 
several  ways  unsatisfactory. 

But  when  the  subject  becomes  one  which  no  single  mind  can  grasp, 
and  which  embraces  the  whole  range  of  human  occupation  and  enquiry, 
the  difficulties  become  as  great,  and  the  methods  as  various,  as  the  uses 
to  which  the  classification  might  be  put ;  and  Mr.  Fergusson  has  entirely 
forgotten  to  inform  us  what  is  the  object  to  which  his  arrangements  are 
addressed.  For  observe :  there  is  one  kind  of  arrangement  which  is 
based  on  the  rational  connection  of  the  sciences  or  arts  with  one  another ; 
an  arrangement  which  maps  them  out  like  the  rivers  of  some  great  coun- 
try, and  marks  the  points  of  their  junction,  and  the  direction  and  force 
of  their  united  currents ;  and  this  without  assigning  to  any  one  of  them 
a  superiority  above  another,  but  considering  them  all  as  necessary  mem- 
bers of  the  noble  unity  of  human  science  and  effort.  There  is  another 
kind  of  classification  which  contemplates  the  order  of  succession  in  which 
they  might  most  usefully  be  presented  to  a  single  mind,  so  that  the 
given  mind  should  obtain  the  most  effective  and  available  knowledge  of 
them  all :  and,  finally,  the  most  usual  classification  contemplates  the 
powers  of  mind  which  they  each  require  for  their  pursuit,  the  objects  to 
which  they  are  addressed,  or  with  which  they  are  concerned ;  and  assigns 
to  each  of  them  a  rank  superior  or  inferior,  according  to  the  nobility  of 
the  powers  they  require,  or  the  grandeur  of  the  subjects  they  contem- 
plate. 

Now,  not  only  would  it  be  necessary  to  adopt  a  different  classification 
with  respect  to  each  of  these  great  intentions,  but  it  might  be  found  so 
even  to  vary  the  order  of  the  succession  of  sciences  in  the  case  of  every 
several  mind  to  which  they  were  addressed  ;  and  that  their  rank  would 
also  vary  with  the  power  and  specific  character  of  the  mind  engaged 
upon  them.  I  once  heard  a  very  profound  mathematician  remonstrate 
against  the  impropriety  of  Wordsworth's  receiving  a  pension  from 
government,  on  the  ground  that  he  was  "  only  a  poet."  If  the  study  of 
mathematics  had  always  this  narrowing  effect  upon  the  sympathies,  the 


396  APPENDIX,    13. 


science  itself  would  need  to  be  deprived  of  the  rank  usually  assigned  to 
it ;  and  there  could  be  no  doubt  that,  in  the  effect  it  had  on  the  mind  of 
this  man,  and  of  such  others,  it  was  a  very  contemptible  science  indeed. 
Hence,  in  estimating  the  real  rank  of  any  art  or  science,  it  is  necessary 
for  us  to  conceive  it  as  it  would  be  grasped  by  minds  of  every  order. 
There  are  some  arts  and  sciences  which  we  underrate,  because  no  one 
has  risen  to  show  us  with  what  majesty  they  may  be  invested ;  and 
others  which  we  overrate,  because  we  are  blinded  to  their  general  mean- 
ness by  the  magnificence  which  some  one  man  has  thrown  around  them : 
thus,  philology,  evidently  the  most  contemptible  of  all  the  sciences,  has 
been  raised  to  unjust  dignity  by  Johnson.*  And  the  subject  is  farther 
complicated  by  the  question  of  usefulness ;  for  many  of  the  arts  and 
sciences  require  considerable  intellectual  power  for  their  pursuit,  and  yet 
become  contemptible  by  the  slightness  of  what  they  accomplish :  meta- 
physics, for  instance,  exercising  intelligence  of  a  high  order,  yet  useless 
to  the  mass  of  mankind,  and,  to  its  own  masters,  dangerous.  Yet,  as  it 
has  become  so  by  the  want  of  the  true  intelligence  which  its  inquiries 
need,  and  by  substitution  of  vain  subtleties  in  its  stead,  it  may  in  future 
vindicate  for  itself  a  higher  rank  than  a  man  of  common  sense  usually 
concedes  to  it. 

Nevertheless,  the  mere  attempt  at  arrangement  must  be  useful,  even 
where  it  does  nothing  more  than  develope  difficulties.  Perhaps  the 
greatest  fault  of  men  of  learning  is  their  so  often  supposing  all  other 
branches  of  science  dependent  upon  or  inferior  to  their  own  best  beloved 
branch ;  and  the  greatest  deficiency  of  men  comparatively  unlearned, 
their  want  of  perception  of  the  connection  of  the  branches  with  each 
other.  He  who  holds  the  tree  only  by  the  extremities,  can  perceive 
nothing  but  the  separation  of  its  sprays.  It  must  always  be  desirable  to 
prove  to  those  the  equality  of  rank,  to  these  the  closeness  of  sequence, 
of  what  they  had  falsely  supposed  subordinate  or  separate.  And,  after 
such  candid  admission  of  the  co-equal  dignity  of  the  truly  noble  arts  and 
sciences,  we  may  be  enabled  more  justly  to  estimate  the  inferiority  of 
those  which  indeed  seem  intended  for  the  occupation  of  inferior  powers 

*  Not,  however,  by  Johnson's  testimony  :  Vide  Adventurer,  No  39.  "  Such  opera- 
tions as  required  neither  celerity  nor  strength, — the  low  drudgery  of  collating  copies, 
comparing  authorities,  digesting  dictionaries,  or  accumulating  compilations." 


APPENDIX,  14.  397 


and  narrower  capacities.  In  Appendix  14.  following,  some  suggestions 
will  be  found  as  to  the  principles  on  which  classification  might  be  based ; 
but  the  arrangement  of  all  the  arts  is  certainly  not  a  work  which  could 
with  discretion  be  attempted  in  the  Appendix  to  an  essay  on  a  branch  of 
one  of  them. 


14.    DIVISIONS   OP   HUMANITY. 

The  reader  will  probably  understand  this  part  of  the  subject  better  if 
he  will  take  the  trouble  briefly  to  consider  the  actions  of  the  mind  and 
body  of  man  in  the  sciences  and  arts,  which  give  these  latter  the  relations 
of  rank  usually  attributed  to  them. 

It  was  above  observed  (Appendix  13.)  that  the  arts  were  generally 
ranked  according  to  the  nobility  of  the  powers  they  require,  that  is  to 
say,  the  quantity  of  the  being  of  man  which  they  engaged  or  addressed. 
Now  their  rank  is  not  a  very  important  matter  as  regards  each  other, 
for  there  are  few  disputes  more  futile  than  that  concerning  the  respective 
dignity  of  arts,  all  of  which  are  necessary  and  honourable.  But  it  is  a 
very  important  matter  as  regards  themselves ;  very  important  whether 
they  are  practised  with  the  devotion  and  regarded  with  the  respect  which 
are  necessary  or  due  to  their  perfection.  It  does  not  at  all  matter 
whether  architecture  or  sculpture  be  the  nobler  art ;  but  it  matters  much 
whether  the  thought  is  bestowed  upon  buildings,  or  the  feeling  is  ex- 
pressed in  statues,  which  make  either  deserving  of  our  admiration.  It 
is  foolish  and  insolent  to  imagine  that  the  art  which  we  ourselves  prac- 
tise is  greater  than  any  other ;  but  it  is  wise  to  take  care  that  in  our 
own  hands  it  is  as  noble  as  we  can  make  it.  Let  us  take  some  notice, 
therefore,  in  what  degrees  the  faculties  of  man  may  be  engaged  in  his 
several  arts  :  we  may  consider  the  entire  man  as  made  up  of  body,  soul, 
and  intellect,  (Lord  Lindsay,  meaning  the  same  thing,  says  inaccurately 
— sense,  intellect,  and  spirit — forgetting  that  there  is  a  moral  sense  as 
well  as  a  bodily  sense,  and  a  spiritual  body  as  well  as  a  natural  body, 
and  so  gets  into  some  awkward  confusion,  though  right  in  the  main 
points.).  Then,  taking  the  word  soul  as  a  short  expression  of  the  moral 
and  responsible  part  of  being,  each  of  these  three  parts  has  a  passive 
and  active  power.     The  body  has  senses  and  muscles ;  the  soul,  feeling 


398  APPENDIX,    14. 

and   resolution ;    the   intellect,  understanding   and  imagination.     The 
scheme  may  be  put  into  tabular  form,  thus  : — 


Passive  or  Receptive  Part. 

Active  or  Motive  Part. 

Body 

-     Senses. 

Muscles. 

Soul 

-     Feeling. 

Resolution. 

Intellect    - 

-     Understanding. 

Imagination. 

In  this  scheme  I  consider  memory  a  part  of  understanding,  and  con- 
science I  leave  out,  as  being  the  voice  of  God  in  the  heart,  inseparable 
from  the  system,  yet  not  an  essential  part  of  it.  The  sense  of  beauty 
I  consider  a  mixture  of  the  Senses  of  the  body  and  soul. 

Now  all  these  parts  of  the  human  system  have  a  reciprocal  action  on 
one  another,  so  that  the  true  perfection  of  any  of  them  is  not  possible 
without  some  relative  perfection  of  the  others,  and  yet  any  one  of  the 
parts  of  the  system  may  be  brought  into  a  morbid  development,  incon- 
sistent with  the  perfection  of  the  others.  Thus,  in  a  healthy  state,  the 
acuteness  of  the  senses  quickens  that  of  the  feelings,  and  these  latter 
quicken  the  understanding,  and  then  all  the  three  quicken  the  imagina- 
tion, and  then  all  the  four  strengthen  the  resolution ;  while  yet  there  is 
a  danger,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  encouraged  and  morbid  feeling 
may  weaken  or  bias  the  understanding,  or  that  the  over  shrewd  and 
keen  understanding  may  shorten  the  imagination,  or  that  the  under- 
standing and  imagination  together  may  take  place  of,  or  undermine,  the 
resolution,  as  in  Hamlet.  So  in  the  mere  bodily  frame  there  is  a 
delightful  perfection  of  the  senses,  consistent  with  the  utmost  health  of 
the  muscular  system,  as  in  the  quick  sight  and  hearing  of  an  active 
savage :  another  false  delicacy  of  the  senses,  in  the  Sybarite,  consequent 
on  their  over  indulgence,  until  the  doubled  rose-leaf  is  painful ;  and  this 
inconsistent  with  muscular  perfection.  Again  ;  there  is  a  perfection  of 
muscular  action  consistent  with  exquisite  sense,  as  in  that  of  the  fingers  of 
a  musician  or  of  a  painter,  in  which  the  muscles  are  guided  by  the  slight- 
est feeling  of  the  strings,  or  of  the  pencil :  another  perfection  of  muscular 
action  inconsistent  with  acuteness  of  sense,  as  in  the  effort  of  battle,  in 
which  a  soldier  does  not  perceive  his  wounds.  So  that  it  is  never  so 
much  the  question,  what  is  the  solitary  perfection  of  a  given  part  of  the 
man,  as  what  is  its  balanced  perfection  in  relation  to  the  whole  of  him  : 
and  again,  the  perfection  of  any  single  power  is  not  merely  to  be  valued 


APPENDIX,    14.  399 

by  the  mere  rank  of  the  power  itself,  but  by  the  harmony  which  it  indi- 
cates among  the  other  powers.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  an  archer's  glance 
along  his  arrow,  or  a  hunter's  raising  of  his  rifle,  there  is  a  certain  per- 
fection of  sense  and  finger  which  is  the  result  of  mere  practice,  a  simple 
bodily  perfection ;  but  there  is  a  farther  value  in  the  habit  which  results 
from  the  resolution  and  intellect  necessary  to  the  forming  of  it :  in  the 
hunter's  raising  of  his  rifle  there  is  a  quietness  implying  far  more  than 
mere  practice, — implying  courage,  and  habitual  meeting  of  danger,  and 
presence  of  mind,  and  many  other  such  noble  characters.  So  also  in  a 
musician's  way  of  laying  finger  on  his  instrument,  or  a  painter's  hand- 
ling of  his  pencil,  there  are  many  qualities  expressive  of  the  special 
sensibilities  of  each,  operating  on  the  production  of  the  habit,  besides 
the  sensibility  operating  at  the  moment  of  action.  So  that  there  are 
three  distinct  stages  of  merit  in  what  is  commonly  called  mere  bodily 
dexterity :  the  first,  the  dexterity  given  by  practice,  called  command  of 
tools  or  of  weapons  ;  the  second  stage,  the  dexterity  or  grace  given  by 
character,  as  the  gentleness  of  hand  proceeding  from  modesty  or  tender- 
ness of  spirit,  and  the  steadiness  of  it  resulting  from  habitual  patience 
coupled  with  decision,  and  the  thousand  other  characters  partially  dis- 
cernible, even  hi  a  man's  writing,  much  more  in  his  general  handiwork ; 
and,  thirdly,  there  is  the  perfection  of  action  produced  by  the  operation 
of  present  strength,  feeling,  or  intelligence,  on  instruments  thus  pre- 
viously perfected,  as  the  handling  of  a  great  painter  is  rendered  more 
beautiful  by  his  immediate  care  and  feeling  and  love  of  his  subject,  or 
knowledge  of  it,  and  as  physical  strength  is  increased  by  strength  of  will 
and  greatness  of  heart.  Imagine,  for  instance,  the  difference  in  manner 
of  fighting,  and  in  actual  muscular  strength  and  endurance,  between  a 
common  soldier,  and  a  man  in  the  circumstances  of  the  Horatii,  or  of 
the  temper  of  Leonidas. 

Mere  physical  skill,  therefore,  the  mere  perfection  and  power  of  the 
body  as  an  instrument,  is  manifested  in  three  stages : 

First,  Bodily  power  by  practice  ; 
Secondly,  Bodily  power  by  moral  habit ; 
Thirdly,  Bodily  power  by  immediate  energy ; 

and  the  arts  will  be  greater  or  less,  ca:teri*  paribus,  according  to  the  de- 


400  APPENDIX,    14. 

grees  of  these  dexterities  which  they  admit.  A  smith's  work  at  his  an- 
vil admits  little  but  the  first ;  fencing,  shooting,  and  riding,  admit  some- 
thing of  the  second ;  while  the  fine  arts  admit  (merely  through  the 
channel  of  the  bodily  dexterities)  an  expression  almost  of  the  whole 
man. 

Nevertheless,  though  the  higher  arts  admit  this  higher  bodily  perfec- 
tion, they  do  not  all  require  it  in  equal  degrees,  but  can  dispense  with  it 
more  and  more  in  proportion  to  their  dignity.  The  arts  whose  chief 
element  is  bodily  dexterity,  may  be  classed  together  as  arts  of  the  third 
order,  of  which  the  highest  will  be  those  which  admit  most  of  the  power 
of  moral  habit  and  energy,  such  as  riding  and  the  management  of 
weapons ;  and  the  rest  may  be  thrown  together  under  the  general  title  of 
handicrafts,  of  which  it  does  not  much  matter  which  are  the  most  honour- 
able, but  rather,  which  are  the  most  necessary  and  least  injurious  to 
health,  which  it  is  not  our  present  business  to  examine.  Men  engaged 
in  the  practice  of  these  are  called  artizans,  as  opposed  to  artists,  who  are 
concerned  with  the  fine  arts. 

The  next  step  in  elevation  of  art  is  the  addition  of  the  intelligences 
which  have  no  connection  with  bodily  dexterity;  as,  for  instance,  in 
hunting,  the  knowledge  of  the  habits  of  animals  and  their  places  of 
abode ;  in  architecture,  of  mathematics ;  in  painting,  of  harmonies  of 
colour  ;  in  music,  of  those  of  sound ;  all  this  pure  science  being  joined 
with  readiness  of  expedient  in  applying  it,  and  with  shrewdness  in  ap- 
prehension of  difficulties,  either  present  or  probable. 

It  will  often  happen  that  intelligence  of  this  kind  is  possessed  without 
bodily  dexterity,  or  the  need  of  it ;  one  man  directing  and  another  exe- 
cuting, as  for  the  most  part  in  architecture,  war,  and  seamanship.  And 
it  is  to  be  observed,  also,  that  in  proportion  to  the  dignity  of  the  art,  the 
bodily  dexterities  needed  even  in  its  subordinate  agents  become  less  im- 
portant, and  are  more  and  more  replaced  by  intelligence ;  as  in  the 
steering  of  a  ship,  the  bodily  dexterity  required  is  less  than  in  shooting 
or  fencing,  but  the  intelligence  far  greater :  and  so  in  war,  the  mere 
swordsmanship  and  marksmanship  of  the  troops  are  of  small  importance 
in  comparison  with  their  disposition,  and  right  choice  of  the  moment  of 
action.  So  that  arts  of  this  second  order  must  be  estimated,  not  by  the 
quantity  of  bodily  dexterity  they  require,  but  by  the  quantity  and  dig- 
nity of  the  knowledge  needed  in  their  practice,  and  by  the  degree  of 


APPENDIX,  14.  401 


subtlety  needed  in  bringing  such  knowledge  into  play.     War  certainly 
stands  first  in  the  general  mind,  not  only  as  the  greatest  of  the  arts 
which  I  have  called  of  the  second  order,  but  as  the  greatest  of  all  arts. 
It  is  not,  however,  easy  to  distinguish  the  respect  paid  to  the  Power, 
from  that  rendered  to  the  Art  of  the  soldier ;  the  honour  of  victory 
being  more  dependent,  in  the  vulgar  mind,  on  its  results,  than  its  difficul- 
ties.    I  believe,  however,  that  taking  into  consideration  the  greatness  of 
the  anxieties  under  which  this  art  must  be  practised,  the  multitude  of 
circumstances  to  be  known  and  regarded  in  it,  and  the  subtleties  both  of 
apprehension  and  stratagem  constantly  demanded  by  it,  as  well  as  the 
multiplicity  of  disturbing  accidents  and  doubtful  contingencies  against 
which  it  must  make  provision  on  the  instant,  it  must  indeed  rank  as  far 
the  first  of  the  arts  of  the  second  order ;  and  next  to  this  great  art  of 
killing,  medicine  being  much  like  war  in  its  stratagems  and  watchings 
against  its  dark  and  subtle  death-enemy. 

Then  the  arts  of  the  first  order  will  be  those  in  which  the  Imaginative 
part  of  the  intellect  and  the  Sensitive  part  of  the  soul  are  joined ;  as 
poetry,  architecture,  and  painting  ;  these  forming  a  kind  of  cross,  in  their 
part  of  the  scheme  of  the  human  being,  with  those  of  the  second  order, 
which  wed  the  Intelligent  part  of  the  intellect  and  Resolute  part  of  the 
soul.  But  the  reader  must  feel  more  and  more,  at  every  step,  the  im- 
possibility of  classing  the  arts  themselves,  independently  of  the  men  by 
whom  they  are  practised ;  and  how  an  art,  low  in  itself,  may  be  made 
noble  by  the  quantity  of  human  strength  and  being  which  a  great  man 
will  pour  into  it ;  and  an  art,  great  in  itself,  be  made  mean  by  the 
meanness  of  the  mind  occupied  in  it.  I  do  not  intend,  when  I  call 
painting  an  art  of  the  first,  and  war  an  art  of  the  second,  order,  to  class 
Dutch  landscape  painters  with  good  soldiers ;  but  I  mean,  that  if  from 
such  a  man  as  Napoleon  we  were  to  take  away  the  honour  of  all  that  he 
had  done  in  law  and  civil  government,  and  to  give  him  the  reputation  of 
his  soldiership  only,  his  name  would  be  less,  if  justly  weighed,  than  that 
of  Buonaroti,  himself  a  good  soldier  also,  when  need  was.  But  I  will 
not  endeavour  to  pursue  the  inquiry,  for  I  believe  that  of  all  the  arts  of 
the  first  order  it  would  be  found  that  all  that  a  man  has,  or  is,  or  can  be, 
he  can  fully  express  in  them,  and  give  to  any  of  them,  and  find  it  not 
enough. 

26 


402  APPENDIX,    15. 

15.    INSTINCTIVE   JUDGMENTS. 

The  same  rapid  judgment  which  I  wish  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  of 
architecture,  may  in  some  sort  also  be  formed  of  painting,  owing  to  the 
close  connection  between  execution  and  expression  in  the  latter ;  as  be- 
tween structure  and  expression  in  the  former.  We  ought  to  be  able  to 
tell  good  painting  by  a  side  glance  as  we  pass  along  a  gallery ;  and, 
until  we  can  do  so,  we  are  not  fit  to  pronounce  judgment  at  all :  not  that 
I  class  this  easily  visible  excellence  of  painting  with  the  great  expres- 
sional  qualities  which  time  and  watchfulness  only  unfold.  I  have  again 
and  again  insisted  on  the  supremacy  of  these  last,  and  shall  always  con- 
tinue to  do  so.  But  I  perceive  a  tendency  among  some  of  the  more 
thoughtful  critics  of  the  day  to  forget  that  the  business  of  a  painter  is 
to  paint,  and  so  altogether  to  despise  those  men,  Veronese  and  Rubens 
for  instance,  who  were  painters,  par  excellence,  and  in  whom  the  expres- 
sional  qualities  are  subordinate.  Now  it  is  well,  when  we  have  strong 
moral  or  poetical  feeling  manifested  in  painting,  to  mark  this  as  the  best 
part  of  the  work  ;  but  it  is  not  well  to  consider  as  a  thing  of  small  ac- 
count, the  painter's  language  in  which  that  feeling  is  conveyed  ;  for  if  that 
language  be  not  good  and  lovely,  the  man  may  indeed  be  a  just  moral- 
ist or  a  great  poet,  but  he  is  not  a  painter,  and  it  was  wrong  of  him  to 
paint.  He  had  much  better  have  put  his  morality  into  sermons,  and  his 
poetry  into  verse,  than  into  a  language  of  which  he  was  not  master. 
And  this  mastery  of  the  language  is  that  of  which  we  should  be  cogni- 
zant by  a  glance  of  the  eye  ;  and  if  that  be  not  found,  it  is  wasted  time 
to  look  farther :  the  man  has  mistaken  his  vocation,  and  his  expression 
of  himself  will  be  cramped  by  his  awkward  efforts  to  do  what  he  was 
not  fit  to  do.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  man  be  a  painter  indeed,  and 
have  the  gift  of  colours  and  lines,  what  is  in  him  will  come  from  his  hand 
freely  and  faithfully ;  and  the  language  itself  is  so  difficult  and  so  vast, 
that  the  mere  possession  of  it  argues  the  man  is  great,  and  that  his 
works  are  worth  reading.  So  that  I  have  never  yet  seen  the  case  in 
which  this  true  artistical  excellence,  visible  by  the  eye-glance,  was  not 
the  index  of  some  true  expressional  worth  in  the  work.  Neither  have  I 
ever  seen  a  good  expressional  work  without  high  artistical  merit :  and 
that  this  is  ever  denied  is  only  owing  to  the  narrow  view  which  men  are 
apt  to  take  both  of  expression  and  of  art ;  a  narrowness  consequent  on 


APPENDIX,  15.  403 

their  own  especial  practice  and  habits  of  thought.     A  man  long  trained 
to  love  the  monk's  visions  of  Fra  Angelico,  turns  in  proud  and  ineffable 
disgust  from  the  first  work  of  Rubens  which  he  encounters  on  his  return 
across  the  Alps.     But  is  he  right  in  his  indignation  ?     He  has  forgotten, 
that  while  Angelico  prayed  and  wept  in  his  olive  shade,  there  was  differ- 
ent work  doing  in  the  dank  fields  of  Flanders  ; — wild  seas  to  be  banked 
out ;  endless  canals  to  be  dug,  and  boundless  marshes  to  be  drained ; 
hard  ploughing  and  harrowing  of  the  frosty  clay ;  careful  breeding  of 
stout  horses  and  fat  cattle ;  close  setting  of  brick  walls  against  cold 
winds  and  snow ;  much  hardening  of  hands  and  gross  stoutening  of 
bodies  in  all   this ;  gross  jovialities  of  harvest  homes  and  Christmas 
feasts,  which  were  to  be  the  reward  of  it ;  rough  affections,  and  sluggish 
imaginations ;  fleshy,  substantial,  iron-shod  humanities,  but  humanities 
still ;  humanities  which  God  had  his  eye  upon,  and  which  won,  perhaps, 
here  and  there,  as  much  favour  in  his  sight  as  the  wasted  aspects  of  the 
whispering  monks  of  Florence  (Heaven  forbid  it  should  not  be  so,  since 
the  most  of  us  cannot  be  monks,  but  must  be  ploughmen  and  reapers 
still).     And  are  we  to  suppose  there  is  no  nobility  in  Rubens'  masculine 
and  universal  sympathy  with  all  this,  and  with  his  large  human  render- 
ing of  it,  Gentleman  though  he  was,  by  birth,  and  feeling,  and  education, 
and  place  ;  and,  when  he  chose,  lordly  in  conception  also  ?     He  had  his 
faults,  perhaps  great  and  lamentable  faults,  though  more  those  of  his 
time  and  his  country  than  his  own ; .  he  has  neither  cloister  breeding  nor 
boudoir  breeding,  and  is  very  unfit  to  paint  either  in  missals  or  annuals ; 
but  he  has  an  open  sky  and  wide- world  breeding  in  him,  that  we  may 
not  be  offended  with,  fit  alike  for  king's  court,  knight's  camp,  or  peas- 
ant's cottage.     On  the  other  hand,  a  man  trained  here  in  England,  in 
our  Sir  Joshua  school,  will  not  and  cannot  allow  that  there  is  any  art  at 
all  in  the  technical  work  of  Angelico.     But  he  is  just  as  wrong  as  the 
other.     Fra  Angelico  is  as  true  a  master  of  the  art  necessary  to  his  pur- 
poses, as  Rubens  was  of  that  necessary  for  his.     We  have  been  taught 
in  England  to  think  there  can  be  no  virtue  but  in  a  loaded  brush  and 
rapid  hand  ;  but  if  we  can  shake  our  common  sense  free  of  such  teach- 
ing, we  shall  understand  that  there  is  art  also  in  the  delicate  point  and 
in  the  hand  which  trembles  as  it  moves ;  not  because  it  is  more  liable  to 
err,  but  because  there  is  more  danger  in  its  error,  and  more  at  stake 
upon  its  precision.     The  art  of  Angelico,  both  as  a  colourist  and  a 


404  APPENDIX,  1G. 

draughtsman,  is  consummate;  so  perfect  and  beautiful,  that  his  work 
may  be  recognised  at  any  distance  by  the  rainbow-play  and  brilliancy  of 
it :  However  closely  it  may  be  surrounded  by  other  works  of  the  same 
school,  glowing  with  enamel  and  gold,  Angelico's  may  be  told  from  them 
at  a  glance,  like  so  many  huge  pieces  of  opal  lying  among  common 
marbles.  So  again  with  Giotto  ;  the  Arena  chapel  is  not  only  the  most 
perfect  expressional  work,  it  is  the  prettiest  piece  of  wall  decoration  and 
fair  colour,  in  North  Italy. 

Now  there  is  a  correspondence  of  the  same  kind  between  the  technical 
and  expressional  parts  of  architecture  ; — not  a  true  or  entire  correspond- 
ence, so  that  when  $he  expression  is  best,  the  building  must  be  also 
best ;  but  so  much  of  correspondence  as  that  good  building  is  necessary 
to  good  expression,  comes  before  it,  and  is  to  be  primarily  looked  for  : 
and  the  more,  because  the  manner  of  building  is  capable  of  being  deter- 
miuately  estimated  and  classed  ;  but  the  expressional  character  not  so : 
we  can  at  once  determine  the  true  value  of  technical  qualities,  we  can 
only  approximate  to  the  value  of  expressional  qualities :  and  besides 
this,  the  looking  for  the  technical  qualities  first  will  enable  us  to  cast  a 
large  quantity  of  rubbish  aside  at  once,  and  so  to  narrow  the  difficult 
field  of  inquiry  into  expression :  we  shall  get  rid  of  Chinese  pagodas  and 
Indian  temples,  and  Renaissance  Palladianisms,  and  Alhambra  stucco 
and  filigree,  in  one  great  rubbish  heap ;  and  shall  not  need  to  trouble 
ourselves  about  their  expression,  or  anything  else  concerning  them. 
Then  taking  the  buildings  which  have  been  rightly  put  together,  and 
which  show  common  sense  in  their  structure,  we  may  look  for  their  far- 
ther and  higher  excellences  ;  but  on  those  which  are  absurd  in  their  first 
steps  we  need  waste  no  time. 

16.    STEE2TOTH    OF    SHAFTS. 

I  could  have  wished,  before  writing  this  chapter,  to  have  given  more 
study  to  the  difficult  subject  of  the  strength  of  shafts  of  different  mate- 
rials and  structure ;  but  I  cannot  enter  into  every  inquiry  which  general 
criticism  might  suggest,  and  this  I  believe  to  be  one  which  would  have 
occupied  the  reader  with  less  profit  than  many  others :  all  that  is  neces- 
sary for  him  to  note  is,  that  the  great  increase  of  .strength  gained  by  a 
tubular  form  in  iron  shafts,  of  given  solid  contents,  is  no  contradiction 


APPENDIX,  17.  405 

to  the  general  principle  stated  in  the  text,  that  the  strength  of  materials 
is  most  available  when  they  are  most  concentrated.  The  strength  of 
the  tube  is  owing  to  certain  properties  of  the  arch  formed  by  its  sides, 
not  to  the  dispersion  of  its  materials  :  and  the  principle  is  altogether  in- 
applicable to  stone  shafts.  No  one  would  think  of  building  a  pillar  of  a 
succession  of  sandstone  rings  ;  however  strong  it  might  be,  it  would  be 
•still  stronger  filled  up,  and  the  substitution  of  such  a  pillar  for  a  solid 
one  of  the  same  contents  would  lose  too  much  space ;  for  a  stone  pillar, 
even  when  solid,  must  be  quite  as  thick  as  is  either  graceful  or  convenient, 
and  in  modern  churches  is  often  too  thick  as  it  is,  hindering  sight  of  the 
preacher,  and  checking  the  sound  of  his  voice. 

17.    ANSWER    TO    ME.     GARBETT. 

Some  three  months  ago,  and  long  after  the  writing  of  this  passage,  I 
met  accidentally  with  Mr.  Garbett's  elementary  Treatise  on  Design. 
(Weale,  1850.)  If  I  had  cared  about  the  reputation  of  originality,  I 
should  have  been  annoyed — and  was  so,  at  first,  on  finding  Mr.  Garbett's 
illustrations  of  the  subject  exactly  the  same  as  mine,  even  to  the  choice 
of  the  elephant's  foot  for  the  parallel  of  the  Doric  pillar :  I  even  thought 
of  omitting,  or  re- writing,  great  part  of  the  chapter,  but  determined  at 
last  to  let  it  stand.  I  am  striving  to  speak  plain  truths  on  many  simple 
and  trite  subjects,  and  I  hope,  therefore,  that  much  of  what  I  say  has 
been  said  before,  and  am  quite  willing  to  give  up  all  claim  to  originality 
in  any  reasoning  or  assertion  whatsoever,  if  any  one  cares  to  dispute 
it.  I  desire  to  reader  to  accept  what  I  say,  not  as  mine,  but  as  the  truth, 
which  may  be  all  the  world's,  if  they  look  for  it.  If  I  remember  rightly, 
Mr.  Frank  Howard  promised  at  some  discussion  respecting  the  "  Seven 
Lamps,"  reported  in  the  "  Builder,"  to  pluck  all  my  borrowed  feathers 
off  me ;  but  I  did  not  see  the  end  of  the  discussion,  and  do  not  know  to 
this  day  how  many  feathers  I  have  left :  at  all  events  the  elephant's  foot 
must  belong  to  Mr.  Garbett,  though,  strictly  speaking,  neither  he  nor  I 
can  be  quite  justified  in  using  it,  for  an  elephant  in  reality  stands  on 
tiptoe  ;  and  this  is  by  no  means  the  expression  of  a  Doric  shaft.  As, 
however,  I  have  been  obliged  to  speak  of  this  treatise  of  Mr.  Garbett's, 
and  desire  also  to  recommend  it  as  of  much  interest  and  utility  in  its 
statements  of  fact,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  pass  altogether  without  no- 


406  APPENDIX,  17. 


tice,  as  if  unanswerable,  several  passages  in  which  the  writer  has  object- 
ed to  views  stated  in  the  "  Seven  Lamps."  I  should  at  any  rate  have 
noticed  the  passage  quoted  above,  (Chap.  30th,)  which  runs  counter  to  the 
spirit  of  all  I  have  ever  written,  though  without  referring  to  me  ;  but  the 
references  to  the  "  Seven  Lamps"  I  should  not  have  answered,  unless  I 
had  desired,  generally,  to  recommend  the  book,  and  partly  also,  because 
they  may  serve  as  examples  of  the  kind  of  animadversion  which  the 
"  Seven  Lamps"  had  to  sustain  from  architects,  very  generally  ;  which 
examples  being  once  answered,  there  will  be  little  occasion  for  my  re- 
ferring in  future  to  other  criticisms  of  the  kind. 

The  first  reference  to  the  "  Seven  Lamps"  is  in  the  second  page, 
where  Mr.  Garbett  asks  a  question,  "  Why  are  not  convenience  and  sta- 
bility enough  to  constitute  a  fine  building  V — which  I  should  have  an- 
swered shortly  by  asking  another,  "  Why  we  have  been  made  men,  and 
not  bees  nor  termites :"  but  Mr.  Garbett  has  given  a  very  pretty, 
though  partial,  answer  to  it  himself,  in  his  4th  to  9th  pages, — an  answer 
which  I  heartily  beg  the  reader  to  consider.  But,  in  page  12.,  it  is  made 
a  grave  charge  againsc  me,  that  I  use  the  words  beauty  and  ornament 
interchangeably.  I  do  so,  and  ever  shall ;  and  so,  I  believe,  one  day, 
will  Mr.  Garbett  himself;  but  not  while  he  continues  to  head  his  pages 
thus  : — "  Beauty  not  dependent  on  ornament,  or  superfluous  features." 
What  right  has  he  to  assume  that  ornament,  rightly  so  called,  ever  was, 
or  can  be,  superfluous  1  I  have  said  above,  and  repeatedly  in  other 
places,  that  the  most  beautiful  things  are  the  most  useless  ;  I  never  said 
superfluous.  I  said  useless  in  the  well-understood  and  usual  sense,  as 
meaning,  inapplicable  to  the  service  of  the  body.  Thus  I  called  pea- 
cocks and  lilies  useless ;  meaning,  that  roast  peacock  was  unwholesome 
(taking  Juvenal's  word  for  it),  and  that  dried  lilies  made  bad  hay  :  but 
I  do  not  think  peacocks  superfluous  birds,  nor  that  the  world  could  get 
on  well  without  its  lilies.  Or,  to  look  closer,  I  suppose  the  peacock's 
blue  eyes  to  be  very  useless  to  him;  not  dangerous  indeed,  as  to  their 
first  master,  but  of  small  service,  yet  I  do  not  think  there  is  a  superflu- 
ous eye  in  all  his  tail ;  and  for  lilies,  though  the  great  King  of  Israel  was 
not  "  arrayed"  like  one  of  them,  can  Mr.  Garbett  tell  us  which  are  their 
superfluous  leaves  *?  Is  there  no  Diogenes  among  lilies  ?  none  to  be 
found  content  to  drink  dew,  but  out  of  silver  1  The  fact  is,  I  never  met 
with  the  architect  yet  who  did  not  think  ornament  meant  a  thing  to  be 


APPENDIX,  17.  407 


bought  in  a  shop,  and  pinned  on,  or  left  off,  at  architectural  toilets,  as 
the  fancy  seized  them,  thinking  little  more  than  many  women  do  of  the 
other  kind  of  ornament — the  only  true  kind — St.  Peter's  kind, — "  Not 
that  outward  adorning,  but  the  inner — of  the  heart."  I  do  not  mean 
that  architects  cannot  conceive  this  better  ornament,  but  they  do  not  un- 
derstand that  it  is  the  only  ornament ;  that  all  architectural  ornament  is 
this,  and  nothing  but  this  ;  that  a  noble  building  never  has  any  extra- 
neous or  superfluous  ornament ;  that  all  its  parts  are  necessary  to  its 
loveliness,  and  that  no  single  atom  of  them  could  be  removed  without 
harm  to  its  life.  You  do  not  build  a  temple  and  then  dress  it.*  You 
create  it  in  its  loveliness,  and  leave  it,  as  her  Maker  left  Eve.  Not  un- 
adorned, I  believe,  but  so  well  adorned  as  to  need  no  feather  crowns. 
And  I  use  the  words  ornament  and  beauty  interchangeably,  in  order  that 
architects  may  understand  this :  I  assume  that  their  building  is  to  be  a 
perfect  creature  capable  of  nothing  less  than  it  has,  and  needing  nothing 
more.  It  may,  indeed,  receive  additional  decoration  afterwards,  exactly 
as  a  woman  may  gracefully  put  a  bracelet  on  her  arm,  or  set  a  flower  in 
her  hair  :  but  that  additional  decoration  is  not  the  architecture.  It  is  of 
curtains,  pictures,  statues,  things  which  may  be  taken  away  from  the 
building,  and  not  hart  it.  What  has  the  architect  to  do  with  these  %  He 
has  only  to  do  with  what  is  part  of  the  building  itself,  that  is  to  say,  its 
own  inherent  beauty.  And  because  Mr.  Garbett  does  not  understand  or 
acknowledge  this,  he  is  led  on  from  error  to  error  ;  for  we  next  find  him 
endeavouring  to  define  beauty  as  distinct  from  ornament,  and  saying  that 
"  Positive  beauty  may  be  produced  by  a  studious  collation  of  whatever 
will  display  design,  order,  and  congruity."  (p.  14.)  Is  that  so  1  There 
is  a  highly  studious  collation  of  whatever  will  display  design,  order,  and 
congruity,  in  a  skull,  is  there  not? — yet  small  beauty.  The  nose 
is  a  decorative  feature, — yet  slightly  necessary  to  beauty,  it  seems  to 
me ;  now,  at  least,  for  I  once  thought  I  must  be  wrong  in  considering  a 
skull  disagreeable.  I  gave  it  fair  trial :  put  one  on  my  bedroom  chim- 
ney-piece, and  looked  at  it  by  sunrise  every  morning,  and  by  moonlight 
every  night,  and  by  all  the  best  lights  I  could  think  of,  for  a  month,  in 
vain.     I  found  it  as  ugly  at  last  as  I  did  at  first.      So,  also,  the  hair  is  a 

*  We  have  done  so — theoretically ;  just  as  one  would  reason  on  the  human  form 
from  the  bones  outwards :  but  the  Architect  of  human  form  frames  all  at  once — bone 
and  flesh. 


408  APPENDIX,  IT. 

decoration,  and  its  natural  curl  is  of  little  use  ;  but  can  Mr.  Garbett  con- 
ceive a  bald  beauty ;  or  does  he  prefer  a  wig,  because  that  is  a  "  studious 
collation"  of  whatever  will  produce  design,  order,  and  congruity  ?  So 
the  flush  of  the  cheek  is  a  decoration, — God's  painting  of  the  temple  of 
his  spirit, — and  the  redness  of  the  lip  ;  and  yet  poor  Viola  thought  it 
beauty  truly  blent ;  and  I  hold  with  her. 

I  have  answered  enough  to  this  count. 

The  second  point  questioned  is  my  assertion,  "  Ornament  cannot  be 
overcharged  if  it  is  good,  and  is  always  overcharged  when  it  is  bad."  To 
which  Mr.  Garbett  objects  in  these  terms :  "  I  must  contend,  on  the 
contrary,  that  the  very  best  ornament  may  be  overcharged  by  being 
misplaced." 

A  short  sentence  with  two  mistakes  in  it. 

First.  Mr.  Garbett  cannot  get  rid  of  his  unfortunate  notion  that  orna- 
ment is  a  thing  to  be  manufactured  separately,  and  fastened  on.  He 
supposes  that  an  ornament  may  be  called  good  in  itself,  in  the  stone- 
mason's yard  or  in  the  ironmonger's  shop :  Once  for  all,  let  him  put 
this  idea  out  of  his  head.  We  may  say  of  a  thing,  considered  separately, 
that  it  is  a  pretty  thing  ;  but  before  we  can  say  it  is  a  good  ornament, 
we  must  know  what  it  is  to  adorn,  and  how.  As,  for  instance,  a  ring  of 
gold  is  a  pretty  thing;  it  is  a  good  ornament  on  a  woman's  finger;  not  a 
good  ornament"  hung  thrdUgh  her  under  lip.  A  hollyhock,  seven  feet 
high,  would  be  a  good  ornament  for  a  cottage-garden ;  not  a  good  orna- 
ment  for  a  lady's  head-dress.  Might  not  Mr.  Garbett  have  seen  this 
without  my  showing  ?  and  that,  therefore,  when  I  said  "  good "  orna- 
ment, I  said  "well-placed"  ornament,  in  one  word;  and  that,  also,  when 
Mr.  Garbett  says  "it  may  be  overcharged  by  being  mis-placed,"  he 
merely  says  it  may  be  overcharged  by  being  bad. 

Secondly.  But,  granted  that  ornament  were  independent  of  its  posi- 
tion, and  might  be  pronounced  good  in  a  separate  form,  as  books  are 
good,  or  men  are  good, — Suppose  I  had  written  to  a  student  in  Oxford, 
"  You  cannot  have  too  many  books,  if  they  be  good  books ;"  and  he  had 
answered  me,  "  Yes,  for  if  I  have  many,  I  have  no  place  to  put  them  in 
but  the  coal-cellar."  Would  that  in  anywise  affect  the  general  prin- 
ciple that  he  could  not  have  too  many  books'? 

Or  suppose  he  had  written,  "  I  must  not  have  too  many,  they  confuse 
my  head."     I  should  have  written  back  to  him  :  "  Don't  buy  books  to 


APPENDIX,  IT.  409 

put  in  the  coal-hole,  nor  read  them  if  they  confuse  your  head ;  you 
cannot  have  too  many,  if  they  be  good :  but  if  you  are  too  lazy  to  take 
care  of  them,  or  too  dull  to  profit  by  them,  you  are  better  without 
them." 

Exactly  in  the  same  tone,  I  repeat  to  Mr.  Garbett,  "  You  cannot  have 
too  much  ornament,  if  it  be  good :  but  if  you  are  too  indolent  to  arrange 
it,  or  too  dull  to  take  advantage  of  it,  assuredly  you  are  better  with- 
out it." 

The  other  points  bearing  on  this  question  have  already  been  stated  in 
the  close  of  the  21st  chapter. 

The  third  reference  I  have  to  answer,  is  to  my  repeated  assertion,  that 
the  evidence  of  manual  labour  is  one  of  the  chief  sources  of  value  in 
ornament,  ("Seven  Lamps,"  p.  49.,  "Modern  Painters,"  §  1.  Chap.  III.,) 
to  which  objection  is  made  in  these  terms :  "  We  must  here  warn  the 
reader  against  a  remarkable  error  of  Ruskin.  The  value  of  ornaments 
in  architecture  depends  not  in  the  slightest  degree  on  the  manual  labour 
they  contain.  If  it  did,  the  finest  ornaments  ever  executed  would  be  the 
stone  chains  that  hang  before  certain  Indian  rock-temples."  Is  that  so  ? 
Hear  a  parallel  argument.  "  The  value  of  the  Cornish  mines  depends 
not  in  the  slightest  degree  on  the  quantity  of  copper  they  contain.  If  it 
did,  the  most  valuable  things  ever  produced  would  be  copper  sauce- 
pans." It  is  hardly  worth  my  while  to  answer  this ;  but,  lest  any  of 
my  readers  should  be  confused  by  the  objection,  and  as  I  hold  the  fact 
to  be  of  great  importance,  I  may  re-state  it  for  them  with  some  expla- 
nation. 

Observe,  then,  the  appearance  of  labour,  that  is  to  say,  the  evidence 
of  the  past  industry  of  man,  is  always,  in  the  abstract,  intensely  de- 
lightful :  man  being  meant  to  labour,  it  is  delightful  to  see  that  he  has 
laboured,  and  to  read  the  record  of  his  active  and  worthy  existence. 

The  evidence  of  labour  becomes  painful  only  when  it  is  a  sign  of  Evil 
greater,  as  Evil,  than  the  labour  is  great,  as  Good.  As,  for  instance,  if  a 
man  has  laboured  for  an  hour  at  what  might  have  been  done  by  another 
man  in  a  moment,  this  evidence  of  his  labour  is  also  evidence  of  his 
weakness ;  and  this  weakness  is  greater  in  rank  of  evil,  than  his  industry 
is  great  in  rank  of  good. 

Again,  if  a  man  have  laboured  at  what  was  not  worth  accomplishing, 
the  signs  of  his  labour  are  the  signs  of  his  folly,  and  his  folly  dishonours 


410  APPENDIX,    17. 

his  industry ;  we  had  rather  he  had  been  a  wise  man  in  rest,  than  a  fool 
in  labour. 

Again,  if  a  man  have  laboured  without  accomplishing  anything,  the 
signs  of  his  labour  are  the  signs  of  his  disappointment ;  and  we  have 
more  sorrow  in  sympathy  with  his  failure,  than  pleasure  in  sympathy 
with  his  work. 

Now,  therefore,  in  ornament,  whenever  labour  replaces  what  was 
better  than  labour,  that  is  to  say,  skill  and  thought ;  wherever  it  substi- 
tutes itself  for  these,  or  negatives  these  by  its  existence,  then  it  is  positive 
evil.  Copper  is  an  evil  when  it  alloys  gold,  or  poisons  food :  not  an 
evil,  as  copper  ;  good  in  the  form  of  pence,  seriously  objectionable  when 
it  occupies  the  room  of  guineas.  Let  Danae  cast  it  out  of  her  lap,  when 
the  gold  comes  from  heaven ;  but  let  the  poor  man  gather  it  up  care- 
fully from  the  earth. 

Farther,  the  evidence  of  labour  is  not  only  a  good  when  added  to 
other  good,  but  the  utter  absence  of  it  destroys  good  in  human  work. 
It  is  only  good  for  God  to  create  without  toil ;  that  which  man  can 
create  without  toil  is  worthless  :  machine  ornaments  are  no  ornaments 
at  all.  Consider  this  carefully,  reader  :  I  could  illustrate  it  for  you  end- 
lessly ;  but  you  feel  it  yourself  every  hour  of  your  existence.  And  if 
you  do  not  know  that  you  feel  it,  take  up,  for  a  little  time,  the  trade 
which  of  all  manual  trades  has  been  most  honoured  :  be  for  once  a  car- 
penter. Make  for  yourself  a  table  or  a  chair,  and  see  if  you  ever 
thought  any  table  or  chair  so  delightful,  and  what  strange  beauty  there 
will  be  in  their  crooked  limbs. 

I  have  not  noticed  any  other  animadversions  on  the  "  Seven  Lamps  " 
in  Mr.  Garbett's  volume  ;  but  if  there  be  more,  I  must  now  leave  it  to 
his  own  consideration,  whether  he  may  not,  as  in  the  above  instances, 
have  made  them  incautiously :  I  may,  perhaps,  also  be  permitted  to 
request  other  architects,  who  may  happen  to  glance  at  the  preceding 
pages,  not  immediately  to  condemn  what  may  appear  to  them  false  in 
general  principle.  I  must  often  be  found  deficient  in  technical  know- 
ledge ;  I  may  often  err  in  my  statements  respecting  matters  of  practice 
or  of  special  law.  But  I  do  not  write  thoughtlessly  respecting  prin- 
ciples ;  and  my  statements  of  these  will  generally  be  found  worth  recon- 
noitring before  attacking.  Architects,  no  doubt,  fancy  they  have  strong 
grounds  for  supposing  me  wrong  when  they  seek  to  invalidate  my 


APPENDIX,  17.  411 

assertions.  Let  me  assure  them,  at  least,  that  I  mean  to«be  their  friend, 
although  they  may  not  immediately  recognise  me  as  such.  If  I  could 
obtain  the  public  ear,  and  the  principles  I  have  advocated  were  carried 
into  general  practice,  porphyry  and  serpentine  would  be  given  to  them 
instead  of  limestone  and  brick ;  instead  of  tavern  and  shop-fronts  they 
would  have  to  build  goodly  churches  and  noble  dwelling-houses ;  and 
for  every  stunted  Grecism  and  stucco  Romanism,  into  which  they  are 
now  forced  to  shape  their  palsied  thoughts,  and  to  whose  crumbling 
plagiarisms  they  must  trust  their  doubtful  fame,  they  would  be  asked  to 
raise  whole  streets  of  bold,  and  rich,  and  living  architecture,  with  the 
certainty  in  their  hearts  of  doing  what  was  honourable  to  themselves, 
and  good  for  all  men. 

Before  I  altogether  leave  the  question  of  the  influence  of  labour  on 
architectural  effect,  the  reader  may  expect  from  me  a  word  or  two 
respecting  the  subject  which  this  year  must  be  interesting  to  all — the 
applicability,  namely,  of  glass  and  iron  to  architecture  in  general,  as  in 
some  sort  exemplified  by  the  Crystal  Palace. 

It  is  thought  by  many  that  we  shall  forthwith  have  great  part  of  our 
architecture  in  glass  and  iron,  and  that  new  forms  of  beauty  will  result 
from  the  studied  employment  of  these  materials. 

It  may  be  told  in  few  words  how  far  this  is  possible ;  how  far  eter- 
nally impossible. 

There  are  two  means  of  delight  in  all  productions  of  art — colour  and 
form. 

The  most  vivid  conditions  of  colour  attainable  by  human  art  are 
those  of  works  in  glass  and  enamel,  but  not  the  most  perfect.  The  best 
and  noblest  colouring  possible  to  art  is  that  attained  by  the  touch  of  the 
human  hand  on  an  opaque  surface,  upon  which  it  can  command  any  tint 
required,  without  subjection  to  alteration  by  fire  or  other  mechanical 
means.  No  colour  is  so  noble  as  the  colour  of  a  good  painting  on 
canvass  or  gesso. 

This  kind  of  colour  being,  however,  impossible,  for  the  most  part,  in 
architecture,  the  next  best  is  the  scientific  disposition  of  the  natural 
colours  of  stones,  which  are  far  nobler  than  any  abstract  hues  producible 
by  human  art. 

The  delight  which  we  receive  from  glass  painting  is  one  altogether 
inferior,  and  in  which  we  should  degrade  ourselves  by  over  indulgence. 


412  APPENDIX,  17. 

Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  that  we  may  raise  some  palaces  like  Alad- 
din's with  coloured  glass  for  jewels,  which  shall  be  new  in  the  annals  of 
human  splendour,  and  good  in  their  place ;  but  not  if  they  superseded 
nobler  edifices. 

Now,  colour  is  producible  either  on  opaque  or  in  transparent  bodies : 
but  form  is  only  expressible,  in  its  perfection,  on  opaque  bodies,  without 
lustre. 

This  law  is  imperative,  universal,  irrevocable.  No  perfect  or  refined 
form  can  be  expressed  except  in  opaque  and  lustreless  matter.  You 
cannot  see  the  form  of  a  jewel,  nor,  in  any  perfection,  even  of  a  cameo 
or  bronze.  You  cannot  perfectly  see  the  form  of  a  humming-bird,  on 
account  of  its  burnishing ;  but  you  can  see  the  form  of  a  swan  perfectly. 
No  noble  work  in  form  can  ever,  therefore,  be  produced  in  transparent  or 
lustrous  glass  or  enamel.  All  noble  architecture  depends  for  its  majesty 
on  its  form :  therefore  you  can  never  have  any  noble  architecture  in 
transparent  or  lustrous  glass  or  enamel.  Iron  is,  however,  opaque ;  and 
both  it  and  opaque  enamel  may,  perhaps,  be  rendered  quite  lustreless  ; 
and,  therefore,  fit  to  receive  noble  form. 

Let  this  be  thoroughly  done,  and  both  the  iron  and  enamel  made  fine 
in  paste  or  grain,  and  you  may  have  an  architecture  as  noble  as  cast  or 
struck  architecture  ever  can  be  :  as  noble,  therefore,  as  coins  can  be,  or 
common  cast  bronzes,  and  such  other  multiplicable  things  ;* — eternally 
separated  from  all  good  and  great  things  by  a  gulph  which  not  all  the 
tubular  bridges  nor  engineering  of  ten  thousand  nineteenth  centuries  cast 
into  one  great  bronze-foreheaded  century,  will  ever  overpass  one  inch  of. 
All  art  which  is  worth  its  room  in  this  world,  all  art  which  is  not  a  piece 
of  blundering  refuse,  occupying  the  foot  or  two  of  earth  which,  if  unen- 
cumbered by  it,  would  have  grown  corn  or  violets,  or  some  better  thing, 

*  Of  course  mere  multiplicability,  as  of  an  engraving,  does  not  diminish  the  intrin- 
sic value  of  the  work  ;  and  if  the  casts  of  sculpture  could  be  as  sharp  as  the  sculp- 
ture itself,  they  would  hold  to  it  the  relation  of  value  which  engravings  hold  to  paint- 
ings. And,  if  we  choose  to  have  our  churches  all  alike,  we  might  cast  them  all  in 
bronze — we  might  actually  coin  churches,  and  have  mints  of  Cathedrals.  It  would  be 
worthy  of  the  spirit  of  the  century  to  put  milled  edges  for  mouldings,  and  have  a  pop- 
ular currency  of  religious  subjects :  a  new  cast  of  nativities  every  Christmas.  I  have 
not  heard  this  contemplated,  however,  and  I  speak,  therefore,  only  of  the  results  which 
I  believe  are  contemplated,  as  attainable  by  mere  mechanical  applications  of  glass  and 
iron. 


APPENDIX,  18.  413 

is  art  which  proceeds  from  an  individual  mind,  working  through  instru- 
ments which  assist,  but  do  not  supersede,  the  muscular  action  of  the  human 
hand,  upon  the  materials  which  most  tenderly  receive,  and  most  securely 
retain,  the  impressions  of  such  human  labour. 

And  the  value  of  every  work  of  art  is  exactly  in  the  ratio  of  the 
quantity  of  humanity  which  has  been  put  into  it,  and  legibly  expressed 
upon  it  for  ever  : — 

First,  of  thought  and  moral  purpose  ; 

Secondly,  of  technical  skill ; 

Thirdly,  of  bodily  industry. 

The  quantity  of  bodily  industry  which  that  Crystal  Palace  expresses 
is  very  great.     So  far  it  is  good. 

The  quantity  of  thought  it  expresses  is,  I  suppose,  a  single  and  very 
admirable  thought  of  Mr.  Paxton's,  probably  not  a  bit  brighter  than 
thousands  of  thoughts  which  pass  through  his  active  and  intelligent 
brain  every  hour, — that  it  might  be  possible  to  build  a  greenhouse  larger 
than  ever  greenhouse  was  built  before.  This  thought,  and  some  very 
ordinary  algebra,  are  as  much  as  all  that  glass  can  represent  of  human 
intellect.  "  But  one  poor  halfpennyworth  of  bread  to  all  this  intolerable 
deal  of  sack."     Alas  ! 

"  The  earth  hath  bubbles  as  the  water  hath : 
And  this  is  of  them." 

18.   EARLY   ENGLISH   CAPITALS. 

The  depth  of  the  cutting  in  some  of  the  early  English  capitals  is,  in- 
deed, part  of  a  general  system  of  attempts  at  exaggerated  force  of  effect, 
like  the  "  black  touches"  of  second-rate  draughtsmen,  which  I  have 
noticed  as  characteristic  of  nearly  all  northern  work,  associated  with  the 
1  ove  of  the  grotesque  :  but  the  main  section  of  the  capital  is  indeed  a 
dripstone  rolled  round,  as  above  described ;  and  dripstone  sections  are 
continually  found  in  northern  work,  where  not  only  they  cannot  increase 
orce  of  effect,  but  are  entirely  invisible  except  on  close  examination  ; 
as,  for  instance,  under  the  uppermost  range  of  stones  of  the  foundation 
of  Whitehall,  or  under  the  slope  of  the  restored  base  of  All  Souls  College, 
Oxford,  under  the  level  of  the  eye.  I  much  doubt  if  any  of  the  Fellows 
be  aware  of  its  existence. 


414  APPENDIX,  19. 

Many  readers  will  be  surprised  and  displeased  by  the  disparagement 
of  the  early  English  capital.  That  capital  has,  indeed,  one  character  of 
considerable  value  ;  namely,  the  boldness  with  which  it  stops  the  mould- 
ings which  fall  upon  it,  and  severs  them  from  the  shaft,  contrasting  itself 
with  the  multiplicity  of  their  vertical  lines.  Sparingly  used,  or  seldom 
seen,  it  is  thus,  in  its  place,  not  unpleasing ;  and  we  English  love  it 
from  association,  it  being  always  found  in  connection  with  our  purest  and 
loveliest  Gothic  arches,  and  never  in  multitudes  large  enough  to  satiate 
the  eye  with  its  form.  The  reader  who  sits  in  the  Temple  church  every 
Sunday,  and  sees  no  architecture  during  the  week  but  that  of  Chancery 
Lane,  may  most  justifiably  quarrel  with  me  for  what  I  have  said  of  it. 
But  if  every  house  in  Fleet  Street  or  Chancery  Lane  were  Gothic,  and 
all  had  early  English  capitals,  I  would  answer  for  his  making  peace  with 
me  in  a  fortnight. 

19.    TOMBS   NEAR   ST.   ANASTASIA. 

Whose  they  are,  is  of  little  consequence  to  the  reader  or  to  me,  and  I 
have  taken  no  pains  to  discover  ;  their  value  being  not  in  any  evidence 
they  bear  respecting  dates,  but  in  their  intrinsic  merit  as  examples  of 
composition.  Two  of  them  are  within  the  gate,  one  on  the  top  of  it, 
and  this  latter  is  on  the  whole  the  best,  though  all  are  beautiful ;  uniting 
the  intense  northern  energy  in  their  figure  sculpture  with  the  most  serene 
classical  restraint  in  their  outlines,  and  unaffected,  but  masculine  sim- 
plicity of  construction. 

I  have  not  put  letters  to  the  diagram  of  the  lateral  arch  at  page  140., 
in  order  not  to  interfere  with  the  clearness  of  the  curves,  but  I  shall 
always  express  the  same  points  by  the  same  letters,  whenever  I  have  to 
give  measures  of  arches  of  this  simple  kind,  so  that  the  reader  need 
never  have  the  diagrams  lettered  at  all.  The  base  or  span  of  the  centre 
arch  will  always  be  a  b  ;  its  vortex  will  always  be  V ;  the  points  of  the 
cusps  will  be  c  c  ;  p  p  will  be  the  bases  of  perpendiculars  let  fall  from 

V  and  c  on  a  b  ;  and  d  the  base  of  a  perpendicular  from  the  point  of  the 
cusp  to  the  arch  line.     Thena  b  will  always  be  the  span  of  the  arch, 

V  p  its  perpendicular  height,  V  a  the  chord  of  its  side  arcs,  d  c  the  depth 
of  its  cusps,  c  c  the  horizontal  interval  between  the  cusps,  a  c  the  length 
of  the  chord  of  the  lower  arc  of  the  cusp,  V  c  the  length  of  the  chord  of 


APPENDIX,  20.  415 

the  upper  arc  of  the  cusp,  (whether  continuous  or  not,)  and  c  p  the  length 
of  a  perpendicular  from  the  point  of  the  cusp  on  a  b. 

Of  course  we  do  not  want  all  these  measures  for  a  single  arch,  but  it 
often  happens  that  some  of  them  are  attainable  more  easily  than  others ; 
some  are  often  unattainable  altogether,  and  it  is  necessary  therefore  to 
have  expressions  for  whichever  we  may  be  able  to  determine. 

V  p  or  V  a,  a  6,  and  d  c  are  always  essential ;  then  either  a  c  and  V  c, 
or  c  c  and  c  p :  when  I  have  my  choice,  I  always  take  a  6,  V  p,  d  c,  c  c, 
and  c  p,  but  c  p  is  not  to  be  generally  obtained  so  accurately  as  the  cusp 
arcs. 

The  measures  of  the  present  arch  are  : 

Ft.  In. 


a  5, 

3„8 

Vp, 

4„0 

V  c, 

2„4| 

a  c, 

2„0i 

d  c, 

0„3i 

20.    SHAFTS   OF   DTJCAL    PALACE. 

The  shortness  of  the  thicker  ones  at  the  angles  is  induced  by  the 
greater  depth  of  the  enlarged  capitals  :  thus  the  36th  shaft  is  10  ft.  4  J 
in.  in  circumference  at  its  base,  and  10  „  0J*  in  circumference  under  the 
fillet  of  its  capital ;  but  it  is  only  6  „  1  j  high,  while  the  minor  interme- 
diate shafts,  of  which  the  thickest  is  7  „  8  round  at  the  base,  and  7  „  4 
under  capital,  are  yet  on  the  average  7  „  7  high.  The  angle  shaft 
towards  the  sea  (the  18th)  is  nearly  of  the  proportions  of  the  36th,  and 
there  are  three  others,  the  15th,  24th,  and  26th,  which  are  thicker  than 
the  rest,  though  not  so  thick  as  the  angle  ones.  The  24th  and  26th  have 
both  party  walls  to  bear,  and  I  imagine  the  15th  must  in  old  time  have 
carried  another,  reaching  across  what  is  now  the  Sala  del  Gran  Con- 
siglio. 

*  I  shall  often  have  occasion  to  write  measures  in  the  current  text,  therefore  the 
reader  will  kindly  understand  that  whenever  they  are  thus  written,  2  „  2,  with  double 
commas  between,  the  first  figures  stand  for  English  feet,  the  second  for  English  inches 


416  APPENDIX,  20. 

They  measure  respectively  round  at  the  base, 

The  15th,  8  „  2 
24th,  9  „  6J 
26th,  8  „  0J 

The  other  pillars  towards  the  sea,  and  those  to  the  27th  inclusive  of 
the  Piazzetta,  are  all  seven  feet  round  at  the  base,  and  then  there  is  a 
most  curious  and  delicate  crescendo  of  circumference  to  the  36th,  thus : 

The  28th,  7  „  3  The  33rd,  7  „  6 
29th,  7  „  4  34th,  7  „  8 

30th,  7  „  6  35th,  7  „  8 

31st,    7„7  36th,10„4j 

32nd,  7  „  5 

The  shafts  of  the  upper  arcade,  which  are  above  these  thicker  columns, 
are  also  thicker  than  their  companions,  measuring  on  the  average,  4  „  8  J 
in  circumference,  while  those  of  the  sea  facade,  except  the  29th,  average 

4  „  7 J  in  circumference.  The  29th,  which  is  of  course  above  the  15th 
of  the  lower  story,  is  5  „  5  in  circumference,  which  little  piece  of  evi- 
dence will  be  of  no  small  value  to  us  by-and-by.  The  35th  carries  the 
angle  of  the  palace,  and  is  6  „  0  round.  The  47th,  which  comes  above 
the  24th,  and  carries  the  party  wall  of  the  Sala  del  Gran  Consiglio,  is 
strengthened  by  a  pilaster;  and  the  51st,  which  comes  over  the  26th,  is 

5  „  4  J  round,  or  nearly  the  same  as  the  29th ;  it  carries  the  party  wall 
of  the  Sala  del  Scrutinio ;  a  small  room  containing  part  of  St.  Mark's 
library,  coming  between  the  two  saloons ;  a  room  which,  in  remem- 
brance of  the  help  I  have  received  in  all  my  inquiries  from  the  kindness 
and  intelligence  of  its  usual  occupant,  I  shall  never  easily  distinguish 
otherwise  than  as  "  Mr.  Lorenzi's."* 

I  may  as  well  connect  with  these  notes  respecting  the  arcades  of  the 
Ducal  Palace,  those  which  refer  to  Plate  XIV.,  which  represents  one  of 

*  I  cannot  suffer  this  volume  to  close  without  also  thanking  my  kind  friend,  Mr. 
Rawdon  Brown,  for  help  given  me  in  a  thousand  ways  during  my  stay  in  Venice  :  but 
chiefly  for  his  direction  to  passages  elucidatory  of  my  subject  in  the  MSS.  of  St. 
Mark's  library. 


APPENDIX,  20.  417 

its  spandrils.  Every  spandril  of  the  lower  arcade  was  intended  to  have 
been  occupied  by  an  ornament  resembling  the  one  given  in  that  plate. 
The  mass  of  the  building  being  of  Istrian  stone,  a  depth  of  about  two 
inches  is  left  within  the  mouldings  of  the  arches,  rough  hewn,  to  receive 
the  slabs  of  fine  marble  composing  the  patterns.  I  cannot  say  whether 
the  design  was  never  completed,  or  the  marbles  have  been  since  remov- 
ed, but  there  are  now  only  two  spandrils  retaining  their  fillings,  and 
vestiges  of  them  in  a  third.  The  two  complete  spandrils  are  on  the  sea 
fagade,  above  the  3rd  and  10th  capitals  (vide  method  of  numbering, 
Chap.  I.,  page  30.)  ;  that  is  to  say,  connecting  the  2nd  arch  with  the  3rd, 
and  the  9th  with  the  10th.  The  latter  is  the  one  given  in  Plate 
XIV.  The  white  portions  of  it  are  all  white  marble,  the  dental  band 
surrounding  the  circle  is  in  coarse  sugary  marble,  which  I  believe  to  be 
Greek,  and  never  found  in  Venice,  to  my  recollection,  except  in  work  at 
least  anterior  to  the  fifteenth  century.  The  shaded  fields  charged  with 
the  three  white  triangles  are  of  red  Verona  marble ;  the  inner  disc  is 
green  serpentine,  and  the  dark  pieces  of  the  radiating  leaves  are  grey 
marble.  The  three  triangles  are  equilateral.  The  two  uppermost  are 
1  „  5  each  side,  and  the  lower  one  1  „  2. 

The  extreme  diameter  of  the  circle  is  3  „  10J ;  its  field  is  slightly 
raised  above  the  red  marbles,  as  shown  in  the  section  at   A,  on  the 
left.     A  a  is  part  of  the  red  marble  field :  a  b  the  section  of  the  dentil 
moulding  let  into  it;  b  c  the  entire  breadth  of  the  rayed  zone,  represent- 
ed on  the  other  side  of  the  spandril  by  the  line  Cf;  c  d  is  the  white 
marble  band  let  in,  with  the  dog-tooth  on  the  face  of  it ;  b  c  is  7}  inches 
across ;  c  d  3| ;  and  at  B  are  given  two  joints  of  the  dentil  (mentioned 
above,  in  the  chapter  on  dentils,  as  unique  in  Venice)  of  their  actual 
size.     At  C  is  given  one  of  the  inlaid  leaves ;  its  measure  being  (in 
inches)  C/7f  ;  C  h  £  ;  f  g  £  ;  fe  4|,  the  base  of  the  smaller  leaves  be- 
ing of  course  fe — fg  =  4.     The  pattern  which  occupies  the  other 
spandril  is  similar,  except  that  the  field  b  c,  instead  of  the  intersecting 
arcs,  has  only  triangles  of  grey  marble,  arranged  like  rays,  with  their 
bases  towards  the  centre.     There  being  twenty  round  the  circle,  the 
reader  can  of  course  draw  them  for  himself;  they  being  isosceles,  touch- 
ing the  dentil  with  their  points,  and  being  in  contact  at  their  bases  :  it 
has  lost  its  central  boss.     The  marbles  are,  in  both,  covered  with  a  rusty 
coating,  through  which  it  is  excessively  difficult  to  distinguish  the  colours 

27 


418  APPENDIX,    21. 

(another  proof  of  the  age  of  the  ornament).  But  the  white  marbles  are 
certainly,  in  places  (except  only  the  sugary  dentil),  veined  with  purple, 
and  the  grey  seem  warmed  with  green. 

A  trace  of  another  of  these  ornaments  may  be  seen  over  the  21st  ca- 
pital ;  but  I  doubt  if  the  marbles  have  ever  been  inserted  in  the  other 
spandrils,  and  their  want  of  ornament  occasions  the  slight  meagreness 
in  the  effect  of  the  lower  story,  which  is  almost  the  only  fault  of  the 
building. 

This  decoration  by  discs,  or  shield-like  ornaments,  is  a  marked  cha- 
racteristic of  Venetian  architecture  in  its  earlier  ages,  and  is  carried 
into  later  times  by  the  Byzantine  Renaissance,  already  distinguished 
from  the  more  corrupt  forms  of  Renaissance,  in  Appendix  6.  Of  the 
disc  decoration,  so  borrowed,  we  have  already  an  example  in  Plate  I. 
In  Plate  VIII.  we  have  an  earlier  condition  of  it,  one  of  the  discs  being 
there  sculptured,  the  others  surrounded  by  sculptured  bands :  here  we 
have,  on  the  Ducal  Palace,  the  most  characteristic  of  all,  because  likest 
to  the  shield,  which  was  probably  the  origin  of  the  same  ornament 
among  the  Arabs,  and  assuredly  among  the  Greeks.  In  Mr.  Donald- 
son's restoration  of  the  gate  of  the  treasury  of  Atreus,  this  ornament 
is  conjecturally  employed,  and  it  occurs  constantly  on  the  Arabian- 
buildings  of  Cairo. 

21.    ANCIENT    REPRESENTATIONS    OF    WATER. 

I  have  long  been  desirous  of  devoting  some  time  to  an  enquiry  into 
the  effect  of  natural  scenery  upon  the  pagan,  and  especially  the  Greek, 
mind,  and  knowing  that  my  friend,  Mr.  C.  Newton,  had  devoted  much 
thought  to  the  elucidation  of  the  figurative  and  symbolic  language  of 
ancient  art,  I  asked  him  to  draw  up  for  me  a  few  notes  of  the  facts  which 
he  considered  most  interesting,  as  illustrative  of  its  methods  of  represent- 
ing nature.  I  suggested  to  him,  for  an  initiative  subject,  the  representa- 
tion of  water ;  because  this  is  one  of  the  natural  objects  whose  portrait- 
ure may  most  easily  be  made  a  test  of  treatment,  for  it  is  one  of  univer- 
sal interest,  and  of  more  closely  similar  aspect  in  all  parts  of  the  world 
than  any  other.  Waves,  currents,  and  eddies  are  much  liker  each  other, 
everywhere,  than  either  land  or  vegetation.  Rivers  and  lakes,  indeed, 
differ  widely  from  the  sea,  and  the  clear  Pacific  from  the  angry  North- 


APPENDIX,  21.  419 

em  ocean ;  but  the  Nile  is  liker  the  Danube  than  a  knot  of  Nubian 
palms  is  to  a  glade  of  the  Black  Forest ;  and  the  Mediterranean  is  liker 
the  Atlantic  than  the  Campo  Felice  is  like  Solway  moss. 

Mr.  Newton  has  accordingly  most  kindly  furnished  me  with  the  fol- 
lowing data.  One  or  two  of  the  types  which  he  describes  have  been  al- 
ready noticed  in  the  main  text ;  but  it  is  well  that  the  reader  should 
again  contemplate  them  in  the  position  which  they  here  occupy  in  a 
general  system.  I  recommend  his  especial  attention  to  Mr.  Newton's 
definitions  of  the  terms  "  figurative  "  and  "  symbolic,"  as  applied  to  art, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  paper. 


In  ancient  art,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  art  of  the  Egyptian,  Assyrian, 
Greek,  and  Roman  races,  water  is,  for  the  most  part,  represented  con- 
ventionally rather  than  naturally. 

By  natural  representation  is  here  meant  as  just  and  perfect  an  imita- 
tion of  nature  as  the  technical  means  of  art  will  allow:  on  the  other 
hand,  representation  is  said  to  be  conventional,  either  when  a  confessedly 
inadequate  imitation  is  accepted  in  default  of  a  better,  or  when  imitation 
is  not  attempted  at  all,  and  it  is  agreed  that  other  modes  of  representa- 
tion, those  by  figures  or  by  symbols,  shall  be  its  substitute  and 
equivalent. 

In  figurative  representation  there  is  always  impersonation  ;  the  sensi- 
ble form,  borrowed  by  the  artist  from  organic  life,  is  conceived  to  be  ac- 
tuated by  a  will,  and  invested  with  such  mental  attributes  as  constitute 
personality. 

The  sensible  symbol,  whether  borrowed  from  organic  or  from  inorganic 
nature,  is  not  a  personification  at  all,  but  the  conventional  sign  or  equiva- 
lent of  some  object  or  notion,  to  which  it  may  perhaps  bear  no  visible 
resemblance,  but  with  which  the  intellect  or  the  imagination  has  in  some 
way  associated  it. 

For  instance,  a  city  may  be  figuratively  represented  as  a  woman 
crowned  with  towers ;  here  the  artist  has  selected  for  the  expression  of 
his  idea  a  human  form  animated  with  a  will  and  motives  of  action  analo- 
gous to  those  of  humanity  generally.  Or,  again,  as  in  Greek  art,  a  bull 
may  be  a  figurative  representation  of  a  river,  and,  in  the  conception  of 


420  APPENDIX,    21. 


the  artist,  this  animal  form  may  contain,  and  be  ennobled  by,  a  human 
mind. 

This  is  still  impersonation ;  the  form  only  in  which  personality  is  em- 
bodied is  changed. 

Again,  a  dolphin  may  be  used  as  a  symbol  of  the  sea;  a  man  plough- 
ing with  two  oxen  is  a  well-known  symbol  of  a  Roman  colony.  In  nei- 
ther of  these  instances  is  there  impersonation.  The  dolphin  is  not  in- 
vested, like  the  figure  of  Neptune,  with  any  of  the  attributes  of  the  hu- 
man mind ;  it  has  animal  instincts,  but  no  will ;  it  represents  to  us  its 
native  element,  only  as  a  part  may  be  taken  for  a  whole. 

Again,  the  man  ploughing  does  not,  like  the  turreted  female  figure, 
personify,  but  rather  typifies  the  town,  standing  as  the  visible  representa- 
tion of  a  real  event,  its  first  foundation.  To  our  mental  perceptions,  as 
to  our  bodily  senses,  this  figure  seems  no  more  than  man  ;  there  is  no 
blending  of  his  personal  nature  with  the  impersonal  nature  of  the  colony, 
no  transfer  of  attributes  from  the  one  to  the  other. 

Though  the  conventionally  imitative,  the  figurative,  and  the  symbolic, 
are  three  distinct  kinds  of  representation,  they  are  constantly  combined 
in  one  composition,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  following  examples,  cited  from 
the  art  of  successive  races  in  chronological  order. 

In  Egyptian  art  the  general  representation  of  water  is  the  convention- 
ally imitative.  In  the  British  Museum  are  two  frescoes  from  tombs  at 
Thebes,  Nos.  177.  and  170.  :  the  subject  of  the  first  of  these  is  an  oblong 
pond,  ground-plan  and  elevation  being  strangely  confused  in  the  design. 
In  this  pond  water  is  represented  by  parallel  zigzag  lines,  in  which  fish 
are  swimming  about.  On  the  surface  are  birds  and  lotos  flowers  ;  the 
herbage  at  the  edge  of  the  pond  is  represented  by  a  border  of  symmetri- 
cal fan-shaped  flowers ;  the  field  beyond  by  rows  of  trees,  arranged  round 
the  sides  of  the  pond  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  and  in  defiance  of  all 
laws  of  perspective. 

In  the  fresco,  No.  170.,  we  have  the  representation  of  a  river  with 
papyrus  on  its  bank.  Here  the  water  is  rendered  by  zigzag  lines  ar- 
ranged vertically  and  in  parallel  lines,  so  as  to  resemble 
lg* LXXi-  herring-bone  masonry,  thus.  There  are  fish  in  this 
Y//{/////(^/(  fresco  as  in  the  preceding,  and  in  both,  each  fish  is 
/^//////////})  drawn  very  distinctly,  not  as  it  would  appear  to  the 
^^^\\^\^>^  eye  viewed  through  water.  The  mode  of  representing 
#      this  element  in  Egyptian  painting  is  further  abbreviated 


APPENDIX,    21.  421 

in  their  hieroglyphic  writing,  where  the  sign  of  water  is  a  zigzag  line  ; 
this  line  is,  so  to  speak,  a  picture  of  water  written  in  short  hand.  In  the 
Egyptian  Pantheon  there  was  but  one  aquatic  deity,  the  god  of  the  Nile  j 
his  type  *is,  therefore,  the  only  figurative  representation  of  water  in 
Egyptian  art.  (Birch,  "  Gallery  of  British  Museum  Antiquities,"  PI. 
13.)  In  Assyrian  sculpture  we  have  very  curious  conventionally  imita- 
tive representations  of  water.  On  several  of  the  friezes  from  Nimroud 
and  Khorsabad,  men  are  seen  crossing  a  river  in  boats,  or  on  skins,  ac- 
companied by  horses  swimming  (see  Layard,  ii.  p.  381.).  In  these 
scenes  water  is  represented  by  masses  of  wavy  lines  somewhat  resem- 
bling tresses  of  hair,  and  terminating  in  curls  or  volutes  ;  these  wavy  lines 
express  the  general  character  of  a  deep  and  rapid  current,  like  that  of  the 
Tigris.  Fish  are  but  sparingly  introduced,  the  idea  of  surface  being  suf- 
ficiently expressed  by  the  floating  figures  and  boats.  In  the  representa- 
tion of  these  there  is  the  same  want  of  perspective  as  in  the  Egyptian 
fresco  which  we  have  just  cited. 

In  the  Assyrian  Pantheon  one  aquatic  deity  has  been  discovered,  the 
god  Dagon,  whose  human  form  terminates  in  a  fish's  tail.  Of  the 
character  and  attributes  of  this  deity  we  know  but  little. 

The  more  abbreviated  mode  of  representing  water,  the  zigzag  line, 
occurs  on  the  large  silver  coins  with  the  type  of  a  city  or  a  war-galley, 
(see  Layard,  ii.  p.  386.).  These  coins  were  probably  struck  in  Assyria, 
not  long  after  the  conquest  of  it  by  the  Persians. 

In  Greek  art  the  modes  of  representing  water  are  far  more  varied. 
Two  conventional  imitations,  the  wave  moulding  and  the  Mseander,  are 
well  known.  Both  are  probably  of  the  most  remote  antiquity ;  both 
have  been  largely  employed  as  an  architectural  ornament,  and  subor- 
dinately  as  a  decoration  of  vases,  costume,  furniture  and  implements. 
In  the  wave  moulding  we  have  a  conventional  representation  of  the  small 
crisping  waves  which  break  upon  the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  sea 
of  the  Greeks. 

Their  regular  succession,  and  equality  of  force  and  volume,  are  gene- 
ralised in  this  moulding,  while  the  minuter  varieties  which  distinguish  one 
wave  from  another  are  merged  in  the  general  type.  The  character  of 
ocean  waves  is  to  be  "  for  ever  changing,  yet  the  same  for  ever;"  it  is 
this  eternity  of  recurrence  which  the  early  artist  has  expressed  in  this 
hieroglyphic. 


422  APPENDIX,    21. 

With  this  profile  representation  of  water  may  be  compared  the  sculp- 
tured waves  out  of  which  the  head  and  arms  of  Hyperion  are  rising  in 
the  pediment  of  the  Parthenon  (Elgin  Room,  No.  (65.)  91,  Museum 
Marbles,  vi.  pi.  1.).  Phidias  has  represented  these  waves  like  a  mass  of 
overlapping  tiles,  thus  generalising  their  rippling  movement.  In  the 
Mseander  pattern  the  graceful  curves  of  nature  are  represented  by  angles, 
as  in  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  of  water :  so  again  the  earliest  represent- 
ation of  the  labyrinth  on  the  coins  of  the  Cnossus  is  rectangular ;  on 
later  coins  we  find  the  curvilinear  form  introduced. 

In  the  language  of  Greek  mythography,  the  wave  pattern  and  the 
Mseander  are  sometimes  used  singly  for  the  idea  of  water,  but  more 
frequently  combined  with  figurative  representation.  The  number  of 
aquatic  deities  in  the  Greek  Pantheon  led  to  the  invention  of  a  great 
variety  of  beautiful  types.  Some  of  these  are  very  well  known.  Every- 
body is  familiar  with  the  general  form  of  Poseidon  (Neptune),  the 
Nereids,  the  Nymphs  and  River  Gods ;  but  the  modes  in  which 
these  types  were  combined  with  conventional  imitation  and  with  acces- 
sory symbols  deserve  careful  study,  if  we  would  appreciate  the  sur- 
passing richness  and  beauty  of  the  language  of  art  formed  out  of  these 
elements. 

This  class  of  representations  may  be  divided  into  two  principal  groups, 
those  relating  to  the  sea,  and  those  relating  to  fresh  water. 

The  power  of  the  ocean  and  the  great  features  of  marine  scenery  are 
embodied  in  such  types  as  Poseidon,  Nereus  and  the  Nereids,  that  is  to 
say,  in  human  forms  moving  through  the  liquid  element  in  chariots,  or  on 
the  back  of  dolphins,  or  who  combine  the  human  form  with  that  of  the 
fish-like  Tritons.  The  sea-monsters  who  draw  these  chariots  are  called 
Hippocamps,  being  composed  of  the  tail  of  a  fish  and  the  fore-part  of  a 
horse,  the  legs  terminating  in  web-feet :  this  union  seems  to  express 
speed  and  power  under  perfect  control,  such  as  would  characterise  the 
movements  of  sea  deities.  A  few  examples  have  been  here  selected  to 
show  how  these  types  were  combined  with  symbols  and  conventional 
imitation. 

In  the  British  Museum  is  a  vase,  No.  1257.,  engraved,  (Lenormant  et 
De  Witte,  Mon.  Ceram.,  i.  pi.  27.)  of  which  the  subject  is,  Europa  cross- 
ing the  sea  on  the  back  of  the  bull.  In  this  design  the  sea  is  represented 
by  a  variety  of  expedients.      First,  the  swimming  action  of  the  bull 


APPENDIX,    21.  423 

suggests  the  idea  of  the  liquid  medium  through  which  he  moves.  Be- 
hind him  stands  Nereus,  his  staff  held  perpendicularly  in  his  hand  ;  the 
top  of  his  staff  comes  nearly  to  the  level  of  the  bull's  back,  and  is  pro- 
bably meant  as  the  measure  of  the  whole  depth  of  the  sea.  Towards 
the  surface  line  thus  indicated  a  dolphin  is  rising ;  in  the  middle  depth 
is  another  dolphin ;  below,  a  shrimp  and  a  cuttle-fish,  and  the  bottom  is 
indicated  by  a  jagged  line  of  rocks,  on  which  are  two  echini. 

On  a  mosaic  found'at  Oudnah  in  Algeria  (Revue  Archeol.,  iii.  pi.  50.), 
we  have  a  representation  of  the  sea,  remarkable  for  the  fulness  of  details 
with  which  it  is  made  out. 

This,  though  of  the  Roman  period,  is  so  thoroughly  Greek  in  feeling, 
that  it  may  be  cited  as  an  example  of  the  class  of  my  thography  now  un- 
der consideration.  The  mosaic  lines  the  floor  and  sides  of  a  bath,  and, 
as  was  commonly  the  case  in  the  baths  of  the  ancients,  serves  as  a  figu- 
rative representation  of  the  water  it  contained. 

On  the  sides  are  hippocamps,  figures  riding  on  dolphins  and  islands, 
on  which  fishermen  stand  ;  on  the  floor  are  fish,  crabs,  and  shrimps. 

These,  as  in  the  vase  with  Europa,  indicate  the  bottom  of  the  sea  :  the 
same  symbols  of  the  submarine  world  appear  on  many  other  ancient 
designs.  Thus  in  vase  pictures,  when  Poseidon  upheaves  the  island  of 
Cos  to  overwhelm  the  Giant  Polydotes,  the  island  is  represented  as  an 
immense  mass  of  rock  ;  the  parts  which  have  been  under  water  are  in- 
dicated by  a  dolphin,  a  shrimp,  and  a  sepia,  the  parts  above  the  water 
by  a  goat  and  a  serpent,  (Lenormant  et  De  Witte,  i.,  tav.  5.). 

Sometimes  these  symbols  occur  singly  in  Greek  art,  as  the  types,  for 
instance,  of  coins.  In  such  cases  they  cannot  be  interpreted  without  be- 
ing viewed  in  relation  to  the  whole  context  of  mythography  to  which 
they  belong.  If  we  find,  for  example,  on  one  coin  of  Tarentum  a  shell, 
on  another  a  dolphin,  on  a  third  a  figure  of  Taras,  the  mythic  founder  of 
the  town,  riding  on  a  dolphin  in  the  midst  of  the  waves,  and  this  latter 
group  expresses  the  idea  of  the  town  itself  and  its  position  on  the  coast, 
then  we  know  the  two  former  types  to  be  but  portions  of  the  greater 
design,  having  been  detached  from  it,  as  we  may  detach  words  from  sen- 
tences. 

The  study  of  the  fuller  and  clearer  examples,  such  as  we  have  cited 
above,  enables  us  to  explain  many  more  compendious  forms  of  expres- 


424  appendix,  21. 

sion.  We  have,  for  instance,  on  coins  several  representations  of  ancient 
harbours. 

Of  these  the.  earliest  occurs  on  the  coins  of  Zancle,  the  modern  Messina 
in  Sicily.  The  ancients  likened  the  form  of  this  harbour  to  a  sickle,  and 
on  the  coins  of  the  town  we  find  a  curved  object,  within  the  area  of 
which  is  a  dolphin.  On  this  curve  are  four  square  elevations  placed  at 
equal  distances.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  these  projections  are  either 
towers  or  the  large  stones  to  which  galleys  were  moored  still  to  be  seen 
in  ancient  harbours  (see  Burgon,  Numismatic  Chronicle,  iii.  p.  40.). 
With  this  archaic  representation  of  a  harbour  may  be  compared  some 
examples  of  the  Roman  period.  On  a  coin  of  Sept.  Severus  struck  at 
Corinth,  (Millingen,  Sylloge  of  lined.  Coins,  1837,  p.  57.,  PL  II.  No.  30.) 
we  have  a  female  figure  standing  on  a  rock  between  two  recumbent  male 
figures  holding  rudders.  From  an  arch  at  the  foot  of  the  rock  a  stream 
is  flowing  :  this  is  a  representation  of  the  rock  of  the  Acropolis  of  Co- 
rinth; the  female  figure  is  a  statue  of  Aphrodite,  whose  temple  sur- 
mounted the  rock.  The  stream  is  the  fountain  Pirene.  The  two  recum- 
bent figures  are  impersonations  of  the  two  harbours,  Lechreum  and 
Cenchreia,  between  which  Corinth  was  situated.  Philostratus  (Icon,  ii., 
c.  16.)  describes  a  similar  picture  of  the  Isthmus  between  the  two  har- 
bours, one  of  which  was  in  the  form  of  a  youth,  the  other  of  a  nymph. 

On  another  coin  of  Corinth  we  have  one  of  the  harbours  in  a  semicir- 
cular form,  the  whole  arc  being  marked  with  small  equal  divisions,  to 
denote  the  archways  under  which  the  ancient  galleys  were  drawn, 
subductce  ;  at  the  either  horn  or  extremity  of  the  harbour  is  a  temple ; 
in  the  centre  of  the  mouth,  a  statue  of  Neptune.  (Millingen,  Medailles 
Ined.,  PI.  II.',  No.  19.  Compare  also  Millingen,  Ancient  Coins  of  Cities 
and  Kings,  1831,  pp.  50—61.  PI.  IV.,  No.  15.  ;  Mionnet,  Suppl.  vii.  p. 
79.,  No.  246. ;  and  the  harbour  of  Ostium,  on  the  large  brass  coins  of 
Nero,  in  which  there  is  a  representation  of  the  Roman  fleet  and  a  reclin- 
ing figure  of  Neptune.) 

In  vase  pictures  we  have  occasionally  an  attempt  to  represent  water 
naturally.  On  a  vase  in  the  British  Museum  (No.  785.),  of  which  the 
subject  is  Ulysses  and  the  Sirens,  the  sea  is  rendered  by  wavy  lines 
drawn  in  black  on  a  red  ground,  and  something  like  the  effect  of  light 
playing  on  the  surface  of  the  water  is  given.  On  each  side  of  the  ship 
are  shapeless  masses  of  rock  on  which  the  Sirens  stand. 


APPENDIX,    21.  425 

One  of  the  most  beautiful  of  the  figurative  representations  of  the  sea 
is  the  well-known  type  of  Scylla.  She  has  a  beautiful  body,  terminat- 
ing in  two  barking  dogs  and  two  serpent  tails.  Sometimes  drowning 
men,  the  rati  nantes  in  gurgite  vasto,  appear  caught  up  in  the  coils  of 
these  tails.  Below  are  dolphins.  Scylla  generally  brandishes  a  rudder, 
to  show  the  manner  in  which  she  twists  the  course  of  ships.  For 
varieties  of  her  type  see  Monum.  dell'  Inst.  Archeol.  Rom.,  iii.  Taw. 
52—3. 

The  representations  of  fresh  water  may  be  arranged  under  the  follow- 
ing heads — rivers,  lakes,  fountains. 

There  are  several  figurative  modes  of  representing  rivers  very  fre- 
quently employed  in  ancient  mythography. 

In  the  type  which  occurs  earliest  we  have  the  human  form  combined 
with  that  of  the  bull  in  several  ways.  On  an  archaic  coin  of  Metapon- 
tum  in  Lucania,  (see  frontispiece  to  Millingen,  Ancient  Coins  of  Greek 
Cities  and  Kings,)  the  river  Achelous  is  represented  with  the  figure  of  a 
man  with  a  shaggy  beard  and  bull's  horns  and  ears.  On  a  vase  of  the 
best  period  of  Greek  art,  (Brit.  Mus.  No.  789. ;  Birch,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc. 
of  Lit.,  New  Series,  Lond.  1843,  i.  p.  100.)  the  same  river  is  represented 
with  a  satyr's  head  and  long  bull's  horns  on  the  forehead ;  his  form,  hu- 
man to  the  waist,  terminates  in  a  fish's  tail ;  his  hair  falls  down  his  back ; 
his  beard  is  long  and  shaggy.  In  this  type  we  see  a  combination  of  the 
three  forms  separately  enumerated  by  Sophocles,  in  the  commencement 
of  the  Trachinise. 

og  pH  ev  Tpiulv  fiopcpaTaiv  ^rpet,  narpbg, 
cpoiT&v  evapyfig  ravpog,  oXIot*  alolog 
dnctXMV  hXixTog,  ^Hor'  &vdpei(p  xvtev 
@ ov7i pcapog^  In  de  datfxiov  yevsi&dog 
itpovvol  diEQQaivovTO   Kptjvalov  TtOTOV. 

In  a  third  variety  of  this  type  the  human-headed  body  is  united  at  the 
waist  with  the  shoulders  of  a  bull's  body,  in  which  it  terminates.  This 
occurs  on  an  early  vase.  (Brit.  Mus.,  No.  452.)  On  the  coins  of 
CEniadse  in  Acarnia,  and  on  those  of  Ambracia,  all  of  the  period  after 
Alexander  the  Great,  the  Achelous  has  a  bull's  body,  and  head  with  a 
human  face.    In  this  variety  of  the  type  the  human  element  is  almost  ab- 


426  APPENDIX,   21. 

sorbed,  as  in  the  first  variety  cited  above,  the  coin  of  Metapontum,  the 
bull  portion  of  the  type  is  only  indicated  by  the  addition  of  the  horns  and 
ears  to  the  human  head.  On  the  analogy  between  these  varieties  in  the 
type  of  the  Achelous  and  those  under  which  the  metamorphoses  of  the 
marine  goddess  Thetis  are  represented,  see  Gerhard,  Auserl.  Vasenb,  ii., 
pp.  106 — 113.  It  is  probable  that,  in  the  type  of  Thetis,  of  Proteus,  and 
also  of  the  Achelous,  the  singular  combinations  and  transformations  are 
intended  to  express  the  changeful  nature  of  the  element  water. 

Numerous  other  examples  may  be  cited,  where  rivers  are  represented 
by  this  combination  of  the  bull  and  human  form,  which  may  be  called, 
for  convenience,  the  Androtauric  type.  On  the  coins  of  Sicily,  of  the 
Archaic  and  also  of  the  finest  period  of  art,  rivers  are  most  usually 
represented  by  a  youthful  male  figure,  with  small  budding  horns ;  the 
hair  has  the  lank  and  matted  form  which  characterises  aquatic  deities  in 
Greek  mythography.  The  name  of  the  river  is  often  inscribed  round 
the  head.  When  the  whole  figure  occurs  on  the  coin,  it  is  always  repre- 
sented standing,  never  reclining. 

The  type  of  the  bull  on  the  coins  of  Sybaris  and  Thurium,  in  Magna 
Grsecia,  has  been  considered,  with  great  probability,  a  representation  of 
this  kind.  On  the  coins  of  Sybaris,  which  are  of  a  very  early  period, 
the  head  of  the  bull  is  turned  round ;  on  those  of  Thurium,  he  stoops 
his  head,  butting:  the  first  of  these  actions  has  been  thought  to  sym- 
bolise the  winding  course  of  the  river,  the  second,  its  headlong  current, 
On  the  coins  of  Thurium,  the  idea  of  water  is  further  suggested  by  the 
adjunct  of  dolphins  and  other  fish  in  the  exergue  of  the  coin.  The 
ground  on  which  the  bull  stands  is  indicated  by  herbage  or  pebbles. 
This  probably  represents  the  river  bank.  Two  bulls'  heads  occur  on  the 
coins  of  Sardis,  and  it  has  been  ingeniously  conjectured  by  Mr.  Burgon 
that  the  two  rivers  of  the  place  are  expressed  under  this  type. 

The  representation  of  river-gods  as  human  figures  in  a  reclining  posi- 
tion, though  probably  not  so  much  employed  in  earlier  Greek  art  as  the 
Androtauric  type,  is  very  much  more  familiar  to  us,  from  its  subsequent 
adoption  in  Eoman  mythography.  The  earliest  example  we  have  of  a 
reclining  river-god  is  in  the  figure  in  the  Elgin  Room  commonly  called 
the  Ilissus,  but  more  probably  the  Cephissus.  This  occupied  one  angle 
in  the  western  pediment  of  the  Parthenon ;  the  other  Athenian  river, 
the  Ilissus,  and  the  fountain  Callirrhoe,  being  represented  by  a  male  and 


appendix,  21.  427 

female  figure  in  the  opposite  angle ;  this  group,  now  destroyed,  is  visible 
in  the  drawing  made  by  Carrey  in  1678. 

It  is  probable  that  the  necessities  of  pedimental  composition  first  led 
the  artist  to  place  the  river-god  in  a  reclining  position.  The  head  of  the 
Ilissus  being  broken  off,  we  are  not  sure  whether  he  had  bull's  horns, 
like  the  Sicilian  figures  already  described.  His  form  is  youthful ;  in  the 
folds  of  the  drapery  behind  him  there  is  a  flow  like  that  of  waves,  but 
the  idea  of  water  is  not  suggested  by  any  other  symbol.  When  we 
compare  this  figure  with  that  of  the  Nile  (Visconti,  Mus.  Pio  Clem.,  i., 
PI.  38.),  and  the  figure  of  the  Tiber  in  the  Louvre,  both  of  which  are  of 
the  Roman  period,  we  see  how  in  these  later  types  the  artist  multiplied 
symbols  and  accessories,  ingrafting  them  on  the  original  simple  type  of 
a  river-god,  as  it  was  conceived,  by  Phidias  in  the  figure  of  the  Ilissus. 
The  Nile  is  represented  as  a  colossal  bearded  figure  reclining.  At  his 
side  is  a  cornucopia,  full  of  the  vegetable  produce  of  the  Egyptian  soil. 
Round  his  body  are  sixteen  naked  boys,  who  represent  the  sixteen 
cubits,  the  height  to  which  the  river  rose  in  a  favourable  year.  The 
statue  is  placed  on  a  basement  divided  into  three  compartments,  one 
above  another.  In  the  uppermost  of  these,  waves  are  flowing  over  in 
one  great  sheet  from  the  side  of  the  river-god.  In  the  other  two  com- 
partments are  the  animals  and  plants  of  the  river ;  the  bas-reliefs  on 
this  basement  are,  in  fact,  a  kind  of  abbreviated  symbolic  panorama  of 
the  Nile. 

The  Tiber  is  represented  in  a  very  similar  manner.  On  the  base  are, 
in  two  compartments,  scenes  taken  from  the  early  Roman  myths ; 
flocks,  herds,  and  other  objects  on  the  banks  of  the  river.  (Visconti, 
Mus.  P.  CI.  i.,  PI.  39. ;  Millin,  Galerie  Mythol.,  i.,  p.  77.,  PI.  74.,  Nos. 
304.  308.) 

In  the  types  of  the  Greek  coins  of  Camarina,  we,find  two  interesting 
representations  of  lakes.  On  the  obverse  of  one  of  these  we  have,  within 
a  circle  of  the  wave  pattern,  a  male  head,  full  face,  with  dishevelled 
hair,  and  with  a  dolphin  on  either  side ;  on  the  reverse  a  female  figure 
sailing  on  a  swan,  below  which  a  wave  moulding,  and  above,  a  dolphin. 

On  another  coin  the  swan  type  of  the  reverse  is  associated  with  the 
youthful  head  of  a  river-god,  inscribed  "  Hipparis "  on  the  obverse. 
On  some  smaller  coins  we  have  the  swan  flying  over  the  rippling  waves, 
which  are  represented  by  the  wave  moulding.     When  we  examine  the 


428  APPENDIX,  21. 

chart  of  Sicily,  made  by  the  Admiralty  survey,  we  find  marked  down 
at  Camarina,  a  lake,  through  which  the  river  Hipparis  flows. 

We  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  inhabitants  of  Camarina  represented 
both  their  river  and  their  lakes  on  their  coins.  The  swan  flying  over 
the  waves  would  represent  the  lake  ;  the  figure  associated  with  it  being 
no  doubt  the  Aphrodite  worshipped  at  the  place  :  the  head,  in  a  circle 
of  wave  pattern,  may  express  that  part  of  the  river  which  flows  through 
the  lake. 

Fountains  are  usually  represented  by  a  stream  of  water  issuing  from 
a  lion's  head  in  the  rock :  see  a  vase,  (Gerhard,  Auserl.  Vasenb.,  taf. 
cxxxiv.),  where  Hercules  stands,  receiving  a  shower-bath  from  a  hot 
spring  at  Thermae  in  Sicily.  On  the  coins  of  Syracuse  the  fountain 
Arethusa  is  represented  by  a  female  head  seen  to  the  front ;  the  flowing 
lines  of  her  dishevelled  hair  suggest,  though  they  do  not  directly  imi- 
tate, the  bubbling  action  of  the  fresh-water  spring ;  the  sea  in  which  it 
rises  is  symbolised  by  the  dolphins  round  the  head.  This  type  presents 
a  striking  analogy  with  that  of  the  Camarina  head  in  the  circle  of  wave 
pattern  described  above. 

These  are  the  principal  modes  of  representing  water  in  Greek  my- 
thography.  In  the  art  of  the  Roman  period,  the  same  kind  of  figurative 
and  symbolic  language  is  employed,  but  there  is  a  constant  tendency  to 
multiply  accessories  and  details,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  later  repre- 
sentations  of  harbours  and  river-gods  cited  above.  In  these  crowded 
compositions  the  eye  is  fatigued  and  distracted  by  the  quantity  it  has  to 
examine  ;  the  language  of  art  becomes  more  copious,  but  less  terse  and 
emphatic,  and  addresses  itself  to  minds  far  less  intelligent  than  the 
refined  critics  who  were  the  contemporaries  of  Phidias. 

Rivers  in  Roman  art  are  usually  represented  by  reclining  male 
figures,  generally  bearded,  holding  reeds  or  other  plants  in  their  hands, 
and  leaning  on  urns  from  which  water  is  flowing.  On  the  coins  of 
many  Syrian  cities,  struck  in  imperial  times,  the  city  is  represented  by 
a  turreted  female  figure  seated  on  rocks,  and  resting  her  feet  on  the 
shoulder  of  a  youthful  male  figure,  who  looks  up  in  her  face,  stretching 
out  his  arms,  and  who  is  sunk  in  the  ground  as  high  as  the  waist.  See 
Muller  (Denkmaler  d.  A.  Kunst,  i.,  taf.  49.,  No.  220.)  for  a  group  of 
this  kind  in-  the  Vatican,  and  several  similar  designs  on  coins. 

On  the  column  of  Trajan  there  occur  many  rude  representations  of 


appendix,  21.  429 


the  Danube,  and  other  rivers  crossed  by  the  Romans  in  their  military 
expeditions.  The  water  is  imitated  by  sculptured  wavy  lines,  in  which 
boats  are  placed.  In  one  scene  (Bartoli,  Colonna  Trajana,  Tav.  4.)  this 
rude  conventional  imitation  is  combined  with  a  figure.  In  a  recess  in 
the  river  bank  is  a  reclining  river-god,  terminating  at  the  waist.  This 
is  either  meant  for  a  statue  which  was  really  placed  on  the  bank  of  the 
river,  and  which  therefore  marks  some  particular  locality,  or  we  have 
here  figurative  representation  blended  with  conventional  imitation. 

On  the  column  of  Antoninus  (Bartoli,  Colon.  Anton.,  Tav.  15.)  a 
storm  of  rain  is  represented  by  the  head  of  Jupiter  Pluvius,  who  has  a 
vast  outspread  beard  flowing  in  long  tresses.  In  the  Townley  collection , 
in  the  British  Museum,  is  a  Roman  helmet  found  at  Ribchester  in  Lan- 
cashire, with  a  mask  or  vizor  attached.  The  helmet  is  richly  embossed 
with  figures  in  a  battle  scene;  round  the  brow  is  a  row  of  turrets;  the 
hair  on  the  forehead  is  so  treated  as  to  give  the  idea  of  waves  washing 
the  base  of  the  turrets.  This  head  is  perhaps  a  figurative  representation 
of  a  town  girt  with  fortifications  and  a  moat,  near  which  some  great 
battle  was  fought.  It  is  engraved  (Vetusta  Monum.  of  Soc.  Ant.  Lon- 
don, iv.,  PI.  1-4.). 

In  the  Galeria  at  Florence  is  a  group  in  alto  relievo  (Gori,  Inscript. 
Ant.,  Flor.  1727,  p.  76.  Tab.  14.)  of  three  female  figures,  one  of  whom 
is  certainly  Demeter  Kourotrophos,  or  the  earth ;  another,  Thetis,  or 
the  sea ;  the  centre  of  the  three  seems  to  represent  Aphrodite  associated, 
as  on  the  coins  of  Camarina,  with  the  element  of  fresh  water. 

This  figure  is  seated  on  a  swan,  and  holds  over  her  head  an  arched 
veil.  Her  hair  is  bound  with  reeds ;  above  her  veil  grows  a  tall  water 
plant,  and  below  the  swan  other  water  plants,  and  a  stork  seated  on  a 
hydria,  or  pitcher,  from  which  water  is  flowing.  The  swan,  the  stork, 
the  water-plants,  and  the  hydria  must  all  be  regarded  as  symbols  of 
fresh  water,  the  latter  emblem  being  introduced  to  show  that  the  ele- 
ment is  fit  for  the  use  of  man. 

Fountains  in  Roman  art  are  generally  personified  as  figures  of  nymphs 
reclining  with  urns,  or  standing  holding  before  them  a  large  shell. 

One  of  the  latest  representations  of  water  in  ancient  art  is  the  mosaic 
of  Palestrina  (Barthelemy,  in  Bartoli,  Peint.  Antiques)  which  may  be 
described  as  a  kind  of  rude  panorama  of  some  district  of  Upper  Egypt, 
a  bird's-eye  view,  half  map,  half  picture,  in  which  the  details  are  neither 


430  appendix,  22,  23. 

adjusted  to  a  scale,  nor  drawn  according  to  perspective,  but  crowded 
together,  as  they  would  be  in  an  ancient  bas-relief. 


22.   ARABIAN   ORNAMENTATION. 

I  do  not  mean  what  I  have  here  said  of  the  Inventive  power  of  the 
Arab  to  be  understood  as  in  the  least  applying  to  the  detestable  orna- 
mentation of  the  Alhambra.*  The  Alhambra  is  no  more  characteristic 
of  Arab  work,  than  Milan  Cathedral  is  of  Gothic :  it  is  a  late  building,  a 
work  of  the  Spanish  dynasty  in  its  last  decline,  and  its  ornamentation  is 
fit  for  nothing  but  to  be  transferred  to  patterns  of  carpets  or  bindings  of 
books,  together  with  their  marbling,  and  mottling,  and  other  mechanical 
recommendations.  The  Alhambra  ornament  has  of  late  been  largely 
used  in  shop-fronts,  to  the  no  small  detriment  of  Regent  Street  and  Ox- 
ford Street. 

23.    VARIETIES   OF   CHAMEER. 

Let  B  A  C,  Fig.  LXXIL,  be  the  original  angle  of  the  wall.  Inscribe 
within  it  a  circle,  ])QNj),  of  the  size  of  the  bead  required,  touching 
A  B,  A  C,  in  p,  p  ;  join  p,  p,  and  draw  B  C  parallel  to  it,  touching  the 
circle. 

Then  the  lines  B  C,  p  p  are  the  limits  of  the  possible  chamfers  con- 
structed with  curves  struck  either  from  centre  A,  as  the  lines  Q  q,  N  c?, 
r  u,  g  c,  &c,  or  from  any  other  point  chosen  as  a  centre  in  the  direction 
Q  A  produced :  and  also  of  all  chamfers  in  straight  lines,  as  a  b,  e  f. 
There  are,  of  course,  an  infinite  number  of  chamfers  to  be  struck  between 
B  C  and  p  p,  from  every  point  in  Q  A  produced  to  infinity ;  thus  we 
have  infinity  multiplied  into  infinity  to  express  the  number  of  possible 
chamfers  of  this  species,  which  are  peculiarly  Italian  chamfers ;  together 
with  another  singly  infinite  group  of  the  straight  chamfers,  a  b,  e  f,  &c. 
of  which  the  one  formed  by  the  line  a  b,  passing  through  the  centre  of 
the  circle,  is  the  universal  early  Gothic  chamfer  of  Venice. 

*  I  have  not  seen  the  building  itself,  but  Mr.  Owen  Jones's  work  may  I  suppose, 
be  considered  as  sufficiently  representing  it  for  all  purposes  of  criticism. 


APPENDIX,   23. 
Fig.  LXXII. 


431 


Again.  Either  on  the  line  A  C,  or  on  any  other  lines  A  I  or  A  m, 
radiating  from  A,  any  number  of  centres  may  be  taken,  from  which,  with 
any  radii  not  greater  than  the  distance  between  such  points  and  Q,  an 
infinite  number  of  curves  may  be  struck,  such  as  t  u,  r  s,  N  n  (all  which 
are  here  struck  from  centres  on  the  line  A  C).  These  lines  represent 
the  great  class  of  the  northern  chamfers,  of  which  the  number  is  infinity 
raised  to  its  fourth  power,  but  of  which  the  curve  N  n  (for  northern) 
represents  the  average  condition ;  the  shallower  chamfers  of  the  same 
group,  r  s,t  u,  &c,  occurring  often  in  Italy.  The  lines  r  w,  t  u,  and  a  b 
may  be  taken  as  approximating  to  the  most  frequent  conditions  of  the 
southern  chamfer. 

It  is  evident  that  the  chords  of  any  of  these  curves  will  give  a  relative 
group  of  rectilinear  chamfers,  occurring  both  in  the  North  and  South ; 
but  the  rectilinear  chamfers,  I  think,  invariably  fall  within  the  line  Q  C, 
and  are  either  parallel  with  it,  or  inclined  to  A  C  at  an  angle  greater 
than  ACQ,  and  often  perpendicular  to  it ;  but  never  inclined  to  it  at 
an  angle  less  than  ACQ. 


432  appendix,  24. 


24.  KENAISSANCE  BASES. 

The  following  extract  from  my  note-book  refers  also  to  some  features 
of  late  decoration  of  shafts. 

"  The  Scuola  di  San  Rocco  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  examples  of 
Renaissance  work  in  Venice.  Its  fluted  pillars  are  surrounded  each  by  a 
wreath,  one  of  vine,  another  of  laurel,  another  of  oak,  not  indeed  ar- 
ranged with  the  fantasticism  of  early  Gothic  ;  but,  especially  the  laurel, 
reminding  one  strongly  of  the  laurel  sprays,  powerful  as  well  as  beauti- 
ful, of  Veronese  and  Tintoret.  Their  stems  are  curiously  and  richly 
interlaced — the  last  vestige  of  the  Byzantine  wreathed  work — and  the 
vine-leaves  are  ribbed  on  the  surfaces,  I  think,  nearly  as  finely  as  those 
of  the  Noah*,  though  more  injured  by  time.  The  capitals  are  far  the 
richest  Renaissance  in  Venice,  less  corrupt  and  more  masculine  in  plan 
than  any  other,  and  truly  suggestive  of  support,  though  of  course  show- 
ing the  tendency  to  error  in  this  respect ;  and  finally,  at  the  angles  of  the 
pure  Attic  bases,  on  the  square  plinth,  are  set  couchant  animals ;  one, 
an  elephant  four  inches  high,  very  curiously  and  cleverly  cut,  and  all 
these  details  worked  with  a  spirit,  finish,  fancy,  -and  affection  quite  worthy 
of  the  middle  ages.  But  they  have  all  the  marked  fault  of  being  utterly 
detached  from  the  architecture.  The  wreaths  round  the  columns  look 
as  if  they  would  drop  off  the  next  moment,  and  the  animals  at  the  bases 
produce  exactly  the  effect  of  mice  who  had  got  there  by  accident :  one 
feels  them  ridiculously  diminutive,  and  utterly  useless." 

The  effect  of  diminutiveness  is,  I  think,  chiefly  owing  to  there  being 
no  other  groups  of  figures  near  them,  to  accustom  the  eye  to  the  propor- 
tion, and  to  the  needless  choice  of  the  largest  animals,  elephants,  bears, 
and  lions,  to  occupy  a  position  so  completely  insignificant,  and  to  be  ex- 
pressed on  so  contemptible  a  scale, — not  in  a  bas-relief  or  pictorial  piece 
of  sculpture,  but  as  independent  figures.  The  whole  building  is  a  most 
curious  illustration  of  the  appointed  fate  of  the  Renaissance  architect^ — 
to  caricature  whatever  they  imitated,  and  misapply  whatever  they 
learned. 

*  The  sculpture  of  the  Drunkenness^of  Noah  on  the  Ducal  Palace,  of  which  we 
shall  have  much  to  say  hereafter. 


appendix,  25.  433 

25.  romanist  decoration  of  bases. 

I  have  spoken  above  (Appendix  12.)  of  the  way  in  which  the  Roman 
Catholic  priests  everywhere  suffer  their  churches  to  be  desecrated.     But 
the  worst  instances  I  ever  saw  of  sacrilege  and  brutality,  daily  permitted 
in  the  face  of  all  men,  were  the  uses  to  which  the  noble  base  of  St. 
Mark's  was  put,  when  I  was  last  in  Venice.     Portions  of  nearly  all  cathe- 
drals may  be  found  abandoned  to  neglect ;  but  this  base  of  St.  Mark's 
is  in  no  obscure  position.     Full  fronting  the  western  sun — crossing  the 
whole  breadth  of  St.  Mark's  Place — the  termination  of  the  most  noble 
square  in  the  world — the  centre  of  the  most  noble  city — its  purple  mar- 
bles were,  in  the  winter  of  1849,  the  customary  gambling  tables  of  the 
idle  children  of  Venice ;  and  the  parts  which  flank  the  Great  Entrance, 
that  very  entrance  where  "  Barbarossa  flung  his  mantle  off,"  were  the 
counters  of  a  common  bazaar  for  children's  toys,  carts,  dolls,  and  small 
pewter  spoons  and  dishes,  German  caricatures,  and  books  of  the  Opera, 
mixed  with  those  of  the  offices  of  religion ;  the  caricatures  being  fastened 
with  twine  round  the  porphyry  shafts  of  the  church.     One  Sunday,  the 
24th  of  February,  1850,  the  book-stall  being  somewhat  more  richly  laid 
out  than  usual,  I  noted  down  the  titles  of  a  few  of  the  books  in  the  order 
in  which  they  lay,  and  I  give  them  below.     The  irony  conveyed  by  the 
juxtaposition  of  the  three  in  Italics  appears  too  shrewd  to  be  accidental ; 
but  the  fact  was  actually  so. 

Along  the  edge  of  the  white  plinth  were  a  row  of  two  kinds  of  books, 
Officium  Beatse  Virg.  M. ;   and  Officium  Hebdomadse  sanctae, 
juxta  Formam  Missalis  et  Breviarii  Romani  sub  Urbano  VIII. 
correcti. ' 
Behind  these  lay,  side  by  side,  the  following  : 

Don  Desiderio.     Dramma  Giocoso  per  Musica. 
Breve  Esposizione  della  Carattere  di  vera  Religione. 
On  the  top  of  this  latter,  keeping  its  leaves  open, 

La  Figlia  del  Reggimento.     Melodramma  comica. 

Carteggio  di  Madama  la  Marchesa  di  Pompadour,  ossia  raccolta 

di  Lettere  scritte  della  Medesima. 
Istruzioni  di  morale  Condotta  per  le  Figlie. 
Francesca  di  Rimini.     Dramma  per  Musica. 
28 


434:  appendix,  25. 


Then,  a  little  farther  on,  after  a  mass  of  plays  : — 

Orazioni  a  Gesu  Nazareno  e  a  Maria  addolorata. 

Semiramide ;  Melodramma  tragico  da  rappresentarsi  nel  Gran 
Teatro  il  Fenice. 

Modo  di  orare  per  l'Acquisto  del  S.  Giubileo,  conceduto  a  tutto 
il  Mondo  Cattolico  da  S.  S.  Gregorio  XVI. 

Le  due  illustre  Rivali,  Melodramma  in  Tre  Atti,  da  rappresent- 
arsi nel  nuovo  Gran  Teatro  il  Fenice. 

II  Cristiano  secondo  il  Cuore  di  Gesu,  per  la  Pratica  delle  sue 
Virtu. 

Traduzione  del'  Idioma  Italiana. 

La  ehiava  Chinese ;  Commedia  del  Sig.  Abate  Pietro  Chiari. 

La  Pelarina  ;  Intermezzo  di  Tre  Parti  per  Musiea. 

II  Cavaliero  e  la  Dama ;  Commedia  in  Tre  Atti  in  Prosa. 
I  leave  these  facts  without  comment  But  this  being  the  last  piece  of 
Appendix  I  have  to  add  to  the  present  volume,  I  would  desire  to  close  its 
pages  with  a  question  to  my  readers — a  statistical  question,  which,  I 
doubt  not,  is  being  accurately  determined  for  us  all  elsewhere,  and 
which,  therefore,  it  seems  to  me,  our  time  would  not  be  wasted  in 
determining  for  ourselves. 

There  has  now  been  peace  between  England  and  the  continental 
powers  about  thirty-five  years,  and  during  that  period  the  English  have 
visited  the  continent  at  the  rate  of  many  thousands  a  year,  staying 
there,  I  suppose,  on  the  average,  each  two  or  three  months  ;  nor  these 
an  inferior  kind  of  English,  but  the  kind  which  ought  to  be  the  best — 
the  noblest  born,  the  best  taught,  the  richest  in  time  and  money,  having 
more  leisure,  knowledge,  and  power  than  any  other  portion  of  the  nation. 
These,  we  might  suppose,  beholding,  as  they  travelled,  the  condition  of 
the  states  in  which  the  Papal  religion  is  professed,  and  being,  at  the 
same  time,  the  most  enlightened  section  of  a  great  Protestant  nation, 
would  have  been  animated  with  some  desire  to  dissipate  the  Romanist 
errors,  and  to  communicate  to  others  the  better  knowledge  which  they 
possessed  themselves.  I  doubt  not  but  that  He  who  gave  peace  upon 
the  earth,  and  gave  it  by  the  hand  of  England,  expected  this  much  of 
her,  and  has  watched  every  one  of  the  millions  of  her  travellers  as  they 
crossed  the  sea,  and  kept  count  for  him  of  his  travelling  expenses,  and 
of  their  distribution,  in  a  manner  of  which  neither  the  traveller  nor  his 


appendix,  25.  435 

courier  were  at  all  informed.  I  doubt  not,  I  say,  but  that  such  accounts 
have  been  literally  kept  for  all  of  us,  and  that  a  day  will  come  when 
they  will  be  made  clearly  legible  to  us,  and  when  we  shall  see  added 
together,  on  one  side  of  the  account  book,  a  great  sum,  the  certain  por- 
tion, whatever  it  may  be,  of  this  thirty-five  years'  spendings  of  the  rich 
English,  accounted  for  in  this  manner  : — 

To  wooden  spoons,  nut-crackers,  and  jewellery,  bought  at  Geneva,  and 
elsewhere  among  the  Alps,  so  much ;  to  shell  cameos  and  bits  of  mosaic 
bought  at  Rome,  so  much;  to  coral  horns  and  lava  brooches  bought 
at  Naples,  so  much ;  to  glass  beads  at  Venice,  and  gold  filigree  at 
Genoa,  so  much;  to  pictures,  and  statues,  and  ornaments,  everywhere, 
so  much;  to  avant-couriers  and  extra  post-horses,  for  show  and  mag- 
nificence, so  much ;  to  great  entertainments  and  good  places  for  seeing 
sights,  so  much ;  to  ball-dresses  and  general  vanities,  so  much.  This, 
I  say,  will  be  the  sum  on  one  side  of  the  book ;  and  on  the  other  will  be 
written, 

To  the  struggling  Protestant  Churches  of  France,  Switzerland,  and 
Piedmont,  so  much. 

Had  we  not  better  do  this  piece  of  statistics  for  ourselves,  in  time  1 


THE    END. 


New  York  : 

S.  W.  Benedict,  Print., 

16  Spruce  street. 


MR.  RUSKIN'S 

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  "THE  STONES  OP  VENICE." 

PREPARING  FOR  PUBLICATION, 

In  Twelve  Parts,  Folio  Imperial  Size,  Price  One  Guinea  each, 

EXAMPLES 

' OF    THE 

ARCHITECTURE  OF  YE1ICE, 

SELECTED,  AND  DRAWN  TO  MEASUREMENT  FROM 
THE  EDIFICES. 

BY  JOHN  RUSKIN, 

AUTHOR    OF    "  SEVEN    LAMPS    OF    ARCHITECTURE,"    "  MODERN    PAINTERS,"    ETC. 


PROSPECTUS. 

MR.  ELTSKIN  has  found  it  impossible  to  reduce  to  the  size  of  an  octavo 
volume  all  the  sketches  made  to  illustrate  his  intended  Essay  on  Vene- 
tian Architecture ;  at  least  without  loss  of  accuracy  in  detail :  he  has 
thought  it  better  to  separate  some  of  the  plates  from  the  text,  than  either 
to  throw  the  latter  into  a  folio  form,  or  diminish  the  fidelity  of  the  draw- 
ings. The  subjects  which  are  absolutely  necessary  to  the  understanding 
of  the  essay  will  alone  therefore  be  reduced,  and  published  with  the 
text ;  the  rest  will  be  engraved  on  the  size  of  the  drawings,  and  will 
form  a  separate  work,  which,  though  referred  to  in  the  text,  will  not  be 
essential  to  the  reading  of  it.  The  essay  will  thus  be  made  accessible 
in  a  form  involving  the  least  possible  expense  to  the  general  reader,  and 
those  who  may  be  more  deeply  interested  in  the  subject  may  possess 
the  book  of  illustrations  executed  on  a  scale  large  enough  for  the  expres- 
sion of  all  details. 


2 

A  short  explanatory  text  will  be  given  with  each  number  of  the  large 
plates,  so  as  to  save  the  trouble  of  reference  to  erratic  notices  in  the 
Essay. 

In  order  to  prevent  future  disappointment,  Mr.  Ruskin  wishes  it  espe- 
cially to  be  observed  that  very  few  of  the  drawings  will  be  of  entire 
buildings.  Nearly  all  the  subjects  are  portions  of  buildings,  drawn  with 
the  single  purpose  of  giving  perfect  examples  of  their  architecture,  but 
not  pictorial  arrangements.  Many  of  the  subjects  will,  however,  be 
found  to  possess  much  picturesque  value,  especially  those  mezzotinted ; 
but  others  will  be  separate  details — capitals,  cornices,  or  other  orna- 
ments, which  can  possess  interest  only  for  those  who  desire  to  enter 
earnestly  into  the  subject  of  Venetian  architecture.  The  chief  value  of 
the  plates  will  be  their  almost  servile  veracity — a  merit  which  will  be 
appreciated  when  the  buildings  themselves  are  no  more:  and  they  perish 
daily. 

Each  Part  will  contain  Five  plates,  engraved  by  the  first  artists ;  and 
as  nearly  as  possible  fac-similes  of  Mr.  Ruskin's  original  drawings,  but 
of  mixed  character :  some  will  be  finished  mezzotints ;  some,  tinted 
lithographs ;  and  some  mere  wood-cuts,  or  line  engravings,  like  Plates 
X.  and  XL  of  the  octavo  volume.  There  will  be  at  least  one  mezzotint 
in  each  number. 

The  first  Part  will  shortly  appear,  and  the  work  will  be  completed  as 
rapidly  as  possible ;  but  the  author  cannot  pledge  himself  to  any  stated 
time  for  the  appearance  of  the  Parts. 

Fifty  India  Proofs  only  will  be  taken  on  Atlas  Folio,  price  Two 
Guineas  each  Part ;  and  only  a  limited  number  of  plain  Impressions  will 
be  printed  in  the  first  instance,  which  will  be  appropriated  to  Subscribers. 


SuBSCEIBEES'   NAMES    WILL   BE   RECEIVED   BY 

JOHN  WILEY,  304  BROADWAY,  NEW  YORK. 


THE  SECOND  VOLUME  OF 

THE    STONES    OF    YENICE 


IS   LN   PEEPAEATION. 


n,'  V      h 


II! 


