Q(mi@frii®cii 


1976 


U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  TRANSPORTATION 
Federal  Highway  Administration 


'/ 


r 


A= 


»    ;. 


F  T  1 


v 


'y^jin?^ 


355 


@ifiifSi@frii®@i 


A  HISTORY  OF  THE  FEDERAL-AID  PROGRAM 


7  HUG 


^^ITES  O* 


U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  TRANSPORTATION 
Federal  Highway  Administration 


For  sale  by  the  Superintendent  of  Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office 
Washington,  D.C.  20402 

Stock  No.  050-001-00123-3 


Notice 

"Wliere  sources  known  to  be  covered  by  reo;istered  copyright  have  been 
quoted  in  this  book,  the  name  of  the  copyri<>-ht  owner  is  inchided  in  the 
reference.  Any  omissions  are  unintentional  and  do  not  afl'ect  tlie  validity 
of  the  copyright. 

The  identification  (in  writing,  in  photographs,  or  in  drawings)  of  items 
of  equipment  by  trademarks  or  by  manufacturer's  name  is  for  historical 
accuracy  only  and  does  not  constitute  an  endorsement  by  the  U.S.  Government 
of  the  equipment  or  the  manufacturer. 


II 


PrefQce 


This  book  has  been  written  for  a  ^Yidely  diversified 
audience — those  interested  in  the  o-eneral  history  of 
our  Nation's  highways  and  those  whose  interest  might 
be  more  narrowly  confined  to  matters  relating  to  the 
technical  aspects  of  highway  transportation.  It  has 
been  prepared  in  two  parts — Part  I  deals  with  the 
broad  subject  of  higliway  history  from  colonial  days 
forward  to  the  historic  highway  legislation  of  1956; 
Part  II  deals  separately  and  in  some  detail  with  the 
several  areas  of  responsibility  for  administration, 
planning  and  research,  design,  construction  and  main- 
tenance of  highways  and  bridges,  both  foreign  and 
domestic  as  authorized  under  the  Federal  highway 
legislation. 

The  reader  will  note  the  changing  reference  to  the 
name  of  the  Federal  unit  assig-ned  responsibility  for 
the  administration  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  pro- 
gram— the  original  Office  of  Road  Inquiry,  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads,  the  Public  Roads  Administration, 
again  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  and  finally  the 
Federal  Highway  Administration.  These  changes  in 
organization  title  are  chronicled  in  Chapter  I,  Part  II 
which  covers  the  program  administration  through 
the  years. 

Biographical  information  on  a  few  key  individuals 
has  been  included  at  the  end  of  Part  I  and  in  selected 
chaptei-s  of  Pait  II  wliere  each  man's  contribution  is 
directly  related.  The  numbers  are  purposely  limited, 
and  many  hundreds  of  dedicated  and  competent  indi- 
viduals go  unrecognized. 

Many  former  and  current  employees  have  con- 
tributed text  for  or  reviewed  this  book.     The  manu- 


scripts, in  most  instances,  have  been  edited  to  make 
this  book  a  reasonable  leng-th,  but  the  original  manu- 
scripts are  available  in  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Transportation  Library  for  future  scholars  to  review. 
In  addition  to  those  listed  below,  many  others  assisted 
in  the  preparation  of  this  book,  in  particular  Mary 
Jo  Burke  and  Verla  R.  Cook  of  the  Department  of 
Transportation  Library,  to  assure  a  history  as  complete 
as  possible. 


Chauncey  Aldrich 
James  A.  Bloom 
Frank  L.  Calhoun 
Carl  A.  Cai'penter 
William  O.  Comella 
Howard  D.  Correll 
F.  William  Cron 
Charles  D.  Curtiss 
Phillip  Darling- 
Michael  De  Stephanis 
Martin  Deuterman 
Thomas  O.  Edick 
H.  Dean  Fravel 
Robert  B.  Gair 
A.  F.  Ghiglione 
Willis  Grafe 
E.  H.  Holmes 
John  B.  Kemp 
Ross  W.  Kruser 

C.  V.  Kurylo 
Lester  P.  Lamm 

D.  AV.  Loutzenheiser 


Henry  H.  Mahiei- 
Martin  F.  Maloney 
E.  J.  Martin,  Jr. 
Kennon  Nakamura 
Barbara  M.  Neilson 
John  D.  O'Fallon 
S.  Z.  Phillips 
Charles  W.  Prisk 
Joyce  N.  Ritter 
Elizabeth  Samson 
Gordon  B.  Sharpe 
C.  L.  Shufflebarger 
C.  A.  Steele 
Josephine  C.  Sweeney 
E.  A.  Swick 
A.  Taragin 

A.  Clayson  Taylor 
William  P.  Walker 
York  Welbom 

M.  Susan  Wiley 
George  M.  Williams 

B.  Dianne  Williford 


ni 


Fofeujord 


The  economic  growth  of  the  United  States  in  the 
200  years  of  its  existence  and  the  record  of  individual 
prosperity  achieved  by  its  people  in  that  brief  period 
of  time  are  attributable  to  the  success  of  the  trans- 
portation system  developed  during  that  period — a 
system  almost  totally  dependent  on  the  Nation's 
highways. 

This  book  has  been  written  to  record  for  posterity 
the  story  of  highway  development  in  the  United 
States,  beginning  in  the  early  years  of  the  new  Nation 
and  expanding  with  the  growing  country  as  it  moved 
into  the  undeveloped  areas  west  of  the  original  colonial 
States,  and  ultimately  evolving  into  the  Federal-aid 
highway  program  in  which  the  State  and  Federal 
Governments  have  worked  cooperatively  and  success- 
fully for  the  past  60  years.  It  is  a  proud  story  and 
one  that  should  be  recorded. 

The  book  will  make  available  for  future  highwaj^ 
transportation  officials  a  documentation  of  earlier  de- 
cisions and  experiences  which,  up  to  this  time,  have 
been  available  only  in  scattered  writings  or  in  the 
individual  knowledge  and  recollections  of  many  of 
those  involved  directly  in  the  Federal-aid  highway 
program  during  this  period  of  development  and 
whose  experiences  have  not  previously  been  i-ecorded. 

Our  Nation  will  continue  to  grow  and  to  progress, 
and  our  transportation  system  will  contribute  ma- 
terially toward  that  objective. 

Norbert  T.  Tiemann 

Federal  Highway  Administrator 
1976 


IV 


Content/ 


PQ^^    ^Jn©                     I    The  Colonial  Legacy 2 

2    Early  Turnpike  Era 8 

J    Early  Federal  Aid  for  Roads  and  Canals 16 

A    The  Age  of  Steam 28 

S    The  Good  Roads  Movement 36 

Q    Dawn  of  the  Motor  Age 54 

g     The  Beginning  of  Scientific  Roadbuilding 64 

Q    The  Drive  for  Federal  Aid 80 

0  Planning  a  Highway  System 90 

1^5    The  Highway  Boom 112 

1  I    Roads  for  National  Defense 142 

12  Events    Leading   to    Enactment   of   the    1956    Federal-Aid 

Highway  Act 154 


V 


Administration  of  the  Federal- Aid  Proeram 198 


Part  Tuuo      i 

M.   Finance  and  Economics 238 

3    Planning    264 

A  Research 320 

K   Right-of-Way  and  Environment 354 

A   Design 380 

T   Bridges 418 

^J   Construction  and  Maintenance 444 

^3   Development  of  the  Interstate  Program 466 

ILJ    Construction  in  the  Federal  Domain 486 

I  I    International  Operations 518 

Epilogue — The  Success  Story 542 

Highway  Related  Legislation 546 

Picture  Credits 548 

VI  Index 551 


The 

Colonial 

Legacy 


The  Indian  canoe. 


The  Wilderness  Road. 


Tlie  young  Nation  that  emerged  from  the  War  of 
Independence  had  a  \Yeak  government  and  a  primitive 
transportation  system.  The  rivers  and  the  sheltered 
coastal  waters,  such  as  Long  Island  Sound,  Chesapeake 
Bay  and  Albemarle  Sound,  were  the  principal  high- 
ways for  travel  and  commerce.  Extending  back  from 
these  arteries  were  roads  in  various  stages  of  develop- 
ment. A  Y&vy  few  of  these,  near  the  largest  cities, 
were  "artificial  roads."  ditched  and  sometimes  hard- 
surfaced  with  gravel  or  with  "pounded  stone."  The 
rest  were  imi:»roved  only  to  the  extent  of  removing 
stumps  and  boulders  and  leveling  the  worst  irregulari- 
ties of  the  ground.  Many  of  these  roads  were  im- 
passable for  wheeled  vehicles  in  winter  or  during  the 
spring  thaw.  Travelers  crossed  small  streams  by  ford- 
ing and  the  larger  ones  by  ferries.  Bridges  were  few 
and  far  between. 

On  the  fringes  of  settlement,  the  "roads"  were  really 
only  horsepaths,  unsuitable  for  wheeled  vehicles.    The 


Wilderness  Road  through  Cumberland  Gap,  located 
by  Daniel  Boone  in  1775.  was  such  a  pack  trail.* 

General  Braddock's  military  road,  constructed  in 
1755,  was  chopped  out  to  a  width  of  12  feet — wide 
enough  to  pass  the  train  of  150  Conestoga  wagons  in 
a  single  file — but  by  1758  it  had  reverted  to  a  trace 
through  the  forest.  The  other  main  transmountain 
road,  the  Pennsylvania  Road,  had  been  widened  in 
1758  during  the  French  and  Indian  War  to  pass 
General  John  Forbes'  wagon  trains,  but  was  otherwise 
unimproved. 


*  However,  a  Kentucky  historian  has  called  the  Wilderness 
Road  "...  a  monument  to  the  skill  of  Boone  as  a  practical 
engineer  and  surveyor.  It  required  a  mind  of  far  more  than 
ordinary  calii)er  to  locate  through  more  than  two  hundred 
miles  of  mountain  wilderness  a  way  of  travel  which,  for  a 
hundred  years,  has  remained  practically  unchanged.  .  .  ."  * 


3 


Cable  ferry  over  the  Colorado  River.    In  the  early  days,  this  method  was  frequently  used  to  cross  rivers. 


X.-. 


One    of    the   first    road    signs    in    America — hieroglyphics    on 
Basset  rock,  near  Washington,  Utah. 


Winter  travel  over  primitive  trail. 


The  Pennsylvania  Road. 


Colonial  post  rider. 


Early  Postal  and  Stagecoach  Service 

Despite  the  primitive  condition  of  the  roads,  a  land 
postal  service  was  operated  by  the  colonial  authorities 
between  the  principal  cities  of  the  eastern  seaboard. 
In  1729,  4  weeks  were  required  to  send  a  letter  from 
Boston  to  Williamsburjr,  Virginia.  For  the  most  part, 
the  mail  was  carried  on  foot  or  by  post  riders  on 
horseback  who  averaged  about  4  miles  per  hour,  with 
no  night  travel. 

The  mails  were  speeded  up  considerably  during 
Benjamin  Franklin's  long  tenure  as  Deputy  and  Asso- 
ciate Postmaster  General,  from  1737  to  1757,  and  1762 
to  1773.  Within  a  year  after  his  appointment, 
Franklin  had  so  improved  the  service  that  a  letter 
could  be  sent  from  Philadelphia  to  Boston  and  a  reply 
returned  in  3  weeks.  After  1764,  Franklin  made  the 
mails  move  day  and  night  between  Philadelphia  and 
New  York,  and  this  fast  service  was  later  extended 
to  Boston.^ 

As  early  as  1750,  there  was  a  regular  stage-wagon* 
service  from  Philadelphia  to  New  York  via  Trenton 
and  Brunswick.  Just  before  the  Revolution,  passen- 
gers could  travel  by  stage  from  Philadelphia  to  the 
Paulus  Hook   (now  Jersey  City)   ferry  in  2  days  in 


*  A    covered    springless    vehicle    fitted    with    rigid    wooden 
benches  for  carrying  passengers. 


good  weather,  and  public  passenger  stages  were  avail- 
able for  the  journey  from  New  York  to  Boston.^ 

Local  Authorities   Responsible  for  Roads 

Under  colonial  laws  patterned  after  those  of  the 
mother  country,  roadmaking  and  mending  were  re- 
sponsibilities of  the  local  governments — the  towns  in 
New  England  and  the  counties  in  other  colonies.  In 
the  former,  the  elected  town  officers,  among  them  a 
surveyor  of  highways,  were  charged  with  the  upkeep 
of  highways,  private  ways,  causeways  and  bridges ;  and 
were  authorized  to  remove  obstructions  from  the  high- 
ways, to  dig  for  stone,  gravel,  clay  or  marl  in  any 
land  not  planted  or  enclosed,  and  to  command  the 
labor,  on  appointed  days  after  public  notice,  of  all 
persons  over  16  years  of  age  for  work  on  the  roads.* 

In  Virginia,  the  County  Court,  composed  of  eight 
or  more  gentleman  inliabitants  elected  by  the  free- 
holders and  approved  by  the  Governor,  was  respon- 
sible for  the  condition  of  the  roads  and  bridges.  The 
court  could  contract  for  necessary  road  work  or  direct 
that  it  be  performed  gratis  by  the  "tithable  males" 
under  the  direction  of  the  precinct  surveyors,  or  fore- 
men. Tithable  persons  were  local  residents  over  16 
years  of  age,  whether  free,  slave,  or  indentured.  Own- 
ers of  two  or  more  tithables  could  send  them  as  sub- 
stitutes in  lieu  of  working  in  pei^son.^ 


The  Flying  Machine. 


Rolling  tobacco  to  market 


Model  of  Nantucket,  Mass.  fish  cart.  The 
barrel  takes  place  of  wheel  and  makes  trac- 
tion easier  on  sandy  roads. 


The  other  colonies  had  similar  provisions  for  keep- 
ing their  roads  in  repair,  and  all  of  them  authorized 
the  local  authorities  to  require  compulsory  road  serv- 
ice or  its  equivalent  in  cash.  This  "statute  labor"  was 
for  years  the  principal  resource  available  to  local  gov- 
ernments for  road  work  in  the  colonies  and  later  in 
the  States,  but  other  resources,  such  as  private  sub- 
scriptions, donations  by  public  spirited  citizens,  assess- 
ments on  adjacent  property,  or  the  proceeds  of  public 
lotteries,  were  occasionally  available.® 

There  were  hundreds  of  private  ferries  on  the  rivers. 
These  ranged  from  canoes  and  small  rowboats  to  flat- 
bottomed  barges  capable  of  carrying  a  wagon  or  sev- 
eral cattle.  The  right  to  operate  a  ferry  was  obtained 
from  the  colonial  legislature  or  the  county  by  a  grant 
or  contract,  under  which  the  ferry  owner  was  allowed 
to  collect  fixed  fees  in  compensation  for  his  services 
and  the  use  of  his  property.  Ferry  proprietors  were 
considered  to  be  public  carriers,  responsible  for  the 
life  and  property  of  their  passengers.'' 

The  English  practice,  begun  in  1663,  of  permitting 
the  local  authorities  or  private  persons  to  raise  money 
for  roadbuilding  and  maintenance  by  charging  user 
tolls  did  not  spread  to  the  colonies.  Except  for  pay- 
ment of  ferrj'  fees,  a  traveler  could  freely  use  the 
roads,  such  as  they  were,  from  Maine  to  Georgia. 


REFERENCES 

'Address  by  T.  H.  MacDonald,  Chief,  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads,  in  Washington,  D.C.,  October  6,  1926. 

'A.  Rose,  Histoeic  American  Highways — Public  Roads  of 
THE  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1953)  p.  32. 

^Id.,  p.  34. 

'Id.,  p.  62. 

nd.,  p.  64. 

"Id.,  p.  23. 

'Id.,  p.  45. 


Early 

Turnpike 

Era 


In  all  of  the  States,  a  long  and  severe  depression 
followed  independence.  Recovery  was  hampered  by 
the  wretched  condition  of  the  roads,  which  had  be- 
come practically  imj^assable  in  many  places  from  lack 
of  maintenance  during  the  war. 

Postwar  Recovery  Generates  Increased  Road  Traffic 

Business  began  to  pick  up  about  1787,  and  with  the 
increase  in  trade  came  a  rapid  increase  in  road  traffic, 
especially  near  the  larger  cities.  The  feeble  efforts  of 
the  local  authorities  were  not  equal  to  keeping  the 
roads  in  repair  under  this  traffic,  so  there  was  wide- 
spread agitation  for  State  assistance  to  help  maintain 
the  principal  roads.  The  debt-burdened  State  gov- 
ernments met  this  challenge  by  appealing  to  private 
capital  for  the  funds  to  build  better  highways.  They 
chartered  private  turnpike*  companies,  conferring  on 
them  authority  to  build  roads  and  charge  tolls  to  the 
public  for  their  use.  The  first  of  these  companies, 
chartered  by  Virginia  in  1785,  built  a  turnpike  road 
from  Alexandria,  on  the  Potomac  River,  westward  to 
the  mountains  near  Berryville.    However,  the  first  to 


*  Originally,  a  "turnpil<e"  was  a  long  pole  or  pike  which 
barred  the  traveler's  way  at  each  tollgate.  After  he  paid  the 
required  toll,  the  pike  was  turned  or  swung  out  of  the  traveler's 
path.'  "Turnpike"  eventually  became  a  synonym  for  any  high- 
class,  stone-surfaced  road. 


be  completed  for  any  considerable  distance,  and  one 
of  the  most  successful  financially,  was  in  Pennsyl- 
vania, between  Philadelphia  and  Lancaster.^ 

Transportation  Plan  Proposed  for  Pennsylvania 

In  February  1791,  The  Society  for  Promoting  the 
Improvement  of  Roads  and  Inland  Navigation  sub- 
mitted to  the  Pennsylvania  Legislature  what  may  be 
the  earliest  statewide  transportation  plan  in  U.S. 
history.  This  plan  proposed  that  the  Legislatt;re  ap- 
point a  Board  of  Commissioners  with  power  to  decide 
the  locations  of  the  principal  roads  in  the  State  and 
determine  which  should  be  improved  by  turnpike  com- 
panies and  which  ought  to  be  made  or  repaired  at 
public  cost.  The  board  would  then  have  the  authority 
to  advertise  and  award  contracts  to  build  and  operate 
the  turnpikes,  and  also  to  employ  persons  to  repair 
those  roads  deemed  unsuitable  for  turnpikes.  Simi- 
larly, the  board  would  have  authority  to  contract  for 
the  construction  and  operation  of  toll  canals  or  to 
make  other  navigation  improvements  at  public  ex- 
pense.^ 

An  important  feature  of  the  transportation  plan 
was  the  vohmtary  relinquishment  by  the  State  for  a 
stated  number  of  years  of  its  right  to  charter  parallel 
competing  facilities  that  would  destroy  or  diminish 
tlie  income  or  re\'enue  of  turnpikes  or  toll  navigations 
already  established. 


8 


""^tW^S^ 


Wayside  inn  on  Lancaster  Road. 


The  Legislature  was  not  ready,  at  tliat  time,  to 
confer  sncli  vast  ^lowers  on  an  administrative  body. 
However,  it  did  announce  its  readiness  to  subsidize 
road  and  canal  building  in  sparsely  settled  pai-ts  of 
the  State  with  liberal  appropriations  of  public  money 
and  to  incorporate  companies  "for  the  gradual  and 
progressive  improvement  of  roads  and  waters  where 
the  tolls  would  be  sufficient  to  recompense  the  sub- 
scribers or  stockholdei*s,  and  the  charge  woidd  fall, 
according  to  justice,  upon  those  who  were  to  be  bene- 
fitted, in  pi'oportion  to  the  use  they  might  make  of 
such  roads  and  waters."  * 

Under  this  policy,  the  Legislature,  in  April  1791, 
appropriated  36,160  Pennsylvania  pounds  to  be  ex- 
pended under  the  direction  of  the  Governor  and 
Council  for  some  68  road  and  navigation  improve- 
ments scattered  all  over  the  state.^  Later,  in  April 
1793,  the  Legislature  authorized  the  Governor  to  in- 
corporate the  Conewago  Canal  Company  to  construct 
a  lock  canal  around  the  Conewago  Falls  of  the  Sus- 
quehanna River  at  public  expense,  to  be  "opened  as  a 
public  highway  and  for  public  use,  forever  .  .  .  free 
of  toll,  and  any  and  every  other  charge  whatso- 
ever. .  .  ."  ^ 

In  September  1791,  the  Legislature  authorized  the 
incorporation  of  the  Schuylkill  and  Susquehanna 
Company  to  build  a  toll  canal  between  those  rivers. 
Two  other  acts  in  April  1792  established  the  Phila- 
delphia and  Lancaster  Turnpike  Road  Company  and 
the  Delaware  and  Schuylkill  Canal  Navigation  Com- 
pany. Other  turnpike  and  canal  acts  followed  in  later 
years,  all  modeled  on  the  earlier  ones. 

The  charters  granted  to  the  turnpike  and  canal 
companies  under  these  acts  were  practically  identical — 
in  fact,  both  canals  and  turnpikes  were  considered  to 
be  "highways."  Both  were  regulated  transportation 
monopolies  granted  by  specific  acts  of  the  State  Leg- 
islature. These  acts  specified  the  termini  and  general 
route  of  the  road  or  canal,  set  minimum  engineering 
standards  and  conferred  the  right  of  eminent  domain 
for  taking  necessary'  right-of-way  and  road  materials. 


Inn  near  Brandywine,  Pa.,  on  Lancaster  Road. 


The  companies  were  authorized  to  collect  tolls  at  rates 
specified  in  the  acts,  but  these  rates  were  subject  to 
renegotiation  at  intervals.  The  comjDanies  were  re- 
quired to  keep  their  facilities  in  good  order  at  all 
times.  Turnpike  acts  set  load  limits  and  minimmn 
tire  widths  for  vehicles  using  the  roads  to  protect  the 
companies  from  destructive  ov^erloading  by  their 
patrons,  especially  during  the  spring  thaw. 

The  Lancaster  Road — Prototype  Turnpike 

The  charter  for  the  Philadelphia  to  Lancaster  Road 
required  that  it  be  laid  out  .50  feet  wide  between 
fences,  of  which  at  least  21  feet  "sliall  be  made  an 
artificial  road,  which  shall  be  bedded  with  wood,  stone, 
gravel,  or  any  other  hard  substance,  well  compacted 
together,  a  sufficient  depth  to  secure  a  solid  foundation 
to  the  same;  and  the  said  road  shall  be  faced  with 
gravel,  or  stone  pounded,  or  other  small  hard  sub- 
stance, in  such  manner  as  to  secure  a  fii-m,  and,  as 
near  as  the  materials  will  admit,  an  even  surface  . . ." ' 
The  gradient  was  limited  to  an  angle  of  4  degrees 
with  the  horizon.  (Tliis  is  the  equivalent  of  a  grade 
of  7  percent.) 


9 


The  Company  had  no  trouble  selling  its  stock  to 
eager  investors  at  $300  per  share.  "I  have  never  seen 
men,"  an  eyewitness  wrote,  "so  wet  with  sweat  in  the 
harvest  field  as  some  were  in  the  crowd  today  who 
subscribed  to  the  turnpike  road."  *  Construction  be- 
gan in  February  1793,  and  was  completed  for  the  full 
length  of  62  miles  in  a  little  under  3  years — a  remark- 
able engineering  achievement  for  the  period.  The 
cost  was  $465,000,  or  an  average  of  $7,500  per  mile.^ 

The  Company  collected  tolls  at  13  points  along  the 
road  at  rates  varying  from  214  cents  per  vehicle-mile 
for  stages  and  coaches  drawn  by  2  horses  to  5  cents  per 
mile  for  4-horse  freight  wagons  with  4-inch  tires. 
Vehicles  with  wider  tires  could  travel  for  lower  rates, 
and  a  horse  and  rider  could  travel  10  miles  for  6  cents. 

The  Lancaster  Pike  did  not  return  more  than  2 
percent  of  the  invested  capital  for  the  first  5  years 


by  the  British  Fleet.  During  the  war,  from  10  to  20 
freight  wagons  arrived  daily  at  Charleston,  South 
Carolina,  from  cities  as  far  away  as  Boston.^^ 

The  Transmountain   Roads 

The  larger  seaboard  States  from  New  York  to  North 
Carolina  had  extensive  areas  of  western  lands  which 
they  were  anxious  to  settle  and  develop.  Also,  the 
seaport  cities  were  eager  for  the  trade  such  develop- 
ment would  produce.  There  was,  therefore,  a  strong 
sentiment  to  push  good  roads  westward  over  the 
Allegheny  Mountain  barrier.  Four  main  transmoun- 
tain roads  resulted. 

After  completion  of  the  Lancaster  Pike  to  Lan- 
caster, the  Pennsylvania  Legislature  granted  charters 
for  extending  it  westward  to  Pittsburgh.  The  State 
subsidized  this  "Pennsylvania  Road"  by  subscribing 
to  the  stock  of  some  of  the  companies. 


Conestoga  wagon  "Philadelphia  to  Pittsburg  20  days." 


after  it  was  opened,  but,  as  the  western  part  of  the 
State  developed,  the  profits  rose  until  in  some  years 
they  reached  15  percent,  the  maximum  permitted  by 
the  charter. 

Rapid  Spread  of  Toll  Roads  and  Canals 

After  1800,  most  of  the  States  adopted  toll  financing 
for  main  roads  and  canals,  while  retaining  the  old 
statute  labor  system  for  local  improvements.  By 
1808,  Connecticut  had  chartered  50  turnpike  com- 
panies, which  had  completed  770  miles  of  roads.  In 
New  York,  67  companies,  capitalized  at  over  $5  mil- 
lion, were  chartered  before  1807  to  build  3,071  miles 
of  turnpike  roads,  and  21  companies  were  chartered 
to  build  toll  bridges."  By  1828,  Pennsylvania  had 
3,110  miles  of  turnpike  roads,  costing  $8  million.^^ 

The  turnpike  companies  at  first  concentrated  their 
efforts  on  the  main  roads  between  cities  where  traffic 
was  heaviest,  and  since  most  of  these  cities  were  along 
the  Atlantic  coast,  the  coastal  highway  (now  U.S. 
Route  1)  was  the  first  to  be  improved  over  any  con- 
siderable distance.  The  Delaware  River  Bridge  Com- 
pany built  a  substantial  bridge  at  Trenton,  N.  J.,  in 
1806,  and  by  1812  the  New  York-Philadelphia  road 
was  stone-surfaced  the  full  distance  between  those 
cities.  These,  and  improvements  to  the  coastal  high- 
way in  other  States,  came  just  in  time  to  save  the 
country  from  a  severe  transportation  crisis  during  the 
War  of  1812,  when  coastal  shipping  was  blockaded 


Primitive  method  of  breaking  stone  on  toll  road. 

In  New  York  the  turnpikes  developed  without  State 
subsidies,  and  many  of  the  turnpike  roads  were  con- 
trolled by  large  landowners  who  sometimes  were  more 
interested  in  selling  land  than  in  providing  transpor- 
tation. However,  by  1812  New  Yoric  had  a  well- 
developed  turnpike  system  extending  from  the 
Massachusetts  boundary  to  Lake  Ei'ie. 

Maryland  chartered  several  turnpike  companies  in 
the  1820's  to  connect  Baltimore  with  the  Cumberland 
Road  (the  National  Road),  then  being  built  by  the 
Federal    Government   with    congressional    appi'opria- 


10 


The  Erie  Canal. 


tions ;  and  was  thus  prepai'ed  to  cash  in  on  the  Federal 
investment  when  the  Cumberland  Road  reached  the 
Ohio  Eiver. 

Virginia  incorporated  the  Northwestern  Turnpike 
in  1831  as  a  State-owned  enterprise,  with  the  Governor 
as  president  of  the  board  of  directors,  to  build  a  turn- 
pike road  from  Winchester  to  "some  point  on  the 
Ohio  Eiver  to  be  situated  by  the  princi])al  engineer." 
The  principal  engineer  was  Captain  Claudius  Crozet, 
formerly  professor  of  engineering  at  "West  Point,  and 
perhaps  the  ablest  road  engineer  in  America  at  tliis 
time.  This  road  was  completed  to  Parkersburg  on  the 
Ohio  River  in  1838,  at  a  cost  of  $400,000." 

The  standards  and  costs  of  the  many  turnpikes 
varied  widely.  Some  were  graded  and  ditched,  but 
imsurfaced.  Most  were  surfaced  with  gravel  or 
pounded  stone.  The  pounded  stone  surface  was  very 
expensive  because  all  stone  had  to  be  quarried  and 
broken  by  hand  labor.*  After  1846  some  roads  were 
surfaced  with  wooden  planks  laid  on  heavy  sills. 
Average  construction  costs  for  turnpikes  varied  be- 
tween $550  per  mile  to  as  high  as  $14,000  per  mile." 

The  turnpike  movement  eventually  spread  into  all 
the  States,  and  by  1850  there  were  hundreds  of  com- 
panies  operating   thousands   of   miles   of   roads  and 


*  The  first  practical  mechanical  stone  crusher  was  patented 
by  Eli  Whitney  Blake,  in  1858. 


canals.  These  contributed  tremendously  to  the  States' 
internal  development  by  opening  new  lands  to  settle- 
ment, by  reducing  the  cost  of  haulage  from  the  farms 
to  the  markets,  and  by  stimulating  the  development 
of  industries.  Indeed,  the  construction  of  these 
privately  financed  public  works  was,  itself,  a  major 
industry  in  the  early  1800's. 

At  first,  only  citizens  of  the  United  States  were 
allowed  to  own  road  and  canal  stock,  but  this  restric- 
tion was  later  waived  to  attract  European  investment 
capital.  Some  States  subsidized  turnpike  and  canal 
companies  by  tax  exemptions  and  by  purchasing  shares 
in  the  ventures.  The  charter  granted  by  Kentucky 
to  the  Ohio  Canal  Company,  for  example,  not  only 
authorized  the  Governor  to  subscribe  for  1,000  shares 
on  behalf  of  the  State,  but  also  extended  the  privilege 
to  the  United  States  Government  and  to  five  other 
States  bordering  on  the  Ohio  River. 

With  certain  notable  exceptions,  such  as  the  Erie 
Canal,  the  profits  on  toll  road  and  canal  investments 
were  modest  at  best.  Most  of  the  charters  contained 
provisions  for  reducing  tolls  when  profits  reached  a 
certain  level,  usually  12  or  15  percent  per  year.  The 
Schuylkill  and  Susquehanna  Navigation  Company's 
charter  required  that  when  profits  exceeded  15  percent 
per  annum  1  percent  of  the  same  shall  be  reserved 
"for  the  establishment  of  schools,  and  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  arts  and  sciences.  .  .  ."  " 


11 


Roads  and  Canals  Coexisted 

Generally,  toll  roads  and  toll  canals  were  not  in 
direct  competition  with  each  other  over  the  same  or 
nearby  routes,  and  conld  coexist  as  elements  of  an 
expanding  transportation  system.  Because  of  their 
more  restrictive  grade  lines,  canals  followed  more  in- 
direct routes  and  were  longer  than  turnpikes.  Pass- 
ing the  boats  through  the  locks  was  a  slow  and  tedious 
business.  Consequently,  average  canal  speeds  seldom 
exceeded  2  or  3  miles  per  hour,  as  compared  to  4  to  6 
miles  per  hour  on  stagecoaches.  The  coach  lines, 
therefore,  got  most  of  the  passengers  and  U.S.  mail 
contracts,  and  the  turnpike  freighters  retained  the 
short-haul  and  the  fast- freight  business.  On  the  other 
hand,  one  horse  pulling  a  canal  boat  could  move  as 
much  freight  as  eight  4-horse  wagon  teams  on  a  road.* 
This  made  for  a  very  low  toll  rate,  so  the  canals 
got  the  heavy  freight  if  the  shipper  had  a  choice  of 
carriers. 

Only  where  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  total 
movement  was  through  freight  and  the  turnpikes  and 
canals  had  common  terminals  did  they  come  into  di- 
rect and  damaging  competition.  This  happened  when 
the  Erie  Canal  was  opened  between  Albany  and 
Buffalo  in  1825  and  the  Pennsylvania  river-canal 
navigation  system  was  opened  between  Philadelphia 
and  Pittsburgh  in  1834.  In  both  cases,  the  heavy 
freight  to  and  from  the  Great  Lakes  and  the  Ohio 
Valley  switched  to  the  canals  and  most  of  the  wagon 
freighters  went  out  of  business,  but  the  stagecoach 
lines  continued  to  prosper.  The  toll  roads  consequently 
suffered  a  drastic  decrease  in  their  total  income. 

Improved  Engineering  and  Administrative  Methods 

The  toll  roads  were  built  by  contractors,  or  by  hired 
laborers  supervised  by  trained  roadbuilders.  Their 
construction  was  thus  a  notable  departure  from  the 


*  In  1807  Robert  Fulton  wrote,  ".  .  .  on  a  road  of  the  best 
kind,  four  horses,  and  sometimes  five,  are  necessary  to  trans- 
port only  three  tons.  On  a  canal  one  horse  will  draw  twenty- 
five  tons,  and  thus  perform  the  work  of  forty  horses."  " 


long-established  feudal  custom  of  building  roads  with 
inefficient  statute  labor  directed  by  amateur  super- 
visors. To  meet  the  standards  in  their  charters,  the 
turnpike  companies  had  to  hire  people  with  some 
understanding  of  civil  engineering  to  lay  the  roads 
out;  and,  on  the  whole,  the  turnpike  roads  were  well 
located,  and  well  built. 

The  earlier  turnpikes  were  paved  according  to  the 
recommendations  of  J.  P.  M.  Tresaguet,  Director 
General  of  the  French  roads  from  1775  to  1785,  with 
whose  work  educated  Americans,  such  as  Benjamin 
Franklin,  were  well  acquainted.  Tresaguet  insisted 
on  an  adequate  right-of-way  for  his  roads  and  pro- 
vided generous  side  ditches  to  carry  away  surface 
water  that  might  otherwise  stand  on  the  road  and 
soften  it.  On  a  crowned  and  rolled  subgrade,  his 
roadbuilders  placed  a  layer  of  heavy  foundation 
stones,  laid  on  edge,  with  the  interstices  packed  solidly 
with  smaller  stones  rammed  in  place  by  hammering. 
Above  this  course,  by  hand,  they  placed  successive 
layers  of  broken  stone,  course  by  course,  compacted 
and  filled  so  that  the  stones  interlocked  with  each 
other.  The  top  3  inches  were  of  hard,  specially  se- 
lected stone,  broken  with  hammers  to  walnut-size  at 
the  quarry  and  hauled  to  the  road  to  form  the  wearing 
course.^^ 

The  carriageways  of  Tresaguet's  roads  were  18  feet 
wide  and  about  10  inches  thick.  Most  of  the  early 
American  turnpikes  were  at  least  this  wide,  a  common 
width  being  20  feet.  The  Lancaster  Pike  was  at  least 
24  feet  throughout  and  in  places  even  wider. 

Tresaguet's  greatest  contribution  to  highway  ad- 
ministration was  his  insistence  on  prompt  and  in- 
cessant maintenance  of  every  mile  of  road  by  trained 
and  adequately  paid  workmen.  The  system  of  main- 
tenance he  established  made  France's  roads  the  best  in 
the  world  for  two  generations. 

After  about  1820,  the  ideas  of  the  Scotsman,  John 
L.  McAdam,  who  was  responsible  for  the  good  roads 
around  Bristol,  England,  dominated  American  road- 
building.  McAdam  didn't  believe  in  massive  founda- 
tion courses — ^he  asserted  that  the  native  soil,  alone. 


Laying  stone  foundation  in  Massachusetts.  Although  macadam 
roads  were  in  use,  as  late  as  1898  the  Tresaguet  roadbuilding 
method  could  be  found. 


'^^'*^^ 


r 


Rolling  stone  toith  steam  roller  near  Westfleld,  Mass.  in  1898. 


was  what  supported  the  road  and  the  traffic  upon  it 
and  that  the  function  of  the  road  crust  was  only  to 
protect  the  basement  soil  from  wetting  and  abrasion. 
His  roads,  6  to  10  inches  thick,  were  made  of  angular 
broken  stones,  all  passing  a  2-inch  ring  and  packed 
by  traffic  until  they  interlocked  into  a  dense  mass. 
The  first  American  road  built  according  to  JNIcAdam's 
principles  was  the  Boonsborough  to  Hagerstown 
Turnpike  in  Maryland,  completed  in  1822.^^ 

McAdam  was  primarily  an  administrator,  rather 
than  an  engineer.  Like  Tresaguet,  he  insisted  on 
thorough  and  continuous  maintenance.  He  also  advo- 
cated payment  of  adequate  salaries  to  attract  good 
men  who  would  make  roadbuilding  a  career. 

As  might  be  expected,  the  administration  of  turn- 
pikes varied  widely  from  company  to  company,  de- 
pending on  the  quality  of  the  management,  the  amount 
of  toll-paying  traffic,  and  how  well  the  roads  were 
originally  laid  out  and  constnicted.  Many  were 
imderfinanced,  and  failures  and  reorganizations  were 
frequent.  The  standard  of  maintenance  was  not  al- 
ways as  high  as  it  should  have  been,  especially  for 
those  roads  that  were  not  making  much  money.  But 
on  the  whole,  the  turnpikes  were  a  vast  improvement 
over  both  the  miserable  I'oads  and  tracks  that  preceded 
them  and  the  equally  bad  local  roads  still  under  town- 
ship cxjntrol. 


Early  Railroads  Were  Regarded  as  Public  Highways 

In  1808  Benjamin  Latrobe,  the  distinguished  archi- 
tect and  civil  engineer,  and  one  of  the  designers  of 
the  U.S.  Capitol,  summarized  the  prospects  of  rail- 
roads as  a  national  mode  of  transportation  in  these 
words : 

.  .  .  railroads  are  out  of  the  question  as  to  the  carriage 
of  common  articles.  Railroads  leading  from  the  coal 
mines  to  the  margin  of  the  James  River,  might  answer 
their  expense,  or  others  from  the  marble  quarries  near 
Philadelphia  to  the  Schuylkill.  But  these  are  the  only 
instances,  within  my  knowledge,  in  which  they  at  present 
might  be  employed. 

There  is,  however,  a  use  for  railroads  as  a  temporary 
means  to  overcome  the  most  difficult  parts  of  artificial 
navigation ;  and  for  this  they  are  invaluable.  .  .  ." 

Latrobe's  objection  to  railroads  concerned  the  spe- 
cialized iron-wheeled  carriages  required  to  travel  on 
them;  these  were  too  expensive  for  the  average  farmer 
or  shipper  to  own,  and  also  unsuitable  for  operation 
on  the  common  roads.  Because  of  this  restriction, 
only  specialized  roads  hauling  large  quantities  of  bulk 
freight,  such  as  coal,  from  a  single  source  would  be 
able  to  collect  sufficient  tolls  from  traffic  to  pay  out 
their  construction  cost. 


13 


At  this  time,  there  were  no  railroads  in  the  United 
States  and  only  a  few  in  Europe.  The  carriages  or 
wagons  were  pulled  by  horses.  On  a  good  railroad, 
one  horse  could  pull  four  wagons  of  2  tons  each.^" 

England's  first  commercial  railroad,  opened  in  1820, 
was  originally  intended  to  be  operated  with  horses. 
Even  later  when  the  Liverpool  and  Manchester  Rail- 
road was  chartered  in  1828,  it  too  was  intended  pri- 
marily to  haul  freight  by  horse  power  and  included 
a  provision  in  its  charter  that  the  owners  could  exact 
toll  of  all  persons  who  might  put  vehicles  on  the  road 
for  transporting  goods.  However,  this  provision  was 
required  of  few  shippers  because  this  railroad  adopted 
steam  propulsion  a  year  later. 

About  the  same  time  in  Pennsylvania,  the  State 
built  a  railroad  from  Philadelphia  to  Columbia  and 
licensed  20  different  companies  to  run  their  horse- 
drawn  cars  over  it."  In  Indiana,  the  chief  engineer 
of  the  Madison  and  Indianapolis  Railroad  recom- 
mended in  1837  that  the  State  furnish  steam  motive 
power  for  its  railroads,  "leaving  the  cars  for  the  con- 
veyance of  freight  and  passengers  to  be  furnished  by 
individuals  or  companies,  from  whom  the  state  will 
exact  the  proper  toll  for  the  use  of  the  road,  and  for 
the  motive  power."  ^^ 

In  their  early  days,  railroads  were  regarded  in  the 
same  light  as  turnpikes  and  canals,  to  be  used  by  and 
for  the  benefit  of  the  public.  The  theory  that  a  rail- 
road was  private  property  to  be  used  exclusively  by 
the  owners  and  with  which  they  could  do  as  they 
pleased,  prevailed  for  only  a  very  short  time. 

Rapid  Extension  of  Railroads  in  the  United  States 

In  the  United  States,  the  first  charters  for  commer- 
cial railroads  were  granted  in  1827  to  the  Baltimore 
and  Ohio  Railroad  to  operate  in  Virginia,  Maryland, 
and  Pennsylvania,  and  to  the  Charleston  and  Ham- 
burg Railroad  for  operation  in  South  Carolina.  Other 
States  followed  soon  afterward,  issuing  charters  for 
short  railroads,  few  exceeding  100  miles  in  length. 
Up  to  the  end  of  1830,  only  41  miles  of  railroad  were 
constructed.  This  increased  to  918  miles  by  the  end 
of  1835  and  to  2,797  by  1840.  In  1856,  18,400  miles 
were  in  operation,  and  by  1860  railroads  were  being 
built  at  the  rate  of  5,000  miles  per  year,  with  31,000 
miles  in  operation.^^ 

Steadily,  this  multitude  of  short  lines  was  consoli- 
dated into  more  efficient  systems  by  financial  mergers 
and  by  standardization  of  gauges,  so  that  long  ship- 
ments were  possible  without  changing  railroads  or 
cars. 

Only  a  very  few  of  the  earliest  railroads  were 
planned  for  operation  by  animal  power.  After  about 
1835  practically  all  of  the  American  railroads  were 
made  heavy  enough  to  support  steam  engines,  and,  to 
accommodate  the  higher  speeds  possible  with  steam 
propulsion,  were  laid  out  with  much  less  curvature 
and  easier  gradients  than  was  customary  for  turnpike 
roads.  At  first,  operating  speeds  were  only  about  8 
to  10  miles  per  hour  but  these  doubled  by  1840. 

These  higher  speeds,  plus  the  ability  to  haul  large 
tonnages  at  low  cost,  gave  the  railroads  a  tremendous 
competitive  edge  over  both  the  turnpikes  and  the 
canals.    For  topographic  reasons,  the  railroads  located 


their  lines  parallel  or  close  to  the  previously  estab- 
lished turnpikes  and  canals,  thus,  coming  into  direct 
competition  with  them  for  most  of  their  length.  This 
competition  was  ruinous  to  the  freight  wagon  and 
stagecoach  companies  which  eventually  lost  not  only 
their  passengers  and  freight,  but  also  their  mail  con- 
tracts to  the  rails. 

Decline  of  the  Turnpikes 

The  National  Pike,  or  Cumberland  Road,  had  en- 
tered upon  an  era  of  great  prosperity  when  the  Balti- 
more and  Ohio  Railroad  reached  Cumberland, 
Maryland,  in  1842.  Eleven  years  later,  when  the  rail- 
road reached  the  Ohio  River  at  AVheeling,  the  horse 
transportation  companies  went  into  bankruptcy.  The 
same  blight  spread  to  the  great  Pennsylvania  wagon 
road  to  the  west  when  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad  was 
completed  to  Pittsburgh  in  1854.  Roadside  businesses, 
which  depended  on  the  road  traffic,  such  as  inns  and 
stables,  shriveled  and  dried  up.  With  no  revenue 
coming  in,  the  turnpike  companies  stopped  mainte- 
nance and  the  proud  turnpikes  became  so  rough  that 
travelers  refused  to  pay  toll.^* 

Milepost  10  miles  west  of  Philadelphia  on  the  old  Lancaster 

Turnpike. 


14 


At  the  eastern  end  of  the  Pennsylvania  Road,  the 
Lancaster  Turnpike,  once  the  finest  road  in  America, 
fell  steadily  into  decay.  In  1880  the  company  served 
notice  on  the  township  super\-isors  of  its  intent  to 
abandon  17  miles  of  road.  These  sections  were  then 
"distumpiked''  and  returned  to  public  control.  A 
little  later,  the  company  sold  35  miles  of  road  to  other 
companies  for  $40,000.  to  be  used,  partly  at  least, 
for  a  railroad  bed,  and  in  1899  the  company  sold  all 
of  its  remainin<i:  interest  in  the  turn])ike  for  $10  a 
share — one-thirtieth  of  what  it  sold  for  100  years  be- 
fore. The  Lancaster  Turnpike  Road  Company  was 
dissolved  in  February  1902.-^ 

AVith  variation  in  detaih  lumdreds  of  other  turn- 
pikes met  the  same  fate  as  the  Lancaster  Pike,  most 
of  them  eventually  reverting  to  the  local  authorities 
for  maintenance. 

Paradoxically,  as  the  older  through  turnpikes  col- 
lapsed, new  cliartere  were  being  issued  for  feeder 
roads  to  the  railroads.  Thus,  the  number  of  new 
charters  did  not  diminish  gi'eatly  until  about  1875.^" 
Many  of  the  newly  chartered  feeders  enjoyed  a 
measure  of  prosperity  and  maintained  tliemselves 
until  condemned  or  bought  out  by  tlie  States  or  local 
governments  in  the  early  20th  century. 

REFERENCES 

'C.  BoBTH,  Mankind  on  the  Mo\'e  (Automotive  Safety 
Foundation,  Washington,  D.C.,  ]9G9)  p.  S. 

'A.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Public  Roads  of 
THE  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1953)   p.  37. 


'  A.  Gallatin,  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Tkeasuet 
on  Roads  and  Canals,  S.  Doc.  No.  2,'")0,  10th  Cong.,  1st  Sess., 
p.  842   (1808). 

*  Id.,  p.  843. 
^Id..  pp.  863,  864. 
"Id.,  p.  851. 
'Id.,  p.  895. 

*  J.  W.  Broolvs,  A  History  of  American  Highways,  Sect.  2, 
p.  5  (unpul)lishe(i  worlc  in  Department  of  Transportation 
Library). 

°A.  Gallatin,  supra,  note  3,  p.  738. 
'"Id.,  p.  737. 

"  G.   R.   Chatburn,   Highways   and   Highway  Transporta- 
tion (Thos.  Y.  Crowell,  New  Yorlt,  1923)  p.  62. 
'"  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  2,  pp.  46,  47. 
"  Id.,  pp.  .56,  57. 

"  A.  Gallatin,  supra,  note  3,  p.  737. 
''Id.,  p.  8.51. 
'Ud.,  p.  918. 

"A.  Rose,  supra,  note  2,  p.  40. 
"Id.,  p.  53. 

'"A.  Gallatin,  supra,  note  3,  p.  917. 
'"Id. 

''  G.  R.  Chatburn,  supra,  note  11,  pp.  101,  102. 
'■Id.,  pp.  106,  107. 
''Id.,  p.  108. 
"  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  2,  p.  66. 

'^  A.  B.  Hulbert,  Historic  Highways  of  America,  Vol.  11 
(Arthur  H.  Clark  Co.,  Cleveland,  1904)  pp.  91-96. 

'"  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  2,  p.  72. 


15 


GQfly 

federal  Pid 
for 

Rood/  ond  Conol/ 


Zone's  Trace — First  Federally  Aided  Road 

In  March  1796,  Colonel  Ebenezer  Zane,  the  founder 
of  Wheeling,  Virginia,  petitioned  Congress  for  per- 
mission to  build  a  post  road  overland  through  the 
territory  northwest  of  the  Ohio  River  to  the  important 
river  port  of  Limestone,  Kentucky  (now  Maysville). 
Such  a  route,  Zane  said,  would  be  100  miles  shorter 
than  the  windings  of  the  Ohio  River,  on  which  15 
men  with  their  boats  were  then  engaged  in  transport- 
ing the  mails,  and  would  also  be  immune  to  interrujD- 
tion  by  floods,  floating  ice  or  low  water.  The  road 
would  afford  far  faster  mail  service  while  saving  at 
least  three-quarters  of  the  $4,000  annual  cost  of  oper- 
ating the  mail  route.  Furthermore,  the  proposed  road 
would  provide  a  shorter  and  safer  route  for  travelers 
both  to  and  from  the  West. 

As  his  only  compensation  for  building  the  road, 
Zane  asked  that  he  be  allowed  to  locate  United  States 
military  bounty  land  warrants  totaling  three  square 
miles  where  his  road  crossed  the  Muskingum,  Hock- 
hocking,  and  Scioto  Rivers. 

Colonel  Zane's  request  was  approved  by  Congress 
in  the  act  of  May  17,  1796,  with  the  stipulation  that 
Zane  establish  ferries  ui)on  the  three  rivers  and  oper- 
ate them  at  rates  of  ferriage  to  be  established  by  any 
two  judges  of  the  Northwest  Territory.^ 

Zane's  first  road  was  no  more  than  a  pack  trail,  but 
as  soon  as  it  was  finished,  the  Government  established 


a  mail  route  over  it  from  "Wheeling  to  IMaysville  and 
beyond  to  Lexington,  Kentucky,  and  eventually  Nash- 
ville, Tennessee.  Zane's  Trace  played  an  important 
part  in  opening  southeastern  Ohio  to  settlement.  It 
was  also  used  by  hundreds  of  flatboatmen  returning 
on  foot  or  horseback  to  Pittsburgh  and  upriver  towns 
from  downriver  ports  as  far  away  as  New  Orleans. 

By  1803,  the  road  was  chopped  out  wide  enough  for 
wagons  to  pass.  The  portion  between  '\Anieeling  and 
Zanesville  became  a  part  of  the  National  Road  after 
1825,  and  the  rest  became  an  important  turnpike  in 
the  1830's. 

The  grant  to  Zane  appears  to  be  the  first  instance 
of  local  road  subsidy  by  the  Federal  Government,  but 
it  did  not  have  much  influence  on  Federal  policy  after- 
ward. Furthermore,  the  aid  extended  was  not  par- 
ticularly generous,  since,  in  any  event,  Zane  had  the 
legal  right  as  a  Revolutionary  War  veteran  to  ex- 
change his  warrants  (and  any  he  might  buy  from 
other  veterans)  for  public  land.  In  reality,  the  act 
gave  Zane  only  the  right  to  locate  his  lands  in  advance 
of  the  general  public  and  at  strategic  locations  where 
he  could  later  profit  from  their  resale  to  settlers. 

Financing   Roads   in   New  States 

The  lack  of  roads,  and  the  resources  to  build  them, 
was  a  serious  impediment  to  the  development  of  the 
lands  north  and  west  of  the  Ohio  River.    The  United 


16 


The  Gallatin  Report. 


States  Government  owned  practically  all  of  the  un- 
developed land,  the  sale  of  which  was  its  main  soui'ce 
of  revenue.  "What  could  be  more  logical  than  to  set 
aside  a  portion  of  the  revenues  fi'om  the  sale  of  public 
lands  for  building  roads  and  canals,  thus,  promoting 
not  only  the  development  of  the  new  territories,  but 
land  sales  as  well? 

In  1801  Secretarjf  of  the  Treasury  Albert  Gallatin, 
in  a  letter  to  Representative  William  B.  Giles  of 
Virginia,  suggested  that  one-tenth  of  the  net  proceeds 
of  public  land  sales  be  applied  to  the  building  of 
roads,  but  only  with  tlie  consent  of  the  States  through 
which  such  roads  might  pass.-  This  idea  was  incor- 
porated in  the  Ohio  Statehood  Enabling  Act  of  1802, 
except  that  only  5  percent  of  the  proceeds  of  land 
sales  was  to  be  set  aside  for  roads.  Ohio's  constitu- 
tional convention  modified  the  5-percent  plan  by  in- 
sisting that  three-fiftlis  of  the  road  money  be  spent 
on  roads  "within"  the  State  and  under  the  control  of 
the  Legislature.  This  change  was  accepted  by  Con- 
gress in  1803  by  an  act  wliich  established  a  "2  percent 
fund"  derived  from  the  sale  of  i^ublic  lands  to  be  used 
under  the  direction  of  Congress  for  constructing  roads 
"to  and  through"  Ohio.^ 


Following  the  Ohio  precedent,  Louisiana,  Indiana, 
Mississippi,  Illinois,  Alabama,  and  Missouri,  on  their 
admission  to  statehood,  were  given  3  percent  grants 
for  roads,  canals,  levees,  river  improvements,  and 
schools.  Congress  later  granted  an  additional  2  per- 
cent to  these  States,  except  Indiana  and  Illinois, 
which,  with  Ohio,  had  already  received  (he  equivalent 
in  expenditures  on  the  National  Road.  The  additional 
2  percent  funds  were  used  by  these  States  for  rail- 
roads. 

The  remaining  24  States  admitted  between  1820  and 
1910  received  5  percent  grants,  except  Texas  and  West 
Virginia,  in  which  the  Federal  Government  had  no 
lands.  Of  the  22  States  that  received  grants,  9  were 
authorized  to  use  them  for  public  roads,  canals,  and 
internal  improvements,  and  13  for  schools.^ 

The  First  National  Transportation  Plan 

Secretary  Gallatin,  at  the  request  of  tlie  U.S.  Senate, 
made  the  first  national  inventory  of  transportation 
resources  in  1807.  Out  of  this  study  came  his  report 
on  roads  and  canals  in  1808,  a  remarkably  comprehen- 
sive and  forward-looking  document  which,  unfortu- 
nately, had  little  immediate  effect  on  U.S.  transpor- 
tation policy. 


17 


Gallatin  clearly  undei*stood  the  vital  role  of  trans- 
portation for  increasing  the  wealth  of  nations.  As 
he  stated  in  his  report : 

It  is  sufficiently  evident  that,  whenever  the  annual  ex- 
pense of  transportation  on  a  certain  route,  in  its  natural 
state,  exceeds  the  interest  on  the  capital  employed  in 
improving  the  communication,  and  the  annual  expense 
of  transportation  (exclusively  of  tolls),  by  the  improved 
route,  the  difference  is  an  annual  additional  income  to 
the  nation.  Nor  does  in  that  case  the  general  result 
vary,  although  the  tolls  may  not  have  been  fixed  at  a  rate 
sufficient  to  pay  to  the  undertal<ers  the  interest  on  the 
capital  laid  out.  They,  indeed,  when  that  happens,  lose ; 
but  the  community  is  nevertheless  benefited  by  the 
undertaking.  The  general  gain  is  not  confined  to  the 
difference  between  the  expense  of  the  transportation  of 
those  articles  which  had  been  formerly  conveyed  by  that 
route,  but  many  which  were  brought  to  market  by  other 
channels  will  then  find  a  new  and  more  advantageous 
direction ;  and  those  which  on  account  of  their  distance 
or  weight  could  not  be  transported  in  any  manner  what- 
ever, will  acquire  a  value,  and  become  a  clear  addition 
to  the  national  wealth.^ 

Gallatin  then  went  on  to  show  that  in  developed 
countries,  such  as  France  and  England,  there  is  suf- 
ficient concentration  of  wealth  and  population  that 
private  capital  will  flow  into  undertakings,  such  as 
canals  and  turnpikes,  offering  only  remote  and  mod- 
erate profit.  By  contrast,  in  underdeveloped  countries, 
such  as  the  United  States,  commerce  will  not  support 
expensive  roads  and  canals,  except  near  a  few  seaport 
cities.  Even  these  facilities  will  not  be  fully  produc- 
tive until  they  become  integrated  into  larger  networks 
which  only  the  general  government  can  finance  and 
carry  through. 

Gallatin,  therefore,  proposed  that  Congress  launch 
a  great  national  program  of  roads,  canals  and  inland 
navigations  to  be  completed  in  10  years  and  which  he 
estimated  would  cost  about  $20  million.  To  finance 
this  program,  he  recommended  annual  appropriations 
of  $2  million,  amounting  to  less  than  one-seventh  of 
the  Government's  annual  income  and  less  than  half 
of  the  fiscal  surplus  at  that  time.    This  modest  invest- 


ment would,  he  said,  not  only  stimulate  internal  de- 
velopment, but  would  also  enhance  the  value  of  the 
yet  unsold  Federal  lands  by  far  more  than  the  cost  of 
the  program,  while  contributing  to  the  national  de- 
fense. Lastly  and  most  importantly,  "Good  roads  and 
canals  will  shorten  distances,  facilitate  commercial  and 
personal  intercourse,  and  unite,  by  a  still  more  inti- 
mate community  of  interests,  the  most  remote  quarters 
of  the  United  States.  No  other  single  operation, 
within  the  power  of  the  Government,  can  more  ef- 
fectually tend  to  strengthen  and  perpetuate  that 
Union  which  secures  external  independence,  domestic 
peace,  and  internal  liberty."^ 

The  works  proposed  by  Gallatin  were,  first,  a  series 
of  great  canals  along  the  Atlantic  coast  connecting 
the  natural  bays  and  estuaries  into  one  continuous 
waterway  for  the  carriage  of  heavy  freight.  Supple- 
menting this  waterway,  there  would  be  a  light-duty 
turnpike  from  Maine  to  Georgia  for  passengers,  mail 
and  light  goods  hauling.  The  second  part  of  the  plan 
was  to  form  communications  between  the  four  great 
Atlantic  rivers  and  the  Western  rivers  by  river  im- 
provements, short  canals  and  four  heavy-duty  freight 
turnpikes  across  the  mountains.  These  would  be  sup- 
plemented by  internal  roads  to  Detroit,  St.  Louis  and 
New  Orleans.  The  third  part  was  to  open  inland 
navigation  between  the  Hudson  River  and  the  Great 
Lakes  and  the  St.  Lawrence  River,  plus  a  canal  around 
the  Niagara  rapids  to  open  the  Great  Lakes  to  sloop 
navigation  as  far  as  the  extremities  of  Lake  Michigan. 

The  First  National  Plan  For  Financing 
Internal   Improvements 

Gallatin's  bold  scheme  was  years  ahead  of  its  time 
and,  further,  it  was  proposed  at  a  time  when  Congress 
was  already  divided  by  the  Cumberland  Road  debate. 
It  was  shelved  during  the  War  of  1812.  However, 
the  plan  had  many  friends  in  and  out  of  Congress, 
chief  of  whom  was  Jolxn  C.  Calhoun,  South  Carolina. 


This  scene  at  the  Fairview  Inn,  near  Baltimore,  is  typical  of 
the  heavy  travel  on  the  Cumberland  Road.  Heavily  loaded 
freight  wagons,  herds  of  stock,  stagecoaches,  and  buggies  de- 


pended on  the  inns  along  the  way  for  food  and  rest  after  long 
weary  hours  on  the  road. 


18 


Bridge  over  the  Monocacy  River  near  Frederick,  Maryland, 
built  about  1810  by  Baltimore  bankers  on  the  road  connecting 
Baltimore  with  the  old  Cumberland  Road. 


In  1816  the  question  of  chartering  a  second  National 
Bank  was  before  Congress.  Calhoun  introduced  a 
bill  providing  that  the  bonus  of  $1.5  million  to  be 
paid  by  the  Bank  for  the  new  charter,  plus  the  divi- 
dends on  the  Go\-erinnent's  stock  in  the  Bank  for  the 
next  20  yeare,  be  set  apart  as  a  i)ermanent  fund  for 
internal  improvements.  This  fund  was  to  be  appor- 
tioned among  tlie  States  in  proi)ortion  to  their  repre- 
sentation in  the  lower  Plouse  of  Congress,  and  the 
improvements  were  to  be  built  by  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment with  the  assent  of  the  States  in  which  they 
might  be  located.  Since  the  annual  di\idends  on  the 
Government's  $7  million  of  stock  were  $500,000,  the 
bill  would  pi'ovide  a  20-year  program  of  nearly  $13 
million. 

Urging  adoption  of  this  bill,  Calhoun  pointed  to  the 
need  for  roads  for  defense,  but  primarily  to  encourage 
commerce  and  cement  political  union : 

If  we  look  into  the  nature  of  wealth,  we  find  that 
nothing  can  be  more  favorable  to  its  growth  than  good 
roads  and  canals  .  .  .  Many  of  the  improvements  con- 
templated are  on  too  great  a  scale  for  the  resources 
of  the  States  or  individuals ;  and  many  of  such  nature 
that  the  rival  jealousy  of  the  States,  if  left  alone,  might 
prevent. 

Let  us  then  bind  the  Republic  together  with  a  perfect 
.system  of  roads  and  canals.  Let  us  conquer  space.  It 
is  thus  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  Republic  will  be 
brought  within  a  few  days  travel  of  the  centre;  it  is 
thus  a  citizen  of  the  West  will  read  the  news  of  Boston 
still  most  from  the  press.  The  mail  and  the  press  are 
the   nerves   of   the   body  politic' 

Calhoun's  bill  was  bitterly  opposed  in  both  the 
House  and  Senate,  not  only  by  the  strict  constitu- 
tionalists, but  also  by  those  who  thought  the  money 
should  be  applied  to  tax  relief  and  retirement  of  the 
war  debt.  Others  said  the  States  might  refuse  assent 
to  the  improvements  or  try  to  dictate  their  location 
for  political  expediency  and,  thus,  defeat  the  purpose 
of  the  plan.  Still  others  branded  the  bill  as  a  scheme 
to  mulct  the  wealthy  States  in  which  adequate  roads 
and  canals  had  already  been  built  at  great  expense, 
for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  and  improvident  States. 

In  the  end,  however,  the  bill  passed  both  the  House 
and  Senate  by  narrow  margins,  to  be  vetoed  on  March 
3,  1817,  by  President  Madison,  who  declared  it  to  be 
an  improper  interpretation  of  the  constitutional  power 
of  the  General  Government  to  regulate  commerce  and 
provide  for  the  national  defense.*  The  motion  to 
override  the  veto  failed  in  the  House,  ending  the  first 
attempt  to  set  up  a  continuing  national  plan  for  in- 
ternal improvements.® 

The  Cumberland   Road 

On  ]\Iarch  29,  1806,  President  Jefferson  approved 
an  act  which  directed  that  the  President,  with  the 
advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  appoint  three  com- 
missioners to  lay  out  and  build  a  road  from  the  head 
of  navigation  on  the  Potomac  Eiver  at  Cumberland, 
Maryland,  to  a  point  on  the  Ohio  River."  The  act 
set  certain  minimum  standards  for  the  proposed  road 
and  appropriated  $30,000  from  the  proceeds  of  Ohio 
land  sales  to  finance  the  location  of  the  road  and  to 
start  construction.  The  debates  attending  the  passage 
of  this  act  exposed  the  bitter  rivalries  and  jealousies 


19 


between  the  eastern  seaboard  States  over  the  develop- 
ment of  the  lands  beyond  the  Ohio  River. 

The  seaport  cities  in  particular  feared  the  advantage 
that  a  Government-financed  road  might  give  in  com- 
petition for  the  western  trade.  Strict  constructionists 
of  the  U.S.  Constitution  denied  that  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment had  the  authority  to  build  roads  at  all,  except 
possibly  in  the  territories.  Proponents  of  Federal 
roadbuilding  on  the  other  hand,  asserted  that  author- 
ity to  build  roads  was  implied  under  the  "general 
welfare"  clause  of  the  Constitution. 

In  the  end,  the  issue  was  decided  by  those  of  both 
parties  who  felt  strongly  that  the  bonds  between  the 
East  and  the  West  should  be  strengthened  in  the  in- 
terest of  national  unity,  and  the  act  passed  the  House 
by  a  narrow  margin.  At  least  one  representative  from 
every  State  voted  in  fa\'or  of  the  road. 

President  Jefferson  lost  no  time  in  selecting  the 
three  commissioners  and  in  applying  to  the  legisla- 
tures of  Maryland,  Virginia,  and  Pennsylvania  for 
permission  to  build  the  road  within  their  boundaries. 
The  first  two  States  gave  their  assent  without  restric- 
tion, but  Pennsylvania  held  back  and  conditioned  its 
approval  on  the  road's  passing  through  the  towns  of 
Uniontown  and  Washington.^^ 

It  took  the  commissioners  4  years  to  select  the  route, 
and  another  8  years  to  push  the  construction  through 
from  Cumberland  to  AVlieeling,  Virginia,  the  head  of 


low-water  navigation  on  the  Ohio  River.  This  road 
was  30  feet  wide,  with  the  central  20  feet  paved  by 
the  Tresaguet  method,  that  is,  with  several  layers  of 
small  broken  stone  placed  over  a  foundation  of  7-inch 
stones.  It  was  cleared  66  feet  wide,  ditched,  and  pro- 
vided with  drains  and  bridges.  The  cost,  paid  out  of 
the  Ohio  2  percent  land  fund,  was  about  $1.75  million, 
or  an  average  of  $14,000  per  mile.*  ^^ 

From  the  time  the  first  section  was  opened  in  1813, 
the  Cumberland  Road  came  under  heavy  traffic,  so 
heavy  in  fact,  that  the  stone  surface  was  worn  away 
almost  as  fast  as  it  was  built.  The  commissioners 
were  unable,  with  the  funds  available,  to  provide  the 
systematic  and  continual  maintenance  required  by 
broken  stone  roads;  and  they  were  without  power  to 
protect  the  road  from  the  depredations  of  travelers 
and  local  residents.**  Consequently,  the  condition  of 
the  road  steadily  deteriorated,  despite  efforts  to  repair 
the  worst  damage. 

To  provide  a  regular  source  of  funds  for  mainte- 
nance, Congress  in  1822  passed  an  act  authorizing  the 
collection  of  tolls  from  users  of  the  road.     President 


*  This  cost  included  maintenance  during  the  8-year  con- 
struction period. 

**  Freighters  ripped  up  the  shoulders  by  descending  the  steep 
hills  with  locked  wheels.  Local  inhabitants  fenced  in  parts  of 
the  right-of-way,  dug  into  the  banks,  dragged  logs  over  the 
road,  and  even  stole  broken  stone  from  the  road  bed." 


Old  Cumberland  Road  at  Wills  Creek  just  west  of  Cumberland,  Bid. 


20 


OM  Cumherland  Road  approaching  Chestnut  Ridge  Mountains  in  Pennsylvania  about  1899. 


Monroe  vetoed  this  act  on  the  ground  that  it  was  an 
unwarranted  extension  of  the  power  vested  in  Con- 
gress to  make  appropriations,  "under  which  power, 
with  the  consent  of  the  States  through  whicli  the  road 
passes,  the  work  was  originally  commenced,  and  has 
so  far  been  executed."  ^'  Collection  of  tolls,  the  Presi- 
dent said,  implied  a  power  of  jurisdiction  or  sover- 
eignty which  was  not  granted  to  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment by  the  Constitution  and  could  not  be  unilaterally 
conveyed  by  any  State  without  a  constitutional  amend- 
ment. It  was  one  thing  to  make  appropriations  for 
public  imi)rovements,  but  an  entirely  ditt'erent  thing 
to  assume  jurisdiction  and  sovereignty  over  the  land 
whereon  those  improvements  were  made.'-'  This  has 
been  the  Federal  position  on  highway  grants  to  the 
States  down  to  the  present  day. 

Transfer  to   State   Control 

In  the  10  years  following  President  JMonroe's  veto, 
Congress  made  occasional  and  niggardly  appropria- 
tions for  maintaining  the  Cumberland  Road,  but  these 
were  inadequate  to  i^reserve  it  under  ever-increasing 
traffic*  The  supporters  of  the  road  linally  realized 
that  there  was  little  chance  that  a  Congress  bitterly 
divided  over  tlie  issue  of  federally-financed  internal 
improvements  would  ever  make  adequate  provisions 
for  keeping  it  in  repair.  State  operation  as  a  toll 
road  seemed  to  be  the  only  solution  to  the  dilemma, 
and  between  1831  and  1833,  the  Legislatures  of  Ohio, 
Pennsylvania,  Marjdand  and  Virginia  agreed  to  ac- 
cept and  maintain  their  sections  of  the  National  Road. 


*  For  the  years  1823  to  1827,  a  total  of  $55,000  was  appro- 
priated for  repairs,  an  average  of  only  $88  per  mile  per  year — 
hardly  enough  to  keep  the  ditches  open.'^  An  idea  of  the 
traffic  can  be  had  from  the  fact  tliat  in  1822  one  of  the  five 
commission  liouses  at  Wheeling  unloaded  1,081  wagons,  aver- 
aging 3,500  pounds  of  freight  each,  and  the  annual  total  freight 
bill  from  Baltimore  to  Wlieeling  was  estimated  at  $390,000." 
In  addition,  hundreds  of  stagecoaches  and  private  vehicles 
used  the  road  daily.  Nineteen  thousand  pigs  were  driven  over 
the  road  in  1831,  some  in  droves  of  GOO  animals." 


Maryland  and  Pennsylvania,  which  had  the  oldest  and 
worst-woni  sections  conditioned  their  acceptance  upon 
the  Government's  first  putting  the  road  into  a  good 
state  of  repair  and  erecting  toll  gates.'" 

The  Government  spent  nearly  $800,000  in  1833, 
1834,  and  1835  for  repairing  the  road  east  of  the  Ohio 
River,  the  work  being  done  mider  the  supernsion  of 
the  Anny  Corps  of  Engineers.  This  work  was  prin- 
cipally rebuilding  the  pavement  according  to  Mc- 
Adams'  method,  adding  broken  stone  to  replenish  the 
wear  of  traffic.  As  soon  as  each  section  was  recon- 
structed, the,  States  assumed  jurisdiction  and  mainte- 
nance. By  the  end  of  1835  the  National  Road,  from 
Cumberland  to  the  Ohio-Indiana  line,  was  national 
no  longer. 

Westward  Extension  of  the  National  Road 

As  soon  as  the  Cumberland  Road  reached  the  Ohio 
River,  there  was  agitation  to  extend  it  westward 
through  Ohio  and  the  newly-admitted  States  of 
Indiana  and  Illinois.  These  States,  like  Ohio,  had 
provisions  in  their  acts  of  admission  for  setting  aside 
2  percent  of  the  income  from  sales  of  public  lands  for 
road  improvements. 

In  1820  Congress  appropriated  $10,000  for  laying 
out  a  road  between  "Wlieeling  and  the  left  bank  of  the 
Mississippi  River.  Howe\-er,  the  road  did  not  officially 
get  under  way  until  1825,  when  Congress  made  an- 
other appropriation  to  start  construction  and  to  extend 
the  surveys  to  the  permanent  seat  of  government  in 
Missouri,  passing  through  the  seats  of  government  of 
Ohio,  Indiana,  and  Illinois.^"  Thereafter,  the  Gov- 
ernment spent  slightly  over  $4  million  to  push  the 
road  as  far  west  as  Vandalia,  then  the  capital  of 
Illinois. 

From  Wheeling  to  Vandalia  the  road  was  laid  out 
with  Roman  straightness  in  an  80-foot  right-of-way, 
but  except  in  eastern  Ohio,  it  did  not  approach  the 
high  construction  standard  of  the  Cumberland  Road 
east  of  the  Ohio  River.     This  was  partly  because  of 


21 


Old  tollhouse  on  Cumberland  Road  near  Frostburg,  Md. 


the  scarcity  of  good  roadbuilding  stone,  which  had  to 
be  hauled  long  distances.  In  Indiana  and  Illinois  the 
road  was  only  a  cleared  and  graded  dirt  track. 

The  annual  appropriation  bills  continued  to  be  bit- 
terly opposed  in  Congress  and  passed  by  increasingly 
narrower  margins.  After  1832  there  was  sentiment 
in  Congress  to  use  the  money  appropriated  for  the 
National  Road  to  build  a  railroad  west  from  Colum- 
bus, Ohio,  and  an  unsuccessful  amendment  to  the 
appropriation  bill  for  1836  proposed  to  do  just  that. 
The  last  regular  appropriation  for  the  Road  was  in 
1838,  but  construction  continued  until  1840  when  the 
funds  ran  out.^^ 

By  its  act  of  1831,  Ohio  accepted  the  road  as  fast 
as  it  was  completed  by  the  Federal  engineers  and  put 
it  imder  toll.  The  road  was  never  finished  in  Indiana 
and  Illinois,  and  in  1848  Congress  ceded  to  the  former 
"all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  every  kind  belonging 
to  the  United  States  as  connected  with  said  road. . . ." 
A  similar  act  for  Illinois  was  passed  in  1856.  In 
1879  Congress  granted  Ohio  the  right  to  make  the 
road  free,  ^^Provided,  That  this  consent  shall  have  no 
effect  in  respect  to  creating  or  recognizing  any  duty 
or  liability  whatever  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States."  " 

The  National  Road  never  reached  the  Mississippi, 
but  petered  out  in  the  Illinois  prairies.  Its  ultimate 
demise  could  have  been  forecast  in  1831  when  Congress 
agreed  to  turn  the  eastern  sections  over  to  the  States 
for  operation  and  maintenance.  The  end  was  due  not 
so  much  to  the  constitutional  and  sectional  objections 


that  had  plagiied  the  road  from  the  beginning,  as  to 
the  growing  feeling  in  the  country  and  in  Congress 
that  roads  and  canals  were  already  obsolete  for  long- 
distance transportation.  The  day  of  die  railroad  was 
at  hand. 

The  Maysville  Turnpike  Veto 

The  course  of  highway  policy  in  the  United  States 
was  profoundly  influenced  by  two  presidential  vetoes. 
President  Monroe's  veto  of  Federal  toll  collections  on 
the  Cumberland  Road  has  already  been  mentioned. 
President  Jackson's  veto  on  May  27,  1830,  of  turnpike 
stock  subscriptions  established  national  policy  with 
respect  to  internal  improvements  of  purely  local 
character. 

In  January  1827,  the  Kentucky  Legislature  peti- 
tioned Congress  to  provide  Federal  aid  for  an  arti- 
ficial road  from  Maysville  to  Lexington,  Kentucky. 
This  would  be  an  extension  of  the  mail  route  leaWng 
the  National  Road  at  Zanesville,  Ohio,  and  following 
Zane's  Trace  to  the  Ohio  River.  In  1828  an  appro- 
priation bill  in  the  U.S.  Congress  authorizing  this 
road  failed  by  only  one  vote  in  the  Senate.^-^ 

The  Legislature  then  incorporated  the  Maysville, 
Washington,  Paris,  and  Lexington  Turnpike  Road 
Company  to  build  the  road,  with  the  provision  that 
1,500  shares  of  stock  be  reserved  for  subscription  by 
the  U.S.  Government.  In  a  parallel  action,  Congress 
passed  a  bill  authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
to  subscribe  to  1,500  shares  in  the  Compan^^  in  the 
name  and  for  the  use  of  the  United  States.^* 


22 


1830 — The  Maysville  Turnpike. 


The  President  vetoed  this  bill  on  the  ground  that 
the  proposed  improvement  was  of  purely  local,  and 
not  national,  importance. 

It  has  no  connection  with  any  established  system  of 
improvements ;  it  is  exclusively  within  the  limits  of  a 
State,  starting  at  a  point  on  the  Ohio  River  and  nmning 
out  60  miles  to  an  interior  town,  and  even  as  far  as  the 
State  is  interested  conferring  partial  instead  of  general 
advantages. 

However,  he  went  on. 

What  is  properly  national  in  its  character  or  otherwise 
is  an  inquiry  which  is  often  extremely  difficult  of  solu- 
tion .  .  . 

If  it  be  the  wish  of  the  people  that  the  construction 
of  roads  and  canals  should  be  conducted  by  the  Federal 
Government,  it  is  not  only  highly  expedient,  but  indis- 
pensably necessary,  that  a  previous  amendment  to  the 
Constitution,  delegating  the  necessary  power  and  defining 
and  restricting  its  exercise  with  reference  to  the  sov- 
ereignty of  the  States,   should  be  made.   .   .  .^ 

Jackson  was  not  personally  hostile  to  internal  im- 
provements; in  fact,  less  than  a  year  before  in  his 
first  annual  message  to  Congress  he  had  recommended 
distributing  the  embarrassing  annual  surplus  Federal 
revenue  among  the  States  to  be  used  by  them  for 
internal  improvements. 

The  Maysville  Turnpike  veto  not  onh^  put  an  end 
to  all  thought  of  national  aid  to  local  road  improve- 
ments, but  it  also  forestalled  any  efforts  that  might  be 
made  to  provide  Federal  aid  to  such  genuinely  na- 
tional promotions  as  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad. 
Over  20  years  would  pass  before  Congress  would  i^ro- 
vide  any  significant  subsidy  for  railroads. 


The  Maysville  Turnpike  was  eventually  completed 
with  State  and  private  ftmds.  The  road  had  long 
been  a  mail  route,  so  the  Government  insisted  it  could 
run  the  mails  over  it  without  paying  tolls.  This 
question  was  settled  by  the  courts  in  favor  of  the 
Turnpike  Company  in  1838;  thereafter  mail  contrac- 
tors paid  the  same  fees  as  the  general  public.-" 

The   Michigan   Road 

The  first  settlements  in  Indiana  were  along  the 
Ohio  River  and  the  Wabash  and  White  Rivers.  By 
1826  settlement  had  reached  the  southern  limits  of  the 
Potowatomi  Indian  lands,  which  extended  from  the 
Wabash  River  to  Lake  ^Michigan.  At  this  time  the 
only  overland  communication  with  central  Indiana 
was  along  a  poor  dirt  wagon  road  from  Indianapolis, 
the  capital,  to  Madison  on  the  Ohio  River. 

In  October  1826,  the  U.S.  Government  concluded  a 
treaty  with  the  Potowatomi  under  which  the  Indians 
ceded  a  large  area  of  northern  Indiana  and  southern 
Michigan  to  the  United  States.  Among  other  things 
this  treaty  provided  that  the  State  of  Indiana  should 
be  given  a  strip  of  land  100  feet  wide  for  a  road  com- 
mencing at  Lake  Michigan  and  extending  to  the 
Wabash  River,  jilus  a  section  (640  acres)  of  good  land 
contiguous  to  every  mile  of  the  road,  and  in  addition, 
a  section  of  land  for  every  mile  the  road  was  extended 
southward  from  the  Wabash  Ri\er.  Congress,  in 
March  1827,  authorized  Indiana  to  locate  and  build 
this  "^Michigan  Road"'  in  accordance  with  the  treaty, 
from  Lake  ^Michigan  to  Indianapolis  and  southward 
to  IMadison.  using  funds  from  the  sale  of  the  desig- 
nated Indian  lands.^' 


23 


From  1830,  when  the  Le^shature  authorized  con- 
struction to  be^in,  until  1840,  the  sale  of  the  Indian 
lands  yielded  $241,332,  with  several  hundred  acres 
remaining  to  be  sold.  As  noted  earlier,  Indiana  also 
received  grants  from  Congrass  under  its  Statehood 
Act  from  the  proceeds  of  public  land  sales  within  the 
State.  For  a  decade,  these  were  the  two  principal 
sources  of  finids  for  wagon  roads.  When  they  were 
exhausted,  Indiana,  like  its  neighbors,  turned  to 
private  financing  and  chartered  i)lank  road  and  turn- 
pike companies  to  finish  the  job. 

Land  Grants  to  the  States  for  Wagon  Roads 

The  grant  of  Potowatomi  lands  to  Indiana  was  not 
the  fii'st  Federal  land  grant  to  a  State  for  roads,  or 
the  last.  The  first  significant  Federal  land  grant  was 
in  February  1823  when  Congress  granted  Ohio  a  120- 
foot  right-of-way  for  a  public  road  from  the  lower 
rapids  of  the  Miami  River  of  Lake  Erie  to  the  western 
boundai-y  of  the  Western  Reserve.  To  finance  the 
road,  Congress  gave  the  State  all  the  public  lands  for 
1  mile  on  each  side  of  the  road,  with  the  proviso  that 
they  could  not  be  sold  for  less  than  $1.25  per  acre.^* 

Congress  subsidized  a  toll  turnpike  from  Columbus 
to  Sandusky  by  another  grant  to  Ohio  in  1827.  This 
grant  gave  the  State  every  alternate  section  of  land 
abutting  the  west  side  of  the  road.^^ 

The  Maysville  Turnpike  veto  put  an  end  to  further 
wagon  road  subsidies,  other  than  the  National  Road, 
tmtil  the  Civil  War.  Between  1863  and  1869,  however. 
Congress  made  10  separate  grants  of  land  to  Michigan, 
Wisconsin,  and  Oregon  for  certain  "military"  wagon 
roads.  These,  with  the  previous  grants  to  Indiana 
and  Ohio,  totaled  3,560,000  acresj^"  or  about  5,500 
square  miles — an  area  somewhat  larger  than  Connecti- 
cut. 

Federal  Land  Subsidies  for  Canals 

Prior  to  President  Jackson's  administration  (1829- 
1837),  Federal  largesse  extended  not  only  to  roads, 
but  canal  and  river  improvements  as  well.  In  March 
1822,  Congress  granted  Illinois  a  180-foot  right-of- 
way  for  a  canal  to  connect  the  Illinois  River  and  Lake 
Michigan.  This  act  authorized  the  State  to  take  con- 
struction materials  from  adjacent  public  lands  and, 
in  addition,  granted  Illinois  one-half  of  the  public 
lands  in  a  strip  10  miles  wide  centered  on  the  canal. 
In  return,  the  State  agreed  that  the  canal  would  be 
"a  public  highway  for  the  use  of  the  Government  of 
the  United  States,  free  from  any  toll  or  charge  what- 
ever, for  any  property  of  the  United  States,  or  any 
persons  in  their  service."  ^^ 

This  Illinois  River-Lake  Michigan  Canal  grant  was 
the  first  land  subsidy  voted  by  Congress  for  internal 
improvements,  and  became  a  precedent  for  the  subse- 
quent granting  of  immense  tracts  of  the  public  domain. 

An  act  of  May  24,  1828,  which,  as  a  subsidy  to 
canals,  granted  Ohio  500,000  acres  to  be  selected  from 
any  available  public  lands  within  the  State,  became 
the  precedent  for  the  general  act  of  September  4,  1841, 
granting  500,000  acres  each  to  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois, 
Alabama,  Missouri,  Louisiana,  Arkansas,  and  Michi- 
gan  and   to  each  public  land  State  admitted  there- 


after.* These  grants  were  to  be  used  for  specified 
internal  improvements,  such  as  roads,  railways, 
bridges,  canals,  river  improvements,  and  draining  of 
swamps.^^ 

Military   Roads — The   Natchez  Trace 

Until  the  construction  of  the  Cumberland  Road  and 
the  Pennsylvania  Road,  the  only  outlets  for  the  pro- 
duce of  the  Ohio  River  Valley  were  by  packhorse 
trains  across  the  mountains  or  downriver  in  flatboats 
and  rafts.  At  New  Orleans  the  crews  sold  the  vessels 
and  their  cargoes  and  either  embarked  by  sea  for 
eastern  ports  or  returned  overland  by  foot  or  horse- 
back through  the  lands  of  the  friendly  Choctaw  and 
Chickasaw  Indians,  to  the  Mero  Settlements,  now 
Nashville,  Tennessee.  From  here,  they  could  find 
their  way  to  the  upper  valley  by  trails  through  central 
Kentucky  to  Zane's  Trace  and  beyond. 

In  1801  the  Government  negotiated  agreements  with 
the  Choctaws  and  Chickasaws  "  'to  lay  out,  open,  and 
make,  a  convenient  wagon  road  through  their  land, 
between  the  settlements  of  Mero  District  (Nashville), 
in  the  State  of  Tennessee,  and  those  of  Natchez,  in  the 
Mississippi  Territory.'  "  ^^  Upon  conclusion  of  these 
agreements,  the  Army  began  widening  the  old  Indian 
trails,  eight  companies  of  infantry  working  south  from 
Mero  District  and  six  companies  northward  from 
Natchez.  This  military  road,  later  called  the  Natchez 
Trace,  was  completed  in  1803.^*  Although  it  served 
a  peaceful  purpose  to  thousands  of  returning  flatboat- 
men,  this  road  was  initially  conceived  with  strategic 
military  ends  in  view,  in  the  event  the  United  States 
should  become  embroiled  with  Spain  over  the  port  of 
New  Orleans. 

The  Jackson   Military  Road 

Following  the  War  of  1812,  Congress  authorized  a 
more  direct  military  road  from  Nashville  to  New 
Orleans,  which  w;ould  shorten  the  distance  between 
those  cities  by  220  miles. 

The  First  and  Eighth  Infantry  Regiments  began 
work  on  this  road  in  June  1817,  completing  it  in  May 
1820.  Two  congressional  appropriations  totaling 
$15,000  were  only  a  small  part  of  the  cost  of  this  road. 
Over  75,800  man-days  of  labor  were  expended  on  it 
by  the  troops,  and  the  total  disbursement  from  mili- 
tary funds  was  well  over  $300,000.  For  this,  the 
Army  cleared  a  right-of-way  40  feet  wide  through 
dense  forest,  graded  an  earth  road  35  feet  wide,  built 
20,000  feet  of  corduroy  causeways,  and  over  35  sub- 
stantial bridges  from  60  to  200  feet  long.  By  1824 
most  of  this  road  south  of  Columbus,  INIississippi,  was 
grown  over  and  abandoned.^^ 

Military   Roads   on  the   Frontiers 

The  Army  built  more  than  100  other  military  wagon 
roads  in  the  period  from  1807  to  1880,  most  of  them 
in  the  territories.  Their  total  length  was  well  over 
21,000  miles,  and  they  cost  at  least  $4  million,  not 
counting  the  labor  of  the  troops.-^®  Some  were  built 
by  the  troops  and  some  by  hired  labor. 


I 


*  States  admitted  after  1889  received  cash  grants  for  edu- 
cational and  penal  institutions  instead  of  acreage. 


24 


1809— The  Natchez  Trace. 


1820— General  Jackson's  Military  Road. 


J 

P^ 

1 

'^^^^^^^^^r^                                         i  wM^^^^^^^M 

114 

^^.. 

L         V 

OHBI 

1 

J 

jl^^  **•""■ 

1:^ 

IV.   it 

^^1 

iSe^ — The  Mullan  Road. 


These  roads  were  crude — mere  wagon  tracks  across 
the  prairies  or  traces  chopped  through  the  heavy  tim- 
ber of  Florida  or  Wisconsin — but  in  the  early  years 
of  settlement,  they  were  often  the  only  roads  the  set- 
tlers had.  Among  them  were  the  famous  Santa  Fe 
Trail  from  Kansas  City  to  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico, 
marked  by  the  Army,  following  a  route  originally 
beaten  by  traders  and  trappers,  and  Colonel  Cooke's 
Road  from  Santa  Fe  to  San  Diego,  pioneered  by  the 
Army  in  1846.  The  Army  reopened  the  400-mile  Old 
Spanish  Trail  from  Pensacola  to  St.  Augustine, 
Florida,  in  1824-1830.  Military  roads  radiated  like 
the  spokes  of  a  wheel  from  strategic  Detroit  toward 
Chicago,  Grand  Rapids,  Saginaw  and  Cleveland,  and 
in  1838  a  512-mile  wagon  road  was  made  from  Ft. 
Snelling,  Minnesota  Territory,  to  Ft.  Leavenworth  in 
Kansas  Territory. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  the  military  wagon 
roads  was  located  and  built  by  Lieutenant  John 
Mullan  in  1858  to  1862  from  Fort  Benton  in  Dakota 
Territory,  the  head  of  steamboat  navigation  on  the 


Missouri  River,  across  the  Rocky  Mountains  to  Old 
Fort  Walla  Walla  on  the  Columbia  River.  For  20 
years  afterward,  this  road  was  the  only  way  open  to 
emigrants  into  western  Montana  and  northern  Idaho." 

In  the  single  year  1866  there  passed  over  the  Mullan 
Road  20,000  persons  travelling  back  and  forth,  including 
2,000  miners  stampeding  into  Montana,  1,500  head  of 
horses,  5,000  head  of  cattle,  6,000  mules  loaded  with 
freight,  83  wagons  and  $1  million  in  money.'' 

During  the  overland  migrations  of  the  1850's  and 
1860's,  the  Army  improved  and  marked  most  of  the 
pioneer  wagon  trails  and  used  them  to  supply  its  gar- 
risons. Between  1850  and  1869  some  of  these  trails 
were  transcontinental  mail  routes  used  by  the  Butter- 
field  Overland  Mail,  the  Pony  Express,  and  other  mail 
contractors. 

After  the  Government  divested  itself  of  the  National 
Road,  military  roads  were  practically  the  only  Federal 
subsidies  to  local  transportation.  These  were  meager 
indeed,  compared  to  the  largesse  that  ^^■as  distributed 
by  Congress  to  the  railroads. 


26 


REFERENCES 


*A.  B.  HuLBEET,  Historic  Highways  of  America,  Vol.  11 
(Arthur  H.  Clark,  Co.,  Cleveland,  1904)  pp.  157,  158. 

'P.  D.  JoRDON,  The  Nationax  Road  (Bobbs-Merrill,  In- 
dianapolis, 1948)  pp.  71,  72. 

'A.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Pi-blic  Roads  of 
THE  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1953)  p.  66. 

*  Office  of  Feder.m,  Coordinator  of  U.S.  Transportation, 
Public  Aids  to  Transportation,  Aids  to  Railroads  and  Re- 
lated Subjects,  Vol.  II   (GPO  Washington,  D.C.,  1938)  p.  7. 

'A.  Gallatin,  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
ON  Roads  and  Canals,  S.  Doc.  No.  250,  10th  Cong.,  1st  Sess., 
p.  724  (1808). 

*Id.,  p.  725. 

'Annals  of  Congress,  14th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.  (Gales  and 
Seaton,  Washington,  D.C.,  1854)  pp.  851-854. 

'Id.,  pp.  1061,  1062. 

'Id. 

"A.  Rose,  supra,  note  3,  p.  66. 

"A.  B.  HuLBERT,  Historic  Highways  of  America,  Vol.  10 
(Arthur  H.  Clark,  Co.,  Cleveland,  1904)  p.  26. 

"Id.,  p.  54. 

"  P.  D.  Jordan,  svpra,  note  2,  p.  88. 

"  A.  B.  HuLBERT.  supra,  note  11,  pp.  58,  59. 

"Id.,  p.  59. 

"Id.,  pp.  194-197. 

"  P.  D.  Jordan,  supra,  note  2,  p.  217. 


"Id.,  p.  238. 
"Id.,  p.  170. 

'"  A.  B.  HuLBERT,  supra,  note  11,  p.  73. 
"Id.,  p.  90. 

"  P.  D.  Jordan,  supra,  note  2,  p.  175. 
"  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  8,  p.  57. 
"  Id.,  p.  58. 

"A.  B.  HuLBERT,  supra,  note  1,  pp.  171,  172. 
"°  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  3,  p.  58. 

"  A.  C.  Rose,  The  Michigan  Road,  Road  Builders  News, 
Vol.  38,  No.  7,  Aug.  1938,  pp.  12-17. 

^  Off.  of  Fed.  Coordinatoe,  supra,  note  4,  p.  7. 

'"Id.,  p.  8. 

''Id. 

"Id.,  p.  9. 

"A.  Rose,  supra,  note  3,  pp.  44,  45. 

'*Id.,  p.  44. 

'"Id.,  p.  51. 

™  Military  Roads.  A  Brief  History  of  the  Construction 
OF  Highways  by  the  Military  Establishment  and  a  Gazet- 
teer of  the  Military  Roads  in  Continental  United  States 
(National  Highway  Users  Conference,  Washington,  D.C.,  1935) 
pp.  1-14. 

"  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  3,  pp.  80,  81. 

"  R.  E.  HuLT,  Steamboats  in  the  Timber  ( Binf ords  and 
Mart,  Portland,  1952)  App.,  p.  205. 


27 


The 

Pgeof 

/team 


1807— Robert  Fulton's  CLERMONT 


28 


The  Beginning  of  Steam  Navigation 

The  revolution  of  mechanical  propulsion  affected 
marine  transport  about  a  generation  before  it  became 
apparent  on  land.  In  1787,  John  Fitch  established 
the  first  regular  steamboat  service  in  the  United  States 
on  the  Delaware  River,  between  Philadelphia  and 
Bordentown,  28  miles  away.  His  ship,  a  stem  wheeler, 
could  make  8  miles  per  hour,  but  the  machinery  occu- 
pied so  much  space  that  little  was  left  for  cargoes  and 
the  ship  was  commercially  imsuccessfid.  After  lim- 
ning some  2,000  miles,  she  was  laid  up  in  1790  and 
never  used  again.^ 

In  1807  Robert  Fulton,  with  the  backing  of  Robert 
R.  Livingston,  designed  a  steamboat  with  an  economic 
ratio  of  power  to  capacit3^  This  vessel  was  133  feet 
long,  with  a  beam  of  13  feet,  and  weighed  100  tons. 
She  was  a  sidewheeler,  powered  by  an  English  Boulton 
and  Watt  engine  of  about  20  horeepower,  and  could 
make  the  150-mile  trip  from  New  York  to  Albany  in 
about  30  hours.  From  her  maiden  voyage  in  August 
1807,  the  Clei^mooit  was  a  commercial  success.- 

Henry  Shreve  had  his  own  ideas  about  steamboat 
construction  for  river  navigation.  He  knew  that  the 
western  rivers  were  treacherous,  filled  with  snags  and 
shifting  sandbars,  and  subject  to  tremendous  fluctua- 
tions in  water  level.  To  successfull}^  combat  these 
hazards,  a  ship  should  have  a  very  shallow  draft  and 
a  very  powerful  engine.  To  implement  these  ideas, 
Shreve  built  his  own  steamboat,  laying  the  keel  in 
September  1815  at  Wheeling,  Virginia.  Essentially, 
the  Washington  was  a  flatboat  powered  by  steam,  with 
the  engine  on  the  main  deck  and  the  boilers  on  another 
deck  above.  To  get  the  extra  power  he  needed,  he 
operated  the  boilers  well  above  atmospheric  pressure. 
The  two-cylinder  engine  could  develop  over  100 
horsepower   driving  the  ship's   stern   paddlewheel.^ 

The  Washington  broke  all  previous  records  for  speed 
on  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio  Rivers,  and  she  was  in 
fact  the  prototype  for  the  great  fleet  that  plied  these 
rivers  for  the  next  50  years.  In  the  spring  of  1817, 
Shreve  took  her  from  Louisville  to  New  Orleans  in 
17  days,  returning  the  1,352  miles  upstream  against 
the  current  in  24:  days.  By  1860,  river  steamers  that 
could  make  the  upstream  voyage  in  less  than  5  days 
were  in  regular  service.* 

Steam   Navigation   Thrives 

After  Fulton's  successful  demonstration  that  steam 
propulsion  was  practical,  the  steamboat  industry 
prospered.  Between  1807  and  1817,  131  vessels  were 
built  in  the  United  States,  and  by  1832  there  were  474 
in  operation.  Some  of  these  were  ferries  for  trans- 
porting passengers,  carriages  and  wagons  across  large 
rivers.  In  1837,  158  steamboats  were  launched,  and 
by  1846,  steamers  were  being  built  at  a  rate  of  225  per 
year.^  By  1859.  there  were  more  than  2,000  steamboats 
on  the  Mississippi  River  and  its  tributaries. 

Steamboats  were  a  major  factor  in  opening  the  west 
for  settlement.  River  villages  became  busy  ports  and 
then  thriA-ing  cities,  such  as  Memphis,  St.  Louis. 
Louis\'ille  and  Cincinnati.  Above  all,  New  Orleans 
prospered  on  the  river  traffic,  becoming  the  third 
busiest  port  in  the  United  States,  and  in  1860  the  value 
of  products  passing  through  her  port  exceeded  $200 


million.®  Every  overland  trail  to  the  Far  AVest  began 
at  the  head  of  steamboat  navigation  on  some  western 
river. 

Federal  Assistance  to   Navigation 

Tlie  fii"st  Federal  act  for  navigation  improvement 
was  passed  in  1809.  Thereafter,  up  to  1830,  Congress 
appropriated  $2,867,000  for  subscriptions  to  canal 
stock  and  for  such  improvements  as  ports  and  piers 
and  removal  of  river  obstructions — slightly  more  than 
had  been  appropriated  for  the  National  Road.^  A 
large  part  of  these  appropriations  was  spent  to  remove 
hazards  from  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  Rivers. 

From  1830  onward,  Congress  appropriated  gener- 
ously for  river  and  harbor  improvements,  many  of 
them  as  completely  within  a  single  State  as  the  Mays- 
ville  Turnpike.  In  addition  to  improving  the  major 
rivers,  the  Great  Lakes  and  the  coastal  ports,  many 
creeks  and  inlets  were  made  navigable,  encouraging 
not  only  the  flow  of  commerce  but  also  the  flow  of 
Federal  dollars  into  every  congressional  district. 

Railroad   Expansion 

By  1850  the  railroad  had  proved  to  the  American 
people,  and  particularly  to  those  who  had  money  to 
invest,  that  it  was  far  faster,  cheaper  and  more  adapt- 
able to  the  coimtry's  transportation  needs  than  either 
turnpikes  or  canals.  As  investment  flowed  in  ever- 
increasing  amounts  into  railroads,  the  funds  available 
for  extending  or  even  maintaining  the  old  horsedrawn 
facilities  became  less  and  less  and  finally  dried  up 
altogether. 

In  the  1850's  railroad  building  escalated  into  a 
national  frenzy.  "The  people  were  crazed  with  the 
idea  of  improvement;  every  town  wanted  to  grow 
bigger  and  a  railroad  was  an  absolute  necessity ;  scores 
of  companies  were  formed  with  the  intention  of  be- 
ginning construction,  then  deeding  the  improvement 
to  some  established  line  to  operate.  Many  communi- 
ties subscribed  stock,  others  voted  bonds,  others  paid 
for  right-of-way  by  private  subscription  in  order  to 
secure  a  railroad.  The  result  was  often  overbuilding, 
parallel  lines,  too  many  roads  attempting  to  occupy 
the  same  territory,  with  the  result  that  branch  lines 
often  never  paid  interest  on  the  cost  of  construction."* 
The  fever  even  spread  to  Congress,  which  granted 
immense  tracts  of  public  land  to  subsidize  railways. 

With  the  possible  exception  of  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio,  the  Pennsylvania  and  a  few  others,  the  early 
railroads  were  local  ventures,  sometimes  less  than  20 
miles  long,  each  connecting  a  town  to  its  neighbor  or 
to  the  nearest  river,  lake,  or  seaport.  In  the  West  and 
South,  many  of  the  railroads  were  mere  extensions  of 
the  river  navigation  systems.  However,  by  1860  most 
of  the  short  lines  were  linked  up  into  systems,  a  trend 
that  was  accelerated  in  the  North  and  West  with  the 
general  adoption  of  the  56V2-inch  "standard  gauge." 

The   First  Railroad   War 

AVhen  the  Civil  War  began,  about  two-thirds  of  the 
railroad  mileage  was  in  the  North.  The  railroad  net- 
works enabled  both  the  Union  and  Confederate  forces 
to  shift  men  and  supplies  with  a  speed  previously 
unknown  in  warfare.  The  North  had  an  additional 
advantage  in  that  it  controlled  the  sea  approaches  to 


29 


Mississippi  River  Steamboats 


the  Confederacy  and  much  of  the  inland  navigation 
system,  including  Chesapeake  Bay  and  its  estuaries 
and  the  Mississippi-Ohio  River  systems.  Superiority 
in  both  land  and  water  transportation  was  an  im- 
portant factor  in  the  ultimate  victory  of  the  Union 
armies,  and  this  advantage  increased  as  the  war  went 
on.  The  North  was  able  not  only  to  maintain  its  rail- 
roads to  carry  increased  war  traffic,  but  to  extend 
them  as  well ;  while  the  South  was  barely  able  to  keep 
its  railroads  operating. 

Important  as  the  railroads  were  to  the  strategic 
conduct  of  the  war  by  botli  armies,  the  day-to-day 
military  operations  for  the  most  i:)art  followed  the 
wagon  roads,  and,  as  in  earlier  wars,  the  condition  of 
the  roads  influenced  the  outcome  of  military  opera- 
tions. The  most  famous  example  of  this  was  Bum- 
side's  disastrous  "mud  march"  of  1863,  described  by 
a  participant: 

.  .  .  thousands  of  the  boys  in  blue,  after  horses  and 
mules  could  do  no  more  in  pulling  the  pontoon  wagons 
that  must  be  gotten  through  to  the  Rappahannock,  to 
build  the  bridge  on  which  the  army  was  to  cross,  were 
put  on  the  ropes  to  tug  and  pull,  and  pull  and  tug,  hour 
after  hour,  and  way  into  the  night ;  but  they  were  Vir- 
ginia roads,  and  it  was  no  use ;  so  after  days  and  days 


of  mud  and  rain  the  campaign  was  abandoned,  and,  worn 
and  weary,  we  marched  back  to  our  old  camps  at  Fal- 
mouth and  beyond,  and  in  passing  saw  the  greetings  of 
the  'Johnnies'  over  the  river  in  Fredericksburg,  on  a 
banner  bearing  the  cheerful  legend  'Bumside  stuck  in 
the  mud.'  .  .  . 

Yes,  we  have  helped  to  build  corduroy  roads  in  war 
times,  when  it  had  grown  cold  enough  to  freeze  the  mud 
so  as  to  bear  a  soldier's  weight,  and  more  than  once  we 
have  built  right  over  the  body  of  a  horse  or  mule,  that 
had  gone  down  to  rise  no  more." 

In  the  theater  of  operations,  the  common  roads 
suffered  severely  from  heavy  military  traffic  and 
scanty  maintenance.  Collection  of  tolls  was  virtually 
impossible  on  the  Southern  turnpikes;  while  surface 
wear,  erosion,  and  damage  to  bridges  and  toll  houses 
hastened  their  bankruptcy. 

Postwar  Railroad — Steamboat  Competition 

During  the  war,  a  large  number  of  steamboats  were 
built  at  inflated  prices  to  carry  troops  and  military 
supplies  on  the  Mississippi  River  and  its  tributaries. 
When  normal  commerce  was  resumed  after  the  war, 
less  than  half  of  these  vessels  were  able  to  find  profit- 
able employment. 


30 


The  Meeting  o1  the  Rails 


Fierce  and  ruinous  competition  ensued  among  the 
shii:)owners.  whose  plight  was  compounded  by  the  rail- 
roads because  they  began  actively  extending  their 
lines  as  soon  as  hostilities  were  over.  Short  lines 
leading  to  river  ports  were  extended  inland  linking 
up  with  others,  and  eventually  connecting  with  each 
other  to  form  parallel  transportation  systems  which 
were  able  to  capture  the  passengers  of  the  steam 
packets  and  most  of  their  profitable  freight.  The 
unregulated  railroads  cut  freight  rates  below  the  cost 
of  haulage  on  sections  where  they  were  in  direct  com- 
petition with  water  transportation,  recouping  these 
losses  by  charging  higher  rates  on  other  parts  of  their 
systems.  Another  weapon  of  the  railroads  was  their 
refusal  to  establish  joint  rail-water  rates  with  the 
steamboat  companies.^" 

Fighting  back,  the  shipowners  formed  freight  pools 
and  organized  common  carrier  packet  lines  controlling 
a  number  of  boats.  They  instituted  dependable  sched- 
uled service  between  the  principal  river  ports.  These 
measures  slowed  the  drift  to  disaster  but  were  unable 
to  check  it  entirely.  Water  transportation  on  the 
Mississippi  system  reached  its  peak  in  1889,  when  over 
28  million  tons  were  carried.  Thereafter,  traffic  de- 
clined, in  spite  of  tremendous  increases  in  the  Nation's 
population  and  wealth,  to  about  19.5  million  tons  in 
1906,  and  16  million  tons  in  1916.  Practically  all  of 
this  was  heavy  bulk  freight,  such  as  coal,  stone  and 
gravel,  carried  in  long  barge  tows.  The  romantic 
river  packets  were  becoming  things  of  the  past." 


Federal   Subsidies  to   Railroads 

Early  Federal  subsidies  to  railroads  had  been  in  the 
form  of  surveys  made  at  Government  expense  by  civil 
engineers  and  officers  of  the  U.S.  Army  and  the  re- 
mission of  import  duties  on  railroad  iron. 

The  numerous  turnpike  and  canal  projects  of  the 
early  1880's  created  a  brisk  demand  for  civil  engineers 
and  surveyors,  yet  the  supply  of  such  individuals  in 
the  United  States  was  quite  limited.  The  largest 
group  was  employed  by  the  U.S.  Army  in  its  Corps 
of  Engineers.* 

In  April  1824,  Congress  passed  the  General  Survey 
Bill  (4  Stat.  22),  appropriating  $30,000  annually  and 
authorizing  the  President  to  use  a  limited  number  of 
civil  engineers  and  officers  of  the  Corps  of  Engineers 
to  prepare  the,  necessary  surveys,  plans  and  estimates 
for  "  'such  roads  and  canals  as  he  may  deem  of  na- 
tional importance,  in  a  commercial  or  military  point 
of  view,  or  necessaiy  for  the  transportation  of  the 
public  mail.' "  The  employment  of  Government  engi- 
neers was  not  limited  to  surveys  ordered  by  law  or  by 
resolutions  of  Congress,  but  was  interpreted  by  the 
President  to  apply  also  to  "  'Surveys  of  a  national  or 
highly  interesting  commercial  character,  applied  for 
by  states  or  incorporated  companies,' "  and  when 
engineers  could  be  conveniently  spared  from  other 
work.^^ 


*  The  first  engineering  .school  in  this  country  was  the  United 
States  Military  Academy,  founded  in  1802. 


31 


Although  railways  were  not  specifically  mentioned 
in  the  Act,  all  of  the  61  surveys  made  or  proposed 
were  for  railways,  and  the  amount  spent  on  them  was 
about  $75,000." 

Another  early  and  very  substantial  Federal  aid  to 
railroads  was  the  remission  of  import  duties  on  rail- 
road iron  during  the  years  1830  to  1841.  The  total 
duties  remitted  in  this  period — almost  $6  million — 
gave  the  infant  railroad  industry  a  much-needed  boost 
at  a  critical  time  in  its  history  at  the  expense  of  the 
infant  iron  industry.*  " 

By  an  act  approved  on  July  7,  1838,  Congress  made 
all  railroads  "post  routes"  and,  thus,  eligible  to  carry 
the  mails.     Strictly  speaking,  this  was  not  a  subsidy. 


*  The  remitted  duty  amounted  to  about  $2,000  pei-  mile  of 
track,  or  almost  one-sixth  of  the  total  cost  per  mile. 


but  it  opened  to  the  railroads  a  valuable  source  of 
income. 

These  early  aids  to  railroads  were  a  mere  foretaste 
of  what  was  to  come  in  later  years. 

The   Railroad   Land   Grants 

In  the  early  19th  century,  it  was  almost  an  article 
of  faith  with  the  American  peojile  that  national 
l^rosperity  depended  on  the  settlement  of  the  western 
lands,  practically  all  of  which  belonged  to  the  Govern- 
ment. The  Federal  j)olicy  was  to  encourage  settlement 
by  removal  of  the  Indians,  favorable  laws  and  cheap 
land  prices.  A  logical  extension  of  this  policy  was  to 
encourage  access  to  the  lands  by  building  first  the 
National  Road,  and  later,  by  subsidizing  canals  and 
railroads. 


The  first  Federal  land  grants  for  railroads  were 
made  to  Illinois,  Mississippi,  and  Alabama  in  1850 
and  totaled  3,736,000  acres  of  land  which  the  States 
transferred  to  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  and  the 
Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad.  With  these  grants  as  a 
precedent,  Congress  in  the  period  1850  to  1871  aided 
some  50  other  railroads  by  similar  grants  of  public 
land  to  nine  other  southern  and  western  States*  for 


•  The  Government  eventually  received  a  handsome  return 
on  its  grants  to  the  railroads.  One  of  the  conditions  of  these 
grants  was  that  the  aided  railroads  transport  Government 
troops,  mail,  and  freight  at  reduced  rates.  In  later  years, 
other  railroads,  although  not  aided  by  land  grants,  voluntarily 
reduced  their  rates  to  compete  for  the  Government  business. 
As  a  result,  the  total  savings  in  transporting  the  mails,  troops 
and  Government  property  up  to  1934  amounted  to  $168.2 
million  and  by  the  end  of  World  War  II  were  far  above  that 
amount."    Congress  renounced  all  rate  concessions  in  1945. 


The  railway  station  was  the  meeting  place  for  ail — greeting 
arrivals,  farewells  to  those  departing,  and  a  good  place  to 
pick  up  the  latest  gossip  by  those  who  just  came  to  watch. 


33 


th( 

1 


Although  railways  wex'e  not  specifically  mentioned 
in  the  Act,  all  of  the  61  surveys  made  or  proposed 
were  for  railways, 
about  $75,000." 

Another  early  an^ 
railroads  was  the  r(i 
road  iron  during  tl 
duties  remitted  in 
gave  the  infant  raili 
at  a  critical  time  in 
infant  iron  industry 

By  an  act  approve 
all  railroads  "post  i 
the  mails.     Strictly 


but  it  opened  to  the  railroads  a  valuable  source  of 
income. 


*  The  remitted  duty 
track,  or  almost  one-si: 


32 


Although  railways  were  not  specifically  mentioned 
in  the  Act,  all  of  the  61  surveys  made  or  proposed 
were  for  railways,  and  the  amount  spent  on  them  was 
about  $75,000." 

Another  early  and  very  substantial  Federal  aid  to 
railroads  was  the  remission  of  import  duties  on  rail- 
road iron  during  the  years  1830  to  1841.  The  total 
duties  remitted  in  this  period— almost  $6  million- 
gave  the  infant  railroad  industry  a  much-needed  boost 
at  a  critical  time  in  its  history  at  the  expense  of  the 
infant  iron  industry.*  " 

By  an  act  approved  on  July  7,  1838,  Congress  made 
all  railroads  "post  routes"  and,  thus,  eligible  to  carry 
the  mails.    Strictly  speakiag,  tliis  was  not  a  subsidy, 


•The  remitted  duty  amounted  to  about  $2,000  per  mile  of 
traclc,  or  almost  one-sixth  of  the  total  cost  per  mile. 


but  it  opened  to  the  railroads  a  valuable  source  of 
income. 

These  early  aids  to  railroads  were  a  mere  foretaste 
of  what  was  to  come  in  later  years. 

The  Railroad  Land   Grants 

In  the  early  19th  century,  it  was  almost  an  article 
of  faith  with  the  American  people  that  national 
prosperity  depended  on  the  settlement  of  the  western 
lands,  practically  all  of  which  belonged  to  the  Govern- 
ment. The  Federal  policy  was  to  encourage  settlement 
by  removal  of  the  Indians,  favorable  laws  and  cheap 
land  prices.  A  logical  extension  of  this  policy  was  to 
encourage  access  to  the  lands  by  building  first  the 
National  Road,  and  later,  by  subsidizing  canals  and 
railroads. 


The  first  Federal  land  grants  for  railroads  were 
made  to  Illinois,  Mississippi,  and  Alabama  in  1850 
and  totaled  3,736,000  acres  of  land  which  the  States 
transferred  to  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  and  the 
Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad.  With  these  grants  as  a 
precedent.  Congress  in  the  period  1850  to  1871  aided 
some  50  other  railroads  by  similar  grants  of  public 
land  to  nme  other  southern  and  western  States*  for 

•The  Government  eventually  received  a  handsome  return 
on  its  grants  to  the  railroads.  One  of  the  conditions  of  these 
grants  was  that  the  aided  railroads  transport  Government 
troops,  mail,  and  freight  at  reduced  rates.  In  later  years 
other  railroads,  although  not  aided  by  land  grants,  voluntarily 
reduced  their  rates  to  compete  for  the  Government  business. 
As  a  result,  the  total  savings  in  transporting  the  mails,  troops 
and  Government  property  up  to  1934  amounted  to  $168.2 
million  and  by  the  end  of  World  War  11  were  far  above  that 
amount.''    Congress  renounced  all  rate  concessions  in  1945 


The  railway  station  was  the  meeting  place  for  all — greeting 
arrivals,  farewells  to  those  departing,  and  a  good  place  to 
pick  up  the  latest  gossip  by  those  who  just  came  to  watch. 


Monument  commerating  the  last  spike  on  the  joining  of  the  Central  Pacific  and  Union 
Pacific  railroads  into  the  first  transcontinental  railway  in  this  country. 


a  total  of  about  36,466,000  acres.  Even  larger  grants 
were  to  come  in  connection  with  the  Pacific  railroads. 
Eventually,  Federal  land  grants  to  subsidize  railroads 
amounted  to  130.3  million  acres,  to  which  should  be 
added  48.9  million  acres  of  State  land  grants.^^ 

Railroads  Dominate  U.S.  Transportation 

The  northern  States  had  such  tremendous  produc- 
tive capacity  that  they  were  able  to  fight  the  Civil 
War  and  at  the  same  time  push  a  railroad  across  the 
western  plains  and  mountains.  This  railroad,  liberally 
aided  by  grants  of  public  land  and  Government  loans, 
was  completed  in  1869.     Within  the  next  20  years. 


four  other  transcontinental  railroads  were  completed, 
along  with  a  north-south  railroad  through  California, 
Oregon,  and  Washington  Territory,  and  innumerable 
connectors,  branches,  and  feeder  lines  all  over  the 
country.  In  1887  alone,  12,878  miles  of  track  were 
laid,  and  by  1900  there  were  260,000  miles  of  railroad 
in  the  United  States.^^ 

These  railroads  opened  up  the  country  to  settlement 
and  development  as  it  had  never  been  opened  before. 
They  created  the  mass  market  that  made  the  phenom- 
enal industrial  expansion  of  the  1880's,  1890's,  and 
early  1900's  possible,  and  which  in  turn,  started  the 
trend  toward  urbanization  that  continues  to  this  day. 


34 


REFERENCES 

*R.  KlBBY,  S.  WiTHINGTON,  A.  DaBLING  &  F.  KiLGOUK,  ENGI- 
NEERING IN   History    (McGraw-Hill,   New  York,   1956)    p.  250. 

^Id.,  pp.  252,  253. 

'Id.,  p.  255. 

*Id.,  p.  256. 

°G.  Chatbubn,  Highways  and  Highway  Transportation 
(Thos.  Y.  Crowell,  New  York,  1923)  p.  91. 

*Id.,  p.  90. 

'Id.,  p.  96. 

»/d.,  p.  109. 

"  M.  Whitehead,  A  Word  From  The  National  Grange,  Good 
Roads,  Vol.  1,  No.  1,  Jan.  1892,  pp.  82,  83. 

"  Office  of  Federal  Coordinator  of  U.S.  TRiVNSPORTATioN, 
Public  Aids  to  Transportation,  Public  Aids  to  Transporta- 


tion BY  Water,  Vol.  Ill  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C.,  1939)  pp. 
16-18. 

"/d.,  p.  17. 

"  L.  Haney,  a  Congressional  History  of  Railways  in  the 
United  States  (Reprint,  Augustas  M.  Kelly,  New  York,  1968) 
p.  276. 

"Office  of  Federal  Coordinator  of  U.S.  Transportation, 
Public  Aids  to  Transportation,  Aids  to  Railroads  and  Re- 
lated Subjects,  Vol.  II  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C.,  1938)  pp. 
4.  5. 

"Id.,  p.  5. 

"/d.,  p.  46. 

"•/d..  pp.  11,  12,  32. 

"  B.  Weisberger,  The  Life  History  of  the  United  States, 
The  Age  of  Steel  and  Steam,  Vol.  7  (Time,  Inc.,  New  York, 
1964)  p.  31. 


35 


The 
Good 
Rood/ 
movement 


Rural  Roads  in  the  Late  19th  Century 

Railroad  competition  drove  the  long-distance  wagon 
freighter  and  stagecoach  companies  out  of  business  in 
the  1850's  and  1860's,  and  traffic  fell  off  to  the  point 
where  toll  road  operation  was  unprofitable.  Some  of 
the  turnpike  companies  were  able  to  sell  their  roads 
to  the  counties  for  much  less  than  they  cost  originally  ; 
but  most  of  them  simply  surrendered  their  charters 
and  ceased  operation.  Their  facilities  were  then  taken 
over  by  the  local  authorities  and  maintained  as  com- 
mon roads.  With  the  heavy  through  traffic  gone,  the 
more  prosperous  counties  were  able  to  maintain  these 
roads  in  fairly  good  condition  for  local  travel.*  In 
the  poorer  counties,  travel  became  more  and  more  un- 
comfortable as  the  old  turnpikes  deteriorated  from 
lack  of  care. 

In  the  East,  the  old  turnpikes  were  only  a  fraction 
of  the  mileage  imder  county  and  township  control. 
Most  of  the  people  lived  along  roads  that  were  estab- 
lished in  the  early  days  of  settlement  through  con- 
tinued public  use  rather  than  by  plan.  These  followed 
the  boundaries  between  farms  or  occupied  the  lands 
least  suited  for  agriculture,  and,  thus,  were  often 
winding  and  poorly  located.  Over  the  years,  they  had 
been  improved  by  the  county  and  township  super- 
visors with  what  scanty  funds  they  could  raise  from 
taxes,  and  practically  everywhere,  except  in  the  wealth- 
iest counties,  these  roads  were  maintained  by  statute 
labor. 

The  local  road  situation  was  somewhat  different  in 
the  "public  land  States" — i.e.,  those  States  that  had 


*  The  stone  surfaces  of  the  original  turnpikes  were  gener- 
ally 18  or  20  feet  wide.  The  local  supervisors  generally  re- 
plenished the  stone  only  on  the  central  10  or  12  feet.' 


L[>^yZ 


FEDERAL    AID   ROUTES     ON    EXISTING    STATE    HIGHWAYS 


FEDERAL  AlO  ROUTES   NOT  ON  EXISTING  STATE  HIGHWAYS 


A  19/(8  map  of  Kansas  showing  State  highways  generally  located 
on  a  grid  pattern,  a  carry  over  from  the  days  when  roads  were  built 
on  section  lines  and  each  owner  donated  land  for  the  right-of-way. 


36 


been  formed  from  the  public  domain.*  The  lands  in 
these  States  had  been  subdivided  into  rectangular 
townships  and  sections  according  to  an  ordinance  of 
May  29,  1785.  These  land  lines  became  the  boundaries 
between  farms  and,  thus,  were  the  lines  of  least  resist- 
ance for  local  roads.  The  customary  right-of-way  for 
these  roads  was  one  chain  wide,  or  66  feet,  each  prop- 
erty owner  donating  33  feet  on  his  side  of  the  section 
line.  As  in  the  East,  these  roads  were  normally  main- 
tained by  statute  labor. 

In  the  Great  Plains  and  the  Far  West,  this  tendency 
to  fix  the  local  roads  on  the  section  lines  was  strength- 
ened in  July  1866  by  an  act  in  which  Congress 
granted  a  free  right-of-way  for  public  roads  over 
unreserved  public  lands.  A  number  of  counties  took 
advantage  of  this  act  by  declaring  all  section  lines  in 
the  county  to  be  public  roads,  thus,  reserving  the 
right-of-way  before  the  lands  became  private  prop- 
erty. The  Legislature  of  Dakota  Territory  passed  an 
act  making  all  section  lines  public  roads  66  feet  wide, 
to  the  extent  that  it  was  physically  possible  to  build 
roads  on  these  lines.- 

Section  line  roads  were  easy  to  build  in  level  coun- 
try, but  in  hilly  country  it  was  impossible  to  stay  on 
the  section  lines  and  preserve  a  reasonable  gradient.** 
The  rectangular  pattern  imposed  considerable  indirect 
traffic  on  those  whose  destination  was  diagonal  to  the 
land  grid.  Nevertheless,  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
miles  of  these  section  line  roads  were  built  as  the 
public  land  States  were  settled.  Initially,  these  roads 
were  mere  wagon  tracks,  but  over  the  years  many  of 
them  were  graded  and  ditched,  and  some  were  grav- 
eled. This  work  was  aided  tremendously  by  the  intro- 
duction of  blade  graders  after  1878.  Some  of  these 
were  pulled  by  6  horses  and  in  easy  country,  a  mile  of 
ditched  earth  road  could  be  built  in  a  single  day. 

The  years  between  1850  and  1900  have  been  called 
the  "dark  age  of  the  rural  road,"  yet  in  this  period 
well  over  li/^  million  miles  of  rural  roads  were  built 
in  the  United  States.  It  is  true  that,  with  insignifi- 
cant exceptions,  these  roads  were  unimproved,  or  at 
best  only  ditched  and  graded,  yet  in  the  aggregate 
they  represented  a  mighty  public  effort,  particularly 
in  the  West  where  population  was  sparse  and  the 
people  poor. 

The  Financing  of  Rural  Roads 

Until  the  early  1900's,  the  main  sources  of  local 
road  funds  were  taxes  on  property,  poll  taxes  and 
statute  labor.  In  1904  only  25  States  had  laws  per- 
mitting counties,  townships  or  road  districts  to  issue 
bonds  for  road  improvement,  and  in  these  the  privilege 
was  used  sparingly  and  usually  only  to  finance  a 
particularly  expensive  purchase,  such  as  a  steel  or 
concrete  bridge.  The  total  expenditures  on  rural  roads 
from  bond  issues  were  only  about  $3.5  million  in  1904.* 

Property  taxes  levied  for  road  support  varied  widely 
from  State  to  State  and  from  county  to  county  within 
the  same  State.  As  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  (OPR) 
observed  in  1904, 


Unquestionably  the  bitterest  controversies  in  counties 
and  townships  in  connection  with  the  subject  of  road  im- 
provement are  over  proposed  increases  in  the  rates  of 
property  taxation  for  road  purposes.  It  is  common  In 
many  parts  of  the  United  States  for  uninformed  though 
honestly-disposed  citizens,  to  mal^e  a  determined  opposi- 
tion to  a  very  moderate  and  perfectly  reasonable  increase 
in  the  tax  rate.' 

The  average  tax  rate  of  all  counties  reporting  to  the 
OPR  in  1904  was  25.7  cents  per  $100  valuation,  but 
this  gives  little  idea  of  the  tremendous  variation  be- 
tween counties,  some  of  which  levied  only  1.3  cents  per 
$100  valuation  and  some  as  much  as  $1.60  per  $100 
valuation."  These  taxes,  together  with  poll  taxes  pay- 
able in  cash,  were  by  far  the  major  source  of  funds  for 
building  and  maintaining  the  country  roads,  yielding 
some  $53.8  million  in  1904.  While  this  seems  like  a 
large  sum,  it  amounted  to  very  little  when  spread  over 
2.1  million  miles  of  road.^ 

In  1904  11  States  assessed  an  annual  poll  tax  vary- 
ing from  $1  to  $5  per  person  for  upkeep  of  the  roads. 
This  tax  could  be  paid  in  labor  or  in  cash.  In  addi- 
tion, 25  States  retained  the  ancient  statute  labor  sys- 


*  All   States  except  the  Original  Thirteen,  and  Maine,  Ver- 
mont, Kentucky,  Tennessee,  West  Virginia  and  Texas. 

**  In  1900  there  were  more  roads  having  excessively  steep 
grades  in  Iowa  than  in  Switzerland.' 


Working  out  the  road  tax  on  a  gravel  road.  Ten  days  labor 
or  $5  tax  was  required  by  law  in  Alabama  as  late  as  1913. 

tem  under  which  all  able  bodied  male  citizens  of 
certain  ages  living  along  a  road  were  required  to  work 
on  its  repair  a  stated  number  of  days  per  year  or  pay 
the  equivalent  in  cash.*  Despite  its  inefficiency,  the 
work  rendered  in  1904  by  statute  labor  was  valued  by 
the  OPR  at  $19.8  million,  and  amounted  to  about  one- 
quarter  of  all  rural  road  expenditures  that  year.* 

Most  of  the  rights-of-way  for  county  and  township 
roads  were  donated  by  their  owners  to  the  local 
authorities,  and  these  donations  represented  a  very 
considerable  part  of  the  original  cost  of  these  roads. 
Over  the  years,  these  rights-of-way  came  to  some  10.4 
million  acres  of  land,  valued  in  1904  at  about  $342 
million.^"  The  roads  themselves  probably  represented 
an  investment  of  at  least  a  billion  dollars. 

This  large  investment  was,  however,  spread  so  thinly 
that  very  few  rural  residents  enjoyed  adequate  road 
service.  In  the  northern  States,  earth  roads  were 
quagmires  during  the  spring  thaw  and  became  dis- 
tressingly soft  during  rains  at  any  time  of  year.  Deep 
sand   was  a   problem   in  many   parts  of  the  South. 

♦  As  late  as  1889  no  cash  poll  taxes  or  property  taxes  were 
levied  for  road  purposes  in  Kentuclty,  South  Carolina,  Georgia, 
Alabama,  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  New  Mexico  and  Utah,  and 
the  rural  roads  in  these  States  were  built  and  maintained 
exclusively  by  statute  labor.' 


37 


The  Jefferson  Memorial  Road  near 
Charlottsville,  Va.,  before  improvement. 


Either  way — loose  sand  or  deep  mud — ^the  loads  a 
farmer  could  haul  with  his  teams  were  only  a  fraction 
of  what  they  would  have  been  on  a  reasonably  good 
road,  and  this  difference  was,  in  effect,  a  tax  on  every- 
thing the  farmer  bought  or  sold.  The  following  ac- 
count of  one  farmer's  struggle  with  his  local  roads  is 
typical  of  the  era : 

After  the  war  I  lived  9  miles  north  of  Charlotte.  The 
roads  at  times  were  so  very  bad  that  everybody  was 
landlocked ;  the  ladies  could  not  go  to  church  in  winter ; 
they  hardly  ever  thought  of  going  to  tOMTi.  The  men 
went  on  horseback  and  sometimes  it  took  a  good  thor- 
oughbred to  carry  you  there.  .  .  .  The  first  thing  that 
impressed  me  with  the  importance  of  good  roads  occurred 
in  1867.  It  rained  almost  everyday  for  a  month ;  the 
roads  were  horrible.  I  left  home  with  two  wagons,  one 
with  four  horses  and  one  with  three,  to  go  to  Charlotte, 
only  9  miles  away,  for  .some  fertilizer.  I  got  a  ton  on  one 
wagon  and  half  a  ton  on  the  other,  and  when  within  a 
mile  and  a  half  of  home  on  the  return  trip  we  stalled, 
and  had  to  take  the  horses  out  and  leave  the  wagons 
there  all  night.  We  went  back  after  the  wagons  the  next 
day  and  it  took  until  nearly  11  o'clock  to  get  them  home. 
The  merchant  from  whom  I  got  the  guano  paid  $5  per 
ton  freight  on  it  from  Baltimore  to  Charlotte.  Consider- 
ing everything,  it  cost  me  over  twice  as  much  to  take  the 
guano  9  miles  from  Charlotte  to  my  home  as  it  did  to 
bring  it  from  Baltimore  to  Charlotte  on  the  railroad." 


The  mud  could  be  so  sticky  that  a  pair  of  oxen 
had  difficulty  getting  these  wheels, 
without  a  load,  free. 


'■m-s^^*^ 


38 


Although,  this  appears  to  be  a?i  exaygeraied  condition  of  early  roads,  it  was  a  common  enough  occurrence  that  the  Oood  Roads 
magazine  in  May  1892  published  the  following  guide  on  "What  to  do  When  A  Horse  Falls": 

1.  Jump  down  and  hold  the  animal's  head,  to  prevent  his   dashing  it  about  to  his  own  injury. 

2.  Loosen  the  check-rein  (if  you  are  so  foolish  as  to  use  one)  and  the  parts  of  the  harness  which  fasten  on  the  vehicle. 

3.  Back  the  carriage  so  as  to  get  the  shafts  and  traces  clear. 

4.  Steady  and  support  the  horse's  head,  and  excite  and  encourage  him,  with  hand  and  voice,  to  rise. 

5.  When  you  have  got  him  up  pat  and  further  encourage  him,  and  see  if  he  is  wounded  or  otheruHse  injured. 

6.  Let  him  stand  still  -a  short  time  and  recover  himself,  and  then  proceed  gently  and  with  greater  caution  than  before. 


The  high  cost  of  transport  from  the  farms  was  also 
a  tax  on  the  people  of  the  cities  who  were  forced  to 
pay  higher  prices  for  locally  grown  food  and  farm 
products.  In  1901  fruit  from  California  could  be 
shipped  to  Raleigh,  North  Carolina,  by  rail  for  less 
than  farmers  li\dng  only  15  miles  away  could  deliver 
their  fruit  to  the  Raleigh  markets. 

You  see  by  this  that  the  railroads  enable  the  fruit 
growers  of  California  to  compete  with  the  fruit  growers 
of  your  own  county  towns.  .  .  .  The  way  to  successfully 
compete  with  these  people  is  to  build  good  roads  so  as  to 
enable  us  to  get  to  market  at  any  time  and  carry  a  full 
load,  thereby  reducing  cost  of  transportation.  ...  A  bad 
road  is  a  relentless  tax  assessor  and  a  sure  collector." 

Transportation   in  the   Cities 

According  to  the  1900  census,  there  were  161  cities 
of  more  than  25,000  inhabitants.  Of  these,  27  had 
populations  in  the  100,000  to  300,000  range  and  11 
had  more  than  300,000  people. 

The  ability  to  move  goods  freely  from  place  to  place 
was  absolutely  necessary  to  the  prosperity  of  these 
cities.  Industry,  powered  by  steam,  used  great  quan- 
tities of  coal  which  had  to  be  hauled  over  the  streets 
from  the  docks  and  railroad  yards  to  the  factories  and 
mills.  Similarly,  the  hauling  of  raw  materials  and 
finished  goods  to  and  from  the  factories,  warehouses, 
docks  and  railroads  generated  a  tremendous  volume 
of  truck  and  dray  traffic.  Outside  of  the  industrial 
areas,  city  dwellers  depended  on  their  streets  for  de- 
liveries of  coal,  ice  and  groceries. 

A  typical  3-horse  truck  of  the  1890's  weighed  7,000 
pounds  empty  and  could  carry  a  10-ton  pay  load,  and 
horsedrawn  trucks  and  drays  capable  of  hauling  18- 
ton  net  loads  were  fairly  common  in  large  cities. 
These  vehicles  ran  on  steel  tires  which  pulverized  all 
but  the  hardest  pavement  surfaces.  Consequently,  the 
main  streets  of  the  large  cities  were  built  very  heavily 
and    surfaced    with   granite   blocks   or   hard   paving 


bricks.*  The  minor  business  streets  and  residential 
streets  were  commonly  of  macadam  or  gravel,  and  in 
the  1890's  many  of  these  were  made  dust- free  by 
asphalt  surfacing.**  ^* 

For  the  most  part,  city  dwellers  enjoyed  excellent 
local  transportation.  Even  comparatively  small  cities 
had  horsecar  lines,  some  of  which  persisted  into  the 
early  1900's.  About  1873  cable  railways  were  intro- 
duced in  the  larger  cities,  but  in  the  1890's  these,  as 
well  as  most  of  the  horsecar  lines,  were  converted  to 
electric  propulsion.  "By  1890  more  than  one  himdred 
American  cities  had  installed  or  were  in  the  process 
of  installing  electric  street  railways."  ^^ 

Small  towns  on  the  peripheries  of  the  large  cities 
were  tied  to  the  cities  by  steam  railroads  and  after 
about  1894,  by  electric  interurban  railroads  as  well. 
Frequent  schedules  on  these  railroads  made  it  con- 
venient for  thousands  of  the  more  prosperous  city 
workers  to  live  in  the  suburbs  and  commute  to  work. 

The  Financing  of  Urban  Roads  and  Streets 

Concentrated  populations,  trade  and  industry  built 
a  fruitful  base  for  property  taxation  in  the  cities. 
These  taxes,  supplemented  by  special  assessments,  pro- 
vided the  funds  for  thousands  of  miles  of  improved 


*  Broadway  in  New  Yorlt  City  was  surfaced  with  blocks  of 
granite  10  inches  thick  laid  on  a  6-inch  concrete  base ;  and  in 
Philadelphia  pavements  for  important  streets  were  made  of 
8-inch  stone  cubes  laid  on  beds  of  gravel  15  inches  deep."  In 
the  1890's  these  stone  pavements  were  overlaid  with  asphalt 
to  reduce  noise  and  rolling  resistance  and  to  provide  better 
footing  for  the  horses. 

**  Asphalt  paving  was  first  used  in  New  York  and  Phila- 
delphia in  1871  and  immediately  l)ecame  popular  because  of 
its  smoothness,  silence  and  ea.se  of  cleaning.  By  1897  over 
27.4  million  square  yards  of  asphalt  were  laid  in  American 
cities." 


39 


■      ,  jgS^-?*'*^**^ 


The  Cherrelyn  Horsecar  was  unique  among  horsecars  of  the  day 
for  the  horse  only  pulled  the  car  one  way  and  was  a  nonpaying 
passenger  on  its  return  trip.  It  operated  up  and  down  the  steep 
hill  from  downtown  Englewood  to  Cherrelyn  (Colorado) ,  a  dis- 
tance of  almost  a  mile,  between  1883  and  1910.  The  horse,  some- 
times wearing  a  straw  hat,  riding  on  the  special  platform  on  the 
back  of  the  car  was  a  popular  attraction  for  both  tourists  and 
residents.  Today  the  old  Cherrelyn  is  restored  and  is  on  display 
near  the  City  Hall  in  Englewood. 


40 


Even  the  streets  of  some  towns  iverc  nearly 
as  bad  as  the  rural  roads  after  a  heavy  rain. 


streets,*  as  well  as  sewers,  water  supplies,  street  lights, 
schools,  parks  and  other  municipal  services  far  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  rural  citizens. 

Most  city  street  improvements  were  financed  by 
bond  issues  which  were  amortized  out  of  general  tax 
revenues.  The  cities  for  the  most  part  avoided  "pay- 
as-you-go"  financing  and  did  most  of  their  original 
construction  by  contract. 


Broken  and  abandoned  carriages 
were  the  eyesore  of  the  day. 


*  In  1907,  the  first  year  for  which  reliable  figures  are  avail- 
able, there  were  47,000  miles  of  roads  and  streets  in  cities  of 
30,000  or  more  population,  of  which  20,646  were  improved 
with  some  kind  of  surface  better  than  dirt.  These  included 
7,675  miles  of  heavy-duty  pavement ;  4,161  miles  with  asphalt 
surfaces ;  6,274  miles  of  macadam  ;  and  2,536  miles  of  gravel." 


Practically  all  American  cities  enjoyed  the  right, 
conferred  upon  them  by  the  State  legislatures,  to 
assess  the  cost  of  street  improvements  to  the  benefited 
property.  This  power  greatly  enlarged  the  financial 
resources  available  to  the  cities  for  improvements.* 

City  dwellers  were  exempt  from  the  obligation  to 
perform  statute  labor.  Instead  of  i-elying  on  the 
obsolete  and  wasteful  statute  labor  system,  cities  ac- 
complished their  sti-eet  maintenance  with  paid  labor 
under  the  super\dsion  of  civil  engineers  or,  at  the 
least,  persons  with  some  knowledge  of  roadbuilding, 
and  paid  for  it  out  of  general  tax  revenues. 

Beginning  of  the  Good  Roads  Movement 

The  great  disparity  between  the  cities  and  the  rural 
areas  in  the  quality  of  life  was  evident  to  everyone, 
but  few  city  dwellers  thought  they  had  any  obligation 
to  do  anything  about  it.  They  had  taxed  themselves 
to  build  their  roads  and  streets,  let  the  farmers  do 
likewise,  was  the  prevailing  sentiment  in  the  cities. 
Nevertheless,  the  impetus  for  road  reform  came  from 
the  cities  and  primarily  from  civic  leaders  who  ap- 
preciated the  economic  burdens  laid  on  city  dwellers 
and  farmers  alike  by  the  bad  roads.  These  leaders 
realized  and  accepted  the  cold  hard  facts  that  good 
roads  were  impossible  without  adequate  funds  and 
that  these  could  be  obtained  only  by  the  taxation  of 
urban,  as  well  as  rural,  property. 

In  1879  the  General  Assembly  of  North  Carolina 
passed  the  "Mecklenburg  Road  Law"  permitting  that 
county  to  levy  a  road  tax  on  all  property  in  the  county, 
including  that  in  Charlotte,  the  principal  city.  The 
act  was  repealed  the  following  year,  but  was  re-enacted 
in  1885,  and  eventually  most  of  the  counties  of  the 
State  elected  to  operate  their  roads  under  this  law. 
By  1902  Mecklenburg  was  acknowledged  to  have  the 
best  roads  in  North  Carolina,  and  its  citizens  were 
cheerfully  paying  the  highest  road  taxes  in  the  State: 
35  cents  per  $100  property  valuation,  plus  $1.05  on 
the  poll." 

The  first  State  road  convention  was  held  in  Iowa 
City,  Iowa,  in  1883,  primarily  to  try  to  bring  about 
some  improvement  in  the  deplorable  condition  of  the 
rural  roads.  This  convention  recommended  payment 
of  road  taxes  in  cash  instead  of  labor,  consolidation 
of  road  districts,  letting  road  construction  to  respon- 
sible contractors,  and,  most  importantly,  authorizing 
county  boards  to  levy  a  property  tax  to  create  a  road 
fund.  These  recommendations  were  adopted  by  the 
Iowa  Legislature  in  an  act  passed  in  1884,  but  the 
reforms  were  made  optional  with  the  coimties  rather 
than  mandatory.^" 

Other  States  adopted  "good  road  laws"  similar  to 
North  Carolina's  and  Iowa's,  but  the  good  roads  move- 


*  The  special  assessment  is  an  institution  of  American 
origin,  first  used  in  New  York  City  in  colonial  times  to  finance 
streets  and  sewers.  By  1893  all  States  and  Territories  had 
laws  authorizing  municipal  corporations  to  assess  the  cost  of 
physical  improvements  against  benefited  properties.  Street 
railway  companies  were  customarily  assessed  with  the  cost  of 
paving  between  their  tracks,  and  for  a  certain  distance  on 
each  side.  The  right  to  make  special  assessments  was  rarely 
conferred  on  counties  and  townships,  but  in  some  States  spe- 
cial road  improvement  districts  were  created  by  the  legi-slature 
and  given  the  power  of  asse.ssment." 


41 


As  a  result  of  the  Mecklenhurg  Road  Law,  loads  such  as  this  could  be  hauled  by  two  nvules  on  a  macadamized  road 
in  any  weather  where  formerly  only  two  hales  of  cotton  could  be  hauled  on  an  earth  road  in  fairly  good  weather. 


ment  did  not  really  get  underway  until  about  1890 
when  the  organized  bicyclists  launched  a  national 
public  relations  campaign  to  whip  up  sentiment  favor- 
able to  more  and  better  roadbuilding. 

The  Wheelmen  and  The  Roads 

Bicycles  became  practical  vehicles  for  personal 
transportation  with  the  introduction  of  the  "safety" 
design*  in  1884  and  the  pneumatic  tire  in  1888.  Al- 
most overnight  cycling  became  a  national  craze  in  the 
United  States.  "A  frenzy  seized  upon  the  people  and 
men  and  women  of  all  stations  were  riding  wheels; 
ardent  cyclists  were  found  in  every  city,  village  and 
hamlet."  ^i 

The  wheelmen  were  not  content  to  do  their  riding 
on  the  relatively  smooth  city  streets,  but  fanned  out 
into  the  country  in  all  directions.  They  organized 
cross-country  rallies,  road  races,  weekend  excursions. 
These  activities  brought  the  wheelmen  into  intimate 
contact  with  the  miserable  country  roads,  and  they 
became  vociferous  advocates  of  road  improvement. 

All  over  the  country,  the  bicyclists  formed  social 
organizations,  or  "wheel  clubs,"  to  promote  cycling  as 
a  sport.  Leading  this  movement  nationally  was  the 
League  of  American  Wheelmen,  which  had  been  or- 
ganized in  1880  by  consolidating  a  number  of  local 
"ordinary"  bicycle  clubs.  Very  early  in  its  life  the 
League  perceived  that  cycling  as  a  sport  depended  on 
good  roads,  and  it  transformed  itself  into  a  powerful 
propaganda  and  pressure  group  for  promoting  them. 


"Newspaper  space  was  freely  utilized;  many  papers 
making  special  and  regular  features  of  'good  roads'; 
pamphlets  were  published  and  distributed  broadly, 
and  a  magazine  was  established."  ^^  Appropriately, 
this  magazine  was  titled  Good  Roads.,  and  it  was 
launched  in  1892  under  the  energetic  editorship  of 
I.  B.  Potter,  a  New  York  City  civil  engineer  and 
lawyer.  Good  Roads  circulated  far  beyond  the  ranks 
of  the  wheelmen  and  was  very  influential  in  molding 
public  opinion  to  accept  the  inevitable  taxes  that 
would  be  required  to  create  good  roads.  Potter  heaped 
ridicule  on  American  roads  by  contrasting  their  sad 
condition  with  the  fine  roads  of  Europe,  particularly 
those  of  France.  He  ran  testimonials,  praising  good 
roads  where  they  existed  in  the  United  States.     He 

A  leisure  bicycle  trip  into  the 
country  about  the  turn  of  the  century. 


*  They  were  called  "safety"  bicycles  because,  unlike  the 
"ordinary"  bicycle  with  its  high  front  wheel,  the  rider  was 
less  apt  to  be  propelled  over  the  handlebars  if  he  hit  an 
obstacle. 


42 


also  published  educational  articles  on  the  principles 
of  good  roadbuilding  and  the  economic  benefits  of  all- 
weather  roads.  He  used  pictures  of  good  and  bad 
roads  freely,  thus,  liolding  tlie  reader's  attention  where 
words  alone  would  have  failed.  Xewspapers  and  na- 
tional magazines  reprinted  these  articles,  affording 
them  the  widest  distribution.-^ 

A  "Good  Roads  Association"  was  formed  in  Mis- 
souri in  1891,  followed  by  similar  organizations  in 
other  States.-*  A  national  road  conference,  the  first 
of  its  kind,  was  held  in  1894  with  representatives  from 
11  States.  Resolutions  passed  at  this  conference  urged 
the  State  legislatures  to  set  up  limited  systems  of 
State  roads,  and  to  create  temi)orary  highway  com- 
missions to  recommend  suitable  legislation  to  imple- 
ment good  roads  programs.-'^ 

State  Aid  Spreads  the  Financial  Burden 

In  1890  all  the  public  roads  in  New  Jersey  outside 
of  the  cities  were  under  township  control  and  were 
built  and  maintained  at  township  expense.  Purely 
local  traffic  predominated  on  most  of  these  roads,  but 
some  carried  traffic  from  neighboring  townships  and 
even  beyond,  and  on  a  few,  teams  could  be  counted 
from  as  many  as  20  townships.  By  actual  count,  the 
Xew  Jersey  Road  Improvement  Association  proved 
that  the  traffic  on  these  main  roads  was  intercounty 
rather  than  local,  and  it  asserted  that,  in  fairness,  the 
counties  and  the  State  should  shoulder  part  of  the 
burden  of  building  and  maintaining  them.  The  Asso- 
ciation and  the  League  of  American  "N^Hieelmen  put 
their  support  behind  a  State-aid  bill  in  the  Legisla- 
ture which  became  law  April  14,  1891.  This  law  de- 
clared that  "The  expense  of  constructing  permanently 
improved  roads  may  reasonably  be  imposed,  in  due 
proportions,  upon  the  State  and  upon  the  counties  in 
which  they  are  located."  It  left  the  initiation,  plan- 
ning and  supervision  of  State-aided  projects  in  the 
hands  of  the  county  officials,  but  reserved  to  the  State, 
represented  by  the  Board  of  Agriculture,  the  right  to 
approve  projects  and  to  accept  or  reject  contracts. 
Upon  completion,  the  cost  of  the  improvement  was  to 
be  split  three  ways :  one-tenth  to  be  assessed  to  the 
property  holders  along  the  road,  one-third  to  the 
State  and  the  remainder  to  the  county.  The  act  ap- 
propriated $75,000  as  the  State's  share  for  the  first 
year's  operations.^** 

The  State-aid  act  was  challenged  in  the  courts  and 
upheld.  The  Board  then  approved  petitions  for 
State  aid  to  three  projects  in  Middlesex  County  total- 
ing 10.55  miles  which,  when  completed  in  December 
1892,  became  the  first  roads  to  be  improved  under  the 
act." 

In  1894  the  operation  of  the  act  was  placed  under  a 
Commissioner  of  Public  Roads  appointed  by  the 
Governor  for  a  3-year  term.  New  Jersey,  thus,  be- 
came the  second  State,  after  Massachusetts,  to  estab- 
lish a  State  highway  organization.  For  a  niunber  of 
years,  however,  the  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads  had 
very  little  real  authority  over  State-aided  roads  and 
none  at  all  over  other  roads.  Lacking  the  power  to 
initiate  projects,  he  could  not  insure  that  State-aided 
roads  would  link  up  into  highways  of  any  great  con- 
tinuous length,  and  after  they  were  completed,  he 
could  not  require  that  they  be  adequately  maintained. 


"The  Right-of-Way" — bicyclists  and  horsecart 
vying  for  the  road. 

Nevertheless,  the  New  Jersey  State-Aid  Act  was  a 
milestone  in  the  history  of  highway  administration  in 
the  United  States,  for  it  clearly  stated  the  principle 
that  highway  improvement  for  the  general  good  was 
an  obligation  of  the  State  and  county,  as  well  as  the 
people  living  along  the  highway.  The  act  also  im- 
posed much-needed  reforms  in  local  road  administra- 
tion: it  abolished  the  numerous  road  districts,  along 
with  the  overseer  method  of  road  improvement,  and 
required  the  township  committees  to  adopt  a  system- 
atic plan  for  improving  the  highways. 

The  First  State  Highway  Department 

Massachusetts  approach  State  aid  somewhat  dif- 
ferently from  New  Jersey.  The  Legislature  created 
a  3-man  continuing  commission  and  charged  it  with 
the  building  and  conti-ol  of  a  system  of  main  highways 
connecting  the  municipalities  of  the  Commonwealth. 
Originally,  the  counties  w^ere  supposed  to  grade  these 
roads,  after  which  the  Highway  Commission  would 
surface  them.  In  1894,  the  law  was  changed  to  require 
the  Conmiission  to  shoulder  the  entire  cost  of  con- 
struction, charging  one-quarter  of  the  expense  back  to 
the  counties.^*  At  the  same  time,  the  Legislature  ap- 
propriated $300,000  to  begin  the  operation  of  the 
Commonwealth  Highway  Plan,  an  amount  that  was 
afterward  substantially  increased  from  year  to  year. 


43 


The  Massachusetts  plan  was  a  tremendous  improve- 
ment over  the  New  Jersey  State-aid  law.  First,  it 
concentrated  the  limited  State  funds  on  a  small  mile- 
age of  the  most  important  roads,  thus,  assuring  that 
they  could  eventually  be  connected  into  a  continuous 
network.  The  power  to  initiate  projects  remained 
with  the  local  officials,  but  the  Highway  Commission 
had  authority  to  approve  or  reject  and  also  to  make 
the  surveys  and  plans  and  to  award  and  inspect  the 
construction  contracts,  thus,  retaining  control  over 
standards.  This  control  eventually  led  to  establishing 
statewide  standards  for  highways  of  various  classes 
and  also  to  setting  standards  for  materials  used  in 
roads.  Finally,  the  IVIassachusetts  plan  left  the  main- 
tenance of  the  roads  improved  with  State  aid  under 
the  direct  control  of  the  Highway  Commission,  which 
could  charge  a  part  of  the  cost  back  to  the  local  gov- 
ernments.^® 

The  State-aid  principle,  in  various  forms,  spread 
slowly  to  other  States  after  New  Jersey  and  Massa- 
chusetts had  shown  the  way.  In  some  States  the  aid 
consisted  only  of  advice,  which  might  be  accepted  or 
rejected  by  the  local  authorities ;  but  in  New  York  the 
State  Highway  Commission  was  given  direct  or  in- 
direct supervision  over  every  public  highway  in  the 
State.  Four  States  helped  only  to  the  extent  of  put- 
ting convicts  from  the  State  penitentiary  to  work  on 
the  roads,  while  others  authorized  the  employment  of 
State  and  county  convicts  for  road  work  and  gave 
cash  grants  in  addition.  Illinois  conducted  a  large 
stone-crushing  operation  with  convicts  and  gave  the 
stone  to  the  counties  free,  except  for  the  cost  of  haul- 
ing. Maryland,  New  Hampshire,  New  York,  Wash- 
ington and  California  required  all  State  aid  to  be 
spent  on  tnmkline  road  systems.^"  The  last  States  to 
enact  some  form  of  State  aid  were  South  Carolina, 
Texas  and  Indiana,  all  in  1917. 

Revival  of  the  Federal  Government's  Interest  in  Roads 

As  the  Good  Roads  Movement  gained  momentum, 
its  supporters  began  to  put  pressure  on  Congress  to 
provide  some  kind  of  Federal  assistance  to  highways. 
The  proposed  Chicago  World's  Fair,  planned  for  1893, 
seemed  an  auspicious  occasion  for  a  demonstration  of 
Federal  interest. 

In  July  1892,  a  Senate  bill  was  introduced  to  create 
a  National  Highway  Commission  "for  the  purpose  of 
general  inquiry  into  the  condition  of  highways  in  the 
United  States,  and  means  for  their  improvement,  and 
especially  the  best  method  of  securing  a  proper  exhibit 
at  the  World's  Columbian  Exposition  of  approved 
appliances  for  road  making,  and  of  providing  for 
public  instruction  in  the  art  during  the  Exposition."  ^^ 
Although  introduced  by  Senator  Charles  F.  Mander- 
son  of  Nebraska,  this  bill  was  written  by  General  Roy 
Stone,  a  prominent  New  York  civil  engineer  and  good 
roads  booster.^- 

The  Senate  passed  the  National  Highway  Commis- 
sion bill,  but  it  was  lost  by  adjournment  of  Congress 
and  failed  to  become  law.  However,  in  the  next  ses- 
sion. Representatives  Allan  C.  Durburow  of  Illinois* 
and  Clarke  Lewis  of  Mississippi  introduced  resolutions 


*  Mr.  Durburow  was  Chairman  of  the  Select  Committee  on 
the  Columbian  Exposition. 


instructing  the  House  Committee  on  Agriculture  to 
incorporate  a  clause  in  the  pending  agricultural  ap- 
propriation bill  to  authorize  the  Secretary  of  Agricul- 
ture to  "make  inquiry  regarding  public  roads,"  and  to 
"make  investigations  for  a  better  system  of  roads." 

The  Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1893,  as 
finally  approved  on  March  3,  appropriated  $10,000  to 
enable  the  Secretary  "to  make  inquiries  in  regard  to 
the  systems  of  road  management  throughout  the 
United  States  ...  to  make  investigations  in  regard  to 
the  best  method  of  road-making  .  .  .  and  to  enable  him 
to  assist  the  agricultural  college  and  experiment  sta- 
tions in  disseminating  information  on  this  subject. . . ." 

The  U.S.  Office  of  Road  Inquiry 

Secretary  J.  Sterling  Morton  implemented  this 
statute  on  October  3,  1893,  by  setting  up  the  Office  of 
Road  Inquiry  (ORI)  within  the  Department  of  Agri- 
culture. To  head  this  office  he  appointed  General  Roy 
Stone  as  Special  Agent  and  Engineer  for  Road  In- 
quiry, but  was  careful  to  limit  Stone's  authority  to 
investigating  and  disseminating  information.  He  was 
specifically  forbidden  to  seek  to  influence  or  control 
road  policy  in  the  States  or  counties  or  to  promote  or 
encourage  schemes  to  furnish  work  to  the  unemployed 
or  to  convicts.  "The  Department  is  to  furnish  infor- 
mation, not  to  direct  and  formulate  any  system  of 
organization,  however  efficient  or  desirable  it  may 
be."  " 

With  characteristic  energy,  Stone,  whose  entire  staff 
consisted  of  himself  and  one  clerk,  sent  letters  of  in- 
quiry to  the  governors  of  the  States  and  Territories, 
and  their  secretaries  of  state,  the  members  of  Congress, 
the  State  geologists  and  all  the  railroad  presidents, 
soliciting  information  on  highway  laws,  the  locations 
of  materials  suitable  for  roadbuilding,  and  rail  rates 
for  hauling  such  materials.  By  the  end  of  June  1894, 
the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry  had  issued  nine  bulletins 
on  these  subjects,  some  of  which  were  already  in  their 
second  printing!^* 

In  the  following  year  the  ORI  produced  nine  more 
bulletins,  three  of  which  were  the  proceedings  of  na- 
tional good  roads  conventions.  The  promoters  of 
these  meetings  had  no  trouble  getting  able  and  in- 
fluential men  on  their  programs  as  speakers,  including 
General  Stone,  and  publication  of  their  speeches  at 
Government  expense  was  an  easy  and  cheap  way  to 
spread  the  gospel  of  good  roads  throughout  the 
country. 

Another  major  ORI  project  begim  in  1894  was  a 
large-scale  Good  Roads  National  Map  of  all  the  ma- 
cadamized and  gravel  roads  in  the  United  States. 
For  this.  Stone  sent  a  map  of  each  county  to  the  clerk 
or  surveyor  of  that  county,  asking  that  it  be  returned 
with  the  existing  roads  laid  down  upon  it.  By  June 
1895,  he  was  able  to  compile  statewide  road  maps  for 
Pennsylvania,  Indiana  and  New  Jersey  from  these 
county  maps,  with  those  of  other  States  in  various 
stages  of  compilation.^^ 

To  round  out  a  year  of  extraordinary  activity,  the 
ORI,  with  the  help  of  the  Division  of  Statistics  of 
the  Agriculture  Department,  compiled  information  on 
the  cost  of  hauling  farm  products  to  market  in  1,160 
counties  in  the  United  States.  These  statistics  showed 
that  a  farmer's  average  haul  to  market  or  shipping 


44 


points  ranged  from  6.4  miles  in  the  East  to  23.3  miles 
in  the  Far  West,  with  a  national  average  of  12.1  miles. 
The  average  load  for  a  2-horse  team  was  a  little  over 
2,000  pounds  and  the  average  cost  of  hauling  was  25 
cents  per  ton-mile.^®  By  comparison,  the  cost  of 
hauling  farm  products  by  railroad  was  about  i/^  cent 
per  ton-mile  at  this  time. 

The  Object  Lesson  Road  Program 

As  yet,  General  Stone  had  not  found  a  satisfactory 
way  to  assist  the  agricultural  colleges  and  experiment 
stations  to  disseminate  information  on  roadmaking. 
A  solution  to  this  problem  came  out  of  the  experience 
of  the  State  Highway  Commission  in  implementing 
the  Massachusetts  State-aid  law  of  1893.  The  Legis- 
lature had  appropriated  $300,000  with  the  provision 
that  each  county  was  to  receive  a  "fair  apportion- 
ment." The  Commission  decided  to  parcel  the  money 
out  to  37  widely  scattered  projects,  each  about  1  mile 
long,  on  the  theory  that  once  the  people  had  a  taste  of 
good  roads,  they  would  put  pressure  on  the  Legisla- 
ture for  a  bigger  future  appropriation.  Each  project 
was  located  where  it  would  eventually  form  a  link  in 
a  continuous  system  of  tnmk  roads  between  the  prin- 
cipal cities.^^ 

Stone  proposed  to  apply  the  Massachusetts  idea  na- 
tionally by  building  short  "object  lesson  roads"  near 
or  on  the  experimental  farms  of  the  various  States. 
These  would  serve  to  instnict  the  roadmakers,  to  edu- 
cate the  visiting  public  and  to  improve  the  economic 
administration  of  the  farms.^*  This  plan  was  satis- 
factory to  James  Wilson,  the  new  Secretary  of  Agri- 
culture, who  preferred  that  the  OKI  emphasize  the 


practical  side  of  roadbuilding  rather  than  the  aca- 
demic. However,  the  total  annual  budget  of  the  Office 
of  Road  Inquiry  was  only  $10,000  at  this  time,  so 
General  Stone  had  to  scrounge  most  of  the  cost  of  the 
first  object  lesson  roads. 

He  began  the  scrounging  by  reducing  his  own  office 
staff,  using  the  money  saved  to  hire  practical  road- 
building  experts,  of  whom  the  first  was  General  E.  G. 
Harrison  of  Asbury  Park,  New  Jersey,  a  civil  engineer 
who  enjoyed  a  national  reputation  as  a  builder  of 
macadam  roads.  Next,  he  talked  the  road  equipment 
manufacturers  into  providing  equipment  free  as  a 
good  will  and  promotion  gesture.  Finally,  he  got  the 
experiment  stations,  the  local  road  authorities  and,  in 
some  cases,  j^rivate  individuals  to  put  up  the  cash  to 
pay  for  labor,  materials,  hauling  and  part  of  the  wages 
of  the  machine  operators. 

The  OKI's  share  of  the  cost  of  each  project  consisted 
only  of  the  salary  and  travel  expenses  of  the  super- 
visory road  expert,  the  expense  of  transporting  the 
loaned  equipment  to  and  from  the  project  and  part  of 
the  wages  of  the  equipment  operators.  However,  the 
design,  stakeout  and  supervision  of  construction  were 
under  the  complete  control  of  the  ORI  supervisor, 
"in  order  that  the  roads  may  be  creditable  to  the 
Government  when  done."  ^^ 

The  first  object  lesson  road  project  was  compara- 
tively small,  involving  a  cash  outlay  of  only  $321  put 
up  by  the  New  Jersey  Agricultural  College  and  Ex- 
periment Station  at  New  Brunswick.  Under  this 
project.  General  Harrison,  in  June  1897,  placed  6 
inches  of  trap  rock  macadam  8  feet  wide  on  a  660-foot 
section  of  the  main  road  leading  from  the  town  to  the 


Building  the  first  object  lesson  road  near  the 
New  Jersey  Agricultural  College  and  Experi- 
ment Station,  New  Brunswick,  N.J.,  in  1897. 


45 


«5 


Working  the  road  machine  on  a  section 
of  the  experimental  road  at  Oeneva,  N.T. 

college  farm.  He  then  moved  the  equipment  to 
Geneva,  New  York,  where  he  built  li/^  miles  of  road 
connecting  the  city  to  the  New  York  Agricultural 
Experiment  Station.  This  road  cost  $9,046  and  was 
financed  by  contributions  from  the  town  of  Greneva, 
the  experiment  station  and  three  private  individuals. 
After  its  completion,  Harrison  moved  the  equipment 
to  Kingston,  Rhode  Island,  where  he  completed  a  road 
for  the  Agricultural  College  of  Rhode  Island  in  1898." 
These  roads  accomplished  their  intended  purpose. 
They  were  a  forceful  demonstration  of  General  Stone's 
"seeing  is  believing"  philosophy  of  selling  good  roads 
to  the  public.  They  attracted  hundreds  of  visitors, 
including  many  county  road  officials.  They  also  at- 
tracted a  deluge  of  requests  for  similar  object  lesson 
roads  at  other  agricultural  colleges  which  Stone  was 
unable  to  fill  because  his  funds  had  run  out.  In 
September  1897  he  wrote: 

The  work  now  in  hand  will  exhaust  all  the  funds  that 
can  be  spared  from  this  year's  appropriation,  unless 
something  additional  is  provided  to  meet  the  many  urgent 
demands  of  the  agricultural  colleges  and  experiment  sta- 
tions for  'Government'  roads. 


If  the  manufacturers  continue  willing  to  furnish  the 
machinery  free,  an  expenditure  by  the  Governnient  of 
from  $300  to  $500  for  each  locality  will  be  sufficient  to 
call  out  enough  local  help  to  build  from  $2,000  to  $10,000 
worth  of  road  at  most  of  the  116  agricultural  colleges  and 
experiment  stations,  and  any  required  number  of  outfits 
can  be  put  in  the  field  at  once  .  .  ." 

Educational  Work  of  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry 

General  Stone  and  his  deputy  engineer,  Maurice  O. 
Eldridge,  were  indefatigable  writers  and  speakers. 
In  addition  to  writing  or  editing  20  published  bulle- 
tins and  30  circulars  on  various  aspects  of  the  road 
problem,  they  accepted  invitations  to  appear  on  the 
programs  of  several  dozen  good  roads  conventions  and 
farmer's  road  institutes.  The  invitations  were,  in  fact, 
far  more  numerous  than  the  ORI  could  accept  with 
its  limited  budget  and  force.  General  Stone  was  also 
an  acknowledged  expert  on  good  roads  legislation,  and 
his  advice  was  sought  by  several  States,  notably 
California,  New  York,  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island, 
in  framing  their  highway  laws. 

Following  the  outbreak  of  war  with  Spain,  General 
Stone,  in  August  1898,  was  granted  leave  of  absence 
from  the  ORI  to  serve  with  the  Army.  During  the 
war  he  was  a  Brigadier  General  on  the  staff  of  General 
Nelson  Miles.  The  war  over,  he  resumed  his  duties  in 
January  1899,  but  resigned  October  13,  1899,  to  return 
to  New  York,  where  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  the 
National  League  for  Good  Roads,  an  organization  he 
had  helped  to  found  in  1893  before  his  appointment 
to  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry. 

The  Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries 

While  General  Stone  was  on  military  duty,  the 
Office  of  Road  Inquiry  was  temporarily  headed  by 
Martin  Dodge  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  formerly  President 
of  the  Ohio  State  Highway  Commission.  "Wlien  Stone 
resigned  in  October  1899,  the  name  of  the  agency  was 
changed  to  the  Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries 
(OPRI)  and  Mr.  Dodge  was  appointed  as  Director. 


General  Stone's  plan  for 
three  great  demonstration 
roads — /?-o???  Portland, 
Maine,  to  Jacksonville, 
Pla.,  on  the  east  coast; 
i      from  Seattle,  Wash.,  to 
San  Diego,  Calif.,  on.  the 
west  coast;  and  from 
Washington,  D.C.,  to  San 
Francisco,  Calif. 


46 


About  1898  Martin  Dodge  advanced 
the  idea  of  steel  track  wagon  roads 
by  exhibiting  sections  of  stcci  track 
at  the  Trans-Mississippi  Exposition 
at  Omaha.  The  advantages  were 
that  steel  tr-ack  was  less  costly  to 
install  and  ynaintain,  more  durable, 
and  the  power  required  to  move  a 
vehicle  was  only  a  small  fraction  of 
that  needed  over  any  other  ki7id  of 
road.  This  dcmon.'^t ration  shows 
an  11-ton  load  being  hauled  by  one 
horse  on  a  steel  track  while  it 
would  take  20  horses  to  haul  tliis 
load  on  an  ordinai-y  road  of  that 
day. 


For  2  years,  prior  to  General  Stone's  resignation, 
Congi-ess  had  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  his  entreaties  for 
more  funds  to  expand  tlie  demonstration  road  pro- 
gram. ^Y\^ien  i\Ir.  Dodge  took  office  in  1899,  the  budget 
was  still  only  $10,000  per  year,  and  for  another  2 
years  he  had  no  success  in  getting  it  increased.  This 
resistance  was  due,  in  part  at  least,  to  fear  on  the  part 
of  some  people  that  the  OPRI  was  the  entering  wedge 
for  national  roads  under  Federal  control.  Seeking  to 
allay  this  suspicion,  Dodge  wrote  in  his  report  for 
1901: 

It  is  proper  just  here  to  call  attention  to  a  misconcep- 
tion which  appears  to  exist  in  the  minds  of  some  to  the 
effect  that  increased  appropriations  for  this  work  may 
lead  to  National  aid.  It  should  be  distinctly  understood 
that  the  work  of  this  Office,  like  that  of  many  other 
Divisions  of  the  Department,  is  purely  educational.  In 
requesting  an  increased  appropriation  it  was  not  the  in- 
tention to  shift  the  burden  and  responsibility  of  con- 
structing improved  roads  from  the  States  and  counties  to 
the  General  Government.  Such  a  plan  is  not  feasible,  and 
even  if  it  were,  it  would  not  be  desirable,  for  there  could 
be  no  surer  way  of  postponing  the  building  of  good  roads 
than  by  making  them  dependent  upon  National  aid.  Under 
such  a  system  States  and  counties  would  wait  for  National 
aid  and  little  or  nothing  would  be  done." 

Director  Dodge's  plea  for  more  funds  did  not  bear 
fruit  until  1903  when  Congress  increased  the  OPRI's 
budget  to  $30,000.  In  the  meantime,  to  better  keep  in 
touch  with  local  developments  and  economize  on  travel 
expense,  Dodge  divided  the  country  into  four  "divi- 
sions," with  a  special  agent  in  charge  of  each.  To 
head  the  Eastern  Division,  he  appointed  Logan  W. 
Page,  a  geologist  who  at  the  time  was  also  Chief  of 
the  Bureau  of  Chemistry's  Division  of  Tests.  Page 
had  been  invited  to  Washington  in  1900  to  set  up  a 
materials  laboratory  in  the  Bureau  of  Chemistry  of 
the  Department  of  Agriculture  and  to  conduct  a  study 
of  road  materials  on  a  national  scale.  The  other  divi- 
sion heads  were  Professor  J.  A.  Holmes  of  Chapel 
Hill,  North  Carolina.  J.  A.  Stout  of  INIenominee, 
Wisconsin,  and  James  W.  Abbott  of  Denver,  Colorado. 

All  of  the  division  agents,  except  Page,  were  part- 
time  employees,  and  their  available  time  was  fully 
employed  attending  conventions,  writing  articles  and 
collecting  information  on  the  progress  of  legislation. 
An  idea  of  the  duties  of  these  agents  can  be  gleaned 


from  Dodge's  summai-y  of  Special  Agent  Abbott's 
work  for  1901.  In  addition  to  traveling  more  than 
12,000  miles  by  railroad, 

He  attended  and  participated  in  the  work  of  four  very 
important  conventions,  at  two  of  which  he  read  papers. 
He  has  written  several  articles  for  publication  in  leading 
newspapers,  and  numerous  interviews  have  been  published 
giving  accounts  of  his  movements  and  work.  He  spent 
some  time  in  consultation  with  the  road  committees  of 
the  Colorado  legislature  and  assisted  in  framing  a  care- 
fully prepared  road  law.  He  visited  many  places  in 
Colorado,  Utah,  and  California,  and  gave  advice  where  it 
was  desired  regarding  specific  or  general  road  improve- 
ment. Mr.  Abbott  visited,  practically  at  his  own  expense, 
this  Office  and  the  highway  departments  of  New  York, 
Massachusetts,  and  California.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  He  has,  by  personal  interviews  and  private  letters, 
brought  the  sul)ject  of  road  improvement  to  the  attention 
of  governors  and  other  State  officials,  the  editors  of  lead- 
ing new.spapers,  professors  in  institutions  of  learning, 
presidents  and  managers  of  railroads,  prominent  civil  and 
mining  engineers,  members  of  the  legislatures,  boards  of 
county  commissioners,  road  supervisors,  the  heads  of 
leading  industries,  manufacturers  of  road  machinery,  be- 
sides a  large  number  of  influential  private  citizens." 

All  this  for  $1,500  per  year!  Obviously,  Special 
Agent  Abbott  also  had  a  private  income  to  draw  upon, 
as  did  the  other  division  heads. 

Until  1903  the  OPRI  had  only  one  object  lesson 
road  construction  team,  which  was  managed  by  Special 
Agent  and  Road  Expert  E.  G.  Harrison  until  his 
death  in  February  1901.  This  team  was  shipped  from 
place  to  place  by  rail  on  a  prearranged  schedule,  build- 
ing eight  or  nine  roads  per  year,  each  14  to  I14  miles 
long.  After  a  sufficient  amount  of  road  had  been  built 
at  each  location,  a  "good  roads  day"  would  be  ar- 
ranged, and  the  farmers  of  that  and  the  adjacent  coun- 
ties would  be  invited  to  attend.  Special  Agent 
Harrison  would  lead  the  crowd — often  as  many  as  500 
persons — along  tlie  new  construction,  lecturing  on  the 
fundamentals  of  drainage,  stone  surfacing  and  road 
maintenance.  Harrison  would  arrange  for  the  lecture 
to  be  printed  in  the  local  newspaper.  The  following 
is  a  brief  quote  from  one  of  these  accounts: 

'We  are  not  here  to  build  city  streets,  nor  boulevards. 
Cities  are  able  to  pay  for  their  expensive  streets  and 
know  how  to  build   them.     But  the  U.S.  is  interested  in 


47 


the  rural  districts  and  wishes  to  help  the  farmers  and 
others  to  get  good  roads.  Therefore,  the  Department  of 
Agriculture  has  established  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry, 
which  is  seeliing  to  gather  all  the  information  possible 
about  the  construction  and  maintenance  of  good  roads 
and  to  impart  it  gratis  to  the  people.  The  government 
will  not  build  your  roads,  but  will  place  at  your  disposal 
all  the  information  it  has  gained  from  experts,  experi- 
ments and  other  sources.  .  .  . 

'Here  we  have  not  even  built  the  best  kind  of  macadam 
road.  For  that  you  must  go  to  your  cities  and  look  at 
the  boulevards.  We  have  simply  taken  the  material  at 
hand  and  from  it  constructed  the  best  road  possible  with 
the  money  we  have.  The  boulders  from  which  the  stone 
is  crushed  were  brought  from  the  neighboring  farms. 
They  are  of  good  quality  and  very  hard.  They  consist 
of  granite,  trap,  syenite,  quartz,  etc.  This  is  much  better 
than  your  soft  limestone,  or  loose  sandy,  washed  gravel.' " 

After  1903,  with  a  tripled  budget,  the  OPRI  was 
able  to  keep  four  demonstration  teams  in  the  field. 
Also,  with  Page's  new  laboratory  in  operation,  the 
Government  undertook  to  test  the  materials  going  into 
the  object  lesson  roads  without  charge  to  the  local 
cooperators,  eliminating  guesswork  in  this  very  im- 
portant aspect  of  roadbuilding. 

The  Good   Roads  Trains 

In  1893  there  was  only  one  national  good  roads 
organization  in  the  United  States  and  three  or  four 
local  associations.  Eight  years  later  there  were  over 
100  organizations  promoting  good  roads,  including  six 
distinctly  national  road  associations.    In  1901  the  most 


active  and  aggressive  of  these  organizations  was  the 
National  Good  Roads  Association  (NGRA)  which 
had  been  formed  during  the  Chicago  Good  Roads 
Convention  of  1900,  and  was  headed  by  Colonel 
William  H.  Moore  of  St.  Louis  as  president  and 
Colonel  R.  W.  Richardson  of  Omaha  as  secretary. 
Like  many  other  good  roads  organizations,  the  Na- 
tional Good  Roads  Association  had  no  permanent 
membership  list  and  depended  for  its  support  on  do- 
nations from  civic  groups,  manufacturers  of  road 
machinery,  suppliers  of  road  materials,  wealthy  indi- 
viduals, the  public  at  large  and  even  the  railroads. 

Colonel  Moore,  the  guiding  spirit  of  the  NGRA,  was 
a  skillful  and  persuasive  promoter,  with  a  wide  ac- 
quaintanceship among  influential  people.  In  1901  he 
conceived  the  idea  of  a  traveling  good  roads  show  that 
would  cover  the  country,  educating  the  public  on  the 
advantages  of  improved  highways,  very  much  in  the 
manner  of  the  circuses  and  the  popular  Chautauqua 
shows.  He  persuaded  the  road  machinery  companies 
to  help  with  this  project  by  donating  their  latest 
models,  along  with  trained  operators,  to  run  them. 
From  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad,  he  obtained  the 
promise  of  an  11 -car  train  free  of  charge,  to  transport 
the  show  from  place  to  place.  Finally,  he  approached 
Director  Dodge  to  give  Government  sanction  to  the 
idea  by  providing  a  road  expert  to  lecture  on  roads 
and  supervise  demonstrations  of  roadbuilding.  Dodge 
was  unable  to  help  because  his  budget  was  already 
committed  to  other  work;  however,  when  the  Associa- 


The  Southern  Railway  Oood  Roads  Train  vnth 
some  of  the  road  experts  during  its  fall  trip  in  1901. 


48 


tion  offered  to  pay  the  expert's  salary  and  expenses, 
he  agreed  to  participate  and  designated  Special  Agent 
Charles  T.  Harrison  of  New  Jersey  as  the  OPRI's 
representative.* 

The  Association  mounted  a  high-powered  publicity 
campaign  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  "Good  Roads 
Train."  Advance  agents  organized  local  conventions 
and  lined  up  donations  of  labor  and  materials  for 
demonstration  i^rojects.  The  train,  consisting  of  nine 
flat  cars  loaded  with  road  machinery,  and  two  sleep- 
ing cars  for  the  operators,  laborers,  officials,  road 
experts  and  press  representatives,  pulled  out  of  Chi- 
cago early  in  April  1901,  under  the  management  and 
control  of  Colonel  Richardson.  Before  returning  in 
August,  it  stopped  at  16  cities  in  five  States,  wliere 
the  construction  crew  built  sample  roads  of  earth, 
stone  or  gravel  varying  in  length  from  14  mile  to 
114  miles.  Director  Dodge,  who  went  along  on  the 
first  trip  from  Chicago  to  New  Orleans,  expressed  his 
enthusiasm  for  the  project  in  this  glowing  account : 

About  20  miles  of  earth,  stone,  and  gravel  roads  were 
built  and  15  large  and  enthusiastic  conventions  were 
held.  The  numbers  attending  these  conventions  and  wit- 
nessing the  work  were  very  large,  in  nearly  every  instance 
more  than  a  thousand  persons  and  in  some  cases  2,000 
persons  being  present.  Among  the  attendants  were  lead- 
ing citizens  and  officials,  including  governors,  mayors, 
Congressmen,  members  of  legislatures,  judges  of  the 
county  court,  and  road  officials.  This  was  undoubtedly 
the  most  successful  campaign  ever  waged  for  good  roads, 
and  the  expedition  has  been  of  great  service  to  the  cause, 
and  especially  to  the  people  of  the  Mississippi  Valley." 


*  Charles    T.    Harrison    replaced   E.   G.    Harrison   who   died 
February  6,  1901. 


At  this  time  the  steam  railroads  were  among  the 
strongest  supporters  of  good  roads.  Secure  in  their 
position  as  the  backbone  of  the  American  transporta- 
tion system,  they  were  anxious  to  extend  their  tribu- 
tary traffic  areas  and  also  to  overcome  some  of  the 
widespread  hostility  engendered  by  their  high-handed 
methods  of  dealing  with  the  public.  The  economic 
aspect  of  the  railway  interest  in  roads  was  aptly  ex- 
pressed by  an  official  of  the  Southern  Railroad  in 
1902: 

.  .  .  They  [the  Southern  Railroad]  now  handle  the 
products  of  from  2  to  5  miles  on  each  side  of  their  trades. 
In  the  winter  season  they  can  not  get  the  products  that 
are  any  farther  away.  If  you  had  improved  roads,  they 
would  be  able  to  serve  the  country  20  to  30  miles  from 
their  tracks.  ...  If  you  are  a  shipper,  you  know  that 
at  some  seasons  of  the  year  it  is  hard  to  get  cars ;  that 
every  railroad  in  the  United  States  suffers  from  a  lack 
of  cars  and  locomotives,  and  that  the  industries  of  almost 
every  community  suffer  on  this  account.  This  is  because 
the  traffic  on  all  railroads  is  so  greatly  congested  within 
a  few  months  of  the  year.  It  is  not  divided  over  the 
twelve  months  as  it  ought  to  be.  If  there  were  good 
roads  leading  to  every  railroad  station  in  the  United 
States,  the  railroads  would  be  able  to  get  along  with  half 
the  cars  they  now  need.  .  .  .'"' 

The  Illinois  Central  Railroad  "expedition"  was  so 
successful  that  Colonel  Moore  had  little  difficulty  lin- 
ing up  others.  One  left  Chicago  on  the  Lake  Shore 
and  Michigan  Southern  Railroad  for  Buffalo,  where 
it  was  placed  on  exhibit  on  the  grounds  of  the  Pan- 
American  Exposition  during  the  International  Good 
Roads  Congress  during  September  1901.*^ 


The  crushing  plant  in  operation  at  Winston^Salem,  N.C., 
during  a  macadam  roadbuilding  demonstration  in  1901. 


49 


The  most  elaborate  expedition  of  all  was  sponsored 
jointly  by  the  Southern  Railroad  and  the  NGRA  and 
cost  the  railroad  over  $80,000.  It  left  Alexandria, 
Virginia,  on  October  29,  1901,  and  was  on  the  road  for 
5  months,  traveling  4,037  miles  and  demonstrating  at 
18  good  roads  conventions.  Welcoming  this  train  to 
Lynchburg,  U.S.  Senator  J.  W.  Daniel  of  Virginia 
said: 

An  itinerant  college  on  wheels  has  come  among  us.  It 
brings  its  professors  and  its  equipment  with  it.  It  is 
known  as  the  'good  roads  train'  of  the  Southern  Railway 
system.  This  college  does  not  teach  out  of  books,  nor 
solely  by  word  of  mouth.  It  teaches  by  the  greater  power 
of  example.  If  you  will  just  watch  its  operation  you  will 
see  a  new  good  road  grow  over  an  old  and  bad  road  at 
the  magic  touch  of  titanic  machinery,  and  while  an  orator 
talks  of  road  building  it  will  set  his  words  to  the  music 
of  practical  accomplishment.'" 


When  the  automobile  arrived,  many 

miles  of  rural  road  were  similar  to  this 

one  along  Bishop  Creek  in  California. 


A  steam  roller  in  operation  on  a  demonstration 
macadam  pavement  near  Greenville,  Tenn.,  in  1901. 


The  Pere  Marquette  Railroad  and  the  Michigan 
Good  Roads  Association  sponsored  a  Good  Roads 
Train  for  the  summer  of  1902 — the  only  train  which 
did  not  have  at  least  one  of  Dodge's  road  experts 
aboard.  The  last  of  the  Good  Roads  Trains  left  St. 
Paul  on  the  Great  Northern  Railroad,  September  8, 
1903,  for  an  expedition  through  Minnesota,  the  Da- 
kotas,  Montana,  and  beyond  to  the  Pacific  Coast. 

The  First  National  Road  Inventory 

One  of  the  most  ambitious  tasks  undertaken  by  the 
OPRI  during  Director  Dodge's  administration  was  an 
inventory  of  all  the  roads  in  the  Thiited  States  outside 
of  the  cities.  The  information  for  this  enumeration 
was  obtained  in  1904  from  questionnaires  sent  to  the 
county  authorities  or  from  "voluntary  correspondents" 


appointed  by  the  OPRI.  The  investigators,  headed 
by  Assistant  Director  M.  O.  Eldridge,  went  far  beyond 
merely  tabulating  road  mileage.  They  investigated 
taxation  and  sources  of  revenue,  road  laws  and  total 
expenditures  in  every  county  of  every  State.  Road 
mileage  was  subdivided  according  to  surface  type. 
The  information  was  so  voluminous  that  over  2  years 
were  required  to  tabulate  it  and  issue  the  report,  which 
did  not  appear  until  May  1907.*^ 

The  OPRI  study  showed  that  there  were  2,151,570 
miles  of  rural  public  roads  in  the  United  States  in 
1904,  plus  1,598  miles  of  stone-surfaced  toll  roads.* 
Of  the  public  roads,  only  153,662  miles  had  any  kind 
of  surfacing.**  The  expenditures  on  roads  in  1904 
were  $79.77  million  of  which  only  $2.6  million  was 
contributed  by  the  States  in  the  form  of  State  aid.^^ 

OfFice  of  Public  Roads  Achieves  Permanent  Status 

From  its  beginning  in  1893  as  the  ORI,  the  Office 
of  Public  Road  Inquiries  had  been  a  temporary  or- 
ganization set  up  by  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  to 
perform  a  job  mandated  by  Congress,  namely,  to  col- 
lect and  disseminate  information  about  good  roads. 
Apparently,  Congress  did  not  contemplate  originally 
that  this  would  become  a  permanent  function  of  the 
Government,  but  the  work  was  continued  from  year 
to  year  by  a  short  paragraph  in  the  annual  Agricul- 
ture appropriation  bill.     In  1903  and  again  in  1904 


*  By   comparison,   there  were  213,904  miles  of  railroads  in 
the  United  States  in  1904.=" 

**  This  mileage  was  distributed  as  follows : 


Surfacii 

[ig  Type 

Miles) 

Earth 

Gravel 

Stone 

Shells,  etc.    Total 
Sand-Clay 

Eastern  and 

Southeastern 

States 

580,850 

24,627 

21,240 

3,091        629,808 

Texas 

119,281 

167 

1,909 

52         121,409 

Public  Land 

States 

1,297,777 

83,439 

15,473 

3,664     1,400,853 

1,997,908 

108,233 

38,622 

6,807      2,151,570 

In  addition  to  the  above,  there  were  1,101  miles  of  stone- 
surfaced  toll  roads  in  Pennsylvania  and  497  miles  of  toll  roads 
in  Maryland. ^1 


50 


A   plank   road   between  El   Centra, 
Calif.,   and   Yuma,  Ariz. 


51 


stuck  in  the  mud  in  Sacramento  Cawyon. 


Director  Dodge  recommended  that  his  office  be  trans- 
formed into  a  Division  of  the  Department  "with  a 
statutory  roll  of  officers  and  employees." 

The  work  of  this  Office  appears  to  be  no  longer  of 
tentative  character.  Year  after  year  it  has  assumed  in- 
creased importance  and  wider  scope,  and  there  is  now  a 
general  demand  coming  up  from  all  sections  of  the  coun- 
try that  it  be  made  a  permanent  feature  of  the  work  of 
this  Department.  It  appears  fitting,  therefore,  that  it  be 
given  a  more  definite  legal  status,  thereby  adding  dignity 
and  stability  to  this  branch  of  the  Department's  work. . .  .^ 

Congress  eventually  heeded  this  plea,  and  in  the 
Agriculture  Appropriation  Act,  of  March  3,  1905  (33 
Stat.  882),  it  merged  the  Division  of  Tests  of  the 
Bureau  of  Chemistry  with  the  Office  of  Public  Road 
Inquiries  to  form  the  Office  of  Public  Roads.  The 
new  agency  had  a  statutory  roll,  headed  by  a  Director, 
"who  shall  be  a  scientist  and  have  charge  of  all  sci- 
entific and  technical  work,"  at  a  salary  of  $2,500  per 
year.  The  Act  also  provided  for  a  Chief  of  Records, 
an  Instrument  Maker  and  6  clerks,  and  boosted  the 


total   annual   appropriation   for  the  office's  work  to 
$50,000. 

The  requirement  that  the  Director  should  be  a  sci- 
entist prevented  Martin  Dodge,  a  lawyer,  from  suc- 
ceeding to  the  directorship  of  the  new  Office  of  Public 
Roads,  and  Logan  Waller  Page  was  appointed  instead. 

Director  Page  assumed  the  helm  of  the  Office  of 
Public  Roads  at  a  momentous  time  in  the  history  of 
land  transportation.  To  his  predecessors  "good  roads" 
meant  wagon  roads,  constructed  according  to  the  time- 
tested  methods  of  Tresaguet,  Telford  and  McAdam 
and  designed  for  horsedrawn  steel-tired  traffic  travel- 
ing 6  to  8  miles  per  hour.  In  1905  the  shape  of  things 
to  come  was  dimly  foreshadowed  by  scarcely  78,000 
automobiles,  most  of  which  were  confined  to  the  cities. 
Ten  years  later  2.33  million  autos  were  raising  clouds 
of  dust  on  the  country  roads,  and  by  1918  this  mimber 
had  increased  to  5.55  million.  The  motor  age  had 
arrived,  and  with  it  a  new  kind  of  highway,  designed 
specifically  for  motor  vehicles,  would  evolve.  Director 
Page  would  preside  over  the  early  stages  of  this 
evolution. 


52 


REFERENCES 

*  J.  Owen,  The  Controverted  Questions  in  Road  Construction, 
Transactions,  Vol.  28  (American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers, 
New  York,  1893)  p.  111. 

'43  U.S.C.  Section  218  (1964). 

'  M.  O.  Eldridge,  Good  Roads  For  Farmers,  Farmers'  Bulle- 
tin No.  95  (Office  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C.,  1900) 
p.  9. 

*  M.  O.  Eldridge,  Public  Road  Mileage,  Re\'enues  and 
Expenditures,  In  the  United  States  In  1904,  Bulletin  No.  32 
(Office  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C.,  1907)  p.  16. 

'Id.,  p.  18. 

'Id. 

'  Id.,  p.  16. 

Ud.,  p.  20. 

*Id.,  p.  16. 

"Id.,  p.  14. 

"  S.  Alexander,  History  of  Good  Road  Making  in  Mecklen- 
burg County,  Proceedings  of  the  North  Carolina  Good 
Roads  Con\-ention,  Bulletin  No.  24  (Bureau  of  Public  Roads, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1903)  pp.  22,  23. 

"T.  Parker,  Good  Roads  and  Their  Relation  to  the  Farmer, 
Proceedings  of  the  North  Carolina  Good  Roads  Convention, 
Bulletin  No.  24  (Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C., 
1903)  p.  27. 

"  W.  Gillespie,  A  Manual  of  the  Principles  and  Practice 
OF  Road  Making  (A.  S.  Barnes  and  Co.,  New  York,  1871) 
pp.  221,  227. 

"A.  Blanchard  &  A.  Fletcher  (eds.),  American  Highway 
Engi;s-eer's  Handbook,  1st  ed.  (Wiley,  New  York,  1919)  p.  467. 

"G.  TiLLSON,  Asphalt  and  Asphalt  Pavements,  Transac- 
tions, Vol.  38  (American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers,  New 
York,  1897)  pp.  224,  234. 

"R.  KiRBY,  S.  Withington,  a.  Darling  &  F.  Kilgoue, 
Engineering  in  History  (McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  1956) 
p.  396. 

"  Office  of  Federal  Coordinator  of  U.S.  Transportation, 
Public  Aids  to  Transportation,  Public  Aids  to  Motor  Ve- 
hicle Transportation,  Vol.  IV  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C.,  1940) 
p.  6. 

"  L.  Van  Ornum,  Theory  and  Practice  of  Special  Assess- 
ments, Transactions,  Vol.  38  (American  Seciety  of  Civil  En- 
gineers, New  York,  1897)  pp.  336-361. 

"J.  Holmes,  Roadhuilding  in  North  Carolina,  Proceedings 
OF  THE  North  Carolina  Good  Roads  Con\-ention,  Bulletin 
No.  24  (Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C.,  1903) 
pp.  66,  67. 

'°H.  Trumbower,  Roads,  Encyclopedia  of  the  Social 
Sciences,  Vol.  13  (MacMillan,  New  York,  1948)  pp.  406,  407. 

"  G.  Chatburn,  Highways  and  Highway  Transportation 
(Thos.  Y.  Crowell,  New  York,  1923)  p.  128. 


"Id.,  pp.  128,  129. 
"/d.,  p.  129. 

"  W.  H.  Moore,  Respon.se  to  Address  of  Welcome,  Proceed- 
ings OF  THE  North  Carolina  Good  Roads  Con\'ention,  Bulle- 
tin No.  24  (Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C.,  1903) 
p.  12. 

"H.  Trumbower,  supra,  note  20,  p.  407. 

"  L.  Page,  Progress  and  Present  Status  of  the  Good  Roads 
Movement  in  the  United  States,  Yearbook  of  The  Department 
OF  Agriculture,  1910  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C.,  1911)  p.  270. 

"  A.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Public  Roads  of 
the  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1953)  pp.  94,  95. 

"  G.  Chatburn,  supra,  note  21,  pp.  150,  151. 

"  M.  Eldridge,  G.  Clark  &  A.  Luedke,  State  Highway 
Management,  Control  and  Procedure,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1, 
No.  9,  Jan.  1919,  p.  60. 

*'  L.  Page,  supra,  note  26,  pp.  273,  274. 

"23  Cong.  Rec.  6846  (1892). 

'^  G.  Chatbltin,  supra,  note  21,  p.  133. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1893,  Letter 
From  Secretary  Morton  to  General  Roy  Stone,  Oct.  3,  1893, 
p.  586. 

'*  Bltreau  of  Pxjblic  Roads  Annual  Report,  1894,  p.  217. 

'"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1895,  p.  198. 

''/d.,  p.  197. 

"  G.  Perkins,  State  Highways  in  Massachusetts,  Yearbook 
of  The  Department  of  Agriculture,  1894  (GPO,  Washington, 
D.C.,  1895)  pp.  508,  509. 

=*  BPR,  supra,  note  35,  p.  198. 

''  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1897,  p.  174. 

*"  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Yearbook  of  The  De- 
i'artment  of  Agriculture,  1897  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C., 
1898)  pp.  376-379. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  39,  p.  174. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1901,  p.  251. 

"/d.,  p.  238. 

"  Gen.  Harrison  Tells  How  the  Road  Was  Built,  The  Road 
Maker,  Vol.  1,  No.  3,  (Port  Huron,  Mich.)  p.  6. 

"BPR,  supra,  note  42,  p.  243. 

"'  M.  A.  Hays,  Interest  of  Railways  in  Road  Improvement, 
Proceedings  of  the  North  Carolina  Good  Roads  Convention, 
Bulletin  No.  24  (Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C., 
1903)  pp.  15,  16. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1902,  p.  309. 

**  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1903,  p.  337. 

*'  M.  O.  Eldridge,  supra,  note  4,  pp.  5-7. 

""Id.,  p.  11. 

"  Id.,  pp.  8,  9. 

"/d. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  48,  p.  347. 


53 


Douun 

of 

the 

motor  Pge 


The  Early  Automobiles 

In  1900  there  were  about  8,000  automobiles  in  the 
United  States,  practically  all  concentrated  in  the  ma- 
jor cities.^  Probably  half  of  these  were  electric-motor 
driven,  silent  and  dependable,  but  limited  by  their 
lead-acid  batteries  to  an  operating  radius  of  25  to  30 
miles.  Since  dependable  pneumatic  tires  did  not  be- 
come available  until  1897,  practically  all  of  these 
electrics  ran  on  solid  rubber  tires,  and  most  of  them 
were  European-made. 

In  the  late  1890's,  the  Stanley  brothers  of  Newton, 
Massachusetts,  perfected  the  European  steam  car  into 
a  reliable  American  vehicle  with  a  greater  driving 
range  than  the  electric.  By  1900  their  steamers  had 
driven  the  European  models  from  the  American  mar- 
ket and  two  factories  were  producing  cars  under  the 
Stanley  patents.^ 

Karl  Friedrich  Benz  of  Mannheim,  Germany,  built 
the  first  reliable  internal  combustion  engine  automo- 
bile— ^a  three-wheeler — in  1885.  This  extraordinary 
vehicle  had  electric  ignition,  water  cooling  system,  a 
differential  gear  and  surface  carburetor — all  Benz  in- 
ventions. Later  Benz  invented  the  fixed  front  axle 
with  steerable  stub  axles  and  in  1899  the  gear  box  for 
changing  speeds.^     In  1893  he  exhibited  a  four-wheel 


vehicle  which  incorporated  most  of  these  advanced 
mechanical  ideas  at  the  Chicago  World  Fair.  This 
machine,  which  incorporated  in  rudimentary  form, 
practically  all  of  the  essential  features  of  the  modern 
automobile,  was  the  inspiration  for  many  others  pro- 
duced by  American  inventors  in  the  following  decade. 
The  total  production  of  U.S. -made  automobiles  for 
the  year  1900  was  4,192  machines,  of  which  1,575  were 
electrics,  1,681  were  steamers  and  936  were  gasoline 
engine-driven.*  ^  These,  along  with  the  European  im- 
ports, were  individually  handcrafted  and  correspond- 
ingly expensive,  costing  from  $3,000  to  $12,000  each 
at  a  time  when  industrial  and  farm  laborers  were  paid 
$1  for  a  10-hour  day. 

Auto  Manufacturers  Tap  Mass  Market 

These  early  automobiles  were  large,  heavy  and 
clumsy,  partly  from  a  paucity  of  engineering  knowl- 
edge on  how  to  compute  the  stresses  in  their  various 
parts  and  partly  from  lack  of  strong  light  materials 
for  their  manufacture.  About  1906  vanadium  alloy 
steel,  developed  in  Europe,  became  available  in  the 
United  States,  and  by  using  it  and  other  alloys,  Henry 
Ford  of  Detroit,  JNIichigan,  was  able  to  redesign  his 
big,  heavy  touring  car  into  a  much  ligliter  and  smaller 


54 


kai 


An  early  American  automobile  built  around  1893. 


vehicle — the  famous  Model  T.  At  the  same  time,  he 
tooled  up  to  mass-produce  components  for  this  one 
vehicle  and  designed  a  mo^-ing  assembly  line  on  which 
to  put  the  components  together  into  cars.* 

By  thus  redesigning  the  vehicle  and  standardizing 
the  production  process,  Ford  was  able  to  increase  pro- 
duction from  1,599  units  in  1905  to  8,729  units  in  1906 
and  14,887  units  in  1907,  at  the  same  time  reducing 
prices.  These  lower  prices,  in  turn,  opened  the  door 
to  a  huge  mass  market.  As  sales  increased,  Ford  was 
able  to  realize  further  economies  of  scale  in  manufac- 
turing, and  still  further  reductions  in  cost,  until  by 
1917  he  was  selling  cars  for  less  than  $600  apiece. '^ 

As  Ford's  competitors  adopted  his  methods  in  a 
rush  to  catch  up  with  him,  the  automotive  industry 
turned  out  an  ever-increasing  flood  of  vehicles  at  lower 


*  Henry  Ford  did  not  invent  mass-production,  nor  was  he 
the  first  to  apply  it  to  auto  making.  The  French  made  inter- 
changeable parts  for  muslvct  locks  before  1785,  and  the  Colt 
Armory  at  Hartford,  Connecticut,  was  mass-producing  fire- 
arms before  the  Civil  War.'  Ford's  contribution  was  in  or- 
ganizing manufacturing  into  a  smooth  coordinated  process, 
eliminating  wasted  time  and  effort,  and  continuously  applying 
technology  to  increase  productivity. 


A  1907  Columbia  built  by  the  Electric 
Vehicle  Co.  in  Hartford,  Conn.    However, 
this  is  not  an  electric  car.    The  auto  manu- 
facturers of  that  period  numbered  in  the 
thousands,  but  often  a  manufacturer  built  no 
more  than  a  dozen  or  so  ears. 


55 


and  lower  prices.*  To  an  increasing  extent,  the  own- 
ers of  these  vehicles  began  using  them  on  the  country 
roads,  as  well  as  the  city  streets,  bringing  about  a 
rural  road  crisis  that  began  to  be  seriously  felt  by 
about  1910. 

Competitive  Auto  Racing  Spurs  Vehicle  Development 

Some  of  the  pre-1900  autos  were  used  as  for-hire 
cabs  in  the  cities,  but  most  were  owned  by  wealthy 
people  who  used  them  for  personal  convenience  and 
as  pleasure  vehicles.  In  Europe,  where  there  were 
many  miles  of  smooth  macadam  roads,  road  racing  by 
wealthy  owner-drivere  was  a  popular  sport.  Backed 
by  motor  car  manufacturers  and  tire  makers,  road 
racing  eventually  became  big  business  there,  and  con- 
tributed a  great  deal  to  the  rapid  improvement  of 
motor   design   and   mechanical   reliability,   which,   in 


turn,  gave  Europe  undisputed  leadership  of  the  motor 
car  industry  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  war  in  Europe 
in  1914. 

As  the  Wheelmen  had  done  before  them,  the  Ameri- 
can motorists  organized  themselves  into  clubs  for  social 
enjoyment  of  their  hobby  and  to  protect  themselves 
from  restrictive  legislation.  The  Automobile  Club  of 
America,  one  of  the  oldest  of  these  social  clubs,  or- 
ganized a  road  race,  which  was  run  on  April  14,  1900, 
between  Springfield  and  Babylon,  Long  Island.  A 
5-horsepower  electric  car  won  this  50-mile  event  in  the 
surprisingly  good  time  of  2  hours  31^  minutes,  fol- 
lowed by  a  steamer  (2  hours  18  minutes)  and  a  gaso- 
line car  (2  hours  30  minutes).^  However,  road  racing 
never  became  popular  in  the  United  States,  partly 
because  of  hostile  laws,  but  mostly  for  lack  of  sufficient 
mileage  of  reasonably  motorable  roads.* 


"Toot  'n'  be  darned."    A  common  problem  when  horsedrawn  vehicles  and  automobiles  mixed  on  narrow  roads. 


*  Annual  production  of  U.S.-made  motor  vehicles  was  2.^,000 
in  1905,  187,000  in  1910  and  969,930  in  1915."  The  average 
new  motor  vehicle  price  in  the  United  States  in  1916  was 
about  $605. 


Harry  Grant  driving  a  60-hp 
Berliet  at  Lowell,  Mass,  Sept.  7, 1908. 
Grant  came  in  second. 


*  In  1906  a  group  of  racing  enthusiasts,  headed  by  William 
K.  Vanderbilt,  Jr.,  organized  the  Long  Island  Motor  Parkway 
Company,  which  built  a  motor  road  on  private  right-of-way 
as  a  race  course  for  the  Vanderbilt  Cup.  The  first  unit  of 
this  parkway,  opened  October  10,  1908,  was  11  miles  long, 
paved  with  reinforced  concrete,  and  was  one  of  the  first  roads 
in  the  world  to  have  superelevated  or  banked  curves.  When 
completed  in  1910,  this  road  was  45  miles  long,  and  when  not 
used  for  racing,  it  was  opened  to  pleasure  vehicles  as  a  toll 
road."  "  The  European  counterpart  of  the  Long  Island  Motor 
Parkway  was  the  Avus,  begun  in  1913  but  not  completed  until 
1919.  Tbi.?  was  a  divided  highway  6  miles  long  laid  out  on  an 
absolutely  straight  line  from  Charlottenburg  to  Berlin,  Ger- 
many, with  no  grade  crossings  and  limited  access  to  the  traffic 
lanes."  In  1909  Carl  G.  Fisher  built  a  2%-mile  oval  racing 
speedway  at  Indianapolis,  Indiana." 


56 


The  Automobile  Ventures  Into  the  Country 

In  the  early  1900's  a  motor  trip  for  any  considerable 
distance  into  the  country  was  an  uncertain  undertak- 
ing. To  run  out  of  fuel  was  disastrous  and  might 
entail  a  walk  of  seA^eral  miles  to  the  nearest  hardware 
or  paint  store.  Mechanical  service  was  practically 
unobtainable;  blowouts  and  tire  punctures  were  fre- 
quent and  not  easy  to  repair.  Dust  was  a  major  nuis- 
ance in  dry  weather.  Most  embarrassing  of  all,  there 
were  no  comfort  stations,  and  tourists  were  dependent 
on  private  kindness  or  the  more  secluded  portions  of 
the  right-of-way  for  sanitary  accommodations. 

The  automobile,  to  the  dismay  of  road  officials,  was 
imexpectedly  damaging  to  macadam  and  gravel  roads. 
According  to  Director  Page : 

.  .  .  The  driving  wheels  of  motor  cars  moving  at  high 
rates  of  speed  exert  a  powerful  tractive  force  on  the  road 
surface,  which  displaces  the  materials  composing  the 
surface.  The  result  is  that  the  finer  particles  and  dust 
are  thrown  into  the  air  to  be  carried  off  by  cross  cur- 
rents of  air.  The  rubber  tire  of  the  automobile  does  not 
wear  any  appreciable  amount  of  dust  from  the  rock  frag- 
ments, and  con.sequently,  the  loss  of  rock  dust  is  a  perma- 
nent loss  to  the  road.  Under  these  conditions,  the  road 
soon  ravels,  making  travel  difficult  and  allowing  water 
to  make  its  way  to  the  earth  subgrade  or  foundation." 

The  initial  reaction  to  this  destruction  of  the  rural 
roads  was  a  clamor  to  bar  automobiles  from  the  high- 
ways or  severely  limit  their  speed.  Fortunately, 
calmer  counsels  prevailed,  and  some  observers,  such 
as  the  editor  of  American  Highways  magazine,  ac- 
tually viewed  dusting  as  a  blessing  in  disguise: 

.  .  .  However,  the  motors  are  unquestionably  here  to 
stay  and  are  going  to  play  an  important  and  very  useful 
part  in  the  lives  of  coming  generations,  and  instead  of 
trying  to  bar  them  off  the  roadways  or  misusing  their 
owners,  highway  commissioners  should  attack  the  prob- 
lems they  present  and  should  solve  them  as  they  have 
former  problems.  It  is  rather  fortunate  than  otherwise 
that  the  motors  have  appeared  on  the  scene  before  road- 
building  in  the  better  sense  engaged  public  attention. 
Had  their  advent  been  postponed  until  the  country  had 
built  up  a  complete  system  of  roads  a  tremendous  expense 
would  have  been  incurred  for  tearing  up  the  old  material 
and  relaying  it." 

It  was,  perhaps,  inevitable  that  the  early  motorists 
should  come  into  conflict  with  the  farmers.  Desj^ite 
the  fact  that  most  surfaced  rural  roads  built  after 
1900  had  been  made  possible  by  State  aid,  paid  for 
largely  by  city  people  or  by  urban  support  for  county 
bond  issues,  many  rural  residents  looked  upon  the 
motorists  as  intruders.  This  feeling  was  exacerbated 
by  a  minority  of  the  motorists  who  used  the  roads  for 
racing,  often  with  mufflers  cut  out,  frightening  live- 
stock and  teams  and  raising  clouds  of  dust.  Some  of 
the  farmers  countered  by  refusing  to  yield  for  over- 
taking, forcing  motorists  to  creep  along  behind  them 
for  miles.  It  was  even  alleged  that  some  farmers 
buried  spikes  and  glass  in  the  roads  to  puncture  tender 
tires. 

This  division  between  farmers  and  urban  motorists 
affected  the  solidarity  of  the  Good  Roads  Movement, 
and  was  not  finally  resolved  until  the  farmers  them- 
selves became  motorists  along  with  everyone  else,  and 
motoring  ceased  to  be  regarded  as  a  rich  man's  pas- 
time. The  final  burying  of  the  hatchet  came  with  the 
enactment  of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916. 


The  Problems  of  Automobile  Registration  and  Regula- 
tory Laws 

In  the  early  years  of  this  century,  pleasure  driving 
was  restricted  by  a  host  of  State  and  local  laws  and 
ordinances,  as  well  as  by  the  condition  of  the  roads 
and  other  hardships.  New  York  was  the  first  State 
to  require  registration  of  motor  vehicles,  and  in  1901, 
the  first  year  a  fee  was  charged,  this  State  collected 
nearly  $1,000  from  its  motorists."  The  New  York 
law  was  primarily  a  measure  for  legal  control  rather 
than  for  revenue,  but  in  later  years  New  York  and 
other  States  collected  sizable  amounts  of  money  in 
registration  fees.* 

As  other  States  began  charging  registration  fees, 
problems  of  reciprocity  between  the  States  arose  to 
plague  motorists.  New  York,  the  leader  in  the  regis- 
tration movement,  allowed  any  vehicle  to  use  its  roads, 
provided  that  vehicle  was  registered  in  its  own  State, 
and  provided  that  State  granted  the  same  privilege  to 
cars  registered  in  New  York.  At  this  time.  New  York 
had  full  reciprocity  with  15  other  States  but  not  with 
New  Jersey.  As  a  result,  thousands  of  New  Yorkers 
who  had  summer  homes  on  the  Jersey  coast  had  to 
register  their  machines  for  the  full  year  in  both 
States.^^  A  similar  relation  existed  with  Massa- 
chusetts and  17  other  States  which  did  not  grant  full 
reciprocity. 

Lack  of  reciprocity  was  a  serious  hindrance  not 
only  to  pleasure  travel,  but  also  to  interstate  commerce 
which  was  just  beginning  to  use  the  roads  again  after 
a  lapse  of  60  years.  As  the  secretary  of  state  of  New 
York  said  in  1911 : 

...  It  seems  to  be  a  failure  to  recognize  the  importance 
of  the  automobile,  when  a  tourist  is  confronted  by  the 
necessity  of  carrying  with  him  on  a  tour  throughout  the 
States  the  license  of  each  State  he  enters.  .  .  .  The 
automobile  gives  opportunities  of  seeing  the  country 
which  the  people  have  never  had  to  such  an  extent  before. 
It  leads  to  many  small  interesting  places  which  even  the 
railroad  with  its  great  facilities  has  not  been  able  to 
make  sufficiently  accessible.  It  enables  the  people  to 
know  their  country  better.  It  brings  people  into  closer 
contact.  Especially  is  this  true  of  the  commercial  vehicle. 
Trips  from  New  York  to  Philadelphia  are  very  frequent. 
It  surely  will  not  be  conducive  to  the  growth  of  this 
phase  of  the  industry  and  to  business  generally  if  a  mer- 
chant in  Philadelphia,  desiring  to  carry  goods  to  New 
York  City,  will  have  to  have  his  machine  registered  in 
Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey  and  New  York  and  to  pay  a 
fee  in  each  State.  .  .  ." 

In  many  States,  registration  fees  were  not  the  only 
imposts  on  motor  vehicle  owners.  Some  cities  and 
villages  required  the  motorist  to  pay  a  "wheel  tax"  of 
$10  to  $20  per  year  for  the  privilege  of  driving  on 
their  streets.  A  number  of  States  collected  a  personal 
property  tax  on  the  vehicle  in  addition  to  the  registra- 
tion fee. 

After  he  had  solved  the  registration  and  tax  prob- 
lems, other  hazards  confronted  the  motorist  when  he 
ventured  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  city.  The  indi- 
vidual municipalities  had  their  own  ordinances  regu- 
lating speeds,   parking,  the  use  of  bells,  horns  and 


*  In  the  first  10  months  of  1911,  35  States  collected  a  total 
of  $.3,746,938  in  registration  fees  and  operator  license  fees 
from  516,977  owners  of  motor  vehicles.  The  amounts  collected 
ranged  from  $986  in  Utah  (442  owners  and  51  operators)  to 
$882,975  in  New  York   (81,665  owners  and  33,485  operators)." 


57 


I 


<l 


The  Pasear  was  the  name  given  to  a 
combination  of  three  highways  in  Cali- 
fornia: El  Camino  Real  or  the  Royal 
Highway ;  El  Camino  Sierra  or  the  Moun- 
tain Highway;  and  El  Camino  Capital  or 
the  Capital  Highway.  These  roads  form 
a  1,500-mile  scenic  circuit  from  San  Fran- 
cisco to  Los  Angeles,  to  Lake  Tahoe,  and 
back  to  San  Francisco.  In  1912  the  ad- 
vocates of  the  Pasear  urged  that  the 
roads  be  improved  for  motor  travel  in 
time  for  the  Panama-Pacific  Exposition 
to  be  held  at  San  Francisco  in  1915. 
These  scenes  along  the  El  Camino  Sierra 
are  a  prelude  to  the  rugged  beauty  to  be 
found  on  the  Pasear. 


58 


m^ 


ca  jm 


One  of  the  challenges  of  the  early  AAA  tours. 


gongs,  the  making  of  unnecessary  exhaust  noise  and 
the  emission  of  noxious  gas,  smoke  or  steam,  and  they 
could  impose  fines  for  violations.  These  regulations 
varied  widely  from  city  to  city  and,  especially  in  the 
smaller  municipalities,  were  often  enforced  in  a  dis- 
criminatory way.  The  operation  of  "speed  traps"  by 
local  peace  officers  was  a  widespread  abuse  in  rural 
communities,  with  the  fines  going  into  the  local  treas- 
ury or  the  pocket  of  the  police  justice  or  magistrate.* 
The  widespread  variations  in  traffic  regulations,  and 
especially  in  registration  requirements,  laid  a  severe 
burden  on  motorists  and  also  on  automobile  manufac- 
turers who  regarded  them  as  obstacles  to  vehicle  own- 
ership and  the  expansion  of  the  market  for  automo- 
biles. Combating  restrictive  legislation  was  a 
principal  reason  for  the  organization  of  both  the 
American  Automobile  Association  in  1902**  and  the 


*  The  speed  trap  racket  was  so  bad  in  New  York  prior  to 
1910  that  the  Legislature  passed  an  act  that  year  requiring 
all  fines  imposed  for  violations  of  the  motor  vehicle  laws  to 
be  turned  over  to  the  State  treasurer.  This  reduced  the  fines 
collected  from  motorists  to  a  mere  trickle.^" 

**  A  numl)pr  of  State  and  local  automobile  clubs  banded  to- 
gether to  form  the  American  Automobile  Association,  which 
rapidly  became  the  national  voice  of  the  automobile  owners 
and  a  powerful  lobby  for  good  roads. 


National  Automobile  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  1913.* 
These  and  other  organizations  backed  a  bill  in  the 
60th  Congress  that  would  have  required  Federal  reg- 
istration for  all  vehicles.  They  also  worked  diligently 
to  standardize  the  motor  vehicle  laws  in  all  the  States. 
Eventually,  both  goals  were  achieved  without  Federal 
intervention,  as  shall  be  seen. 

The  Motor  Pathfinders 

Up  to  1903  no  automobile  had  crossed  the  United 
States  under  its  own  power,  and  most  people  who 
knew  anything  about  American  roads,  especially  those 
of  the  Rocky  Mountain  and  Great  Plains  States, 
thought  such  a  trip  impossible.  Dr.  H.  Nelson  Jackson, 
of  Burlington,  Vermont,  thought  otherwise,  and  he 
burned  with  the  urge  to  be  the  first  person  to  travel 
from  coast  to  coast  by  motor.  On  May  23,  1903,  he 
left  San  Francisco,  in  secrecy,  with  his  chauffei;r 
Sewell  K.  Crocker,  in  a  20-horsepower  Winton  touring 
car.  Sixty-three  days  later,  the  two  pathfinders  rolled 
into  New  York  after  averaging  90  miles  per  day  in  44 
days  actual  running  time,  despite  terrible  weather." 

A  year  after  Doctor  Jackson's  feat,  a  group  of  motor 
enthusiasts  conceived  the  idea  of  a  mass  motor  tour  or 


*  Now  the  Motor  Vehicles  Manufacturers  Association. 


60 


"pilgrimage"  from  the  major  eastern  cities  to  the 
Louisiana  Purchase  Centennial  Exposition  in  St. 
Louis.  The  logistics  for  such  an  expedition  at  this 
time  were  formidable.  There  were  no  through  routes, 
no  reliable  road  maps,  no  wa}-  of  knowing  the  condi- 
tion of  the  roads  in  advance,  no  road  signs  or  route 
markers.  Between  major  cities,  getting  repairs  for  a 
breakdown,  or  even  fuel,  was  an  uncertain  business. 
The  promoters  of  the  tour  enlisted  the  aid  of  the  auto- 
mobile clubs  along  the  way  who  agreed  to  select  and 
map  the  best  roads  in  their  areas  and  mark  them  with 
confetti  at  the  critical  cross  roads  so  the  out-of-State 
motorists  wouldn't  get  lost.  The  trip  was  planned  in 
100-mile  stages,  and  each  entrant  was  provided  with 
marked  maps  showing  the  assembly  points,  the  selected 
routes,  and  points  along  the  way  where  repairs,  fuel, 
lodging  and  meals  might  be  obtained.  Finally,  the 
promotei-s  persuaded  the  American  Automobile  Asso- 
ciation (AAA)  to  supervise  the  alfair  through  a  set 
of  committees.^^ 

Fifteen  cars  left  New  York  City  July  25,  1904.  At 
Albany  they  were  joined  by  a  contingent  from  New 
England  led  by  Charles  J.  Glidden,  the  most  experi- 
enced motorist  in  America,  who,  with  Mrs.  Glidden, 
had  already  logged  17,782  miles  in  17  countries  in  his 
English  Napier.    The  tour  continued  through  Buffalo, 


Cleveland,  Toledo,  South  Bend  and  Chicago  to  St. 
Louis,  losing  a  few  machines  enroute  from  mechanical 
failure,  but  picking  up  new  entrants  at  the  principal 
cities.  Of  108  machines  registered  for  the  tour,  70 
reached  starting  points  and  only  58  of  these  reached 
St.  Louis.  The  Boston  entrants  covered  1,264  miles 
in  17  days,  an  average  of  70  miles  per  day  of  hard 
driving.^^  Unlike  Dr.  Jackson,  who  had  shunned 
publicity,  the  St.  Louis  World  Fair  Motor  Cara\Tin 
carried  reporters  from  the  Nation's  principal  news- 
papers and  was  attended  b}'  enonnous  ballyhoo,  which 
focused  on  the  execrable  condition  of  most  of  the 
roads  encountered  by  the  hardy  pathfinders. 

Upon  arrival  in  St.  Louis,  Charles  Glidden  an- 
nounced that  he  was  presenting  a  trophy  to  the  Ameri- 
can Avitomobile  Association  on  which  would  be 
engraved  the  name  of  the  owner-driver  of  the  car 
making  the  best  record  on  a  carefully  organized  long 
distance  tour  such  as  the  one  just  completed.  This 
reliability  contest  would  be  an  annual  affair,  super- 
vised by  the  AAA,  which  would  draw  up  the  rules  for 
the  contest  and  retain  ownership  of  the  trophy. 

The  first  Glidden  Tour  of  34  participants  left  New 
York  City  July  11,  1905,  on  an  870-mile  junket 
through  New  England.  Thereafter,  the  Tour  was 
held  annually  until  1910.==* 


The  Ohio  Mud  Hen  during  a  cross  country  trip  in  1911  about  to  cross  the  Gila  River  in  Arizona  with  the  aid  of  a  couple  of  mules. 


61 


The  Pioneer  Freighter  bridging  a  swampy  area  on  the  north  side  of  the  White  Mountains  in  Arizona. 


The  Jackson-Crocker  transcontinental  trip  had  been 
a  daring  stunt,  like  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  a  rowboat, 
with  no  underlying  purpose  other  than  to  show  that 
it  could  be  done.  The  St.  Louis  tour  was  a  similar 
challenge  on  a  larger  scale.  The  competition  for  the 
Glidden  Cup,  however,  had  a  more  serious  objective — 
to  focus  national  attention  on  the  difficulty  of  travel- 
ing any  considerable  distance  on  the  common  roads — 
and  it  was  remarkably  effective  in  meeting  this  objec- 
tive. The  Glidden  Tours  showed  conclusively  that 
motor  cars  were  mechanically  capable  of  traveling 
long  distances  if  the  roads  were  reasonably  good,  and 
they  fueled  a  rising  demand  from  motorists  for  motor- 
able  long-distance  roads,  even  a  coast-to-coast  high- 
way.* Many  people  thought  the  States  and  counties 
would  never  be  able  to  provide  such  highways,  and 
they  seriously  advocated  that  the  Federal  Government 
build  and  operate  national  highways. 

The  Pioneer  Freighter.,  a  gasoline-powered  motor 
truck  made  by  the  Saurer  Motor  Car  Company,  made 


two  memorable  cross  country  trips  in  1911.  This  37 
horsepower  vehicle  weighed  3  tons  and  carried  a  load 
of  31/^  tons  of  lumber  for  bridging  creeks  and  soft 
places,  plus  supplies  of  fuel  and  camp  equipment.  The 
expedition  was  in  the  charge  of  A.  L.  Westgard  of  the 
Touring  Club  of  America,  who  had  also  been  commis- 
sioned a  Special  Agent  of  the  Office  of  Public  Eoads 
by  Director  Page. 

The  first  trip  of  the  Pioneer  Freighter  began  March 
4,  1911,  at  Denver,  Colorado,  and  proceeded  via  Santa 
Fe  and  Phoenix  to  Los  Angeles.  This  trip  traversed 
1,450  miles  in  66  days,  of  which  53  days  were  con- 
sumed in  actual  travel.  The  average  speed  was  3.26 
miles  per  hour^ — about  as  fast  as  a  man  could  walk. 
The  machine  was  shipped  to  Pueblo,  Colorado,  by  rail, 
leaving  there  under  its  own  power  June  12,  1911,  and 
ending  in  New  York  City  in  July  1911.  The  full 
significance  of  these  trips  would  be  felt  a  few  years 
later,  when  the  United  States  began  mobilizing  for 
World  War  I.=^« 


*  In  1907  a  group  of  promoters  proposed  a  toll  road  from 
New  York  to  Boston  to  be  built  on  a  150-foot  fenced  right-of- 
way  with  two  one-way  25-foot  roadways  and  entrances  every 
6  or  7  miles.  They  estimated  that  traffic  would  be  250  cars 
per  day  each  way  and  planned  to  charge  each  one  a  toll  of 
5  cents  per  mile.'" 


62 


! 


The  Pioneer  Freighter  fording  a  river  near  Ft.  A  pache,  Ariz. 


REFERENCES 

'1971  Automobile  Facts  and  Figukes  (Automobile  Manu- 
facturers Association,  Detroit,  1971)  p.  18. 

'  C.  BoBTH,  Mankind  on  the  Move  (Automotive  Safety 
Foundation,  Washington,  D.C.,  1969)  p.  171. 

'  R.  KiEBT,  S.  Withington,  a.  Dabling  &  F.  KiLGOUE,  Engi- 
NEEBiNG  In  History  (McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  1956)  pp.  406, 
407. 

*  Supra,  note  1,  p.  3. 

°A.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Public  Roads 
OF  the  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Of- 
ficials, Washington,  D.C.  1953)  p.  102. 

•A.  BuBSTALL,  A  History  of  Mechanical  Engineering 
(M.I.T.  Press,  Cambridge,  1965)  p.  224. 

'  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  5,  p.  103. 

'Supra,  note  1,  p.  3. 

•  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  5,  pp.  101,  102. 
"Id.,  p.  106. 

"H.  Kelly,  Toll  Roads,  Pl-blic  Roads,  Vol.  12,  No.  1,  Mar. 
1931,  p.  4. 

"  C.  TuNN.\RD  &  B.  Pushkaeev,  Man-Made  America  :  Chaos 
OB  Control?  (Tale  University  Press,  New  Haven,  1963)  p. 
163. 


"A.  Rose,  supra,  note  5,  p.  103. 

"L.  Page,  Roads,  Paths  and  Bridges  (Sturgis  and  Walton, 
Co.,  New  York,  1912)  p.  216. 

"Editorial,  American  Highways,  Vol.  2,  No.  8,  Jan.  1908 
(American  Highways  Publishing  Co.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.) 
p.  239. 

"A.  Rose,  supra,  note  5,  p.  102. 

"E.  Lazansky,  a  Model  State  Motor  Vehicle  Law,  Papebs, 
Addresses  and  Resolutions  Before  the  American  Road 
Congress  (Richmond,  Va.,  Nov.  1911),  (Waverly  Press,  Balti- 
more, 1912)  p.  151. 

''  Id.,  pp.  153,  154. 

"Id. 

"'Id.,  p.  157. 

"  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  5,  pp.  102,  103. 

"  C.  BoRTH,  supra,  note  2,  pp.  178-183. 

''Id. 

-^  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  5,  p.  103. 

"Plan  Oreat  Auto  Boulevard,  American  Highways,  Vol.  1, 
No.  10,  Mar.  3970  (American  Highways  Publishing  Co.,  Grand 
Rapids,  Mich.)  pp.  278,  279. 

^  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  5,  p.  107. 


68 


The 

Beginning 
of 

/Cientific 
Roodbuilding 


f 


The  appointment  of  Logan  Waller  Page  as  Director 
of  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  brought  a  new  type  of 
leader — the  scientifically  trained  civil  servant — into 
the  highway  movement.  In  1893,  when  only  23  years 
of  age,  Page  was  appointed  director  of  the  road  ma- 
terials laboratory  of  the  Lawrence  Scientific  School 
of  Harvard  University  and  also  geologist  and  testing 
engineer  of  the  Massachusetts  State  Highway  Com- 
mission. At  this  time,  although  standard  practice  in 
France,  the  laboratory  testing  of  road  materials  was 
unknown  in  the  United  States.  Page  enrolled  in  the 
French  Laboratory  of  Bridges  and  Roads  where  he 
learned  the  French  methods,  introducing  them  later 
into  his  Massachusetts  laboratory.^  After  7  years  of 
distinguished  work  for  the  Commission,  Page  was  in- 
vited to  Washington  in  1900  to  set  up  a  road  materials 
laboratory  in  the  Bureau  of  Chemistry  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Agriculture.^  This  laboratory  tested  thou- 
sands of  specimens  for  the  OPRI  under  the  object 
lesson  road  program,  and  Page  was  instrumental  in 
establishing  testing  laboratories  in  some  of  the  States. 
In  the  reorganization  of  1905,  Page's  laboratory  be- 
came the  Division  of  Tests  of  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  and  eventually  one  of  the  world's  famous 
physical  research  organizations. 


..'»'  • . .'  ■.j^jmkm.-.-itiemf' 


The  Jefferson  Highway  near 

DeQueen,  Arkansas,  before  improvement. 


64 


»>  :  i 


'*        ** 


-■^'■^f: 


.       Vw''  ^^ 


■^  ».t 


^. 


l|ml^ 


^mt 


*«^«ri  i.: -r^ 


The  Jefferson  Highway  after  improvement  as  a  gravel  road. 

Expansion  of  the  Object  Lesson  Road  Program 

When  Page  became  director  of  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  (OPR)  in  1905,  only  14  States  had  highway 
departments,  and  5  of  these  were  less  than  6  months 
old.*  The  mileage  of  roads  under  State  control  was 
v'ery  small,  and  State  expenditures,  mostly  in  the  form 
of  aid  to  the  counties  and  townships,  were  only  about 
3  percent  of  total  road  expenditures  in  the  United 
States.** 

It  was  as  evident  to  Director  Page  as  it  had  been  to 
his  predecessors  that  the  main  effort  for  improving 
the  rural  roads  would  have  to  be  directed  to  the  coun- 
ties and  townships.  Up  to  this  time,  the  OPR's  most 
popular  work  with  tlie  local  governments  had  been 
the  object  lesson  roads,  and  already  ample  evidence  of 
their  effectiveness  was  beginning  to  accumulate.  This 
evidence  was  summarized  by  Director  Dodge  in  1904: 


♦Massachusetts  (organized  1893),  New  Jersey  (1894), 
Connecticut  (1895),  Rhode  Island  (1896),  New  York  (1898), 
Vermont  (1898),  Pennsylvania  (1903),  Ohio  (1904),  Iowa 
(1904),  Illinois  (1905),  Michigan  (1905),  Minnesota  (1905), 
New  Hampshire  (1905),  Washington  (1905).' 

**  In  1904  total  road  expenditure,  including  the  estimated 
value  of  statute  labor,  was  $79.77  million,  of  which  $2.6  million 
was  State  aid." 


...  a  section  of  good  road  built  as  an  object  lesson 
under  the  direction  of  the  United  States  Government  in 
any  community  has  the  effect  of  awakening  much  greater 
interest  than  such  a  road  constructed  by  the  local  authori- 
ties. That  the  people  desire  instruction  by  the  building 
of  object  lesson  roads  and  are  willing  to  bear  the  expense 
incident  thereto  is  fully  proved  by  the  requests  received 
for  cooperation,  the  number  being  far  more  than  we  are 
able  to  comply  with.  That  the  results  are  almost  uni- 
formly satisfactory  and  frequently  beyond  the  most 
sanguine  expectation  is  demonstrated  by  reference  to  the 
letters  embodied  in  this  report  from  representative  citi- 
zens in  the  sections  where  the  roads  were  built  and  by 
personal  investigations  by  representatives  of  this  Office. 
In  some  instances  the  object  lesson  resulted  in  the  slow 
but  steady  improvement  of  the  common  roads ;  in  a  few 
cases  the  results  were  the  inauguration  of  extensive  sys- 
tems of  road  building.  In  practically  every  instance 
.some  measure  of  progress  resulted  from  the  object  lesson. 
It  would  seem  to  be  conservative  to  estimate  that  an 
average  of  at  least  10  miles  of  improved  highways  are 
constructed  as  a  result  of  the  building  of  each  of  these 
roads.  .  .  .^ 

Page,  whose  budget  had  been  increased  to  $50,000, 
decided  to  expand  the  object  lesson  road  program  and 
change  its  emphasis  away  from  macadam  construction 
to  a  wider  use  of  local  materials,  particularly  the  most 
abundant  of  all — earth,  clay  and  sand.  As  he  wrote 
in  1909: 


65 


.  .  .  Experience  has  shown  that  our  earth  roads  can,  in 
general,  be  very  much  improved  by  proper  construction 
and  systematic  maintenance  at  a  cost  well  within  the 
reach  of  almost  any  community.  Furthermore,  these 
improved  earth  roads  serve  as  the  best  possible  founda- 
tion for  further  improvements  with  a  hard  surface  as 
means  become  available.  .  .  .° 


Post  road  in  Lauderdale  County, 
Alabama.    Small  hump  in  distance  is  chert 
which  will  be  cut  and  used  for  surfacing. 

The  concept  of  stage  construction,  enunciated  by- 
Page  in  the  above  quotation,  became  one  of  the  guid- 
ing principles  of  Federal  road  policy  for  the  next  50 
years. 

During  1908,  1909  and  1910,  the  OPR  supervised 
the  construction  of  1,300  miles  of  earth  roads  and  440 


miles  of  sand-clay  roads.*  Inevitably,  object  lesson 
roads  to  demonstrate  the  use  of  local  materials  be- 
came, in  some  respects,  experimental  roads  as  well. 
The  OPR's  Road  Expert,  W.  L.  Spoon,  who  was 
handling  the  object  lesson  road  work  in  the  southern 
States,  thought  that  clay  might  be  made  into  a  suit- 
able road  surfacing  material  by  burning  or  roasting 
it  in  place  on  the  road.  A  small  experimental  project 
was  set  up  the  summer  of  1904  near  Clarksdale, 
Mississippi,  in  which  300  feet  of  clay  "gumbo"  road 
was  burned  by  wood  and  bark  fires  until  the  clay  was 
nonplastic.  The  resulting  surface  compared  favorably 
to  gravel  and  cost  only  one-fourth  as  much.* 

The  OPR  also  cooperated  in  the  construction  of 
experimental  sand-clay  roads  in  Iowa,  Kansas  and 
Nebraska  to  determine  whether  sand-clay  was  suitable 
for  areas  with  cold  climates  and  deep  frost  penetra- 
tion. 

Experimental  Roads  Expand  Knowledge  of  Road- 
building 

These  experiments  were  not  the  first  in  which  the 
Office  had  been  involved.  In  1898,  the  Office  of  Public 
Road  Inquiries  had  built  short  steel  trackway  roads 
at  the  Trans-Mississippi  Exposition  at  Omaha  and  at 
Ames,  Iowa,  and  St.  Anthony  Park,  Minnesota.    These 


*  Mileage  based  on  an  assumed  average  width  of  15  feet. 
Sand-clay  roads  were  ancestral  to  our  modern  soil  stabiliza- 
tions and  were  first  used  extensively  in  Richland  County, 
South  Carolina,  in  1889,  from  where  they  spread  through  the 
South  in  the  1890's.' 


Sand-clay  road  in  San  Patricio  County,  Texas.    Smoothing 

with  road  drag  after  rain.    No  roUer  available  and  the 

road  is  not  yet  thoroughly  compacted  by  traffic. 


proved  to  be  impractical.  Another  experimental  track- 
way road,  this  one  of  bricks,  was  built  on  the  Depart- 
ment of  Agriculture  grounds  in  Washington  in  1900. 
The  most  important  of  these  early  experiments,  how- 
ever, was  the  oil  treatment  of  a  4r,650-foot  section  of 
the  Queens  Chapel  Road  in  the  District  of  Columbia. 
In  1900  the  automobile  was  not  a  significant  cause 
of  road  dusting,  and  road  oiling  was  practically  un- 
known outside  of  Los  Angeles  County,  California, 
where  6  miles  of  road  were  oiled  in  1898  to  lay  the 
dust  "which,  churned  beneath  the  wheels  of  yearly 
increasing  travel  during  the  long  dry  season  in  that 
region,  had  become  a  most  serious  nuisance." "  The 
Queens  Chapel  Road  had  a  surface  of  sandy  clay  and 
loam.  This  was  shaped  up  and  sprinkled  with  oil 
delivered  by  an  ordinary  water-sprinkling  wagon. 

The  ordinarj-  sprinkling  wagon  was  found  quite  satis- 
factory, especially  as  the  weather  was  warm,  so  that  the 
oil  ran  quite  fast  enough  to  be  gradually  taken  up  by  the 
surface  and  not  so  fast  that  it  would  flow  into  the  side 
ditches,  as  would  have  been  the  case  had  the  required 
amount  been  applied  at  once." 

The  oil  used  for  this  experiment  was  "that  which 
is  left  of  crude  petroleum  after  such  volatile  sub- 
stances as  naptha,  kerosene,  benzine  and  gasoline  have 
been  extracted."  The  results  of  the  treatment  ap- 
peared to  be  good,  but  the  OPRI  elected  to  reserve 
judgment  on  its  ultimate  effectiveness : 

This  road  was  treated  several  weeks  ago,  and  so  far  as 
we  are  now  able  to  judge  the  new  system  is  a  success  as 
a  dust  layer.  We  believe  that  where  roads  have  so  much 
traffic  and  dust  as  to  require  the  use  of  the  sprinkling 
cart  in  dry  weather,  the  residue  oil,  or  roadbed  oil,  as  it 
is  called  by  dealers,  could  be  used  very  effectively  and 
economically.  The  fact  that  it  settles  the  dust  and  kills 
weeds  was  first  recognized  and  utilized  by  the  West 
Jersey  and  Seashore  Railroad.  It  is  now  being  applied 
annually  to  about  thirty  of  the  leading  railroads  through- 
out the  country,  and  its  use  is  being  gradually  extended 
to  the  ordinary  country  roads.  It  is  claimed  by  some 
that  the  application  of  crude  oil  will  make  a  surface 
impervious  to  water,  and  con.sequently  comparatively 
free  from  frost  and  mud.  If  this  be  the  case,  oil  will 
supersede  gravel  and  stone  in  the  improvement  of  country 
roads.  The  test  of  time  alone  can  settle  this  very  much 
disputed  question." 

Out  of  these  early  experiments  there  gradually 
evolved  a  new  program,  the  object  of  which  was  not 
so  much  to  demonstrate  good  construction  practice  as 
to  acquire  new  knowledge  and  experience. 

In  1908  the  OPR  began  a  study  to  determine 
whether  blast  furnace  slag  could  be  made  into  a  suit- 
able road  aggregate  by  mixing  it  with  lime,  limestone, 
tar  or  asphaltic  road  oil.  This  investigation  had  an 
immense  economic  potential,  since  about  20  million 
tons  of  slag  were  produced  annually  in  the  United 
States,  most  of  which  had  no  commercial  value. 

Between  1908  and  1916,  the  OPR  supervised  or 
participated  in  the  construction  of  several  dozen  ex- 
perimental roads,  ranging  from  earth-oil  mixtures  to 
Portland  cement  concrete  and  paving  brick.  These 
were  inspected  periodically  and  their  service  evaluated 
and  correlated  with  the  laboratory  records  of  the  ma- 
terials that  went  into  them.  Eventually  the  OPR 
engineers  drew  up  specifications  for  each  type  of  con- 
struction based  on  their  experiences  with  these  experi- 
mental roads  and  tlie  numerous  object  lesson  roads. 
These  specifications  were  published  in  bulletins,  some 
of  which  went  into  five  editions,  and  were  widely  used 


Electric  car  on  steei 

track  at  the  Traiis- 

Mississippi  Exposition 

at  Omaha  in  1898. 


by  counties,  States  and  engineering  colleges  as  refer- 
ences. In  particular,  the  OPR's  specifications  for  bi- 
tuminous road  binders  became  the  standards  for  the 
industry  and  were  adopted  by  most  of  the  State  high- 
way commissions. 

The  Dust  Nuisance  and  Road  Preservation 

The  light  duty  macadam  and  gravel  roads  con- 
structed during  the  Good  Roads  Movement  served 
their  purpose  very  well  until  appreciable  numbers  of 
automobiles  began  to  use  them.*  Many  engineers. 
Page  among  them,  were  convinced  that  the  solution 
to  this  troublesome  problem  lay  in  using  something 
other  than  stone  dust  or  clay  as  a  binder  for  stone  and 
gravel  roads.  Hot-laid  asphalt  paving  had  been  used 
on  city  streets  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  since 
the  early  1870's,  but  was  considered  far  too  expensive 
for  country  roads.  However,  liquid  materials  con- 
taining bitumen  cement,  such  as  petroleum,  coke-oven 
tar  and  water-gas  tar,  were  plentiful  and  cheap  and 
seemed  promising  as  dust  layers. 

An  opportunity  to  test  these  materials  came  in  1905 
when  the  Madison  County  Roads  Association  and  the 
city  engineer  of  Jackson,  Tennessee,  sought  the  OPR's 
cooperation  in  experiments  to  determine  the  value  of 
coal  tar  and  petroleum  oils  for  building  dustless  roads. 
Page  agreed  to  participate  by  supplying  expert  super- 
vision and  the  facilities  of  the  OPR  laboratory.  The 
Tennessee  experiments  were  moderately  successful,  and 
3  years  later,  in  1908,  the  tar  and  residual  petroleum 
oil  (asphalt)  treatments  were  pronounced  "on  the 
whole  very  satisfactory,"  but  the  crude  oil  treatment 
had  disappeared,  leaving  the  roads  as  dusty  as  ever." 


*  In  1900  there  were  8,000  automobiles  in  the  United  States. 
By  190.5  there  were  77,400  autos  and  1,400  trucks.  By  1910 
motor  vehicles  had  multiplied  six  times,  to  468,500,  and  by 
1915  the  total  was  2,491,000." 


67 


The  dMst  rmisance. 


In  the  summer  of  1907,  the  OPE  joined  with  the 
Massachusetts  Highway  Commission  to  make  experi- 
mental application  of  water-gas  tar  and  coal  tar  on 
the  main  New  York  to  Boston  highway  and  also  co- 
operated with  Warren  County  and  Bowling  Green, 
Kentucky,  to  investigate  the  fitness  of  rock  asphalt 
as  a  binder  for  macadam. 

These  projects  all  pointed  to  the  need  for  a  more 
systematic  knowledge  of  bituminous  products  and 
methods  for  using  them.  To  get  some  of  this  knowl- 
edge, the  OPR  arranged  a  cooperative  research  project 
with  Cornell  University  at  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  to  test  the 
relative  value,  under  practically  uniform  conditions, 
of  different  bituminous  road  binders  applied  by  dif- 
ferent methods.  As  its  contribution  to  the  project, 
the  OPR  added  two  chemists  to  its  laboratory  staff 
and  stepped  up  its  testing  and  research  on  asphalts 
and  tars. 

The  field  tests  showed  that  both  the  penetration 
method  and  the  mixing  m,ethod  of  making  bituminous 
macadam  surfaces  gave  good  results.  The  laboratory 
studies  were  especially  fruitful : 


Through  its  laboratory  work  the  Office  has  been  able 
to  offer  valuable  advice  in  regard  to  specifications  for 
bituminous  road  binders  and  in  many  instances  to  frame 
such  specifications  upon  the  request  of  various  public 
bodies. 

Many  worthless  road  preparations  have  been  and  are 
at  present  being  manufactured  and  sold  to  the  public 
through  ignorance  on  the  part  of  both  producer  and 
consumer  with  regard  to  the  requisite  characteristics  of 
such  materials  to  meet  local  conditions.  These  materials 
are  sold  under  trade  names,  and  as  a  rule  carry  no  valid 
guarantee  of  quality.  Specifications  for  such  materials 
are  therefore  needed  for  the  protection  of  the  public.  .  .  . 
Some  manufacturers  have  already  followed  the  work  of 
the  Office  along  this  line,  and  are  either  manufacturing 
materials  in  accordance  with  specifications  of  the  Office 
or  stand  ready  to  do  so  upon  request." 

In  succeeding  years  the  dust  abatement  program 
was  enlarged,  until  by  1916,  the  OPR  was  involved  in 
experiments  on  28  roads  in  11  States  and  the  District 
of  Columbia.  Gradually,  the  emphasis  shifted  from 
"dust  prevention"  to  "road  preservation,"  and  the 
building  up  of  tar  or  asphalt  wearing  courses  over 
macadam,  slag  or  gravel  bases.  This  led  to  the  gen- 
eral adoption  of  bituminous  surfaces  whei'ever  auto- 
mobiles were  an  appreciable  portion  of  the  total  traffic. 


68 


In  1909  the  science  of  producing 
Portland  cemetit  concrete  teas  in  its 
infancy.    Tliis  early  rotary  mixer  was  used 
at  Cornell  University  in  Ithaca,  New  York. 


The  Office  of  Public  Roads'  dust  prevention  and 
experimental  roads  programs  were  the  training 
grounds  for  the  small  group  of  highway  engineers  and 
physical  scientists  who  later  laid  the  foundations  of 
soil  engineering  and  pavement  design. 

Dragging   the  Dirt  Roads 

Dirt  roads  will  not  stand  up  under  traffic  unless 
they  are  shaped  and  kept  free  of  ruts  so  that  water 
will  shed  quickly  and  not  soak  in  and  soften  the  road- 
bed. Even  befox'e  the  Civil  War,  some  townsliip 
supervisors  were  smoothing  their  roads  by  dragging 
them  with  "a  stick  of  timber,  shod  with  iron,  and 
attached  to  its  tongue  or  neap  obliquely,  so  that  it  is 
drawn  over  the  road  'quartering,'  and  throws  all  ob- 
structions to  one  side."  ^^ 

About  1905,  D.  Ward  King,  of  Maitland,  Missouri, 
improved  on  this  simple  device  by  splitting  the  timber 
lengthwise  and  positioning  the  two  halves,  one  ahead 
of  the  other,  to  make  a  rigid  platform.  A  typical 
King  drag  was  made  from  an  8-inch  log  split  down 
the  middle;  the  two  halves  were  held  about  3  feet 


Applying  bitumen  on  a  stretch  of 
road  at  Cornell  University  in  1910. 


i 


-^^      «** 


Coal  tar  and  crude  oil  experiments. 
70 


71 


r 


^^iggj 


K-S^'    'm 


•^Sf* 


191 


<, ^1 


Cool  tar  and  crude' 
70 


?S^*K 


Coal  tar  atvd  crude  oil  experiments. 
70 


apart  by  struts  and  the  lower  edge  of  the  front  log 
was  shod  with  a  14-inch  steel  cutting  plate.  A  hitch- 
ing chain  attached  to  the  front  log  could  be  adjusted 
so  that  the  drag  would  move  earth  to  either  side  of 
the  road  as  the  device  was  pulled  behind  a  team.  This 
drag  could  be  made  on  the  farm  for  about  $2.^^ 

The  King  split-log  drag  was  a  surprisingly  effective 
maintenance  machine.  After  a  little  instruction  and 
practice,  an  average  farmer  could  easily  drag  6  to  8 
miles  of  road  per  day  and  could  keep  a  well-graded 
dirt  road  in  good  shape  for  light  traffic  for  as  little  as 
$8  per  mile  per  year.  The  appearance  of  the  King 
drag  coincided  with  Director  Page's  decision  to  place 
greater  emphasis  on  earth  and  sand-clay  roads  in  the 
object  lesson  road  program,  so  Page  decided  to 
promote  dragging  as  well.  In  1906  he  had  King 
write  a  manual  on  how  to  make  and  use  the  split-log 
drag.  This  was  published  by  the  Department  of 
Agriculture  as  a  Farmer's  Bulletin,  and  thousands  of 
copies  were  distributed.  The  OPE,  assigned  experts 
to  deliver  lectures  and  make  demonstrations  in  the 
use  of  the  drag.  A  number  of  States  passed  "King 
Drag  Laws"  authorizing  the  township  supervisors  to 
contract  with  abutting  farmers  to  drag  the  public 
roads.^' 

This  activity,  in  a  few  years,  brought  about  a  re- 
markable improvement  in  the  condition  of  the  country 
dirt  roads  and  brought  home  to  the  local  supervisors, 
as  nothing  else  had  before,  the  importance  of  prompt 
and  intelligent  maintenance. 

Experimental   Maintenance 

In  1911  the  French  roads  were  not  only  the  best  in 
the  world,  but  were  also  the  best  maintained.  Main- 
tenance was  strongly  centralized  and  closely  super- 
vised ;  every  road  was  divided  into  short,  segments  of 
a  few  kilometers,  each  the  full-time  responsibility  of 


a  paid  patrolman  who  lived  nearby,  usually  within 
walking  distance.  Page  wanted  to  try  out  the  French 
system  under  American  conditions,  and  in  1911  at  his 
recommendation,  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  con- 
tracted with  Alexandria  County,  Virginia,  for  a  2-year 
experimental  maintenance  project  to  include  8  miles 
of  earth  roads.  Under  this  contract,  the  county  super- 
visors agreed  to  shape  up  the  roads  and  put  them  in 
good  condition,  after  which  the  OPR  hired  a  local 
farmer  as  a  patrolman  to  maintain  the  roads  under 
OPR  supervision.  The  patrolman  was  paid  $60  per 
month  plus  an  extra  $1  per  day  whenever  he  used  his 
team  for  dragging. 

The  roads  selected  for  the  experiment — Columbia 
Pike  and  the  Mount  Vernon  Road — were  among  the 
heaviest-traveled  in  the  county,*  yet  the  patrolman 
kept  them  in  first-class  condition  most  of  the  time  at 
a  cost  of  $95.77  per  mile  per  year.^^  This,  however, 
was  far  more  than  the  average  rural  county  was 
spending  to  maintain  its  roads.  In  the  final  analysis, 
this  experiment  demonstrated  not  so  much  the  ef- 
ficiency of  the  patrol  system  as  the  desirability  of 
more  durable  surfaces  for  all  but  the  very  lightest- 
trafficked  roads. 

The  Washington-Atlanta  Maintenance  Demonstration 
Road 

The  Alexandria  County  experiment  was  the  begin- 
ning of  a  major  effort  by  the  OPR  to  raise  mainte- 
nance standards  in  the  counties.  By  1912,  a  decade  of 
promotion  by  the  good  roads  associations,  the  motor- 
ists, and  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  others  had 
trebled  the  funds  available  annually  for  roadbuilding. 
Hundreds  of  counties  had  issued  bonds  to  finance  road 


*  One  section   near  Fort  Myer  carried  173  wagons  and  96 
cavalry  horses  per  day,  plus  a  few  runabouts. 


72 


programs,  and  about  half  of  the  States  had  State-aid 
programs,  some  of  which  were  financed  by  State  bond 
issues.*  Roads  were  improved  with  borrowed  money 
faster  than  the  supervisors  could  arrange  to  take  care 
of  them,  and  in  this  emergency,  the  counties  turned 
to  the  OPR  for  advice  and  assistance. 

To  meet  this  demand,  Page  set  up  a  Division  of 
Maintenance  in  the  OPR  under  Edwin  W.  James 
which  embarked  on  an  ambitious  program  of  instruc- 
tion and  demonstration.  James'  engineers  studied  the 
details  of  State  maintenance  in  States  that  had  effec- 
tive highway  departments  and  also  in  selected  coun- 
ties, some  with  good  maintenance  programs  and  some 
with  poor  ones.  They  also  persuaded  a  number  of 
strategically  located  counties  with  new  bond-financed 
roads  to  introduce  adequate  maintenance  on  one  se- 
lected demonstration  road  in  each  county,  the  work 
to  be  xmder  OPR  supervision. 

The  capstone  of  the  maintenance  program  was  a 
mammoth  demonstration  road,  involving  49  counties 
in  Virginia,  the  Carolinas  and  Georgia,  the  purpose 
of  which,  in  Page's  words,  was  "conducting  an  object 
lesson  in  road  maintenance  on  a  sufficient  scale  to  at- 


Knowing  who  is  responsible  for  the  condition  of 

the  road  and  appealing  to  the  pride  of  the  patrolman. 

tract  general  attention,  and  at  the  same  time  render 
the  largest  amount  of  assistance  at  the  least  relative 
cost  to  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  .  .  ."  ^°  Under  the 
plan  adopted  for  this  "Washington-Atlanta  High- 
way," a  continuous  route  between  these  cities  was 
traced  over  existing  county  roads,  the  combined  length 
of  which  was  1,038  miles.  The  participating  counties 
agreed  first  to  put  the  selected  roads  in  good  condition 
and  then  to  accept  the  supervision  of  an  engineer 
assigned  by  the  OPR  who  would  approve  all  mainte- 
nance expenditures. 

The  work  began  in  the  spring  of  1914  with  only  723 
miles  under  the  cooperative  plan  and  three  experi- 
enced engineers  detailed  by  the  OPR  to  supervise  the 
work.  The  experiment  continued  until  1917  when  the 
OPR  had  to  withdraw  its  engineers  for  more  urgent 
work.     The  success  of  the  maintenance  plan  was  at- 

*  There  were  $229.44  million  of  local  road  and  bridge  bonds 
and  $115.32  million  of  State  bonds  outstanding  on  .January  1, 
1915."  Many  of  the  roads  financed  by  county  bond  issues 
were  improved  to  make  them  eligible  as  free  rural  mail  de- 
livery routes. 


Removing  the  ridge  with  a  drag  after 
a  cultivator  has  loosened  the  material. 


tested  by  the  fact  that,  from  March  1915  through 
June  1916,  a  total  of  876  miles  of  road  had  been  under 
OPR  supervision  and  "had  not  been  closed  to  traffic 
at  any  point,  even  in  the  winter  months,"  ^^  and  by 
the  adoption  of  the  OPR  maintenance  methods  by 
many  other  counties  not  on  the  Washington-Atlanta 
route. 

Among  these  last  was  a  group  of  13  counties  in 
North  Carolina  which  joined  with  the  State  Highway 
Commission  in  1916  to  petition  for  OPR  supervision 
over  a  proposed  Central  Plighway  from  Morehead 
City  to  Statesville,  about  338  miles.  The  OPR  as- 
signed two  engineers  to  this  project  until  the  United 
States'  entry  into  the  European  war  made  it  necessary 
to  withdraw  them. 

The   Problems   of  Road   Management 

The  OPR's  four  road  construction  demonstration 
teams  could  fill  only  a  fraction  of  the  requests  for 
object  lesson  roads.  However,  in  many  cases  what 
was  needed  was  not  so  much  a  demonstration  road  as 
good  advice  from  a  road  expert.  After  1904  Page 
began  detailing  experienced  engineers,  upon  request, 
as  consultants  to  counties  to  get  them  started  properly 
on  their  road  programs.  These  assignments,  each  last- 
ing from  2  days  to  a  week,  covered  every  conceivable 
aspect  of  road  engineering  and  management  and  oc- 
cupied most  of  the  time  of  the  OPR  special  agents. 

In  time,  Page  and  his  aides  came  to  realize  that 
advising  the  counties  on  specific  road  problems  did 
little  to  improve  the  overall  competence  of  road  man- 
agement. Therefore,  in  1908,  the  OPR  began  a  more 
comprehensive  approach  which  is  best  described  in 
Page's  own  words : 


73 


As  an  example  of  this  work,  San  Joaquin  County,  Cal., 
may  be  mentioned.  At  the  request  of  the  proper  authori- 
ties an  engineer  was  detailed  to  make  a  comprehensive 
study  of  all  conditions  affecting  the  highways  of  that 
county.  About  three  months  were  required  for  this  work, 
during  which  time  his  salary  was  paid  by  the  Government 
and  his  local  expenses  by  the  community.  The  final  re- 
port, besides  containing  a  full  and  detailed  description  of 
the  existing  conditions,  embodied  al.so  detailed  recom- 
mendations for  a  system  of  improvements  in  road  admin- 
istration, construction,  and  maintenance  within  the  reach 
of  the  people  and  which  they  have  since  adopted.  A 
bond  issue  of  about  $1,800,000  was  voted  to  provide  the 
necessary  revenues,  and  a  system  of  roads  is  now  under 
construction  which  will  place  San  Joaquin  County  among 
the  foremost  counties  of  the  State  in  the  matter  of  trans- 
portation facilities.^ 


extraordinary  in  U.S.  highway  history,  lasted  until 
December  1913.  "The  officials  of  Bennington  County 
were  so  pleased  with  the  results  of  this  object-lesson 
supervision  that  they  have  since  employed  an  engineer 
to  take  charge  of  the  road  work  of  the  cotmty."  ^^ 

The  Shortage  of  Highway  Engineers 

The  Bennington  County  experience  pointed  up  one 
of  the  most  serious  problems  of  this  period — the  gen- 
eral lack  of  engineering  expertise  at  the  county  level. 
Some  critics  asserted  that,  because  of  this  lack,  from 

County  patrolmen  in  New  York 
were  responsible  for  2  to  8  miles  of 
road  and  were  paid  $3  per  day  in  1914. 


The  "model  systems"  program  was  an  instant  suc- 
cess. By  assigning  as  many  engineers  as  he  could 
spare  from  other  work,  Page  in  10  years  was  able  to 
assist  144  counties  in  28  States  to  reorganize  and  mod- 
ernize their  road  operations.  Most  of  these  counties 
sold  bonds  to  finance  a  start,  on  the  programs  recom- 
mended by  the  OPR  advisers. 

Bennington  County,  "Vermont,  carried  the  model 
system  idea  one  step  further.  In  1912,  69  of  the  74 
road  officials  of  the  county,  with  the  approval  of  the 
State  Highway  Commissioner,  petitioned  the  OPR  to 
detail  an  engineer  for  1  year  to  supervise  all  road 
work  in  the  county  and  its  townships.  Page  assigned 
an  engineer  in  1913,  who  was  in  effect  the  County 
Engineer,  in  direct  charge  of  all  road  work  carried 
on  in  the  county.    This  arrangement,  one  of  the  most 


one-quarter  to  one-third  of  all  the  money  spent  on  the 
country  roads  was  wasted.  Most  of  this  waste  came 
about  because  the  roads  were  originally  poorly  located 
or  poorly  drained,  and  these  errors  were  perpetuated 
when  the  roads  were  later  upgraded.  Repeatedly,  in 
its  bulletins  and  expert  advice,  the  OPR  urged  that 
the  old  locations  be  revised  to  reduce  grades  and  un- 
necessary curvature,  and  to  improve  drainage  before 
expensive  bond-financed  surfacing  was  undertaken. 
Such  improvement  required  engineering  study  and 
advice. 

Many,  perhaps  most,  counties  thought  they  were  too 
poor  to  afford  an  engineer.  Others  didn't  really  want 
one  for  fear  he  might  lead  them  into  expensive  road 
schemes  that  would  raise  taxes.  Still  others  chmg  to 
the  ancient  tradition  of  amateur  supervision  of  in- 


74 


efficient  statute  labor.  Those  counties  that  wanted  to 
hire  engineers  had  difficulty  finding  them,  since  the 
supply  of  civil  engineers  with  highway  training  was 
exceedingly  small. 

The  shortage  was  so  serious  that  Director  Dodge  in 
1903  had  recommended  that  Congress  establish  in 
Washington,  in  connection  with  the  Office  of  Public 
Road  Inquiries,  a  National  School  for  Roadbuilding, 
similar  to  the  famous  School  of  Bridges  and  Roads 
which  had  trained  French  road  engineers  since  1747. 
This  institution,  as  envisioned  by  Dodge,  would  be 
"...  a  post-graduate  school,  where  graduates  in  civil 
engineering  from  the  land-grant  colleges  could  secure 
a  thorough  course  in  theoretical  and  practical  road 
building.  .  .  .  The  American  school  of  road  building 
should  include  a  series  of  lectures  by  experts  of  this 
Office,  and  some  practical  work  in  the  road-material 
laboratory  and  in  connection  with  tlie  object-lesson 
road  work  of  the  Office  in  different  parts  of  the  coun- 
try." ^*  Most  of  the  students  would  be  employees  of 
the  States,  counties  and  cities  who  would  return  to 
these  agencies  after  completing  their  training. 

This  school  was  never  established,  but  after  he  be- 
came Director,  Page  obtained  Department  approval 
for  a  training  program  under  which  a  limited  number 
of  young  civil  engineering  graduates,  after  taking 
competitive  examinations,  were  appointed  to  the  posi- 
tion of  civil  engineer  student  in  the  OPR,  at  a  salary 
of  $600  per  year.  These  young  men  learned  practical 
roadbuilding  in  the  field  with  the  OPR's  object  lesson 
road  teams.  They  received  instruction  in  testing 
road  materials  in  the  laboratory  and  were  detailed  as 
assistants  in  the  OPR's  other  actiidties  to  learn  by 
doing.  After  1  year  in  the  training  program,  they 
were  eligible  for  promotion  to  junior  highway  engi- 
neer without  further  examination.^^ 

Despite  the  small  compensation,  the  OPR  had  no 
trouble  recruiting  all  the  ci\al  engineer  students  it 
needed.  Over  a  period  of  10  years,  some  70  engineers 
were  hired,  of  whom  about  36  resigned  within  a  year 
of  completing  their  training  to  accept  positions  with 
colleges,  counties  and  State  highway  departments. 
Page  accepted  these  losses  philosophically : 

.  .  .  the  engineers  after  a  few  years'  training  in  the 
office  are  in  great  demand  for  State  and  county  worlf. 
The  practice  of  permitting  these  engineers  to  resign  is 
detrimental  in  one  sense  to  the  service,  in  that  the  office 
is  constantly  losing  some  of  its  best  men,  but  the  benefits 
derived  by  the  various  States  and  counties  through  the 
distribution  of  trained  men  to  all  sections  of  the  country 
are  so  great  as  to  be  a  vindication  of  the  wisdom  of  this 
project.^ 

Page  also  realized  that  his  ability  to  expand  the 
Federal  good  roads  effort  would  depend  on  attracting 
additional  experienced  engineers  to  his  staff.  His  first 
acquisition  was  Arthur  N.  Johnson,  the  able  highway 
engineer  of  the  Marj^land  Roads  Commission.*  John- 
son agreed  to  take  over  the  supervision  of  the  OPR's 
far  flung  field  operations.  Later,  Page  got  Edwin  W. 
James,  who  had  supervised  road  work  in  the  Philip- 
pines, to  transfer  to  the  OPR  from  the  War  Depart- 


ment. However,  in  the  long  run,  the  major  source  of 
recruitment  for  the  OPR's  permanent  force  of  engi- 
neers was  the  civil  engineer  student  training  program. 
Page's  foresight  was  forcefully  demonstrated  12  years 
later  when  the  trainees  he  had  selected  for  this  pro- 
gram became  the  backbone  of  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  organization  for  administering  the  immense 
Federal-aid  appropriations. 

Director  Page's  interest  in  the  education  and  train- 
ing of  engineers  went  far  beyond  his  own  organization. 
In  1909  he  had  the  OPR  survey  the  status  of  highway 
engineering  instruction  in  all  the  technical  schools  and 
colleges  in  the  United  States,  and  he  furnished  advis- 
ors to  help  the  schools  set  up  practical  courses  in  high- 
way design  and  construction.  The  OPR  aided  a 
number  of  schools  to  set  up  first-class  testing  labora- 
tories, and  whenever  its  agents  and  engineers  could  be 
spared  from  other  work,  they  were  detailed  to  lecture 
on  highway  engineering  in  the  colleges. 

Federal   Roads  on   Federal   Lands 

Since  the  two  agencies  were  in  the  same  department 
of  the  Government,  it  was  natural  for  the  Forest 
Service  to  turn  to  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  for  help 
with  its  road  problems,  and  the  OPR  was  furnishing 
occasional  advice  on  forest  trails  as  early  as  1905.^^ 

However,  it  was  not  until  1913  that  a  formal  ar- 
rangement was  made  for  the  OPR  to  handle  road 
work  in  the  national  forests.*  Congress  in  1912  had 
required  that  10  percent  of  the  revenues  from  the 
national  forests  should  be  spent  to  construct  roads 
and  trails  within  these  forests.^*  By  the  end  of  fiscal 
year  1912,  $210,925  had  accumulated  in  the  forest  road 
fund,  and  the  Forest  Service  found  that  it  needed 
expert  advice  on  where  and  how  to  spend  the  money. 
The  Chief  Forester  asked  Director  Page  to  assign 
highway  engineers  to  inspect  all  the  existing  roads 
and  to  recommend  how  these  should  be  improved  and 
where  others  should  be  built.  The  OPR  then  assigned 
five  engineers  to  this  work,  one  for  each  of  five  forest 
districts. 

About  this  time,  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  also 
asked  for  assistance  to  help  with  the  planning  of  roads 
in  the  national  parks.  Page  responded  by  placing  an 
engineer  and  a  field  survey  party  in  Yosemite  National 
Park  during  the  summer  of  1914  and  promised  to 
begin  work  in  five  other  parks  as  soon  as  he  could  find 
the  engineers.** 

To  handle  this  sudden  increase  in  workload.  Director 
Page  set  up  a  Division  of  National  Park  and  Forest 
Roads  within  the  OPR  and  assigned  responsibility 
for  the  Division  to  T.  Warren  Allen.     The  work  in 


*  Johnson  resigned  2  years  later  to  become  chief  engineer 
of  the  Illinois  Highway  Department,  and  he  subsequently  be- 
came one  of  the  most  distinguished  American  highway  engi- 
neers and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  science  of  traffic  analysis. 


*  In  1910  the  OPR,  at  the  request  of  the  Crater  Lake  High- 
way Commission,  a  private  body,  assigned  a  road  expert  to 
supervise  the  construction  of  a  road  through  the  Crater  Lake 
National  Forest  to  the  Crater  Lake  National  Park  and  to  plan 
a  system  of  roads  and  trails  for  the  Park.  This  road  was 
financed  by  county  funds  and  private  subscriptions  and  was 
not  actually  Forest  Service  work.^ 

**  At  this  time,  there  was  no  National  Park  Service ;  each 
park  superintendent  reported  directly  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  and  did  his  own  road  work,  except  for  Yellowstone 
where  the  roads  were  built  by  the  Corps  of  Engineers.  In 
1914  there  were  12  national  parks. 


75 


federally  owned  areas  built  up  so  rapidly  that,  by 
1916,  the  OPR  was  maintaining  160  miles  of  road, 
constructing  170  miles  and  making  surveys  and  plans 
for  yet  another  477  miles — a  total  program  that  was 
spread  over  12  States  and  Alaska,  and  which  exceeded 
the  programs  of  a  number  of  State  highway  depart- 
ments. This  far-flung  program  would  soon  receive  a 
major  boost  from  Congress  in  the  Federal  Aid  Road 
Act  of  1916. 

Publicity  Adds  Momentum  to  the  Good  Roads  Move- 
ment 

Most  of  the  OPR's  engineers  were  as  much  at  home 
on  the  lecture  platform  as  in  the  field  or  the  labora- 
tory. The  special  agents  spent  most  of  their  time  on 
such  work,  and  they  and  the  Washington  Office  staff 
were  in  great  demand  as  speakers  at  road  conventions 
and  meetings  of  trade  associations  and  professional 
groups.  Director  Page  supplied  lecturers  only  upon 
invitation  and  then  only  upon  assurance  that  the  meet- 
ing had  been  properly  advertised  and  that  the  attend- 
ance would  justify  the  expense.  He  was  never  able 
to  satisfy  the  demand,  even  though  he  doubled  and 
then  trebled  the  number  of  men  assigned  to  the  work. 
In  1906  the  OPR  engineers  gave  about  100  lectures  in 
14  States.  By  1912,  27  lecturers  were  giving  1,139 
lectures  which  were  heard  by  208,472  persons  in  37 
States.^" 

To  reach  even  more  people,  Page,  in  1907,  launched 
an  information  campaign  directed  at  the  rural  popu- 
lation. Twenty-five  hundred  county  newspapers  co- 
operated by  publishing  short  practical  articles  on  road 
construction  and  maintenance  written  by  the  OPR 
staff.  Through  this  program.  Page  estimated  that  he 
could  reach  up  to  10  million  people  a  year.^^  ^^ 

Important  as  it  was,  the  OPR  publicity  was  only  a 
small  part  of  a  nationwide  outpouring  of  good  roads 
propaganda.  The  magazine.  Good  Roads,  founded  by 
the  League  of  American  Wheelmen,  was  still  the 
leading  publication  in  the  good  roads  field,  but  it 
had  many  competitors.  In  1908  the  American  Auto- 
mobile Association  (AAA)  launched  the  American 
Motorist  to  speak  for  the  rapidly  increasing  number 
of  automobile  owners.  Hardly  a  month  passed  with- 
out an  article  on  good  roads  appearing  in  the  influ- 
ential Saturday  Evening  Post  or  in  Harper''s  Maga- 
zine, and  between  1910  and  1915,  it  is  safe  to  say  that 
no  national  issue  received  greater  coverage  in  the 
country  and  city  newspapers. 

Show  Business  in  the  Road  Business 

In  1908  Congress  authorized  a  Government  exhibit 
at  the  Alaska- Yukon-Pacific  Exposition  and  specific- 
ally provided  that  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  should 
be  represented.  For  its  part  of  the  exhibit,  the  OPR 
prepared  a  series  of  scale  models,  complete  with  minia- 
ture machinery,  showing  every  aspect  of  roadbuilding. 
These  were  supi^lemented  with  a  handbook,  a  series  of 
moving  pictures  and  stereopticon  slides  and  a  lecture 
on  roads. 

The  Seattle  exhibit  of  1909  was  so  successful  that 
the  OPR  made  up  several  others  like  it  which  were 
shown  at  national  expositions  and  fairs  in  1910.  These 
boosted  the  demand  still  further,  so  Page  arranged  to 
transfer  a  professional  model  maker  from  the  Smith- 


sonian Institution  to  augment  the  OPR's  effort.  The 
models  were  loaned  to  various  State  fairs  and  exposi- 
tions, which  agreed  to  cover  the  cost  of  installation 
and  transportation.  The  exhibits  were  accompanied 
by  an  OPR  road  expert  to  show  the  slides  and  give 
lectures.  Between  1910  and  1917,  the  exhibits  were 
shown  at  over  100  places  and  were  seen  by  some  2i/^ 
million  people. 

In  1911  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad  offered  to  pro- 
vide a  "Road  Improvement  Train"  to  carry  the  OPR 
exhibit  throughout  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  and 
arrangements  were  made  with  the  State  Highway 
Department  and  the  Pennsylvania  State  College  to 
sponsor  the  tour.  The  train  consisted  of  an  exhibit 
car,  a  lecture  car  and  two  flat  cars  carrying  full-sized 
crushers,  rollers,  graders  and  even  split-log  drags. 
The  train  stopped  at  165  places  during  its  2-month 
tour.  The  crowds  were  so  large  in  the  larger  towns 
that  the  lectures  had  to  be  held  in  court  houses  and 
opera  houses.  Over  53,000  people  saw  the  exhibits  and 
heard  the  lectures.^^ 

Not  to  be  outdone  by  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad, 
the  Southern  and  five  other  eastern  and  midwestem 
railroads  petitioned  the  OPR  to  outfit  Road  Improve- 
ment Trains  for  them,  and  these  took  to  the  road  in 
1911  and  1912,  carrying  the  good  roads  gospel  to  some 
163,000  people  in  650  towns.  The  last  Good  Roads 
Train  in  American  history  toured  the  State  of  Iowa 
in  1916. 

The  American   Highway  Association 

By  1910  there  were  literally  scores  of  organizations 
in  the  United  States  devoted  to  the  promotion  of  good 
roads.  A  few  of  these  were  strong,  effective,  and 
national  in  scope.  The  American  Automobile  Asso- 
ciation founded  by  the  motorists  in  1902  and  the 
American  Road  Makers,  bringing  together  State  engi- 
neers, road  contractors  and  road  machinery  manufac- 
turers, were  in  this  category.  However,  many  of  the 
good  roads  associations  were  primarily  pressure  groups 
whose  purpose  was  to  get  improved  roads  by  influenc- 
ing legislation.  Most  of  these  had  no  dues-paying 
members  but  depended  on  commercial  interests — rail- 
roads, materials  producers,  automobile  manufactur- 
ers— for  financial  support. 


The  interior  of  the  exhibit  car 
of  the  Road  Improvement  Train. 


76 


Secretary  of  Agriculture  Wilson  and  L.  W.  Page  visiting 
the  Road  Improvement  Train  October  4,  1911. 


7T 


Page  continued  his  predecessors'  policy  of  furnish- 
ing speakers  for  the  annual  conventions  of  the  larger 
good  roads  associations,  but  he  also  saw  a  need  for  a 
larger,  permanent  umbrella-type  organization  to  en- 
compass the  entire  Good  Roads  Movement.  In  1910 
at  Page's  invitation,  the  officials  of  some  30  State  and 
interstate  organizations,  including  highway  depart- 
ments, railroads,  good  roads  associations,  and  others, 
niet  in  Washington  and  formed  the  American  Asso- 
ciation for  Highway  Improvement,  electing  Page  as 
its  first  president,  along  with  a  prestigious  board  of 
directors. 

This  Association  sponsored  the  First  American  Road 
Congress  at  Richmond,  Virginia,  in  1911  which  passed 
strong  resolutions  recommending  r^* 

•  That  Congress  extend  financial  aid  to  the  States 
to  encourage  them  to  build  and  maintain  good  roads. 

•  That  no  appropriation  for  road  construction 
should  ever  be  made  without  proper  provision  for 
maintenance  afterward. 

•  That  all  States  provide  for  State  supervision  of 
main  highways  through  a  State  highway  department, 
and  that  liberal  financial  assistance  be  given  through 
State  aid  in  the  building  and  maintenance  of  such 
roads. 

•  That  the  work  of  construction  and  maintenance 
of  all  public  highways  of  any  locality  or  State  should 
be  under  the  direction  of  experienced  highway  engi- 
neers. 


•  That  all  the  States  enact  laws  providing  for  the 
employment  of  prison  labor  for  the  improvement  of 
public  highways. 

•  That,  for  safety  of  the  public,  all  vehicles  be  re- 
quired to  display  a  lighted  lamp  at  night,  visible  at 
least  200  feet  ahead,  and  a  red  light  visible  from  the 
rear. 

•  That  the  use  of  the  muffler  cut-out  and  the  un- 
necessary use  of  horns  and  bells  be  forbidden  in 
thickly  settled  sections. 

•  That  slow-moving  traffic  be  required  to  drive  to 
the  right  so  that  faster  vehicles  may  pass, 

•  That  uniform  speed  regulations  be  adopted  by 
all  States,  and  the  local  authorities  in  cities,  villages, 
and  towns  be  prohibited  from  fixing  local  speed  regu- 
lations. 

•  That  officials  responsible  for  bridges  be  required 
to  inspect  them  periodically  and  post  safe  weight 
limits. 

•  That  all  roads  be  systematically  placarded  by 
sign  boards  giving  directions  and  distances  to  towns 
and  cities. 

These  resolutions  were  a  complete  and  unambiguous 
statement  of  the  principles  that  were  to  guide  the 
American  highway  movement  for  the  next  5  years. 

In  1912  the  Association  shortened  its  name  to  Amer- 
ican Highway  Association  and  joined  with  the  Amer- 
ican Automobile  Association  to  sponsor  the  Second 


78 


American  Road  Congress.  The  Third  and  Fourth 
American  Eoad  Congresses  followed  in  1913  and  1914. 
A  number  of  State  highway  commissioners  and 
chief  engineers  assumed  very  active  roles  in  the  Amer- 
ican Highway  Association,  but  most  of  the  State  men 
felt  a  need  for  an  organization  more  specifically 
tailored  to  their  needs.  Such  an  organization,  with 
membership  restricted  to  the  chief  officials  of  the 
State  highway  departments  and  their  staffs,  was  pro- 
posed by  Virginia's  Commissioner  of  Highways, 
Greorge  P.  Coleman,  in  Januarj'  1914.  Page  endorsed 
the  idea,  although  he  had  hoped  the  State  officials 
would  organize  within  the  framework  of  the  American 
Highway  Association,  and  in  March  1914  he  wrote  to 
Mr.  Coleman: 

It  has  become  increasingly  apparent  to  me  during  the 
past  few  years  that  some  medium  should  be  provided  for 
bringing  the  heads  of  the  various  State  Highway  Depart- 
ments and  of  this  office  into  closer  touch,  for  the  consid- 
eration of  questions  of  mutual  interest.  Some  sort  of 
organization  is,  to  my  mind,  highly  desirable,  but  I  think 
the  best  results  can  only  be  obtained  by  limiting  the 
membership  strictly  to  official  heads  of  departments  and 
their  immediate  staff,  thus  making  the  organization 
strictly  official  and  enabling  full  and  frank  consideration 
of  questions,  particularly  those  of  a  technical  character 
untrammeled  by  commercialism  or  popular  prejudices." 

With  Page's  blessing,  the  formation  of  the  new  body 
was  assured,  and  in  December  1914  the  American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  was  organized 
"for  the  purpose  of  providing  mutual  cooperation  and 
assistance  to  the  State  highway  departments  and  the 
several  States  and  the  Federal  Government,  as  well  as 
for  the  discussion  of  legislative,  economic  and  techni- 
cal subjects  pertaining  to  the  administration  of  such 
departments."  ^® 

One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  newly  formed  association 
was  to  instruct  the  executive  committee  to  prepare, 
for  the  consideration  of  Congress,  a  bill  authorizing 
Federal  aid  to  highways. 


A  plank  bridge  in  South  Carolina 
a  half  mile  long  and  too  narrow 
for  two  teams  of  horses  to  pass. 


REFERENCES 

'  L.  Page,  The  Selection  of  Materials  for  Macadam  Roads, 
Proceedings  of  the  Thipd  American  Road  Congress  (Detroit, 
Mich.,  Sept.-Oct.  1913),  (Waverly  Press,  Baltimore,  1914)  p. 
170. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1919,  pp.  34,  35. 

'AASHO — The  First  Fifty  Years,  1914-1964  (American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C., 
1965)   pp.  322-330. 

•  M.  Eldridge,  Public-Road  Mileage,  Revenues  and  Ex- 
penditures IN  THE  United  States  in  1904,  Bulletin  No.  32 
(Office  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C.,  1907)  pp.  16-18. 

'  BtJBEAU  OF  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1904,  pp.  442,  443. 

•  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1909,  p.  7. 

'  A.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Public  Roads  of 
THE  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1953)  p.  92. 

'  BiTREAU  OF  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1905,  pp.  427,  428. 

•  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  7,  p.  101. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1900,  p.  287. 

"Id. 

"1971  Automobile  Facts  and  Figures  (Automobile  Manu- 
facturer's Association,  Detroit,  1971)  p.  18. 

"  Office  of  Public  Roads,  Progress  Reports  of  Experi- 
ments With  Dust  Preventives,  Circular  No.  89  (U.S.  Dept. 
of  Agriculture,  Washington,  D.C.,  1908)   p.  26. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1910,  pp.  785, 
786. 

"W.  Gillespie,  A  Manual  of  the  Principles  and  Practice 
of  Road-Making  (A.  S.  Barnes,  New  York,  1871)  p.  191. 

"  Office  of  Public  Roads,  The  Road  Drag  and  How  It  Is 
Used,  Farmers'  Bulletin  597  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Agriculture,  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  1914)  p.  5. 

"Kansas  King  Drag  Bill,  American  Highways,  Vol.  1,  No. 
10,  Mar.  1907,  p.  277. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1913,  p.  9. 

"  Office  of  Public  Roads,  Public  Road  Mileage  and  Reve- 
nues IN  THE  United  States,  1914,  Bulletin  No.  390  (U.S.  Dept. 
of  Agriculture,  Washington,  D.C.,  Jan.  12,  1917)  p.  3. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1914,  p.  6. 

''Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1916,  p.  4. 

^  BPR,  supra,  note  6,  p.  27. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  20,  p.  4. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1903,  p.  332. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  8,  pp.  434,  435. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1911,  p.  28. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  8,  p.  434. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  26,  pp.  25,  26. 

"Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1912  (37  Stat  288). 

'"BtTREAu  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1912,  pp.  33,  34. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1907,  pp.  22,  27. 

"Bubeau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1908,  p.  6. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  26,  p.  42. 

"  American  Association  for  Highway  Improvement,  Papers, 
Addresses,  and  Resolutions  Before  the  American  Road 
Congress  (Richmond,  Va.,  Nov.  1911)  (Waverly  Press,  Balti- 
more, 1912)  pp.  187-190. 

"  Supra,  note  3,  p.  50. 

"Id.  p.  52. 


79 


The 


for 
Federal  Pid 


Rural  Free  Delivery  of  U.S.  Mall — A  Powerful  Force  for 
Road  Improvement 

It  is  hard  for  rural  residents  today  to  realize  the 
isolation  in  which  most  farmers  lived  in  the  19th 
century.  There  were  then  no  rural  mail  delivery,  no 
telephones.  One  had  to  go  to  town,  perhaps  4  or  5 
miles  away,  to  get  a  newspaper.  If  the  roads  were 
bad,  as  they  usually  were  in  winter  and  spring,  the 
rural  schools  and  churches  might  be  only  a  third 
filled,  and  even  neighbors  might  have  difficulty  com- 
municating with  each  other. 

One  of  the  strongest  arguments  of  the  good  roads 
advocates  of  the  1890's  was  that  good  roads  would 
reduce  this  isolation,  and  particularly,  would  make  it 
practical  for  the  Government  to  deliver  mail  to  the 
farms,  as  some  European  countries  had  been  doing 
for  decades.  In  1893,  largely  through  the  influence 
of  the  State  Granges  of  the  Patrons  of  Husbandry, 
Congress  appropriated  $10,000  for  an  experimental 
program  of  rural  mail  delivery.  After  some  foot 
dragging  by  the  Postmaster  General,  who  thought  the 
idea  impractical,  the  Post  Office  Department  estab- 
lished the  first  experimental  rural  delivery  routes 
from  Charlestown,  Halltown  and  Uvilla,  West  Vir- 
ginia, on  October  1,  1896,  and  by  July  1897,  44  routes 
were  in  operation.  Congress  increased  the  appropria- 
tion to  $50,000  in  1898,  and  thereafter  the  free  delivery 
system  grew  rapidly  until,  by  1903,  there  were  8,600 


carriers  traveling  200,000  miles  per  day  and  reaching 
almost  5  million  people.^ 

The  Department  made  it  a  rule  that  rural  delivery 
would  be  established  only  along  reasonably  good  roads 
and  that  the  carrier  need  not  go  out  on  his  route  un- 
less the  roads  were  in  fit  condition  for  travel.  These 
requirements  marshaled  public  opinion  on  the  side  of 
those  who  wanted  better  roads,  and  hundreds  of 
counties  undertook  substantial  road  improvements  to 
get  rural  delivery.  In  Texas,  for  example,  100  fords 
were  replaced  by  bridges  in  1901  and  1902. 

Under  a  1906  agreement  between  the  Postmaster 
General  and  the  Secretary  of  Agricultui'e,  a  locality 
desiring  a  rural  mail  route  could  petition  the  Office 
of  Public  Roads  for  an  engineer  inspector  to  examine 
the  route  and  recommend  whatever  was  necessary  to 
make  it  suitable  for  carrjdng  the  mail.  It  was  then 
up  to  the  local  officials  to  make  the  improvements,  but 
sometimes  the  inspector,  if  requested,  might  assume 
temporary  supervision  of  the  work  as  an  object  lesson 
in  roadbuilding.  Director  Page,  thus,  hoped  to  greatly 
extend  the  OPR's  educational  work : 

As  the  chief  aim  and  purpose  of  this  Office  is  to  bring 
about  a  general  and  uniform  improvement  of  the  country 
roads  throughout  the  United  States,  a  cooperative  plan 
such  as  the  one  described  above  offers  the  best  possible 
means  of  achieving  positive  results  in  furtherance  of  that 
purpose.  By  this  means  correct  methods  of  road  building 
and  road  maintenance  will  be  introduced  into  practically 
every  section  of  the  United  States.'^ 


80 


Important  as  these  efforts  were,  they  did  not  satisfy 
the  skyrocketing  demand  for  rural  delivery  service. 
Congress  was  generous  with  funds  to  operate  and  ex- 
tend the  free  delivery  system — in  fact,  it  consistently 
appropriated  more  than  the  Post  Office  Department 
asked  for — but  the  problem  was  really  one  of  roads 
on  which  to  carry  the  mails  and  not  one  of  financing 
the  postal  service.  This  was  realized  by  Congressman 
Walter  P.  Brownlow  of  Tennessee,  who  in  1903  intro- 
duced a  bill  that  would  provide  $20  million  annually 
in  Federal  aid  to  States  or  counties  for  the  building 
of  post  roads.  The  grants  would  have  to  be  for  spe- 
cific roads,  and  the  State  or  county  applying  for  aid 
would  have  to  agree  to  pay  one-half  of  their  costs. 
Plans  and  specifications  for  the  aided  roads  would  be 
drawn  by  the  Federal  Government  to  insure  adequate 
standards,  but  the  contracts  for  the  work  could  be  let 
and  supervised  by  the  State  or  county.^ 

Brownlow's  bill  did  not  become  law,  but  thereafter, 
for  13  years,  bills  for  some  form  of  national  aid  to 
roads  were  introduced  in  every  session  of  Congress. 
One  of  these,  introduced  in  1912  by  Representative 
Dorsey  W.  Shackleford  of  Missouri,  would  authorize 
the  spending  of  $25  million  per  year  out  of  the  Fed- 
eral fiscal  surplus  to  improve  and  maintain  rural  free 
delivery  routes.  The  aid  would  be  distributed  to  the 
counties  at  the  rate  of  $15  for  each  mile  of  graded 
earth  road,  $20  for  each  mile  of  gravel  road,  and  $25 
for  each  mile  of  macadam,  provided  the  counties  had 
spent  a  like  amount  on  these  roads  in  the  preceding 
year.*  The  sliding  scale  would  be  an  inducement  to 
the  local  authorities  to  upgrade  their  roads.'*  Shackle- 
ford  argued  that  this  aid  would  actually  save  the 
Government  money  in  the  long  run  by  reducing  the 


*  In  1912  there  were  1,200,000  miles  of  rural  delivei-y  routes 
in  the  United  States,  most  of  them  over  dirt  roads. 


cost    of    rural    delivery    which   was   then    losing   $28 
million  per  year.^ 

The  Shackleford  bill  passed  the  House  but  was  lost 
in  the  Senate.  However,  in  the  same  session  an  ex- 
perimental appropriation  was  added  to  the  Post  Office 
Department  Appropriation  Bill  (37  Stat  551)  to  be 
spent  by  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture,  in  cooperation 
with  the  Postmaster  General,  to  improve  the  condi- 
tion of  certain  selected  post  roads,  and  thereafter,  to 
determine  "the  increase  in  the  territory  which  could 
be  served  by  each  carrier  as  a  result  of  such  improve- 
ment, the  possible  increase  of  the  number  of  delivery 
days  in  each  year,  the  amount  required  in  excess  of 
local  expenditures  for  the  pi'oper  maintenance  of  such 
roads,  and  the  relative  saving  to  the  Government  in 
the  operation  of  the  Rural  Delivery  Service  and  to 
the  local  inhabitants  in  the  transportation  of  their 
products  by  reason  of  such  improvement.  .  .  ." 

The  Act  also  required  that  the  State  or  local  gov- 
ernment receiving  aid  should  put  up  two-thirds  of  the 
total  cost  and  that  the  Secretary  and  the  Postmaster 
General  should  report  back  to  Congress  within  1  year 
the  results  of  their  operation  and  also  their  recom- 
mendations, pro  or  con,  on  a  general  plan  of  national 
aid  for  the  improvement  of  postal  roads. 

This  was  a  very  large  assignment  for  both  Depart- 
ments and  one  that  was  to  test  their  negotiating  skills 
to  the  utmost.  Unfortunately,  Congress  failed  to  pro- 
vide either  agency  with  administrative  funds  to  carry 
out  the  Act,  so  they  had  to  secure  the  necessary  engi- 
neers and  postal  inspectors  by  cutting  down  on  other 
activities. 

Another  more  important  provision  of  the  same  Act 
authorized  the  appointment  of  a  joint  committee  of 
five  Senators  and  five  Representatives  to  make  an  in- 
quiry into  the  whole  matter  of  Federal  aid  to  high- 
ways and  to  report  back  to  Congress  at  the  earliest 
possible  date. 


Traffic  on  an  improved  post 
"  1^      road  in  Tennessee  in  1903. 

""1 


81 


An  earth  road  near 
Stafford,  Va.  that  was 
7-epaired  with  pine  poles 
about  1912. 


The  Complexities  of  Federal-State-County  Cooperation 

In  order  to  treat  all  States  equally,  and  also  to  get 
information  representative  of  all  parts  of  the  country, 
the  two  Departments  divided  the  $500,000  appropria- 
tion equally  among  the  48  States.  They  then,  in  a 
joint  letter,  notified  each  governor  of  the  apportion- 
ment and  asked  that  he  designate  about  50  miles  of 
road  within  his  State  on  which  rural  delivery  was  or 
might  be  established  as  an  experimental  post  road. 
Five  governors  did  not  even  bother  to  reply  to  this 
request;  six  refused  to  participate;  and  28  indicated 
that  they  were  unable  to  comply  for  lack  of  legal 
powers  or  because  of  conflicting  State  statutes.  Two 
States,  Georgia  and  South  Carolina,  declined  to  par- 
ticipate because  of  Federal  statutes  requiring  an  8- 
hour  work  day  and  the  Executive  Order  of  May  18, 
1905,  barring  the  employment  of  convict  labor  on 
Government  work.  In  the  end,  only  Alabama,  Iowa, 
and  Oregon  agreed  to  designate  post  roads  and  accept 
the  Federal  subsidy.^ 

By  this  time,  nearly  7  months  had  passed  and  no 
projects  were  underway,  so  the  two  Departments  tried 
a  different  approach.  They  decided  to  select  from 
two  to  eight  locations  representative  of  conditions  in 
various  sections  of  the  country  and  to  concentrate  the 
available  funds  on  a  few  roads  in  these  localities. 
This  plan  produced  the  desired  result,  and  eventually 
agreements  were  made  for  17  post  road  projects  total- 
ing 457  miles,  located  in  13  States  and  28  counties, 
but  not  without  practical  and  legal  difficulties.  One 
county  in  Virginia  figured  that  it  could  build  roads 
more  economically  by  doing  its  own  work  with  con- 
victs or  by  free  labor  working  10  or  11  hours  per  day 
than  by  accepting  the  Federal  subsidy,  and  the  county 
canceled  its  agreement.  The  original  idea  of  appoint- 
ing a  trustee  in  each  county  to  hold  the  funds  for 
each  post  road,  subject  to  disbursement  by  a  Federal 
engineer,  had  to  be  dropped  in  some  States  because 
of  conflict  with  State  laws.  The  most  serious  objec- 
tions came  from  Minnesota  which  protested  the  8-hour 


clause  in  the  agreements  and  appealed  the  matter  to 
the  Attorney  General  of  the  United  States,  who  ruled 
that  the  work  contemplated  under  the  post  road  pro- 
gram was,  after  all,  not  public  work  of  the  United 
States,  within  the  meaning  of  the  statutes,  and,  there- 
fore, neither  the  8-hour  law  or  the  prohibition  on  use 
of  convict  labor  would  apply.^ 

The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  turned  the  supervision 
of  the  post  road  program  over  to  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads,  and  Page  in  turn  assigned  responsibility  to 
E.  W.  James,  who  detailed  an  engineer  to  each  project 
to  lay  out  the  road,  supervise  construction,  and  ap- 
prove expenditures.  Cooperation  with  the  counties 
was  not  easy.  Unlike  Bennington  County,  Vermont, 
which  had  petitioned  the  OPR  to  assign  an  engineer, 
the  cooperating  post  road  counties  had  surrendered 
their  control  over  the  joint  road  funds  unwillingly 
and  only  to  get  the  Federal  subsidy.  The  Secretary 
and  the  Postmaster  General  described  some  of  the 
difficulties  in  these  words : 

From  correspondence  and  from  the  attitude  of  the  local 
officials  in  many  places  it  appears  that  there  is  a  dispo- 
sition frequently  to  avoid  the  obvious  requirements  of 
the  present  act  with  respect  to  Government  control  over 
the  expenditure  of  joint  funds.  The  allotments  have 
been  looked  upon  not  infrequently  in  the  light  of  a  gra- 
tuity, the  idea  of  the  post  road  has  been  lost  sight  of, 
and  the  question  has  been  frequently  raised  in  the  field 
as  to  why  the  Government  would  not  give  the  money  to 
the  counties  and  let  them  spend  it.  .  .  . 

Fiscal  procedure  in  the  States  and  counties,  if  possible, 
should  be  provided  for  in  local  statutes,  written  with 
Federal  aid  in  mind.  The  longest  delays,  the  most  un- 
satisfactory conferences,  and  the  most  troublesome  rou- 
tine in  the  execution  of  the  present  projects  have  arisen 
because  the  Federal  aid  and  supervision  of  local  funds 
was  not  thought  of  when  the  fiscal  regulations  of  the 
States  and  counties  were  made. 

We  find  that  many  States  incorporate  into  their  State 
road  laws  certain  details  of  design  and  methods  of  con- 
struction which,  in  any  general  distribution  of  national 
aid,  would  at  once  act  as  checks  on  supervision  by  the 
National  Government.  .  .  .* 


82 


The  first  post  road  to  be  completed  was  opened  to 
traffic  in  1914.  It  was  a  dirt  road,  extending  141^ 
miles  west  from  Florence,  Alabama,  to  Waterloo.  The 
program,  with  congressional  extensions,  dragged  on 
for  four  more  years,  until  the  last  post  road,  in 
Dubuque  County,  Iowa,  was  opened  in  1918.  From 
the  start,  this  program  was  a  very  considci'able  burden 
on  the  Office  of  Public  Roads,  yet  in  carrying  it  out, 
the  OPR  learned  valuable  lessons  which  Director  Page 
was  able  to  pass  on  a  few  years  later  to  the  framers 
of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916.  The  most 
important  of  these  recommendations  was  that  Federal 
aid  should  be  dispensed  only  through  the  48  States, 
avoiding  the  complexities  of  dealing  with  the  Nation's 
more  than  3,000  counties. 

It  is  worth  noting  that  the  post  road  program  of 
1912  to  1918  was  the  Office  of  Public  Roads'  first  in- 
volvement with  the  Federal  policy  of  inducing  social 
change  in  the  States  by  means  of  the  public  works 
programs.  Later  legislation  conditioned  Federal 
grants  for  roads  on  State  compliance  with  the  8-hour 
law,  the  prohibition  of  convict  labor,  the  use  of  hand 
labor  methods,  the  paj^ment  of  minimum  wages,  and 
numerous  other  requirements  that  were  primarily 
social. 


P      APPROVES  OUALIFICATIONS    OF 
g  COUNTY    HIGHWAY  CNSINEERS    AND 

I 


SUPERINTENDENTS 


,,i^i^ 


PREPARES  ESTIMATES  FOR  COUNTV     ^ 
BOND    ISSUES.  ^ 


<^».;»:^%^;»;^j^»i^:;%%^^^^ 


CHART  ILLUSTRATING  SCOPE  OF  A  MODEL 

STATE  highh:\yder\rtment 


Although  the  date  is  not  known,  it  can  he  assumed  that 
Director  Page  made  up  this  model  of  a  State  highway 
departmetit  about  the  time  that  he  made  his  recommendation 
on  the  1916  Federal  Aid  Road  Act. 


The   Lincoln   Highway 

The  Glidden  Tours  and  the  exploits  of  the  Pioneer 
Freighter  inspired  a  growing  interest  in  motorable 
long-distance  roads  among  the  rapidly  increasing  class 
of  automobile  owners.  In  1912  Carl  G.  Fisher,  builder 
of  the  Indianai:)olis  Speedway,  conceived  the  idea  of 
a  "coast-to-coast  rock  highway"  as  a  way  to  dramatize 
the  need  for  interstate  roads.  He  was  able  to  get 
suppoi't  for  this  idea  from  some  of  the  foremost  lead- 
ers of  the  automotive  and  allied  industries,  and  in 
July  1913,  Fisher  and  his  supporters  formed  the 
Lincoln  Highway  Association  to  carry  out  the  scheme 
and  collect  public  subscriptions  to  pay  for  it.  The 
Association  then  selected  what  they  considered  the 
most  direct  route  across  the  mid-United  States  begin- 
ning at  New  York  and  proceeding  by  way  of  Phila- 
delphia, Chicago,  Omaha,  Cheyenne,  and  Salt  Lake 
City  to  San  Francisco,  a  total  distance  of  about  3,150 
miles.'' 

The  Association  recruited  members  in  all  of  the 
towns  along  the  route,  and,  with  thoroughgoing  ef- 
ficiency, appointed  able  and  influential  local  citizens 
as  "consuls"  to  promote  the  improvement  of  the 
various  sections  of  the  route.  The  result  was  a  rich 
harvest  of  local  and  national  publicity  and  sizable 
cash  contributions  as  well. 

The  Lincoln  Highway  Association  collected  millions 
of  dollars  from  the  public,  but  its  officers  had  no 
illusions  that  they  would  ever  be  able  to  get  enough 
to  build  the  highway  from  this  source.  Their  pri- 
mary purpose  was  to  educate  the  public  to  the  need 
for  better  roads  and  build  political  support  for  na- 
tional aid  to  good  roads.  As  a  vehicle  for  this  edu- 
cational campaign,  they  adopted  Roy  Stone's  tried 
and  tested  technique  of  object  lesson  roads.  The 
funds  donated  to  the  Association  were  used  to  finance 
"seedling  miles"  distributed  throughout  the  length  of 
the  route.  The  first  of  these,  begun  October  1914, 
near  the  village  of  Malta,  Illinois,  was  a  cement  con- 
crete pavement,  and  many  of  the  others  were  of  simi- 
lar high  types  suitable  for  heavy  traffic. 

The  Lincoln  Highway  inspired  a  tremendous 
amount  of  argument  both  for  and  against  long- 
distance roads.  The  rural  interests  generally  were 
against  them,  claiming  that  the  Nation  would  be 
drained  of  funds  to  build  a  few  "peacock  alleys"  for 
the  enjoyment  of  wealthy  tourists.  Urban  spokesmen 
said  the  country  had  been  too  long  in  bondage  to  the 
medieval  English  concept  that  roads  were  the  re- 
sponsibility of  the  smallest  and  weakest  units  of  gov- 
ernment, namely,  the  road  districts,  townships,  and 
counties,  and  that  the  Federal  Government  should 
assume  responsibility  for  "national  routes." 

Among  the  most  active  of  the  national  roads  advo- 
cates was  the  National  Highways  Association,  an 
organization  its  enemies  claimed  was  dominated  by 
the  road  machinery,  road  materials,  and  portland 
cement  interests.  This  Association  published  a  map 
showing  a  recommended  50,000-mile  system  of  na- 
tional roads  extending  from  coast  to  coast  and  from 
Canada  to  the  Gulf,  which  it  claimed  should  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  Federal  Government  to  build 
and  maintain.*  "    Such  a  system,  proponents  claimed. 


*  This  idea  was  30  years  ahead  of  its  time  and  was  not 
realized  until  the  Interstate  System  was  authorized  in  1944. 


83 


With  the  spring  thaiv,  roads  such  as  this  one  in  Michigan 
about  1916  annually  became  impassable  because  of  the  mud. 


would  not  lay  any  additional  expense  on  the  States 
and  counties  but,  rather,  would  relieve  them  of  the 
cost  of  keeping  up  their  heaviest  trafficked  roads, 
leaving  more  of  the  local  funds  to  spend  on  the  local 
roads. 

The  American  Automobile  Association  took  a  strong 
position  in  favor  of  Federal  aid  and  against  dissipat- 
ing the  Federal  funds  in  driblets  over  the  more  than 
2  million  miles  of  local  roads : 

...  we  advocate  the  main  roads  to  be  built  first,  and 
those  are  the  two  fundamental  principles  that  this  Asso- 
ciation is  working  for :  that  the  government  should  aid, 
and  that  the  government  money  should  be  spent  only  on 
the  main  thoroughfai-es  and  should  not  be  dissipated  by 
trying  to  spend  it  on  2,000,000  miles  of  road  .  .  .  we 
believe  that  this  work  should  not  of  necessity  be  done 
by  the  government,  but  that  the  State  highway  officials, 
in  cooperation  with  the  government,  should  agree  on  the 
roads,  the  plans,  and  the  specifications,  and  on  the 
various  features  of  the  contract." 

The  Evolution  of  a  National  Policy  on  Federal  Aid 

"WHien  the  Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  of  1912 
was  passed,  it  was  already  apparent  to  most  Congress- 
men that  some  form  of  Federal  aid  to  roads  was  in- 
evitable. The  real  questions  before  Congi-ess  were 
how  much  the  aid  should  be  and  the  form  in  which  it 
should  be  granted.  The  experimental  post  road  ap- 
propriation   and    the    congressional    joint    committee 


were  measures  designed  to  get  some  answers  to  these 
questions,  but  in  the  end,  the  inevitable  Federal-aid 
bill  was  hammered  out  on  the  anvil  of  political  com- 
promise. 

The  legislators  appointed  to  the  Joint  Committee 
on  Federal  Aid  in  the  Construction  of  Post  Roads 
represented  all  shades  of  opinion  from  extreme  na- 
tional road  advocates  to  local  road  supporters.  The 
Committee  held  hearings  and  drew  heavily  on  the 
files  of  the  State  Department  and  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  for  information  on  the  economic  and  social 
importance  of  roads  and  how  they  were  administered 
in  the  United  States  and  the  advanced  countries  of 
Europe.  They  learned,  for  example,  that  in  the 
United  States  the  average  haul  for  farm  products  to 
market  or  to  the  nearest  railroad  station  was  9  miles; 
and  the  average  cost  of  hauling  over  the  existing 
country  roads  was  21  cents  per  ton-mile.  By  com- 
parison, it  cost  French  farmers  only  8  cents  per  ton- 
mile  to  haul  farm  products  over  their  macadam  roads. 
The  difference,  or  13  cents  per  ton-mile,  was  in  effect 
a  financial  burden  laid  on  American  producers  and 
consumers  alike  by  bad  roads,  a  "mud  tax"  that  was 
costing  the  country  $504  million  annually.  At  6  per- 
cent, this  loss  represented  the  interest  on  $8.4  billion, 
which,  according  to  some  economists,  might  profitably 
be  spent  annually  to  improve  the  roads  instead  of  the 
niggardly  $204  million  spent  in  1912.^- 


84 


The  Committee  received  testimony  on  the  effect  of 
bad  roads  on  the  education  of  rural  children,  the 
quality  of  rural  life,  and  migration  of  young  people 
from  the  farms  to  the  cities ;  and  on  the  value  of  farm 
land,  the  labor  of  horses,  and  the  wear  and  tear  on 
wagons  and  draft  gear,  and  the  motorization  of  farm 
transportation.  They  sent  inquiries  to  people  in  all 
walks  of  life  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  of  10,000 
replies,  97  percent  were  in  favor  of  some  form  of 
Federal  aid. 

The  Joint  Committee's  work  stretched  out  far 
longer  than  Congress  had  anticipated  and  was  not 
completed  when  the  63d  Congress  convened  in  1914. 
This  did  not  discourage  the  proponents  of  Federal 
aid,  who  poured  a  steady  stream  of  bills  into  the 
legislative  hopper  in  the  first  session.  In  all,  10  bills 
were  introduced  in  the  Senate  and  39  in  the  House. 
These  bills  covered  the  whole  spectrum  of  thinking  on 
the  Federal-aid  question.  At  one  extreme  was  Ala- 
bama Senator  John  H.  Bankhead's  bill  to  set  up  a 
National  Bureau  of  Highways  in  Washington  to 
spend  $25  million  per  year  on  a  national  highway 
system.  At  the  other  end  was  a  bill  by  Senator  Hoke 
Smith  of  Georgia  to  classify  all  the  rural  mail  routes 
according  to  the  type  of  surfacing  and  then  pay  each 
State  $60  annually  for  each  mile  of  Class  A  (mac- 
adam) road,  $30  per  mile  for  Class  B  (gravel),  and 
$15  per  mile  for  Class  C  (earth),  as  "rental"  for  the 
use  of  the  roads  to  carry  the  U.S.  mail.  A  novel 
plan  offered  by  Senator  Jonathan  Bourne,  Jr.,  of 
Oregon  would  apportion  $1  billion  among  the  States 
according  to  four  factors.  Under  this  complicated 
plan,  the  Federal  Government  would  lend  part  of  the 
money  to  the  States  at  4  percent  interest  and  the  re- 
mainder would  be  a  subsidy  for  State  roads.  This 
was  to  be  accomplished  by  the  issuance  of  both  State 
and  Federal  Government  bonds  over  a  long  period  of 
time. 


Through  this  welter  of  different  Federal-aid  plans 
there  ran  a  thin  thread  of  agreement  on  three  matters : 

•  The  amount  of  Federal  aid  should  be  from  $20 
to  $25  million  annually. 

•  The  aid  should  be  apportioned  among  the  States 
according  to  some  formula.  (The  most  popular 
formula  was  one-third  of  the  funds  according  to 
population,  one-third  according  to  geographic 
area,  and  one-third  accoi'ding  to  the  mileage  of 
post  roads.) 

•  The  aid  should  be  matched  by  State  contribu- 
tions, with  50-50  the  most  favored  ratio. 

Eventually  the  House  passed  a  modified  version  of 
the  "ABC  Rental  Plan"  offered  by  Representative 
Shackleford  of  Missouri,  but  this  bill  was  lost  in  the 
Senate  reportedly  because  of  the  opposition  of  the 
American  Automobile  Association  and  big  city  in- 
terests.^^ 

In  support  of  his  plan  to  subsidize  the  lesser  rural 
roads,  Shackleford  used  an  argument  that  would  have 
repercussions  for  years  afterward  in  the  design  of 
highways.  He  asserted  that  there  are  two  types  of 
roads:  "touring  roads"  and  "business  roads,"  and  that 
the  two  are  somehow  incompatible  in  the  same  system 
of  highways.  In  1913,  at  the  Third  American  Road 
Congress  he  said : 

It  can  not  be  doubted  that  an  overwhelming  majority 
of  the  people  want  federal  road  legislation ;  but,  un- 
fortunately, they  radically  differ  in  opinion  as  to  what 
such  legislation  should  provide.  They  are  divided  into 
two  general  classes,  which  for  the  purposes  of  this  dis- 
cussion may  be  designated  as  the  'touring-roads'  class 
and  the  'business-roads'  class.  The  'touring-roads'  class 
is  marching  under  a  banner  upon  which  is  inscribed  in 
letters  of  gold :  'See  America  first.'  The  'business-roads' 
class  is  marshaling  its  forces  under  a  flag  which  bears 
the  legend ;  'Cheaper  transportation  and  lower  cost  of 
living.'  .  .  . 


State  Highway  No.  1   (note  1-25)  in  New  Mexico  in  1915  with  a  6  percent  grade  into  Nogal  Canyon. 


85 


The  'touring-roads'  class  demands  that  the  United 
States  shall  limit  its  road  activities  to  the  construction 
and  maintenance  of  a  few  'ocean-to-ocean'  and  'across- 
country'  highways  of  great  perfection  and  then  leave  the 
rest  of  the  people  to  build  their  own  roads  or  do  without, 
as  they  may  choose. 

The  'business-roads'  class  believes  that  in  dealing  with 
roads  we  must  keep  in  mind  their  functions  and  the  rela- 
tion which  they  bear  to  the  general  transportation  system 
of  the  country ;  that,  as  the  harbor  is  the  terminus  of  the 
river  and  the  railroad,  so,  for  practical  purposes,  the 
railway  station  is  the  terminus  for  roads ;  that  neither 
freight  nor  passengers  will  ever  be  carried  long  distances 
over  roads  as  cheaply  as  they  could  be  over  railways, 
and  that  it  is  an  idle  dream  to  imagine  that  auto  trucks 
and  automobiles  will  take  the  place  of  railways  in  the 
long-distance  movement  of  freight  or  passengers ;  that 
the  proper  function  of  roads  is  not  to  connect  antipodal 
oceans  nor  the  distant  capitals  of  far-away  States,  but 
to  make  easy  communication  between  the  farms  on  one 
hand  and  the  towns  and  railway  stations  on  the  other, 
to  the  end  that  the  farmer  may  market  his  crops  at  less 
expense  and  the  town  dweller  may  get  farm  products 
more  easily  at  less  cost.  They  therefore  favor  a  general 
system  of  roads  radiating  from  the  towns  and  railway 
stations  out  among  the  farms." 

In  later  years,  in  a  different  context,  and  in  some- 
what different  form,  Shackleford's  arguments  would 
be  used  to  oppose  parkways,  highway  beautification 
and  long-distance  freeways. 

In  their  report  of  January  21,  1915,  the  members 
agreed  unanimously  on  the  need  and  desirability  of 
Federal  aid  and  its  constitutionality,  but  not  on  any 
specific  policy  for  Congress  to  follow  in  granting 
such  aid.  The  Committee  failed  to  come  to  grips 
with  the  question  of  how  much  aid  should  be  granted, 
other  than  to  counsel  that  Federal  aid  should  be 
undertaken  in  a  large  way  rather  than  a  small, 
haphazard  way.  They  warned  that  small  contribu- 
tions spread  over  a  large  mileage  would  create  a 
"pork  barrel"  that  would  dissipate  the  Federal  funds 
without  any  permanent  upgrading  of  the  roads.  The 
Committee  also  came  out  against  centralization  of 
control  over  the  road  program  in  Washington. 

Prophetically,  the  Committee  declared,  "We  believe 
that  permanent  highways  will  result  in  very  consid- 
erable adoption  of  auto-truck  hauling  in  preference 
to  rail  transportation  where  the  distance  is  within  a 
half  day's  run."  ^^ 

Federal  Aid  Becomes  A  Reality 

Among  the  first  bills  introduced  into  the  64th  Con- 
gress in  January  1916  was  Representative  Shackle- 
ford's  H.R.  7617,  providing  that  "the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture,  on  behalf  of  the  United  States,  shall,  in 
certain  cases,  aid  the  States  in  the  construction  and 
maintenance  of  rural  post  roads."  This  bill  proposed 
to  appropriate  $25  million  annually,  out  of  which 
each  State  would  receive  at  least  $65,000.  The  re- 
mainder would  be  apportioned  one-half  in  proportion 
to  population  and  one-half  in  proportion  to  the  mile- 
age of  rural  free  delivery  (RFD)  and  star  post  routes. 
The  locations  and  standards  of  the  aided  roads  were 
to  be  agreed  upon  between  the  Secretary  of  Agricul- 
ture and  the  States,  and  earth,  sand-clay,  and  other 
low  cost  surfaces  would  be  eligible  for  the  subsidy,  as 
well  as  higher  types,  and  the  Federal  share  of  the 
cost  would  be  not  less  than  30  percent  nor  more  than 
50  percent.  To  receive  Federal  aid  after  1920,  each 
State  would  have  to  have  a  State  highway  department 


to  administer  the  Federal  funds.  Finally,  the  con- 
struction and  maintenance  of  the  aided  roads  would 
remain  under  State  control. 

Other  good  roads  bills  were  introduced  in  the  64th 
Congress,  but  Shackleford's  H.R.  7617  attracted  the 
most  support.  Its  author  had  been  cochairman  of  the 
Joint  Congressional  Committee,  and  he  was  now 
chairman  of  the  newly  formed  House  Committee  on 
Roads.  He  had  come  to  realize  that  compromise  be- 
tween the  long-distance  roads  and  local  roads  advo- 
cates would  be  necessary  to  pass  any  Federal-aid  bill. 
His  new  bill  had  the  support  of  the  American  Asso- 
ciation of  State  Highway  Officials,  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture,  the  Postmaster  General,  and  the  Office 
of  Public  Roads,  all  of  whom  opposed  the  ABC 
rental  plan  so  dear  to  Shackleford's  heart. 

When  the  Shackleford  bill  reached  the  floor  of  the 
House,  there  was  no  opposition  to  it  on  constitutional 
grounds,  and  almost  everybody  was  satisfied  that 
ownership  and  responsibility  for  roads  should  remain 
with  the  State  and  local  governments.  There  was 
also  general  agreement  that  the  Government  should 
deal  only  with  States  through  a  highway  department. 
Debate  revolved  almost  entirely  about  the  formula 
for  apportioning  the  funds  among  the  States,  and  the 
exclusion  of  places  of  more  than  2,500  population 
from  the  benefits  of  the  act.* 

Opponents  of  the  bill  claimed  that  the  apportion- 
ment formula  gave  the  wealthier  States,  which  con- 
tributed most  of  the  Federal  revenues,  less  than  their 
fair  share  of  the  post  road  benefits,  and  they  were 
particularly  bitter  that  the  cities,  which  contributed 
a  very  large  share  of  the  revenue  in  all  States,  got 
nothing  at  all  from  the  bill.  The  rural  road  advo- 
cates replied  that  the  wealthy  States  and  the  cities 
had  already  received  more  than  their  fair  share  of 
the  national  income  in  other  forms,  such  as  expensive 
post  offices  and  public  buildings,  harbor  improvements, 
veterans'  pensions  (one-third  of  the  pensioners  lived 
in  six  eastern  States,  practically  none  in  the  south) 
and,  most  of  all,  in  shelter  of  their  industries  behind 
a  high  protective  tariff. 

Despite  the  opposition,  the  Shackleford  Bill,  with 
some  changes,  passed  the  House  by  a  good  margin  and 
was  carried  unanimously  in  the  Senate.  It  became 
law  July  11,  1916. 

The  principal  changes  in  the  bill  were  to  reduce  the 
funding  and  change  the  apportionment  factors  to  one- 
third  according  to  area,  one-third  according  to  popu- 
lation, and  one-third  according  to  post  road  mileage. 
The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  was  allowed  to  take  3 
percent  off  the  top  of  all  appropriations  for  adminis- 
tration. No  Federal  aid  was  to  be  apportioned  to  any 
State  until  its  legislature  had  assented  to  the  provi- 
sions of  the  Act,  but  after  that,  the  Secretary  would 
pay  one-half  of  the  actual  cost  of  any  approved 
project,  including  the  cost  of  bridges  and  culverts,  up 
to  $10,000  per  mile.  After  completion  of  the  aided 
road,  it  would  be  the  duty  of  the  State  to  properly 
maintain  it,  and  if  this  were  not  done,  the  Secretary 
could  refuse  to  approve  further  Federal  aid  in  that 
State  until  the  road  was  restored  to  good  condition. 


*  The   debate   on    the   Federal-aid   bill   comprises   some  300 
pages  of  The  Congressional  Record,  Vol.  53,  1916. 


86 


Congress  realized  that  it  would  take  some  time  for 
the  States  to  enact  suitable  legislation  assenting  to 
the  Federal  Act,  to  raise  matching  funds  and  train 
personnel  for  an  expanded  road  program.  The  Con- 
gress, in  order  to  provide  time,  allowed  States  with 
unexpended  funds  at  the  close  of  the  fiscal  year  one 
additional  fiscal  year  to  obligate  funds  and,  for  those 
States  that  did  not  have  a  State  highway  department, 
the  appropriation  would  be  available  until  the  close 
of  the  third  fiscal  year  following  the  fiscal  year  for 
which  it  was  apportioned.  The  legislators  may  also 
have  remembered  how  long  it  took  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture  and  the  Postmaster  General  to  implement 
the  much  smaller  post  road  program  of  1912.  At  any 
rate,  they  appropriated  only  $5  million  for  fiscal  year 
1917,  the  first  year  of  the  new  program,  but  at  the 
same  time,  they  provided  for  increasing  the  amount 
by  $5  million  annually  up  to  a  maximum  of  $25  mil- 
lion in  1921.*  Thus,  although  the  amount  initially 
available  was  not  large.  Congress,  by  appropriating 
for  5  years  in  advance,  made  it  possible  for  the  States 
to  plan  ahead  and  build  up  an  orderly  program.  This 
wise  policy  has  continued  down  to  the  present. 

Launching  the  Federal-Aid  Program 

The  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916  placed  an  im- 
mense additional  responsibility  on  Logan  Waller  Page 
and  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engineer- 
ing,** to  whom  Secretary  of  Agriculture  Houston 
delegated  the  administration  of  the  Act.  First,  they 
had  to  apportion  the  appropriated  funds  among  the 
48  States,  and  this  required  that  the  Postmaster 
General  certify  the  mileage  of  rural  delivery  and  star 
routes  in  each  State.  The  apportionment  was  pub- 
lished July  21,  1916,  just  10  days  after  President 
Wilson  signed  the  Act. 

Page  and  the  Department  solicitor  then  drafted 
tentative  regulations  for  carrying  out  the  provisions 
of  the  Act,  and  invited  the  heads  of  all  the  State 
highway  departments  to  a  conference  in  Washington 
to  discuss  them.  The  draft  regulations  did  not  satisfy 
everyone,  particularly  the  provisions  denying  Federal 
participation  in  the  cost  of  right-of-way  and  the  cost 
of  making  preliminary  surveys  and  plans.  However, 
most  of  the  suggestions  made  by  the  State  officials 
were  incorporated  in  the  final  draft,  and  the  regula- 
tions were  issued  September  1, 1916. 

The  harmonious  cooperation  between  the  Federal 
and  State  officials  in  drafting  these  regulations  was  a 
good  omen  for  the  eventual  success  of  the  Federal-aid 
program.  Their  work  was  so  well  done  that  the 
regulations  were  not  greatly  changed  for  years  after- 
ward, even  though  the  Act  itself  was  very  consider- 
ably amended. 


*  In  addition  to  providing  $75  million  for  Federal  aid  to 
post  roads,  Congress  appropriated  $10  million  for  roads  and 
trails  in  national  forests  to  be  spent  at  the  rate  of  $1  million 
per  year  beginning  in  1917  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Secretary  of  Agriculture. 

**  On  July  1,  1915,  the  Department's  work  on  farm  drainage, 
irrigation  and  farm  architecture  was  merged  with  the  work 
on  roads  under  a  new  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engi- 
neering (OPRRE)  with  Logan  Waller  Page  as  Director.  The 
working  force  under  Page  after  the  merger  was  4.50  persons, 
of  whom  288  were  from  the  rolls  of  the  old  OPR  and  162 
from  other  agencies." 


The  Act  gave  the  State  highway  departments  the 
authority  to  initiate  projects  subject  to  approval  of 
the  plans,  specifications  and  estimates  by  the  Secre- 
tary. To  provide  prompt  inspection  and  approval  of 
projects.  Page  decentralized  the  OPRRE  into  ten 
regional  districts,  each  in  charge  of  an  experienced 
highway  engineer.  At  the  same  time,  he  had  men  at 
work,  in  cooperation  with  the  States,  preparing  stand- 
ard forms  for  plans  and  specifications,  and  in  Feb- 
ruary 1917  he  convened  a  conference  of  State  testing 
engineers  in  Washington  to  recommend  to  the  States 
standard  specifications  and  methods  of  testing  road 
materials. 

The  OPRRE's  administrative  diligence  was  matched 
by  that  of  those  States  which  already  had  adequate 
highway  departments.  By  July  1917,  Page's  district 
engineers  had  received  applications  from  26  States  for 
Federal  aid  in  the  construction  of  949  miles  of  road 
estimated  to  cost  $5.43  million,  the  Federal  share  of 
which  amounted  to  about  $2.43  million,  or  less  than 
half  of  the  funds  appropriated  by  Congress  for  fiscal 
year  1917.  Of  these  projects,  188  miles,  with  a  Fed- 
eral share  of  $846,152,  had  been  approved.^^ 

Standards  for  Federally  Aided  Roads 

Representative  Shackleford's  original  bill,  which 
much  amended  eventually  became  the  Federal  Aid 
Road  Act,  provided  that  Federal  aid  might  be  used 
for  earth  and  sand-clay  roads,  as  well  as  for  higher 
types,  ".  .  .  one  of  the  purposes  of  this  Act  being  to 
encourage  and  promote  the  improvement  of  a  general 
system  of  roads  leading  from  cities,  towns  and  rail- 
way stations  into  the  adjacent  farming  communi- 
ties."^* This  specific  language  was  eliminated  while 
the  bill  was  under  consideration  in  Congress.  Instead, 
the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  was  given  the  power  to 
review  and  approve  State  proposals,  including  road 
types  and  standards,  subject  to  the  limitation  that 
approved  projects  should  be  "substantial  in  character." 

The  poorer  States  of  the  South  and  West  regarded 
this  limitation  with  considerable  apprehension,  fear- 
ing that  the  Secretary  might  require  macadam,  con- 
crete or  other  high  types  of  surfacing  for  Federal 
approval.  This  apprehension  may  have  been  rein- 
forced by  the  fact  that  the  first  Federal-aid  project 
approved  was  a  20-foot  concrete  road  in  California. 
To  allay  this  widespread  fear,  Secretary  Houston,  in 
February  1917,  issued  a  specific  statement  to  the 
public : 

'This  department,  which  is  charged  with  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act,  has  placed  abso- 
lutely no  restrictions,  either  direct  or  implied,  upon  the 
kinds  of  highways  to  be  constructed.  States  may  submit 
for  approval  any  kind  of  road,  even  an  earth  road,  and 
approval  will  be  given  if  the  construction  be  substantial 
in  character,  suitable  for  traffic  needs,  and  meets  the 
terms  of  the  Federal  act.  To  give  State  legi.slators  and 
highway  officials  the  impression  that  this  department 
favors  only  costly  types  of  road  or  discriminates  in  favor 
of  any  particular  material,  results  not  only  in  spreading 
misinformation,  but  in  placing  barriers  in  the  way  of 
States  which  wish  to  avail  themselves  of  Federal  aid  in 
road  construction.'  "• 

This  announcement  apparently  had  the  desired 
effect.  As  of  January  1918,  80  percent  of  the  2,849 
miles  submitted  for  Federal -aid  approval  were  for 
gravel,  sand-clay  or  graded  earth  roads. 


87 


A  caution  sign  to  drivers  to  preserve 
the  low  type  State  highway. 


The  Federal-aid  regulations  of  1916  contained  one 
rather  unusual  provision : 

Unless  otherwise  specifically  stipulated  in  the  project 
agreement,  bridges,  viaducts  and  under-passes  shall  have 
clear  veidth  of  roadway  of  not  less  than  16  feet,  and 
clear  head  room  of  not  less  than  14  feet  for  a  width  of 
8  feet  at  the  center.* 

This  was  one  of  the  few  occasions  on  which  the 
Federal  Government  chose  to  set  standards  for  roads. 
In  the  years  following,  the  Government  let  the  States 
set  standards  by  agreement  among  themselves  through 
the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
and  then  made  adherence  to  these  standards  a  condi- 
tion for  receiving  Federal  aid.  Thus,  strictly  speak- 
ing, there  have  never  been  "national  standards"  for 
roads  in  the  United  States,  such  as  were  established 
by  the  governments  of  France  and  other  European 
countries. 

The  Road  Census  of  1914 

The  Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries  made  the  first 
national  road  inventory  in  1904,  canvassing  not  only 
road  mileage,  but  also  revenues  and  expenditures  for 
construction  and  maintenance.  This  information, 
such  as  it  was,  was  obtained  entirely  by  correspond- 
ence, and  before  the  inventory  was  over,  some  60,000 
printed  forms  and  letters  were  sent  out  and  received 
by  the  OPRI.  The  information  was  far  from  com- 
plete, and  some  was  of  questionable  accuracy.  In 
some  instances,  the  county  road  officials  refused  to 
supply  the  information  unless  paid  for  their  services, 
and  in  such  cases,  it  became  necessary  to  secure  the 
information  through  postmasters,  attorneys,  physi- 
cians or  other  private  citizens. 

The  roads  in  many  counties  and  townships  have  never 
been  measured,  surveyed  or  recorded,  and  in  such  cases 
it  became  necessary  to  secure  an  estimate  of  the  mileage 
from  persons  best  informed  on  this  subject  in  the  coun- 
ties. In  some  instances  no  permanent  records  appeared 
to  have  been  kept  of  collections  or  expenditures  of  road 
funds,  and  in  others  the  records  are  kept  in  such  manner 
as  to  confuse  rather  than  enlighten  one  in  search  of 
information." 


Tollgate  in  Ambrose  County  near  Lynchburg,  Ya.  The  sign 
warns  that  there  is  a  fine  o/  $10.  for  exceeding  the  speed  limit 
of  6  m.p.h. 


In  1909,  the  OPR  made  another  inventory  by  mail, 
canvassing  only  the  mileage  of  various  types  of  road 
surfaces. 

By  1914,  well  over  half  of  the  States  had  highway 
departments,  and  Page  persuaded  these  departments 
to  help  with  the  road  census  by  supplying  "collabora- 
tors" who  would  collect  the  information  in  their  States 
and  forward  it  to  OPR.  In  those  States  that  did  not 
supply  collaborators,  the  OPR  collected  the  informa- 
tion directly  from  the  local  authorities,  or  from  local 
and  State  road  associations,  chambers  of  commerce, 
automobile  clubs,  postmasters  and  private  citizens. 
Apparently,  in  these  States  the  quality  of  recordkeep- 
ing had  improved  but  little  since  1904 : 

Highway  accounting  systems  and  methods,  especially 
in  the  local  subdivisions  of  States,  are,  in  general,  far 
from  satisfactory.  In  many  places  the  records  were 
found  to  be  so  indefinite  or  so  incomplete  that  the  most 
careful  investigation  failed  to  determine  even  the  bare 
total  of  what  funds  had  been  expended  on  roads  and 
bridges  during  the  previous  years.  At  times  the  memory 
of  some  official  or  employee  seemed  a  better  guide  than 
the  permanent  existing  records. 

Lack  of  definite  data  and  records  by  the  local  sub- 
divisions is  even  more  pronounced  as  to  road  mileage. 
Hundreds  of  instances  were  discovered  where  the  local 
officials  could  give  no  more  than  a  rough  estimate,  as 
maps  had  not  been  prepared  or  measurement  of  the 
roads  been  made." 


Despite  these  shortcomings,  the  census  of  1914, 
taken  as  a  whole,  was  the  most  accurate  and  compre- 
hensive inventory  of  American  roads  and  road  fi- 
nances made  up  to  that  time.  The  most  striking 
finding  was  an  enormous  increase  in  the  total  annual 
expenditures  on  roads  and  bridges,  from  $79.62  mil- 
lion in  1904  to  $240.26  million  in  1914,  a  large  part  of 
which  was  derived  from  the  sale  of  bonds.* 

The  mileage  summary  showed  that  the  country's 
network  of  rural  roads,  that  is,  those  outside  incor- 
porated cities  and  towns,  had  grown  from  2,151,379 
miles  in  1904  to  2,445,760  miles  in  1914.  Roads  sur- 
faced with  sand-clay,  gravel,  macadam  or  substances 
other  than  plain  dirt  had  increased  from  153,530 
miles  in  1904  to  257,291  miles  in  1914  but  were  still 
only  10.5  percent  of  the  total  mileage.  Of  the  sur- 
faced mileage,  32,180  miles,  or  12.5  percent,  were  of 
dust-free  types,  such  as  bituminous  macadam,  brick 
or  concrete.  These,  with  a  few  thousand  more  miles 
added  in  1915  and  1916,  would  soon  be  put  to  the 
supreme  test  of  Avartime  traffic. 


*  About  $21.0  million  of  road  and  bridge  bonds  had  been 
issued  in  the  10  years  preceding  1904  in  five  States.''  In 
1914,  the  total  of  State  and  local  bridge  and  road  bonds  out- 
standing was  $344.76  million,  distributed  through  42  States. 
Of  this  amount,  $115.32  million  were  State  bonds  issued  by 
New  Yorlc  ($65  million)  and  10  other  States." 


REFERENCES 


*A.  Machen,  Rural  Free  Delivery  of  Mails,  Proceedings, 
North  Cabolina  Good  Roads  Convention,  Bulletin  No.  24 
(Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries,  Washington,  D.C.,  1903) 
p.  51. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1906,  p.  23. 

'  M.  Dodge,  Our  National  Policy,  Proceedings,  National 
Good  Roads  Con\-ention  Held  At  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  Bulletin 
No.  26  (Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries,  Washington,  D.C., 
1903)  p.  20. 

*  Address  by  Hon.  Wm.  P.  Borland,  Proceedings,  Third 
American  Road  Congress,  (American  Highway  Association, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1914)  p.  76. 

'64  Cong.  Rec.  1353  (1916). 

'Joint  Report  of  The  Progress  of  Post  Road  Improve- 
ment, H.  Doc.  204,  63d  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  pp.  4,  5. 

'  Id.,  pp.  19,  20. 

"Id.,  p.  13. 

•a.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Public  Roads  of 
The  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1953)  p.  109. 

"D.  Shackleford,  Federal  Road  Legislation,  Proceedings, 
Third  American  Road  Congress  (American  Highway  Asso- 
ciation, Washington,  D.C.,  1914)  pp.  59,  60. 

"  Proceedings,  Foltith  American  Road  Congress  (Ameri- 
can Highway  Association,  Washington,  D.C,  1915)  pp.  26,  27. 


"Federal  Aid  To  Good  Roads,  H.  Doc.  1510,  63d  Cong.,  3d 
Sess.,  pp.  15-17. 

"  D.  Shacklefoed,  supra,  note  10,  p.  63. 

"Id.,  pp.  56,  57. 

"  H.  Doc,  supra,  note  12,  p.  15. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1915,  p.  1. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1917,  p.  3. 

''H.  R.  7617,  64th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  Jan.  6,  1916. 

"J.  Penntbacker  &  L.  BoYKiN,  Federal  Aid  to  Highioays, 
Yearbook  of  The  Department  of  Agriculture,  1917  (GPO, 
Washington,  D.C,  1918)  p.  135. 

'°  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Rules  and  Regula- 
tions OF  The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  For  Carrying  Out 
The  Federal  Aid  Road  Act,  Circular  No.  65  (GPO,  Washing- 
ton, D.C,  1916)  p.  10. 

''M.  Eldridge,  Public-Road  Mileage,  Revenues  and  Ex- 
penditures In  The  United  States  In  1904,  Bulletin  No.  32 
(Office  of  Public  Roads,  Washington,  D.C,  1907)  p.  7. 

"  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engineering,  Public 
Road  Mileage  and  RE^'ENUES  In  The  United  States,  1914 — 
A  Summary,  Bulletin  No.  390  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Agriculture, 
Washington,  D.C,  1917)  p.  2. 

"  M.  Eldridge,  supra,  note  21,  p.  18. 

"  OPRRE,  supra,  note  22,  pp.  3,  8. 


89 


Planning 
fl  HiQhuuQy 
/y/tem 


The  Clouds  of  War 

The  United  States  was  only  slightly  prepared  for 
hostilities  when  war  was  declared  against  Germany 
April  6,  1917.  The  total  strength  of  the  Army  was 
less  than  200,000  men,  and  most  of  these  were  recent 
enlistments  in  the  early  stages  of  training.  Perhaps 
half  a  dozen  regiments  stationed  in  the  Canal  Zone 
and  on  the  Mexican  border  were  at  war  strength;  the 
rest  of  the  Regular  Army  was  scattered  all  over  the 
country  in  battalion-sized  garrisons.  Some  industries 
had  tooled  up  to  produce  munitions  for  the  Allies,  and 
America  was  making  large  shipments  of  food  to 
Europe;  but  these  were  only  token  efforts  compared 
to  those  that  would  be  required  to  fight  a  full-scale 
war. 

Within  a  week  of  the  Declaration  of  War,  President 
Wilson  created  the  Council  of  National  Defense,  con- 
sisting of  the  Secretaries  of  War,  the  Navy,  Agricul- 
ture, the  Interior,  Commerce,  and  Labor,  along  with 
an  unpaid  Advisory  Council  of  industrialists,  labor 
leaders,  financiers,  and  prominent  citizens  from  all 
walks  of  life.  Boards  and  committees  functioning 
under  the  authority  of  the  National  Council  eventually 
supervised  every  aspect  of  the  war  effort,  including 
regulation  of  the  national  economy. 

On  May  17,  1917,  Congress  imposed  Selective 
Service,  and  the  United  States  set  out  to  build  an 
army  of  a  million  men.    This  national  Army  was  to 


be  trained  in  16  huge  cantonments,  each  as  large  as  a 
good-sized  city,  complete  with  railroad  tracks  and 
terminals,  sewers,  waterworks,  streets,  roads,  and 
housing  for  22,000  men.  First,  however,  it  was  neces- 
sary to  train  the  officers  who  would  train  the  men; 
and  for  this  job  the  Army  built  12  officer  training 
camps  at  existing  military  posts.  All  of  this  con- 
struction went  on  at  such  a  pace  that  the  12  officer 
training  camps  and  9  of  the  16  cantonments  were 
completed  by  June  14,  1917 — just  30  days  after  the 
program  was  started.^ 

A  drastic  industrial  expansion  paralleled  the  mili- 
tary mobilization.  Steel  mills  were  expanded.  The 
capacity  of  portland  cement  mills  was  increased  to 
meet  the  spiraling  demand  triggered  by  an  immense 
construction  program.  Brand  new  shipyards  were 
built  in  eastern  ports  to  build  steel  and  concrete  ships 
to  replace  the  dozens  sunk  each  month  by  German 
U-boats;  and  at  Sparrows  Point,  Maryland,  Bethle- 
hem Steel  built  a  city  to  house  its  ship5'ard  workers, 
complete  with  sewerage,  water,  and  streets. 

Breakdown  of  a   Lopsided  Transportation  System 

The  railroads  were  as  unprepared  for  war  as  the 
rest  of  the  country — perhaps  more  so.  For  a  decade 
they  had  been  under  effective  Government  regulation, 
and  to  preserve  competition  they  had  been  prohibited 
from  pooling  freight  or  from  merging  parallel  com- 
peting  lines,   even   where   such   mergers  would  have 


90 


resulted  in  more  efficient  systems.  The  years  1913 
and  1914  were  a  period  of  sluggish  business  activity 
during  which  the  earnings  of  the  railroads  had  been 
low  and  their  dividends  small.  They  had  had  diffi- 
culty borrowing  money  for  equipment  and  improve- 
ment of  terminals,  and  some  authorities  estimated 
that  the  American  railroads  as  a  whole  were  5,000 
locomotives  short  of  the  number  needed  to  handle 
traffic  in  normal  times,  especially  during  the  fall 
harvest. 

At  the  low  point  of  the  1914  recession,  the  railroads 
had  about  400,000  idle  cars.  In  1915  traffic  began  to 
pick  up  under  the  stimulation  of  war  orders  from  the 
Allies,  and  by  September  1916,  cars  were  beginning 
to  be  scarce.  ^^Hien  the  United  States  entered  the 
war,  there  was  a  nationwide  shortage  of  about  148,000 
cars.^ 

Foreseeing  trouble  ahead,  the  railway  executives 
met  in  Washington  on  April  11,  1917,  and  "voluntar- 
ily agreed  to  merge  their  'individual  and  competitive 
activities  to  produce  a  maximum  of  national  trans- 
portation efficiency.'  "  ^  They  created  the  Railroads' 
War  Board,  a  committee  of  five  top  executives,  to 
coordinate  the  operations  of  the  mainline  railroads 
and  draw  up  rules  for  conservation  of  motive  power, 
joint  use  of  terminals,  and  the  use  of  embargoes 
against  shipments  to  areas  already  choked  with  loaded 
cars.  The  board  eliminated  unnecessary  or  competing 
passenger  trains  and  luxury  services.    They  organized 


an  educational  campaign  among  shippers  to  promote 
better  utilization  of  cars*  and  quicker  loading  and 
unloading.  By  September  1917,  these  efforts  had  re- 
duced the  car  shortage  to  about  34,000  cars,  and  the 
railroads  had  moved  16  percent  more  freight  than  in 
the  corresponding  period  of  1916,  which  itself  had 
been  a  record  year. 

Despite  the  efforts  of  the  Railroads'  War  Board, 
the  transportation  picture  became  darker  as  the  fall 
harvest  of  1917  approached,  and  creeping  paralysis 
began  to  spread  over  the  railroad  system.  Coastal 
ships  that  normally  carried  coal  from  Chesapeake 
Bay  ports  to  New  England  were  diverted  to  trans- 
Atlantic  service,  throwing  an  extra  load  on  the  rails. 
Ancient  locomotives  that  had  been  continued  in  serv- 
ice far  beyond  their  normal  lifespan  began  to  break 
down.  Traditionally  underpaid  track  labor  left  the 
railroads  for  the  warplants,  and  track  maintenance 
declined  to  a  dangerous  level.  However,  the  major 
bottlenecks  appeared  at  the  terminals,  which  for 
dense  traffic  lines,  fixed  the  ultimate  limit  of  the  traffic 
that  could  be  handled.  In  the  words  of  one  executive, 
"Its  terminals  are  the  heart  of  a  transportation  sys- 
tem. If  the  terminals  are  inadequate  to  handle  the 
traffic  currently,  then  congestion  follows,  traffic  is  set 


*  It  was  estimated  that  in  1916  an  average  carload  of  less- 
tlian-carload  package  freight  was  only  7  tons,  whereas  the 
capacity  of  a  properly  loaded  car  was  several  times  that 
amount.^ 


The  importance  of  streets  and  highways  in  shipping  goods  was 
demonstrated  during  the  war  as  increasing  numbers  of  trucks  carried 
commercial  or  military  supplies.    Below,  army  trucks  wait  for  a  load  of  tires. 


91 


The  poor  loading  of  railroad  cars  added  to  the 
general  inability  of  the  railroad  system  to  handle 
all  the  transportation  needs  of  the  icar  years. 


off  between  terminals,  the  arteries  become  clogged, 
and  the  system  fails  to  perform  its  functions  prop- 
erly." ^ 

The  terminal  tieups  came  about  from  a  variety  of 
causes.  Due  to  shortage  of  ships,  export  freight  ac- 
cumulated in  the  North  Atlantic  terminals.  Con- 
tractors for  cantonments  and  shipyards  ordered 
materials  forwarded  far  in  advance  of  their  ability 
to  receive  and  unload  them.  (At  one  time  over  5,000 
carloads  of  wooden  piling  were  tied  up  in  the  Hog 
Island  shipyard  waiting  to  be  unloaded.)  Feverish 
demand  for  materials  to  keep  industry  going  led 
manufacturers  to  purchase  raw  materials  from  un- 
usual markets  in  excessive  quantities,  Avith  the  result 
that  arrivals  were  badly  bunched  and  unloading  was 
slow  and  difficult. 

In  many  terminals  antiquated  business  procedures 
were  a  principal  cause  of  congestion.  Older  cities 
such  as  New  York  had  an  inadequate  number  of  team 
tracks  where  freight  could  be  unloaded  directly  from 
the  cars  into  drays  and  trucks.  Most  freight  con- 
signed to  lower  Manhattan,  even  in  carload  lots,  was 
unloaded  at  freight  depots  and  stored  there  until 
picked  up  by  the  consignee,  who  was  notified  by  mail 
of  the  shipment's  arrival.  Due  to  congestion  in  the 
mails,  the  notice  might  take  3  days  to  reach  the  con- 
signee who  then  had  48  hours  in  which  to  pick  up 
the  goods. 


Indescribable  traffic  congestion  prevailed  around 
the  freight  houses.  Some  trucks  stood  in  line  for 
hours  or  even  days  to  pick  up  a  few  boxes  of  freight. 
One  count  at  a  Manhattan  depot  showed  100  drays 
standing  in  line  at  7  a.m.  waiting  for  loads.  Unload- 
ing from  the  freight  cars  was  often  haphazard,  so 
that  a  truck  driver  might  have  difficulty  finding  his 
consignment  and  then  even  more  trouble  getting  it 
to  the  loading  dock. 

With  freight  piling  up  in  the  stations,  the  railroads 
set  off  incoming  cars  in  the  freight  yards,  and  when 
these  also  filled  up,  on  any  available  empty  siding  at 
small  towns  approaching  the  city.  As  these,  too,  be- 
came filled,  the  congestion  spread  outward  as  much 
as  30  or,  in  extreme  cases,  60  miles  from  the  city. 
Eventually,  the  railroads  were  forced  to  embargo 
further  shipments  to  that  city  until  some  of  the  con- 
gestion cleared  up. 

Toward  the  end  of  the  war  the  railroads,  then 
under  Government  operation,  cleared  up  much  of  the 
terminal  congestion  by  instituting  "store-door  deliv- 
ery." Under  this  system,  cities  were  divided  into 
zones.  Freight  consigned  to  addresses  in  these  zones 
was  unloaded  from  the  cars  into  specified  areas  on  the 
loading  docks,  where  it  was  picked  up  by  registered 
trucks  and  delivered  direct  to  the  consignee  without 
prior  notice.  If  the  consignee  was  not  ready  to  accept 
the  shipment,  it  was  taken  immediately  to  a  public 
warehouse  and  stored  at  the  consignee's  expense.  By 
eliminating  the  free  storage  at  the  depot,  this  system 
broke  the  bottleneck  in  a  few  weeks.  Store-door  de- 
livery also  reduced  the  enormously  inefficient  waste 
of  trucks  and  labor  waiting  for  loads  at  the  freight 
stations. 

Unable  to  get  long-haul  freight  into  the  cities,  the 
railroads  refused  to  accept  short-haul  shipments  such 
as  milk  and  produce  from  the  surrounding  country, 
and  the  food  distribution  system  began  to  suffer.  A 
few  farmers  Avho  OAvned  trucks  began  to  drive  them 
into  the  city  Avith  loads  of  A^egetables  instead  of  to  the 
nearest  railroad  station.  At  the  other  end,  wholesal- 
ers and  even  retailers  began  to  send  their  own  trucks 
out  into  the  country  for  loads  of  produce.  The  cost 
per  mile  was  more  than  for  rail  shipment,  but  the 
delay  was  less  and  terminal  costs  Avere  eliminated  at 
both  ends,  so  they  at  least  broke  even  on  the  business. 

Birth   of  the  Trucking   Industry 

Practically  eA^erj''  large  business  in  the  cities  had  a 
few  trucks  for  drayage  and  deliA'eries,  and  by  1917 
most  of  these  Avere  poAver  driA^en.*  "^^Hien  the  city 
terminals  began  to  choke  up.  some  consignees  had 
their  shipments  sent  to  outlying  towns  and  sent  their 
trucks  there  to  receive  them,  at  the  same  time  carry- 
ing outgoing  shipments.  Soon,  himdreds  of  trucks 
were  being  used  in  this  way,  and  the  radius  of  opera- 
tion was  constantly  increasing. 

Alcron,  Ohio,  tied  up  with  a  package  freight  em- 
bargo, broke  the  embargo  by  truck  hauls  to  14  out- 
lying shipping  points  within  a  radius  of  20  miles. 
A  New  York  drug  firm  started  making  weekly  de- 
liA'eries  to  Boston  in  its  own  trucks.    Cleveland  manu- 


*  In  1917  there  were  391,000  motor  trucks  registered  in  the 
United  States,  most  of  them  used  in  the  cities. 


92 


facturers  bought  motor  trucks  and  started  a  motor 
freight  service  to  bring  castings  from  foundries  20  to 
30  miles  away.  An  Akron  tire  manufacturer  found  it 
feasible  to  deliver  to  Detroit  and  Boston  by  truck, 
and  a  new  household  moving  business  began  operat- 
ing between  Chicago  and  Milwaukee.  Some  shippers 
used  trucks  for  the  first  part  of  a  haul  that  would 
have  required  two  rail  carriers,  avoiding  the  transfer 
between  railroads.  In  June  1917,  nine  new  trucks 
were  driven  from  Hartford,  Wisconsin,  to  Baltimore — 
1,200  miles — under  their  own  power  because  the  manu- 
facturer couldn't  get  railroad  cars;  and  in  Connecti- 
cut, when  the  railroads  embargoed  certain  classes  of 
freight,  truck  transport  made  it  possible  to  keep 
factories  open.^ 

By  August  1917,  car  shortages  and  embargoes  had 
diverted  so  much  traffic  to  trucks  that  the  highways 
began  to  show  signs  of  disti-ess.  Pennsylvania,  New 
York,  Xew  Jersey,  and  Xew  England  had  fairly  good 
networks  of  bituminous  macadam  roads;  but  these 
were  of  light  construction,  seldom  more  than  7  or  8 
inches  thick,  and  also  were  in  many  places  only  14  to 
16  feet  wide.  At  this  time  all  trucks  ran  on  solid 
rubber  tires,  and  since  there  were  no  laws  against 
overloading,  many  were  loaded  to  the  full  capacity 
of  their  engines.  "Within  a  feAv  months  maintenance 
costs  began  to  soar,  as  the  thin  road  crusts  wore  out 
and  broke  through.  The  States  and  counties  were 
unable  to  get  railroad  cars  to  haul  stone  and  bitu- 
minous material,  and  they  increased  over-the-road 
hauling  with  their  own  trucks,  throwing  a  further 
load  on  the  highways.  The  Connecticut  Legislature 
made  an  emergency  appropriation  of  $6.5  million  just 
to  keep  the  main  highways  passable  for  traffic. 
Massachusetts  spent  $2  million  on  maintenance  of 
State  highways  alone  and  $1.25  million  for  resurfac- 
ing and  strengthening  trunk  routes.  Other  States 
were  faced  with  similar  huge  expenditures  at  a  time 
of  rapidly  escalating  costs  and  labor  shortage. 

The   Plight  of  the   Highway  Contractors 

The  large  highway  bond  issues  of  1915  and  1916, 
plus  the  prospect  of  sizable  road  expenditures  under 


the  1916  Federal  Aid  Road  Act,  led  many  experienced 
and  inexperienced  contractors  into  the  road  business. 
With  the  outbreak  of  war,  they  immediately  began 
to  encounter  difficulties  in  getting  materials,  especially 
steel,  and  in  retaining  labor  on  the  job.  Within  a 
few  months  material  costs  advanced  20  to  30  percent 
and  wages  of  common  labor  went  up  to  $2.50  and 
even  $3.00  per  day.  Railroad  car  shortages  made 
deliveries  of  stone  and  asphalt  uncertain.  Large 
numbers  of  contractors  were  forced  out  of  business, 
and  others,  having  completed  their  contracts,  refused 
to  bid  for  new  work. 

The  virtual  collapse  of  the  highway  construction 
industry  created  a  desperate  situation  for  States  and 
counties  struggling  to  keep  the  roads  open  in  the  face 
of  ever-increasing  numbers  of  heavy  trucks  and  dev- 
astating losses  of  personnel  to  war  industry  and  the 
Army.  What  made  the  job  particularly  heartbreak- 
ing was  the  sentiment  openly  expressed  in  some  seg- 
ments of  the  war  effort  hierarchy  that  roadbuilding 
was  nonessential  work  that  should  be  discontinued 
for  the  duration  of  the  emergency. 

As  the  summer  of  1917  advanced,  a  coal  famine 
began  to  develop  in  the  industrial  eastern  States  be- 
cause of  the  shortage  of  railway  cars.  Production  of 
munitions  was  beginning  to  be  affected  when  the 
Priority  Board  of  the  Council  of  National  Defense 
issued  Priority  Order  No.  2,  to  be  effective  November 
1,  1917,  prohibiting  the  use  of  open  top  cars  other 
than  flat  cars  for  shipping  supplies,  other  than  coal, 
for  construction,  maintenance  and  repair  of  public 
and  private  highways,  streets,  and  sidewalks  or  for 
theaters  and  other  places  of  amusement.''  This  pe- 
remptory order,  issued  without  public  hearings  or 
other  advance  warning,  struck  the  States  "like  a  bolt 
from  the  blue,"  at  a  particularly  bad  time.  It  caught 
them  with  many  miles  of  new  road  graded  but  not 
surfaced  with  winter  approaching.  Despite  the  fact 
that  trucking  had  already  released  thousands  of  cars 
for  war  purposes  and  the  roads  in  the  vicinity  of 
cantonments  and  ports  of  embarkation  were  being 
pounded  to  pieces  by  truck  traffic,  the  Priority  Board 
refused  to  recede   from  its  position,  and  road  work 


At  the  turn  of  the  20th  century, 
the  Hicks  Company  in  Rockville, 
Md.,  loas  making  local  deliveries 
of  dry  goods.    This  was  a 
forerunner  of  the  scene  on  a 
much  larger  scale  during  World 
War  I  ivhcn  local  deliveries 
for  all  kinds  of  goods  became 
a  demand  with  the  advent  of 
motorized  delivery  trucks. 


93 


state  highway  officials  on  inspection  tour  of  1917  construction  project 
in  Michigan.    Such  projects  were  soon  forced  to  stop  when  involvement 
in  the  war  caused  shortage  of  materials  and  manpower. 


Truck  assembly  increased 
to  meet  the  war  needs. 


and  road  materials  production  that  was  dependent  on 
rail  transportation  ground  to  a  stop. 

As  a  direct  result  of  the  widespread  protests  over 
Priority  Order  No.  2,  the  National  Council  set  up  a 
Highway  Transport  Committee  in  Washington  to 
represent  the  highway  and  highway  transport  inter- 
ests, and  appointed  Roy  D.  Chapin,  President  of  the 
Hudson  Motor  Company,  as  chairman.  This  Com- 
mittee began  its  work  November  29,  1917. 

The  National  Military  Truck  Routes 

The  experience  of  the  Allies  had  shown  that  enor- 
mous numbers  of  trucks  would  be  needed  in  France 


to  support  military  operations.  The  War  Production 
Board  decided  to  standardize  truck  designs  to  sim- 
plify parts  supply  and  increase  production,  and  they 
induced  the  motor  industry  to  design  two  vehicles  on 
which  to  concentrate  production  for  the  duration  of 
the  war.  Class  A  trucks  were  to  have  a  capacity  of 
3  tons  and  a  speed  of  14  miles  per  hour,  while  Class  B 
trucks  would  carry  5  tons  at  12  miles  per  hour.  The 
Army  placed  an  order  for  30,000  of  these  trucks  in 
September  1917. 

Several  months  before  the  Highway  Transport 
Committee  was  organized,  Chapin  advanced  the  idea 
that  trucks  destined  for  France  could  be  driven  from 


94 


A  caravan  of  trucks  from  Detroit  headed  for  eastern  seaports  and  the  war. 


the  factories  to  the  ports  of  embarkation,  and  he  ob- 
tained the  Army's  approval  for  an  experimental  con- 
voy. On  November  22,  1917,  a  trail-blazing  party 
consisting  of  representatives  of  the  Ohio  Highway 
Department,  the  Army,  the  Lincoln  Highway  Asso- 
ciation, and  the  OPRRE  left  Toledo  enroute  to  the 
East  Coast.  The  route  they  selected  crossed  Ohio  via 
Toledo  and  Akron  to  East  Palestine,  where  the  Penn- 
sylvania Highway  Department  picked  it  up,  continu- 
ing on  to  Pittsburgh  and  across  the  Allegheny 
Mountains  to  Harrisburg,  Lancaster,  and  Phila- 
delphia. This  became  the  main  military  truck  route. 
Later,  other  truck  routes  were  designated  by  Ohio, 
West  Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  and  Maryland  over  the 
Old  National  Road,  and  by  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  and 
New  York  via  Cleveland,  Erie,  Buffalo,  and  Albany 
to  New  York  City. 

In  December  the  Quartermaster  General  announced 
that,  in  order  to  relieve  the  squeeze  on  railroad  cars, 
the  trucks  would  be  driven  overland  to  the  Atlantic 
Coast  under  their  own  power.^  The  first  Army  truck 
convoy  left  Toledo  early  in  December  1917,  at  the 
beginning  of  one  of  the  most  severe  winters  in  recent 
U.S.  history.  Three  weeks  later,  on  January  3,  1918, 
29  of  the  30  vehicles  that  began  the  trip  rolled  into 
Baltimore.®  This  grueling  trip  was  testimony  to  the 
durability  of  the  war-model  trucks  and  the  endurance 
of  the  drivers,  but  most  of  all,  to  the  superb  mainte- 
nance efforts  of  the  Pennsylvania  Highwa}'  Depart- 
ment, which,  as  a  result  of  careful  preplanning,  had 
kept  the  road  open  over  the  Alleghenies  in  the  face  of 
blizzards  that  left  drifts  3  to  6  feet  deep.  In  some 
places  the  crews  worked  around  the  clock  to  keep  the 
road  open.  Teams  and  drags  broke  a  track  through 
the  drifts,  followed  by  horsedrawn  road  machines  and 
homemade  plows  mounted  on  trucks.^"  Altogether, 
7  trucks  and  plows,  22  road  machines,  20  drags,  105 
teams,  3  tractors,  and  200  men  were  thrown  into  this 
massive  and  successful  maintenance  effort.^^ 

Military  vehicles  were  not  the  only  ones  to  use  the 
truck  roads.  Because  they  were  kept  free  of  snow 
throughout  the  winter,  they  attracted  large  numbers 
of  private  trucks  and  automobiles.  In  Ohio  this  traf- 
fic was  particularly  heavy : 

With  the  congested  condition  of  the  railroads  and  their 
inability  to  promptly  handle  supplies  that  were  needed 
in  almost  every  community,  it  became  necessary  after 
opening  up  main  arteries  for  travel  to  open  up  the  lateral 


MeConnellsburg,  Pa.,  and  other  similar  towns  and  villages 
ivitiiessed  the  industrial  might  of  the  Nation  as  caravans  of 
trucks  rolled  through  on  the  way  "over  there." 

roads  in  order  to  reach  the  possible  outlet  to  and  from 
markets  and  villages.  The  amount  of  traffic  these  high- 
ways must  sustain  is  apparent.  The  truck  traffic  was 
practically  constant  with  all  additional  vehicles  conceiv- 
able using  many  of  the  roads  .  .  .  Not  only  did  truck  and 
automobile  traffic  greatly  increase,  but  burdens  were 
placed  upon  them  clearly  in  excess  of  what  any  ordinary 
road  would  be  expected  to  carry.  This  great  increase  in 
traffic  was,  of  necessity,  confined  largely  to  such  roads 
as  had  been  prepared  by  the  removal  of  snow  drifts, 
etc." 

In  the  months  following  the  first  convoy,  the  Army 
sent  the  remaining  30,000  trucks  east  via  the  truck 
routes,  each  loaded  with  3  tons  or  more  of  spare  parts 
and  munitions.  This  operation  released  17,250  rail- 
road cars  for  other  work,  but  the  cost  per  ton-mile 
was  high,  even  without  considering  the  efforts  of  the 
States  and  counties  to  keep  the  roads  open.  From  a 
historical  vieAvpoint,  the  main  accomplishment  of  the 


95 


Snowplotcs  played  an  important 
role  in  keeping  the  milita7-y  truck 
routes  open. 


Trucks  were  steadily  being  built  for  war  duty,  but  highway  offlcials 

were  hard  pressed  to  get  funds  or  materials  to  maintain  the  roads  damaged  by  the  trucks. 


truck  routes  was  to  demonstrate  that  it  was  possible 
to  keep  long  stretches  of  highway  open  to  traffic 
through  a  severe  winter  and  that  dependable  long- 
distance interstate  travel  on  the  highways  was  desir- 
able and  even  necessary. 

The  Highway  Departments  Call  for  a  National  War 
Policy  for  Roads 

When  the  annual  meeting  of  the  American  Associa- 
tion of  State  Highway  Officials  (AASHO)  opened  at 
Richmond,  Virginia,  December  4,  1917,  the  problem 
uppermost  in  the  minds  of  the  delegates  was  how  to 
carry  on  and  keep  the  roads  open  in  the  face  of  what 
many  of  them  perceived  to  be  a  hostile  policy  by  the 
Government  toward  highway  transportation.  Prior- 
ity Order  Xo.  2  was  only  the  latest  action  hampering 
their  efforts.  The  War  Industries  Board  had  as- 
sumed control  over  all  supplies  of  cement,  brick,  steel, 
stone,  and  gravel  and  was  giving  the  highest  priori- 
ties for  these  materials  to  defense  installations  and 
the  railroads.  Tlie  Fuel  Administration  controlled 
the  supply  of  fuel  oil,  and  to  make  more  fuel  avail- 
able, it  restricted  the  production  of  asphalt.  No  bond 
issues  exceeding  $100,000  could  be  made  without  the 
assent  of  the  Capital  Issues  Committee,  a  war  organi- 


zation that  was  particularly  hostile  to  highways. 
Clearing  a  project  through  these  war  agencies  was  a 
matter  of  weeks  and  even  months  since  there  was  very 
little  cooperation  between  them. 

To  make  things  easier  for  the  Government,  AA.SHO 
called  upon  all  the  States  to  designate  the  essential 
war  roads  and  estimate  the  amounts  of  materials  and 
rail  transportation  that  would  be  needed  for  their 
construction  and  maintenance  during  the  coming  year. 
These  programs  would  then  clear  through  the  Execu- 
tive Committee  of  AASHO  and  in  due  course  be 
presented  to  the  Priority  Board  and  to  the  Highway 
Transport  Committee  of  the  National  Council,  of 
which  Director  Page  of  the  OPRRE  was  a  member." 
The  delegates  also  passed  a  resolution, 

.  .  .  That  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials  request  the  United  States  Government  to  formu- 
late and  promulgate,  as  soon  as  possible,  a  definite  policy 
for  road  and  street  construction  and  maintenance,  and 
that  it  is  requested  that  said  policy  contain  a  statement 
that  freight  ears  shall  be  furnished  next  spring  for  the 
transportation  of  tlie  necessary  materials  for  the  con- 
struction and  maintenance  of  streets  and  roads  of  eco- 
nomic or  military  value." 

There  was  a  note  of  urgency  in  tliis  resolution,  for 
the  State  officials  knew  that  the  spring  breakup  was 


96 


only  a  few  months  away.  Throughout  the  winter  the 
roads,  once  cleared  of  snow,  could  carry  hea^'y  trucks 
because  they  were  frozen  solid,  but  every  highway 
engineer  and  maintenance  superintendent  knew  what 
could  be  expected  after  the  spring  thaw  began. 

The  Department  of  Agriculture  immediately  en- 
dorsed the  AASHO  plan  and  asked  all  States  to 
submit  their  priority  programs  as  soon  as  possible. 

Government  Seizure  of  the  Railroads 

To  avert  complete  paralysis,  the  Government  seized 
all  the  mainline  steam  railroads  on  December  26,  1917, 
and  set  up  a  Federal  Railroad  Administration  to 
operate  them.  This  was  not  so  much  a  reflection  on 
the  work  of  the  Railroads'  War  Board  as  an  admis- 
sion that  only  a  Government  agency  could  suspend 
the  operation  of  the  antitrust  laws  and  the  onerous 
regulations  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission, 
designed  to  foster  competition,  and  force  tlie  various 
war  agencies  to  resolve  their  conflicting  demands  for 
transportation.  "The  government  can  ignore  the  anti- 
trust laws,  force  the  various  war-supply  departments 
to  accept  what  transportation  is  given  tliem,  eliminate 
the  problems  of  credit  and  capital  for  future  con- 
struction, and  settle  beyond  dispute  the  demands  of 
labor."  « 

The  Railroad  Administration  organized  the  seized 
lines  into  three  huge  systems — the  Eastern  Railroads, 
Southern  Railroads,  and  Western  Railroads,  pooling 
equipment  and  terminals.  Since  the  Government  now 
had  direct  control  over  all  railroad  cars,  the  Priority 
Board  suspended  the  operation  of  Priority  Order  No. 
2,  and  on  February  6,  1918,  Director  General  of  Rail- 
roads McAdoo   assured  AASHO   that   "The  United 


States  Railroad  Administration  will  cooperate  with 
the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  by  transporting  ma- 
terials for  construction  of  national  highways  desig- 
nated by  it  as  a  military  or  economic  necessity,  when 
the  equipment  is  available  and  not  needed  to  move 
supplies  for  the  army,  navy,  shipping  board,  or  other 
governmental  activities."  *'"' 

The  Quagmires  of  Spring 

In  1917  very  few  States  had  load  limit  laws  to 
protect  their  highways.  Michigan  had  just  passed  a 
law  requiring  reduced  loads  during  the  spring  thaw. 
A  1913  Pennsylvania  law  permitted  gross  vehicle 
loads  of  24,000  pounds,  not  to  exceed  750  pounds  per 
inch  width  of  tire,  and  a  few  eastern  States  had 
similar  laws.  But  these  laws  were  not  enforced 
strictly  and  apparently  not  at  all  against  military 
vehicles.  Prophetically,  the  Engineering  News- 
Record  warned  of  the  coming  debacle  and  urged 
engineering  societies  and  the  press  to  prepare  the 
public  for  it:  "The  universal  cry  for  a  more  complete 
use  of  the  roads  in  order  to  relieve  the  railroads  of 
their  abnormal  burdens  will  probably  be  utilized  as 
an  excuse  to  evade  or  even  violate  intentionally  not 
only  statute  law  [on  vehicle  loading],  but  the  law  of 
reason."  ^^ 

With  the  arrival  of  spring,  the  predicted  destruc- 
tion occurred  on  an  unprecedented  scale.  In  Delaware 
a  single  truck  with  a  gross  load  of  11  tons  broke  up  a 
light  macadam  road  from  end  to  end  in  one  trip. 
In  New  York  bituminous  macadam  roads  that  had 
given  good  service  for  5  to  10  years  broke  up  and 
became  impassable  under  truck  traffic  averaging  only 
30  heavy  vehicles  per  day.     Roads  that  cost  $11,000 


This  Fairfax  County,  Va.,  road,  macadam  surfaced  with  bituminous  materials,  shows  the 
effect  of  truck  trafflc  in  1918. 


97 


per  mile  to  build  in  1912  were  destroyed  so  completely 
that  the  State  estimated  it  would  cost  $32,000  per 
mile  to  repair  them  at  inflated  1918  costs.  In  New 
Jersey  the  "heavy  truck  would  break  through  the 
crust,  and  immediately  upon  being  extricated  would 
be  followed  by  others,  until  there  was  formed  a 
veritable  quagmire."  ^^ 

Supposedly  higher  types  of  pavement,  such  as 
cement  concrete  and  brick  on  concrete  bases,  also 
failed,  principally  because  the  extremely  thin  4-inch 
and  5 -inch  slabs  failed  to  bridge  the  soft  spots  in  the 
subgrade.  However,  in  Wayne  County,  Michigan, 
which  for  a  number  of  years  had  been  using  progres- 
sively thicker  concrete  pavements,  8-  and  9-inch  slabs 
stood  up  remarkably  well  under  some  of  the  heaviest 
trucking  in  the  Nation. 

In  normal  times  the  States  and  counties  would  have 
closed  their  roads  to  save  them  from  destruction,  but 
in  time  of  war  this  was  unthinkable.  It  was  also 
impracticable  to  force  the  truckers  to  lighten  their 
loads  enough  to  provide  any  real  relief.  The  highway 
departments  handled  the  emergency  as  best  they  could. 
Those  that  were  able  to  get  railroad  cars  hauled  in 
immense  quantities  of  stone  and  gravel.  Others,  such 
as  Massachusetts,  used  nearby  supplies  of  poor  quality 
gravel  and  soft  stone  rather  than  wait  for  railroad 
cars  to  haul  in  better  materials : 

While  the  roads  would  not  wear  as  long,  we  felt  that 
in  these  times  as  this  work  could  be  done  without  closing 
them  so  they  could  still  be  used  by  the  traffic,  and  as 
four  carloads  of  bitumen  would  be  sufficient  to  construct 
a  mile  of  road  which  would  require  40  carloads  of  cement 
or  from  70  to  80  carloads  of  imported  stone  or  gravel, 
that  this  would  save  rail  shipments  and  thereby  help  the 
general  traffic  situation." 

In  this  emergency  the  States,  despite  the  AASHO 
priority  road  program,  were  still  having  difficulties 
getting  railroad  cars,  asphalt  and  road  materials  for 
maintenance.  To  get  things  moving  faster,  the  Secre- 
tary of  Agriculture,  at  Director  Page's  suggestion, 
invited  the  Army,  the  War  Production  Board,  the 
Fuel  Administration,  the  Railroad  Administration, 
and  the  Capital  Issues  Committee  to  name  representa- 
tives to  meet  with  Page  in  a  council  to  coordinate  the 
Government's  highway  activities.  At  its  first  meeting 
June  8,  1918,  this  United  States  Highway  Council 
elected  Mr.  Page  as  chairman,  and  thereafter  until  it 
dissolved  on  November  13,  1918,  the  Council  passed 
on  over  7,300  applications  for  highway  financing, 
railway  cars  or  materials.  By  acting  as  a  clearing- 
house for  the  industry,  the  Council  drastically  short- 
ened the  time  required  for  project  approvals, 
approving  95  percent  of  the  asphalt  applied  for,  50 
percent  of  the  crushed  stone,  and  45  percent  of  the 
open  top  cars,  but  only  12  percent  of  the  steel  and  15 
percent  of  the  highway  financing.^" 

With  so  much  destruction  occurring  in  such  a  short 
time,  primarily  as  a  result  of  national  defense  needs, 
it  was  inevitable  that  there  should  be  appeals  to  Con- 
gress to  pay  for  the  damage.  Representative  John  G. 
Cooper  of  Ohio  introduced  a  bill  "to  aid  the  States 
in  the  maintenance,  repair,  and  reconstruction  of 
roads  subjected  to  extraordinary  wear  by  reason  of 
the  use  of  such  roads  by  the  Government  of  the  United 
States."  This  bill  never  emerged  from  committee, 
probably  because  its  essential  purpose  was  accom- 
plished by  other  legislation. 


Amazing   Growth   of  Truck  Transportation 

The  production  of  trucks  was  not  greatly  restricted 
during  the  war,  and  in  fact  was  encouraged.  Through- 
out 1918  the  truck  factories  turned  out  about  19,000 
units  per  month,  and  at  the  end  of  1918  there  were 
about  525,000  nonmilitary  trucks  of  all  sizes  registered 
in  the  United  States.  This  was  an  increase  of  199,000 
over  1917." 

In  spite  of  war  restrictions  on  fuel  and  the  gener- 
ally poor  condition  of  the  roads,  for-hire  trucking 
thrived  in  an  atmosphere  unclouded  by  Government 
regulation  and  surcharged  by  intense  competition. 
The  heavy  demand  for  trucking  was  not  due  solely 
to  the  failure  of  the  railroads  and  their  embargoes 
on  short-haul  package  freight.  Shippers  were  becom- 
ing aware  that  for  short  hauls,  trucks  could  greatly 
shorten  delivery  time.  This  was  dramatically  illus- 
trated early  in  the  war  when  a  disastrous  fire  oc- 
curred in  Salem,  Massachusetts.  Using  trucks  to 
bring  tents  to  shelter  the  victims,  the  National  Guard 
was  able  to  complete  the  trip  from  Framingham,  42 
miles  away,  in  only  3  hours.  Due  mostly  to  terminal 
delays,  this  shipment  would  have  taken  2  days  by 
rail.^^ 

Trucking  also  saved  drayage  charges  at  both  ends 
of  the  shipment,  and  these,  even  in  normal  times,  were 
often  more  than  the  railroad  freight  charges.  Also, 
shippers  soon  found  that  boxing  and  crating  could 
often  be  omitted  without  increasing  breakage.  Thus, 
although  the  cost  of  truck  hauling  was  12  to  25  cents 
per  ton-mile,  this  was  no  greater  than  the  total  door- 
to-door  cost  of  rail  shipment  for  short  haul  trips.* 

Despite  the  intense  and  unregulated  competition,  a 
number  of  reliable  motor  carriers  established  regular 
service  between  the  principal  cities.  Beginning  in 
November  1917,  the  Beam  Fletcher  Corporation  op- 
erated twenty-two  5-ton  White  trucks  between  Phila- 
delphia and  New  York  carrying  400  tons  per  day.^' 
Early  in  1918  the  Liberty  Highway  Company  began 
a  motor  express  business  between  Toledo  and  Detroit 
with  daily  runs  of  a  5-ton,  four-wheel-drive  Walter 
truck  pulling  three  5-ton  trailers.  The  running  time 
was  71/^  to  9  hours  one  way,  depending  on  the  weather 
and  the  condition  of  a  12-mile  stretch  of  unsurfaced 
dirt  road  on  the  main  route  between  these  cities.  (If 
the  road  was  bad,  the  driver  might  have  to  pull  his 
trailers  through  the  12-mile  gap  one  at  a  time.)^® 

In  Maryland,  the  Farmers'  Cooperative  Association 
of  Harford  County  obtained  a  franchise  to  operate  a 
motor  express  on  the  Baltimore-Bel  Air  Road  to  haul 
milk  and  produce  to  Baltimore,  returning  with  empty 
milk  cans  and  package  express  for  the  farmers.^' 
And  in  Alabama  the  Civic  Association  of  Birming- 
ham averted  a  coal  famine  by  contracting  with  the 
Jenkins  Motor  Company  to  haul  200  tons  of  coal  per 
day  direct  from  the  mines  to  consumers.^® 


*  In  normal  times  the  terminal  charges  for  rail  freight 
were  15  to  45  cents  per  ton,  depending  on  the  commodity  and 
the  terminal.  Once  loaded  on  cars,  mainline  railroads  could 
haul  freight  for  only  2%  mills  per  ton-mile,  and  even  low- 
traffic  branch  lines  could  haul  for  2  or  3  cents  per  ton-mile. 
In  1916,  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad's  average  system  operat- 
ing cost  was  4.3  mills  per  ton-mile,  including  terminal 
charges."  Railroad  men  estimated  that  an  average  railroad 
car  traveled  about  25  miles  per  day,  spending  12  hours  in 
terminals  for  every  hour  of  movement  between  terminals." 


98 


Trucks  also  played  an  impoi'tant  role  in  civilian  life  by  making  short  haul 
runs  faster  and  cheaper  than  could  the  overburdened  trains. 


Even  greater  tonnages,  in  the  aggregate,  were 
hauled  by  business  and  industry  in  company-owned 
vehicles.  In  1917  and  1918,  the  Goodyear  Tire  and 
Rubber  Company  ran  its  trucks  on  schedule  from 
Akron  to  Chicago  and  even  Boston,  carrying  relief 
drivers  and  running  day  and  night.  By  the  spring 
of  1918,  the  "N^Tiite  Motor  Company  of  Cleveland  was 
sending  most  of  its  new  trucks  to  the  East  under  their 
own  power  over  the  "Liberty  Highway,"  a  route 
through  central  New  York  which  the  White  Company 
drivers  had  pioneered  to  avoid  the  massive  breakups 
on  the  Army  truck  routes.  After  1  year  of  truck 
deliveries,  the  Otis  Elevator  Company  found  that  it 
had  saved  $100,000  in  the  cost  of  boxing  and  crating 
for  truck  shipments  as  compared  to  rail  shipment,  as 
well  as  a  great  deal  of  paper  work.  "\'\niere  6  days  to 
6  weeks  had  been  required  for  rail  delivery,  the  com- 
pany trucks  needed  only  24  hours  and  delivered  the 
goods  in  better  condition.  Because  of  the  shorter  de- 
livery time,  less  capital  was  tied  up  in  goods  in 
transit.^^ 

These  and  similar  experiences  by  hundreds  of  other 
shippers  permanently  changed  the  shipping  habits  of 
American  industry.  In  a  matter  of  a  few  months, 
the  railroads  lost  millions  of  tons  of  freight  business 
by  default — business  they  were  destined  never  to 
recover. 


Fresh  Vegetables   by  Mail 

The  Post  Office  Department  began  rural  mail  de- 
livery by  automobile  in  1915,  and  by  1917  a  consider- 
able number  of  the  43,562  rural  routes  were  motorized, 
but  of  these,  only  288  emanated  from  the  50  largest 
cities.*  ^° 

In  July  1916,  Congress  authorized  the  Postmaster 
General  to  conduct  experiments  in  three  or  more  com- 
munities to  determine  "the  most  practical  means  of 
extending  the  operations  of  the  parcel  post  in  the 
direction  of  promoting  the  marketing  of  farm  pro- 
ducts and  furthering  direct  transactions  between  pro- 
ducers and  consumers."  ^^ 

By  the  time  the  Government  established  the  first 
experimental  routes,  war  had  been  declared,  and  the 
pinch  on  railroad  cars  for  short-haul  shipments  was 
already  being  felt.  Although  the  service  was  not 
cheap    (14   cent   per   pound   for  hauls  averaging   50 


*  The  dispatch  of  rural  mail  by  automobile  began  July  1, 
1915,  at  Quarryville,  Pennsylvania.  The  vehicles  were  re- 
quired to  be  of  at  least  80  cubic  feet  capacity  and  able  to 
carry  800  pounds  of  mail."  In  1915  carriers  sei-ving  motor 
veliicle  routes  that  were  at  least  50  miles  long,  6  days  per 
week,  received  $1,800  per  year.  Carriers  .serving  horsedrawn 
vehicle  routes  at  least  24  miles  long  received  $1,200  per  year. 
All  carriers  were  required  to  furnish  their  own  transporta- 
tion." 


miles),  it  was  enthusiastically  received  by  farmers 
along  the  routes  and  widely  i^raised  in  the  press. 
Herbert  Hoover,  the  Federal  Food  Administrator, 
hailed  the  service  as  a  means  for  saving  food,  50 
percent  of  which  was  rotting  in  the  field  for  lack  of 
transportation.  Others  pointed  out  that  rural  express 
would  relieve  draft  animals  from  transportation  duty, 
releasing  land  devoted  to  growing  animal  fodder  for 
the  raising  of  human  food.  Still  others  envisioned 
public  food  markets  in  the  cities,  supplied  direct  from 
the  fields  by  parcel  post.  And,  of  course,  the  service 
would  enable  farmers  to  devote  more  time  to  raising 
food  and  less  time  to  taking  it  to  market.^* 

The  Government  established  eight  routes,  mostly 
in  the  Washington-Baltimore-Philadelphia  area,  and 
operated  them  with  19  Government-owned  1-ton 
trucks.  The  Department  kept  precise  records  of  all 
direct  and  indirect  expenses,  including  Department 
overhead  and  depreciation  on  the  vehicles.  For  the 
6  months  ending  May  31,  1918,  the  Postmaster  Gen- 
eral reported  to  Congress  that  only  one  route,  between 
Philadelphia  and  Atlantic  City,  had  lost  money  and 
that  the  operation  as  a  whole  had  grossed  $152,217  in 
6  months  against  total  expenses  of  $29,100,  for  net 
earnings  of  $123,118.^5 

Projecting  these  enormous  profits  on  a  theoretical 
nationwide  rural  express  network  of  10,000  miles,  the 
Postmaster  General  estimated  gross  revenues  of  $80 
million  per  year,  with  a  surplus  of  about  $40  million 
per  year  above  all  operating  and  Departmental  ex- 
penses. This  surplus,  he  recommended,  might  well 
be  spent  to  improve  the  roads  of  the  network  to  a 
high  standard  to  reduce  vehicle  operating  costs  and 
ensure  reliable  daily  service.  Such  roads  should  be 
of  concrete  or  brick,  at  least  16  feet  wide  and  9  inches 
thick,  and  would  cost  about  $20,000  per  mile,  or  $200 
million  for  the  network.^^ 

Earlier  in  the  2d  session  of  the  65th  Congress, 
Senator  Claude  A.  Swanson  of  Virginia  had  intro- 
duced a  bill  that  would  permit  the  Postmaster  General 
to  establish  a  Federal  network  of  motor  express  routes 
and  to  devote  one-half  of  the  gross  revenues  from 
these  routes  to  improve  them  for  motor  truck  opera- 
tion. Despite  the  statistical  support  of  the  Postmaster 
General's  optimistic  report,  this  bill  failed  in  commit- 
tee. Congress,  instead,  included  an  item  of  $300,000 
in  the  Post  OiRce  appropriation  for  fiscal  year  1919 
to  be  used  by  the  Postmaster  General  for  experiments 
in  motor  truck  delivery  in  the  vicinity  of  large  cities 
".  .  .  to  promote  the  conservation  of  food  products  and 
to  facilitate  the  collection  and  delivery  thereof  from 
producer  to  consumer,  and  the  delivery  of  articles 
necessary  in  the  production  of  such  food  products."  ^'' 

This  was  July  1918.  By  the  time  the  Postmaster 
General  came  back  to  Congress  with  his  next  report, 
the  war  had  ended  and  conditions  had  radically 
changed.  Private  enterprises  such  as  the  Farmers' 
Cooperative  Association  of  Harford  County  had 
moved  into  the  transportation  vacuum  the  Govern- 
ment hoped  to  fill  and  were  doing  the  job  for  much 
less  than  the  fourtli  class  mail  rate.  The  motor  route 
service  did  not  materially  increase  new  postal  busi- 
ness, and  the  service  was  made  to  show  a  profit  only 
by  diverting  fourtli  class  mail  to  the  Department's 
trucks  that  would  otherwise  have  gone  by  train.^* 


Post  Roads  Versus  Through   Roads 

The  first  impact  of  the  war  on  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  and  Rural  Engineering  was  a  loss  of  men, 
some  in  key  positions,  who  volunteered  for  military 
service.*  When  the  Secretary  of  War  requested  engi- 
neers to  plan  and  supervise  the  building  of  roads  for 
the  Army  cantonments.  Director  Page  assigned  18 
experienced  men  to  this  work  for  periods  of  a  year  or 
more.  Page  also  assigned  engineers  to  map  the  Army 
truck  routes  and  channeled  most  of  his  laboratory's 
efforts  into  war  work. 

Wliat  personnel  remained  after  these  losses  and  as- 
signments were  concentrated  on  the  Federal-aid  pro- 
gram. Although  severely  crippled  by  manpower 
shortages,  the  States  continued  to  submit  Federal-aid 
projects  for  approval  throughout  the  war.  By  July 
1918,  the  OPRRE  had  approved  572  projects,  totaling 
6,249  miles  in  length,  estimated  to  cost  $42.28  million, 
of  which  $16.05  million  was  Federal  aid.  However, 
only  five  projects,  totaling  17.6  miles,  had  actually 
been  completed. 

The  Federal  x\id  Road  Act  provided  that  the  Fed- 
eral funds  could  be  spent  only  in  the  construction  of 
"rural  post  roads,"  defined  as  "any  public  road  over 
which  the  United  States  mails  now  are  or  may  here- 
after be  transported,  excluding  every  street  and  road 
in  a  place  having  a  population,  as  shown  by  the  latest 
available  Federal  census,  of  two  thousand  five  hun- 
dred or  more,  except  that  portion  of  any  such  street 
or  road  along  which  the  houses  average  more  than 
two  hundred  feet  apart."  The  Act  also  provided  that 
the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  and  the  State  liighway 
departments  "shall  agree  upon  the  roads  to  be  con- 
structed and  the  character  and  method  of  construc- 
tion." 

The  Secretary,  acting  through  the  OPRRE,  at  the 
outset  of  the  program  tried  to  eliminate  haphazard 
roadbuilding  by  asking  each  State  to  submit  an  over- 
all plan  or  scheme  showing  where  the  State  proposed 
to  spend  its  share  of  the  5-year  Federal  appropria- 
tion. This  wise  requirement  forced  the  States  that 
did  not  already  have  established  highway  systems  to 
begin  classifying  their  highways  and  setting  up  sys- 
tems. This  kind  of  planning  and  the  organization 
and  strengthening  of  the  several  State  highway  de- 
partments were  the  principal  accomplishments  of  the 
first  2  years  of  the  Federal-aid  program.^^ 

Very  early  in  the  program  the  States  began  to  have 
difficulty  scheduling  improvements  to  their  major 
system  roads  that  would  also  follow  the  rural  post 
routes.  In  keeping  with  good  system  planning,  the 
State  trunkline  roads  were  laid  out  along  compara- 
tively direct  lines  between  county  seats  and  major 
cities.  The  post  routes,  on  the  other  hand,  meandered 
through  the  country  to  enable  the  carriers  to  serve 
the  greatest  nmnber  of  patrons  with  the  least  travel. 
The  Attorney  General  held  that  to  prove  the  post 
road  requirement  would  "require  the  submission  of 
evidence  to  show  that  the  mails  are  actually  carried 
over  the  road  proposed  to  be  improved  or  that  there 
is   a   reasonable   prospect   that   tliis   will   be   done." " 


*  Of  187  male  employees  on  the  rolls  when  wnv  was  de- 
clared, 52  or  28  percent  had  entered  the  military  service  by 
June  1918.     When  the  war  ended,  79  were  in  the  service. 


100 


The  OPRRE  made  as  liberal  an  interpretation  as 
possible  and  ruled  that  the  direct  route  could  be  fol- 
lowed as  long  as  it  also  substantially  followed  post 
routes  with  gaps  of  onl}'  a  mile  or  two  in  length. 

Yet  even  with  this  liberalized  interpretation,  some 
of  the  western  States  found  the  post  road  clause  an 
impossible  hurdle  to  clear.  In  most  of  them,  the  main 
highways  most  in  need  of  improvement  ran  through 
sparselj'  populated  prairies,  deserts,  and  mountains 
where  there  was  no  prospect  of  rural  post  routes  being 
needed  or  established  for  decades.  Nevada,  a  State 
as  large  as  all  of  New  England,  had  only  four  rural 
routes. 

The  industrialized  eastern  States  were  also  denied 
the  full  benefits  of  Federal  aid  by  the  provision  in 
the  Act  limiting  Federal  participation  to  50  percent 
of  the  cost  up  to  a  maximum  of  $10,000  per  mile. 
Many  of  the  eastern  States  were  beginning  to  build 
heavier  and  wider  pavements  and  these,  with  wartime 
inflation,  were  costing  $40,000  to  $50,000  per  mile. 

The  States  expressed  their  dissatisfaction  with  these 
provisions  of  the  Act  at  the  Richmond  meeting  of 
AASHO  in  December  1917,  but  the  Administration, 
preoccupied  with  conducting  the  war,  was  unwilling 
to  ask  Congress  for  corrective  legislation. 

The   Riff  in  the  Good    Roads   Movement 

The  battle  for  Federal  aid  in  the  64th  Congress  had 
been  a  contest  between  the  proponents  of  long-distance 
improved  highways  and  those  who  wanted  only  to  get 
the  farmer  out  of  the  mud.  Neither  side  was  really 
satisfied  with  the  compromise  embodied  in  the  1916 
Federal  Aid  Road  Act,  and  neither  side  approved 
wholly  of  the  OPRRE's  efforts  to  administer  the  Act. 
The  post  road  clause  was  the  major  concession  in  the 
law  for  the  local  roads  people,  and  the  OPRRE  very 
obviously  was  sympathetic  to  the  State  highway  de- 
partments' efforts  to  eliminate  compliance  with  it  as  a 
requirement  for  Federal  aid. 

The  long-distance  highway  boosters  regarded  the 
OPRRE's  efforts  to  get  the  States  to  designate  high- 
way systems  as  inadequate  to  ever  produce  a  national 
road  system.  In  a  number  of  States  the  systems  were 
so  extensive  that  it  would  take  decades  of  Federal 
aid  at  the  most  optimistic  rate  of  appropriation  to 
bring  them  up  to  an  acceptable  interstate  standard. 
And  even  with  the  benevolent  intervention  of  the 
OPRRE,  it  was  difficult  to  get  the  States  to  coordi- 
nate their  systems  with  their  neighbor  States.  The 
States  were  primarily  interested  in  State  systems,  not 
national  systems. 

Before  the  war  was  over,  the  national  road  advo- 
cates decided  to  cut  loose  from  Federal  aid  and  pres- 
sure Congress  for  a  national  system  under  Federal 
control.  They  supported  the  Postmaster  General's 
motor  express  route  proposal  as  a  step  in  the  right 
direction.  And  in  October  1918,  Senator  George  E. 
Chamberlain  of  Oregon  introduced  a  bill  "to  provide 
for  taking  over,  improvement,  relocation,  construc- 
tion, and  maintenance  of  a  system  of  National  high- 
ways and  State  highways,  designed  to  facilitate  the 
movement  of  troops,  equipment,  munitions,  and  sup- 
plies, and  to  promote  the  general  welfare  of  the  people 
of  the  United  States."  "    This  bill  was  buried  in  the 


Committee  on  Military  Affairs,  but  it  showed  which 
way  some  winds  were  blowing. 

In  October  1918,  the  influential  Engineering  News- 
Record,  which  had  formerly  favored  Federal  aid, 
came  out  for  a  national  highway  system,  declaring 
that  the  Federal-aid  projects  already  approved  by  the 
OPRRE  were  so  scattered  that  there  was  no  hope 
that  they  could  ever  be  connected  into  a  workable 
national  system.''-  The  editor  declared  that  "The 
Federal  road  administration  has  too  long  been  in  a 
subordinate  capacity,  lost  in  a  department — that  of 
Agriculture — whose  main  interests  are  foreign  to  road 
work,"  and  went  on  to  recommend  that  an  autonomous 
commission  similar  to  the  Interstate  Conunerce  Com- 
mission be  set  up  to  build  and  operate  national  high- 
ways." 

The   Postwar  Highway  Drive   Begins 

With  the  end  of  the  war  in  sight,  practically  all  of 
the  States  began  preparations  for  a  postwar  road 
program.  The  highway  atmosphere  in  late  1918  was 
entirely  different  from  what  it  had  been  before  the 
wai'.  In  Pennsylvania,  where  a  bond  issue  for  State 
highways  had  been  defeated  by  40,000  votes  in  1913, 
an  even  bigger  issue  for  $50  million  carried  by  180,000 
votes  in  November  1918.**  Illinois  proposed  a  $60 
million  bond  issue  to  pay  for  a  carefully  selected 
4,800-mile  system  of  trunk  highways,  and  it  carried 
by  a  large  majority.*^ 

In  November  1918,  Secretary  of  Agriculture  Hous- 
ton warned  that  the  unexpended  balances  from  the 
1916  Federal-aid  act  would  be  inadequate  to  carry  on 
an  effective  postwar  road  program  in  view  of  the 
enormous  damage  the  country's  roads  had  sustained 
during  the  war,  and  the  need  for  more  and  stronger 
roads.  He  recommended  larger  appropriations  from 
the  Federal  treasury. 

The  postwar  road  program  was  the  main  theme  of 
the  Joint  Highway  Congress  sponsored  by  the  Ameri- 
can Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  and  the 
Highway  Industries  Association  and  scheduled  to  be 
held  at  Chicago,  December  11  and  12,  1918. 

The  Congress  opened  under  a  pall  of  sadness  cast 
by  the  sudden  death  of  Logan  Waller  Page,  Director 
of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,*  and  the  foremost 
highway  engineer  of  the  United  States.  Page  had 
died  of  a  heart  attack  the  night  of  December  9,  1918, 
during  a  meeting  of  the  executive  committee  of 
AASHO,  to  the  dismay  of  the  State  highway  forces 
who  had  been  counting  on  him  to  lead  the  drive  for 
an  expanded  postwar  Federal-aid  program.  Page 
had  brought  to  the  meeting  a  Federal-aid  bill  that 
had  been  drafted  by  the  Administration  and  had  the 
support  of  AASHO.  It  provided  for  re-wording  the 
post  road  clause  of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916, 
for  authorizing  50  percent  Federal  participation  in 
the  cost  of  roads  with  no  upper  limit  and  for  increas- 
ing appropriations  by  a  total  of  $450  million  over  a 
4-year  period.  Those  favoring  the  continuation  of 
Federal  aid  planned  to  seek  the  endorsement  of  the 
Joint  Highway  Congress  for  the  Page  bill. 


*  On  July  1,  1918,  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural 
Engineering  had  been  elevated  to  the  status  of  a  bureau  in 
the  Department  of  Agriculture. 


101 


On  the  other  side,  the  principal  spokesman  for  na- 
tional highways  was  Editor  E.  J.  Mehren  of  the 
Engineering  News-Record.  He  outlined  a  plan  for  a 
national  highway  system  of  50,000  miles  consisting 
of  five  east-west  routes  and  ten  north-south  routes, 
which  would  include  about  2  percent  of  all  U.S.  roads. 
This  system  would  give  every  State  at  least  one 
through  north-south  route  and  one  through  east-west 
route  and  would  cost  about  $1.25  billion.  With  con- 
gressional appropriations  of  $100  million  per  year,  it 
would  take  12i/^  years  to  complete.  Mehren  recom- 
mended that  Congress  set  up  a  Federal  Highway 
Commission  to  build,  maintain,  and  operate  the 
system.*® 

Still  another  plan  was  unveiled  by  James  I.  Blak- 
slee,  Fourth  Assistant  Postmaster  General,  for  a 
Postal  Motor  Express  System  of  15,000  miles  costing 
about  $450  million  which,  he  claimed,  if  authorized 
by  Congress,  would  pay  for  itself  out  of  surplus  postal 
revenues. 

The  Joint  Highway  Congress,  dominated  by  the 
American  Automobile  Association,  the  National 
Automobile  Chamber  of  Commerce,  representatives  of 
the  emerging  trucking  industry,  and  other  urban  inter- 
ests, passed  a  resolution  favoring  the  Mehren  plan  for 
a  national  system.  The  outnumbered  AASHO  dele- 
gates then  met  in  separate  session,  endorsed  the  Page 
bill  and  went  on  record  as  having  "favored  the  mak- 
ing of  all  expenditures  under  the  Federal-aid  plan, 
the  routes  in  the  Federal  system  being  selected  by  the 
various  states  and  connected  at  the  state  lines  by  the 
Federal  department  in  cases  where  connections  are  not 
made  by  the  adjoining  states."  *^ 

Unsuccessful    Attempt    in    Congress    to    Extend    Federal 
Aid  for  3  Years 

The  Page  bill,  sponsored  by  Senator  Swanson  of 
Virginia,  was  one  of  six  highway  measures  introduced 
when  Congress  convened  in  December  1918.  One  of 
these,  also  sponsored  by  Swanson,  would  authorize 
the  Postmaster  General  to  set  aside  one-half  of  the 
net  proceeds  from  the  operation  of  motor  parcel  post 
for  the  improvement  of  a  system  of  Federal  motor 
express  routes.  Another,  by  Senator  Reed  Smoot  of 
Utah,  would  establish  a  National  Academy  of  High- 
way and  Bridge  Engineering  in  Washington.  The 
others  were  Federal-aid  bills  similar  to  the  Page  bill 
providing  for  augmentation  of  the  funds  provided  in 
the  original  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  for  fiscal  years 
1920  and  1921  and  an  extension  of  Federal  aid  through 
fiscal  year  1924. 

This  last  authority  was  important,  for  it  would 
insure  the  continuation  of  the  policy  of  Federal  as- 
sistance and  enable  the  States  to  plan  an  orderly 
program.  It  was,  however,  opposed  by  those  who 
were  against  Federal  aid  to  highways,  and  they  were 
successful  in  confining  the  funds  authorized  to  fiscal 
years  1919,  1920,  and  1921  and  reducing  the  total 
amount  to  $200  million.  In  addition,  the  rural  road 
advocates  imposed  a  limit  of  $20,000  per  mile  on 
Federal  participation. 

In  this  form,  the  road  legislation  was  added  as  a 
rider  to  tlie  Post  Office  Appropriation  Bill  for  1920 
(40  Stat  1252),  along  with  anotlier  provision  author- 
izing the  Secretary  of  War  to  transfer  to  the  Secre- 


tary of  Agriculture  "all  available  war  material, 
equipment,  and  supplies  not  needed  for  the  purposes 
of  the  War  Department,  but  suitable  for  use  in  the 
improvement  of  highways,  and  that  the  same  be  dis- 
tributed among  the  highway  departments  of  the  sev- 
eral states  to  be  used  on  roads  constructed  in  whole 
or  in  part  by  Federal  aid. . . ." 

When  this  measure  reached  the  floor  of  the  House, 
the  $200  million  appropriation  encountered  only  token 
resistance.  Congress  clearly  felt  some  obligation  to 
help  repair  the  damage  inflicted  on  the  State  roads 
by  war  traffic.  "The  interstate  character  of  traffic,  as 
well  as  its  excessive  volume,  render  inequitable  the 
placing  of  the  cost  burden  on  individual  States."  *^ 
Also,  there  was  consensus  that  public  improvements 
would  be  needed  to  stimulate  business  and  provide 
employment  for  returning  veterans.  Senator  Swanson 
urged  road  improvements  as  a  weapon  for  gaining  a 
place  for  the  United  States  in  world  markets.  Good 
roads  he  said  would  save  American  producers  $700 
million  annually  and  enable  them  to  undersell  foreign 
competitors. 

The  bill  proposed  that  the  term  "rural  post  road" 
be  construed  to  mean  "any  public  road  a  major  por- 
tion of  which  is  now  used,  or  can  be  used,  or  forms  a 
connecting  link  not  to  exceed  ten  miles  in  length  of 
any  road  or  roads  now  or  hereafter  used  for  the  trans- 
portation of  the  United  States  mails."  Unexpectedly, 
this  clause  aroused  considerable  opposition  from  the 
floor,  and  Senator  Charles  S.  Thomas  of  Colorado 
declared  that  the  bill  "commits  the  United  States  to 
the  improvement  of  every  cattle  trail,  every  cow  path, 
and  every  right  of  way  in  the  United  States."  Sena- 
tor James  W.  Wadsworth,  Jr.,  of  New  York  said,  "I 
am  convinced  that  any  road  that  can  be  made  suitable 
for  carrying  mail  includes  any  and  every  road  in  the 
United  States."  *^  This,  of  course,  was  exactly  the 
effect  desired  by  the  Administration  when  it  proposed 
the  amendment.  The  new  post  road  definition  ended 
the  pretense  that  Federal  aid  for  highways  rested 
even  in  part  on  Congress'  constitutional  power  to 
establish  a  postal  system.  The  feeble  opposition  was 
unable  to  change  the  bill,  and  it  became  law  on  Feb- 
ruary 28,  1919. 

Only  a  few  days  before  the  passage  of  the  Post 
Office  Appropriation  Bill  Senator  Charles  E.  Town- 
send  of  Michigan  introduced  his  own  highway  bill  to 
establish  a  Federal  Highway  Commission  of  seven 
members,  each  to  be  paid  $10,000  per  year,  with  power 
to  establish  a  Federal  highway  system  of  not  less  than 
two  trunkline  roads  in  each  State,  suitably  connected 
to  the  trunklines  of  adjacent  States  and  counties. 
This  bill,  although  lost  by  adjournment,  was  an  omen 
of  the  coming  battle  over  Federal  aid  in  the  66th 
Congress.^" 

Thomas  H.  MacDonald  Selected  to  Head  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads 

Wlnile  the  Page  bill  was  working  its  way  through 
Congress,  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  was  trying  to 
fill  the  vacant  position  of  Director  of  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads.  This  was  not  an  easy  task,  partly  be- 
cause of  the  prestige  the  position  had  acquired  under 
Page  and  partly  because  of  the  meager  salary  of 
$4,500  Congress  had  allowed  for  the  job,  which  was 


102 


With  roadbuilding  severely  limited  during  the  war  and  a  slow  postwar  start,  many  roads 
tcere  still  a  quagmire  each  spring. 


far  below  the  compensation  of  many  State  highway 
executives.  The  American  Association  of  State  High- 
way Officials  had  recommended  Thomas  H.  MacDon- 
ald,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Iowa  State  Highway 
Commission  for  the  position,  and  MacDonald  was 
willing  to  accept  if  more  adequate  compensation  could 
be  provided. 

When  nearly  4  months  had  passed  without  filling 
the  position,  the  highway  departments  began  to  get 
restless,  and  some  suggested  that  the  hiatus  in  direc- 
tion was  affecting  the  work  of  the  Bureau  and  delay- 
ing project  approvals.  This  was  denied,  and  on 
April  1,  1919,  MacDonald  was  appointed  "engineer 
in  immediate  charge  of  the  work  under  the  Federal 
aid  road  act''  pending  a  reexamination  by  Congress 
of  the  Director's  compensation.^^  On  July  1,  1919, 
he  was  appointed  to  fill  the  vacant  directorship,  with 
the  title  of  Chief  of  Bureau,  at  a  salary  of  $6,000 
per  year. 

Highway  Building  Gets  Off  to  a  Slow  Start 

Less  than  half  a  million  dollars  of  the  funds  au- 
thorized by  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  had  been  paid 
out  to  the  States  when  the  war  ended  in  November 

1918.  This  left  $29.5  million  available  for  fiscal  year 

1919,  to  which  Congress  added  another  $50  million  in 
the  Post  Office  Appropriation  Bill.  After  deducting 
3  percent  for  BPR  Administration,  about  $77  million 
were  available  to  the  States  for  their  1919  programs." 

Large  as  this  sum  seemed,  it  was  only  a  small  part 
of  the  funds  voted  for  roads  in  1919.     Besides  the 


$110  million  already  authorized  in  Pennsylvania  and 
Illinois,  Michigan,  California,  Oregon,  South  Dakota, 
Utah,  Wyoming,  and  Nevada  authorized  another 
$114.8  million  worth  of  bonds,  and  bond  issues  carried 
in  dozens  of  counties,  some  for  very  large  sums.*  ^^ 
Without  counting  the  cities,  which  were  also  prepar- 
ing large  street  programs,  the  funds  available  for  new 
construction  in  1919  were  well  over  $400  million.'^ 
This  was  about  five  times  the  amount  spent  under 
State  supervision  in  1918  for  new  construction. 

For  a  variety  of  reasons,  the  States  were  slow  get- 
ting started  on  their  1919  programs.  Many  did  not 
have  plans  ready,  and  in  some  States,  the  bond  funds 
and  Federal-aid  matching  money  did  not  become 
available  until  the  construction  season  was  well  ad- 
vanced. Early  in  the  year  there  was  a  shortage  of 
trained  highway  engineers.**  There  was  also  a  short- 
age of  contractors  and  construction  equipment. 


*  For  example,  on  July  1,  1919,  St.  Louis  County,  Minne- 
sota, approved  $7.5  million  of  road  bonds  by  a  9  to  1  margin. 
This  was  the  largest  sum  ever  authorized  for  roads  in  any 
county  of  the  United  States  up  to  that  time.  About  the  same 
time  the  Dallas  County,  Texas,  voters  approved  an  issue  of 
$6.5  million  for  road  and  bridge  bonds.  In  both  of  these 
States,  the  counties  were  required  to  match  Federal-aid  funds 
rather  than  the  State." 

**  At  this  time  about  one-fifth  of  all  the  trained  highway 
engineers  were  still  in  the  Army.  The  French  Government 
had  requested  the  United  States  to  reconstruct  the  roads 
worn  out  by  American  military  operations,  and  to  do  this  the 
Army  l<ept  the  engineer  troops  overseas  the  best  part  of  the 
summer  of  1919. 


103 


By  the  time  road  construction  began  to  gain  some 
momentum,  the  annual  movement  of  coal  from  the 
mines  to  markets  had  begun  and  open  top  railroad 
cars,  which  had  been  plentiful  in  the  spring,  became 
scarce  once  again.  This  cut  into  the  supplies  of  con- 
struction materials,  and  many  contractors  were  unable 
to  complete  their  contracts  before  winter  set  in.  "When 
the  season  ended,  no  more  than  half  of  the  1919  road 
program  had  been  realized,  and  only  $2.7  million  of 
the  available  Federal  aid  had  been  earned  by  the 
States. 

The  failure  of  the  States  to  measure  up  to  public 
expectations  was  widely  criticized.  In  defense,  A.  R. 
Hirst,  President  of  the  American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials,  said, 

Never,  I  believe,  since  the  days  of  early  railroad  de- 
velopment have  the  American  people  been  so  determined 
to  change  instantly  their  means  of  transport  and  not 
even  then  were  they  so  willing  to  pay  the  cost,  provided 
they  could  get  the  results. 

What  are  the  results  they  are  now  demanding  and 
what  are  some  of  the  problems  that  grow  from  these 
demands? 

They  are  expecting  the  States  which  had  no  highway 
organizations  three  or  even  two  years  ago,  which  had 
done  no  preliminary  work  and  in  some  of  which  hardly 
a  mile  of  modern  rural  highway  had  ever  been  built,  to 
create  an  organization  full  sprung  from  the  earth  (like 
our  imaginary  defensive  and  aggressive  army  was  to 
spring)  and  to  build  instantly  hundreds  of  miles  of 
modern  roads  costing  millions  upon  millions  of  dollars. 
In  the  older  States  in  the  highway  game,  better  prepared 
with  organizations  and  contractors,  and  with  some  knowl- 
edge of  materials  and  construction  conditions,  they  are 
asking  us  to  double,  triple,  or  quadruple  our  annual  out- 
put of  roads.^ 

The  Debacle  of  1920 

Shutting  their  eyes  to  the  obvious  impossibility  of 
performance,  some  States  announced  1920  road  pro- 
grams that  were  even  larger  than  those  for  1919. 
Additional  bond  issues,  plus  the  Federal  aid  author- 
ized for  fiscal  year  1920  had,  according  to  BPR  esti- 
mates, boosted  the  road  funds  available  to  the  States 
and  counties  to  at  least  $663  million.  A  few  sober 
voices  warned  of  trouble  ahead  and  advised  the  States 
to  revise  their  programs  downward  to  a  realistic  level 
or  risk  loss  of  public  confidence.^^  Others  predicted 
that  the  highway  program  would  put  unbearable 
strains  on  the  national  economy  which  was  already 
suffering  from  shortages  of  every  kind.  In  particular, 
they  said  the  competition  for  labor  might  lead  to  an 
agricultural  disaster  if  the  farmers  could  not  get  their 
crops  planted  and  harvested. 

Despite  the  warnings,  the  States  began  advertising 
road  projects  on  a  massive  scale  early  in  1920,  so  as 
to  be  ready  for  construction  as  soon  as  the  weather 
permitted  in  the  spring.  Very  soon  the  market  for 
road  contracts  was  saturated;  and  as  contractors  be- 
came loaded,  bids  fell  off  and  bid  prices  escalated 
alarmingly.  High-type  roads  that  had  cost  $20,000 
per  mile  before  the  war,  and  which  went  for  $40,000 
per  mile  in  1919,  went  up  to  $49,000  and  even  higher. 
In  Pennsylvania  bids  ranged  from  $52,500  to  $91,500 
per  mile  for  concrete  roads. 

In  March  1919,  the  State  Auditor  of  Ohio  asked 
the  Highway  Department  to  hold  up  conti*act  awards 
pending  a  readjustment  of  economic  conditions  after 


13  contracts  for  44  miles  of  highway  were  offered  with 
only  two  bids  received.  In  May,  the  New  York  State 
Highway  Department  withdrew  all  highway  projects 
not  already  awarded  to  contract  "until  the  situation 
shows  a  decided  change  for  the  better."  Also  in  May, 
the  Minnesota  Commissioner  of  Highways  ordered 
the  counties  to  stop  letting  new  work  and  concentrate 
on  finishing  projects  already  under  contract. 

Bond  interest  rates  began  to  rise  early  in  1920.  In 
April  the  City  of  Pittsburgh  received  no  bids  for  a 
proposed  issue  of  4i/^  percent  improvement  bonds. 
California  was  unable  to  sell  its  highway  bonds  be- 
cause State  law  fixed  interest  at  not  over  4i/^  percent 
and  prohibited  the  sale  of  State  bonds  below  par. 
While  the  legislature  wrestled  with  the  problem,  all 
construction  and  even  advance  planning  came  to  a 
stop. 

With  the  opening  of  the  construction  season,  other 
troubles  developed  in  abundance.  Contractors  who 
had  taken  contracts  anticipating  delivery  of  equip- 
ment in  the  spring  sat  idle  waiting  for  the  equipment. 
(The  road  equipment  producers  were  themselves  hav- 
ing labor  and  materials  problems  and  were  far  behind 
on  their  orders.)  Open  top  railway  cars  became 
scarce  early  in  the  season  because  of  construction 
demand,  and  not  enough  cars  were  available  for  haul- 
ing coal,  causing  localized  coal  famines.  Because  of 
coal  shortage,  some  of  the  portland  cement  mills  re- 
duced production,  causing  a  shortage  of  cement,  with 
contractors  scrambling  wildly  for  the  available  sup- 
plies at  soaring  prices. 

The  cement  shortage  was  particularly  serious  to  the 
industrial  eastern  and  north  central  States,  which  had 
suffered  the  most  damage  from  heavy  trucking  during 
the  war.  They  were  convinced  that  only  concrete 
pavements  or  brick  surfaces  on  concrete  bases  could 
stand  up  to  heavy  truck  traffic,  and  they  were  also 
dominated  by  the  idea  that  their  main  roads  should 
be  of  "permanent  construction"  that  would  "outlive 
the  bonds." 

Delaware  and  Rhode  Island,  unable  to  get  portland 
cement,  changed  their  designs  to  bituminous  concrete 
to  utilize  asphalt,  which  was  still  in  reasonably  good 
supply.  Wisconsin,  which  had  planned  a  400-mile 
cement  concrete  road  program,  cut  back  to  200  miles. 

To  add  to  the  States'  and  contractors'  difficulties, 
the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  in  June  1920, 
gave  the  coal  industry  priority  on  open  top  cars,  shut- 
ting down  scores  of  road  projects  at  the  height  of  the 
construction  season. 

To  keep  going  and  to  appease  the  public  demand 
for  highway  construction,  some  States  resorted  to 
methods  that  would  never  have  been  countenanced  in 
normal  times.  Some  let  contracts  on  a  cost-plus- 
percentage,  or  cost-plus-a-fixed  fee  basis.  Others  set 
up  force-account  or  day-labor  organizations  to  do 
their  own  work.  Temporary  surfaces  were  laid  on 
many  projects  in  the  expectation  of  better  conditions 
in  1921  under  which  to  do  the  final  paving. '^^ 

When  the  construction  season  ended  in  December 
1920,  not  more  than  one-quarter  of  the  anticipated 
program  had  been  realized,  and  in  some  States,  the 
accomplishment  was  less  than  20  percent.  However, 
it  was  possible  to  salvage  some  consolation  from  what 
appeared  to  be  a  massive  failure. 


104 


First,  the  Federal-aid  program  had  done  much  bet- 
ter than  in  any  previous  year  with  total  payments  to 
the  States  of  about  $35.44  million  as  compared  to  only 
$4.66  million  in  the  previous  3  years.^^ 

Then,  curtailed  construction  programs  allowed  the 
States  to  put  more  engineers  on  preparing  surveys 
and  plans  for  future  work.  Because  of  this  enforced 
breathing  spell,  the  States  were  able  to  get  the  un- 
precedented number  of  1,286  projects,  totaling  10,826 
miles,  ready  for  contract — twice  as  many  as  in  all  the 
previous  years  of  the  Federal-aid  program.  The  esti- 
mated total  cost  of  these  projects  was  $197.6  million, 
with  a  Federal  sliare  of  $85.9  million.  This,  accord- 
ing to  Chief  MacDonald,  was  a  very  desirable  ac- 
complishment : 

...  it  has  been  fortunate  for  the  future  stability  of 
the  roadbuilding  program  that  because  of  the  limitations 
imposed  there  has  been  sufficient  time  to  get  the  neces- 
sary engineering  work  done  much  more  thoroughly  than 
would  have  been  possible  had  we  gone  hastily  into  a 
heavy  construction  program."" 

And  finally,  there  was  a  rather  general  feeling  that 
the  slowdown  would  benefit  everyone  in  the  long  run 
by  taking  the  inflationary  heat  off  labor  rates  and 
materials  prices.  The  inability  to  get  work  under 
contract  would  almost  certainly  allow  construction 
prices  to  stabilize  so  that  the  same  funds  would  later 
buy  more  roads  and  bridges. 

In  the  perspective  of  later  events,  the  most  signifi- 
cant development  of  1919  and  1920  was  a  tremendous 
expansion  of  the  highway  construction  business  and 
the  manufacture  of  road  machinery.  Encouraged  by 
the  prospect  of  a  huge  postwar  highway  program, 
literally  hundreds  of  new  contractors  entered  the 
highway  field,  and  the  old  ones  that  had  survived  the 
war  greatly  expanded  their  capacity.  Under  the 
stimulus  of  high  labor  rates  and  acute  labor  shortage, 
the  construction  industry  began  an  astounding  mech- 
anization which  not  only  arrested  the  inflation  in 
road  prices,  but  in  a  few  years  brought  them  down  to 
relatively  low  levels. 

Federal  Aid  In  Kind — The  War  Surplus  Equipment 

At  the  end  of  the  war,  the  United  States  Govern- 
ment was  the  largest  owner  of  motor  trucks  in  the 
world,  by  a  wide  margin,  and  most  of  these  vehicles 
were  surplus  to  the  peacetime  needs  of  the  Army. 
To  the  motor  industry,  this  huge  surplus  of  vehicles 
was  a  threat  hanging  over  the  postwar  truck  market. 
The  highway  people,  on  the  other  hand,  looked  upon 
these  vehicles  as  a  possible  way  to  replace  the  vehicles 
worn  out  during  the  war. 

Congress  resolved  the  dilemma  in  four  acts  author- 
izing and  directing  the  Secretary  of  War  to  transfer 
to  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  all  vehicles,  construc- 
tion equipment,  and  supplies  not  needed  by  the  mili- 
tary but  suitable  for  use  in  improving  the  highways 
for  distribution  among  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments. The  only  conditions  imposed  were  that  the 
States  must  request  tlie  equipment,  pay  transportation 
charges  from  Avliere  it  was  stored,  and  agree  not  to 
resell  it. 

In  June  1919,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  acting 
for  the  Secretary,  allocated  20,519  motor  trucks  to  the 


This  2-ton  Army  ordinance  truck  was  converted  into  a  dump 
truck  for  highway  construction  use. 

States;  and  by  the  end  of  July,  a  third  of  these  had 
been  delivered  to  them.  By  October  1920,  a  total  of 
22,719  surplus  vehicles  had  been  delivered.  This 
windfall  was  a  tremendous  boost  to  the  maintenance 
efforts  of  the  States  and  counties,  for  it  enabled  them 
to  haul  stone  and  gravel  for  repairs  when  railway 
cars  were  unobtainable. 

By  1921  the  flow  of  war  surplus  to  the  States  had 
become  a  broad  stream,  including  not  only  motor 
trucks,  "Fords,"  and  autos,  but  shop  equipment,  spare 
parts,  and  construction  equipment  of  all  kinds  from 
hand  shovels  to  steam  shovels.  Over  20,000  tons  of 
explosives  worth  $10  million  were  distributed  and  en- 
thusiastically applied  to  highwaj'  construction  and 
quarry  operations.  One  construction  superintendent 
declared  "The  results  of  TXT  in  rock  blasting  are  so 
far  superior  to  those  of  any  other  explosive  that  we 


105 


have  found  that  an  experienced  powderman  who  has 
once  used  TNT  can  hardly  be  induced  to  use  anything 

else."  «i 

The  massive  distribution  was  substantially  com- 
pleted in  1925  by  which  time  equipment  and  supplies 
worth  $215  million  had  been  given  to  the  States  and 
the  BPR  had  retained  foi-  its  own  use  equipment 
worth  another  $7.8  million.®^ 

The  Defects  of  the  Federal-Aid  Program  Exposed 

The  Federal-aid  forces  suffered  serious  defections 
in  April  1919,  when  a  group  of  national  road  advo- 
cates formed  the  Federal  Highway  Council.^^  One 
of  the  organizers  of  this  group  was  highly  respected 
Henry  G.  Shirley,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Maryland 
State  Roads  Commission  and  one  of  the  founders  of 
AASHO.  The  avowed  purpose  of  the  Council  was 
to  get  Congress  to  set  up  a  system  of  national  high- 
ways under  Federal  control  such  as  that  proposed  by 
the  Townsend  bill.  The  backing  for  such  a  system 
came  principally  from  the  eastern  and  north  central 
States  that  had  suffered  the  most  from  wartime  traffic. 
Most  of  these  States  had  well-defined,  limited  State 
highway  systems  and  strong  highway  departments; 
and  they  had  for  years  concentrated  much  of  their 
money  on  main  intercity  highways  which  were  under 
the  direct  control  of  and  maintained  by  the  State. 
In  these  States  Federal  aid  had  been  applied  to  the 
through  routes  with  good  effect. 

The  situation  was  quite  different  in  17  southern, 
prairie,  and  western  States  in  which  the  counties  were 
still  the  basic  political  units  for  building  and  main- 
taining roads.  These  States  had  created  weak  high- 
way departments  or  commissions  to  receive  and 
distribute  the  Federal-aid  funds  and  had  given  them 
some  powers  to  approve  or  disapprove  standards,  but 
these  departments  generally  lacked  the  power  to  ini- 
tiate projects  and  so  to  place  the  funds  where  they 
were  most  needed.  Even  worse,  the  legislatures  of 
some  States  had  directed  that  the  Federal  funds  must 
be  subapportioned  among  the  counties  according  to  a 
formula  similar  to  the  Federal-aid  formula  (14  ac- 
cording to  area,  %  according  to  population,  and  % 
according  to  post  road  mileage).  This  split  the  lim- 
ited amount  of  the  State's  apportionment  into  frag- 
ments, each  too  small  for  a  satisfactory  project,  a 
process  that,  according  to  Henry  Shirley,  would  re- 
sult in  these  States  being  "spotted  with  and  not  linked 
by  Federally  constructed  highways."  "*  In  one  south- 
ern State  a  sparsely  populated  county  got  only  $4,000 
of  Federal  aid  in  one  year  for  its  portion  of  the  State 
highway  system.  At  this  rate,  according  to  Shirley, 
it  would  take  100  years  to  complete  one  road  across 
the  county  even  though  this  road  might  also  be  an 
important  link  between  important  cities  in  adjoining 
States. 

Minnesota  and  Kansas  were  prohibited  by  their 
constitutions  from  engaging  in  works  of  internal  im- 
provement, and  sonio  southern  States  were  legally 
unable  to  incur  bonded  debt.    In  these  and  a  number 


916     THE    STATE   LINE 


A  drawback  of  the  1916  Federal  Air  Road  Act  was  that 
federally  aided  roads  need  not  have  been  connected. 

of  other  States,  the  counties  were  required  to  put  up 
all  or  part  of  the  matching  funds  for  Federal  aid  and 
also  to  pay  for  maintaining  the  roads  afterward. 
This  policy,  according  to  the  director  of  the  American 
Automobile  Association's  Good  Roads  Board,  resulted 
in  giving  good  ".  .  .  roads  in  rich  counties  and  in 
pauperizing  poor  counties."  ®^  Another  result  was 
that  the  completed  roads  in  the  poor  counties  were 
often  poorly  maintained  and  there  was  little  the  State 
highway  departments  could  do  about  it  other  than 
threaten  to  withhold  future  Federal-aid  funds. 

To  establish  eligibility  for  Federal  aid,  the  Secre- 
tary of  Agriculture  had  required  all  States  to  desig- 
nate State  systems  of  main  roads  on  which  the  Federal 
funds  would  be  spent.  These  systems  totaled  214,000 
miles,  or  8  percent  of  all  U.S.  roads.  However,  for 
individual  States,  the  system  mileage  varied  from  less 
than  5  percent  up  to  as  much  as  15  percent  of  the  total 
existing  mileage;  and  in  some  of  the  latter  States  the 
systems  were  so  diffuse  that  it  would  take  years  to 
improve  them,  and  even  then  they  would  not  provide 
reasonably  direct  routes  to  important  places  in  neigh- 
boring States. 

Critics  of  Federal  aid  also  liked  to  point  out  that, 
according  to  the  official  reports  of  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads,  three-quarters  of  the  road  mileage  im- 
proved with  Federal  aid  had  low-  or  intermediate- 


106 


type  surfaces  such  as  earth,  sand-clay,  gravel,  or 
macadam  which  were  incapable  of  carrying  heavy 
truck  traffic  without  excessive  maintenance,  and  were, 
therefore,  unsuitable  as  long-distance  national  roads. 
(However,  the  same  reports  showed  that  65  percent 
of  the  funds  were  spent  for  high-type  roads  such  as 
concrete  and  brick.) 

Chief  MacDonald  was  well  aware  of  these  short- 
comings when  lie  assumed  office  in  1919.  He  appre- 
ciated the  need  for  a  connected  system  of  interstate 
highways,  but  he  did  not  believe  that  a  separate  na- 
tional sj'stem  under  a  Federal  commission  or  depart- 
ment was  the  way  to  achieve  it.  Such  a  system,  he 
thought,  would  eventually  absorb  a  very  large  part 
of  the  funds  Congress  was  willing  to  vote  for  roads 
and,  thus,  weaken  Federal  aid  to  the  States.  Mac- 
Donald  also  questioned  the  assumption  that  long- 
distance highways  were  necessary  for  national  defense, 
and  in  June  1920,  he  wrote : 

There  is  no  support  for  the  assumption  that  long  trans- 
continental roads  will  be  needed  for  military  defense,  a 
transcontinental  road  which  merely  crosses  the  continent 
is  of  little  military  value.  What  is  needed  is  a  series  of 
roads  connecting  all  important  depots,  mobilization,  and 
industrial  centers,  which,  as  thus  connected,  may  give  us 
a  transcontinental  route  eventually ;  l)ut  the  transconti- 
nental feature  is  of  secondary  importance." 

The  real  need,  in  his  mind,  was  to  strengthen  the 
State  highway  departments  by  giving  them  full  con- 
trol over  both  the  Federal-aid  matching  funds  and  the 
maintenance  of  Federal-aid  highways.  In  time,  he 
believed  long-distance  highways  would  come  into 
existence  as  the  States  improved  their  trunk  highways, 
provided  they  could  be  persuaded  to  agree  on  a  re- 
stricted mileage  of  interstate  roads  on  which  to  con- 
centrate the  Federal-aid  funds.  The  immediate  prob- 
lem was  to  bring  about  such  an  agreement  and,  thus, 
blunt  the  arguments  of  the  national  road  advocates. 

The  BPR  Begins  National  System  Studies 

MacDonald's  handling  of  this  problem  was  typical 
of  his  approach  to  many  later  ones.  First,  he  ob- 
tained the  support  of  tlie  State  highway  departments 
by  persuading  Secretary  Houston  to  set  up  a  Federal- 
Aid  Advisory  Committee  of  six  members  recom- 
mended by  the  Executive  Board  of  AASHO,  of  which 
MacDonald  himself  was  a  member.®^  The  members 
of  the  Advisory  Board  were  from  all  parts  of  the 
country,  and  they  all  favored  limited  State  road  sys- 
tems under  the  complete  control  of  strong  highway 
departments. 

MacDonald  then  asked  the  War  Plans  Division  of 
the  Army  General  Staff  and  the  Corps  of  Engineers 
to  cooperate  with  the  BPR  to  select  those  highways 
that  were  of  national  strategic  or  military  import- 
ance; and  when  the  military  accepted  this  invitation, 
he  supplied  them  with  maps  of  all  the  States*  on 
which  the  BPR  had  plotted  the  tentative  road  systems 
submitted  by  the  States  and  also  all  of  the  approved 
Federal-aid  projects.^*  ** 


*  These  base  maps  were  prepared  to  a  scale  of  approxi- 
mately 8  miles  to  the  inch  by  the  Geological  Survey.  When 
that  agency's  appropriation  was  exhausted,  MacDonald  placed 
five  of  its  cartographers  on  the  BPR  payroll  to  finish  the  job. 


These  preparations  completed,  MacDonald  an- 
nounced in  March  1920,  that  the  BPR,  with  support 
of  the  Advisory  Committee  was  going  to  make  a 
nationwide  survey  of  the  roads  of  the  country  and  a 
classification  of  all  highways  in  respect  to  their  im- 
portance and  character  of  service."®  This  was  neces- 
sary, he  said,  because  the  rate  of  improvement  of  the 
public  roads  is  much  slower  than  the  public  is  de- 
manding; yet. 

There  must  come  a  realization  that  only  a  percentage 
of  the  resources  demanded  for  increasing  the  rate  of 
road  production  can  be  provided  for  this  purpose,  and  so 
the  production  of  roads  must  be  studied  and  programs 
determined  the  same  as  for  any  large  industrial  under- 
taliing,  and  in  order  that  the  roads  which  meet  the 
greatest  economic  needs  will  receive  first  consideration." 

The  survey,  MacDonald  said,  would  enable  the 
Bureau  and  the  States  to  segregate  the  roads  into 
systems  according  to  their  national.  State,  county,  or 
local  importance,  determine  their  needs  for  improve- 
ment, and  allocate  the  costs  of  improvement  and 
maintenance  between  the  systems. 

Meantime,  the  States  were  approaching  a  serious 
financial  situation.  Under  the  Bankhead  Act  of  1916 
and  the  Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  of  1919,  Con- 
gress had  provided  funds  for  Federal  aid  only  through 
fiscal  year  1921.  When  the  2d  session  of  the  66th 
Congress  opened  in  January  1920,  Senator  Chamber- 
lain of  Oregon  introduced  an  Administration  bill 
backed  by  AASHO  which  would  have  provided  $100 
million  per  year  for  Federal  aid  in  fiscal  years  1921, 
1922,  1923,  and  1924,  with  the  provision  that  the 
money  be  concentrated  on  an  adequate  national  high- 
way system  selected  by  the  States  and  connected  at 
the  State  lines.  Senator  Townsend  also  introduced 
his  proposal  for  a  Federal  highway  commission  and 
a  national  highway  system. 

In  committee,  a  measure  known  as  the  Sells  bill, 
which  provided  funds  for  only  fiscal  year  1922,  was 
substituted  for  the  Chamberlain  bill  and  was  then 
passed  by  the  House  by  a  margin  of  almost  8  to  1. 
However,  it  failed  narrowly  in  the  Senate,  and  Con- 
gress adjourned  without  passing  a  highway  bill. 
MacDonald  warned  of  hardship  ahead  for  the  States : 

The  fact  that  a  new  apportionment  of  funds  was  not 
made  in  January  1921,  made  it  impossible  for  the  States 
to  maintain  an  unbroken  continuity  of  policy  and  admin- 
istration in  respect  to  Federal-aid  work,  and  this  condi- 
tion has  resulted  in  an  unprecedented  number  of  with- 
drawals, cancellations,  and  modifications  of  existing 
projects  as  the  States  have  endeavored  to  adjust  their 
programs  to  a  reduced  rate  of  expenditure.  This  condi- 
tion has  emphasized  the  fact  that  in  so  large  and  im- 
portant a  national  policy  as  Federal  aid  implies,  the 
action  of  the  Federal  Government  should  as  nearly  as 
possible  be  uniform,  consistent,  and  prompt.  The  prob- 
able cost  of  administering  Federal  aid  in  the  several 
States  will  no  doubt  be  appreciably  increased,  owing  to 
the  fact  that  the  States  do  not  yet  know  whether  Federal 
aid  will  be  continued,  under  what  conditions  it  will  be 
continued,  or  what  appropriation  is  likely  to  be  made, 
.so  that  it  is  practically  impossible  for  them  to  make  any 
definite  plans  with  respect  to  the  administration  or 
financing  of  future  work  or  to  conduct  the  necessary 
studies  preparatory  to  filing  applications  for  additional 
aid." 

**  Apparently  the  Post  Office  Department  was  not  asked  to 
participate  in  these  studies  even  though  at  the  time  (March 
1920)  the  Postmaster  General  was  still  engaged  in  experi- 
ments with  motor  parcel  post  and  motor  truck  transportation 
of  fourth  class  mail. 


107 


A  New  Charter  For  Federal  Aid 

Although  the  appropriation  for  1922  was  lost,  the 
supporters  of  the  Sells  bill  interpreted  the  lopsided 
vote  in  the  House  as  a  substantial  endorsement  for 
Federal  aid.  The  Engineering  News-Record^  recog- 
nizing the  "overwhelming  sentiment"  in  favor  of 
Federal  aid,  withdrew  its  support  of  the  Townsend 
bill  and  urged  all  the  highway  factions  to  get  to- 
gether on  a  compromise  measureJ^ 

The  Federal-aid  people,  under  MacDonald's  leader- 
ship, were  eager  to  compromise,  and  in  April  1921, 
the  Executive  Committee  of  AASHO  met  in  Wash- 
ington to  draft  a  bill  that  would  retain  the  essential 
principles  of  the  1916  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  and 
correct  its  weaknesses.  To  win  the  support  of  the 
national  highway  system  advocates,  this  bill  provided 
that  each  State  must  designate  a  State  highway  sys- 
tem, including  not  more  than  7  percent  of  all  roads 
in  the  State  on  which  all  the  Federal  funds  must  be 
spent.  Three-sevenths  of  this  system  must  be  roads 
"interstate  in  character"  and  up  to  60  percent  of  the 
Federal  funds  could  be  spent  on  this  fraction.  The 
bill  also  provided  that  State  funds  must  be  used  to 
match  the  Federal  money  and  that  all  construction 
and  maintenance  must  be  performed  under  the  direct 
supervision  of  the  State  highway  department.  The 
State  must  agree  to  properly  maintain  all  federally 
aided  roads,  and  where  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture 
has  found  the  maintenance  to  be  inadequate,  he  may, 
after  60  days'  notice,  restore  the  road  to  a  proper 
condition  of  maintenance  and  charge  the  cost  to  the 
State's  apportionment  of  Federal  funds  and  also 
withhold  further  Federal  aid  until  the  State  refunds 
the  money  so  spent.  The  authors  got  Representative 
Cassius  Dowell  of  Iowa  to  introduce  this  bill  when 
the  67th  Congress  convened  in  April  1921.''^ 

Senator  Townsend  was  also  inclined  to  compromise, 
and  he  rewrote  his  bill  to  provide  that  a  "post  roads 
and  federal  highway  commission"  should  select  an 
"interstate  highway  system,"  and  set  standards  but 
that  the  system  be  built,  maintained,  and  operated  by 
the  States  with  Federal  aid.  His  bill  proposed  an 
appropriation  of  $200  million  for  a  2-year  program.''* 

A  few  States,  for  one  reason  or  another,  were  un- 
able to  spend  all  the  Federal  aid  previously  appor- 
tioned to  them  by  the  1916  Act,  and  to  keep  them 
from  losing  the  money.  Senator  Lawrence  C.  Phipps 
of  Colorado  introduced  a  bill  extending  the  time 
limit  for  States  to  use  these  funds  by  1  additional 
year  for  a  total  of  2  fiscal  years  beyond  the  fiscal  year 
the  funds  were  made  available.  This  bill  passed  the 
Senate  unanimously;  but  when  it  reached  the  House, 
the  Committee  on  Roads  added  the  Dowell  bill  with 
its  limiting  7  percent  system  and  60  percent  fund 
expenditure  as  an  amendment,  and  in  this  form  it  was 
passed  by  the  House  with  a  thumping  majority. 

Eventually,  after  a  long,  hot  summer  of  hearings 
and  conferences,  the  Phipps-Dowell  and  Townsend 
bills  were  merged  and  passed  with  an  appropriation 
of  $75  million  as  the  Federal  Highway  Act  of  No- 
vember 9,  1921. 

This  Act  ended,  or  at  least  submerged,  the  feud 
between  the  local  and  lone;-distance  road  advocates 


by  concentrating  the  Federal-aid  funds  on  limited 
interconnected  systems  and  by  requiring  that  the 
paved  surface  of  the  interstate  roads  should  be  not 
less  than  18  feet  wide.  It  greatly  strengthened  the 
State  highway  departments,  especially  in  their  main- 
tenance function,  and  it  permanently  laid  to  rest  the 
idea  of  a  national  highway  system  under  Federal 
control.  However,  much  to  the  disappointment  of  the 
States,  the  appropriation  was  for  only  1  year  (fiscal 
year  1922),  and,  thus,  it  failed  to  provide  the  con- 
tinuity so  urgently  needed  for  program  planning.* 

The   Federal-Aid   Highway  System 

The  selection  and  approval  of  the  "7-percent  sys- 
tem" of  roads  mandated  by  the  Federal  Highway  Act 
was  the  largest  and  most  important  task  ever  as- 
signed to  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  In  anticipa- 
tion of  the  passage  of  the  Act,  Chief  MacDonald 
asked  each  highway  department  to  certify  the  total 
mileage  of  public  roads  in  its  State.  These  mileages 
totaled  2,859,575  miles,  which  fixed  the  maximum  ex- 
tent of  the  Federal-aid  system  at  200,170  miles. 

Immediately  upon  passage  of  the  Act,  MacDonald 
requested  the  States  to  submit  tentative  system  recom- 
mendations. At  the  same  time,  he  assigned  a  BPR 
task  force,  under  Edwin  W.  James,  the  job  of  devis- 
ing an  equitable  method  for  testing  the  systems  sub- 
mitted by  the  States. 

This  group  obtained  from  the  Bureau  of  the  Census 
its  latest  figures,  by  counties,  for  population,  value  of 
agricultural  products,  value  of  mineral  products, 
value  of  forest  products,  and  value  of  manufactured 
products.  Calling  the  State  population  100,  they 
calculated  a  population  index  for  each  county.  In 
the  same  manner  they  calculated  county  indices  for 
the  four  significant  production  factors.  Finally,  by 
adding  all  these  together  and  dividing  by  five  they 
obtained  a  composite  index  for  each  county. 

Then,  according  to  James : 

We  adopted  squares  as  emblems  of  the  indices.  When 
these  squares,  blackened  in,  were  put  into  their  appro- 
priate counties  on  a  clean  map,  we  had  a  series  of  em- 
blems through  which  diagrammetric  routes  could  be  laid 
out.  Routes  through  the  heaviest  emblems  were  routes 
through  the  generally  wealthiest  and  all  around  most 
important  county  areas.  Road  locations  could  be  made 
catching  obvious  local  control  points  along  these  diagram- 
matic lines,  and  you  had  a  selection  from  best  to  poorest 
almost  staring  you  in  the  face." 

By  October  1922,  tentative  system  maps  had  been 
received  from  all  but  nine  States.  Most  of  the  routes 
in  these  systems  followed  existing  roads,  and  they 
agreed  remarkably  well  with  the  BPR  task  force's 
studies.  Surprisingly,  the  largest  deviations  from 
what  appeared  to  be  the  best  interstate  routes  oc- 
curred in  States  such  as  New  York  and  Massachusetts 
where  a  large  percentage  of  the  principal  roads  was 
already  improved.  In  these  States  there  was  "a  nat- 
ural disposition  to  designate  other  roads  of  less  im- 
portance as  the  Federal-aid  highway  system  for  the 
State."  ^^     These  and  other  differences  were  smoothed 


*  Congress  remedied  this  by  appropriating  a  total  of  $190 
million  in  Federal  aid  for  fiscal  years  1923,  1924,  and  1925 
in  the  Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  of  June  19,  1922  (42 
Stat  660). 


108 


out  in  conferences  between  the  BPR  and  the  indi- 
vidual States  and  by  regional  conferences  between  the 
States  to  coordinate  across  State  boundaries.  The 
first  inter-State  conference  at  Troy,  New  York,  re- 
sulted in  completely  coordinated  primary  systems  for 
New  England,  New  York,  and  New  Jersey. 

System  selection  and  highway  correlation  were 
somewhat  different  in  the  west  where  population  was 
scattered,  road  distances  great,  and  financial  resources 
very  limited.  "The  designation  of  a  system  of  roads 
in  such  States  adequate  at  once  to  serve  local  require- 
ments and  at  the  same  time  correlate  satisfactorily 
with  the  roads  of  adjoining  States  demands  very  care- 
ful adjustments  in  order  to  keep  the  mileage,  the  re- 
sources, and  the  service  value  of  the  roads  properly 
balanced  and  economically  justified."  "  In  a  few  of 
the  larger  western  States,  three-sevenths  of  the  total 
Federal-aid  mileage  was  insufficient  to  make  all  of  the 
connections  to  interstate  roads  in  adjoining  States, 
and  some  of  the  secondary  Federal-aid  mileage  had 
to  be  used  for  this  purpose. 

The  huge  job  of  designating  and  approving  all  of 
the  48  State  systems  and  correlating  them  across  State 
lines  was  completed  November  1,  1923,  the  work  pub- 
lished by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  the  form  of 
a  national  map  of  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  System. 
Because  many  States  designated  less  than  7  percent 
of  their  total  mileage  on  the  Federal-aid  system,  the 
roads  shown  on  this  map  totaled  only  168,881  miles, 
or  5.9  percent  of  all  U.S.  roads.  However,  almost 
immediately,  the  system  began  growing  and  it  has 
been  growing  ever  since.*  By  July  1923,  Maryland, 
Delaware,  and  Rhode  Island  had  completed  their 
original  systems  to  a  satisfactorj^  standard  and  had 
been  granted  increases  by  the  Secretary. 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  estimated  that  for  the 
country  as  a  whole  at  least  90  percent  of  the  popula- 
tion resided  not  more  than  10  miles  from  a  Federal- 
aid  road,  and  in  a  few  States,  this  figure  was  as  high 
as  97  or  99  percent.  The  BPR  estimated  that  at  least 
94  percent  of  the  cities  of  5,000  or  more  population 
were  directly  on  the  system.^* 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  concentrated  a  sizable 
amount  of  money  on  a  limited  mileage  of  roads,  re- 
sulting in  the  rapid  improvement  of  interstate  routes. 
Fiscal  year  1922  was  a  banner  year  in  which  nearly 
14,000  miles  of  the  Federal-aid  system  were  improved. 
By  July  1925,  46,486  miles,  or  over  one-quarter  of  the 
system,  had  been  brought  up  to  a  reasonably  travel- 
able  standard. 

However,  the  production  of  motor  vehicles  increased 
at  an  even  more  rapid  rate.  From  1916  to  1921  regis- 
trations increased  at  about  1.4  million  per  year.  From 
1921  to  1925  the  rate  increased  to  about  2.37  million 
per  year,  and  in  1925  the  total  number  of  motor  ve- 
hicles  of   all   types   registered   was   19.95   million.''^  ^° 


*  The  Federal  Highway  Act  provided  that  whenever  a 
State  had  finished  improving  its  entire  original  7  percent 
system,  the  State,  with  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture,  could  add  additional  increments.  The  Emer- 
gency Relief  and  Construction  Act  of  1932  modified  this  to 
provide  that  increments  of  1  percent  of  total  State  road 
mileage  could  be  added  to  the  Federal-aid  system  whenever 
90  percent  of  the  original  system  plus  all  subsequent  incre- 
ments had  been  improved. 


With  the  increase  in  vehicle  ownership,  there  came 
an  immense  increase  in  travel  and  tourism,  and  cross 
country  motoring  rapidly  became  the  major  recrea- 
tional activity  of  millions  of  Americans. 

The  End  of  the  Trails 

The  cross  country  wagon  trails  of  the  prerailroad 
era  were  a  romantic  episode  in  American  history. 
These  trails  furnished  the  emigrants  one  essential 
service  that  outweighed  all  others — the  assurance  that 
if  the  traveler  followed  the  trail,  he  would  eventually 
arrive  at  his  destination  and  not  become  lost. 

When  the  Lincoln  Highway  Association  was  or- 
ganized in  1913,  this  assurance  was  lacking  for  any- 
one so  rash  as  to  attempt  a  long  overland  trip,  for  the 
roads  were  almost  completely  unsigned  and  there  were 
few  reliable  maps.  Few  residents  along  a  road  could 
give  the  traveler  reliable  information  on  the  condition 
of  the  roads  in  the  next  county  or  even  beyond  a 
distance  of  10  miles  in  their  own  county.  By  select- 
ing and  mapping  the  best  roads  over  the  most  direct 
routes  and  by  encouraging  the  local  officials  to  im- 
prove them  and  the  local  auto  clubs  to  mark  them, 
the  Lincoln  Highway  Association  provided  services 
of  real  value  to  motorists.  The  American  Automobile 
Association  augmented  these  services  by  publishing 
its  famous  "Blue  Books,"  advising  tourists  of  the  ac- 
commodations to  be  found  along  the  route.  In  1915 
Lewis  Stubbs  of  St.  Joseph,  Missouri,  proposed  mark- 
ing auto  trails  by  painting  colored  bands  around 
utility  poles,  and  the  Automobile  Club  of  St.  Joseph 
marked  a  considerable  mileage  of  the  Pikes  Peak 
Ocean-to-Ocean  Highway,  the  "Appian  Way  of  Amer- 
ica," in  this  manner.*^ 

The  National  Old  Trails  Association  formed  in 
1913  was  dedicated  to  preserving  and  improving  the 
old  Cumberland  Road  and  the  old  Santa  Fe  Trail  as 
a  transcontinental  route.  In  1915  Carl  Fisher  was 
instrumental  in  organizing  the  Dixie  Highway,  a  net- 
work of  parallel  roads  extending  from  the  Straits  of 
Mackinac  to  Miami,  Florida.  Between  1914  and  1916 
community  boosters  put  together  the  Yellowstone 
Trail,  under  the  slogan  "A  good  road  from  Plymouth 
Rock  to  Puget  Sound,"  with  the  Pikes  Peak  Ocean- 
to-Ocean  Highway  following  in  1916.®^ 

Because  they  were  marked  and  advertised,  these 
pioneer  auto  trails  became  channels  for  the  rising  tide 
of  tourist  traffic.  After  World  War  I,  competing  auto 
trails  burgeoned  in  scores.  In  the  absence  of  an  of- 
ficial marking  system,  these  trails  provided  a  useful 
service  to  motorists,  even  though  they  were  estab- 
lished in  large  part  to  promote  the  commercial  inter- 
ests of  their  sponsors.  But  within  a  few  years,  the 
movement  got  out  of  hand  as  more  and  more  trails 
were  organized.  By  1924  there  were  at  least  250 
marked  trails  sponsored  by  100  or  more  separate 
organizations,  each  with  a  headquarters  and  issuing 
maps  and  promotional  material  and  collecting  funds. 
Some  of  these  routes  were  interstate  in  character, 
some  of  only  local  significance.  Some  routes  were 
promoted  to  further  roadbuilding  by  arousing  public 
opinion,  some  were  purely  scenic,  and  some  existed 
only  to  provide  salaries  for  their  organizers.^^ 


109 


The  trail  organizations  were  highly  competitive 
and  their  efforts  were  uncoordinated,  resulting  in 
numerous  overlaps. 

For  example,  70  percent  of  one  trail  overlapped  other 
marked  routes  and  one  trail  overlapped  as  many  as  11 
others.  One  road  carried  eight  different  trail  markers 
for  a  considerable  distance.  Many  trails  had  alternate 
sections,  compounding  the  confusion,  and  one  had  alter- 
nates following  three  separate  roads,  all  with  the  same 
name.  Most  routes  followed  their  financial  support  and 
it  was  impossible  to  integrate  many  of  them  into  any 
logical  highway  system.'^ 

The  pressure  of  the  trail  associations  for  the  im- 
provement of  their  trails  made  sensible  programing 
by  the  State  highway  departments  almost  impossible. 
The  situation  finally  became  so  bad  that  in  1924  the 
American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  ap- 
proved a  resolution  calling  on  the  Secretary  of  Agri- 
culture to  name  a  board  of  BPR  and  State  engineers 
to  formulate  a  numbering  and  marking  system  of 
interstate  character  for  the  principal  highways  of  the 
United  States.  In  response  to  this  resolution,  the 
Secretary  appointed  a  Joint  Board  of  21  State  high- 
way engineers  and  3  BPR  engineers  under  the  chair- 
manship of  Chief  MacDonald  with  E.  W.  James  as 
secretary. 

Early  in  its  work  the  Joint  Board  decided  to  con- 
fine the  numbered  routes  to  actual  existing  roads  in 
the  Federal-aid  system,  but  to  disregard  the  state  of 
improvement  of  any  road  as  a  factor  in  putting  it  on 
the  system.  The  Board  pointedly  avoided  holding 
public  hearings  to  avoid  placing  itself  in  the  position 
of  arbiter  between  competing  trails. 

The  Joint  Board  sponsored  six  regional  meetings 
at  which  each  highway  department  had  an  oppor- 
tunity to  designate  its  most  important  routes  and 
coordinate  across  State  lines  with  its  neighbors.  When 
these  recommendations  were  consolidated  on  a  single 
map,  they  added  up  to  a  system  of  81,096  miles,  or 
2.8  percent  of  the  total  existing  road  mileage.  The 
Board  then  went  over  the  State  recommendations 
eliminating  routes  of  doubtful  interstate  importance 
and  finally  arrived  at  a  "skeleton  system"  of  50,137 
miles  which  it  submitted  to  the  individual  States  for 
approval. 

By  this  time  the  work  of  the  Board  had  begun  to 
attract  popular  attention  and,  to  use  the  expression 
of  the  president  of  AASHO,  "the  Infernal  regions 
began  popping."  Every  community  of  any  size 
wanted  to  be  on  a  numbered  route,  just  as  a  genera- 
tion earlier  every  town  thought  it  a  matter  of  life  and 
death  to  be  on  a  railroad.  Under  the  influence  of 
local  pressure  the  skeleton  system  was  fleshed  out  to 
75,884  miles.  This  was  the  system  that  was  recom- 
mended by  the  Joint  Board  to  the  Secretary  of  Agri- 
culture in  its  final  report  and  approved  by  him.  The 
Secretary  sent  the  report  to  AASHO  recommending 
that  the  Association  "take  such  necessary  steps  as 
might  be  feasible  under  their  respective  State  laws 
to  put  the  plan  into  operation."  ^^ 

At  its  annual  meeting  in  October  1925,  AASHO 
delegated  to  its  Executive  Committee  authority  to 
make  minor  changes  in  the  system  recommended  by 
the  Joint  Board  "as  appeared  necessary  or  desirable." 
Immediately,  requests  for  changes  began  to  come  in 
from  the  States,  most  of  them  inspired  by  the  trail 
associations.     The  Executive  Board  acted  on  142  such 


requests  and  approved  additions  which  boosted  the 
total  system  mileage  to  96,626  miles.  This  system 
was  approved  by  ballot  of  the  States  on  November  11, 
1926,  and  was  immediately  put  into  effect  by  all  the 
States  and  marked  with  the  familiar  black  and  white 
shield  markers  which  for  almost  50  years  have  guided 
American  motorists. 

AVliat  became  of  the  private  trails?  They  were 
replaced  by  one  or  more  U.S.  numbered  routes  and, 
one  by  one,  the  trail  associations,  their  work  done, 
went  out  of  business.  However,  for  years  afterward 
and  even  today,  sections  of  road  in  many  States  con- 
tinued to  be  called  "Lincoln  Highway,"  "Yellowstone 
Trail,"  "Dixie  Highway,"  etc. 

REFERENCES 

'  Engineers  At  Washington  Rush  Work  On  Army  Oamps 
But  There  Is  Much  Delay,  Engineering  News-Recoed,  Vol. 
78,  No.  12,  June  21,  1917,  p.  619. 

^C.  Upham,  Car  Shortage  and  Its  Relation  to  Highwa/y 
Work,    Engineering   News-Record,   Vol.    79,   No.   24,   Dec.    13, 

1917,  p.  1099. 

'  Making  Existing  Facilities  Do  The  Work — The  Railroads' 
Problem,   Engineering   News-Record,   Vol.   80,   No.   1,   Jan.   3, 

1918,  p.  4. 

*  Transportation  Needs — Rail,  Water,  Highivay,  Engineer- 
ing News-Record,  Vol.  80,  No.  16,  Apr.  18,  1918,  p.  779. 

^  The  Immediate  Needs  of  the  Railroads,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  4,  Jul.  25,  1918,  p.  166. 

^ Build  Roads!,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  79,  No.  3, 
Jul.  19,  1917,  p.  98. 

'  Priority  Order  to  Halt  Road  Construction,  Engineering 
News-Recoed,  Vol.  79,  No.  18,  Nov.  1,  1917,  p.  855. 

'  Short  Stretches  vs.  Through  Routes,  Engineering  News- 
Recoed,  Vol.  79,  No.  25,  Dec.  20,  1917,  p.  1137. 

'  The  First  Motor  Truck  Convoy,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  80,  No.  1,  Jan.  3,  1918,  p.  3. 

"  Pennsylvania  Keeps  Roads  Open  For  Motor  Truck  Convoy, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  80,  No.  9,  Feb.  28,  1918,  p.  408. 

"  G.  Biles,  Clearing  Roads  for  Army  Transport,  Public 
Roads,  Vol.  1,  No.  1,  May  1918,  p.  13. 

"  C.  Cowen,  How  Ohio  Handles  Important  Roads  Broken 
Doion  By  Huge  Trafflc,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  Nos.  6-8,  Dec. 
1918,  p.  26. 

"Action  By  The  State  Highway  Officials,  Engineering 
News-Recoed,  Vol.  79,  No.  24,  Dec.  13,  1917,  p.  1087. 

"  Secretary  Houston  Will  Urge  Vital  Road  Work,  Engi- 
neeeing  News-Recoed,  Vol.  80,  No.  3,  Jan.  17,  1918,  p.  140. 

^^  Government  Operation  And  What  It  Means,  Engineeeing 
News-Record,  Vol.  80,  No.  1,  Jan.  3,  1918,  p.  5. 

^^  McAdoo  Will  Aid  hi  Transporting  Road  Materials,  Engi- 
neeeing News-Recoed,  Vol.  80,  No.  8,  Feb.  21,  1918,  p.  381. 

"  What  Most  Highway  Departments  Will  Face  In  The  Near 
Future,   Engineeeing  News-Record,  Vol.  80,  No.  15,  Apr.  11, 

1918,  p.  693. 

''W.  Thompson,  New  Jersey,  One  Of  The  Great  Sufferers, 
Plans  To  Meet  Needs  Of  The  Future,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1, 
No.  2,  Jun.  1918,  p.  21. 

'°W.  Sohier,  Massachusetts  Sees  The  Solution  In  Limits 
Upon  Capacity  And  Loads  Of  Trucks,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1, 
No.  2,  Jun.  1918,  p.  13. 

^''  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1919,  p.  5. 

"Truck  Facts  Foe  1927  (National  Automobile  Chamber 
of  Commerce,  New  York,  1927)  p.  10. 

"  Carrying  Tour  Terminal  Facilities  With  You,  Engineer- 
ing News-Record,  Vol.  79,  No.  24,  Dec.  13,  1917,  p.  1985. 

''^  Motor  Trucks  Needed  To  Supplemait,  Not  Compete,  With 
Highways,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  82,  No.  3,  Jan.  16, 

1919,  p.  120. 

"J.  Wallace,  Unit  Operation  Of  Terminal  Zones  Urged, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  80,  No.  16,  Apr.  18,  1918, 
p.  779. 


110 


'^Industry's  Use  Of  Highways  And  Motor  Trucks  To  Re- 
lieve Freight  Congestion,  Engineering  News-Recokd,  Vol.  79, 
No.  22,  Nov.  29,  1917,  p.  1033. 

'"Developing  Freight  Routes  on  Highways  With  Motor 
Trucks  and  Trailers,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No. 
2,  Jul.  11,  1918,  p.  106. 

"  Highicay  Carries  Tivelve  Times  As  Much  Local  Freight 
As  Railroad,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  5,  Aug. 
1,  1918,  p.  224. 

"  Contract  Let  For  Motor-Truck  Transportation  Of  Coal, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  24,  Oct.  3,  1918,  p.  647. 

"  Comparison  Of  Short-Haul  Truck  And  Rail  Shipments, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  82,  No.  19,  May  8,  1919,  pp. 
903,  904. 

'"  H.  Doc.  159,  65th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  p.  2. 

"  Editorial,  American  Motorist,  Vol.  7,  No.  4,  Jul.  1915, 
p.  436. 

"Joint  Resolution  Making  Appropriations  for  the  Post 
Office  Department  for  Fiscal  Year  1916   (38  Stat  1227). 

"39  Stat  424. 

"Regional  Highicay  Transport  Directors  Meet,  Engineer- 
ing News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  13,  Sept.  26,  1918,  p.  599. 

"Report  Shows  Results  Of  Motor  Parcel  Post  Service, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  2,  Jul.  11,  1918,  pp. 
90-91. 

"Id.,  pp.  90-92. 

"40  Stat  753. 

"Cong.  Rec.  65th  Cong.,  3d  Sess.,  Vol.  57,  App.,  p.  386. 

"P.  Wilson,  Operations  of  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Under 
the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  No.  10,  Feb. 
1919,  p.  22. 

"  S.  R.  666,  65th  Cong.,  3d  Sess.,  p.  3. 

"Cong.  Rec.  65th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  Vol.  56,  pp.  11,  311. 

"  Wanted — A  Connected  National  Highway  System,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  14,  Oct.  3,  1918,  p.  608. 

"  Post-War  Highway  Drive  Begins,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  20,  Nov.  14,  1918,  pp.  878,  879. 

"  Report  of  The  State  Highway  Department  of  Penn- 
sylvania, 1917-1920   (J.  L.  L.  Kuhn,  Harrisburg,  1922)  p.  15. 

"  Second  Administrati\'e  Report  of  The  Directors  of  De- 
partments For  The  Year  July  1,  1918-June  30,  1919  (Illi- 
nois State  Journal  Co.,  Springfield,  1919)  p.  204. 

"E.  Mehren,  a  Suggested  National  Highway  Policy  and 
Plan,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  25,  Dec.  19, 
1918,  p.  1115,  1116. 

"  National  Highicay  System  Gets  Strong  Backing,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  25,  Dec.  19,  1918,  p.  1108. 

"  S.  R.,  supra,  note  40,  p.  10. 

"57  Cong.  Rec.  2427  (1919). 

*/<?.,  p.  3635. 

"  New  Roads  Official  Named,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  No.  11, 
Mar.  1919,  p.  3. 

°  BPR,  supra,  note  20,  p.  8. 

°A.  Anderson,  State  Highicay  Mileages  Aiid  Expenditures 
in  the  Year  1918,  Pltjlic  Roads,  Vol.  2,  No.  15,  Jul.  1919,  p.  3. 

"  Largest  County  Bond  Issue,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  2,  No.  15, 
Jul.  1919,  p.  7. 


"Authorized  Road  Bond  Issues  Total  Nearly  $500,000,000, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  84,  No.  4,  Jan.  22,  1920,  p.  202. 

'"A.  Hirst,  The  American  Highway  Problem,  Public  Roads, 
Vol.  2,  No.  20,  Dec.  1919,  p.  6. 

^Curtailed  Highway  Construction,  Shall  It  Be  Voluntary 
Or  Enforced?,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  84,  No.  10, 
Mar.  4,  1920,  p.  451. 

■^P.  Sargent,  The  President's  Address,  Public  Roads,  Vol. 
3,  No.  32,  Dec.  1920,  p.  6. 

™  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1920,  p.  5. 

°°T.  MacDonald,  Federal-Aid  Accomplishments,  Pxtblic 
Roads,  Vol.  3,  No.  32,  Dec.  1920,  p.  14. 

"  L.  Smith,  TNT  A  Success  In  Road  Work,  Public  Roads, 
Vol.  3,  No.  31,  Nov.  1920,  p.  13. 

"'  BtnjEAU  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1925,  p.  28. 

"^  Federal  Highway  Council  Formed,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  82,  No.  16,  Apr.  17,  1919,  p.  790. 

"  Why  Federal  Aid  Will  Not  Build  A  National  Highway 
System,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  84,  No.  7,  Feb.  12, 
1920,  p.  336. 

°'M.  Eldridge,  Federal  Highway  Appropriations,  Engineer- 
ing News-Record,  Vol.  86,  No.  6,  Feb.  10,  1921,  p.  272. 

^T.  MacDonald,  Four  Years  Of  Road  Building  Under  The 
Federal- Aid  Act,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  3,  No.  26,  Jun.  1920,  p.  13. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  20,  p.  34. 

^  BPR,  supra,  note  59,  p.  7. 

"'Highway  Classification  Undertaken  by  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  84,  No.  13,  Mar.  25, 
1920,  p.  635. 

'"Id. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1921,  pp.  6,  7. 

"  Getting  Together  On  Highway  Policy,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  86,  No.  13,  Mar.  31,  1921,  p.  534. 

"  State  Officials  Confer  On  Highway  Policies,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  86,  No.  16,  Apr.  21,  1921,  p.  696. 

"  Revised  Townsend  Road  Bill  Introduced,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  86,  No.  18,  May  5,  1921,  p.  783. 

"Letter  from  E.  W.  James  to  F.  W.  Cron,  Feb.  21,  1967, 
(Original  in  the  Department  of  Transportation  Library, 
Washington,  D.C.) 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1922,  p.  3. 

■"Id. 

™  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1923,  p.  3. 

■"Motor  Vehicle  Registration  15,092,177,  Public  Roads,  Vol. 
5,  No.  2,  Apr.  1924,  p.  16. 

^°  Motor  Vehicle  Registrations,  Revenue  And  Gasoline  Taxes 
For  The  Year  1925,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  7,  No.  2,  Apr.  1926, 
p.  50. 

"  Ask  A. A. A.  Recognition  for  Pike's  Peak  Route,  American 
Motorist,  Vol.  7,  No.  4,  Apr.  1915,  p.  232. 

^'V.  Stevenson,  American  Highways,  Vol.  1,  (Winship 
Publishing  Co.,  New  York,  1919)  pp.  13-17. 

*'E.  James,  Making  And  Unmaking  A  System  Of  Marked 
Routes,  American  Highways,  Oct.  1933,  p.  16. 

'*  F.  Cron,  Touring  By  Numbers — Why  and  How,  Public 
Works,  Feb.  1968,  p.  80. 

*'E.  James,  Marking  Our  Highway  System,  American 
Highways,  Oct.  1931,  p.  19. 


Ill 


The 

Highujoy 
Boom 


".  .  .  but  each  separate  project  [new  road]  is  to  some 
community  a  new  opportunity,  a  means  of  bettering, 
in  some  respects,  the  economic  and  social  status  of  the 
community,  and  together  they  form  the  links  which,  eventually 
united,  will  constitute  a  new  means  of  transportation.  .  .  ." 


112 


The  Beginning  of  a  Sustained  Highway  Program 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921  increased  the 
limit  of  Federal  participation  in  road  costs  to  $20,000 
per  mile,  a  change  that  had  been  urged  by  the  eastern 
and  northern  States  to  compensate  for  the  wartime 
inflation  in  the  cost  of  the  higher  t3'pes  of  road  pave- 
ments. "N^Hien  Congress  again  considered  the  financing 
of  the  Federal-aid  program  in  April  1922,  this  limit 
became  a  bone  of  contention.  Rural  interests  wanted 
the  limit  cut  back  to  as  low  as  $4,000  per  mile  to  force 
the  States  to  use  the  less  expensive  construction  types 
and,  thus,  more  rapidl}'  provide  some  kind  of  im- 
provement for  the  entire  Federal-aid  system,  and  par- 
ticularly its  less  heavily  traveled  parts.  Eventually, 
a  compromise  was  reached  on  a  limit  $16,250  per  mile 
for  projects  funded  in  fiscal  year  1923,  falling  to 
$15,000  per  mile  in  1924  and  thereafter.* 

This  was  only  a  minor  setback  for  Federal  aid. 
Much  more  important  was  Congress  resumption  of 
the  desirable  practice  of  authorizing  aid  funds  sev- 
eral years  in  advance  by  authorizing  appropriations 
of  $50  million,  $65  million,  and  $75  million  for  fiscal 
years  1923,  1924  and  1925.  Since  most  State  legisla- 
tures met  biennially,  this  advance  notice  of  Congress 
intent  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  States  in 
planning  their  own  matching  appropriations  and 
budgets. 

This  removal  of  uncertainty  in  the  Federal-aid 
program  coincided  with  a  drop  in  wages  and  a  lower- 
ing of  price  levels  for  construction  materials.  The 
State  highway  departments,  profiting  from  their  past 
mistakes  and  added  experience,  had  developed  much 
more  effective  construction  organizations  and  proce- 
dures, and  these  were  matched  by  a  stronger  and  more 
efficient  construction  industry.  The  result  was  the 
completion  of  10,247  miles  of  construction  at  a  cost 
of  $189  million — 314  times  as  much  as  had  been  ac- 
complished since  the  Federal-aid  program  began — in 
the  single  fiscal  year  of  1922.  To  Chief  MacDonald 
the  mere  recital  of  statistics  could  not  possibly  convey 
an  adequate  idea  of  what  was  accomplished.  In  1922 
he  wrote : 

But  merely  to  say  that  this  year  has  added  10,000 
miles  to  the  previously  existing  mileage  conveys  no  ade- 
quate sense  of  the  far-roaching  effects  of  the  work  that 
is  being  done.  The  10,000  miles  completed  represent 
something  more  than  the  equivalent  of  three  transconti- 
nental roads.  They  are  not  transcontinental  roads.  They 
are  not  even  connected  roads,  though  as  the  work  con- 
tinues they  will  he  connected ;  but  each  separate  project 
is  to  some  community  a  new  opportunity,  a  means  of 
bettering,  in  some  respects,  the  economic  and  social 
.status  of  the  community,  and  together  they  form  the 
links  which,  eventually  united,  will  constitute  a  new 
means  of  transportation,  no  less  important  to  the  country 
as  a  whole  than  that  offered  by  the  railroads.' 

Roadbuilding   by  Stages 

The  1922  record  was  possible  mainly  because  at 
least  two-thirds  of  the  work  was  of  low  type,  such  as 
graded  earth,  sand-clay  and  gravel,  and  this  in  turn 
came  about  because  the  BPR  adopted  a  stage  con- 


struction policy  in  the  early  years  of  the  Federal-aid 
program : 

In  many  instances  it  lias  lieen  found  advisable  to  grade 
and  drain  a  road  and  delay  an  expensive  pavement  until 
a  later  time.  This  policy  will  be  continued  under  the 
same  conditions:  that  is,  when  the  volume  of  traffic  at 
the  time  of  the  original  construction  is  not  large  enough 
to  require  any  lietter  siu'face  than  can  1)0  l)uilt  of  selected 
soil,  sand-clay,  or  gravel,  when  financial  considerations 
require  that  tlio  expense  of  a  pavement  bo  deferred,  and 
wlien,  as  in  the  light  of  past  expei-ience  it  has  often  been 
found  advisable,  a  delay  to  allow  the  subgrade  to  become 
stal)le  is  believed  to  l)e  necessary.  In  such  cases  the  plan 
will  be,  as  it  has  been  in  the  past,  to  so  design  and  con- 
struct the  grades  and  drainage  structures  and  whatever 
temporary  surfacing  tliat  is  applied,  that  any  additions 
or  subsequent  improvements  can  be  made  without  loss  of 
prior  investment." 

Most  of  the  stage  construction  projects  were  in  the 
West,  the  Prairie  States  and  the  South  where  traffic 
was  light  and  roadbuilding  was  least  advanced.  The 
intention  to  build  by  stages  was  set  forth  in  the 
project  agreement,  or  contract  between  the  Govern- 
ment and  the  State,  and  only  a  portion  of  the  Fedei-al 
share  of  the  cost  of  the  project  was  paid  upon  com- 
pletion of  the  first  stage;  the  rest  was  held  back  until 
the  final  stage  was  finished.  As  traffic  increased,  the 
State  upgraded  the  initial  construction  with  better 
surfaces,  but  these  second  stage  projects  did  not  be- 
come an  appreciable  part  of  the  total  Federal-aid 
program  until  about  1926,  when  11  percent  of  all 
mileage  improved  was  second  stage.  By  1933,  how- 
ever, 55  percent  of  the  mileage  was  in  this  category. 

The  basic  concept  of  stage  construction  was  good, 
but  it  failed  to  take  into  account  the  enormous  in- 
crease in  vehicle  ownership  and  road  traffic  that  would 
occur  during  the  1920's,  or  the  rapid  evolution  in 
highway  engineering.  In  the  5  years  or  so  that  elapsed 
between  original  and  second  stage  construction,  many 
States  changed  their  ideas  as  to  what  were  adequate 
or  desirable  standards.  Instead  of  following  the 
original  plan  for  the  second  stage,  they  upgraded  it, 
and  in  many  instances  made  minor  relocations  to 
eliminate  sharp  curves.*  Thus,  the  stage  construc- 
tion, or  "wait  and  see"  approach,  resulted  in  abandon- 
ing some  of  the  original  construction,  but  also  avoided 
premature  investment  in  high-type  work  that  would 
later  have  proved  inadequate. 

The  stage  construction  policy  accomplished  its  pur- 
pose which  was  to  give  the  poorest  portions  of  the 
Federal-aid  system  a  modest  improvement  as  soon  as 
possible.  This  philosophy  was  well  expressed  by 
Chief  MacDonald  in  his  annual  report  for  1926 : 

An  exactly  similar  policy  was  followed  l)y  the  builders 
of  the  railroads,  whose  first  object  was  to  'get  the  traffic 
through,'  leaving  until  a  later  date  the  perfecting  pro- 
ces.ses  of  ballasting,  l)anking  of  curves,  etc.  It  is  the 
only  satisfactory  method  of  dealing  with  the  conditions 
existing  in  many  of  the  Southern,  Middle  Western,  and 
Western  States  in  which  there  are  thousands  of  miles 
of  main  road  still  entirely  devoid  of  any  improvement 
whatever.' 

However,  not  everyone  agreed  with  this  policy,  and 
some  influential  critics  asserted  that  the  Federal  aid 
was  being  frittered  away  in  low-grade  work  that 
would  never  handle  the  traffic.  They  pointed  to  the 
original   Federal   Aid   Road  Act  of   1916  which  re- 


*  The    participation   limit    on   cost   per   mile   was   raised   to 
$25,000  in  1930  and  eliminated  altogether  in  1934. 


*  By  fiscal  year  1933  these  minor  relocations  had  shortened 
the  original  locations  by  237  miles  or  about  1.1  percent. 


113 


quired  that  "The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  shall  ap- 
prove only  such  projects  as  may  be  substantial  in 
character."    To  these  critics  MacDonald  replied: 

In  interpreting  the  word  'substantial'  the  Secretary  has 
taken  cognizance  of  the  fact  that  an  improvement  which 
is  substantial  for  one  density  and  kind  of  traffic  may  not 
be  substantial  for  another.  It  has  been  recognized  that 
the  types  of  roads  which  it  is  desirable  to  construct  in 
New  York,  Massachusetts  and  Pennsylvania  are  not  suit- 
able or  necessary  for  Nevada,  Idaho,  and  the  Dakotas . . . 
the  decision  as  to  the  type  of  road  which  the  Secretary 
will  approve  for  a  given  locality  has  been  based  in  every 
case  upon  the  traffic  which  is  using  the  existing  road  and 
which  it  is  estimated  will  use  the  improved  road  .  .  . 
The  result  is  that  the  Secretary  has  approvel  roads  of 
all  types  and  widths,  from  graded  earth  roads  to  concrete, 
brick,  or  bituminous  concrete,  narrow  as  well  as  wide; 
but  the  essential  point  is  that  in  each  case  the  decision 
has  been  based  upon  the  best  engineering  judgment  of 
the  Federal  Government  and  the  several  State  highway 
departments,  which  between  them  employ  the  most 
highly  capable  highway  engineers  in  the  country/ 

The  1916  Act  permitted  spending  Federal-aid  funds 
on  practically  any  rural  post  road.  Director  Page 
and,  later,  Chief  MacDonald  tried  to  focus  the  aid  on 
the  main  intercity  and  intercounty  roads,  but  in- 
evitably, because  of  the  realities  of  local  politics,  a 
number  of  roads  of  only  local  importance  were  im- 
proved. These  failed  to  pass  the  test  for  inclusion  in 
the  7  percent  system,  but  the  States,  under  their  con- 
tracts with  the  Government,  were  still  obliged  to 
maintain  them.  To  relieve  the  States  of  this  burden, 
the  Government  permitted  them  to  pay  back  the  Fed- 
eral share  of  the  cost  of  these  roads  and  then  turn 
them  back  to  the  counties  for  maintenance.  This 
process  began  in  1924  and  by  1933,  1,526  miles  had 
been  relinquished. 

Stage  construction  was  little  used  by  the  eastern 
and  northern  States.  Their  federal-aid  mileage  was 
already  largely  improved  with  dustless  pavement, 
thousands  of  miles  of  which  had  been  severely  dam- 
aged by  trucking  during  the  war.  Their  problem  was 
to  reinforce  their  roads  to  carry  heavy  motor  trucks, 
and  for  this  they  chose  concrete  or  brick  pavements, 
not  only  because  of  their  generally  excellent  service 


during  the  war,  but  also  because  they  were  considered 
"permanent"  and,  therefore,  suitable  for  bond  financ- 
ing. With  a  few  notable  exceptions,  these  costly  new 
pavements  were  laid  within  the  existing  rights-of- 
way,  and,  thus,  perpetuated  the  faults  of  poor  aline- 
ment  and  grade  that  existed  in  the  old  roads. 

Getting  the  Traffic  Through  and  Paying  the  Highway 
Bill 

Within  5  years  of  the  debacles  of  1920  and  1921,  the 
States  had  increased  their  capacity  for  roadbuilding 
to  the  point  where  they  were  able  to  obligate  $100 
million  of  Federal  aid  per  year.*  By  1929  they  had 
improved  90  percent  of  the  Federal-aid  system,  or 
about  170,000  miles,  to  some  degree,  at  least,  by  ade- 
quate grading  and  drainage.  A  little  less  than  half 
of  this  mileage,  some  79,000  miles,  was  improved 
with  Federal  aid  and  State  matching  funds;  the  rest 
with  State  and  local  funds  alone.^ 

This  record  was  made  possible  not  only  by  im- 
proved organization  and  management,  but  also  by  a 
rapid  increase  in  the  highway  revenues  of  all  the 
States.  The  increase  was  accompanied  by  a  shifting 
of  much  of  the  highway  tax  burden  from  real  prop- 
erty to  the  road  user. 

In  1921  there  were  10.5  million  motor  vehicles  reg- 
istered in  the  United  States,  and  the  owners  of  these 
vehicles  paid  $122.5  million  to  the  States  in  road-user 
taxes.**  This  was  about  one-third  of  the  total  State 
expenditures  for  construction.  The  rest  came  from 
Federal  aid  and  general  State  revenues. 


*  From  fiscal  year  1925  to  fiscal  year  1929,  the  regular 
Federal-aid  appropriations  were  $75  million  per  year,  so  this 
rate  of  obligation  was  possible  only  because  of  the  unused 
backlog  of  appropriations  from  earlier  years.  This  backlog 
was  used  up  in  1928. 

**  The  gasoline  tax,  first  imposed  by  Oregon  in  1919,  was 
still  a  minor  source  of  revenue  in  1921,  amounting  to  only 
$5.4  million.  By  1929  fuel  taxes  were  $430.2  million,  or  56 
percent  of  all  revenues  from  road  users. 


With  more  and  more  cars  being 
sold,  the  automotive  industry 
favorably  affected  the  national 
economy  by  requiring  more  ma- 
terials and  services  for  the  trav- 
eler and  his  car. 


114 


By  1929  the  number  of  vehicles  had  increased  21^ 
times,  to  26.5  million,  but  State  highway  revenues  had 
increased  over  6  times,  to  $763.4  million,  and  the  per- 
centage of  the  highway  burden  carried  by  road  users 
had  risen  to  over  99  percent.  Actually,  wlien  Federal 
aid  is  considered,  the  road  users  paid  about  $81  mil- 
lion more  than  the  cost  of  building  and  maintaining 
the  State  highways.  Some  of  this  excess  was  spent 
for  nonhighway  purposes,  but  most  of  it  was  dis- 
tributed as  aid  to  the  counties  and  townships." 

Impact  of  the  Motor  Vehicle 

The  period  from  1921  to  1929  was  one  of  rising 
prosperity,  paced  by  the  automobile  industry  which 
not  onl}^  increased  its  production  astonishingly,  but 
also  improved  the  vehicles  while  reducing  prices.  In 
the  early  1920's  the  industry  introduced  installment 
sales  on  a  large  scale  and  strengthened  the  secondhand 
car  market.  As  a  huge  mass  market  for  automobiles 
burgeoned,  sales  increased  from  1.6  million  units  in 
1921  to  4.0  million  in  1923  and  5.3  million  in  1929, 
valued  at  $3.4  billion.  Motor  vehicle  manufacture 
became  a  major  industry  wliich,  in  1929,  employed 
471,000  people. 

Automobiles  affected  the  national  economy  in  in- 
numerable ways.  They  greatly  expanded  the  market 
for  steel,  glass,  rubber  and  fuel.  Thousands  of  ga- 
rages and  service  stations  sprang  up  along  the  new 
roads  to  care  for  the  motorists'  needs.  Auto  touring 
had  its  impact  on  the  travel  business,  spreading  tens 


of  millions  of  dollars  throughout  the  country.  New 
automobile  factories,  garages,  tourist  facilities  and 
the  large  road  and  street  programs  helped  to  fuel  the 
already  imposing  construction  and  business  boom  of 
the  twenties. 

The  proliferation  of  motor  vehicles  also  had  its 
dark  side.  As  millions  of  new  drivers  took  to  the 
roads,  traffic  accidents  increased  by  leaps  and  bounds, 
their  cost  reaching  nearly  $1.3  billion  by  1929.  High- 
way fatalities  more  than  tripled,  from  10,723  in  1918 
to  31,215  in  1929.^ 

On  the  streets  of  the  larger  cities,  traffic  congestion 
became  unbearable.  Police  and  city  engineers  tried 
frantically  to  keep  traffic  moving  by  instituting  one- 
way street  schemes,  by  developing  automatic  traffic 
signals  and  by  assigning  the  right-of-way  to  arterial 
traffic  with  the  innovative  stop  sign.  One  of  the 
simplest  and  most  effective  measures  for  expediting 
traffic  movement  was  by  cutting  back  curb  corners  at 
intersections  from  the  customary  4-  or  5-foot  radius 
to  12  or  even  15  feet.  This  permitted  vehicles  to 
make  right  turns  without  swinging  into  the  adjoining 
lane  and  greatly  smoothed  traffic  flow. 

With  the  increase  in  traffic  and  highway-related 
business,  long  "string  towns"  developed  along  the  ap- 
proaches to  every  city,  and  advertising  signs  by  the 
thousands  proclaimed  the  virtues  of  innumerable 
products  and  services  to  growing  captive  audiences. 
Because  of  these  roadside  activities,  new  highways 
became  congested  and  dangerous  within  a  few  years 
of  opening,  creating  demands  for  by-passes. 


Tftc  increasing  popularity  of  cars  and 
automotive  trai'cl  also  had  its  dark  side. 


115 


The  Private  Toll   Bridge  Menace 

As  interstate  roads  were  completed  and  connected 
with  each  other,  the  growing  stream  of  traffic  at- 
tracted another  class  of  highway  parasite — the  private 
toll  bridge  promoter.  By  1928,  private  bridges  were 
becoming  a  serious  threat  to  the  free  use  of  the  high- 
ways. In  1928  alone,  Congress  granted  75  franchises 
for  private  toll  bridges  over  interstate  waters  and 
the  States  issued  many  others.  Most  of  these  were 
stock  promotion  projects,  giving  favored  cliques  a 
strangle  hold  for  years  on  key  sites  on  the  main  high- 
way artei'ies  on  terms  inadequate  to  protect  the  public 
interest. 

Chief  MacDonald  spoke  out  against  this  trend  at 
the  1928  AASHO  meeting : 


Private  toll-bridge  interests  are  becoming  bolder  and 
obstructing  tbe  public's  business.  They  are  attempting 
to  defeat  legislation  unfavorable  to  themselves  and  are 
obstructing  the  efforts  of  highway  departments  to  carry 
on  State  projects. 

***** 

There  is  much  confusion  in  the  public  mind  on  this 
question.  In  all  sincerity  many  have  endorsed  the  private 
toll  bridge  franchise  on  the  theory  that  it  is  desirable  to 
have  bridges,  and  if  the  public  funds  are  not  sufficient  or 
available,  rather  than  do  without,  it  is  better  to  grant  a 
toll  franchise  to  private  interests.  This  is  not  the  is- 
sue .  .  .  The  real  question  is  the  very  simple  one  of 
whether  it  is  sound  public  policy  to  grant  the  right  to 
collect  a  private  profit  from  the  user  of  the  highway. 
The  answer  ought  to  be  a  vigorous  and  authoritative 
'No.'  There  is  no  place  on  the  public  highway  today  for 
the  privately  owned  toll  bridge.** 

MacDonald  was  not  against  toll  bridges  as  such, 
but  he  thought  they  should  be  owned  and  operated 
by  the  State  or  other  public  authority  and  freed  from 
toll  as  soon  as  the  bonds  were  paid  off.  This  type  of 
financing  had  been  provided  for  by  Congress  in  an 
act  approved  March  3,  1927,  which  permitted  Federal- 
aid  funds  to  be  used  on  publicly  owned  toll  bridges 
on  the  Federal-aid  system.  Such  financing  had  also 
been  adopted  by  the  Port  of  New  York  Authority  for 
four  monumental  and  costly  bridges,  including  the 
immense  George  Washington  Bridge  over  the  Hudson 
River. 


Farmers  in  Paneytown,  Ark., 
'ford  stream  to  avoid  the  fee 
on  a  private  toll  bridge. 


A  toll  house  at  the  approach  to  a  publicly  owned 

and  operated  bridge  on  U.S.  1  in  South  Carolina,  1921. 


116 


Chief  MacDonald  also  warned  of  another  threat  to 
free  highways  in  the  possible  resurgence  of  the  private 
toll  road,  for  which  the  Italian  autostrade  were  the 
current  models.  These  roads  had  been  built  in  the 
early  1920's  on  private  rights-of-way,  with  limited 
access,  and  were  for  automobiles  only.  The  bonds 
were  guaranteed  by  the  Italian  government.  Mac- 
Donald  said : 

The  motor  road  on  a  closed  right  of  way  takes  on  the 
characteristics  of  a  railroad.  A  highway  cannot  be  so 
transformed  and  continue  to  serve  in  a  universal  way. . . . 

If  de  luxe  service  roadways  to  a  limited  extent  are 
needefl  on  private  rights  of  way  their  development  should 
be, undertaken  by  tho  existing  railways,  not  in  coniiicti- 
tion  with  them.  IMuch  harm  without  componsating  i)one- 
fits  will  otherwise  result.  Once  let  franchises  lie  granted 
to  private  interests  with  the  necessary  power  of  eminent 
domain,  and  inconceivable  harm  would  result  to  the 
financial  structure  of  the  railways  in  that  area." 

Railroads  Versus   Highways 

The  steam  railroads  experienced  a  remarkable  re- 
covery from  the  postwar  doldrums  in  1921.*  Even 
so,  their  net  operating  revenue  for  that  year  returned 
them  only  3  percent  on  their  investment — not  enough 
to  cover  fixed  charges.*"  Some  railroad  executives 
blamed  the  failure  to  make  a  better  showing  on  truck 
competition,  which,  they  claimed  was  "subsidized"  by 
the  free  use  of  public  highways  paid  for,  in  part  at 
least,  by  the  railroads'  own  property  taxes.  Some 
railroads  moimted  a  publicity  campaign  to  protest  the 
"unfairness"  of  this  subsidized  competition,  and  their 
arguments  were  given  sonie  substance  by  President 
Harding's  December  1922  address  to  Congress  in 
which  he  said  that  motor  haulage  would  be  wasteful 
if  burdened  with  its  proper  share  of  the  highway 
cost.^* 

However,  there  were  realists  in  the  railroad  indus- 
try who  realized  that  trucks  and  improved  highways 
had  come  to  staj'  and  that  the  railroads  would  have 
to  accommodate  them.  One  executive  said  flatly  that 
low-volume  unprofitable  brancli  railroads  should  be 
replaced  b}'  truck  lines  and  that  trucks  could  help  the 
railroads  by  collecting  and  delivering  carload  freight 
for  long  hauls.*^  In  the  east  a  number  of  railroads 
made  determined  efforts  to  reclaim  the  short-haul 
business  from  the  trucks,  but  these  efforts  were  onl}' 
partly  successful.  Practically  all  hauls  under  30  miles 
were  gone  for  good,  but  the  railroads  were  able  to  get 
back  a  good  part  of  the  over-70-mile  business,  at  least 
temporarily. 

For  the  electric  railroads,  highway  competition  was 
disastrous  and  eventually  fatal.  In  the  early  1920's, 
few  States  regulated  buses  as  common  carriers,  and 
bus  and  stage  lines  sprang  up  by  the  hundreds,  com- 
peting fiercely  with  each  other  for  business.**    These 


*  The  Government  returned  the  railroads  to  their  owners 
in  1920. 

**  There  was  a  .short-lived  parallel  trend  in  the  cities  where 
unregulated  "jitneys"  made  huge  inroads  into  .street  railroad 
revenues  with  their  flexi))le  routings  and  cut-rate  fares.  The 
usual  fare  was  5  cents,  or  "one  jitney"  in  current  slang,  hence 
the  name.  .litneys  wei-e  clearly  in  violation  of  the  traction 
companies'  charters  and  were  eventually  outlawed  by  most 
cities,  along  with  competing  intracity  buslines. 


operated  over  most  of  the  roads  radiating  out  from 
the  cities,  reaching  hundreds  of  rural  families  who 
were  not  served  by  the  electric  railroads.  However, 
many  buses  ran  in  direct  competition  with  the  inter- 
urban  lines  on  parallel  roads,  carrying  both  passengers 
and  express. 

By  1923  interurban  buslines  were  operating  pneu- 
matic-tired vehicles  that  would  carry  30  passengers 
and  some  even  60  passengers  in  relative  comfort  at 
fares  of  about  4  cents  per  mile,  which  closely  approxi- 
mated the  rates  charged  by  steam  and  electric  rail- 
roads. For  tlie  convenience  of  both  passengers  and 
buslines,  the  business  interests  in  many  cities,  small 
as  well  as  large,  organized  terminal  associations  to 
provide  waiting  rooms  and  other  terminal  facilities 
for  the  convenience  of  the  public."  Through  compe- 
tition between  themselves  and  financial  mergers,  the 
buslines  rapidly  became  formidable  competitors  of 
both  the  steam  and  electric  railroad  lines  for  pas- 
senger traffic,  and  by  1930  most  of  them  wei'e  placed 
under  State  regulation  as  common  carriers. 

Buses  were  not  the  only  competitors  for  passenger 
traffic.  Rapidly  increasing  motor  car  ownership  was 
equally  damaging  to  the  railroads,  and  by  the  end  of 
the  1930's,  most  of  the  electric  railroads  were  in  re- 
ceivership. So  rapid  was  the  obsolescence  and  de- 
cline of  this  form  of  transportation  that  some  of  these 
were  only  20  years  old  Avhen  they  ceased  operation. 

Heavy  Trucks  Shake  the  Foundations  of  Highway 
Engineering 

Up  to  1917,  the  main  problems  of  highway  engi- 
neers were  financial,  not  technological.  Roadbuilding 
was  an  established  art  practiced  essentially  according 
to  the  precepts  laid  down  by  Tresaguet,  Telford  and 
McAdam  more  than  a  century  earlier.  The  principal 
innovation,  and  perhaps  the  earliest  application  of 
research  to  roadbuilding,  was  the  successful  develop- 
ment of  bituminous  surfaces  in  the  early  1900's  to 
combat  dusting.  The  roads  built  prior  to  World 
War  I  were  narrow  and  thin,  but  they  were  adequate 
for  automobiles  and  farm  vehicles. 

This  feeling  of  technological  well-being  came  to  an 
abrupt  end  in  the  spring  of  1918  with  the  widespread 
failure  of  roads  of  all  types  under  heavy  trucking. 
Prevost  Hubbard,  the  BPR's  chief  chemist  and  ex- 
pert on  bituminous  pavements  described  the  disaster 
as  follows: 

Hundreds  of  miles  of  roads  failed  under  the  heavy 
motor-truck  traffic  within  a  comparatively  few  weeks  or 
months.  Roads  with  bituminous  surfaces,  bituminous 
macadam  roads,  and  bituminous  concrete  roads  all  failed 
alike,  together  with  other  types  u.sed  in  State  and  county 
work.  These  failures  were  not  only  sudden  but  com- 
plete, and  almost  overnight  an  excellent  surface  might 
become  impassable  ...  A  very  large  proportion  of  the 
failures  have  been  characterized  by  an  almost  simul- 
taneous destruction  of  the  entire  road  stnicture,  and  not 
merely  the  disintegration  of  the  wearing  course  or  pave- 
ment proper."' 

Director  Page  made  the  investigation  of  these  mas- 
sive failures  his  first  order  of  business  for  1918.  He 
sent  the  OPRRE  experts  into  every  part  of  the  coun- 
try to  investigate  and  report.  Highway  Engineer 
J.  L.  Harrison  found  two  kinds  of  failure  in  Illinois 


117 


Concrete  mixer 
-     patching  a  had  spot  in  the 
roadbase  (asphalt  top  has 
been  removed). 


and  Ohio.  One  was  failure  of  the  base  due  to  over- 
loading of  a  frost-softened  subgrade,  such  as  Hubbard 
described,  resulting  in  sudden  and  complete  failure. 
The  other  was  internal  failure  of  macadam  bases  due 
to  pressures  high  enough  to  crush  the  stone  particles. 
Harrison  found  failure  by  internal  crushing  in  mac- 
adam bases  as  thick  as  18  inches  near  Chicago.  In 
Wayne  County,  Michigan,  he  found  that  thin  concrete 
pavements  had  broken  up  so  badly  that  they  had  to  be 
resurfaced,  but  that  those  which  were  made  7  or  8 
inches  thick  had  withstood  heavy  trucking  with  little 
damage. 

Albert  T.  Goldbeck  and  F.  H.  Jackson  of  the 
OPRRE's  Division  of  Tests  found  that  brick  roads 
on  concrete  bases  in  Ohio,  Illinois,  and  Indiana  had 
stood  up  well  except  where  the  underlying  earth 
foundation  had  become  softened  due  to  poor  soil  or 
poor  drainage. 

All  investigators  agreed  that  pavements  on  sandy, 
well-drained  soils  had  given  much  better  service  than 
those  on  clay  soils,  especially  at  places  where  drain- 
age was  poor  because  of  inadequate  ditches. 

The  most  significant  observation  of  all  was  by 
Harrison  who  noted  that  hundreds  of  pavement  fail- 
ures were  obviously  due  to  moisture  softening  clay 
soils,  yet  the  shoulders  had  adequate  slope  and  drain- 
age was  excellent.  Some  failures  were  on  low  fills 
where  there  was  no  possibility  that  surface  water 
could  have  penetrated  to  the  subgrade.  Harrison 
concluded  that  these  failures  were  caused  by  "non- 
gravitational  water,"  that  is,  water  held  in  the  soil  by 
capillary  attraction.  Not  only  would  such  soils  not 
drain  by  gravity;  they  would  actually  take  up  more 
water  from  below  by  capillary  action  due  to  their  fine 
pore  structure.     He  also  declared  that  any  theory  of 


design  (such  as  Mc Adam's)  that  held  that  soils  under 
a  pavement  could  be  kept  dry  by  an  impervious  cov- 
ering was  fallacious,  and  therefore  only  soils  that  do 
not  lose  their  strength  when  wet,  such  as  gravels  and 
sands,  should  be  used  there. 

How  to   Manage  the   Behemoth 

The  widespread  destruction  of  the  roads  by  truck- 
ing inspired  angry  demands  for  limits  on  the  Aveight 
of  vehicles,  and  for  crushing  taxes  on  trucks  to  make 
them  "pay  their  fair  share"  of  the  maintenance  bill. 
However,  the  more  thoughtful  leaders,  such  as  Dela- 
ware's influential  chief  highway  engineer  Charles 
Upham,  warned  that  the  motor  truck  was  not  just  a 
wartime  phenomenon,  but  would  be  around  for  years 
after  the  war  was  over.  ".  .  .  the  motor  truck,"  he 
said,  "which  has  been  developed  during  abnormal 
times  has  shown  that  it  has  solved  an  economic  prob- 
lem, and  this  solution  assures  us  that  .  .  .  the  heavy 
truck  will  be  utilized  for  transporting  freight  and 
express  within  expanding  limits.  Therefore,  .  .  .  we 
must  build  and  maintain  in  such  a  way  that  our  roads 
will  withstand,  as  permanently  as  possible,  the  de- 
mands of  the  future  heavy  truck  traffic."  ^^ 

Upham's  viewpoint  was  shared  by  most  of  the  State 
highway  department  heads,  but  none  of  them  had  a 
clear  idea  of  how  truck  traffic  might  develop  or  how 
to  deal  with  it.  However,  they  agreed  completely 
that  legal  limits  must  be  placed  on  the  weight  of  the 
vehicle  and  its  load,  and  that  without  such  limits 
there  would  be  no  way  to  protect  the  rural  roads  from 
destruction.  There  was  a  general  consensus  that  the 
5-ton  capacity  truck  was  the  largest  that  should  be 
allowed  on  the  rural  roads,  although  about  15  percent 
of  the  trucks  then  in  existence  were  of  greater  ca- 


118 


—  NOTICE  — 

No    LOADS    ALLOWED   ON    THIS   ROAD 

IN  EXCESs:-AS  follows:  . 


WIDTH   OF  TIRES. 
U    TO    li   IN. 

2     ,,  2i  ,,. 

4  j 

Threshing  engines 
roads  are  wet  or 
tion  of  the  above 
in  compliance  with 
Ohio. 

By  order 

County  [Commissioners 


No. of   Lbs. 

^500   LBS. 

35oo   ,  ,  . 

5  000  ,  .  . 

6  000  .  , . 

prohibited  when 
MUDDY.  Any  viola- 
will  BE   PROSECUTED 

SEC.4904-R.S.OF 


\ 


\'',*m 


A  load  limit  loas  one 
ansiccr  to  the  problem 
of  heavy  trucks  breaking 
up  the  road  surface. 


pacity  than  that.*  A  few  States  had  already  set 
weight  limits  that  would  permit  net  loads  up  to  about 
7  tons  and  were  planning  to  strengthen  their  roads 
to  carry  these  loads.** 

Spokesmen  for  the  infant  trucking  industry  urged 
the  States  not  to  strangle  trucking  by  imposing  un- 
realistically  low  weight  limits.  George  Pride,  Presi- 
dent of  the  Heavy  Haulage  Company  of  New  York 
City,  spoke  out  against  the  3-ton  limit  advocated  by 
several  States,  which,  he  said,  would  increase  hauling 
costs  by  20  percent,  as  compared  to  hauling  in  5-ton 
or  larger  trucks. 

.  .  .  either  directly  or  indirectly,  the  ultimate  consumer 
pays  the  cost  of  all  transportation  of  the  commodities  he 
uses.  If  the  cost  of  transportation  is  lessened  by  the 
motor  truck,  he  gets  the  benefit  of  the  decrease ;  or,  con- 
versely, if  it  should  be  increased  by  unduly  restrictive 
legislation,  he  would  be  penalized  to  the  extent  of  the 
added  expense.'' 

Pride  recommended  that  gross  loads  of  28,000 
poimds   on   four   wheels  be  permitted   and  also  that 


*  For  example,  in  1917  there  were  55,401  trucks  registered 
in  Xew  York,  of  which  8,895,  or  14  percent,  were  of  6  or 
more  tons  capacity.  Of  these,  3,319  could  carrj'  10  tons  or 
more." 

**  The  limit  in  New  Jersey  was  30,000  pounds  gross.  Mary- 
land permitted  7-ton  trucks  to  operate  but  imposed  a  license 
tax  of  $500  on  them,  compared  to  .$60  for  a  3-ton  truck. 
Connecticut  restricted  gross  loads  to  25,000  pounds  on  four 
wheels. 


tests  be  made  by  an  impartial  committee  to  ascertain 
the  real  damage  caused  by  trucks  to  the  roads.  He 
also  warned: 

Whatever  may  be  the  immediate  limit  placed  upon  the 
motor  truck,  it  is  my  judgment  that  it  must  not  be  con- 
sidered final.  We  are  on  the  eve  of  vast  developments, 
and  requirements  of  the  future  will  demand  greater 
weights,  better  and  different  types  of  road  beds,  reduced 
grades,  etc." 

In  April  1918,  the  Engineering  News-Record  de- 
clared that  the  economic  and  engineering  problems 
brought  on  by  trucking  should  be  faced  squarely  and 
not  postponed: 

.  .  .  highways  have  never  been  investigated  with  the 
thoroughness  that  is  necessary  to  prove  their  right  to 
rank  with  the  railroad  or  the  waterway  as  a  transporta- 
tion agency  .  .  .  We  are  faced  at  the  outset,  then  with 
the  question  whether  it  will  pay  to  build  better  and 
costlier  roads  than  any  yet  contemplated ;  whether  it 
will  pay  to  adopt  the  trailer  idea  ...  or  whether  the 
pneumatic  tire,  now  being  developed  by  at  least  one 
company  for  the  heaviest  loads,  will  not  in  the  end  prove 
the  solution." 

As  long  as  the  country  was  at  war,  little  could  be 
done  on  engineering  and  economic  investigations. 
HoAvever,  the  truck  problem  received  a  high  place  on 
the  agenda  for  the  Joint  Highway  Congress  held  in 
Chicago  in  December  1918.  By  resolution,  that  body 
not  only  recommended  a  thorough  investigation  of 
motor  truck  regulations  and  limitations,  but  also 
urged  the  States  to  undertake  experiments  on  dif- 
ferent types  of  pavements  to  develop  basic  engineer- 
ing knowledge.    The  Congress,  which  was  dominated 


119 


by  urban  and  industrial  interests,  also  recommended 
that  gross  loads  of  14  tons  be  permitted  on  the  high- 
ways provided  the  load  per  inch  width  of  tire  did  not 
exceed  800  pounds.* 

Launching  a  National  Highway  Research  Program 

The  matter  was  brought  to  a  head  in  August  1919 
by  Thomas  R.  Agg,  Testing  Engineer  of  the  Iowa 
State  Highway  Commission,  who  wrote  in  an  article 
for  Public  Roads  magazine:** 

During  the  past  10  years,  the  transition  from  horse- 
drawn  to  motor  traffic  has  been  so  nearly  complete  that 
horse  drawn-traffic  can  no  longer  be  considered  a  con- 
trolling factor  in  highway  design ;  yet  practically  all  of 
the  basic  principles  of  highway  construction  were  evolved 
for  horse-drawn  traffic.  These  have  been  modified  from 
time  to  time  as  experience  has  indicated  defects,  but  for 
the  most  part  local  conditions  have  been  so  large  a  factor 
that  types  and  designs  which  have  been  satisfactory  in 


*  The  800-pound  figure  was  recommended  by  tire  manu- 
facturers as  the  maximum  economic  loading  for  solid  truck 
tires.  Heavier  loads  would,  they  said,  cause  crushing  of  the 
rubber  and  premature  failure  by  fatigue.  At  this  time  the 
widest  tire  manufactured  was  14  inches,  so  the  maximum 
load  that  could  economically  be  carried  by  a  two-wheel  axle 
was  22,400  pounds.'" 

**  Public  Roads  was  an  official  publication  of  the  U.S. 
Department  of  Agriculture.  It  had  been  launched  in  May 
1918,  by  Logan  Waller  Page  as  a  vehicle  for  exchange  among 
the  States  of  information  on  methods  for  financing,  building, 
and  maintaining  roads.  By  1919,  Public  Roads  was  an  im- 
portant voice  for  the  highway  engineering  profession  and 
also,  in  effect,  the  journal  of  AASHO,  which  did  not  have  its 
own  publication,  American  Highways,  until  1922. 


one    State    have    proven    entirely    unsatisfactory    in    an- 
other. .  .  . 

It  seems  imperative  that  investigation  in  the  field  of 
highway  engineering  be  prosecuted  with  the  utmost  vigor 
during  the  next  few  years,  else  it  will  be  found  that 
much  of  the  money  expended  for  highway  improvement 
has  not  secured  highways  of  the  maximum  serviceability 
because  the  design  and  the  requirements  for  materials 
were  based  on  unsound  theories  or  inadequate  tests." 

Agg  then  urged  that  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
take  the  lead  in  a  national  program  of  highway  re- 
search : 

The  bureau  has  already  done  a  large  amount  of  re- 
search work  in  this  field  and  has  trained  investigators 
for  carrying  on  the  work  and  for  passing  on  projects 
submitted  for  action  .  .  .  But  most  important  of  all,  the 
bureau  is  in  close  touch  with  the  highway  work  in  the 
various  States  and  is  in  a  position  to  judge  as  to  the 
problems  most  imperative  of  solution  and  to  secure  the 
assistance  of  the  State  highway  departments  in  those 
problems  requiring  the  actual  construction  of  surfaces 
or  structures." 

In  a  companion  article,  A.  R.  Hirst,  President  of 
AASHO,  not  only  endorsed  Agg's  proposal  but 
pledged  AASHO's  support  "for  this  very  great  and 
necessary  work." 

I  agree  thoroughly  with  Mr.  Agg  in  his  statements 
that  the  present  facilities  for  highway  engineering  in- 
vestigations are  not  adequate  to  meet  the  situation,  or 
to  develop  the  theories  upon  which  the  future  science  of 
highway  engineering  should  be  based. 

It  is  to  my  mind  certain  that  unless  the  United  States 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  builds  up  a  good  and  extensive 
organization  to  prosecute  these  inquiries,  that  nothing 
of  value  can  or  will  be  done  by  any  other  existing  or- 
ganization." 


Truck  damage  to  roadways  led  to  a  coordinated  national  research  program  by  1920. 


120 


Agg's  and  Hirst's  appeal  set  the  stage  for  a  series 
of  events  that  resulted  in  the  forniation  on  November 
11,  1920,  of  the  National  Advisory  Board  on  High- 
way Research,  under  the  auspices  of  the  National 
Research  Council  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences. This  Advisory  Board  was  conceived  as  a 
means  of  bringing  together  in  a  coordinated  national 
research  program  all  the  various  agencies  and  organi- 
zations involved  in  highwa^v  transportation  and  high- 
way research.  The  organization  of  the  Board  was 
completed  July  1921  with  the  appointment  of  Dr.  W. 
K.  Hatt  of  Purdue  University  as  Executive  Director. 

As  his  first  job.  Director  Hatt  prepared  a  list  of 
19  "fundamental  questions  in  highway  transport," 
which,  he  said,  could  not  be  answered  without  data 
that  then  were  unavailable.  A  few  of  these  ques- 
tions, listed  below,  illustrate  the  extent  of  the  current 
ignorance  of  fundamental  highway  problems  i^* 

•  "Wliat  is  the  economical  highway  track  unit  for 
each  of  the  several  situations,  e.g.,  intercity,  farm 
to  market? 

•  Wliat  is  the  cost  of  transport  arising  from  the 
vehicle  and  from  the  road  ? 

•  "Wliat  type  of  road  paving  should  be  selected  for 
a  specific  transport  unit  ? 

•  How  should  the  design  of  the  road  and  paving 
be  modified  to  meet  changing  conditions  of  sub- 
grade,  climate,  etc.?  How  shall  subsoils  be  im- 
proved ? 

•  T^-Tiat  sum  of  money  is  the  locating  engineer 
justified  in  spending  to  avoid  increase  in  distance, 
curvature,  rise  and  fall,  maximum  grade,  maxi- 
mum curve? 

•  What  is  the  capacity  of  a  road  of  given  width  as 
expi'essed  in  vehicles  per  hour,  ton-miles  per 
year,  etc.?  A^liat  is  the  appropriate  unit  for  ex- 
pressing traffic  for  various  purposes  ? 

•  How  can  the  volumetric  changes  in  roads  be 
overcome  ? 

•  "VATiat  is  the  economic  life  of  various  types  of 
roads  ? 

•  "V^^lat  police  regulations  should  control  the  use 
of  roads? 

•  What  principles  should  govern  the  selection  of  a 
system  of  roads  in  its  various  parts,  as  influenced 
by  interstate,  inti-astate,  county  or  local  traffic? 

•  To  what  extent  do  social  betterment,  military 
use,  i.e.,  social  value,  and  other  imponderables 
enter  into  highway  policy  ? 

•  How  shall  safety  be  ensured  on  the  roads? 

Hatt  posed  these  questions  at  a  meeting  of  edu- 
cators and  industrial  leaders  held  at  the  University 
of  Maryland  in  August  1921  and  urged  "a  mobiliza- 
tion of  the  efforts,  of  research  agencies  in  a  compre- 
hensive program,"  adding  that  the  National  Research 
Council  would  be  glad  to  coordinate  the  research  but 
would  not  engage  in  research  directly.^^ 

At  this  time  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  was  the 
only  research  organization  that  was  prepared  to  im- 
mediately begin  work  on  a  large-scale  research  pro- 


gram, and,  in  fact,  it  was  already  working  on  some 
aspects  of  the  program.  The  BPR  had  13  major 
studies  underway  in  the  field  of  physical  research  and 
its  research  budget  was  about  one-third  of  the  total 
national  expenditure  on  highway  research.*  Chief 
MacDonald  took  the  lead  in  the  national  program  by 
expanding  the  BPR's  in-house  activities  and  also  by 
entering  into  cooperative  research  agreements  with 
State  highway  departments  and  universities. 

The   Fruits  of  Research 

Throughout  the  1920's,  with  two  notable  exceptions, 
the  brunt  of  the  research  effort  fell  upon  the  Bureau, 
primarily  because  it  had  the  only  large  assured  in- 
come available  for  the  costly  studies  that  were  re- 
quired.** 

For  about  5  years,  the  investigators  concentrated 
mainly  on  soil  and  pavement  research  to  provide  im- 
mediately usable  information  to  guide  the  vast  paving 
programs  that  were  already  underway.  As  a  result 
of  these  studies,  all  States  stopped  using  thin,  that  is, 
4-  and  5-inch  pavements  and  they  rapidly  adopted  a 
20-foot  minimum  width  for  main  road  pavements.*** 
One  of  the  major  fruits  of  the  research  program  was 
a  rational  method  of  analysis  proposed  in  192.5  by 
Professor  H.  M.  Westergaard  of  the  University  of 
Illinois,  which  removed  much  of  the  guesswork  from 
slab  design. 

Out  of  the  BPR  soils  investigations  there  came  a 
practical  system  for  classifying  soils  into  eight  groups 
based  on  physical  properties  that  could  be  measured 
by  simple  laboratory  tests.  This  was  a  tremendous 
step  forward,  for  it  enabled  the  researchers  to  relate 
pavement  performance  to  measurable  soil  properties 
and,  ultimately,  to  predict  in  advance  of  construction 
the  type  and  depth  of  pavement  that  might  be  re- 
quired for  any  field  condition. 


*  In  1920,  22  State  highway  departments  spent  about 
$175,000  on  research  and  21  colleges  and  universities  about 
$150,000.     In  addition,  the  BPR  spent  about  $150,000.'" 

**  The  two  exceptions  were  the  Bates  Experimental  Road, 
financed  liy  the  Illinois  Division  of  Highways,  and  the  Pitts- 
burg, California,  Test  Track  built  by  the  Columbia  Steel 
Company  with  private  funds. 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921  authorized  the  Secretary 
of  Agriculture  to  deduct  up  to  2%  percent  of  all  Federal-aid 
appropriations  for  administering  Federal  aid  "and  for  carry- 
ing on  necessary  highway  research  and  investigational  studies 
independently  or  in  cooperation  with  the  State  highway  de- 
partments and  other  research  agencies  .  .  ."  From  1922  to 
1932  the  sums  so  set  aside  amounted  to  $1.87  million  per 
year,  of  which  probably  one-half  went  into  research.  By 
contrast,  the  States  were  unable  to  use  Federal-aid  funds  for 
research,  because  the  Government's  policy  was  to  approve 
the  use  of  these  funds  only  for  constmction. 

***  The  Bates  and  Pittsburg  Tests  showed  that  narrower 
pavements  channeled  traffic  near  the  edges  and  caused  ex- 
cessive comer  and  edge  breakage.  In  1928  the  AASHO  rec- 
ommended in  its  first  published  I'oad  standards  that  the 
minimum  width  of  one  traffic  lane  be  10  feet.  Other  consid- 
erations, such  as  safety  and  freedom  of  maneuver  at  higher 
speeds,  also  entered  into  this  I'ecommendation.  AASHO  also 
reconunended  a  minimum  thickness  of  6  inches  for  concrete 
pavements  and  the  strengthening  of  all  unsupported  pave- 
ment edges  in  its  1928  standards." 


121 


Highway  Planning   Begins 

In  1920  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  began  a  series 
of  "transportation  surveys"  in  cooperation  with  the 
States,  and  in  a  few  instances,  with  counties  and 
cities  as  well.  In  all,  there  were  16  investigations 
extending  over  a  period  of  16  years.  Twenty  States 
were  involved  at  various  times  with  the  BPR  in  the 
studies. 

The  first  surveys  were  essentially  traffic  censuses  to 
help  the  cooperating  States  select  their  7-percent 
Federal-aid  systems.  Gradually,  the  studies  became 
more  and  more  research-oriented,  and  by  1925  the 
BPR  and  the  States  were  looking  into  every  aspect 
of  highway  transportation :  the  ownership  of  motor 
vehicles;  the  seasonal,  monthly  and  daily  variations 
in  traffic;  the  types  of  vehicles  using  the  roads;  the 
origin  and  destination  of  cargoes;  the  size  and  weight 


of  trucks  and  the  kinds  of  tires  they  ran  on,  and 
whether  they  were  overloaded.  In  the  later  studies, 
they  examined  driver  behavior — the  average  speeds 
of  drivers  traveling  freely  on  the  highway  and  their 
observance  of  traffic  laws,  such  as  those  prohibiting 
passing  on  hills  and  curves. 

In  Maine,  the  researchers  discovered  a  historical 
relationship  between  vehicle  ownership,  population 
and  traffic.  By  projecting  historical  trends  ahead, 
they  were  able  to  make  fair  estimates  of  traffic  5  years 
in  the  future.  From  these  predictions,  the  investi- 
gators placed  the  highways  in  priority  groups  accord- 
ing to  traffic  density,  the  amount  of  future  truck 
traffic,  and  need  for  improvement.  Finally,  they  sug- 
gested improving  the  deficient  mileage  to  an  adequate 
standard  for  the  5-year  future  traffic,  financing  the 
improvements  with  either  a  bond  issue  or  an  increase 
in  the  gasoline  tax."*    Following  the  Maine  study,  this 


Maryland  State  Roads  Commission  testing  laboratory. 
i 


Gore  drilling  outfit  taking  test  cores. 


122 


kind  of  analysis  was  applied  with  increasing  sophisti- 
cation and  accuracy  in  other  States.  A  major  im- 
provement was  the  substitution  of  gasoline  consump- 
tion for  population  increase  as  an  indicator  of  future 
traffic  growth. 

The  Cleveland  Regional  Area  Traffic  Survey  of 
1927  brought  all  levels  of  government — Federal,  State, 
county  and  city — together  for  the  first  time  in  a  con- 
certed study  of  the  traffic  problem  in  a  single  metro- 
politan region.  The  BPR  whicli  paid  half  of  the  cost 
of  the  survey,  agreed  to  participate  only  on  condition 
that  the  study  be  areawide  without  respect  to  political 
boundaries  and  that  it  lead  to  a  general  highway  plan 
for  the  region.  The  study  actually  resulted  in  a  10- 
year  improvement  plan  costing  $63  million — a  budget 
well  within  the  capability  of  the  region.  The  report 
of  the  survey  ended  with  a  note  of  caution  which  was 
to  be  a  guidepost  to  future  planners : 

Traffic  conditions,  however,  are  constantly  changing, 
and  the  recurrence  of  present  conditions  can  be  prevented 
only  by  careful  and  far-sighted  planning  based  on  a 
definite  Icnowledge  of  these  changing  highway  and  traffic 
conditions.  Proper  highway  planning  must  be  a  con- 
tinuous process,  based  on  a  continuing  series  of  facts  in 
order  that  the  constantly  increasing  traffic  demands  may 
be  foreseen  and  met  with  improvements  as  required.'" 

The  Highway  Boom   Continues 

A  decade  of  unprecedented  national  prosperity 
ended  in  1929,  although  signs  of  a  slowdown  had  ap- 
peared earlier.  The  building  industry,  which  had 
been  in  slow  decline  for  2  years,  went  into  a  slump 
early  in  1929.  By  late  summer  the  building-related 
industries — steel,  cement,  lumber — were  curtailing 
production.  Automobile  sales  began  falling,  but  the 
industry,  in  a  runaway  boom,  produced  5,337,087  ve- 
hicles, a  record  not  to  be  equaled  for  20  years.^" 

After  the  stock  market  collapse  of  October  1929, 
deflation  gained  momentum  as  factory  after  factory 
reduced  production.  With  a  huge  unsold  backlog  of 
1929  cars  hanging  over  the  market,  the  auto  industry 
cut  back  to  3.36  million  units  in  1930,  2.38  million  in 
1931,  and  1.33  million  in  1932  and  laid  off  thousands 
of  workers.^^  Nationally,  unemployment  increased 
from  1.5  million  in  1929  to  12  million  in  1932  as  the 
gross  national  product  dropped  from  its  1929  high  of 
$104  billion  to  $58.5  billion  in  1932. 

Throughout  this  massive  deflation,  roadbuilding 
held  up  much  better  than  other  kinds  of  manufactur- 
ing. During  the  "Roaring  Twenties,"  the  States  built 
up  their  roadbuilding  capability  to  the  point  where 
they  could  obligate  $100  million  of  Federal  aid  per 
year.  This  rate  exceeded  Congress  authorizations 
and  was  possible  only  because  of  the  backlog  of  un- 
expended funds  from  the  early  years  of  the  program. 
By  1928  this  backlog  was  exhausted  and  the  States 
began  to  cut  back  their  programs  to  fit  the  authoriza- 
tions, which  were  only  $75  million  per  year.  The 
slowdown  became  apparent  in  fiscal  year  1929,  when 
the  completed  Federal-aid  mileage  that  year  (initial 
construction  plus  stage  construction)  fell  to  9,386 
miles  from  its  1928  level  of  10,174  miles,  and  it  car- 
ried on  into  fiscal  year  1930.^^ 

After  the  1929  crash.  Congress,  at  the  President's 
request,   sought   to  bolster  the   sagging  economy  by 


authorizing  large  sums  for  public  works,  including 
highways.  The  authorization  of  April  4,  1930  (46 
Stat  141)  increased  the  regular  Federal  aid  for  fiscal 
year  1931  by  $50  million,  to  a  total  of  $125  million, 
and  authorized  $125  million  per  year  for  1932  and 
1933.  The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  apportioned  the 
new  1931  funds  immediately  and  also  made  the  1932 
apportionments  available  for  use  in  September  1930, 
instead  of  December,  as  in  the  past.  This  action 
made  $175  million  of  Federal  funds  immediately 
available,  which  was  more  than  many  States  were  able 
to  match,  principally  because  their  legislatures  were 
not  in  session  to  make  the  matching  appropriations 
and  would  not  meet  until  January  1931,  or  later. 

Congress  met  this  situation  by  appropriating  $80 
million  to  be  apportioned  among  the  States  in  the 
same  manner  as  Federal  aid  and  to  be  used  to  match 
the  regular  Federal -aid  apportionments.  These  funds 
were  really  advances  to  the  States,  not  grants,  and 
were  to  be  repaid  by  deduction  from  the  regular 
Federal-aid  apportionments  over  a  period  of  5  years. 
Further,  Congress  required  that  all  of  <  these  emer- 
gency funds  be  obligated  by  September  1,  1931.* 

The  States  responded  to  this  stimulus  with  com- 
mendable promptness.  By  June  30,  1931,  they  obli- 
gated $55  million  of  the  emergency  money  and  by 
August  the  entire  amount,  along  with  most  of  the 
regular  Federal  aid.  Completed  initial  and  stage 
construction  jumped  to  11,033  miles,  and  in  1932  it 
went  far  beyond  that,  to  15,997  miles. 

In  a  small  way,  this  highway  construction  helped 
to  stabilize  employment,  particularly  winter  employ- 
ment for  farmers  who  had  been  hard  hit  by  severe 
drought  in  1930.  Chief  MacDonald  reported  that  the 
early  authorizations  and  the  emergency  loans  had 
boosted  employment  on  Federal-aid  highway  projects 
from  30,944  men  in  January  1931  to  155,466  in  July 
1931,  while  the  total  of  all  Federal  and  State  highway 
employment  that  month  was  385,349  men.^^  However, 
the  stimulation  was  short-lived  and  by  July  1932, 
total  highway  employment  was  only  305,372  persons.^* 

Diversion  of  Highway  Revenues — A  Thorny  Issue 

In  the  early  years  of  the  Depression,  there  was  a 
precipitous  drop  in  the  collections  from  income  and 
property  taxes.  Personal  income  was  down  and  des- 
titution was  widespread.  Millions  of  people  lost  their 
life  savings  in  the  stock  market  crash  and  the  wave 
of  bank  failures  that  followed.  Drought  and  low 
agricultural  prices  wiped  out  tens  of  thousands  of 
farmers  who  lost  their  farms  by  foreclosures  and  tax 
sales.  The  resulting  shortfall  of  revenue  was  felt 
with  particular  acuteness  by  the  counties  and  town- 
ships which  had  traditionally  depended  on  property 
taxation  for  the  support  of  schools  and  local  roads. 

Surprisingly,  road-user  revenues  were  remarkably 
stable.  Motor  vehicle  registrations  increased  slightly 
in  1930  as  compared  to  1929,  reaching  the  peak  of  an 


*  Emergency  Construction  Act  of  December  20,  1930  (46 
Stat  1030).  The  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of  June  18,  1934, 
converted  these  loans  into  outright  grants. 


123 


uninterrupted  rising  trend  extending  back  to  the  in- 
vention of  the  automobile.*  To  millions  of  owners, 
the  automobile  was  no  longer  a  luxury  but  a  necessity 
of  daily  existence,  and  sometimes  gasoline  came  ahead 
of  food  and  clothing  in  the  family  budget.  The  1931 
receipts  from  vehicle  registrations  and  fees  were  only 
6.7  percent  below  1929,  and  in  1932  the  yield  dropped 
another  1.9  percent.  These  were  insignificant  losses 
compared  to  the  massive  deficiencies  in  other  public 
revenues.  The  shrinkage  of  $26.9  million  per  year  in 
revenue  from  registrations  and  fees  was  more  than 
made  up  by  a  whopping  $5.5.5  million  increase  in  the 
annual  yield  of  the  fuel  tax  which,  with  registrations, 
gave  the  States  an  annual  highway  revenue  in  addi- 
tion to  Federal  aid  of  $807  million  in  1932.3« 

This  huge  revenue  was  an  irresistible  magnet  to 
hard-pressed  legislatures.  In  the  words  of  one  com- 
mentator, ".  .  .  the  motor  tax  has  become  a  big  red 
apple  within  easy  reach,  viewed  with  slavering  lips 
by  every  agency  of  government."  ^^  In  1932,  16  States 
"diverted"  $82.8  million  of  road-user  revenue  to  non- 
highway  purposes,  over  one-half  of  this  by  New  York. 
Diversions  increased  to  $145  million  in  1933  and  $164 
million  in  1934;  and  in  the  decade  from  1930  to  1939 
they  totaled  the  huge  sum  of  $1.25  billion.^® 

Diversion  of  highway  funds  to  nonhighway  pur- 
poses began  before  the  Depression  but  did  not  become 
a  real  detriment  to  the  highway  improvement  pro- 
gram until  about  1930.  In  1916  six  States  diverted 
their  entire  receipts  from  motor-vehicle  fees — some 
$700,000 — to  nonhighway  purposes.  When  the  gaso- 
line tax  became  popular,  diversions  increased,  until 
by  1924  they  were  about  $10.7  million  nationwide. 
By  this  time,  motorists,  the  automotive  industries, 
and  the  good  roads  supporters  began  to  be  alarmed  by 
the  trend.  In  1928  they  had  enough  influence  in 
Kansas  and  Missouri  to  push  through  constitutional 
amendments  prohibiting  diversion  of  highway  reve- 
nues. 

Its  opponents  argued  that  diversion  was  unfair  be- 
cause it  saddled  one  class  of  taxpayers — the  motor- 
ists— with  more  than  their  fair  share  of  the  general 
expenses  of  government.  The  author  of  Oregon's 
pioneering  gasoline  tax  law  said,  "We  might  as  well 
tax  sugar  to  build  roads  as  to  tax  gasoline  to  run  the 
government."  ^^  In  particular,  diversion  penalized 
lower  income  families,  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
whom  were  totally  dependent  on  automobiles  and 
buses  to  get  to  work  and  back  again.** 

However,  the  most  telling  argument  against  diver- 
sion was  that  it  was  self-defeating  as  a  means  of 
fighting  unemployment.  In  1932  J.  L.  Harrison  of 
the  BPR  traced  the  employment  generated  by  the 
construction  of  reinforced  concrete  pavement  and 
found  that  ultimately  80  to  90  percent  of  the  total 


expenditure  was  laid  out  for  labor  and  that  only  one- 
seventh  of  this  labor  was  direct  employment  at  the 
road  site.  In  other  words,  for  every  person  employed 
directly  on  the  job,  seven  others  were  indirectly  em- 
ployed making  cement,  aggregates,  and  machinery 
and  in  transporting  these  products  through  the  econ- 
omy.*^ Dollars,  therefore,  were  much  more  effective 
when  used  to  build  roads  than  when  used  for  direct 
relief  or  a  dole. 

This  argument  was  not  lost  on  the  Congress,  which 
not  only  greatly  increased  authorizations  for  roads, 
but  also  declared  in  the  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of 
June  18,  1934: 

Since  it  is  unfair  and  unjust  to  tax  motor- vehicle 
transportation  unless  the  proceeds  of  such  taxation  are 
applied  to  the  construction,  improvement  or  maintenance 
of  highways,  after  June  30,  1935,  Federal  aid  for  high- 
way construction  shall  be  extended  only  to  those  States 
that  use  at  least  the  amounts  now  provided  by  law  for 
such  purposes  in  each  State  from  State  motor  vehicle 
registration  fees,  licenses,  gasoline  taxes,  and  other  spe- 
cial taxes  on  motor-vehicle  owners  and  operators  .  .  . 

Only  two  States  lost  Federal  money  because  of  this 
Act,  but  it  put  a  brake  on  further  diversions,  while 
the  antidiversionists  marshaled  public  opinion  for  a 
series  of  constitutional  amendments  that,  along  with 
an  improving  economic  climate,  eventually  brought 
the  problem  under  control.  By  1942,  14  States  had 
such  amendments.* 

Priming  the   Pump 

As  the  national  economy  continued  to  decline, 
Congress  applied  another  stimulus  in  the  Emergency 
Relief  and  Construction  Act  of  July  21,  1932.  This 
Act  appropriated  $120  million  for  advances  to  the 
States  to  match  Federal-aid  funds  with  the  proviso 
that  the  funds  should  be  obligated  before  July  1, 
1933.  The  advances  were  to  be  repaid  by  deduction 
from  regular  Federal-aid  apportionments  over  a 
period  of  10  years.** 

In  a  number  of  States,  this  assistance  was  sorely 
needed.  Many  had  over  extended  themselves  during 
the  business  boom  by  huge  bond  issues  secured  by  the 
State's  highway  revenues.***  By  1927  bond  interest 
and  repayments  were  an  appreciable  part  of  the  high- 
way budget  in  many  States,  amounting  to  $48  million 
nationwide;  and  by  1932  this  figure  had  risen  to  $90 
million.*^  As  had  been  predicted  by  opponents  of 
bond  financing,  these  payments  became  a  heavy  bur- 
den, cutting  into  the  funds  available  for  maintenance 


*  Registration  peaked  at  26,523,779  vehicles  in  1930.  From 
1921  to  1926  registrations  had  increased  at  a  rate  of  about 
16  percent  per  year,  but  for  the  years  1927  to  1929,  this  rate 
dropped  to  about  6  percent  per  year.  From  1931  to  1934 
registrations  were  24  to  25  million  per  year.'" 

**  About  1940  a  study  by  the  Department  of  Commercp 
.showed  that  half  of  all  car-owning  families  had  a  weel?ly 
income  of  $30  or  less,  three-fourths  had  less  than  $40  per 
week  and  90  percent  less  than  $60  per  week."" 


*  The  Federal  Government  did  not  practice  what  it 
preached.  Until  1956,  it  treated  excise  taxes  on  motor  ve- 
hicles and  fuels  as  general  revenues  not  connected  in  any 
way  with  grants  to  the  States  for  highways.  From  1918 
through  1930  the  Federal  Government  collected  $1.17  billion 
in  excise  taxes  and  from  1933  through  1936  another  $1.08 
billion." 

**  These  advances  were  converted  to  grants  by  the  Hayden- 
Cartwright  Act  of  .Tune  18,  1934. 

***  Illinois  had  pioneered  this  method  of  placing  the  high- 
way burden  on  the  road  users  in  its  $60  million  bond  issue  of 
1919."  In  1923,  the  Legislature,  against  the  opposition  of 
business  and  financial  interests,  approved  the  issue  of  an 
additional  $100  million  of  highway  bonds." 


124 


and  even  for  matching  Federal  aid.*  State  funds 
were  further  depleted  by  increased  allocations  of 
highway  revenues  to  counties  to  meet  the  charges  on 
their  own  highway  bonds  and  to  replace  shriveling 
property  taxes,  by  payments  to  the  financially  be- 
leaguered cities  and  b}'  diversion  to  nonhighway  pur- 
poses, principally  schools  and  relief. 

The  road  contracts  financed  with  Emergency  Relief 
and  Construction  funds  were  the  first  to  contain  pre- 
determined minimum  wages  for  skilled  and  unskilled 
labor.  Congress  insisted  on  these  determinations  to 
protect  labor  from  wage  pressure  and  arrest  fui^ther 
deflation  in  wage  rates.  These  contracts  set  tlic  pat- 
tern for  other  road  work,  and  in  a  short  time,  mini- 
mum wages  became  standard  provisions  in  all  public 
works  contracts. 

With  the  change  of  administrations  in  1933,  the 
Government  suspended  regular  Federal-aid  authori- 
zations and  embarked  on  a  massive  program  of 
emergency  public  works.  The  National  Industrial 
Recovery  Act  of  June  16,  1933  provided  $400  million 
in  grants  to  the  States  without  the  requirement  that 
they  be  matched  by  State  funds  and  instituted  some 
notable  changes  in  Federal  road  policy.  For  the  first 
time,  Federal  funds  could  be  sjDent  on  urban  streets 
that  were  extensions  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  sys- 
tem to  and  through  municipalities  and  on  "secondary 
and  feeder  roads"  that  were  not  on  the  Federal-aid 
system.** 

To  spread  the  work,  Congress  limited  employment 
to  30  hours  per  week  per  worker,  prohibited  convict 
labor,  and  required  that  hand  labor  methods  be  used 
"wherever  consistent  with  sound  economy  and  public 
advantage."  The  States  were  required  to  predeter- 
mine fair  wage  rates  and  to  give  employment  prefer- 
ence to  veterans. 

Congress  continued  the  emergency  program  by  ap- 
propriating $200  million  for  unmatched  grants  to  the 
States  in  the  1934  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  and,  a 
year  later,  $200  million  for  highways  and  $200  mil- 
lion for  eliminating  hazards  at  railroad  grade  cross- 
ings in  the  Emergency  Relief  Appropriation  Act  of 
April  8,  1935.  These  grants,  with  the  National  In- 
dustrial Recovery  Act  grant,  pumped  a  billion  dollars 
into  highway  construction  between  1933  and  1938 — 
enough  to  assure  the  continuation  of  highway  build- 
ing at  boom  levels.  Altogether,  the  emergency  funds 
financed  over  54.000  miles  of  road  improvements  on 
the  Federal-aid  system,  urban  extensions  and  second- 
ary feeder  roads,  plus  the  elimination  of  nearly  3,000 
railroad  grade  crossings.*^ 

Of  equal  or  greater  importance  in  the  reckoning  of 
the  Administration,  the  emergency  program  provided 
the  equivalent  of  162.000  full-time  jobs  per  year  at 
the  job  site  during  the  depths  of  the  Depression.*** 


Indirect  employment  generated  by  the  program  was 
well  over  480,000  full-time  jobs.* 

The  Broadening  of  Federal  Highway  Policy 

The  emergency  funding  for  1933,  1934  and  1935 
had  channeled  Federal  money  into  urban  areas  and 
into  secondary  farm-to-market  roads  not  on  the 
Federal-aid  system.  These  emergency  measures  be- 
came permanent  Federal  policy  in  the  1934  Hayden- 
Cartwright  Act,  which  also  abolished  the  limit  on 
Federal  payment  per  mile  of  road.  In  this  Act,  Con- 
gress resumed  its  practice  of  authorizing  Federal-aid 
funds  2  years  in  advance,  and  also  the  requirement 
that  Federal  funds  be  matched  by  the  States.** 

This  return  to  established  Federal -aid  principles 
locked  the  rather  considerable  Federal-aid  authoriza- 
tions into  the  1936,  1937  and  subse(]uent  budgets  and 
also  i)i-ovol<:ed  a  bitter  attack  on  Federal  aid  from  the 
President.  On  November  27,  1937,  President  Roose- 
velt sent  a  message  to  Congress  protesting  that  Con- 
gress practice  of  advance  authorizations  "ties  the 
hands  of  the  Executive"  and  the  Budget  Director  and 
should  be  abandoned.  The  President's  message  seemed 
merely  to  antagonize  the  Congress  and  strengthened 
its  support  for  Federal  aid.  Senator  Carl  Hayden, 
the  principal  defender  of  Federal  aid  stated  publicly 
that  tying  the  hands  of  the  Executive  in  the  use  of 
road  funds  was  "exactly  what  the  Congress  intended 
to  do."    He  continued, 

'Although  the  President  transmitted  with  his  message 
the  draft  of  a  bill  to  change  the  system  and  repeal  much 
of  the  basic  highway  law,  there  teas  not  one  Senator  or 
one  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives  who  would 
even  introduce  the  bill,  and  the  system  has  continued  to 
operate  just  as  it  is  now  functioning.'  ™ 

The  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  permitted  the  States 
to  use  Federal-aid  funds  for  plans,  surveys  and  engi- 
neering investigations  for  future  work,  and  this 
authority  was  broadened  in  the  Agricultural  Appro- 
priations Act  of  June  16,  1936  to  include  economic 
investigations  as  well.  The  States  could  use  up  to 
11/^  percent  of  their  matched  Federal  aid  for  these 
activities.  This  money  provided  the  stimulus  and  the 
means  for  statewide  highway  planning  surveys  in 
every  State  similar  to  the  BPR's  cooperative  trans- 
portation studies  of  the  preceding  decade.     In  a  few 


*  To  redeem  its  certificates  of  indebtedness,  thp  Louisiana 
Highway  Commission  laid  off  half  of  its  maintenance  em- 
ployees January  1933,  replacing  them  with  relief  workers.'' 

**  The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  channeled  one-quarter  of 
the  funds  into  urban  extensions  and  one-quarter  of  the  re- 
mainder into  feeder  roads. 

***  Actual  employment  fluctuated  seasonally  from  about 
70,000  In  the  winter  months  to  as  high  as  336,000  in  summer.** 


*  BPR  studies  of  a  decade  of  highway  expenditures  showed 
that,  nationwide,  24.4  percent  of  the  total  highway  cost  was 
for  direct  labor  at  the  job  site,  50.3  percent  was  for  indirect 
labor  for  producing  materials  and  equipment  used  on  the  job, 
and  the  remainder  reached  workers  in  other  industries  stim- 
ulated by  the  highway  investments.  For  high-type  surfaces, 
direct  labor  on  the  job  was  only  18  percent  of  the  total  cost, 
but  for  grading  work,  it  went  as  high  as  43  percent  of  the 
cost.  The  BPR  concluded,  "Where  hand  labor  is  permitted 
to  replace  modern  equipment  the  amount  of  improvement 
obtained  with  a  given  expenditure  is  materially  reduced,  and 
the  benefit  to  indirect  or  industrial  labor  in  cities  becomes 
almost  negligible."  " 

**  The  States  were  required  to  match  the  Federal  funds 
dollar  for  dollar  except  for  those  States  in  which  more  than 
5  percent  of  the  total  area  was  nontaxable  public  domain  or 
Indian  lands,  where  the  Ferleral  share  was  larger.  In  Ne- 
vada, where  such  lands  were  over  80  percent  of  the  State's 
total  area.  Federal  aid  was  about  90  percent  of  the  total 
project  cost. 


125 


years,  all  of  the  States  developed  strong  planning 
and  research  organizations  which  joined  with  the 
Bureau  and  the  universities  in  the  first  comprehensive 
investigation  of  national  highway  problems.  This 
national  study  led  directly  to  Congress  authorization 
in  1944  of  a  system  of  "interregional  highways" 
within  the  Federal-aid  system. 

In  these  two  Acts  Congress  not  only  continued  its 
traditional  support  for  roads  in  the  national  forests,* 
but  also  appropriated  funds  for  roads  in  Indian 
reservations,  national  parks,  and  unreserved  lands  of 
the  public  domain,  and  for  "parkways  to  give  access 
to  national  parks,  and  national  monuments,  or  to  be- 
come connecting  sections  of  a  national  parkway 
plan  .  .  ." 

Obsolescence  Overtakes  the   Highways 

After  1921  the  States  concentrated  their  efforts  on 
improving  the  7  percent  Federal-aid  system  into  a 
travelable  national  network.  As  traffic  became  heav- 
ier in  volume  and  faster,  the  States  improved  the 
highways  to  keep  pace.  They  widened  pavements 
first  to  18  feet  as  required  by  the  Federal  Highway 
Act  of  1921  and  then  to  20  feet.  Some  States  banked 
the  curves  of  old  roads  to  make  them  safer  and  flat- 
tened the  cut  slopes  for  greater  visibility.  The  high- 
way departments  of  the  public  land  States  smoothed 
thousands  of  right  angle  turns  with  flatter  curves. 
For  the  most  part,  these  improvements  were  accom- 
plished by  the  maintenance  forces  or  by  small  con- 
tracts with  State  funds.  But  in  1929,  for  the  first 
time  the  BPR  began  to  approve  Federal  aid  for  "re- 
construction" of  roads  previously  improved  with 
Federal-aid  funds.  By  June  1930,  nearly  21  miles  in 
five  States  had  been  reconstructed,  and  this  mileage 
increased  rapidly  in  succeeding  years. 

The  roads  in  the  eastern  and  northern  States,  where 
the  Federal-aid  mileage  had  been  reinforced  after 
World  War  I  with  concrete  or  brick  pavements,  were 
still  far  from  worn  out  by  1930  but  were  obsolete 
in  alinement,  grade  and  width,  resulting  in  thousands 
of  miles  being  rebuilt  during  the  1930's.  In  many 
cases  the  States  made  entirely  new  locations,  relin- 
quishing the  old  roads  to  the  local  authorities. 

As  could  be  expected,  there  was  no  lack  of  criticism 
for  these  abandonments  because  when  the  roads  were 
originally  paved,  it  is  doubtful  that  a  relocation  policy 
would  have  been  possible.  To  begin  with,  in  the  early 
1920's,  property  holders  would  have  considered  it  ex- 
travagant to  jettison  the  old  road  and  its  improve- 
ments. The  crying  need  was  for  durable  surfacing, 
and  most  everyone  thought  the  available  funds  should 
be  spent  on  this  rather  than  right-of-way  and  new 
grading.  Then,  too,  diverting  the  road  from  its  old 
course  would  have  been  bitterly  resisted  by  landown- 
ers along  the  route,  with  possibly  years  of  delay  in 
getting  the  program  started.  For  most  of  them,  the 
roads  were  already  good  enough  in  alinement  and 
width. 


Long  distance  travel  by  road  had  not  developed  and 
was  not  foreseen.  For  the  local  movements  from  one 
town  to  its  immediate  neighbors  the  indirection  of  the 
old  roads  was  not  a  disadvantage,  but  an  advantage. 
Motor  vehicles  were  incapable  of  high  speed  and  were 
legally  restricted  to  very  low  speeds.  The  desire  for  the 
present  high  speed  had  not  been  born  in  a  populace  still 
tied  to  its  home  places  and  regarding  30  miles  an  hour 
as  a  breakneck  pace.  The  improved  curvature  obtainable 
by  slightly  cutting  the  corners  of  the  existing  rights-of- 
way  was  all  that  was  believed  to  be  needed,  and  all  that 
could  reasonably  be  foreseen  as  required  in  the  future." 

By  1934  the  Federal-aid  system,  including  author- 
ized additions,  mostly  in  national  forests  and  public 
land  areas,  comprised  207,231  miles;  and  96  percent 
of  it  had  received  some  kind  of  improvement.*  But 
the  improved  sections  varied  widely  in  adequacy  for 
traffic  and  in  safety  for  road  users.  In  Chief  Mac- 
Donald's  words. 

Moreover,  in  the  effort  to  extend  surfaced  mileage  the 
presence  of  defects  in  alignment  and  the  generally  lower 
standards  of  the  earlier  work  had  been  tolerated.  Bridges 
inherited  from  a  much  earlier  period  had  been  held  in 
service  though  in  many  cases  it  was  necessary  to  post 
them  for  limited  loads  and  their  narrow  widths  pro- 
hibited the  safe  passing  of  vehicles  on  them.  Thousands 
of  railroad  grade  crossings  had  been  allowed  to  remain, 
each  in  some  degree  hazardous.  All  these  known  defects 
had  been  tolerated  to  advance  more  rapidly  the  first 
essential  task  of  smoothing  and  strengthening  the  road 
surfaces  to  get  a  growing  traffic  through."" 

The  improvements  eased  the  worst  bottlenecks 
temporarily,  but  for  many  thousands  of  miles,  it  was 
impossible  to  build  a  really  adequate  road  on  the 
existing  locations.  The  roads  were  simply  too  crooked 
and  the  rights-of-way  too  narrow  to  permit  upgrading 
to  modern  standards.  More  and  more,  the  States  be- 
gan to  build  new  roads  on  new  locations  for  high 
speed  traffic,  relinquishing  the  old  ones  to  the  counties 
for  maintenance. 

The  locators  of  these  new  roads  and  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads'  engineers  who  approved  them  held  a 
philosophy  of  location  that  was  best  expressed  in  1920 
by  Delaware's  influential  chief  engineer,  Charles  M. 
Upham : 

In  giving  consideration  to  alignment  roads  may  be 
divided  into  two  classes,  roads  located  within  parks,  and 
intended  as  scenic  roads  and  used  mainly  by  sightseers 
and  tourists,  and  roads  that  can  be  considered  as  com- 
mercial and  industrial  roads,  which  would  be  located 
within  and  between  business  centers,  towns  and  cities. . . . 

In  considering  the  alignment  of  commercial  roads,  or 
direct  routes,  it  must  always  be  remembered  that  a 
straight  line  is  the  shortest  distance  between  two  points, 
and  from  a  commercial  standpoint  the  shortest  way  is 
not  only  the  most  direct,  but  with  other  things  equal,  is 
the  most  economical ;  therefore,  it  seems  to  be  prac- 
tically conceded  that  ideally  aligned  commercial  roads 
are  those  that  are  laid  in  absolutely  straight  lines. 

Where  there  are  costly  influences  entering  the  problem 
that  make  it  impossible  or  impracticable  to  follow  the 
straight  line,  then  the  alignment  should  approach  the 
straight  line,  and  become  a  compromise  of  line,  grade, 
and  cost  of  construction.^ 

This  dogma  dominated  highway  engineering  in  the 
United  States  for  half  a  century,  leaving  a  legacy  of 
thousands  of  miles  of  absolutely  straight  monotonous 
highway. 


♦  From  1917  through  fiscal  year  1933,  Congress  appro- 
priated $122  million  for  forest  highways,  most  of  which  was 
administered  directly  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 


*  Of   the   improved   mileage,   almost   80,000  miles   had   been 
accomplished  by  the  States  without  Federal  aid. 


126 


tf^jM^'JSft 


The  first  centerline  on  a  rural  State  highway  was  painted 
between  Marquette  and  Ishpeming,  Mich.,  in  1917. 

Highway  Safety  Becomes  a  Serious  National  Problem 

Aside  from  Upham's  arguments,  there  were  two 
main  justifications  for  straight  highways.  Having 
no  curves,  they  were  thought  to  be  less  hazardous  to 
drive  and  also  practically  immune  to  obsolescence, 
since  a  straight  road  can  be  driven  at  the  maximum 
speed  of  wliich  an  automobile  is  capable.  This  last 
argument  was  important  at  a  time  when  speed  records 
were  falling  almost  every  year  at  the  Indianapolis 
Speedway  and  many  engineers  were  predicting  stock 
car  speeds  of  70  or  even  80  miles  per  hour. 

The  safety  argument  was  even  more  persuasive. 
Throughout  the  1920's  highway  fatalities  kept  pace 
with  the  growth  of  the  vehicle  fleet  and  by  1924  had 
reached  almost  20,000  per  year.^*     Recognizing  that 


the  problem  was  national  in  scope,  Secretary  of  Com- 
merce Herbert  Hoover  convened  the  First  National 
Conference  on  Street  and  Highway  Safety  in  Wash- 
ington in  December  1924.  Here,  for  the  first  time, 
representatives  of  State  highway  and  motor  vehicle 
commissions,  police,  insurance  companies,  the  steam 
and  electric  railroads,  safety  councils  and  chambers 
of  commerce,  labor  unions,  women's  clubs,  automobile 
associations,  automotive  manufacturers,  and  truck  and 
bus  operators  met  in  one  place  to  discuss  means  of 
abating  what  was  already  a  national  scandal. 

Committees  appointed  6  months  in  advance  reported 
wide  differences  in  traffic  regulations  from  State  to 
State  and  city  to  city.  They  found  "an  almost  total 
lack  of  systematic  effort  to  secure  accurate  and  com- 
plete data  regard  such  [traffic]  accidents,  their  types 


127 


and  causes,  and  methods  of  prevention."  Twenty 
States  made  no  attempt  to  collect  accident  statistics. 
Only  8  States  required  that  accidents  resulting  in 
personal  injury  be  reported  to  the  commissioner  of 
motor  vehicles  or  similar  centralized  authority,  and 
38  required  railroads  and  common  carriers  to  report 
highway  accidents.'^ 

The  Committee  on  Traffic  Control  reported  that 
high  road  crowns,  a  carryover  from  the  earlier  days 
of  horsedrawn  traffic,  caused  the  "currents  of  traffic" 
to  hug  the  middle  of  the  road  instead  of  keeping  to 
the  right.  Hand  signals  to  warn  others  of  the  inten- 
tions of  drivers  were  not  standardized,  causing  con- 
fusion and  hazard.  The  Committee  concluded  that  it 
was  impossible  to  fix  any  safe  speed  limit  but  that 
traveling  at  a  speed  of  over  35  miles  an  hour  should 
be  considered  unreasonable  and  evidence  of  reckless 
driving.  The  Committee  doubted  the  feasibility  of 
imposing  minimum  speed  limits  on  heavily  traveled 
highways,  even  though  failure  to  follow  the  prevail- 
ing speed  was  a  recognized  cause  of  accidents.^® 

The  Committee  on  Construction  and  Engineering 
brought  in  a  long  list  of  inadequacies  in  the  highways 
and  recommended  that  no  paved  road  or  street  should 
be  less  than  18  feet  wide,  or  any  bridge  less  than  22 
feet  wide.  Rural  highways  should  be  provided  with 
emergency  off-road  stopping  places  at  intervals  not 
exceeding  300  feet,  and  stopping  on  the  traveled  way 
should  then  be  prohibited.  Grades  for  primary  high- 
ways should  be  6  percent  or  less  but  might  go  up  to  9 
percent  in  the  mountains;  the  minimum  curve  radius 
should  be  300  feet,  and  a  300-foot  sight  distance 
should  be  provided  everywhere  on  main  highways. 
For  safety,  high  crowns  should  be  reduced  and  curves 
superelevated  and  widened.^'^  A  white  centerline 
stripe  should  be  painted  on  the  pavement  to  indicate 
no-passing  danger  sections  such  as  curves  and  hilltops, 
and  signs  warning  of  hazards  such  as  curves  and  rail- 
road crossings  should  be  uniform  throughout  the 
United  States.^^  Noting  that  10  percent  of  all  fatali- 
ties were  at  railroad  grade  crossings,  the  Committee 
recommended  that  a  priority  program  be  set  up  to 
eliminate  the  most  dangerous  crossings  first.^^ 

The  Committee  on  the  Motor  Vehicle  reported  that 
a  vehicle  speed  governor  would  be  desirable  but  that 
as  yet  a  practical  one  had  not  been  devised.  The 
most  urgent  safety  problem  facing  the  industry  was 
the  design  of  headlights  that  would  adequately  il- 
luminate the  road  ahead  without  blinding  oncoming 
drivers.  Illumination  engineers  had  worked  out  com- 
binations of  lenses  and  mirrors,  but  these  compro- 
mises were  difficult  to  keep  in  adjustment  and  were 
far  from  satisfactory.*  Another  difficult  problem  was 
providing  adequate  vision  for  the  driver.  The  Com- 
mittee thought  that  "Some  device  for  cleaning  the 
windshield  from  rain  and  snow,  that  can  be  con- 
veniently operated  by  the  driver  should  be  avail- 
able .  .  ."  and  also  that  "All  windshields  should  be 
designed  so  that  they  can  be  opened  to  allow  clear 
vision   in   case   circumstances   make  it  impossible  to 


*  This  problem  was  not  adequately  resolved  until  the  intro- 
duction of  sealed  beam  headlights  about  20  years  later. 


keep  the  windshield  clean."  ®°  This  Committee  also 
thought  that  vehicles  should  be  so  designed  that  the 
accelerator  could  not  be  easily  confused  with  the  brake 
pedal  and  all  vehicles  should  have  brakes  capable  of 
stopping  the  vehicle  in  50  feet  from  a  speed  of  20 
miles  per  hour.^^ 

The  Conference  approved  and  recommended  the 
adoption  by  legislative,  administrative,  technical  and 
educational  bodies  of  a  wide  range  of  measures 
"which,  if  carried  out  even  in  part,  will  effect  an 
immediate  reduction  in  the  accident  toll."  It  also 
recommended  that  the  States,  as  the  sovereign  politi- 
cal units  closest  to  the  problem,  take  the  lead  by  pass- 
ing adequate  motor  vehicle  laws  and  setting  up 
suitable  machinery  for  administering  them  and  for 
policing  the  highways,  registering  vehicles  and  licens- 
ing drivers.  To  the  Federal  Government,  the  Con- 
ference assigned  the  role  of  encouragement,  assembly 
and  distribution  of  information,  and  the  development 
and  use  of  good  practices,  leaving  the  achievement  of 
uniformity  to  the  voluntary  action  of  the  various 
States.  Under  legislative  principles  the  Conference 
declared, 

There  is  in  the  opinion  of  the  Conference,  a  tendency 
to  include  far  too  much  detail  in  legislation.  This  not 
only  divides  responsibility  but  also  hinders  progress 
toward  uniformity.  Laws  should  be  so  drafted  as  to 
include  only  those  features  which  must  be  authorized  by 
legislation,  leaving  the  great  mass  of  detailed  regulations 
to  be  prescribed  by  the  responsible  officials  whose  orders 
should,  within  the  limits  fixed  by  statute,  have  the  effect 
of  law. 

There  should  be  a  minimum  of  restrictive  laws  and 
regulations,  for  the  history  of  transportation  shows  that 
restrictive  measures  written  without  regard  to  economic 
needs  have  always  proved  a  failure.^^ 

For  lack  of  reliable  statistics,  the  Conference  was 
unable  to  come  to  any  formal  conclusion  as  to  the 
causes  of  highway  accidents.  However,  there  is  little 
doubt  that  most  of  the  delegates  agreed  with  Secre- 
tary Hoover  when  he  said. 

It  is  impossible  to  put  the  whole  blame  for  the  deplor- 
able conditions  upon  any  particular  individuals  or  any 
particular  classes  of  traffic.  If  we  were  to  analyze  the 
facts  presented  to  the  conference  as  to  the  causes  of  this 
enormous  death  roll  (sic)  and  injury  we  would  find  that 
incompetence,  carelessness,  and  recklessness  are  the  larg- 
est contributors  to  this  ghastly  toll.  We  would  find  in  a 
lesser  degree  the  lack  of  preventive  measures.  We  would 
find  a  considerable  contribution  from  confusion  over  the 
regulations  in  force.  We  would  find  also  that  prevention 
of  accidents  is  in  part  involved  in  large  problems  of 
difficult  solution  in  the  planning  of  our  cities,  the  con- 
struction of  highways,  and  generally  the  handling  of 
these  new  traffic  problems  that  have  been  thrown  upon 
cities  and  country  wholly  unplanned  for  such  use.*' 

Secretary  Hoover  called  another  conference  for 
March  1926.  During  the  interim  between  this  and 
the  first  conference,  a  special  committee  drew  up  a 
model  "Uniform  Vehicle  Code"  covering  the  registra- 
tion and  titling  of  vehicles,  the  licensing  of  drivers 
and  the  operation  of  vehicles  on  the  highways,  which 
incorporated  the  best  features  of  the  numerous  and 
varied  State  laws  then  on  the  statute  books.  The 
second  conference  approved  this  code,  recommending 
it  to  the  State  legislatures  as  the  basis  for  uniform 
motor  vehicle  legislation.®* 


128 


Highway-railroad  grade  crossings 
such  as  the  one  at  left  were  common 
hazards  for  automobile  traffic  up 
to  the  1930's. 


A  year  of  study  by  another  committee  of  the  second 
conference  disclosed  that  ascertaining  the  causes  of 
accidents  was  far  moi'e  difficult  than  had  once  been 
supposed.  .  It  was  not  sufficient  to  ascribe  most  of  the 
accident  problem  to  human  incompetence,  carelessness 
and  recklessness.  Even  if  adequate  accident  records 
were  available,  this  committee  thought  a  sustained 
program  of  research  by  a  central  organization,  na- 
tional in  scope,  would  be  needed  to  get  to  the  roots  of 
the  problem.^' 

The  Conference  agreed,  and  as  a  result  of  its  rec- 
ommendation, the  HigliAvay  Research  Board  (HRB) 
organized  a  "Committee  on  Causes  and  Prevention  of 
Highway  Accidents,"  in  May  1927  to  coordinate  acci- 
dent research  nationwide.*  The  HRB  played  a  major 
part  in  subsequent  efforts  to  reduce  the  accident  toll. 


*  The  first  act  of  the  Committee  was  to  request  the  BPR 
to  compile  an  index  of  published  articles  on  highway  safety 
and  the  allied  subjects  of  highway  design,  town  planning  and 
traffic  control.  The  BPR  librarians  found  that  no  fewer  than 
2,400  items  on  these  subjec'ts  had  appeared  in  American  and 
European  journals  for  the  years  1923  to  1927 — certain  proof 
of  the  intense  worldwide  concern  over  the  problem."' 


The  First  Large  Highway  Safety  Program 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  the  State  highway 
departments  recognized  that  the  obsolescence  of  the 
highway  system  was  one  of  the  contributing  causes 
of  the  high  accident  toll,  but  they  were  not  willing  to 
accept  all  or  even  a  very  large  part  of  the  responsi- 
bility : 

One  matter  that  confronts  highway  officials  which  is 
of  great  present  importance  and  which  will  be  of  much 
concern  in  the  future  is  the  eradication  of  those  condi- 
tions that  are  now  or  may  be  conducive  to  accident,  in- 
jury, and  death.  A  prominent  part  of  the  effort  to  be 
made  to  correct  conditions  will  be  the  elimination  of 
highway-railroad  grade  crossings  .  .  .  The  .separation  of 
opposing  streams  of  traffic  on  the  most  heavily  traveled 
highways  seems  also  to  be  essential.  The  greatly  in- 
ci-eased  speed  of  motor-vehicle  travel  requires  a  general 
increase  in  sight  distances  and  the  elimination  of  ob- 
structions to  view  at  Intersections.  Occasional  sharp 
curves  and  steep  grades  on  highways  that,  in  general, 
invite  the  driver  to  speed  must  not  be  tolerated.  Pro- 
vision for  pedestrian  travel  separate  from  that  portion 
of  the  highway  used  by  vehicles  must  be  made  wherever 
the  amount  of  pedestrian  travel  justifies  it. 


129 


The  need  for  corrective  measures  in  these  directions  is 
definitely  recognized  and  will  be  cared  for  as  rapidly  as 
available  funds  will  permit.  But  this  alone  does  not  give 
assurance  of  a  complete  solution  of  our  highway-accident 
problem,  since  it  must  be  recognized  that  such  accidents 
are  due,  in  large  measure,  not  to  faults  in  the  highways, 
but  to  weaknesses  of  the  drivers  of  vehicles." 

Congress  response  to  the  highway  accident  problem 
was  to  provide  increased  appropriations  for  highways, 
and  particularly  for  the  elimination  of  grade  cross- 
ings and  other  hazards  to  highway  traffic.  A  consid- 
erable part  of  the  $400  million  granted  to  the  States 
under  the  National  Industrial  Recovery  Act  and  the 
additional  $200  million  of  emergency  grants  under 
the  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  went  into  safety  improve- 
ments. Congress  provided  another  $200  million  for  a 
major  attack  on  grade  crossing  hazards  in  the  Emer- 
gency Relief  Appropi^iation  Act  of  1935,  and  a  fur- 
ther $190  million  in  the  regular  Federal-aid  authori- 
zations for  fiscal  years  1938  through  1943.  All  of 
these  funds  were  outright  grants  and  did  not  have  to 
be  matched  by  the  States.* 

This  huge  safety  program  reached  its  peak  in  fiscal 
years  1937  and  1938  when  the  States  eliminated  over 
1,800  grade  crossings  and  reconstructed  over  300 
existing  grade  separation  structures  at  crossings.  In 
addition,  this  program  provided  for  the  installation 
of  train-activated  protective  devices  at  grade  cross- 
ings with  a  high  of  nearly  1,200  devices  installed  in 
1940. 


*  The  Federal-aid  authorization  of  June  16,  1936  required 
that  grade  crossings  be  eliminated  or  adequately  protected 
on  all  future  projects  financed  by  Federal  aid.  This  made 
grade  crossing  protection  a  permanent  part  of  the  Federal 
highway  program. 


However,  the  grade  crossing  campaign  had  its 
critics  who  claimed  that  far  too  much  money  was 
being  spent  to  solve  a  very  small  part  of  the  total 
problem. 

Signing   for  Safety 

Before  World  War  I,  most  States  were  using  signs 
to  warn  road  users  of  danger  ahead,  particularly 
railroad  crossings,  and  the  railroads  themselves  were 
required  to  post  warning  signs  at  all  public  road 
crossings.  Most  States  agreed  that  danger  signs 
"should  be  conspicuous  and  easily  and  quickly  read, 
and  therefore  concise;  should  specify  the  character 
of  danger  to  be  guarded  against  and  should  be  located 
at  such  distance  from  the  danger  point  as  to  give 
ample  time  to  be  acted  upon."  '^^  However,  agreement 
ceased  with  these  principles,  and  the  signs  themselves 
were  of  an  infinite  variety  of  shapes,  sizes  and  colors. 

In  1922  the  Mississippi  Valley  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials  recommended  that  its  members  use 
distinctive  standard  shapes  for  warning  signs — the 
circle  for  railroad  crossings,  the  octagon  for  stop,  and 
the  diamond  for  caution.  The  American  Association 
of  State  Highway  Officials  (AASHO)  adopted  these 
shapes  in  1924  and  also  the  standard  colors  yellow  for 
caution  signs  and  red  for  stop  signs,  and  in  1927 
AASHO  published  the  first  Uniform  Manual  for 
Highway  Signs.  This  included  not  only  danger  and 
regulatory  signs,  but  also  the  famous  black  and  white 
shield  for  routes  on  the  U.S. -numbered  highway 
system.®^ 

Meantime  the  American  Engineering  Council  was 
making  a  survey  of  sign  practices  in  all  American 
cities  of  over  50,000  population.     The  Council's  1929 


With  additional  financing  hy  Congress,  highway-railroad  grade  crossings  were  either 
eliminated  or  made  safer  with  the  addition  of  train  activated  warning  systems. 


130 


Until  1924,  there  loas  no  national 
agreement  as  to  uniform  road  signs; 
thus,  from  region  to  region  there 
were  an  infinite  variety. 


report  was  adopted  by  the  Third  National  Conference 
on  Street  and  Highway  Safety  in  1930.  It  was  in 
effect  a  manual  of  the  best  practices  of  the  time,  in- 
cludincr  much  of  tlie  practices  embodied  in  AASHO's 
manual.  Recognizing  that  there  could  not  be  differ- 
ent standard  practices  for  signing  in  rural  and  urban 
areas,  AASHO  and  the  National  Conference  orga- 
nized a  Joint  Committee  on  Uniform  Traffic  Control 
Devices*  in  1931,  which  in  1935  brought  out  a  new 


manual  for  national  use.  This  manual,  periodically 
revised  to  keep  i>ace  with  traffic  developments,  has 
been  a  powerful  force  for  uniformity  and  traffic 
safety  in  the  United  States. 

The   Consequences  of  Speed 

In  the  early  days  of  the  automobile,  legal  speed 
limits  were  set  far  below  the  speeds  of  which  most 
motor  vehicles  were  capable.*  Horsedrawn  vehicles 
were  numerous  on  tlie  highways,  and  teams  might 
bolt  if  they  were  approached  or  passed  at  high  speed. 
High  speeds  aggravated  the  dust  nuisance  and  ac- 
celerated the  destruction  of  macadam  surfaces.  Roads 
were  narrow — generally  less  than  16  feet  wide — and 
often  flanked  by  deep  ditches  so  that  other  vehicles 
could  be  f)assed  safely  only  at  low  speed.  Finally, 
the  vehicles,  and  especially  their  tires,  were  of  uncer- 
tain reliability;  blowouts  and  loss  of  steering  control 
were  fairly  frequent,  and  these  could  be  disastrous  at 
speeds  greater  than  25  miles  per  hour. 

All  of  these  factors  changed  as  motor  vehicle  own- 
ership increased.  Animal-drawn  traffic  decreased  and 
became  numerically  and  politically  unimportant. 
Bituminization  solved  the  dusting  problem,  and  ve- 
hicles and  tires  became  more  reliable.  Drivers,  feel- 
ing safer  and  more  comfortable,  increased  their  speeds 
and  were  able  to  exert  enough  political  pressure  to 
have  speed  limits  raised  also. 

With  heavier  traffic  and  higher  speeds,  it  became 
dangerous  to  drive  in  the  middle  of  the  road,  and  the 
States  began  painting  centerlines  on  the  pavements 
to  channelize  traffic  in  lanes.**    At  40  miles  per  hour, 


*  The  .Joint  Committee  now  consists  of  members  from 
AASHO,  the  Institute  of  Traffic  Engineers,  The  National 
Committee  on  Uniform  Traffic  Laws  and  Ordinances,  The 
National  Association  of  Counties  and  The  National  League 
of  Cities. 


*  In  1918  the  legal  limit  in  South  Carolina  was  15  miles 
per  hour  and  five  States  had  limits  of  20  m.p.h.  The  limit 
in  most  States  was  25  to  30  m.p.h.,  but  in  Kansas  40  m.p.h. 
was  pei-missible.     Eight  States  had  no  speed  limit. 

In  1928,  only  Massachusetts  still  had  a  20-mile  per  hour 
limit,  and  in  32  States  the  limits  were  35  to  40  miles  per 
hour.     Four  permitted  45-miIe  per  hour  speeds.™ 

**  In  1920  Marquette  County,  Michigan,  began  painting 
white  centerlines  on  curves.  These  lines  were  hand-painted 
with  whitewash  and  lasted  only  a  month  on  the  road,  but 
were  effective  for  keeping  drivers  on  their  own  side  of  the 
road." 

About  1925  it  became  general  practice  to  build  concrete 
highways  with  a  center  joint  to  control  longitudinal  cracking. 
This  .joint  became  a  visible  line  separating  the  two  lanes  of 
traffic  and  served  the  same  purpose  as  a  painted  stripe. 


131 


these  lanes  appeared  uncomfortably  narrow  to  most 
motorists,  especially  when  passing  trucks.  The  lane 
lines  also  caused  trucks  to  run  closer  to  the  shoulder 
where  they  caused  increased  breakage  of  slab  edges 
and  corners.  To  provide  greater  safety  and  reduce 
edge  damage,  the  State  highway  departments  built 
wider  pavements,  and  they  also  made  new  roads 
straighter.  These  improvements  along  with  mechani- 
cal advances  in  vehicles,  such  as  more  powerful  en- 
gines and  four-wheel  brakes,  in  turn  encouraged  even 
higher  road  speeds. 

Thus,  after  1918,  highway  design  followed  a  spiral 
of  cause  and  effect,  resulting  in  higher  and  higher 
speeds  and  wider  and  wider  pavements.  The  moti- 
vating force  behind  this  spiral  was  the  driving  speed 
preferences  of  the  great  mass  of  vehicle  operators,  and 
the  public  authorities  were  never  able  for  very  long 
to  impose  or  enforce  speed  limits  that  this  great  mass 
of  operators  believed  to  be  unreasonably  low.* 

Balanced  Design  for  Safety 

In  the  1920's  and  1930's,  it  was  good  engineering 
practice  to  locate  new  highways  as  much  as  possible 
in  long  straight  lines  or  "tangents."  When  it  became 
necessary  to  change  direction,  the  locator  laid  out  a 
circular  curve,  the  radius  of  which  he  selected  to  fit 
the  ground  with  the  least  construction  cost  but  which 
could  not  be  less  than  a  certain  minimum  fixed  by 
department  policy.**  In  practice,  locators  made  the 
curves  flatter  than  this  minimum  when  it  was  cheaper 
to  do  so,  but  with  little  consistency.  Motorists  driv- 
ing these  roads  were  expected  to  adjust  their  speeds 
to  the  varying  radii;  and  on  the  sharper  curves  safe 
speeds  might  be  considerably  lower  than  the  posted 
speed  limit. 

In  their  increasing  concern  for  highway  safety, 
many  highway  engineers  worried  about  this  incon- 
sistency between  speed  limits  and  safe  speeds  on 
curves.  One  of  these  was  Joseph  Bamett  of  the  BPR, 
and  in  1935  he  proposed  that  all  new  rural  roads  be 
designed  according  to  an  "assumed  design  speed." 
This,  he  said,  should  be  "the  maximum  reasonably 
uniform  speed  which  would  be  adopted  by  the  faster 
driving  group  of  vehicle  operators,  once  clear  of  ur- 
ban areas."  ^*  All  features  of  geometric  design — curve 
radii,  sight  distance,  superelevation,  even  gradients — 
should  then  be  made  consistent  with  the  chosen  design 
speed  so  that  a  motorist  traveling  at  that  speed  would 
not  have  to  slow  down  to  round  any  of  the  curves  or 
ascend  any  of  the  hills.*** 

Barnett's  "balanced  design"  concept  became  a  per- 
manent feature  of  American  design  policy  with  its 


*  In  1933,  Maryland  studies  showed  that  in  40-mile  per 
hour  speed  zones  the  average  speed  of  all  traffic  was  37  m.p.h., 
and  87  percent  of  the  drivers  were  traveling  less  than  45 
miles  per  hour.  Only  a  minuscule  fraction  were  traveling  as 
fast  as  60  m.p.h.  The  Maryland  authorities  construed  these 
findings  as  good  public  acceptance  of  the  posted  limit." 

**  In  1912,  the  minimum  radius  in  New  York  was  200  feet, 
but  it  was  considered  good  practice  to  use  300-  or  400-foot 
radii  for  curves  on  steep  grades  or  at  the  foot  of  such  grades." 

***  This  idea  was  developed  concurrently  by  the  German 
highway  engineers  in  their  designs  for  the  Reichsautobahnen. 


adoption  by  the  American  Association  of  State  High- 
way Officials  in  1938.  In  its  Policy  on  Highway 
Classification,  AASHO  declared, 

A  principal  factor  affecting  the  choice  of  a  design 
speed  is  the  character  of  the  terrain.  In  general,  rolling 
terrain  will  justify  a  higher  design  speed  than  moun- 
tainous country  since  the  cost  of  constructing  almost 
every  highway  detail  will  be  less.  An  important  highway 
carrying  a  large  volume  of  traffic  may  justify  a  higher 
design  speed  than  a  less  important  highway  in  similar 
topography  due  to  the  fact  that  the  increased  expendi- 
ture for  right  of  way  and  construction  will  be  offset  by 
the  savings  in  vehicle  operation,  highway  maintenance, 
and  other  operating  costs." 

The  essential  data  needed  to  implement  the  bal- 
anced design  concept  came  from  a  series  of  research 
studies  on  driver  reactions,  curve  dynamics  and  ve- 
hicle capabilities  which  began  in  the  middle  1920's. 
By  1936  the  fruits  of  this  research  were  so  abundantly 
available  that  AASHO  appointed  a  special  high-level 
committee  of  senior  State  design  engineers  to  review 
the  available  information  on  highway  design,  bring 
it  up  to  date  and  publish  the  results  in  usable  form. 
Chief  MacDonald  assigned  a  small  task  force  of  BPE. 
experts  to  work  under  this  committee.  Between  1937 
and  1944  this  Special  Committee  on  Administrative 
Design  Policy  summarized  and  published  all  that  was 
known  about  motor  highway  design  in  seven  "poli- 
cies." In  1954  the  Committee  combined  these  policies 
into  a  single  manual  which,  with  later  revisions,  is 
still  the  final  authority  in  the  United  States  on  rural 
highway  design.''^ 

The   Parkway — A  New  Idea   In   Highways 

In  1907,  the  New  York  Legislature  created  the 
Bronx  River  Commission  and  authorized  it  to  pre- 
serve the  waters  of  the  Bronx  River  from  the  pollu- 
tion of  encroaching  trash  dumps  and  land  fills.  The 
Commissioners  acquired  broad  strips  of  land  on  both 
sides  of  the  river,  then  built  a  highway  through  the 
resulting  elongated  park.  They  planned  this  parkway 
as  a  four-lane,  low-speed  recreational  road  connecting 
the  public  parks  of  northern  New  York  City  with 
city  reservoirs  in  Westchester  County. 

Originally  Herman  Merkel,  the  consulting  land- 
scape architect,  recommended  that  the  parkway  be 
planned  as  two  widely  separated  one-way  roads  at 
different  levels  with  a  wide  belt  of  undisturbed  land 
between  them — a  very  advanced  concept  for  the  year 
1917.  He  was,  however,  overruled  by  the  Commission, 
and  only  two  short  divided  sections  were  built.^'^  * 

In  practically  every  respect,  the  Bronx  Parlcway 
was  different  from  other  highways  of  its  time.  It  had 
an  unlimited  right-of-way,  and  this  relieved  the 
builders  from  the  need  to  confine  their  construction 
within  a  narrow  band  of  fixed  width.  Furthermore, 
this  right-of-way  was  also  parkland  which  insulated 
the  roadway  from  the  adjoining  street  and  highway 


*  This  unfortunate  result  was  probably  caused  by  a  popular 
engineering  misconception  that  was  not  dispelled  until  the 
1930's.  E.  W.  James,  Chief  of  Design  of  the  BPR,  stated  in 
1929  that,  "Two  20-foot  pavements  segregating  traffic,  with  a 
parking  between,  are  not  adequate.  Apparently  two  30-foot 
pavements  are  needed  to  equal  a  single  40-foot  pavement  in 
capacity."  " 


132 


systems  and  made  it  possible  to  limit  access  to  it  to  a 
few  places.  All  grade  intersections  were  eliminated 
and  trucks  were  excluded. 

The  parkway's  designers  laid  it  out  as  a  series  of 
long  curves  connected  by  short  tangents — not  so  much 
to  make  the  road  intentionally  crooked  as  to  follow 
the  sinuosities  of  the  river  valley,  and  thus  reduce  the 
depth  of  the  cuts  and  fills.  They  laid  the  grade  line 
to  fit  the  ground  closely  and  varied  and  rounded  the 
slopes  with  unusual  freedom  to  blend  into  the  adja- 
cent land  forms.* 

The  construction  methods  were  no  less  revolutionary 
than  the  design.  Instead  of  clearing  everything  back 
to  the  right-of-way  line,  the  Bronx  River  Parkway 
builders  saved  all  trees  not  actually  within  construc- 
tion limits.  They  saved  the  precious  topsoil,  and 
later  spread  it  over  the  finished  slopes  of  the  parkway 
as  a  seedbed  for  grass  and  plants  to  arrest  erosion. 
The  landscape  plan  was  informal,  blending  the  park- 
way slopes  into  the  adjacent  forest  and  fields. 

Rapid  Spread  of  Parkways  in  the  New  York  Metro- 
politan Area 

The  Bronx  River  Parkway  was  opened  to  traffic  in 
1923.  It  was  so  popular  with  the  people  of  West- 
chester County  that  they  got  the  Legislature  to  set  up 
the  Westchester  County  Park  Commission  with  au- 
thority to  build  more  parkways.  This  Commission 
approached  parkwaj^s  from  a  somewhat  different 
angle.  The  Bronx  River  Parkway  had  been  primar- 
ily an  environmental  cleanup  project  and  pleasure 
drive.  The  Westchester  County  Parkways,  on  the 
other  hand,  were  deliberately  planned  as  suburban 
commuting  arteries  by  locating  them  through  the  cor- 
ridors between  the  existing  steam  and  electric  rail- 
roads that  radiated  out  into  the  county  from  New 
York  City.  Thus,  the  parkways  not  only  moved  com- 
muters into  the  city,  but  also  made  additional  areas 
of  the  county  available  for  development.  The  conse- 
quent large  increases  in  taxable  values  were  more  than 
enough  to  finance  the  very  considerable  costs  of  the 
parlcway  program.  Because  of  the  high  class  resi- 
dential character  of  Westchester  County,  the  Com- 
missioners were  careful  to  retain  for  the  new  park- 
ways the  high  esthetic  standards  that  had  been  estab- 
lished on  the  Bronx  River  Parkway,  as  well  as  the 
wide  right-of-way  and  access  control  features.  Their 
principal  change  in  policy  was  to  flatten  curvature 
somewhat  to  permit  higher  operating  speeds. 

Commuter  and  recreational  parkways  spread  rap- 
idly throughout  the  Xew  York  metropolitan  area  and. 
to  some  extent,  in  and  near  Washington,  D.C.,  but  did 
not  become  popular  elsewhere.** 


•  At  this  time,  other  highways  were  designed  with  uniform 
slopes,  usually  lyo  or  2  horizontal  to  1  vertical,  for  economy 
of  excavation  and  to  stay  within  the  narrow  rights-of-way. 
Contractors  prided  themselves  on  dressing  these  slopes  ac- 
curately and  smoothly  for  a  neat  and  workmanlike  appear- 
ance. 

♦*  One  reason  for  this  lack  of  popularity  was  their  high 
cost.  The  Bronx  River  Parkway  cost  $15  million  for  15 
miles,  which  included  the  parkland  and  measures  to  reclaim 
it  from  blight.  The  Mount  Temon  Memorial  Highway,  the 
first  parkway  in  the  Washington  area  and  opened  to  traffic 
in  1932,  cost  $500,000  per  mile. 


Influence  of  the  Parkway  Concept  on  Highway  Design 

Parkways,  designed  and  operated  essentially  as 
commuter  arteries,  were  tangible  challenges  to  the 
dogma  expressed  by  Upham  that  there  arc  two  kinds 
of  highways — scenic  and  commercial.  Here  were 
highways  that  were  essentially  commercial,  transport- 
ing workers  to  and  from  their  offices,  and  also  scenic 
or  at  least  attractive.  The  fallacy  of  the  old  position 
was  aptly  expressed  in  1932  by  a  distinguished  com- 
mittee of  architects,  engineers  and  planners: 

Highways  traverse  varied  landscapes  and  should  differ 
accordingly.  However,  we  regard  as  unsound  the  common 
idea  that  they  may  be  classified  as  scenic  and  commercial 
and  that  the  appearance  of  the  latter  is  of  minor  conse- 
quence. Scenery  does  not  consist  only  of  spectacular 
views.  All  outdoors  is  scenery  of  one  kind  or  another. 
Therefore,  wherever  the  rural  character  of  the  landscape 
has  not  been  violated,  a  highway  is  scenic. 

Classification  according  to  assumed  use  is  no  more 
valid.  When  a  tourist  comes  to  San  Francisco,  or  a 
citizen  leaves  and  enters  on  a  holiday,  the  Bay  Shore 
Highway  is  a  pleasure  road ;  and  when  a  resident  of 
Eureka  is  called  by  his  affairs  to  Crescent  City,  the 
Redwood  Highway  becomes  a  business  road.  Differing 
localities  and  circumstances  may  suggest  different  kinds 
of  beauty,  but  every  highway  should  be  beautiful,  with 
the  kind  of  beauty  appropriate  to  it." 

The  principles  of  parkway  design — the  wide  park- 
like  right-of-way,  control  of  access,  elimination  of 
grade  crossings  with  other  highways,  fitting  of  the 
alinement  and  grade  to  the  natural  contours  of  the 
ground  without  using  excessive  cuts  and  fills,  shaping 
and  rounding  slopes  to  merge  them  into  the  adjacent 
natural  land  forms,  restoring  natural  vegetation  to 
protect  parkway  surfaces  from  erosion,  and  preserv- 
ing a  high  standard  of  architectural  excellence 
for  bridges  and  other  structures — were  all  developed 
and  proved  out  in  practice  before  1926.  Yet  these 
principles  were  almost  totally  ignored  by  the  design- 
ers of  other  highways,  which  were  laid  out  with  long 
tangents  and  rollercoaster  grade  lines  within  narrow 
rights-of-way,  with  little  effort  to  protect  their  steep 
side  slopes  from  erosion.  On  these  highways  prac- 
tically the  only  concession  to  pleasing  appearance  was 
the  occasional  planting  of  trees  on  the  right-of-way.* 

The  first  application  of  parkway  principles  to  ordi- 
nary highways — on  a  very  limited  scale^ — came  in 
1933.  The  regulations  for  administering  the  National 
Industrial  Recovery  Act  grants  made  it  clear  that  the 
work  done  under  these  grants  should  include  land- 
scaping on  a  reasonably  extensive  mileage  of  roads. 
The  States  then  programed  1,500  miles  of  roadside 
improvement  projects  costing  about  $2.22  million. 
These  were  mostly  on  main  highways  near  cities  and 
towns  where  they  would  provide  employment  and 
also  serve  as  demonstrations  of  what  could  be  accom- 
plished to  beautify  roads. 

This  program,  although  clumsily  carried  out  in 
many  localities,  was  an  immediate  public  relations 
success.  It  inspired  strong  public  support  for  land- 
scaping and  roadside  improvement,  something  that 
had  been  lacking  up  to  that  time.  Of  equal  import- 
ance, it  focused  the  attention  of  the  State  highway 


*The  Amendment  of  May  21,  1928  (45  Stat  683)  authorized 
the  use  of  Federal-aid  funds  for  planting  shade  trees  along 
highways. 


133 


departments  on  the  enormous  annual  maintenance 
cost  of  correcting  the  damage  caused  by  the  erosion  of 
unprotected  slopes  and  ditches,  and  got  them  started 
on  a  long-overdue  program  of  erosion  control  and 
correction. 

The  pilot  beautification  program  also  spotlighted 
the  inadequacy  of  the  prevailing  60-foot  rights-of- 
way.  For  hundreds  of  miles  of  road,  the  State  had 
to  purchase  additional  right-of-way  or  obtain  slope 
easements  from  property  owners  to  provide  room  to 
repair  erosion  damage  and  to  regrade  the  cuts  and 
fills  with  flatter  slopes  and  wider  ditches.  Only  then 
could  grass  and  protective  vegetation  be  established 
to  prevent  future  erosion.  This  experience  led  to  the 
general  adoption  of  wider  rights-of-way  for  new 
highways,  so  that  by  1940,  100  feet  was  practically  a 
standard  for  main  roads. 

The  Secretary  of  Agriculture's  regulations  for 
programing  the  $200  million  of  emergency  road  funds 
authorized  by  the  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of  1934 
required  the  States  to  use  not  less  than  1  percent  of 
their  apportionments  for  the  improvement  of  road- 
sides. By  1936,  5,000  miles  of  roadsides  had  been 
improved  with  emergency  funds  and  with  Federal 
aid,  and  most  State  highway  departments  were  in- 
corporating improved  roadside  design  in  their  new 
projects.    The  BPR  was  able  to  report  in  1936 : 

Provision  is  being  made  within  State  highway  depart- 
ment organizations  for  an  improved  technical  approach 
to  the  various  roadside  problems,  and  more  effective 
methods  of  handling  the  work  are  being  used  as  ex- 
perience is  accumulated.  Only  a  few  years  ago  highways 
were  completed  with  little  thought  of  the  appearance  of 
the  finished  roadside,  and  attempts  were  made  at  so- 
called  beautification  under  conditions  already  bad  and 
often  with  overemphasis  on  some  particular  kind  of 
planting.  Far  better  results  have  been  produced  since 
roadside  improvement  has  been  regarded  as  an  integral 
part  of  highway  improvement  to  be  provided  for  in  plan- 
ning rather  than  as  an  afterthought  follovring  construc- 
tion.«» 


In  recognition  of  the  increasing  importance  of  the 
roadsides  in  highway  planning,  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  established  a  landscape  section  in  its  Washing- 
ton Office  and  urged  the  States  to  set  up  similar  posi- 
tions to  plan  and  direct  the  roadside  work.* 

Congress  gave  a  further  impetus  to  roadside  im- 
provement in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1938 
by  authorizing  landscaping  and  roadside  development 
with  regular  Federal-aid  funds  and  also  "such  sani- 
tary and  other  facilities  as  may  be  deemed  reasonably 
necessary  to  provide  for  the  suitable  accommodation 
of  the  public  .  .  ."  within  the  right-of-way  or  publicly 
controlled  adjacent  areas.  This  encouraged  the  States 
to  build  rest  areas  along  the  main  highways,  a  policy 
that  had  been  pioneered  in  the  early  1930's  by  the 
Ohio  Department  of  Highways. 

Erosion  control,  landscaping  and  rest  areas  brought 
commercial  highways  and  parkways  much  closer  to- 
gether in  the  1930's  but  the  full  merging  of  the  design 
philosophies  behind  them  was  still  30  years  away. 


*  The  landscape  planning  for  the  Mount  Vernon  Memorial 
Highway  was  done  in  1929  by  Wilbur  H.  Simonson,  who 
came  to  the  Bureau  from  the  Westchester  County  Parkways. 
Subsequently,  as  the  BPR's  chief  landscape  architect,  Simon- 
son  played  a  decisive  part  in  the  movement  for  improved 
roadsides  in  the  United  States. 


Pittsylvania  Wayside  Rest  Area  built 
i«  19S5  on  Rt.  29  near  Alta  Vista,  Va. 


134 


A  roadside  park  in  Connecticut,  193S. 


The  Return  of  the  Toll   Road 

Landscaping  and  erosion  control  were  not  the  only 
reasons  for  adopting  wider  rights-of-way.  By  the 
mid-1920's,  the  main  roads  near  and  between  large 
cities  were  getting  seriously  congested.  The  easiest 
way  to  relieve  this  congestion  was  to  add  another  lane, 
and  several  State  highway  departments  did  this  ex- 
tensively, despite  a  growing  realization  that  three- 
lane  roads  might  increase  the  possibility  of  head-on 
collisions.  By  the  middle  thirties,  three-lane  roads 
were  practically  obsolete,  but  hundreds  of  miles  of 
highways  had  been  widened  to  four  lanes,  especially 
in  Cook  County,  Illinois,  and  Wayne  County,  Michi- 
gan. 

However,  these  too  proved  to  be  dangerous,  and 
many  highway  administrators  began  to  believe  that 
the  only  safe  way  to  build  multilane  highways  was  to 
completeh'  separate  the  opposing  lanes  of  traffic,  as 
had  been  done  for  years  on  city  boulevards.  In  1929, 
Milwaukee  County,  Wisconsin,  rebuilt  a  part  of  the 
Blue  Mound  Road  as  a  "split-slab  highway"  with 
"neutral  ground"  between  the  opposing  lanes  of  traffic, 
leaWng  the  remainder  with  an  undivided  four-lane 
pavement.  After  this  road  was  opened  to  traffic,  the 
commissioners  were  pleasantly  surprised  to  observe 
that  the  divided  part  of  this  highway  was  able  to 
carry  more  traffic  at  10  to  20  miles  per  hour  greater 
speed  than  the  undivided  part.*^ 

Despite  their  superior  safety  characteristics,  accept- 
ance of  divided  or  "dual"  highways  was  slow,  and  by 


1937  there  were  only  1,200  miles  of  nonurban  divided 
highway  in  the  United  States.*  *^ 

In  that  year,  Chief  MacDonald  reported: 

The  large  volumes  of  traffic  that  now  flow  between 
densely  populated  localities  have  created  a  demand  for 
wide,  multiple-lane  highways,  built  according  to  the 
highest  standards  of  grade  and  alinement,  with  opposing 
traffic  separated  by  a  center  parkway,  bypassing  all 
cities,  with  structures  separating  streams  of  traffic  at  all 
highway  and  rail  crossings,  and  with  access  from  side 
roads  permitted  only  at  carefully  selected  points.  Such 
highways  offer  great  savings  in  time  and  in  vehicle- 
operating  costs  to  commercial  vehicles,  and  to  the  drivers 
of  private  vehicles  they  offer  freedom  from  dangers  of 
the  highway  and  from  other  vehicles  as  nearly  complete 
as  it  is  possible  to  attain. 

That  large  volumes  of  traffic  would  flow  constantly 
over  such  highways  between  densely  populated  localities 
there  is  no  doubt — a  traffic  large  enough  to  justify  the 
high  cost  of  such  improvement  with  reasonable  assump- 
tions as  to  the  value  of  the  savings  in  fuel  and  time  and 
those  resulting  from  greater  safety  and  freedom  of  travel. 
However  it  is  not  readily  apparent  how  any  large  mile- 
age of  such  highways  might  be  financed.*"" 


*  The  prejudice  against  divided  highways  stemmed  in  part 
from  the  assumption  that  they  were  not  "flexible"  enough  to 
accommodate  changes  in   the  direction  of  traffic  load. 

In  1922,  the  Lincoln  Highway  Association  assembled  a 
panel  of  the  most  eminent  highway  engineers  and  professors 
in  the  United  States  to  recommend  the  "ideal  section"  for 
heavy  traffic  highways.  This  panel  recommended  an  undi- 
vided four-lane  concrete  pavement  40  feet  wide  on  a  100-foot 
right-of-way  to  carry  1.5,000  autos  and  .'5,000  trucks  per  24- 
hour  day  at  a  speed  of  35  miles  per  hour.*' 


135 


The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921,  by  concentrat- 
ing Federal-aid  funds  on  a  limited  mileage  of  the 
principal  highways,  had  temporarily  quieted  demands 
for  interstate  highways  under  Federal  control. 

As  congestion  increased  in  the  1930's,  these  demands 
were  renewed,  and  they  were  not  long  in  reaching 
Congress.  Here,  there  was  talk  of  authorizing  the 
collection  of  tolls  to  finance  Federal  "super  highways" 
between  the  principal  cities — a  possibility  that  had 
been  considered  for  some  time  by  the  BPR  but  had 
been  discouraged  because  of  the  large  volumes  of 
traffic  required  to  support  the  high  cost  of  such  fa- 
cilities. 

Early  in  1937,  President  Roosevelt  summoned  Chief 
MacDonald  to  the  "\^^lite  House  and  handed  him  a 
map  of  the  United  States  on  which  he  had  drawn 
three  east-west  routes  from  coast  to  coast  and  three 
routes  traversing  the  country  from  north  to  south. 
The  President  asked  MacDonald  to  get  started  at 
once  on  a  study  of  the  feasibility  of  constructing  the 
six  routes  as  toll  roads.®^ 

The  basic  information  for  such  a  far-reaching  study 
was  already  in  the  files  of  the  BPR  and  the  State 
highway  departments:  the  product  of  the  economic 
and  traffic  studies  begun  in  1920.  Therefore,  when 
Congress  ordered  a  similar  study  in  the  Federal- Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1938,  the  work  was  already  well  ad- 
vanced, and  the  BPR  task  force  was  able  to  finish  the 
report  to  Congress  by  April  1939. 

From  their  national  traffic  map  the  BPR  analysts 
selected  six  transcontinental  routes  totaling  14,336 
miles  that  would  satisfy  most  of  the  demand  for  long- 
distance travel.  After  making  estimates  of  traffic, 
the  analysts  found  that  only  3,346  miles — those  within 
the  influence  of  the  major  cities — would  need  more 
than  two  traffic  lanes,  and  of  these,  only  547  miles 
would  meet  as  much  as  70  percent  of  their  annual 
cost  from  tolls  by  the  year  1960.  Only  one  section  of 
172  miles,  from  Philadelphia  to  New  Haven,  would 
break  even  by  that  date. 

The  BPR  had  shown  that  toll  financing  was  im- 
practical. Nevertheless,  the  report  pointed  out,  there 
was  an  urgent  need  for  "a  special,  tentatively  defined 
system  of  direct  interregional  highways,  with  all  nec- 
essary connections  through  and  around  cities,  designed 
to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  national  defense  in 
time  of  war  and  the  needs  of  a  growing  peacetime 
traffic  of  longer  range,"  and  also  a  need  to  upgrade 
the  existing  Federal-aid  highways  and  the  secondary 
and  feeder  roads.*® 

The  Bureau  selected  a  26,700-mile  system  of  main 
interregional  highways  which  would  connect  all  of 
the  major  population  centers,  and  which  the  report 
recommended  should  be  built  as  free  public  highways 
on  wide  rights-of-way,  access  controlled,  and  without 
grade  crossings.  The  report  went  on  to  observe  that 
in  the  past,  the  major  obstacles  to  building  needed 
highways,  especially  in  urban  areas,  had  been  "the 
inadequac}^  of  available  funds  and  the  overpowering 
legal  obstacles  that  stand  in  the  way  of  obtaining 
essential  rights-of-way."  *''  Archaic  laws  in  most 
States  limited  the  lands  that  could  be  acquired  or 
taken  for  highways  to  the  bare  essentials  of  present 
needs  without  adequate  allowance  for  future  expan- 
sion and  also  limited  tlie  States'  rights  to  deny  access 


to  abutting  property  owners  in  order  to  preserve  a 
road's  traffic  capacity.  These  difficulties  were  com- 
pounded by  the  Government's  policy  of  denying 
Federal-aid  participation  in  right-of-way  costs  and 
the  usual  practice  of  State  legislatures  of  providing 
for  land  acquisition  in  the  same  acts  that  authorized 
construction,  so  that  the  land  was  seldom  available 
when  needed. 

The  report  recommended  that  Congress  create  a 
Federal  Land  Authority  to  buy  and  hold  lands  for 
interregional  highways  in  advance  of  need  in  those 
States  without  constitutional  authority  to  do  so.  Such 
lands  would  then  be  leased  to  the  States  when  needed 
on  terms  that  would  repay  the  Government's  invest- 
ment in  50  years.  Finally,  in  an  appendix,  the  report 
discussed  the  possibility  of  recovering  all  or  a  part  of 
the  cost  of  interregional  highways  by  the  resale  of 
land  acquired  in  excess  of  the  amount  needed  for  the 
actual  construction  and  protection  of  the  highways. 
This  proposal  was  enthusiastically  approved  by  the 
President  who  remarked  in  transmitting  the  report  to 
Congress : 

Under  the  exercise  of  the  principle  of  'excess-taking' 
of  land,  the  Government,  which  puts  up  the  cost  of  the 
highway,  buys  a  wide  strip  on  each  side  of  the  highway 
itself,  uses  it  for  the  rental  of  concessions  and  sells  it 
off  over  a  period  of  years  to  home  builders  and  others 
who  wish  to  live  near  a  main  artery  of  travel.  Thus  the 
Government  gets  the  unearned  increment  and  reimburses 
itself  in  large  part  for  the  building  of  the  road.^ 

This  suggestion  was  condemned  in  and  out  of  Con- 
gress as  a  socialistic  scheme  to  transfer  the  cost  of 
providing  deluxe  highways  from  those  most  benefited 
to  the  already  heavily  burdened  landowner. 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads'  adverse  report  took 
some  of  the  steam  out  of  the  toll  road  movement,  but 
by  no  means  all.  In  December  1939,  under  pressure 
from  the  toll  road  people,  eight  North  Atlantic  States 
set  up  a  committee  of  State  highway  engineers  to 
make  a  more  comprehensive  study  of  the  interregional 
route  from  Washington,  D.C.,  to  Boston  which,  the 
BPR  report  had  admitted,  had  a  marginal  possibility 
of  success  as  a  toll  road.  This  committee  studied  the 
405-mile  route  and  estimated  that  an  adequate  super 
highway  to  handle  the  traffic  would  cost  $253  million, 
and  recommended  that  some  of  the  Federal  strategic 
highway  funds  be  used  for  further  studies.*''  This 
suggestion  and  the  report  itself  were  buried  in  the 
gathering  mobilization  for  war. 

The   Pennsylvania  Turnpike 

While  the  BPR  was  working  on  the  toll  road  study, 
the  State  of  Pennsylvania  was  perfecting  its  plans  for 
a  modern  high-speed  highway  through  the  Alleghen^^ 
Mountains  on  the  right-of-way  of  the  abandoned 
South  Penn  Railroad.  In  January  1936,  the  Legis- 
lature requested  the  State  highway  department  to 
survey  the  old  railroad  route  and  report  on  the  cost 
of  converting  it  into  a  highway.  A  year  later,  the 
department  reported  that  a  liighway  was  feasible,  but 
would  cost  $50  to  $60  n^illion,  nuich  more  than  could 
be  financed  out  of  the  highway  budget  in  any  reason- 
able period. 

The  Legislature  then  created  the  Pennsylvania 
Turnpike   Conunission   and   authorized  it  to  acquire 


136 


the  South  Penn  right-of-way  and  build  on  it  a  toll 
road  to  which  adjoining  property  would  have  no 
rights  of  access.  The  Legislature  was  careful  to 
stipulate  that  the  bonds  issued  by  the  Commission 
would  not  be  backed  by  the  credit  of  the  State.  This 
stipulation  made  the  bonds  practically  unsaleable  in 
the  depressed  securities  market.  The  project  came  to 
a  standstill  until  the  summer  of  1938,  when  tlie  Public 
Works  Administration,  to  stimulate  employment, 
made  an  outright  grant  of  $26.1  million  to  the  State, 
with  the  proviso  that  construction  be  completed  by 
June  1940 — an  almost  impossible  deadline.  At  the 
same  time,  the  Reconstruction  Finance  Corporation 
purchased  $35  million  of  the  Commission's  bonds  to 
complete  the  turnpike  financing. 

The  Commission  let  the  first  grading  contracts  in 
November  1938,  and  thereafter  pushed  the  construc- 
tion at  top  speed,  day  and  night  with  155  contractors 
and  thousands  of  men  and  machines.  The  160-mile 
turnpike  was  opened  to  traffic  without  fanfare  on 
October  1,  1940. 

The  Pennsylvania  Turnpike  was  the  prototype  of 
the  modern  high-speed  heavy-duty  Interstate  high- 
way. It  incorporated  the  most  advanced  practice  of 
German  and  American  design  engineers  on  highway 
grades  and  curvature  and  was  hailed  by  many  as  the 
safest  highway  in  the  world.  It  had  12-foot  traffic 
lanes,  two  in  each  direction,  separated  by  a  10-foot 
median  strip.  The  right-of-way  was  200  feet  wide. 
The  steepest  grade  was  3  percent,  as  compared  to  8 
and  9  percent  on  the  nearby  Lincoln  Highway,  and 
the  total  climb  going  over  the  mountains  was  only 
one-third  as  much  as  on  the  Lincoln  Highway.  For 
trucks  the  saving  in  transit  time  between  Philadelphia 
and  Pittsburgh  was  5  to  6  hours,  a  saving  sufficient 
to  insure  the  financial  success  of  the  turnpike. 

Toll   Parkways 

While  the  Pennsylvania  Turnpike  was  under  con- 
struction, the  Connecticut  highway  department  was 
completing  a  modern  landscaped  parkway  connecting 
with  Westchester  County's  Hutchinson  River  Park- 
way at  the  New  York  State  boundary  and  extending 
37  miles  to  the  Housatonic  River.  This  road  was 
planned  partly  to  serve  commuters  and  partly  to  ease 
traffic  pressure  on  the  congested  Boston  Post  Road. 
From  its  opening  in  June  1938,  the  Merritt  Parkway 
attracted  large  volumes  of  traffic,  and  within  a  year, 
it  was  carrying  18,800  passenger  cars  per  day.  (Com- 
mercial traffic  was  excluded.)  Searching  for  a  source 
of  funds  with  which  to  extend  the  parkway  north- 
ward to  Hartford,  the  Legislature  decided  to  tap  this 
huge  flow  of  traffic,  and  in  June  1939,  it  imposed  a 
toll  for  use  of  the  road.  The  Parkway  was  amazingly 
profitable  to  the  State.  In  its  first  35  weeks  of  opera- 
tion, 3.4  million  motorists,  most  of  whom  could  have 
used  the  Boston  Post  Road  free,  cheerfully  paid  a 
10-cent  toll  to  use  the  parkway's  uncongested  deluxe 
facilities.  In  its  first  6  months,  the  Merritt  Parkway 
grossed  $320,644,  for  a  net  operating  revenue  of 
$280,000.8'' 

Westchester  County,  heavily  in  debt  for  its  own 
parkways  and  suffering  from  tax  shrinkages,  was  not 
slow  to  notice  the  revenue  pouring  into  the  Connecti- 
cut toll  booth  at  Greenwich,  just  east  of  the  State 


line.  In  August  1939,  the  County  Board  of  Super- 
visors imposed  a  10-cent  toll  on  the  Hutchinson  River 
Parkway  which  in  6  months  grossed  $279,000.  How- 
ever, the  bonanza  was  of  short  duration,  for  an  order 
from  the  New  York  Court  of  Appeals  forced  the 
county  to  stop  collecting  the  toll  and  refund  what 
had  already  been  collected.  The  court  held  that,  al- 
though built  entirely  with  county  fimds,  the  West- 
chester parkways  had  by  use  and  custom  become 
arteries  of  the  State  highway  system  on  which  by 
State  law  the  collection  of  tolls  was  prohibited.^' 

The   Federal   Highways 

In  most  of  the  western  States,  national  forest  high- 
ways occupied  a  strategic  position  in  the  State  road 
system.  In  1920  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  re- 
ported : 

Due  to  the  fact  that  the  forest  areas  lie  alonj;  the 
mountain  summits,  they  eontain  the  passes  through  which 
the  important  tnmk  highways  must  cross  the  mountain 
ranges,  and  as  a  consequence  many  forest  road  projects 
are  links  in  important  State  and  national  highways. 
Within  the  forests  are  ]  5,000  miles  of  roads  which  form 
connecting  links  for  State  and  county  highway  systems."' 

In  1912,  Congress  set  aside  10  percent  of  the  re- 
ceipts from  the  national  forests  as  a  "10-percent  fund" 
for  financing  forest  highways,  and  with  this  money, 
the  Forest  Service  and  the  Office  of  Public  Roads 
made  a  feeble  beginning  on  the  enormous  task  of 
building  the  most  urgently  needed  highway  connec- 
tions.* This  work  received  a  much-needed  boost  from 
the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916  which  appropri- 
ated $10  million  for  forest  roads  for  the  years  1917  to 
1926;  and  further  financial  support  from  the  Post 
Office  Appropriation  Act  of  1919  which  provided  $3 
million  each  for  fiscal  years  1919,  1920  and  1921. 

To  spend  these  funds,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
rapidly  built  up  an  engineering  and  construction 
organization  equivalent  to  that  of  an  average  State 
highway  department,  but  scattered  over  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  square  miles  of  forests.  The  roads  it 
built  in  the  early  twenties  were  narrow  and  steep  but 
reasonably  adequate  for  the  traffic.**  Much  of  the 
construction,  especially  in  the  solid  rock  sections,  was 
done  by  station  contracts  under  which  a  "station 
gang"  of  cooperative  laborers  contracted  to  excavate 
a  100-foot  section  of  road : 

These  men  attack  the  ledge  in  various  ways.  Some- 
times they  use  the  deep  'coyote  hole,'  burrowing  30  feet 
into  the  rock  with  a  tunnel  large  enough  to  permit  a 
stooping  man  to  enter  with  a  wheelbarrow.  Sometimes 
the  hole  is  smaller,  8  or  10  feet  in  depth  and  less  than  a 
foot  in  diameter.  Such  a  hole  is  known  as  a  'boot  jack.' 
One  'coyote  hole'  on  the  Cook.s-Collins  Road  in  Washing- 
ton brought  down  2,000  yards  of  rock  with  1,700  pounds 
of  black  powder." 

The  BPR  also  used  modem  construction  equipment 
such  as  steam  shovels  and  trucks,  much  of  it  war  sur- 
plus from  Army  stocks,  as  well  as  millions  of  pounds 
of  surplus  TNT  explosive  in  building  these  early 
forest  highways. 


*  From  1912  to  1920  the  10-percent  fund  provided  .$2,322,225 
for  forest  roads."' 

**  The  typical  forest  highway  of  this  period  had  a  12-foot 
gravel  surface  and  an  overall  graded  width  of  16  feet. 


137 


When  the  States  selected  the  7  percent  systems  re- 
quired by  the  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921,  they 
included  over  8,000  miles  of  forest  highways.  These 
roads  were  either  entirely  within  the  national  forests 
or  were  necessary  to  the  surrounding  communities  for 
access  to  and  use  of  the  forests.  There  were  also 
about  5,400  miles  of  public  roads  within  the  national 
forests,  but  not  on  the  Federal-aid  system.  These  last 
and  the  roads  on  the  Federal-aid  routes  the  Secretary 
of  Agriculture  grouped  into  a  forest  highway  system 
on  which  one-half  of  the  forest  highway  appropria- 
tions were  to  be  spent.*  The  Secretary  concentrated 
70  percent  of  these  funds  on  approximately  1,000 
miles  of  main  Federal-aid  routes  lying  entirely  within 
the  forests  in  order  to  keep  pace  with  the  improve- 
ment by  the  States  of  the  adjoining  portions  of  these 
routes.^" 

This  policy  complemented  the  policy  of  stage  con- 
struction that  was  being  followed  by  most  of  the 
western  and  southern  States.  To  insure  early  comple- 
tion of  some  kind  of  improvement  on  the  principal 
primary  routes,  the  Government  coordinated  not  only 
the  scheduling  of  improvements  with  the  adjoining 
States,  but  also  adopted  comparable  construction 
standards.  As  traffic  increased,  these  standards  were 
upgraded : 

Meanwhile,  as  the  traffic  increases  standards  of  con- 
struction are  being  constantly  raised.  Grades  and  curva- 
ture are  being  reduced  and  widths  increased,  and  projects 
constructed  originally  as  unsurfaced  earth  roads  are  being 
surfaced." 

Through  the  1920's  and  1930's,  Congress  author- 
ized about  one-tenth  as  much  for  forest  highways 
as  for  Federal  aid  to  the  States.**  This  was  applied 
where  it  was  most  needed  to  keep  up  with  traffic, 
mostly  for  second-  and  third-stage  construction  or  re- 
construction, so  that  by  1939,  two-thirds  of  the  annual 
program  was  rebuilding  or  upgrading  previous  work. 
Even  this  did  not  keep  up  with  demand,  and  a  num- 
ber of  States  and  even  counties  supplied  "cooperative 
funds"  to  supplement  the  Federal  apportionments  for 
roads  of  particular  interest  to  them.  Some  State 
highway  departments  spent  their  own  funds  to  black- 
top forest  highways  carrying  heavy  through  traffic. 
Eventually  the  main  highways  through  the  national 
forests  were  taken  over  by  the  States,  rebuilt,  and 
incorporated  into  their  own  highway  systems. 

Roads  in  the  National   Parks 

Before  the  creation  of  the  National  Park  Service 
in  1916,  each  national  park  superintendent  reported 
directly  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior;  each  had  his 


*  The  original  forest  highway  system  as  finally  approved 
by  the  Secretary  in  1926  comprised  13,459  miles  of  which 
11,271  miles  were  in  Alaska  and  11  western  States  and  2,188 
miles  in  17  eastern  and  southern  States.""  In  addition,  there 
were  thousands  of  miles  of  trails  and  logging  roads  not  in  the 
forest  highway  system,  but  necessary  for  the  protection  and 
use  of  the  forests.  One-half  of  the  forest  highway  appro- 
priations went  to  these  "forest  development  roads." 

**  Forest  highway  appropriations  for  fiscal  years  1917  to 
1941  were  .$108.5  million.  Federal  aid  in  the  same  period  was 
$1.1  billion.  Forest  highways  al.so  received  a  share  of  the 
emergency  relief  funds  provided  by  Congress  during  the 
New  Deal. 


own  road  budget,  and  made  his  own  arrangements 
for  laying  out  and  maintaining  roads.*  There  was 
no  overall  plan  for  developing  the  national  parks  and 
making  them  accessible  to  the  public,  but  in  the  an- 
nual appropriations  to  the  Interior  Department, 
Congress  might  include  amounts  for  specific  roads  in 
certain  parks,  generally  those  with  strong  local  politi- 
cal support. 

In  1924  Congress  gave  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior 
general  authorization  to  construct,  reconstruct  and 
improve  roads  and  trails  in  the  national  parks  and 
appropriated  $2.5  million  each  for  fiscal  years  1924, 
1925,  1926  and  1927  for  such  roads.  In  the  same  Act, 
Congress  directed  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  to 
turn  over  5  percent  of  the  war-surplus  road  equip- 
ment and  supplies  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  for 
use  in  park  road  construction.^^ 

This  act  gave  the  Secretary  the  means  to  plan 
ahead,  and  in  1925  he  had  the  National  Park  Service 
(NPS)  prepare  a  5-year  plan  of  road  improvements 
in  17  national  parks  and  monuments,  totaling  some 
1,510  miles.  Since  the  NPS  had  a  very  small  engi- 
neering staff.  Director  Stephen  Mather  arranged  with 
Chief  MacDonald,  in  1926,  for  the  BPK  to  handle  the 
engineering  and  construction  for  this  program  on  a 
reimburseable  basis.** 

Under  this  agreement,  which,  with  some  changes 
is  still  in  effect,  the  NPS  and  the  BPR  built  some  of 
the  most  scenic  and  spectacular  highways  in  North 
America,  one  of  which  was  described  thus  by  Chief 
MacDonald  in  his  annual  report  for  1927: 

One  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  national-park  projects 
is  the  work  on  the  Transmountain  Highway  in  Glacier 
National  Park.  Here  is  a  road  in  which  practically  every 
conceivable  obstacle  has  been  met  and  overcome.  The 
16-foot  roadway  is  being  literally  hewn  out  of  the  solid 
rock  of  the  Garden  Wall  in  order  to  reach  and  cross  the 
Continental  Divide.™ 

By  1931  only  one-fifth  of  the  5-year  program  was 
finished,  yet  already  some  roads  were  in  need  of  re- 
building to  higher  standards.  Furthermore,  the  Na- 
tional Park  Service  had  acquired  the  Colonial 
National  Historical  Park  and  the  Shenandoah  and 
Great  Smoky  Mountains  Parks  in  the  East  and  had 
begun  road  programs  in  all  of  them  that  were  ulti- 
mately to  run  into  the  millions  of  dollars.  In  January 
1931,  Congress  authorized  (46  Stat  1053)  the  Secre- 
tary of  the  Interior  to  build  approach  roads,  not 
exceeding  60  miles  long  from  the  park  gateway  of 
isolated  national  parks  to  the  "nearest  convenient  7 
percentum  road"  and  required  that  $1.5  million  of  the 
annual  park  road  authorizations  be  spent  on  such 
roads.  And  in  1933  President  Roosevelt,  by  executive 
order,  transferred  to  the  NPS  64  military  parks, 
national  cemeteries,  historical  areas  and  national 
monuments  that  had  formerly  been  in  the  charge  of 
the  War  Department  or  the  Department  of  Agricul- 
ture. Most  of  these  areas  had  roads  in  need  of  mod- 
ernizing. 


*  However,  for  many  years  roadwork  in  Yellowstone  Na- 
tional Park  was  handled  by  the  Army  Corps  of  Engineers. 

**  This  informal  arrangement  was  legitimized  by  Congress 
in  the  Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1928  which  author- 
ized the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  to  perform  engineering 
services  for  other  agencies  of  the  Government  in  connection 
with  roads. 


138 


To  meet  all  these  demands,  the  NPS  in  effect  jetti- 
soned its  original  5-year  plan  and  embarked  on  a 
looser,  but  much  larger,  road  program  tailored  to 
larger  authorizations.  Between  1930  and  1933,  Con- 
gress tripled  the  annual  park  road  authorizations. 
In  1934  and  1935,  the  Administration  allocated  $18.3 
million  of  emergenc}'  relief  funds  for  park  roads  and 
parkways.""  *  With  these  funds  the  NPS  and  BPR 
greatly  expanded  their  efforts,  and  in  the  single  year 
of  1936,  they  completed  204  miles  of  park  roads  and 
142  miles  of  approach  roads."^  By  1941,  when  the 
war  put  an  end  to  roadwork  in  the  parks,  1,781  miles 
of  park  roads  and  255  miles  of  access  roads  had  been 
completed  at  a  cost  of  about  $87  million."^ 

To  some  extent,  roads  in  the  national  parks  were 
demonstration  roads  for  the  embryonic  State  highway 
landscaping  and  erosion  control  programs  of  the 
1930's.  For  years  before  environmental  design  be- 
came popular,  the  National  Park  Service  had  em- 
ployed landscape  architects,  naturalists  and  foresters 
to  advise  on  the  location  and  construction  of  its  roads. 
Because  of  this  advice,  damage  to  the  landscape  from 
roadbuilding  was  much  less  in  the  parks  than  on 
State  highways  or  even  on  roads  in  the  adjacent  na- 
tional forests  constructed  by  the  BPR.  Furthermore, 
the  park  roads  were  highly  visible  models  of  what 
could  be  accomplished  by  good  slope  grading  and 
landscaping  to  blend  a  highway  into  its  natural  sur- 
roundings and  control  erosion  damage. 

The  National   Parkways 

In  May  1928  Congress  instructed  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture  to  build  a  highway  from  Washington  to 
Mount  Vernon  as  a  memorial  to  President  Washing- 
ton and  to  have  it  finished  in  time  for  the  bicentennial 
of  the  first  president's  birth  in  1932.  The  BPR,  act- 
ing for  the  Secretary,  selected  a  scenic  location  along 
the  shore  of  the  Potomac  River  and  designed  a  land- 
scaped four-lane  undivided  highway  in  the  style  of 
the  Westchester  County  parkways.  No  effort  was 
spared  to  make  this  the  most  modern  and  beautiful 
highway  in  the  United  States : 

Every  possible  effort  is  being  put  forth ...  to  make  this 
road  one  of  the  most  attractive  in  North  America.  The 
alignment  as  designed  is  a  succession  of  long,  easy 
curves :  the  grades  rise  and  fall  gently  with  the  natural 
roll  of  the  hills ;  the  cut  and  fill  banks  will  be  cut  to  flat 
slopes  and  rounded  so  as  to  merge  with  the  natural 
topograph ;  and  the  bridges  .  .  .  will  be  graceful  flat 
arches  faced  with  native  stone."" 

The  BPR  finished  the  Mount  Vernon  Memorial 
Highway  on  schedule,  at  a  cost  considerably  above 
the  $4.5  million  originally  provided  by  Congress.  In 
1930  it  became  the  first  unit  of  the  George  Washing- 
ton Memorial  Parkway  authorized  by  the  Capper- 
Cramton  Act  (46  Stat  482). 

The  George  Washington  and  other  later  Federal 
parkways  in  the  Washington  metropolitan  area  be- 
came commuter  arteries  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
Westchester  County  parkways.    The  Blue  Ridge  and 


Natchez  Trace  Parkways,  however,  developed  along 
quite  different  lines  and  much  closer  to  the  original 
Bronx  River  recreational  road  concept. 

These  parkways  were  begun  as  emergency  relief 
projects  without  specific  authorization  by  Congress. 
After  they  were  well  started.  Congress  recognized 
them  as  national  parkways  in  acts  providing  for  their 
administration  and  maintenance  by  the  National  Park 
Service,  '\\nien  originally  planned  in  the  1930's,  these 
parkways  were  conceived  as  modern  motor  roads  with 
extremely  wide  rights-of-way — actually  elongated 
parks  sited  to  provide  scenic  views  for  the  motorists 
and  i-ecreational  opportunities  at  selected  places  along 
the  way.*  Thus  they  became  not  merely  cross-country 
highways,  but  recreational  destinations  in  themselves 
similar  to  the  national  parks  and  monuments. 

The  BPR  as  construction  agent  foi-  the  NPS  let  the 
first  contract  for  the  Blue  Ridge  Parkway  in  Feb- 
ruary 1936,  and  by  the  end  of  1939,  305  miles  were 
completed  or  in  various  stages  of  construction  and 
140  miles  of  continuous  paved  parkway  were  open  to 
traffic,  attracting  300,000  visitors  that  year.^"*  The 
Natchez  Trace  Parkway  developed  much  more  slowly 
and  by  1939  only  36  miles  were  completed. 

Most  of  the  Federal  highways  were  in  the  national 
forests,  the  national  parks  or  the  national  parkways, 
but  there  were  others.  In  the  West,  considerable 
mileages  of  local  roads  in  Indian  reservations  re- 
mained under  Federal  control  after  the  States  took 
over  the  main  primaries  and  secondaries.  Some  of 
the  larger  military  reservations  contained  well  over 
100  miles  of  roads  maintained  by  the  Army  or  Navy.** 
Over  the  years,  the  Government  added  steadily  to  its 
road  inventory  so  that  now  almost  7  percent  of  the 
rural  road  mileage  is  under  Federal  control.*** 

The   First  Foreign-Aid   Program 

A  land  route  connecting  the  countries  of  the  Amer- 
icas has  been  a  dream  of  visionaries  going  back  to 
Spanish  times.  These  early  schemes  did  not  involve 
the  United  States  until  May  1928  when  Congress,  by 
joint  resolution,  requested  the  President  to  explore  the 
possibility  of  an  international  highway  at  the  forth- 
coming Pan  American  Highway  Congress  scheduled 
to  meet  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  August  1929.  f  In 
March  1929,  Congress  authorized  the  appropriation 
of  $50,000  to  enable  the  Secretary  of  State  to  coop- 


*  .$16.0  million  from  the  National  Industrial  Recovery  Act 
and  i$2.3  million  from  the  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of  1934. 
In  addition  the  Civilian  Conservation  Corps  spent  tens  of 
millions  in  the  national  parks  improving  minor  roads  and 
trails. 


♦  The  rights-of-way,  including  all  access  rights,  were  pur- 
chased by  the  States  and  transferred  to  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment. They  averaged  125  acres  per  mile,  but  varied  in  width 
from  400  feet  in  tight  places  to  as  much  as  %  mile  at  special 
park  sites. 

**  In  World  War  II  an  average  cantonment  for  30,000  men 
required  18  miles  of  primary  roads,  7  miles  of  secondaries 
and  3  miles  of  local  roads."' 

***  In  1973,  21.5,747  miles  of  rural  road  were  under  Federal 
control  as  compared  to  a  total  national  rural  mileage  of 
3,175,654  miles.'<" 

t  Congress  was  responding  to  a  previous  re.solution  of  the 
Sixth  International  Conference  of  American  States  calling  for 
the  construction  of  a  highway  connecting  North,  Central  and 
South  America."' 


139 


erate  with  other  governments  of  the  Pan  American 
Union  in  reconnaissance  surveys  to  develop  the  facts. 

These  surveys  began  in  June  1930  in  cooperation 
with  the  governments  of  Panama,  Costa  Rica,  Nica- 
ragua, Honduras  and  Guatemala  under  the  general 
direction  of  E.  W.  James  of  the  BPR.  In  the  course 
of  the  next  3  years,  the  engineers  of  the  BPR.  and  of 
the  Central  American  republics  covered  900  miles  on 
foot  or  horseback  through  dense  jungles  and  rugged 
mountains  to  make  the  ground  reconnaissance.  They 
were  greatly  aided  by  aerial  photographs  of  the  most 
promising  routes  made  by  the  U.S.  Army  Air  Corps 
from  its  bases  in  the  Canal  Zone — one  of  the  earliest 
extensive  uses  of  aerial  photographic  methods  for 
highway  location  in  unexplored  country. 

In  January  1934,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  re- 
ported to  the  Secretary  of  State  that  of  the  3,250 
miles  of  the  route  froni  the  U.S.  border  to  Panama 
City,  1,265  miles  were  already  passable  for  motor 
vehicles  the  year  round  and  1,000  more  were  passable 
in  the  dry  season  and  that  it  was  entirely  practicable 
to  build  a  motor  road  over  the  remainder.^"^ 

Congress  appropriated  $1,075  million  in  June  1934 
to  start  construction  of  the  Inter- American  Highway 
in  cooperation  with  tlie  countries  through  which  it 
would  pass.  The  BPR  then  worked  out  cooperative 
agreements  with  Panama,  Honduras  and  Guatemala 
to  build  three  large  bridges.  Under  these  agreements, 
the  United  States  furnished  the  plans  and  engineer- 
ing supervision,  the  steel  and  cement,  and  some  of  the 
heavy  equipment,  while  the  cooperating  countries 
supplied  labor  and  local  materials.^"^ 

The  assistance  provided  by  Congress  was  little  more 
than  seed  money  to  induce  the  Central  American  re- 
publics to  improve  their  highway  organizations  and 
to  step  up  their  own  construction  efforts.  This  pur- 
pose was  largely  accomplished.  On  work  for  which 
the  United  States  provided  $680,000  up  to  1938,  the 
cooperating  countries  provided  $710,000.^^° 

More  importantly,  the  BPR  made  a  determined 
effort  to  train  engineers  to  carry  on  the  work: 

In  each  country  where  cooperative  work  has  been  con- 
ducted, a  Bureau  engineer  has  been  placed  in  charge  as 
resident  engineer.  All  other  positions  have  been  filled 
with  local  engineers,  most  of  whom  have  been  trained  in 
the  United  States.  It  has  been  the  policy  to  aid  each 
country  in  developing  its  own  highway  engineers  capable 
of  carrying  on  future  highway  programs  according  to  the 
most  modern  standards."' 

In  1938  Congress  authorized  the  President  to  pro- 
vide technical  assistance  to  countries  of  the  Pan 
American  Union  for  planning  and  building  roads. 
Venezuela,  Colombia  and  Ecuador  requested  such  as- 
sistance, whereupon  BPR  engineers  were  assigned  as 
advisers  to  those  countries  in  1939.  And  in  May  1939 
the  Export-Import  Bank  requested  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture  to  assign  highway  engineers  to  assist  the 
Bank  in  evaluating  applications  for  highway  loans 
in  Central  and  South  America.  This  request  was 
filled  by  assigning  experienced  BPR  engineers  to  the 
Bank.  These  small  tentative  efforts  provided  valuable 
experience  for  the  huge  foreign  highway-aid  pi'ogram 
carried  on  by  the  BPR  after  World  War  II. 

Throughout  the  1930's,  woi'k  pi'oceeded  in  a  rather 
leisurely    manner   on    the    Inter-American    Highway, 


limited  largely  by  the  financial  abilities  of  the  coop- 
erating countries.  It  required  the  stimulus  of  war  to 
get  the  program  really  moving — a  stimulus  that  was 
soon  to  be  applied. 

REFERENCES 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1922,  pp.  4,  5. 

^Id.,  p.  7. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1926,  p.  2. 

*  T.  MacDonald,  Four  Years  of  Road  Building  Under  the 
Federal-Aid  Act,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  3,  No.  26,  June  1920, 
pp.  10-12. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1929,  p.  3. 

"Office  of  Federal  Coordinator  For  U.S.  Transportation, 
Public  Aids  To  Transportation,  Public  Aids  To  Motor 
Vehicle  Transportation,  Vol.  IV  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C., 
1940)  pp.  9,  67,  76. 

'Accident  Facts,  1934  (National  Safety  Council,  Chicago, 
1934)  p.  32. 

'  T.  MacDonald,  The  Freedom  of  the  Road,  A^ierican 
Highways,  Vol.  VIII,  No.  1,  Jan.  1929,  pp.  6,  7. 

'  Id.,  pp.  7,  8. 

^"Railroad  Revival,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  88,  No. 
1,  Jan.  5,  1922,  p.  4. 

^^  An  Industrial  Message  to  Congress,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  89,  No.  24,  Dec.  14,  1922,  p.  1006. 

"W.  Lyford,  Urges  Co-operation  Between  Railroads  and 
Motor  Trucks,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  89,  No.  22, 
Nov.  30,  1922,  p.  933. 

"  G.  Chatburn,  Highways  and  Highway  Transportation 
(Thomas  Crowell  Co.,  New  York,  1923)  pp.  429-432. 

"  P.  Hubbard,  Efflcicncy  of  Bituminous  Surfaces  And  Pave- 
ments Under  Motor  TruAilc  Traffic,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  No. 
10,  Feb.  1919,  p.  25. 

"  C.  Upham,  Solution  of  the  Growing  Problem  May  be 
Found  in  Cooperative  Action,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  No.  2, 
Jun.  1918,  p.  16. 

"E.  DuFFEY,  New  York  Advocates  Placing  Reasonable 
Limit  Upon  Total  Load  of  Motor  Trucks,  Public  Roads,  Vol. 
1,  No.  2,  Jun.  1918,  p.  7. 

"  G.  Pride,  Limitations  To  Be  Placed  On  Trucks  From 
User's  Viewpoint,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  81,  No.  22, 
Nov.  28,  1918,  p.  969. 

"/(Z.,  p.  970. 

^'Highway  Transportation  Problem  Needs  Study,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  80,  No.  17,  Apr.  25,  1918,  pp.  798, 
799. 

"  Ideas  and  Actions  :  A  History  of  The  Highway  Re- 
search Board,  1920-1970,  (Highway  Research  Board,  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  1970)  p.  7. 

"  T.  Agg,  Compreheyisive  Investigations  In  Highway  Engi- 
neering Needed,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  2,  Nos.  16-17,  Aug.-Sept. 
1919,  p.  35. 

^^Id.,  p.  36. 

''Id. 

^'  Ideas  and  Actions,  supra,  note  20,  pp.  185,  186. 

''Id. 

'^Id.,  pp.  9,  181. 

^'  Standards  Approved  by  the  American  Association  Of  State 
Highivay  Officials  During  the  Year  1928,  American  Highways, 
Vol.  7,  No.  4,  Oct.  1928,  p.  21. 

^J.  McKay,  The  Maine  Transportation  Survey,  Public 
Roads,  Vol.  6,  No.  3,  May  1925,  pp.  45-18,  67,  68. 

^A  Study  of  Highway  Traffic  in  the  Cleveland  Regional 
Area,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  9,  No.  7,  Sept.  1928,  p.  152. 

^"1971  Automobile  Facts  and  Figures  (Automobile  Manu- 
facturer's Association,  Detroit,  1971)  p.  3. 

'^  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1930,  p.  4. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1932,  p.  2. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1933,  p.  3. 

''Motor  Vehicle  Registrations  and  Receipts,  Public  Roads, 
Vol.  12,  No.  1,  Mar.  1931,  p.  19;  Vol.  13,  No.  2,  Apr.  1932, 
p.  39;  Vol.  14,  No.  3,  May  1933,  p.  54;  Vol.  15,  No.  7,  Sept. 
19.34,  p.  178;  Vol.  10,  No.  5,  Jul.  1935,  pp.  90,  91. 

''Id. 


140 


"DivEESioN — An  Analysis  of  the  Practtce  of  Applying 
Motor  Vehicle  Impost  Collections  To  Other  Than  High- 
way Purposes  (National  Highway  Users  Conference,  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  Jan.  1936)  p.  10. 

''Id.,  p.  22. 

"Id.,  p.  8. 

*°  Dedication  of  Special  Highway  Re\'enltes  To  Highway 
Purposes  (National  Highway  Users  Conference,  Washington, 
D.C.,  Aug.  1941)  p.  9. 

"J.  Harrison,  Where  The  Highicay  Dollar  Goes,  Public 
Roads,  Vol.  13,  No.  2,  Apr.  1932,  p.  21. 

**  Off.  of  Fedeiuvl  Coordinator,  supra,  note  G,  pp.  53,  54. 

"  G.  Chatburn,  supra,  note  13,  p.  330. 

"  Road  Location  by  Legislature,  Engineering  News-Record, 
Vol.  90,  No.  25,  Jun.  21,  1923,  p.  1070. 

"  Supra,  note  35. 

'*  Louisiana  Highway  Forces  To  Be  Cut  on  Jan.  1,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  109,  No.  19,  Nov.  10,  1932,  p.  572. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Reports,  1934-1944. 

**  BuTiEAU  OF  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1936,  p.  6. 

"/d.,  p.  63. 

"  Savt:  The  Feder.\l  Aid  Highway  Principle- — The  Story 
OF  What  It  Is,  How  It  Operates  and  The  Attacks  Against 
It  (National  Highway  Users  Conference,  Washington,  D.C., 
Mar.  1942)  p.  31. 

"Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads,  H.  Doc.  272,  76th  Cong.,  1st 
Sess.,  p.  107. 

"T.  MacDonald,  Federal  Aid  From  The  National  View- 
point, The  History  and  Accomplishments  of  Twenty-Fr-e 
Years  of  Feder^vl  Aid  For  Highways  (American  Association 
of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C.,  Nov.  28,  1944) 
p.  29. 

'"  C.  Upham,  The  Alignment,  Orade,  Width,  And  Thickness 
In  Design  Of  Road  Surfaces,  Pl^blic  Roads,  Vol.  2,  Nos.  21- 
22,  Jan.-Feb.  1920,  p.  25. 

"Accident  Facts,  1927  (National  Safety  Council,  Chicago, 
1928)  p.  6. 

"Report  of  The  Committee  On  Statistics  (National  Con- 
ference on  Street  and  Highway  Safety,  Washington,  D.C., 
Nov.  3,  1924)  pp.  7,  21,  26,  27. 

"Report  of  The  Committee  On  Tr^vffic  Control  (National 
Conference  on  Street  and  Highway  Safety,  Washington,  D.C., 
Nov.  3,  1924)  pp.  9,  10,  14. 

"  Report  of  The  Committee  On  Construction  and  Engi- 
neering (National  Conference  on  Street  and  Highway  Safety, 
Wa.shington,  D.C.,  Nov.  3,  1924 )  pp.  5-7,  12. 

""Id.,  p.  23. 

"Id.,  p.  15. 

"Report  of  The  Committee  On  Motor  Vehicles  (National 
Conference  on  Street  and  Highway  Safety,  Washington,  D.C., 
Nov.  3,  1924)  pp.  9,  14. 

"'Id.,  p.  12.  _ 

"  Report  of  The  First  National  Conference  On  Street 
AND  Highway  Safety,  Washington,  D.C.,  Dec.  15-16,  1924, 
p.  15. 

"Id.,  pp.  9,  10. 

**  Report  of  The  Second  National  Conference  On  Street 
AND  Highway  Safety,  Washington,  D.C.,  Mar.  23-25,  1926, 
p.  15. 

"/d.,  pp.  19. 

"A.  Fletcher,  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Cause  and  Pre- 
vention of  Highicay  Accidents,  Proceedings,  7th  Annual 
Meeting,  Vol.  7,  (Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C., 
1928)    pp.  43,  44. 

"BPR,  supra,  note  48,  p.  10. 

"  Mark  Brooke,  Sidetcalks,  Curbs,  Gutters  and  Highway 
Signs,  American  Highway  Engineer's  Handbook,  A.  H. 
Blanchard,  ed.   (Wiley,  New  York,  1919)  p.  1393. 

"A.  E.  Johnson,  A  Story  of  Road  Signing,  AASHO — The 
First  Fifty  Years,  1914-1964,  (American  Association  of 
State  Highway  Officials,  W^ashington,  D.C.,  1965)  pp.  130,  131. 

'"A.  Bruce,  Effect  of  Increased  Speed  of  Vehicles  on  the 
Design  of  Hightcays,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  10,  No.  1,  Mar.  1929, 
p.  11. 

"  K.  Sawyer,  Line  Controls  Country  Roads  Traffic,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  Oct.  28,  1920,  p.  833. 


"  A.  Johnson,  Notes  on  Traffic  Speeds,  Proceedings,  13th 
Annual  Meeting  (Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C., 
1934)  p.  353. 

"  W.  Hargeu  &  E.  Bonney,  Handbook  For  Highway  Engi- 
neers (McGraw-Hill,  New  Yorlc,  1919)  p.  33. 

"J.  Barnett,  Safe  Side  Friction  Factors  and  Superelevation 
Design,  Proceedings,  16th  Annual  Mooting,  Vol.  16  (Highway 
Resoarch  Board,  Washington,  D.C,  1936)  p.  75. 

"A  Policy  on  Highicay  Classification,  Approved  September 
16,  1938.  Policies  On  Geometric  Design  (American  Associa- 
tion of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C,  1950) 
p.  8. 

"A  Policy  On  Geometric  Design  of  Rural  Highways 
(American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washing- 
ton, D.C,  1954). 

"  G.  D.  Clarke,  The  Parkicay  Idea,  The  Highway  and 
The  Landscape,  W.  B.  Snow,  ed.  (Rutgers  Univ.  Press,  New 
Brunswick,  N.J.,  1959)  pp.  39,  40. 

"E.  James,  Parkway  Features  of  Interest  to  the  Highway 
Engince);  Pltblic  Roads,  Vol.  10,  No.  2,  Apr.  1929,  p.  22. 

"I.  F.  Morrow,  Report  of  the  Section  on  Architecture  of 
the  Commonicealth  Club  of  California,  The  Commonwealth, 
Vol.  8,  No.  46,  Nov.  15,  1932,  p.  245. 

*»  BPR,  supra,  note  48,  p.  11. 

"  Editorial,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  103,  No.  20, 
Nov.  14,  1929,  p.  757. 

*■  B.  Marsh,  Discussion  on  Design  Research,  Proceedings, 
17th  Annual  Meeting,  Vol.  17  (Highway  Research  Board, 
Washington,  D.C,  1938)  p.  253. 

"  W.  Thompson,  Design  Features  of  Lincoln  Highway 
"Ideal  Section,"  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  88,  No.  24, 
Jun.  15,  1922,  p.  982. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1937,  p.  4. 

''As  related  in  January  1974  by  E.  H.  Holmes  of  the  BPR, 
a  memhor  of  the  task  force  that  prepared  the  Interregional 
Highway  Report. 

*'  H.  Doc.  272,  supra,  note  51,  p.  4. 

"/d.,  p.  114. 

''Id.,  pp.  VII,  VIII. 

''Boston-Washington  Super  Highicay,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  126,  Apr.  10,  1941,  pp.  550,  524. 

°°  Tolls  on  Merrltt  Parkway  Paid  By  3%  Million  Cars, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  124,  No.  11,  Mar.  14,  1940, 
p.  360. 

*"  Toll  Collection  Void  on  Western  Parkicay,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  124,  No.  10,  Mar.  7,  1940,  p.  353. 

'^  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1920,  p.  20. 

"  L.  Hewes,  Federal  Road  Building  in  the  National  Forests 
of  the  West,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  3,  No.  26,  Jun.  1920,  pp.  15, 
25,  26. 

^Id.,  p.  26. 

"'  BPR,  supra,  note  3,  p.  30. 

'"Id. 

"  Id.,  p.  31. 

"^Authorization  of  Road  Construction  in  National  Parks 
(43  Stat  90). 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1927,  p.  32. 

"''  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1935,  p.  51. 

"'  BPR,  supra,  note  48,  pp.  58,  61. 

"^  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1941,  pp.  71,  72. 

''^  BPR,  supra,  note  5,  p.  42. 

'"*  History  of  the  Blue  Ridge  Parkway  Project,  Typescript 
of  unknown  authorship,  dated  April  2,  1940,  in  the  files  of  the 
National  Park  Service,  Denver,  Colorado. 

'"^  Road  Builders  Annual  Meeting  Centers  on  War  Restric- 
tions, Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  128,  No.  11,  Mar.  12, 
1942,  p.  .893. 

'""  Federal  Highway  Administration,  Highway  Statistics, 
1973  (Department  of  Transportation,  Washington,  D.C,  1974) 
p.  210. 

""  BPR,  supra,  note  5,  pp.  42,  43. 

'™  Proposed  Inter-American  Highway — Report  Prepared 
By  The  Department  of  Agricultltie  Transmitted  To  The 
Secretary  of  State,  S.  Doc.  224,  73d  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  p.  13. 

'""  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1934,  p.  53. 

"°  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1938,  p.  63. 

'"  Id. 


141 


Rood/ 
for 

notionol 
Defen/e 


The   Pershing   Map 

Shortly  before  the  passage  of  the  Federal  Highway 
Act  of  1921,  Chief  MacDonald  asked  the  War  Plans 
Division  of  the  Army  General  Staff  to  designate  the 
most  important  roads  for  national  defense,  and  he 
supplied  maps  on  which  to  show  these  roads.  In  1922 
the  Army  produced  the  "Pershing  Map,"  showing  for 
the  first  time  the  main  roads  of  prime  importance  in 
time  of  war.  For  the  most  part,  these  coincided  with 
the  principal  roads  selected  by  the  States  for  their  7 
percent  systems,  and,  in  fact,  the  War  Department's 
general  position  was  that  a  system  of  highways  that 
was  adequate  to  serve  the  industrial  and  commercial 
demands  of  the  Nation  would  adequately  serve  the 
military  requirements  also.*  All  of  the  routes  on  the 
Pershing  Map  were  incorporated  into  the  Federal-aid 
system. 

In  1935  the  BPR  and  the  War  Department  restudied 
the  military  highway  needs  to  establish  priorities  for 
improvement.  These  priorities  were  then  passed  on 
to  the  States  for  use  in  planning  their  own  highway 
programs.  These  needs  were  a  principal  factor  in 
selecting  the  26,700-mile  system  of  interregional  high- 
ways recommended  by  the  BPR  in  its  1939  report. 
Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads. 


In  the  postwar  years,  the  United  States  had  allowed 
its  military  forces  to  sink  into  the  same  unprepared 
condition  that  had  prevailed  before  World  War  I. 
The  rude  awakening  came  in  1939  when  the  Germans 
seized  Czechoslovakia  and  prepared  to  invade  Poland. 
In  August  1939,  Congress  hastily  appropriated  $2 
billion  for  defense,  and  the  country  began  rearming. 

The  War  Department  again  reviewed  its  strategic 
highway  map,  adding  more  routes  which  brought  the 
total  up  to  some  74,600  miles,  of  which  29,000  miles 
were  considered  of  immediate  importance  to  the  de- 
fense effort.  The  Public  Roads  Administration 
(PRA)  (successor  to  the  BPR  in  a  governmental 
reorganization  plan)  and  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments immediately  began  an  inventory  of  the  strategic 
network  roads  which  disclosed  that  thousands  of  miles 
of  the  network  failed  to  meet  adequate  standards  for 
either  military  or  civilian  traffic.  Worst  of  all,  the 
survey  revealed  that  there  were  2,400  bridges  that 
were  unable  to  safely  sustain  the  H-15  loading  of  the 
American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
which  was  then  the  standard  for  bridges  on  the 
Federal-aid  system.* 


*  In  1921  General  Pershing  had  testified  before  Congress 
that  what  the  United  States  needed  for  defense  was  not  wide 
transcontinental  superhighways,  but  a  network  of  good  roads 
blanketing  the  country. 


*  Since  1935  the  Army  had  designed  militarj'  equipment  to 
stay  within  the  limits  of  AASHO  bridge  loadings.  Bridges 
designed  for  H-15  loading  would  readily  carry  all  classes  of 
military  equipment  except  50-ton  tanks.  These  could  safely 
pass  under  special  speed  and  spacing  restrictions. 


142 


The  1922  "Pershing  Map." 


The  PRA  estimated  that  it  would  cost  $202  million 
to  remedy  these  deficiencies,  yet  Congress  had  made 
no  appropriations  specifically  for  public  roads  outside 
of  Federal  reservations  as  a  part  of  the  defense  build- 
up. However,  the  need  for  such  roads  increased  rap- 
idly as  the  Army  and  Navy  began  enlarging  existing 
posts  and  laying  out  new  camps  and  airfields,  many 
of  them  in  areas  served  only  by  county  and  local 
roads.  The  Government  placed  some  defense  estab- 
lishments, such  as  powder  works,  in  remote  areas 
almost  devoid  of  roads.  And  mobilization  placed  ab- 
normal strains  on  the  State  highway  systems  to  move 
men  and  materials  to  new  or  enlarged  factories. 

The  stalemate  in  the  European  war  ended  in  April 
1940  with  the  German  invasion  of  Denmark,  and  by 
the  end  of  June,  the  Germans  were  in  firm  control  of 
Western  Europe.  Frantically,  the  United  States  be- 
gan mobilizing  for  war.  Between  June  and  September 
1940,  Congress  appropriated  $11.55  billion  for  military 
housing,  armaments,  munitions,  shipyards  and  a  two- 
ocean  na\^'.  On  September  16,  1940,  Congress  enacted 
the  first  peacetime  draft. 

The  Administration  asked  the  States  and  counties 
to  step  up  work  on  the  strategic  network  and  on  access 
roads  to  defense  installations,  but  with  little  success. 
Many  of  the  defense  access  roads  were  not  on  the 
Federal-aid  or  State  highway  systems  and  were  thus 
ineligible  for  improvement  with  Federal  or  State 
funds.  The  counties  were  impoverished  and  imable 
to  take  on  the  added  burden  of  providing  for  vastly 
increased  volumes  of  defense  traffic.  The  Federal-aid 
secondary  and  feeder  road  fimds  for  fiscal  years  1940 


Ml^l**^ 


With  WW  II  approaching,  access  roads 
had  to  be  built  for  new  military  posts  being 
established.    This  fleet  of  trucks  carrying  tent  platforms 
was  going  to  Camp  Shelby,  Miss.,  where  a  tent 
city  was  built  to  quarter  50,000  recruits. 


143 


and  1941,  drastically  cut  by  Congress,  were  hopelessly 
inadequate  for  the  job. 

The  only  agency  with  sizable  Federal  funds  that 
could  be  used  quickly  to  build  access  roads  was  the 
Work  Projects  Administration,  which  was  still  getting 
about  $65  million  per  month  for  unemployment  work 
relief.  "Wherever  possible  the  WPA's  efforts  were 
channeled  into  defense  projects.  The  i-equirement  that 
sponsors  contribute  25  percent  of  the  project  cost  was 
waived  and  the  nonlabor  cost  limit  on  projects  was 
raised  from  $20,000  to  $100,000  to  permit  the  purchase 
of  more  materials  and  the  use  of  machinery.^  For 
about  5  critical  months  in  the  summer  and  fall  of 
1940  the  WPA  kept  traffic  moving  and  averted  pa- 
ralysis at  dozens  of  defense  installations.  These  roads 
were  mostly  upgraded  local  roads  and  not  really 
planned  to  meet  installation  needs,  but  they  filled  the 
gap  until  Congress  provided  funds  for  more  adequate 
roads. 

Meanwhile  Commissioner  MacDonald  tried  to  per- 
suade the  States  to  concentrate  their  funds  on  the 
most  urgent  needs  of  the  strategic  highway  system. 
He  had  no  direct  legislative  authority  to  do  this  but 
relied  on  his  powers  of  persuasion  and  the  authority 
conferred  in  the  original  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of 
1916  to  approve  or  disapprove  projects.  In  August 
1940  MacDonald  rejected  the  Oklahoma  highway  de- 
partment's entire  $5  million  Federal-aid  program  be- 
cause it  was  scattered  throughout  the  State  with  little 
regard  for  strategic  needs.^  A  month  later  Congress, 
in  the  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1940,  gave  the  Com- 
missioner of  Public  Roads  specific  authority  to  give 
priority  to  defense  highways  in  approving  Federal- 
aid  projects.  In  an  even  more  drastic  departure  from 
traditional  Federal-aid  policies,  Congress  also  au- 
thorized the  Federal  Works  Administrator  to  initiate 
defense  projects  urgently  requested  by  the  Secretary 
of  War  or  Secretary  of  the  Navy  and  to  charge  the 
cost  of  these  projects  to  the  Federal-aid  apportion- 
ments of  the  States  in  which  they  were  situated. 

This  Act  was  not  popular  with  the  States,  who 
viewed  it  as  an  attempt  to  make  them  pay  for  road 
costs  that  were  primarily  the  responsibility  of  the 
national  government.  It  provided  no  money  for 
urgently  needed  access  roads  to  defense  establishments 
and,  in  the  face  of  increasing  civilian  highway  needs, 
actually  reduced  the  Federal  aid  authorized  for  fiscal 
years  1942  and  1943.  Nevertheless,  most  of  them  vol- 
untarily concentrated  a  large  part  of  their  funds  and 
other  resources  on  the  strategic  network  and  such 
access  roads  as  were  on  the  Federal-aid  system,  and 
they  also  provided  engineering  assistance  to  counties 
for  access  roads  not  on  the  Federal-aid  system.  By 
October  1941,  the  combined  Federal-aid  programs  of 
the  States  totaled  11,271  miles,  of  which  2,884  miles 
were  on  the  strategic  network  and  197  miles  were 
access  roads.  Over  40  percent  of  the  total  funds 
programed  were  directed  particularly  to  meeting  de- 
fense needs.^ 

The  PRA  Report  on  Defense  Highway  Needs 

On  June  21,  1940,  President  Roosevelt  requested 
John  M.  Carmody,  the  Federal  Works  Administrator, 

to  have  the  Public  Roads  Administration  .  .  .  mal<e  a 
survey  of  our  highway  facilities  from  the  viewpoint  of 


national   defense    and    advise   me   as   to   any   steps   that 
appear  necessary. 

I  suggest  that  particular  attention  be  paid  to  the 
strength  of  bridges,  the  width  of  strategic  roads,  adequacy 
of  ingress  and  egress  from  urban  centers,  and  the  servic- 
ing of  existing  and  proposed  Army,  Navy  and  Air  bases."  * 

The  PRA's  report  of  February  1,  1941,  Highways 
For  the  National  Defense,  disclosed  an  urgent  need 
for  the  improvement  or  construction  of  1,500  miles  of 
roads  entirely  within  military  reservations  and  2,830 
miles  of  access  roads  to  serve  192  military  establish- 
ments. The  estimated  cost  of  the  access  roads  was 
$220  million.  The  report  noted  that  there  were  2,436 
substandard  bridges  in  the  strategic  network  and 
14,000  miles  of  surfaces  incapable  of  supporting  9,000- 
pound  wheel  loads  in  all  weather.  To  eliminate  these 
deficiencies  would  cost  $458  million.  The  PRA  recom- 
mended immediate  appropriation  of  $150  million  for 
access  roads  and  at  least  $100  million  to  remedy  criti- 
cal deficiencies  in  the  strategic  network,  the  latter  to 
be  apportioned  according  to  the  traditional  Federal- 
aid  formula. 

There  was  no  immediate  action  on  the  PRA  report, 
and  it  was  not  until  June  2,  1941,  that  the  President 
asked  Congress  to  provide  funds  for  defense  highways. 
After  extensive  hearings  in  both  Houses,  Congress 
passed  a  defense  highway  bill  which  provided  $150 
million  for  access  roads  and  $125  million  to  correct 
critical  deficiencies  in  the  strategic  network  to  be  ap- 
portioned among  the  States  according  to  the  Federal- 
aid  formula. 

The  President  vetoed  this  bill  because  of  the  manda- 
tory apportionment  of  the  strategic  highway  funds 
among  the  States,  which,  he  said  prevented  the  Ad- 
ministration from  placing  the  funds  where  they  were 
most  needed.  The  veto  did  not  escape  criticism.  The 
Engineering  Neics-Record  observed  that  the  President 
had  in  the  past  made  repeated  attacks  on  the  appor- 
tionment of  Federal-aid  funds  among  the  States.  The 
veto,  it  declared,  "is  a  step  toward  complete  Federal 
control  over  Federal  contributions  to  state  highway 
work,  which  appears  to  be  the  President's  objective."  ^ 

Congress  bent  a  little  but  did  not  entirely  accede  to 
the  President's  wishes.  Three  months  after  the  veto, 
it  passed  a  practically  identical  bill,  with  the  strategic 
highway  funds  scaled  down  to  $50  million  of  which 
half  were  to  be  apportioned  according  to  the  Federal- 
aid  formula  and  half  could  be  allocated  anywhere  on 
the  network  at  the  discretion  of  the  Federal  Works 
Administrator.  The  matching  ratio  on  these  funds 
was  to  be  75  Federal  to  25  State.  The  $150  million 
of  access  road  funds  in  the  bill  did  not  have  to  be 
matched,  but  initiation  of  projects  was  left  to  the 
Government  rather  than  the  States.*  The  President 
signed  this  bill  November  19,  1941. 

War  Traffic   Pounds  the   Highways 

The  Defense  Highway  Act  cleared  the  way  for  a 
tremendous  highway  effort.  In  October  1941,  the 
PRA  began  construction  of  a  vast  network  of  express 
highways  in  Arling-ton  County,  Virginia,  to  funnel 
50,000  workers  into  the  huge  Pentagon  Building  under 


*  Congress  authorized  the  appropriation  of  an  additional 
$100  million  for  defense  access  roads  in  1942  and  a  further 
$25  million  in  1944. 


144 


This  bridge  on  U.S.  Route  30 
in  Pennsylvania  could  carry  only 
infrequent  loads  such  as  the  152,000- 
pound  tank  transporter  and  tank. 


constniction  by  the  War  Department.  In  1942  alone, 
the  PRA  approved  600  access  road  projects  costing 
over  $200  million.  Some  of  these  projects  were  very 
large  indeed.  In  Michigan  the  highway  department 
began  work  on  a  $12  million  limited  access  expressway 
connecting  Detroit  to  the  River  Rouge  defense  indus- 
try complex  and  the  Ford  Willow  Run  bomber  plant. 

After  the  official  entry  of  the  United  States  into  the 
war  in  December  1941,  packs  of  German  submarines 
began  preying  on  the  coastal  sealanes,  and  by  May 
1942,  they  were  sinking  oil  tankers  at  such  a  rate  as 
to  cause  acute  fuel  shortages  in  the  east.  The  Office 
of  Defense  Transportation  diverted  railroad  tank  cars 
normally  used  to  serve  inland  States  to  East  Coast 
destinations,  hoping  that  the  trucking  industry  would 
fill  the  transportation  gap.  However,  this  plan  ran 
into  a  stubborn  obstacle — the  size  and  weight  laws  of 
the  States. 

For  years  organizations  such  as  the  National  High- 
way Users  Conference,  the  trucking  associations,  and 
the  automobile  manufacturers  had  been  trying  to  get 
the  States  to  enact  uniform  size  and  weight  laws  so 
that  trucks  could  pass  readily  across  State  lines.  Be- 
fore World  War  I  there  had  been  bills  in  Congress 
proposing  national  registration  of  vehicles  and  Fed- 
eral size  and  weight  laws,  but  in  the  end  the  Govern- 
ment left  this  field  of  I'egulation  to  the  States.  The 
result  was  diversity,  not  to  say  chaos.  In  1941  five 
States  still  limited  wheel  loads  according  to  the  width 
of  tire — a  holdover  from  the  days  of  solid  rubber 
tires,  which  had  long  since  disappeared  from  the  high- 
ways. Texas  and  Louisiana  imposed  the  absurd  limit 
of  7,000  pounds  on  "payloads."  In  Kentucky  the 
gross  load  limit  of  a  four-wheel  vehicle  on  pneumatic 
tires  was  18,000  pounds  and  in  six  other  States,  it  was 
20,000  pounds.     At  the  same  time,  other  States  per- 


mitted gross  loads  as  high  as  36,000  pounds  on  four 
wheels.  In  the  neighboring  States  of  North  and 
South  Dakota  the  difference  in  permissible  gross  load- 
ing was  12,000  pounds.  The  permissible  gross  load  on 
one  axle — a  more  significant  measure  of  stresses  im- 
posed on  roads — varied  from  12,000  pounds  in  Ala- 
bama and  Mississippi  to  22,400  pounds  in  Rhode  Island 
and  New  York,  and  even  24,640  pounds  in  the  District 
of  Columbia.* 

In  January  1942  a  bill  was  introduced  in  Congress 
giving  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  the  power 
to  set  uniform  truck  weights  and  sizes  as  a  war  meas- 
ure.'' Thereafter,  a  number  of  States  raised  their  load 
limits.  The  PRA  and  AASHO  drew  up  a  provisional 
Uniform  Code  of  Weights,  Heights  and  Lengths  of 
Motor  Vehicles  which  permitted  axle  loads  of  18,000 
pounds  and  gross  loads  on  four  wheels  of  30,000 
pounds,  and  up  to  40,000  pounds  on  trucks  of  three 
or  more  axles.  This  code  was  put  into  effect  in  all 
States  in  May  1942,  in  some  by  the  legislature  and  in 
others  by  proclamation  of  the  Governor,  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Council  of  State  Governments. 

Despite  the  liberal  limits,  widespread  violations  of 
the  code  began  almost  immediately.  When  some 
States  began  enforcing  the  new  limit,  the  truckers 
appealed  to  the  legislature  or  the  governors  or  even 
congressmen  to  suspend  the  penalties  for  overloading. 
Appeals  to  the  Office  of  Defense  Transportation 
(ODT)  to  stop  overloading  at  the  source  fell  on  deaf 
ears.  The  controversy  came  to  a  head  in  Colorado 
when  Charles  D.  Vail,  who  was  State  Highway  Engi- 
neer and  also  head  of  the  State  Patrol  began  cracking 
down  on  the  overloaders,  most  of  whom  were  petro- 
leum haulers.  He  had  two  reasons  for  this.  One  was 
to  enforce  the  law  and  prevent  wholesale  damage  to 
the  State's  highways.    The  other  was  fear  that  if  the 


145 


Because  of  the  necessity  to  transport  war  materials,  commercial  and  military 
trucks  were  allowed  to  carry  overloaded  cargo  at  the  expense  of  the  Nation's  roads. 


With  materials  ratioved,  only  minor 
maintenance,  such  as  patching  the  cracks 
in  the  surface,  was  performed. 


law  were  not  enforced  the  overloads  would  become 
the  plateau  for  a  new  round  of  weight-increase  de- 
mands by  the  truckers  after  the  war  that  would  lead 
to  the  eventual  rebuilding  of  the  entire  State  highway 
system.^ 

In  March  1943,  ODT  complained  to  the  Governor 
that  Colorado's  rigid  enforcement  was  causing  bottle- 
necks in  motor  freight  movements  throughout  the 
Rocky  Mountain  area  and  was  making  it  impossible 
for  operators  to  use  their  most  efficient  equipment.* 
ODT  suggested  that  Colorado  issue  free  overload 
permits  to  allow  the  truckers  to  run  regularly  with 
overloads  for  the  duration  of  the  emergency.  Vail 
countered  with  a  plan  to  issue  permits  for  a  nominal 
fee  for  small  overloads,  but  with  fees  increasing 
steeply  for  serious  overloads.  This,  Vail  said,  would 
permit  nominal  overloads  up  to  a  certain  point  but 
would  make  it  unprofitable  to  operate  with  danger- 
ously destructive  overloads. 

The  Defense  Transportation  Coordinator  then  ap- 
pealed directly  to  Governor  Vivian  to  "liberalize" 
Colorado's  enforcement  of  the  Uniform  Code,  and  in 
September  1943,  the  Governor  by  proclamation  and 
executive  order  set  aside  the  State's  regulatory  laws 
as  they  might  apply  to  the  transportation  of  materials 
necessary  for  the  war  effort  and  specifically  authorized 
the  continued  operation  of  overlength  and  ovei'weight 
equipment  without  payment  of  any  fees. 


*  By  this  time,  the  truck  manufacturing  industry,  which 
was  going  full  force  to  keep  up  with  wartime  demands,  was 
producing  trucks  in  quantity  which,  when  fully  loaded,  con- 
siderably exceeded  the  18,000-pound  axle  load  of  the  emer- 
gency code. 


146 


This  victory  for  the  truckers  was  widely  publicized, 
and  it  seriouslj'  crippled  enforcement  of  the  code  in 
other  States.  In  the  words  of  the  PRA,  "On  high 
military  authority,  roads  were  pronounced  expend- 
able." « 

Although  the  highway  administrators,  including 
Commissioner  MacDonald,  were  deeply  worried  about 
overloading,  the  rest  of  the  country  was  more  con- 
cerned about  critical  shortages  of  fuel,  rubber,  man- 
power and  vehicles,  and  overloading  was  widely 
tolerated  as  a  way  to  conserve  all  four.  One  highway 
administrator  commented,  "Unwise  publicity  has  con- 
ditioned public  opinion  to  the  point  where  even  ar- 
rests made  of  the  most  flagrant  violators  of  trucking 
codes  are  considered  obstructive  of  interstate  war 
transportation  plans."  ^'' 

The   End   of  the   Highway  Boom 

The  great  highway  boom  that  began  in  1921  and 
continued  unabated  through  the  Great  Depression, 
came  to  an  end  in  the  complexities  and  frustrations 
of  mobilization  and  war.  Fiscal  year  1941  was  the 
peak  year  for  the  Federal-aid  program  with  12,936 
miles  of  roads  of  all  classes  completed;  thereafter 
completed  mileage  fell  to  10,178  miles  in  fiscal  year 
1942,  and  8,445  miles  in  1943.^^  After  1942  practically 
all  new  work  related  directly  to  national  defense. 
The  diminishing  Federal-aid  funds  were  used  to  solve 
traffic  problems  in  areas  congested  by  war  activities.* 
The  forest  highway  funds  went  into  mineral  access 
and  timber  access  roads  to  provide  raw  materials  for 
the  war  effort. 

The  highway  departments  were  feeling  the  pinch 
of  scarcities  even  before  Pearl  Harbor.  In  June  1941, 
the  Office  of  Defense  Mobilization  imposed  materials 
priorities  for  all  kinds  of  construction,  ranging  from 
A-1  for  access  roads  to  military  installations  and 
defense  plants  to  A-10  on  materials  needed  for  main- 
tenance repairs  to  Federal-aid  highways.  Materials 
for  bridges,  tunnels  and  shoulders  for  roads  on  the 
strategic  network  rated  an  A-2  priority  if  on  primary 
highways  or  A-7  if  on  secondaries.  By  April  1942, 
it  required  a  priority  of  A-3  or  better  to  get  steel  of 
any  kind,  and  at  least  A-1  to  get  track-laying  tractors 
or  other  construction  machinery.  Only  15  percent  of 
the  total  U.S.  production  of  construction  equipment 
was  going  to  the  domestic  market — the  rest  went  to 
equip  Army  and  Xavy  engineer  troops  or  as  lend- 
lease  to  European  allies.^- 

In  April  1942,  the  Petroleum  Coordinator  for  War 
limited  the  use  of  asphalt  and  tar  in  the  17  Atlantic 
Seaboard  States  to  projects  certified  by  the  PRA  as 
necessary  to  the  successful  prosecution  of  the  war. 
This  order  was  extended  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  in 
July.  The  PRA  channeled  most  of  the  available 
asphalt  and  tar  into  maintenance  "since  it  is  important 
that  the  condition  of  war  transport  arteries  not  be 
allowed  to  deteriorate."  " 

To  get  around  the  steel  shortage,  the  States  changed 
their  designs.  Ohio  began  using  wooden  bridges  on 
secondary  highways.    Arch  culverts  requiring  no  steel 


were  substituted  for  reinforced  concrete  box  culverts; 
steel  reinforcing  was  omitted  from  concrete  pave- 
ments. 

Acute  manpower  shortages  began  to  appear  in  cer- 
tain categories  of  employees.  In  Michigan  40  percent 
of  the  draftsmen  left  the  State  highway  department 
for  the  Army  or  other  employment,  along  with  25 
percent  of  the  designers  and  27  percent  of  the  inspec- 
tors. The  Pennsylvania  highway  department's  engi- 
neering staff  dropped  from  2,728  persons  to  2,069  in 
8  months.^'*  Utah  experienced  such  a  serious  loss  of 
mechanics  that  it  became  difficult  to  keep  its  equip- 
ment running. 

Contractors  became  scarce  as  bid  prices  advanced. 
In  Kansas  some  contractors  asked  to  be  released  from 
their  road  contracts  in  order  to  bid  on  defense  work. 

In  the  face  of  these  difficulties,  the  States  curtailed 
operations  drastically.  In  April  1942,  the  War  Pro- 
duction Board  issued  an  order  stopping  all  construc- 
tion not  essential  to  the  war  effort.  Pennsylvania 
canceled  its  $50  million  construction  program.  In- 
diana rescinded  all  bridge  contracts  and  North  Caro- 
lina abandoned  all  contracts  already  let  except 
$3,145,000  of  high  priority  defense  access  projects. 
By  the  end  of  1943,  State  work  was  down  to  bare 
bones  maintenance  and  a  diminishing  number  of  de- 
fense access  projects. 

The  maintenance  was  actually  insufficient  to  keep 
up  with  the  increasing  needs.  Periodic  resurfacing 
and  strengthening,  so  necessary  to  preserve  the  integ- 
rity of  pavements,  was  greatly  reduced  and  recon- 
struction practically  eliminated.  The  result  was  the 
rapid  advance  of  decrepitude  accompanied  by  soaring 
maintenance  outlays  as  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments struggled  to  keep  the  ever-weakening  highway 
plant  in  operation. 

Rationing   Highway  Service 

After  the  outbreak  of  war,  the  Government  pro- 
hibited the  manufacture  of  automobiles  and  the  auto 
manufacturers  converted  their  plants  to  arsenals  for 
the  production  of  tanks,  aircraft  engines  and  ord- 
nance. The  number  of  new  cars  produced  dropped 
from  3,779,682  in  1941  to  222,862  in  1942  and  only  139 
and  610  in  1943  and  1944.^^  The  few  new  cars  avail- 
able in  1942  were  strictly  rationed. 

An  acute  shortage  of  rubber  developed  very  early 
in  the  war  and  continued  until  the  United  States 
created  its  own  supplies  of  synthetic  rubber.  The 
War  Production  Board  rationed  tires  and  recapping 
rubber  to  extend  the  dwindling  supplies,  but  this  did 
nothing  to  conserve  the  huge  inventory  of  tires  on  the 
national  fleet  of  34.4  million  vehicles.  In  July  1942, 
the  President  asked  the  States  to  reduce  highway 
speed  limits  to  35  miles  per  hour,  primarily  to  con- 
serve rubber,  but  also  to  save  fuel  and  engine  wear.* 
Subsequent  speed  studies  by  the  PRA  in  15  States 
disclosed  fairly  good  public  acceptance  of  the  reduced 


*  There    were    no    regular    Federal-aid    authorizations    for 
fiscal  years  1944  and  1945. 


*  It  had  been  common  knowledge  for  20  years  that  high 
speed  operation  greatly  shortened  tire  life.  In  1942  and  1943, 
investigations  by  the  PRA  and  the  Iowa  Engineering  Experi- 
ment Station  demonstrated  that  the  life  expectancy  of  tires 
driven  on  concrete  pavements  at  65  miles  per  hour  was  only 
18,700  miles,  liut  that  if  the  speed  were  held  to  35  miles  per 
hour  or  less,  identical  tires  had  a  life  of  56,500  miles." 


147 


limit.  The  observers  noted  average  speeds  of  37  miles 
per  hour  for  cars  and  36  miles  per  hour  for  trucks, 
but  23  percent  of  the  drivers  continued  to  drive  over 
40  miles  per  hour.^^ 

By  April  1942,  fuel  shortages  were  so  severe  in  the 
eastern  States  that  the  Government  imposed  gasoline 
rationing,  and  by  November  1942,  rationing  was  im- 
posed nationwide.  This  greatly  diminished  "non- 
essential" travel,  but  the  volume  of  essential  travel 
was  still  huge. 

The  mobilization  of  1940-41  had  shown  in  a  startling 
way  how  dependent  the  United  States  had  become  on 
its  highways  for  its  very  existence.  Studies  in  Michi- 
gan showed  that  13  percent  of  the  defense  plants 
received  all  of  their  materials  by  highway.  Most  of 
the  remaining  plants  received  at  least  50  percent  of 
their  materials  by  highway  and  more  than  half  of 
their  outgoing  products  left  that  way.  In  February 
1942,  Commissioner  MacDonald  announced  that  only 
a  small  fraction  of  the  10  million  workers  required  to 
man  the  defense  plants  could  possibly  be  accommo- 
dated by  the  existing  rail  and  bus  transit  facilities, 
and  all  the  rest  would  have  to  move  in  private  auto- 
mobiles.^* Another  study  in  Kansas  showed  that  81 
percent  of  the  employees  of  a  large  aircraft  factory 
lived  more  than  5  miles  from  the  plant  and  17  percent 
more  than  10  miles  away.  Only  5  percent  of  the 
plant  workers  used  public  transportation;  93  percent 
depended  on  private  automobiles.^^ 

In  the  early  years  of  the  defense  effort,  it  was  gen- 
erally understood  that  it  would  take  time  to  build 
new  highways  or  enlarge  the  old  ones  and  that  in  the 
meantime  it  would  be  necessary  to  greatly  improve 
the  utilization  of  the  existing  highway  and  mass 
transit  plants.  To  promote  this  utilization,  the  Secre- 
tary of  War,  in  December  1940,  appointed  a  Highway 
Traffic  Advisory  Committee  composed  of  Commis- 
sioner MacDonald  of  the  PEA  and  the  presidents  of 
AASHO,  the  International  Association  of  Chiefs  of 
Police  and  the  American  Association  of  Motor  Vehicle 


Administrators.  The  Secretary  also  asked  that  each 
State  Governor  appoint  a  State  Highway  Traffic  Ad- 
visory Committee,  and  this  was  done  early  in  1941. 
The  several  committees  then  concentrated  on  local 
action  plans  to  organize  transportation  at  warplants 
so  as  to  eliminate  the  need  for  costly  road  improve- 
ments. 

Widespread  staggered  working  hour  programs  re- 
duced traffic  peaks  by  10  to  15  percent  and  also  in- 
creased the  utilization  of  buses  and  streetcars.  In 
Atlanta  a  staggered  hour  plan  had  the  effect  of  adding 
90  buses  to  the  city's  fleet  of  455.  Intense  group  rid- 
ing campaigns  resulted  in  hundreds  of  carpools  and 
increased  average  car  occupancy  from  two  or  less  to 
3.8,  and  in  some  cases  even  4.2  occupants  per  car. 
Walking  to  work  was  encouraged  as  patriotic  exer- 
cise, but  the  committees  found  that  few  workmen 
would  walk  if  the  one-way  distance  was  more  than  2 
miles.^" 

Shrinkage   of  Highway  Revenues 

Rationing  reduced  not  only  nonessential  travel,  but 
highway  revenues  as  well.  Although  nearly  three 
million  trucks  and  buses  were  produced  during  the  4 
war  years,  total  vehicle  registration  dropped  by  over 
1.4  million  as  wear  and  tear  took  their  normal  toll, 
and  thousands  of  owners  laid  up  their  cars  for  the 
duration. 

The  eastern  States  were  the  first  to  feel  the  financial 
pinch.  By  August  1942,  Maryland  gas  tax  collections 
were  running  $250,000  per  month  behind  1941.  Iowa 
revenues  dropped  33  percent  in  June  1942  as  compared 
to  the  same  month  in  1941.  The  Public  Roads  Ad- 
ministration reported  that  following  nationwide  gaso- 
line rationing,  highway  traffic  dropped  35  to  40  percent 
below  corresponding  levels  for  1941. 

In  some  States  this  loss  of  revenue  was  not  par- 
ticularly serious  since  there  were  no  capital  improve- 
ment programs  underway  requiring  large  expendi- 
tures.   The  diminished  revenues  were  sufficient  to  take 


JL 


^ 


Even  with  the  rationing  of  gas  and 
automotive  parts,  workers  at  the  Willow 
Run  bomber  plant  in  Michigan  depended 
on  private  cars  to  go  to  and  from  icork. 


148 


By  October  1943,  the  Alaska  Highway  was  ready  to  serve  as  an  overland  route,  maintaining  the  U.S.  link  with  Alaska. 


care  of  bond  service  and  maintenance.  But  other 
States,  particularly  those  that  had  become  accustomed 
to  diverting  large  amounts  of  highway  revenue  to 
nonhighway  purposes,  underwent  severe  financial  em- 
barrassment. Highway  officials  and  road  user  organi- 
zations that  had  preached  for  yeare  against  diversion 
\dewed  the  predicament  of  these  States  with  consid- 
erable relish,  best  express  by  the  Engineering  News- 
Record,  a  long-time  foe  of  the  diversionists. 

Where  reserved  for  highway  purposes  these  declining 
funds  are  still  relatively  proportionate  to  requirements. 
But  in  those  States  where  legislatures  have  made  diver- 
sions to  the  general  fund,  relief,  the  school  system  or 
oyster  propagation,  the  present  decline  in  revenues  has 
brought  retribution  that  is  harsh  as  it  is  just.  The  legis- 
latures that  avoided  finding  money  for  relief  or  for  their 
school  systems  must  now  find  money  to  keep  their  roads 
from  going  to  pieces." 

Amidst  the  gloom  of  war,  the  shortages  of  every- 
thing and  the  wartime  restrictions  there  was  one 
piece  of  cheerful  news.  Motor  vehicle  traffic  accidents 
dropped  materially  in  1942,  not  only  in  number  but 
in  the  rate  per  100  million  vehicle  miles  of  travel.* 
This  was  due  to  a  combination  of  factors — reduced 
exposure,  lower  speeds  and,  probably,  greater  empha- 
sis on  safety  as  a  contribution  to  the  war  effort. 

Defense   Road   to  Alaska 

After  the  Pacific  Fleet  was  crippled  at  Pearl  Har- 
bor, it  seemed  possible  that  the  United  States  might 
be   cut   off   from   Alaska   except   by   air.     The   U.S.- 


*The  fatalities  in  1941  were  39,969  with  a  rate  of  12.0 
fatalities  per  100  million  vehicle  miles.  In  1942,  deaths 
dropped  to  28,309  total,  or  10.6  per  100  million  vehicle  miles. 
Fatalities  remained  below  the  1941  level  until  1957." 


Canadian  Permanent  Joint  Board  on  Defense  recom- 
mended that  a  military  road  be  built  through  Canada 
to  Alaska,  and  the  United  States  offered  to  build  it. 
By  mid-March  1942,  the  two  countries  agreed  that 
Canada  would  supply  the  right-of-way  and  waive 
customs  duties  and  the  United  States  would  build  and 
maintain  the  road  during  the  war  and  for  6  months 
afterward.  The  1,400-mile  plus  route  from  Dawson 
Creek,  British  Columbia,  to  Big  Delta,  Alaska,  was 
intended  primarily  to  connect  and  supply  a  chain  of 
strategic  military  airfields  and  provide  an  all-weather 
overland  supply  route  to  Alaska.  As  soon  as  the 
agreement  with  Canada  was  negotiated,  the  War 
Department  requested  the  help  of  the  PRA  for  locat- 
ing and  building  the  road. 

Within  a  week  of  the  agreement,  U.S.  engineer 
troops  began  cutting  a  pioneer  road  through  the 
Canadian  wilderness.  During  the  season  of  1942,  the 
Army  placed  seven  regiments  on  the  project  and,  with 
the  assistance  of  PRA  location  engineers  and  con- 
tractors, pushed  the  pioneer  road  through  the  entire 
distance  to  Big  Delta.  Meanwhile,  the  PRA  was 
working  as  rapidly  as  possible  on  reconnaissance, 
survey,  and  plan  preparation  for  the  proposed  all- 
weather  road.  In  addition  the  PRA  was  busy  mobil- 
izing engineers,  contractors  and  equipment  for  the 
huge  job. 

Time  did  not  permit  the  usual  procedure  of  prepar- 
ing plans  and  specifications,  advertising  for  bids  and 
letting  contracts.  Instead,  the  PRA  engaged  four 
engineering  firms  as  management  contractors.  These 
firms  recruited  American  and  Canadian  construction 
contractors  for  the  work,  and  by  the  summer  of  1942, 
in  a  period  of  only  3  or  4  months,  52  contractors  and 
7,000  construction  workers  were  mobilized  in  working 


149 


camps  along  the  route,  widening,  surfacing  and  build- 
ing sections  of  the  Army's  pioneer  road.^^  On  No- 
vember 20,  1942,  7  months  and  17  days  from  start  of 
work,  a  crude  but  motorable  road  was  opened  to  truck 
traffic  the  entire  distance  to  Big  Delta.^* 

By  the  summer  of  1943  the  PRA  had  doubled  the 
construction  force  and  concentrated  on  further  widen- 
ing and  improving  the  pioneer  road  as  well  as  build- 
ing new  sections  and  some  permanent  bridges.  At  the 
peak  of  operations  in  September  1943,  there  were 
1,850  PRA  employees  and  14,100  civilian  employees 
of  81  contractors  working  with  over  11,000  pieces  of 
construction  equipment  on  the  job.  As  with  the 
pioneer  road,  the  bulk  of  the  construction  of  the  1,420 
miles  of  final  highway  was  largely  completed  in  a 
4-month  period  at  a  final  cost  of  $130.6  million.^'^ 
On  October  31,  1943,  the  PRA  phased  out  its  work 
on  the  all-weather  truck  route  and  turned  the  project 
over  to  the  Army  for  maintenance.^" 

The  Trans-Isthmian   Highway 

For  years  after  completion  of  the  Panama  Canal, 
the  only  land  link  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific 
ends  of  the  Canal  was  the  efficient  Panama  Railroad, 
wholly  owned  by  the  United  States  Government.  In 
1939  the  Army,  concerned  about  the  possibility  of  the 
railroad's  being  knocked  out  by  bombing  or  sabotage, 
recommended  construction  of  a  modern  truck  highway 
across  the  isthmus,  and  the  State  Department  then 
negotiated  a  treaty  under  which  the  United  States 
agreed  to  build  the  road  from  Colon  across  Pana- 
manian territory  to  Madden  Dam,  and  Panama  agreed 
to  supply  the  right-of-way.*  Construction  of  the 
highway  was  assigned  to  the  Public  Roads  Adminis- 
tration and  the  grading  work  was  largely  completed 
during  the  1941  dry  season. 

When  war  was  declared  in  December  1941,  the 
Army  urgently  requested  the  PRA  to  finish  the  pav- 
ing on  a  crash  schedule  extending  into  the  wet  season 
and  also  to  accelerate  work  on  a  section  of  the  Inter- 
American  Highway  extending  from  Chorrera  to  the 
strategic  Rio  Hato  airfield.  For  both  jobs  the  War 
Production  Board  assigned  A-1  priorities.  Despite 
the  wettest  dry  season  in  years,  the  PRA  and  the 
Panamanian  Government  completed  the  72  miles  of 
concrete  pavement  and  42  bridges  and  opened  both 
projects  by  July  1,  1942. 

War  Work  on   the   Inter-American   Highway 

In  December  1941,  Congress  authorized  appropria- 
tions of  $20  million  as  aid  to  the  six  Central  American 
republics  for  the  construction  of  the  Inter- American 
Highway  from  the  Mexico-Guatemala  border  to  the 
Canal  Zone.  To  be  eligible  for  the  aid,  each  country 
agreed  to  complete  its  part  of  the  highway  and  to  pay 
one-third  of  the  cost.  These  assurances  were  received 
from  the  six  countries  by  April  1942,  and  each  with 
the  help  of  the  PRA  developed  a  4-year  construction 
plan  to  push  the  road  to  completion. 


As  shipping  losses  to  submarines  mounted  in  early 
1942,  the  Army  became  apprehensive  that  the  United 
States  might  be  cut  off  from  the  Panama  Canal,  and 
the  General  Staff  decided  to  open  a  pioneer  road 
through  the  remaining  gaps  in  the  Inter-American 
Highway,  using  military  funds.  The  standards 
adopted  by  the  Army  for  the  pioneer  road  were  much 
inferior  to  those  agreed  upon  between  PRA  and  the 
cooperating  countries,  but  the  Army  agreed  to  follow 
the  route  chosen  for  the  Inter-American  Highway  as 
closely  as  possible. 

By  mid-July  1942,  the  Chief  of  Engineers  had  as- 
signed a  staff  to  proceed  with  the  pioneer  road  project. 
Contracts  were  made  with  the  governments  of  Guate- 
mala and  El  Salvador  to  complete  the  pioneer  road 
in  their  respective  countries  using  U.S.  furnished 
equipment  and  with  three  American  road  contractors 
for  the  remainder.  The  PRA  continued  its  work  in 
Costa  Rica  and  Panama  and  maintained  engineering 
advisors  to  other  countries  where  PRA  assistance  was 
requested. 

The  work  began  in  Guatemala  in  November  1942, 
but  ran  into  trouble  almost  immediately.  The  General 
Staff  gave  the  Inter- American  project  a  very  low 
priority  in  its  global  schedule.  Equipment  and  sup- 
plies essential  for  military  operations  elsewhere  were 
grudgingly  and  sparingly  committed  to  the  pioneer 
road  project.  Stringent  shipping  restrictions  also 
delayed  the  arrival  of  essential  supplies.  Finally,  in 
October  1943,  the  Army  decided  the  pioneer  road  was 
no  longer  strategically  significant,  withdrew  the  staff 
to  other  duties,  and  closed  the  project.  The  PRA 
continued  construction  on  the  project  in  Costa  Rica. 
A  short  time  later  the  PRA  engineers  returned  to 
their  technical  assistance  efforts  in  the  countries  work- 
ing on  their  4-year  construction  programs. 

Postwar  Planning 

The  Defense  Highway  Act  of  1941  provided  a  small 
sum,  $10  million,  for  postwar  planning,  and  MacDon- 
ald  was  able  to  channel  most  of  this,  with  the  State 
matching  funds,  into  projects  on  the  interregional 
system  proposed  in  the  BPR's  toll  road  report  of 
1939.*  However,  actual  planning  proceeded  rather 
slowly  due  to  scarcity  of  engineers  and  planners,  even 
though  some  States  took  extraordinary  measures  to 
overcome  the  manpower  shortage  by  hiring  high 
school  students  and  older  men  and  women  for  routine 
work.  Urban  expressways,  such  as  the  Bayshore 
Freeway  in  San  Francisco  and  the  Washington- 
Baltimore  Expressway,  predominated  in  most  of  this 
planning,  but  New  York  began  studies  for  a  super- 
highway system  that  would  traverse  the  entire  State 
from  the  New  Jersey  border  to  Lake  Erie.  Indiana 
made  plans  for  rebuilding  60  percent  of  its  antiquated 
State  highway  system  on  which  the  pavements  were 
less  than  20  feet  wide. 

The  Pennsylvania  Turnpike,  opened  late  in  1940, 
had  grossed  $2.6  million  in  its  first  11  months  of 
operation — enough  to  pay  all  expenses  with  a  good 


*  There  was  already  a  heavy  duty  highway  from  Madden 
Dam  to  the  city  of  Panama  built  by  the  United  States  in 
1931  as  a  construction  access  road  to  Madden  Dam. 


*  Congress  provided  another  $50  million  for  planning  in  the 
Act  of  July  13,  1943  (57  Stat  560). 


150 


margin  for  bond  payment.*  "  Undoubtedly,  the  suc- 
cessful experience  of  this  toll  road  had  much  to  do 
with  1941  legislation  in  Florida,  Illinois,  Maine, 
Maryland  and  New  York  creating  independent  au- 
thorities to  sell  bonds  and  build  toll  roads.  Similar 
bills  in  Missouri,  New  Jersey,  Oklahoma  and  Wiscon- 
sin were  defeated  by  narrow  margins.^^ 

The  Pennsylvania  experience  seemed  to  prove  that 
the  motoring  public  wanted  wide,  high-speed  high- 
ways at  a  much  faster  rate  than  they  were  being  pro- 
vided by  the  States  and  was  willing  to  pay  a  stiff 
extra  charge  to  obtain  them.  Nevertheless,  the  Gov- 
ernment persisted  in  its  opposition  to  toll  roads,  and 
on  April  14,  1941,  President  Roosevelt  appointed  a 
National  Interregional  Highway  Committee  of  promi- 
nent highway  engineers  and  planners,  "to  investigate 
the  need  for  a  limited  system  of  national  highways 
to  improve  the  facilities  now  available  for  inter- 
regional transportation,  and  to  advise  the  Federal 
Works  Administrator  as  to  the  desirable  character  of 
such  improvements,  and  the  possibility  of  utilizing 
some  of  the  manpower  and  industrial  capacity  ex- 
pected to  be  available  at  the  end  of  the  war."  ^°  Com- 
missioner MacDonald  of  the  PRA,  who  was  also 
chairman  of  the  new  committee,  provided  it  with  a 
working  staff  of  the  men  who  had  been  most  closely 
identified  with  traffic  research  during  the  two  previous 
decades. 


Meanwhile,  schemes  for  national  superhighways 
wei'e  being  proposed  in  and  out  of  Congress.  In 
October  1941,  the  chairman  of  the  Missouri  Highway 
Commission  called  for  a  comprehensive  plan  for  a 
system  of  postwar  limited  access  highways.  The 
plans  for  these,  he  said,  should  be  prepared  imme- 
diately so  that  they  would  be  ready  when  normal 
times  returned."  A  bill  introduced  into  Congress  in 
October  1942,  would  authorize  a  25,000-mile  network 
of  14  strategic  routes  costing  $10  billion.^^  Finally, 
in  July  1943,  Congress  instructed  the  Commissioner 
of  Public  Roads  "to  make  a  survey  of  the  need  for  a 
system  of  express  highways  throughout  the  United 
States"  and  report  his  findings  to  the  President  and 
Congress  within  6  months. 

The   Interregional   Highway  Report 

Much  of  the  work  for  the  report  on  express  high- 
ways requested  by  Congress  had  already  been  done  by 
the  PRA  and  the  President's  National  Interregional 
Highway  Committee.  The  PRA  task  force  of  experts 
assigned  to  work  with  the  Committee  analyzed  at 
least  six  possible  combinations  of  interregional  routes 
to  arrive  at  the  recommended  "optimum"  system  of 
33,920  miles.  This  system  included  4,470  miles  within 
cities  and  29,450  miles  of  rural  highways.  It  com- 
prised a  little  over  1  percent  of  the  total  street  and 


*  While  the  financial  experience  of  the  turnpike  was  good, 
its  accident  experience  was  bad — worse  than  that  of  the 
Pennsylvania  higliway  system  as  a  whole.  In  less  than  a 
year  after  opening,  the  Commission  imposed  a  60  mile  per 
hour  speed  limit  to  curb  reckless  speeding.^ 


The  experience  of  the  Pennsylvania 
Turnpike  seemed  to  indicate  that 
people  wanted  high-speed  highways 
and  were  willing  to  pay  extra  for  them. 


151 


highway  mileage  of  the  United  States,  yet  the  experts 
estimated  that  it  would  carry  20  percent  of  all  vehicle 
miles  of  travel.  It  would  directly  connect  all  cities 
of  300,000  population  and  reach  59  of  the  62  cities  of 
100,000  to  300,000  population. 

The  Committee  found,  as  had  the  BPR  in  its  1939 
report  Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads,  that  very  little  of 
the  estimated  traffic  on  the  optimum  system  would  be 
long-distance  interregional  traffic.  Most  of  the  traffic, 
and  all  of  the  high-density  traffic,  would  occur  within 
"zones  of  influence"  around  the  cities,  varying  in 
radius  from  35  miles  for  the  largest  cities  to  6  miles 
for  the  small  ones.  Of  the  recommended  system,  8,141 
miles  would  fall  within  these  zones  of  influence,  and 
this  mileage  would  include  practically  all  of  the  high- 
ways and  city  streets  expected  to  carry  more  than 
10,000  vehicles  per  day.  Of  the  remaining  25,779 
miles,  20,300  would  probably  carry  less  than  3,000 
vehicles  per  day,  and  thus  require  only  2-lane  pave- 
ments.^^ 

Because  most  of  the  traffic  was  shown  by  the  State 
and  PRA  traffic  studies  to  have  origins  or  destinations 
within  the  cities,  particularly  their  central  business 
districts,  the  Committee  concluded  that  there  was 
little  need  for  bj^passes.*  The  interregional  routes, 
therefore,  would  have  to  penetrate  into  the  cities, 
where  they  would  exert  a  tremendous  influence  in 
shaping  city  growth.  They  should,  therefore,  be 
planned  in  close  cooperation  with  the  city  governments 
and  planning  authorities: 

The  immediate  inference  ...  is  that  the  creation  of 
such  ample  and  efficacious  traffic  facilities  as  the  improve- 
ment of  the  interregional  routes  would  supply,  will  exert 
a  powerful  force  tending  to  shape  the  future  development 
of  the  city. 

It  is  highly  important  that  this  force  be  so  applied  as 
to  promote  a  desirable  urban  development.  If  designed 
to  do  this,  the  new  facilities  will  speed  such  a  develop- 
ment and  grow  in  usefulness  with  the  passage  of  time.^ 

The  Committee  recommended  standards  for  the 
interregional  highways  but  declined  to  estimate  the 
probable  total  cost  of  the  system.  "Moreover,"  they 
went  on  to  say,  "the  usefulness  and  validity  of  an 
estimate  of  the  total  cost  of  a  construction  program 
that  must  inevitably  extend  over  a  period  of  perhaps 
20  years  and  be  affected  by  unpredictable  changes  in 
the  general  economy,  in  the  habits  and  desires  of 
the  people,  in  the  character  of  vehicles,  and  in  other 
circumstances,  would  still  be  highly  questionable."  ^* 

However,  the  Committee  did  recommend  that  con- 
struction of  the  system  be  prosecuted  at  a  rate  of 
about  $500  million  per  year  in  the  rural  sections  and 
$250  million  per  year  in  the  urban  sections — a  rate 
that  would  provide  about  145,100  man-years  of  direct 
employment,  and  323,400  man-years  of  indirect  em- 
ployment per  year. 

One  of  President  Roosevelt's  strongly  held  convic- 
tions was  that  some  of  the  increase  in  land  values 
created  by  new  highways  should  be  recouped  by  the 
Government  and  used  to  pay  for  the  highways.  The 
Interregional  Plighway  Committee  avoided  this  tick- 


*  The  studios  showed  that  only  4  to  6  percent  of  traffic 
entering  the  largest  cities  was  hypassable  and  only  20  percent 
for  the  smaller  cities  and  50  percent  for  the  smallest  villages."^ 


lish  matter  in  their  report,  but  the  President  brought 
it  up  in  his  message  transmitting  the  report  to  Con- 
gress, as  he  had  in  his  message  on  the  1939  toll  road 
report.  "After  all,"  he  wrote,  "why  should  the  hazard 
of  engineering  give  one  private  citizen  an  enormous 
profit?  If  there  is  to  be  an  unearned  profit,  why 
should  it  not  accrue  to  the  Government — State,  Fed- 
eral or  both?"  37 

The  New   Highway  Charter 

There  were  already  a  number  of  postwar  highway 
proposals  before  the  78th  Congress  when  it  received 
the  interregional  highway  report.  One  of  these  bills 
would  set  up  a  Rural  Local  Roads  Administration 
independent  of  the  PRA  through  which  the  counties 
could  receive  Federal  aid  without  going  through  the 
States.  The  bill  would  give  this  agency  $1,125  billion 
to  begin  operations.^*  Senate  Bill  No.  971,  backed  by 
AASHO,  would  provide  $1  billion  annually  for  3 
years  divided  equally  between  the  Federal-aid  system, 
urban  extensions,  and  secondary  feeder  roads  and 
would  increase  the  Federal  share  of  the  cost  to  75 
percent.  This  bill  would  also  create  an  interregional 
highway  system. ^^ 

The  perennial  toll  road  bill,  with  added  features, 
would  establish  an  independent  commission  with 
authority  to  issue  $10  billion  in  U.S.  bonds  to  pay  for 
a  toll  system  of  8-lane  military  superhighways  and 
for  airports,  with  dams  and  powerplants  to  furnish 
light  for  the  entire  system.*" 

Another  proposal  would  authorize  an  18,000-mile 
system  of  free  superhighways — three  east-west  from 
coast  to  coast  and  six  north-south  from  border  to 
border — with  a  system  of  airports,  each  2  miles  square, 
at  the  18  intersections.  Still  another  would  authorize 
a  defense  highway  across  the  United  States  to  connect 
the  Alcan  Highway  with  the  Inter-American  High- 
way. 

Fantastic  as  some  of  them  were,  these  bills  showed 
that  there  was  still  an  insistent  demand  from  an  im- 
portant segment  of  the  public  for  long-distance 
through  highways.  This  demand  was  coupled  with  a 
rising  insistence  that  more  attention  be  given  to  the 
strictly  rural  roads  and  an  awakening  interest  in  civil 
aviation. 

The  postwar  highway  bill  that  was  finally  enacted 
in  1944  after  9  months  of  congressional  wrangling 
fell  below  the  expectations  of  the  Administration  and 
the  States,  but  was  still  the  largest  in  history.  It 
authorized  Federal  aid  at  the  rate  of  $500  million  per 
year  for  the  three  first  postwar  years,  divided  $225 
million  to  the  Federal-aid  highway  system,  $125  mil- 
lion for  urban  extensions  and  $150  million  for  the 
principal  secondary  and  feeder  roads.  These  last  were 
required  to  be  spent  on  a  secondary  highway  system 
selected  by  the  State  highwa}''  departments  in  coop- 
eration with  the  local  road  officials  and  the  PRA,  but 
without  any  mileage  or  percentage  limits.  Congress 
authorized  participation  with  Federal  funds  up  to 
one-third  of  the  cost  of  right-of-wa)^  but  specifically 
rejected  the  President's  suggestion  for  taking  excess 
right-of-way  for  purpose  of  recoupment.  Finally, 
the  Act  authorized  a  40,000-mile  National  System  of 
Interstate  Highways  but  provided  no  funds  specific- 
ally for  its  construction. 


152 


The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944  preserved 
all  of  the  essential  features  of  the  Federal-State  rela- 
tionship that  had  been  built  up  over  the  preceding 
years,  while  liberalizing  Federal  assistance  in  some 
areas,  notably  right-of-way.  In  passing  it,  Congress 
again  beat  off  efforts  by  the  toll  road  and  superhigh- 
way extremists  to  impose  a  national  system  of  trunk 
highways  under  Federal  control  on  the  country.  The 
National  System  of  Interstate  Highways  was  intended 
to  satisfy  the  demand  for  long-distance  highways,  but 
without  strong  funding,  it  could  not  possibly  achieve 
this  purpose  in  any  reasonable  time,  as  events  in  the 
next  12  years  would  demonstrate. 

REFERENCES 

*  WPA  Mobilization  For  Defense  Starts,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  124,  No.  24,  Jun.  13,  1940,  p.  829. 

'  PRA  Demands  Defense  Priority  For  Federal-Aid  Work, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  125,  No.  10,  Sept.  5,  1940, 
p.  307. 

'  Highway  Needs  of  the  National  Defense,  H.  Doc.  249, 
81st  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  p.  66. 

*Id.,  p.  56. 

^Editorial,  Engineering  News-Recokd,  Vol.  127,  No.  23, 
Dec.  4,  1941,  p.  785. 

"H.  H.  Kelly,  The  Problem  of  Motor  Vehicle  Regulation, 
PxjBLic  Roads,  Vol.  13,  No.  10,  Dec.  1932,  pp.  167,  168. 

'  Legislation  to  Raise  Truck  Weight  Protested,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  128,  No.  4,  Jan.  22,  1942,  p.  155. 

'C.  VAIL,  Regulation  of  Truck  Transportation — A  Challenge 
to  Highway  Departments,  Convention  Group  Meetings — 
Papers  and  Discussions  (American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C.,  1943)  pp.  10-15. 

•H.  Doc,  supra,  note  3,  p.  63. 

'T.  N.  Barker,  The  Development  of  Uniformity  in  State 
Regulations  of  Size  and  Weight  of  Vehicles,  Conx'Ention 
Group  Meetings — Papers  and  Discussions  (American  Asso- 
ciation of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C.,  1943) 
p.  128. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1943,  p.  25. 

"  Construction  Machinery  Purchases  to  be  Placed  on  A-1 
Priority  Basis  by  WPB,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  128, 
No.  16,  Apr.  16,  1942,  p.  581. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1942,  p.  43. 

"  War  Cuts  Into  Personnel  of  Highway  Departments,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  129,  Sept.  10,  1942,  p.  339. 

"  1971  AuTOMOTn'E  Facts  and  Figures  (Automobile  Manu- 
facturer's Association,  Inc.,  Detroit,  1973)  p.  3. 


"  Tire  Wear  and  Costs,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  24,  No.  9,  July- 
Sept.,  1946,  p.  248. 

"  J.  T.  Thompson,  Wai'time  Highioay  Transportation  Prob- 
lems, Convention  Group  Meetings,  ST.  Louis,  Mo.,  Dec.  7,  8, 
9,  1942  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1943)  pp.  114-124. 

"  Transport  in  War  Period  Dominates  Atlantic  States  High- 
way Meeting,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  128,  No.  10, 
Mar.  5,  1942,  p.  368. 

"  Thompson,  supra,  note  17,  pp.  114-124. 

""Id. 

^^Oas  Tax  Diversion  Backfires,  Engineering  News-Record, 
Vol.  129,  No.  13,  Sept.  24,  1942,  p.  410. 

"Accident  Facts — 1973  (National  Safety  Council,  Chicago, 
1973)  p.  59. 

"^  BPR,  supra,  note  11,  pp.  29,  30. 

"  Alcan  Highioay  Officially  Opened — Trucks  Go  North, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  129,  No.  22,  Nov.  26,  1942, 
p.  740. 

"  R.  E.  Royall,  Construction  of  the  Alaska  Highway 
(Public  Roads  Administration,  Washington,  D.C.,  1945)  pp. 
69,  77. 

'"The  Alaska  Highway,  H.  Rept.  1705,  79th  Cong.,  2d 
Sess.,  p.  26. 

^''Pennsylvania  Turnpike  Earns  $2,600,000,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  127,  No.  12,  Sept.  18,  1941,  p.  398. 

^  Transport  in  War  Period  Dominates  Atlantic  States  High- 
ioay Meeting,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  128,  No.  10, 
Mar.  5,  1942,  p.  369. 

'"Brief  News,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  127,  No.  14, 
Oct.  2,  1941,  p.  464. 

"*  Interregional  Highways,  H.  Doc.  379,  78th  Con.,  2d  Sess., 
p.  IIL 

'^Programming  Highway  Construction  to  Meet  Post-Defense 
Needs,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  127,  No.  19,  Nov.  6, 
1941,  p.  649. 

'^  Nation's  Highway  Departments  Make  Plans  to  Meet  Present, 
Post  War  Needs,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  129,  No.  15, 
Oct.  8,  1942,  p.  465. 

"  H.  Doc,  supra,  note  30,  pp.  43-45. 

'*Id.,  p.  60. 

''Id.,  p.  55. 

''Id.,  p.  114. 

"Id.,  p.  V. 

'^  New  Local  Highway  Agency  Proposed  in  Congress,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  131,  No.  21,  Nov.  18,  1943,  p.  727. 

'"  Three  Billion  Dollars  Asked  For  Postwar  Highway  Pro- 
jects, Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  131,  No.  5,  Jul.  29,  1943, 
p.  179. 

*"  Several  Laws  of  Engineering  Interest  Enacted  by  2d 
Session,  78th  Congress,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  133, 
No.  1,  Jul.  6,  1944,  p.  3. 


153 


Event/  Leoding 

to  the 

Enactment 

of  the  1956 

Federol-Pid  Highujoy  Pet 


Rapid   Recovery  of  Motor  Traffic  to   Prewar  Levels 

After  the  surrender  of  Japan,  the  American  econ- 
omy shifted  from  war  to  peace  with  remarkable  speed. 
Huge  wartime  savings,  some  $44  billion,  created  an 
insatiable  market  for  housing  and  for  all  kinds  of 
goods,  including  new  automobiles  to  replace  the  de- 
crepit vehicles  that  had  survived  the  war.  Automo- 
bile production  jumped  from  a  mere  69,532  in  1945 
to  over  2.1  million  in  1946,  3.5  million  in  1947  and 
3.9  million  in  1948.^ 

Reflecting  this  vast  increase  in  vehicle  production, 
registrations  increased  22  percent,  from  the  wartime 
low  of  30.6  million  vehicles  to  37.4  million  vehicles  in 
1947.  (In  this  period  trucks  increased  by  34  percent.) 
With  the  end  of  rationing  and  emergency  speed  con- 
trols, highway  travel  reached  its  prewar  peak  in  1946 
and  began  a  steady  climb  of  about  6  percent  per  year 
that  was  to  continue  for  decades.- 

The  Nation's  highways  were  in  poor  shape  to  re- 
ceive this  traffic.  Most  of, the  deficiencies  disclosed  in 
the  1941  survey  of  the  strategic  network  still  existed 
in  1946.  Under  wartime  restrictions,  the  States  could 
do  little  to  remedy  them,  and,  in  fact,  because  of  wide- 
spread operation  of  overloaded  trucks  and  reduced 
maintenance,  the  State  highway  systems  were  in  worse 
shape  structurally  after  the  war  than  before. 

The  Urban   Traffic   Problem 

In  and  near  the  cities,  hundreds  of  miles  of  high- 
ways  were   functionally   obsolete  because  of  narrow 


pavements,  ribbon  development  and  insufficient  ca- 
pacity. In  the  1920's  and  1930's,  migration  of  the 
more  affluent  inhabitants  to  outlying  suburban  areas 
created  expansive  thinly  spread  residential  communi- 
ties surrounding  the  major  cities.  This  movement  to 
the  suburbs,  which  began  in  the  days  of  the  steam  and 
electric  railroads,  was  greatly  accelerated  by  the 
private  automobile.  As  the  street  and  highway  net- 
works expanded,  more  and  more  peox^le  found  it  con- 
venient to  live  in  the  suburbs  and  drive  to  and  from 
work,  but  the  convenience  decreased  rapidly  as  the 
highways  became  congested  with  ever-increasing 
volumes  of  vehicles. 

The  city,  county  and  State  highwa}^  authorities 
tried  to  keep  up  with  the  traffic  increase,  first  by  wid- 
ening streets  and  highways  and  then  by  providing 
special  high-capacity  roads  such  as  parkways  and 
expressways,  commonly  financed  by  bond  issues.* 
These  special  facilities  expanded  the  radius  of  su- 
burban development  and  attracted  so  much  more 
traffic  that  they  too  became  seriously  congested. 


*  In  the  prewar  period,  the  outstanding  examples  of  such 
deluxe  facilities  were  the  Westchester  County  Parkways  and 
the  Long  Island  State  Tarkway  System.  The  latter,  begun 
in  1925,  by  1947  had  expanded  into  a  158-mile  network  of 
commuter  arteries  tying  western  Long  Island  to  downtown 
New  York.'  In  the  west,  the  Arroyo  Seco  Parkway  between 
Los  Angeles  and  Pasadena,  opened  in  1940,  was  a  dramatic 
demonstration  of  what  could  be  done  to  move  large  volumes 
of  traffic  to  and  from  the  suburbs. 


154 


With  the  postwar  availaMlity  of  VA  housing  and  new  automobiles,  people  began  to 
move  from  the  city  to  outlying  suburban  areas.  Highway  authorities  tried  to  keep 
pace  with  the  commuters,  but  the  day  was  at  hand  for  the  rush-hour  traffic  jam. 


155 


An  "origin-and-destination"  survey. 


Before  the  war  was  over,  many  of  the  State  high- 
way departments  became  involved  with  the  large 
cities  and  urban  counties  in  the  planning  of  costly 
schemes  for  expanding  highway  capacities.  Most  of 
the  Federal  aid  provided  by  Congress  for  postwar 
planning  went  into  urban  highways. 

Federal  Aid  for  Urban   Highways 

In  its  early  days,  the  Federal-aid  program  applied 
strictly  to  rural  roads,  "excluding  every  street  and 
road  in  a  place  having  a  population,  as  shown  by  the 
latest  available  Federal  census,  of  two  thousand  five 
hundred  or  more, ..."  *  This  exclusion  was  suspended 
in  the  Emergency  Relief  and  Construction  Act  of  1932 
and  the  National  Industrial  Recovery  Act  of  1933, 
and  abolished  altogether  in  the  Hayden-Cartwright 
Act  of  1934.  Thereafter,  the  States  enlarged  their 
Federal-aid  systems  to  include  extensions  of  Federal- 
aid  routes  into  and  through  municipalities  and  even 
new  routes  wholly  within  urban  areas,  but  the  main 
interest  of  the  State  highway  departments  was  in  the 
rural  highway  systems  outside  the  cities. 

Congress  changed  all  this  in  1944  by  specifically 
earmarking  $125  million  annually  for  the  first  3  post- 
war years  for  roads  in  urban  areas.  These  funds 
were  to  be  apportioned  to  the  States  in  the  ratio  that 
their  urban  populations  (cities  of  5,000  or  more  in- 
habitants) bore  to  the  national  urban  population.  In 
the  same  Act,  Congress  established  the  National  Sys- 
tem of  Interstate  Highways  and  required  that  its 
routes  should  be  selected  by  the  States  within  the 
cities  as  well  as  between  them.  Thus,  the  Federal- 
Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944  brought  the  State  highway 
departments,  and  also  the  Public  Roads  Administra- 


tion (PRA) ,  actively  into  the  field  of  city  and  regional 
transportation  planning  beside  the  city  and  county 
officials.* 

Urban  Traffic  Studies 

Before  they  could  designate  the  urban  Interstate 
System  arteries  with  confidence,  the  planners  needed 
to  know  a  great  deal  more  than  they  already  knew 
about  the  movements  of  traffic  within  cities  and  be- 
tween cities  and  their  suburbs : 

Traffic  within  an  urban  area  is  more  complex  than  on 
rural  roads.  Traffic  volumes  are  larger,  and  arteries  are 
much  more  numerous.  Parallel  streets  offer  many  alter- 
nate routes  of  travel,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  tell  from 
observing  traffic  volumes  alone  where  the  drivers  really 
want  to  go.  Drivers  often  travel  considerable  distances 
out  of  their  way  to  use  exceptionally  attractive  routes, 
or  to  avoid  congested  or  unattractive  routes.  Examples 
of  this  have  been  noted  in  numerous  cities  and  origin- 
and-destination  surveys  have  shown  that  the  facts  were 
sometimes  quite  different  from  assumptions  made  by  engi- 
neers with  long  familiarity  with  the  local  situation.' 

The  old  techniques  that  had  been  developed  in 
previous  years  during  the  cooperative  State-BPR 
traffic  surveys  and  the  statewide  highway  planning 
surveys,  such  as  driver  interviews  and  postcard  ques- 
tionnaires, were  too  costly,  too  cumbersome  or  not 
sufficiently  accurate.     The  planners  needed  a  better 


♦The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  (BPR)  had  pioneered  in 
urban  traffic  studies  in  the  Cook  County  Transportation  Sur- 
vey of  1924,  the  first  comprehensive  study  of  traffic  in  an 
urban  region  including  a  large  city"  and  in  the  Cleveland 
Regional  Area  Traffic  Survey  of  1927.  The  latter  was  the 
first  concerted  study  by  all  levels  of  government  of  the  traffic 
problems  of  a  single  metropolitan  region." 


156 


method  of  estimating  future  traffic  flows,  and  they 
found  it  in  the  "origin-and-destination  survey,"  a 
sampling  technique  developed  in  1944  by  the  PRA 
with  the  help  of  the  Bureau  of  the  Census.*  The 
origin-destination  surveys  were  made  by  interviewing 
a  sample  of  the  urban  population  at  their  homes  and 
obtaining  from  each  family  in  the  sample  detailed 
information  on  the  travel  habits  of  its  members. 
Samples  varied  from  as  small  as  1  dwelling  unit  in 
30  to  as  high  as  1  in  3,  but  averaged  about  1  in  10. 

During  1944  and  1945  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments and  local  officials,  with  the  help  of  the  PRA, 
analyzed  the  needs  of  30  large  metropolitan  areas  and 
135  cities  of  50,000  or  less  population. 

By  providing  the  means  to  estimate  the  traffic  volumes 
that  will  use  any  specific  route,  these  studies  serve  to 
evaluate  the  merits  of  proposals  advanced  by  different 
groups  within  an  urban  area,  and  to  bring  together  the 
various  local  agencies  in  the  support  of  a  single  plan. 
Availability  of  the  facts  often  permits  harmonizing  the 
views  of  differing  factions,  each  of  whose  proposals,  in 
the  absence  of  facts,  is  of  necessity  based  on  opinions.' 

A  Larger  Share  of  the  Highway  Dollar  for  Non-Federal- 
Aid  System  Roads 

As  statewide  traffic  increased,  so  did  gasoline  tax 
revenues,  and  inevitably  there  was  political  pressure 
to  distribute  some  of  this  revenue  to  the  counties  as 
State  aid  for  their  roads.  In  many  States  a  consid- 
erable part  of  the  State-collected  road-user  revenues 
was  redistributed  to  the  counties,  and  often  in  greater 
amounts  than  was  generated  within  a  specific  county.* 
As  the  State  contributions  increased,  most  counties 
reduced  their  own  support  for  local  roads  (the  reve- 
nues being  derived  mostly  from  property  taxation)  so 
that  by  1947  local  governments  were  carrying  only 
about  40  percent  of  the  cost  of  construction  and  main- 
tenance where  20  years  before  they  had  carried  over 
80  percent."  ** 

The  National  Industrial  Recovery  Act  of  1933  and 
the  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of  1934  had  provided 
emergency  funds  that  could  be  spent  on  "secondary 
or  feeder"  roads  off  the  Federal-aid  system  "to  be 
agreed  upon  by  the  State  highway  departments  and 
the  Secretary  of  Agriculture."  Although  not  required 
by  the  legislation,  the  Secretary,  through  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads,  insisted  that  these  funds  be  spent  on 
connected  road  systems  in  each  State  as  a  condition 
for  his  agreement."  The  States  then,  in  selecting 
systems,  for  the  most  part,  selected  the  roads  carrying 
the  most  traffic,  but  not  necessarily  those  most  desired 
by  the  local  officials.  These  systems  totaled  about 
138,500  miles,  and  on  them  about  $245  million  of 
emergency  relief  and  regular  Federal-aid  funds  were 
spent  by  the  States  in  the  period  from  1934  to  1943. 

Nevertheless,  there  was  widespread  dissatisfaction 
with  the  county  roads  among  rural  residents,  accom- 
panied by  an  unwillingness  to  increase  taxes  to  im- 


*  In  1944  it  was  estimated  that  nationally,  about  61  percent 
of  road-user  revenues  was  going  to  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments, about  26  percent  to  the  counties  and  cities  for  their 
roads  and  streets,  and  the  re.st  to  nonhighway  uses." 

**  In  Delaware,  North  Carolina,  West  Virginia  and  Virginia 
(except  for  two  counties),  the  highway  departments  are  re- 
sponsible for  all  roads  outside  of  municipalities  because  the 
local  governments  succeeded  in  shifting  the  entire  road  burden 
to  the  State. 


prove  them.  This  feeling  led  to  increased  political 
pressure  on  the  State  governments  for  a  larger  share 
of  road-user  taxes  and  also  pressure  on  Congress  for 
dii-ect  Federal  aid  to  the  counties.  In  1943  Senator 
A.  T.  Stewart  of  Tennessee  introduced  a  bill  to  set  up 
a  Rural  Local  Roads  Administration  with  $1.1  billion 
in  Federal  funds  to  be  distributed  among  the  counties 
without  going  through  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments.^^ This  bill  never  emerged  from  committee, 
but  its  supporters  were  able  to  include  a  very  generous 
measure  of  assistance  for  local  rural  roads  in  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944. 

The   Federal-Aid   Secondary  Road  System 

The  1944  Act  authorized  the  appropriation  of  $150 
million  in  each  of  the  first  3  postwar  years  for  projects 
on  the  "principal  secondary  and  feeder  roads"  but 
required  that  the  funds  be  spent  on  "a  system  of  such 
roads  selected  by  the  State  highway  departments  in 
cooperation  with  the  county  supervisors,  county  com- 
missioners, or  other  appropriate  local  road  officials, 
and  the  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads."  The  money 
was  to  be  apportioned  to  the  States  one-third  accord- 
ing to  State  area,  one-third  according  to  rural  popu- 
lation and  one-third  according  to  the  mileage  of  rural 
mail  delivery  and  star  routes,  and  the  Federal  share 
of  any  project  was  limited  to  50  percent. 

Congress  imposed  no  mileage  or  percentage  limits 
on  the  secondary  system,  and  it  soon  became  apparent 
to  the  State  highway  departments  that  their  previously 
selected  secondary  systems  were  not  nearly  large 
enough  to  satisfy  the  local  authorities.  However,  the 
PRA  arbitrarily  set  guidelines  for  selecting  routes 
which  had  the  effect  of  limiting  the  mileage.  First, 
these  guidelines  required  that  the  State  Federal-Aid 
Primary  System  and  the  selected  Secondary  System 
be  integrated  to  form  continuous  networks.  Second, 
the  PRA  limited  the  mileage  it  would  approve  to  a 
system  not  larger  than  could  be  constructed  and  main- 
tained with  the  funds  that  "might  reasonably  be  ex- 
pected to  be  provided"  according  to  past  performance 
in  the  area.* 

The  system  approved  by  the  Commissioner  of  Pub- 
lic Roads  in  June  1946  totaled  217,073  miles,  but  this 
was  just  a  beginning,  as  tens  of  thousands  of  miles  of 
additional  routes  were  then  still  under  review.  Ac- 
cording to  the  PRA,  "No  route  is  approved  without 
first  assessing  its  importance  by  reference  to  the  rec- 
ords made  in  the  planning  surveys  showing  locations 
of  farms,  schools,  churches,  and  business  establish- 
ments, type  of  existing  road  improvement,  general 
population  distribution,  and  the  amount  of  traffic."  ^* 
By  June  1947  the  Secondary  System  had  increased  to 
350,809  miles  and  by  1948  to  377,622  miles.  It  reached 
502,676  miles  in  1955. 

The  States  Select  Interstate  System   Routes 

By  the  1944  Act,  Congress  had  limited  the  National 
System  of  Interstate  Highways  to  40,000  miles  and 
had  also  provided  that  the  routes  should  be  selected 


*  Planning  for  the  Federal-Aid  Secondary  Systems  had  the 
beneficial  effect  of  forcing  the  States  to  reexamine  and  update 
their  Primary  Systems.  Nationwide,  about  40  percent  of  the 
Federal-aid  secondary  routes  were  already  under  State  con- 
trol or  were  immediately  taken  over  by  the  States.  The  rest 
remained  under  local  control. 


157 


by  joint  action  of  the  State  highway  departments  of 
each  State  and  the  adjoining  States.  All  routes  so 
selected  were  automatically  to  become  part  of  the 
Federal-Aid  Primary  System  without  regard  to  pre- 
vious mileage  limits  on  that  System.* 

In  February  1945  the  PRA  requested  each  State  to 
submit  recommendations  for  the  Interstate  System 
routes  within  its  boundaries.  When  these  recom- 
mendations were  all  in,  they  totaled  45,070  miles — 
considerably  over  the  legal  limit  and  far  above  the 
33,920  miles  recommended  by  the  Interregional  High- 
way Committee."  Two  thousand  miles  were  circum- 
ferential or  distributing  routes  around  the  large  cities. 
The  PRA  decided  to  defer  consideration  of  these  to  a 
later  date  and  concentrate  on  getting  the  States  to 
agree  on  the  main  routes  between  the  cities. 

After  weeding  out  the  routes  with  the  weakest 
justifications  and  adding  a  small  mileage  requested 
by  the  War  Department,  the  PRA  came  up  with  a 
total  of  37,324  miles  for  the  main  routes.  In  March 
1946  the  PRA  sent  each  of  the  States  a  map  showing 
this  tentative  integrated  system  and  asked  for  their 
concurrence.  The  first  State  to  concur  was  Nebraska, 
and  by  June  1946  acceptances  had  been  received  from 
37  States.^^ 

It  required  a  year  for  the  PRA  and  the  remaining 
11  States  to  iron  out  their  differences,  but  agreement 


was  finally  reached  on  a  37,681-mile  System,  including 
2,882  miles  of  urban  thoroughfares.  Some  2,319  miles 
were  reserved  for  urban  circumferential  and  distribut- 
ing routes,  to  be  selected  later.  The  Federal  Works 
Administrator  approved  this  System  on  August  2, 
1947.^« 

Interstate  System   Standards  Adopted 

"N^Hiile  the  States  were  selecting  the  Interstate  routes, 
the  PRA  asked  the  American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials  to  propose  standards  to  control  the 
location  and  design  of  the  Interstate  highways.  "There 
was  no  thought  of  requiring  that  every  mile  of  the 
system  be  built  according  to  a  rigid  pattern  but  it  was 
believed  essential  that  there  be  a  high  degree  of  uni- 
formity where  conditions  as  to  traffic,  population 
density,  topography,  and  other  factors  are  similar."  ^^ 

AASHO's  Committee  on  Planning  and  Design 
Policies  had  been  formed  in  1937  to  review  and  eval- 
uate the  immense  amount  of  research  and  operational 
information  on  highways  that  had  accumulated  since 
the  1920's.*  Between  1938  and  1944  the  Committee 
summarized  the  existing  knowledge  of  geometric  de- 
sign and  good  design  practice  in  seven  "Policies" 
which  were  adopted  by  the  Association  and  became, 
in  effect,  the  national  design  policies  for  highways. 
Because  of  this  prior  work,  the  Committee  was  able 


♦The  Federal-aid  system  (later  the  Primary  System)  was 
limited  to  7  percent  of  each  State's  total  highway  mileage  by 
the  1921  Act.  Congress,  in  1932,  allowed  1  percent  increments 
to  be  added  as  a  State  improved  90  percent  of  the  entire 
Federal-aid  system  in  that  State." 


*  Thomas  H.  MacDonald  was  chairman  of  this  powerful 
committee  from  its  inception  until  1944.  The  Committee's 
working  staff  of  design  experts  was  supplied  by  the  BPR 
(and  PRA)  and  functioned  under  Joseph  Barnett,  who  was 
also  secretary  of  the  Committee. 


The  projected  routes  of  the  Interstate  System  as  approved  by  the  Federal  Works  Administrator,  19^.1. 


MCOMHtmCO 


NATIONAL    SYSTEM   OF  INTERSTATE   HIGHWAYS 

SELECTED    BY   JOINT    ACTION    OF   THE   SEVERAL  STATE  HIGHWAY  DEPARTMENTS 

AS  MODIFIED  AND   APPROVED 

BY    THE   ADMINISTRATOR,  FEDERAL  WORKS    AGENCY 

AUGUST    2,  1947 


158 


to  recommend  standards  for  the  Interstate  System  by 
June  1945,  and  these  were  adopted  by  AASHO  and 
approved  by  the  Federal  Works  Administrator  in 
August  1945.* 

Of  necessity,  the  Interstate  standards  were  a  com- 
promise. A  few  States  thought  they  were  inadequate, 
pointing  to  the  provision  permitting  three-lane  high- 
ways for  traffic  volumes  intermediate  between  those 
requiring  a  two-lane  highway  and  those  requiring  a 
four-lane  divided  highway.  Some  criticized  the  weak 
provisions  permitting  grade  crossings  with  railroads 
and  other  highways  for  low-traffic  sections  of  the 
Interstate  System.  In  these  respects,  the  standards 
fell  far  below  those  for  existing  parkways  and  turn- 
pikes which  had  been  held  up  to  the  public  by  many 
people  as  the  ideal  for  the  Interstate  System. 

To  get  wide  acceptance  of  the  standards,  the  Com- 
mittee equivocated  on  other  elements  of  design  by 
setting  up  "minimum"  and  "desirable"  levels  of  de- 
sign.    Thus,  for  level  country,  a  State  could  elect  to 


*  When  the  1956  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  specifically 
called  for  adoption  of  uniform  design  standards  for  the  Inter- 
state System,  these  earlier  standards  were  the  l)asis  for  the 
new  standards,  permitting  completion  of  the  work  in  2  to  3 
months. 


use  either  a  60-  or  70-mile  per  hour  design  speed. 
For  right-of-way,  the  "desirable"  width  for  divided 
highways  was  250  feet,  but  in  a  pinch  the  State  could 
get  by  with  the  "minimum"  of  150  feet. 

Control  of  Access  Recommended  but  Not  Required  for 
Interstate  System 

The  most  important  deficiency  in  the  standards 
concerned  a  matter  over  which  AASHO  had  no  con- 
trol and  little  influence  with  the  States.  This  was  the 
control  of  access  to  the  highway  from  abutting  prop- 
erty. Two  decades  of  experience  had  shown  that  new 
highways  invariably  attracted  ribbon  development  by 
commercial  enterprises  catering  to  the  traffic  on  the 
highway.  Movements  to  and  from  these  businesses 
disrupted  the  traffic  stream  on  the  highway  and 
greatly  increased  accidents.  Eventually,  the  ability 
of  the  highway  to  carry  traffic  was  reduced  far  below 
its  original  capacity  by  the  roadside  activity.  At  the 
same  time  the  cost  of  future  widening  was  made  pro- 
hibitive. Gradually,  highway  administrators  began 
to  realize  that  the  only  way  to  protect  the  capacity  of 
the  highway  was  to  deny  or  restrict  access  to  the  road 
from  the  adjacent  private  property.  This  growing 
realization  ran  counter  to  the  most  deeply  ingrained 


The  lack  of  access  control  prevented  free-flowing  movement  on  this  four-lane,  undivided  bypass  of  U.S.  101  in  California. 


159 


traditions  of  English  common  law  and  also  most 
American  statute  law,  which  granted  to  abutters  the 
very  rights  highway  administrators  now  sought  to 
take  away. 

The  Bronx  River  Parkway  Commission  acquired  a 
broad  expanse  of  parkland  along  each  side  of  the 
parlcway  road.  This  practice  effectively  controlled 
access  to  the  road  while  avoiding  the  question  of  the 
loss  of  access  rights  to  abutting  property  owners. 
However,  there  was  some  doubt  as  to  whether  this 
was  really  sufficient,  and  the  Westchester  County 
Parkway  Commission  made  it  their  practice  to  pur- 
chase access  rights  and  specifically  mention  them  in 
the  deeds.^°  The  Pennsylvania  Legislature  in  the  act 
creating  the  Turnpike  Commission  gave  the  Commis- 
sion the  power  to  acquire  access  rights,  by  eminent 
domain,  if  necessary.  However,  very  few  State  legis- 
latures conferred  such  rights  on  their  highway  com- 
missions. By  1945  only  17  States  had  laws  permitting 
the  control  of  access  to  State  highways. 

The  Committee  on  Planning  and  Design  Policies 
skirted  this  ticklish  question  by  saying, 

Where  State  laws  permit,  control  of  access  shall  be 
obtained  on  all  new  locations  and  on  all  old  locations 
wherever  economically  possible.  .  .  In  those  States  which 
do  not  have  legal  permission  to  acquire  control  of  access, 
additional  right-of-way  should  be  obtained  adequate  for 
the  building  of  frontage  roads  connecting  with  controlled 
access  points,  if  and  when  necessary." 

Slow  Start  of  the  Postwar  Highway  Program 

When  the  war  ended,  the  States  were  well  prepared 
with  plans  for  the  largest  highway  program  in  his- 
tory. On  the  shelf  ready  to  go  were  plans  for  $590 
million  worth  of  road  improvements,  and  plans  for 
another  $2.5  billion  worth  of  work  were  well  advanced. 
A  total  of  about  $624  million  in  Federal  aid  was  avail- 
able from  prewar  and  postwar  authorizations,  and 
most  of  the  States  had  ample  matching  funds  saved 
up  during  the  war.^^  Most  highway  departments 
anticipated  some  difficulty  in  obtaining  trained  engi- 
neers and  building  contractors,  but  this  did  not  seem 
at  first  to  be  a  great  obstacle. 

On  October  2,  1945,  Congress,  by  concurrent  reso- 
lution, declared  that  the  war  emergency  had  been 
relieved  to  such  an  extent  that  the  postwar  road  pro- 
gram authorized  by  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of 
1944  could  proceed.  About  the  same  time  most  of  the 
wartime  restrictions  on  road  building  were  lifted. 
Eager  to  launch  the  postwar  program  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible, and  urged  on  by  the  PRA,  the  State  highway 
departments  advertised  hundreds  of  jobs  during  the 
winter  of  1945^6,  some  of  them  for  very  large  bridges 
or  urban  expressways. 

The  result  was,  in  some  respects,  a  repetition  of  the 
1920  experience.  During  World  War  II  the  inflation 
in  road  construction  prices  had  been  held  to  about  6 
percent  per  year  by  price  controls,  and  after  1943,  by 
scarcity  of  work.  A  number  of  contractors  had  gone 
out  of  business,  and  those  remaining  were  short  of 
serviceable  equipment  and  labor.  The  increased  offer- 
ings of  the  State  highway  departments  in  1945  and 
1946  quickly  saturated  the  available  capacity  of  the 
construction  industry  and  prices  began  to  rise.  At 
the  same  time  materials  scarcities  developed,  par- 
ticularly in  steel  and  lumber,  which  were  in  great 
demand    for    housing.     The   general    uncertainty    in 


prices  and  supplies  resulted  in  higher  bids,  and  by  the 
end  of  1946,  the  prices  of  highway  structures  had 
risen  24  percent  over  the  1945  level.  Concrete  pave- 
ment was  up  12  percent.^^ 

The  States  began  rejecting  the  low  bids  that  were 
far  above  preliminary  estimates  in  an  attempt  to 
stem  the  tide  of  advancing  prices.  By  the  end  of 
fiscal  year  1946,  only  1,958  contracts  for  $298  million 
of  construction  had  been  awarded — less  than  a  third 
of  earlier  expectations.  Twenty-two  percent  of  all 
low  bids  received  had  been  rejected  as  too  high.^*  In 
some  States,  rejections  ran  as  high  as  30  percent  of 
the  low  bids  received. 

This  policy  of  rejecting  low  bids  was  ineffective, 
largely  because  the  country  was  in  the  early  stages  of 
a  building  boom  fueled  not  only  by  the  State  road 
programs,  but  also  by  large  city  expressway  schemes, 
a  huge  increase  in  housing,  and  construction  for  in- 
dustrial reconversion. 

In  August  1946,  the  Director  of  War  Mobilization 
and  Reconversion  restricted  highway  construction  to 
ease  competition  with  the  housing  program  for  scarce 
materials.  This  restriction  was  lifted  in  October  ex- 
cept for  structural  steel,  but  it  had  its  effect  along 
with  rising  prices  in  reducing  State  contract  awards. 
Prices  in  1947  reached  a  level  45  percent  above  1945 
prices  and  nearly  double  the  prewar  level.  Unwilling 
to  admit  that  prices  had  risen  permanently  to  a  new 
plateau,  the  States  rejected  18  percent  of  all  low  bids 
received  in  fiscal  year  1947. 

Despite  these  difficulties,  the  States  made  a  much 
better  showing  in  1947  than  1946,  awarding  contracts 
for  47,163  miles  of  road  estimated  to  cost  $817.7  mil- 
lion. Most  of  these  were  for  rural  primary  or  rural 
secondary  roads  and  for  simple  projects  such  as  re- 
paving  which  did  not  require  right-of-way  or  expen- 
sive plans. 

The  situation  was  quite  different  in  the  urban  areas 
where  most  of  the  projects  were  arterial  street  widen- 
ings,  new  expressways  or  large  bridges.  Some  of 
these  schemes  were  very  large  indeed  and  required  the 
acquisition  and  demolition  of  hundreds  of  buildings 
and  the  relocation  of  many  families  at  a  time  when 
it  was  almost  impossible  to  find  other  housing  for 
them. 

The  State  highway  departments,  usually  in  coop- 
eration with  the  large  cities  or  urban  counties,  started 
over  a  score  of  expensive  expressway  projects  in  1947, 
each  expected  to  cost  in  the  millions.  New  York 
began  clearing  the  way  for  the  $34  million  Cross- 
Bronx  Expressway  and  the  equally  expensive  Brook- 
lyn-Queens Expressway.  Massachusetts  began  the 
Northern  Circumferential  Highway  around  the  Boston 
metropolitan  area,  while  Michigan  launched  the  John 
C.  Lodge  Expressway  and  the  Edsel  Ford  Expressway 
in  Detroit,  each  expected  to  cost  over  $6  million  per 
mile.  In  Chicago  work  began  on  the  Congress  Street 
Expressway,  an  eight-lane  depressed  freeway  designed 
to  accommodate  4,000  vehicles  per  hour  in  each  direc- 
tion, and  estimated  to  cost  $69  million.  Expressways 
in  Denver,  Dallas,  Fort  Worth,  Los  Angeles,  Oakland, 
Jacksonville,  Miami,  Cleveland,  San  Francisco,  and 
Pittsburgh  added  to  the  huge  total. 

The  shortages  of  contractors,  labor,  materials  and 
equipment  persisted  through  1947,  1948,  and  into  1949. 


160 


The  Bronx  River  Parkway  with,  controlled  access  and  extensive  parkland  along  each  side. 


In  addition,  a  severe  shortage  of  highway  engineers 
developed  in  1946  and  became  worse  as  the  highway 
departments  expanded  their  programs.  Most  States 
had  failed  to  raise  their  pay  scales  to  keep  in  step 
with  the  inflation,  and  as  a  result,  many  engineers 
did  not  return  to  State  service  after  the  war  or  left 
for  other  employment  in  industry. 

Struggling  against  these  handicaps  and  the  contin- 
uing high  prices,  the  States  were  able  to  obligate  only 
36  percent  of  their  Federal-aid  authorizations  in  fiscal 
year  1946,  62  percent  in  1947,  and  79  percent  in  1948. 
It  was  necessary  for  Congress  to  extend  the  avail- 
ability of  the  postwar  authorizations  by  1  year,  and 
the  unused  backlog  was  so  large  that  Congress  made 
no  authorization  for  fiscal  year  1949  and  reduced  the 
authorizations  for  1950  and  1951. 

The  Local  Rural   Road   Problem 

Although  slow,  there  was  improvement,  and  in  1949 
the  annual  mileage  of  completed  roads  had  reached 
the  1937  level  of  21,000  miles,  including  about  14,000 
miles  of  farm-to-market  roads.  But  this  did  not  sat- 
isfy the  extreme  rural  road  advocates. 

The  dissatisfaction  in  the  coimties  found  expression 
in  two  bills  before  Congress  which  would  set  up  a 


Rural  Roads  Division  in  the  Public  Roads  Admin- 
istration with  authority  to  dispense  $100  to  $200 
million  annually  to  the  counties  and  local  political  sub- 
divisions without  going  through  the  State  highway 
departments.^^  There  was  also  some  rural  sentiment 
for  doing  away  with  all  system  restrictions  on  rural 
roads  so  that  their  benefits  could  be  more  widely  dis- 
tributed among  the  rural  population. 

In  testifying  before  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on 
Roads  on  these  bills,  Commissioner  MacDonald  as- 
serted that  the  proposed  legislation  would  entail  a 
"vast  amount  of  costly  supervision"  on  the  part  of  the 
PRA  to  insure  that  the  aided  roads  received  proper 
maintenance.  Rural  roads,  he  said,  were  necessarily 
of  light  construction  and  required  efficient  and  con- 
tinuous maintenance  to  preserve  their  integrity.  Past 
experience  had  shown  that  maintenance  was  the  very 
aspect  of  road  management  in  which  the  counties  were 
weakest.  Approval  of  the  bills,  according  to  Mac- 
Donald,  would  greatly  dilute  and  weaken  the  funda- 
mentally sound  rural  road  program  already  in 
operation.^®  In  May  1949,  the  Subcommittee  requested 
Commissioner  MacDonald  to  make  a  study  of  the 
rural  road  problem  and  report  back  to  the  Subcom- 
mittee by  January  1950. 


161 


This  rural  road  was  widened  but 
is  still  too  narrow  for  1953  trafflc. 


The  PRA's  study,  made  with  the  help  of  the  Board 
of  County  Consultants*  and  the  State  highway  de- 
partments, did  little  to  assuage  the  feelings  of  the 
extreme  ruralists.  The  survey  disclosed  that  of  the 
2.5  million  miles  of  local  roads  in  the  United  States 
in  1949,  323,000  miles  were  already  on  the  Federal- 
Aid  Secondary  System.  Another  100,000  miles  carry- 
ing at  least  100  vehicles  per  day  could  and  should  be 
transferred  to  the  Federal-Aid  Secondary  System." 
Another  400,000  miles  was  described  as  "wholly  non- 
essential." To  bring  the  remaining  1.8  million  miles 
up  to  acceptable  standards  and  provide  adequate  main- 
tenance over  a  20-year  period  would  cost  the  local 
governments  about  $894  million  per  year.  Since  the 
local  units  were  already  spending  $835  million  per 
year  on  roads,  the  PRA  concluded  "It  is  apparent  that 
a  relatively  small  addition,  with  efficient  management, 
applied  to  a  planned  program  would  be  sufficient  to 
accomplish  the  satisfactory  improvement  of  local 
roads  in  a  period  of  20  years."  ^^ 

The  report  concluded  that  what  local  roads  needed 
was  not  so  much  more  money  as  improved  adminis- 
tration. Federal  cooperation  and  participation,  the 
PRA  thought,  could  best  be  achieved  through  coordi- 
nation at  the  State  level. 


1 


*  In  1946  the  Federal  Works  Administrator  appointed  a 
Board  of  County  Consultants  consisting  of  10  county  officials 
from  the  PRA's  10  geographical  administrative  areas  to  ad- 
vise the  PRA  on  the  secondary  road  program. 


BPR  "Driver  Behavior"  studies  to  measure  speed,  spacing,  and  lateral  vehicle  placement  on  the  road,  1945. 


162 


Highway  Needs  Versus   Financial   Resources 

In  the  early  1920's  some  economists  and  even  engi- 
neers predicted  that  the  market  for  motor  cars  would 
become  saturated.  As  the  number  of  motor  vehicles 
stabilized,  road  mileage  and  the  need  for  road  im- 
provement would  also  stabilize.  Eventually,  the  high- 
way system  would  reach  a  state  of  "maturity"  at 
which  time  there  would  be  a  diminishing  need  for 
capital  expenditures,  and  most  of  the  highway  reve- 
nues would  be  used  for  maintenance. 

This  prediction  was  never  realized.  Instead,  as 
national  income  increased,  the  automobile  market  ex- 
panded even  more.  The  manufacturers  were  able  to 
spend  large  sums  on  research,  and  they  greatly  im- 
proved the  performance  and  reliability  of  motor  ve- 
hicles. After  World  War  I,  motor  trucks,  which 
pre\aously  had  operated  only  in  cities,  took  to  the 
highways  and  rapidly  increased  in  numbers,  size  and 
speed. 

As  already  noted,  the  highway  administrators  re- 
sponded to  this  ever-increasing  and  continually 
changing  vehicle  population  first,  by  upgrading  the 
old  wagon  roads,  and  then  by  building  improved  new 
roads  tailored  to  the  motor  vehicle.  Finally,  they 
invented  new  types  of  roads  such  as  parkways  and 
expressways  to  move  huge  volumes  of  traffic  at  high 
speeds.  As  the  roads  improved,  the  annual  usage  per 
vehicle  increased,  so  that  highway  traffic  built  up 
faster  than  vehicle  registrations  in  a  self-reinforcing 
spiral.  The  highway  system  never  reached  maturity. 
The  need  for  capital  expenditures  did  not  diminish, 
but  increased  enormously. 

By  the  middle  1940's,  most  States  had  accepted  as 
a  virtual  certainty  that  their  road  systems  would 
never  be  completed.  They  realized  that  they  would 
have  to  plan  highway  improvements  far  into  the 
future  and  establish  a  policy  that  would  recognize 
future  needs  and  provide  for  them : 

Establishment  of  a  highway  policy  that  will  result  in 
adequate  highway  service  in  the  future  requires  determi- 
nation of  the  proper  size  and  cost  of  systems  of  the 
different  classes  of  highways  needed.  There  must  be  an 
equitable  plan  for  distribution  of  costs  among  highway 
users  and  general  taxpayers,  allocation  of  authority  and 
financial  responsibility  among  levels  of  government,  and 
regulation  of  highway  use  to  protect  users  and  to  obtain 
maximum  service.  Each  element  is  so  interrelated  with 
others  that  complete  facts  on  present  conditions  and 
most  up-to-date  results  of  transportation  research  are 
essential  to  develop  an  over-all  analysis  of  highway  needs 
to  serve  the  interests  of  all  in  an  equitable  manner.'* 

In  1947,  the  California  Legislature  created  a  joint 
fact-finding  committee  from  both  houses  to  study  the 
highway  needs  of  the  State  "and  to  recommend  a 
policy  and  means  of  putting  that  policy  into  action."  ^° 
The  Michigan  Good  Roads  Federation  undertook  a 
similar  statewide  needs  analysis.  Other  States  fol- 
lowed, and  by  1950,  13  had  published  needs  reports, 
and  others  were  working  on  the  complex  studies  for 
such  reports. 

The  legislative  and  other  fact-finding  committees 
depended  on  their  State  highway  departments,  as- 
sisted by  the  BPR,  to  supply  the  factual  information 
for  their  studies.  Most  of  this  factual  material  came 
from  the  tremendous  bank  of  economic  and  traffic 
data  assembled  by  the  statewide  planning  surveys  be- 
gun in  the  middle  1930's.     There  was  also  a  large 


amount  of  research  information  on  driver  behavior 
and  the  vehicle-carrying  capacity  of  urban  streets  and 
rural  roads  that  had  been  assembled  before  and  after 
the  war  by  the  BPR,  the  States  and  the  Highway 
Research  Board's  Committee  on  Highway  Capacity. 

The  compilation  of  future  needs  was  simple  in 
principle,  but  laborious  in  practice.  First,  the  analysts 
had  to  forecast  the  traffic  that  might  be  expected  in  a 
future  year  and  then  assign  the  future  traffic  to  the 
various  roads  in  the  several  systems.  Then,  knowing 
the  present  condition  of  these  roads  and  the  desirable 
standards  to  handle  the  forecasted  traffic,  they  could 
compile  a  list  of  "deficiencies."  Finally,  they  would 
compute  the  future  cost  of  the  construction  needed  to 
overcome  these  deficiencies.  The  sum  of  these  costs 
was  the  estimate  of  needs  for  the  particular  year 
studied. 

These  predictions  of  future  needs  were  necessarily 
painted  with  a  broad  brush.  First,  they  depended  on 
the  continuation  of  past  population,  economic,  ve- 
hicle registration,  and  traffic  trends.  And  then  there 
was  considerable  difference  of  opinion  among  the 
States  as  to  what  the  standards  should  be  to  accom- 
modate the  future  traffic.  Nevertheless,  there  was  a 
broad  general  agreement  that  the  past  trends  would 
continue  or  even  be  exceeded  and  that  the  AASHO 
standards  would  be  adequate  or  at  least  tolerable. 
The  needs  estimates  were  widely  accepted  as  being 
well  within  the  accuracy  required  for  long-range 
financial  plans  and  also  for  arousing  popular  support 
for  the  increased  taxes  and  highway  imposts  that 
would  be  required  to  realize  those  plans. 

It  is  safe  to  say  that  most  of  the  State  legislatures 
were  astounded  and  dismayed  by  the  size  of  the  back- 
log of  needs  as  shown  by  the  needs  studies.  The 
California  legislative  committee  found  that  it  would 
cost  $1.7  billion  over  a  10-year  period  to  bring  the 
State's  roads  up  to  a  reasonable  standard.  The  cost 
in  Washington  was  estimated  at  $509  million  and  in 
Oregon  at  $468  million.^^  The  Michigan  committee 
found  needs  that  would  cost  $1.75  billion  to  remedy.^^ 
Connecticut,  one  of  the  smallest  States  in  area,  found 
needs  exceeding  $400  million,  and  in  Massachusetts 
the  needs  exceeded  $700  million.^^ 

In  1950  AASHO  made  its  own  needs  study  and 
asserted  that  what  was  needed  nationally  to  catch  up 
with  highway  needs  was  a  $4  billion  annual  program 
for  15  years  ($1  billion  for  maintenance,  $2.5  billion 
for  construction  and  $500  million  for  interest,  amorti- 
zation and  administration).^*  About  the  same  time 
the  Congressional  Joint  Committee  on  the  Economic 
Report  set  the  immediate  national  road  needs  at  $41 
billion.^^ 

The  reaction  to  the  disclosure  of  these  massive  needs 
varied  from  State  to  State.  The  California  Legisla- 
ture immediately  increased  the  gasoline  tax  by  IV^ 
cents  per  gallon  and  radically  amended  the  highway 
laws  to  speed  up  right-of-way  acquisition  and  permit 
acquisition  of  land  in  advance  of  actual  need  to  fore- 
stall speculative  increases  in  land  prices.  Michigan 
raised  its  3-cent  gasoline  tax  to  5  cents  per  gallon  and 
added  2  cents  to  the  diesel  fuel  tax  which,  along  with 
a  hefty  increase  in  the  truck  weight  tax,  raised  an 
additional  $135  million  annually.^*  Other  States 
looked  to  Congress  to  make  up  the  difference  between 


163 


what  they  needed  and  what  they  could  raise  without 
pain  with  their  current  tax  policies.  Still  others 
thought  the  solution  was  to  get  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment to  withdraw  from  the  taxing  of  fuel  so  that  the 
States,  without  lowering  the  total  tax,  could  use  the 
Federal  2  cents  per  gallon  for  their  own  needs. 

But  most  States  decided  on  some  form  of  credit 
financing  to  close  at  least  a  part  of  the  gap.  The 
Massachusetts  Legislature  authorized  a  $100  million 


bond  issue  backed  by  road-user  revenues  to  improve 
the  main  highways  and  began  looking  into  toll  financ- 
ing for  some  highways.^^  By  a  two-to-one  vote,  the 
voters  of  North  Carolina  approved  a  $200  million 
bond  issue  for  rural  roads.  The  bonds,  backed  by  the 
faith  and  credit  of  the  State,  sold  to  yield  an  effective 
interest  rate  of  only  1.52  percent.^®  * 


*  By  comparison  North  Carolina  sold  its  road  bonds  in  1920 
to  produce  an  effective  interest  rate  of  5  percent. 


Traffic  was  concentrated  around  the  cities,  hut  the  need  to  upgrade  rural  roads  also  demaiided 
that  limited  funds  be  spread  across  the  State,  resulting  in  pavement  loidening  projects  such  as  this. 


164 


In  New  York,  Governor  Thomas  E.  Dewey,  despair- 
ing of  ever  completing  the  Thruway  System  from 
diversion-depleted  current  revenues,  authorized  a 
study  of  revenue  bond  financing  backed  by  tolls. 
When  this  study  showed  that  tolls  alone  would  not 
carry  the  project,  the  Legislature  created  the  New 
York  Thruway  Authority  and  empowered  it  to  sell 
$500  million  in  bonds  backed  by  the  State's  credit.^^ 

Some  State  legislatures  decided  to  wring  as  much 
as  possible  of  the  needed  revenue  from  road  usei-s 
in  the  form  of  tolls  on  the  theory  that  "every  dollar 
that  can  be  obtained  from  private  sources  to  extend 
existing  toll  highways  will  mean  a  dollar  of  regular 
highway  income  released  to  match  federal  aid  for 
highway  building  in  some  other  part  of  the  state."  *" 
Other  States,  notably  New  Jersey,  switched  from  pay- 
as-you-go  financing  to  revenue  bonds  backed  by  tolls 
to  build  their  most  expensive  and  heavily  traveled 
arteries.  Between  1950  and  1954,  the  legislatures  of 
19  States  created  independent  toll  road  authorities  or 
authorized  their  State  highway  departments  to  build 
toll  roads. 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1950  permitted 
the  States  to  borrow  funds  in  the  bond  market  against 
future  Federal-aid  apportionments.  However,  this  au- 
thority did  not  make  any  new  money  available  to  the 
States  or  enhance  their  credit  or  change  their  own 
constitutional  debt  limits;  and  further.  Congress  care- 
fully disclaimed  any  obligation  to  provide  the  future 
Federal-aid  funds  that  might  be  used  to  redeem  the 
bonds.  Consequently,  only  a  few  States  availed  them- 
selves of  the  privilege,  and  these  for  comparatively 
small  amounts. 

The   Financial  Dilemma  of  the  State  Highway  Depart- 
ments 

The  prices  bid  for  highway  construction  peaked  in 
late  1948  and  then  stabilized  at  about  twice  the  prewar 
level.  Highway  maintenance  costs  also  doubled  be- 
cause of  the  war  and  postwar  inflation.  This  put  the 
State  highway  departments  in  a  double  price  squeeze 
at  a  time  when  highway  traffic,  and  particularly 
truck  traffic,  was  increasing  alarmingly.*  As  the 
States  put  increasingly  more  of  their  income  into 
maintenance,  the  money  left  for  new  construction, 
including  Federal-aid  matching,  became  less.  The 
purchasing  power  of  this  remainder  was  only  half 
that  of  the  prewar  period,  yet  the  increased  traffic 
demanded  much  heavier,  wider  and  costlier  roads  than 
the  prewar  models. 

Traffic  growth  was  not  uniform  but  was  concen- 
trated most  heavily  in  the  industrial  States  and,  to  a 
large  extent,  on  a  very  small  mileage  near  and  be- 
tween the  large  cities.  Yet  it  was  politically  impos- 
sible for  the  highway  departments  to  concentrate  their 
funds  on  this  small  mileage.  Their  programs  were 
designed  to  distribute  highway  work  rather  evenly 
over  their  States,  and  in  a  situation  where  all  roads 
needed  some  improvement,  it  was  not  possible  to  deny 


*  In  the  4  years  from  1947  to  1950,  registrations  of  privately 
owned  vehicles  increased  by  11.2  million  units— to  a  total  of 
48.60  million."  Annual  vehicle  miles  of  travel  by  passenger 
automobiles  increased  by  21  percent  and  by  trucks  37  percent. 
In  1950,  about  48  percent  of  the  travel  was  in  urban  places, 
the  rest  on  the  rural  roads." 


some  areas  in  order  to  build  a  few  miles  of  costly 
superhighways  near  the  cities. 

Practically  all  of  the  States  agreed  that  the  most 
troublesome  congestion  was  on  the  selected  Interstate 
System  routes.  These  had  long  been  the  most  im- 
portant traffic  arteries  and  were  now  the  oldest  and 
most  obsolete.  Most  of  the  highway  departments 
made  a  determined  effort  to  upgrade  these  old  roads, 
and  through  fiscal  year  1948  they  channeled  about  22 
percent  of  their  postwar  primary  and  urban  Federal 
aid  and  matching  money,  amounting  to  $384  million, 
into  interstate  projects.  These  totaled  over  2,000 
miles,  including  800  bridges  and  grade  separations, 
but  this  was  a  mere  drop  in  the  bucket  compared  to 
the  obvious  needs. 

Congress    Orders    Reevaluation    of    Defense    Highway 
Needs 

As  the  States  struggled  to  keep  up  with  continual 
traffic  increases,  Western  Europe  was  approaching 
economic  collapse,  and  relations  with  the  Soviet  Union 
were  deteriorating  to  a  state  of  "cold  war."  In  1947 
Congress  acted  to  provide  massive  military  and  eco- 
nomic aid  for  Turkey  and  Greece  to  help  them  resist 
Communist  aggression.  In  April  1948  Congress  ap- 
proved the  $17  billion  Marshall  Plan  to  rebuild 
Europe.  In  June  1948  the  Soviets  blockaded  Berlin, 
and  the  United  States  responded  with  a  massive  air- 
lift to  break  the  blockade. 

In  the  tense  atmosphere  of  these  events.  Congress 
became  more  conscious  of  the  growing  inadequacy  of 
the  country's  highways,  and  particularly  the  Inter- 
state System  to  sustain  a  possible  remobilization.  It 
added  a  provision  to  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1948  requiring  the  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads 
to  study  the  needs  or  potential  needs  of  the  Interstate 
System  for  national  defense  in  cooperation  with  the 
Secretary  of  Defense,  the  State  highway  departments 
and  the  National  Security  Resources  Board  and  report 
back  to  Congress  not  later  than  April  1,  1949. 

The  study  began  with  a  detailed  inventory  which 
disclosed  an  amazing  diversity  of  geometric  standards, 
widths  and  types  of  pavements,  and  dimensions  and 
strengths  of  bridges  among  the  37,800  miles  of  exist- 
ing roads  in  the  System.  The  average  age  of  the  road 
surfaces  was  12  years  and  13  percent  were  more  than 
20  years  old  and  nearing  the  end  of  their  useful  lives. 
In  the  rural  sections,  6,000  miles  had  surfaces  less 
than  20  feet  wide  and  only  4,147  miles  had  more  than 
two  lanes.  On  6,273  miles,  the  shoulders  were  less 
than  4  feet  wide.  There  were  1,262  grade  crossings 
with  main  line  railroads  and  another  785  with  branch 
lines  and  spur  tracks.  Of  the  12,048  bridges  on  the 
System,  only  677  were  found  to  be  below  AASHO's 
H  15  capacity,  but  there  were  many  more  of  inade- 
quate width,  including  52  one-way  bridges  less  than 
18  feet  wide.  Of  the  existing  bridges,  1,245,  aggre- 
gating 29  miles  in  length,  were  of  wooden  construc- 
tion.*^ 

The  PRA  and  the  States  measured  the  traffic  using 
each  section  of  the  System  and  estimated  the  cost  of 
upgrading  each  section  to  handle  this  traffic  according 
to  the  standards  proposed  by  AASHO  for  Interstate 
highways.  They  found  that  many  sections  would 
have  to  be  completely  relocated  to  meet  the  design 
speed,  sight  distance  and  gradient  requirements  and 


165 


that  the  relocations  would  shorten  the  total  length  of 
the  system  by  about  641  miles.  All  together,  the  in- 
vestigators found  that  it  would  take  an  investment  of 
$11.3  billion  at  1948  prices  to  bring  the  Interstate 
System  up  to  an  acceptable  standard  to  handle  1948 
traffic.  To  meet  this  need  in  a  20-year  period  would 
require  an  investment  of  at  least  $500  million  per 
year,  according  to  the  PRA's  report. 

However,  the  report  stated  that  the  needs  of  the 
national  defense  would  require  a  "substantially  more 
rapid  improvement,"  and  it  pointed  out  that  tre- 
mendous benefits  to  the  civilian  economy  would  flow 
from  a  faster  rate  of  modernization.  Rather  than 
stretch  out  the  work  over  20  years,  the  PRA  sug- 
gested credit  financing  with  appropriations  sufficient 
to  amortize  the  bonds  in  20  years.  To  this  end,  the 
report  recommended  that  Congress  consider  permit- 
ting the  States  to  borrow  capital  now  to  complete 
their  sections  of  the  Interstate  System  and  use  their 
future  Federal-aid  apportionments  to  repay  the  bor- 
rowings. To  further  promote  rapid  completion,  the 
report  suggested  that  Congress  increase  the  Federal 
share  of  the  cost  of  Interstate  projects  and  also  ear- 
mark funds  specifically  for  the  Interstate  System. 
These  earmarked  funds  should  be  apportioned  so  that 
the  improvement  of  the  System  would  proceed  at 
about  the  same  rate  in  all  the  States.** 

In  March  1950  Representative  William  M.  Whit- 
tington  of  Mississippi  introduced  a  bill  to  increase 
Federal  aid  for  fiscal  years  1952  and  1953  to  $570 
million  per  year,  of  which  $70  million  would  be  ear- 
marked for  the  Interstate  System,  to  be  matched  75 
percent  Federal  to  25  percent  State.  Whittington's 
bill  would  also  increase  Federal  participation  in  right- 
of-way  costs  to  50  percent  and  permit  the  States  to 
use  future  Interstate  apportionments  to  repay  loans 
incurred  to  finance  Interstate  projects.  This  bill  had 
the  support  of  AASHO,  except  that  AASHO  had 
asked  for  $210  million  for  the  Interstate  instead  of 
the  paltry  $70  million.*^ 

Not  all  the  State  highway  people  were  behind 
AASHO  in  this  support.  Led  by  the  influential  chief 
engineer  of  the  Pennsylvania  State  highway  depart- 
ment, the  Association  of  Highway  Officials  of  the 
North  Atlantic  States  (AHONAS)  passed  a  resolu- 
tion opposing  any  further  increase  in  Federal  aid  to 
the  States,  any  further  earmarking  of  funds  for  par- 
ticular Federal-aid  systems  and  any  increase  in  the 
Federal  share  of  projects.  Increase  in  the  Federal 
share  would,  AHONAS  asserted,  lead  inevitably  to 
more  Federal  control  and  intervention  in  State  af- 
fairs.*® 

Other  bills  in  the  2d  session  of  the  81st  Congress 
would  have  boosted  Federal  aid  to  $870  million  an- 
nually with  $100  million  going  directly  to  counties 
and  townships.  In  the  end,  despite  the  continued 
unsettled  conditions  in  Europe  and  the  outbreak  of 
war  in  Korea  in  June  1950,  Congress  left  the  road 
program  substantially  unchanged  except  for  an  in- 
crease of  $50  million  to  restore  the  1946-48  level  of 
$500  million  per  year.  There  was  no  increase  in  the 
Federal  matching  share  or  any  earmarking  of  funds 
for  the  Interstate  System.  The  only  important 
changes  were  raising  Federal  participation  in  right- 
of-way  costs  to  50  percent  and  the  granting  of  per- 
mission   for    the    States    to    use    future    Federal-aid 


apportionments  to  retire  the  principal  of  bonds  issued 
to  finance  improvements  on  the  Primary  System,  in- 
cluding the  Interstate  System. 

Nearly  2  years  passed  before  Congress  took  any 
further  action  on  the  PRA  recommendations.  The 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1952  increased  Federal 
support  for  the  Primary  and  Secondary  Systems  to 
$550  million  each  for  fiscal  years  1954  and  1955  and 
also  authorized  $25  million  for  each  of  these  years 
for  the  Interstate  System.  This  token  amount  was 
to  be  apportioned  according  to  the  original  Federal- 
aid  formula  and  matched  50-50  by  State  funds. 

Two  years  later  in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1954,  Congress  increased  the  whole  Federal-aid 
program  to  $875  million  per  year,  earmarking  $175 
million  in  fiscal  years  1956  and  1957  for  the  Interstate 
System  and  increasing  the  Federal  share  to  60  percent 
on  Interstate  projects. 

The  reluctance  of  Congress  to  provide  adequate 
funding  for  the  Interstate  System  can  be  explained 
in  part  by  a  rising  sentiment  against  the  principle  of 
Federal  aid,  and  voiced  by  the  1953  Governors  Con- 
ference which  recommended  that  there  be  no  further 
increases  in  aid,  and  that  the  Federal  Government 
withdraw  from  the  taxation  of  motor  fuel.*^  How- 
ever, the  best  excuse  for  congressional  inaction  was  a 
strong  indication  from  a  number  of  States  that  they 
were  well  on  the  way  to  removing  their  worst  traffic 
bottlenecks  by  building  roads  without  Federal  assist- 
ance. 

The  Second  Toll   Road   Era 

The  Pennsylvania  Turnpike  operated  at  a  loss  dur- 
ing the  war  years  despite  increased  traffic.  In  1944, 
1.04  million  vehicles  used  the  turnpike  and  paid  $1.78 
million  in  tolls,  yet  the  Authority  lost  $500,000  and 
had  to  draw  on  the  reserve  built  up  in  1940,  1941  and 
1942.*« 

After  the  war,  traffic  increased  rapidly,  and  this, 
with  increased  toll  rates,  quickly  restored  profitable 
operation.  By  1948  the  turnpike's  net  operating  reve- 
nue was  $5.6  million  per  year.  With  the  financial 
security  of  its  original  investment  assured,  the  Penn- 
sylvania Legislature  authorized  the  Turnpike  Com- 
mission to  extend  the  turnpike  100  miles  east  to 
Philadelphia  at  an  estimated  construction  cost  of  $75 
million  and  60  miles  west  to  the  Ohio  State  line  for 
about  $55  million.*^  The  Commission  had  no  trouble 
selling  its  bonds  to  eager  investors. 

Meanwhile  Maine  was  pushing  plans  for  a  toll  road 
to  be  built  a  few  miles  inland  from  U.S.  Route  1  be- 
tween the  New  Hampshire  border  and  Portland.  This 
road  was  expected  to  attract  most  of  the  summer 
traffic  bound  from  New  York  and  New  England  to 
the  Maine  resorts  and  thus  take  some  of  the  pressure 
off  congested  Route  1.  The  Legislature  thought  this 
traffic  would  not  mind  paying  a  sinall  toll  to  avoid 
the  congestion  on  the  old  road. 

As  soon  as  wartime  restrictions  were  lifted,  the 
Maine  Turnpike  Authority  sold  $15  million  of  reve- 
nue bonds  to  finance  the  47-mile  road  and  began  con- 
struction. Although  the  bonds  were  secured  only  by 
the  future  earnings  of  the  turnpike,  they  sold  readily 
at  a  net  interest  rate  of  only  2.64  percent.  "\^niien  the 
turnpike  was  opened  in  1947,  traffic  exceeded  estimates, 
and  after  some  initial  difficulties,  the  road  operated  in 
the  black  on  a  toll  of  about  li/^  cents  per  mile.^" 


166 


Building  the  New  Jersey  Turnpike. 


With  the  completion  by  Massachusetts  of  a  free 
expressway  to  the  New  Hampshire  line  and  the  open- 
ing of  the  Maine  Turnpike,  traffic  congestion  became 
intolerable  on  New  Hampshire's  15-mile  portion  of 
U.S.  Route  1.  Unable  to  obtain  an  increase  in  the 
gas  tax  from  the  Legislature  to  finance  major  im- 
provements for  the  old  winding  road,  the  Highway 
Commission  asked  for  authority  to  build  a  toll  road 
financed  by  State  bonds.  The  bonds,  backed  by  the 
faith  and  credit  of  the  State,  sold  for  a  net  interest 
rate  of  only  1.58  percent.  The  toll  road,  built  in  only 
1  year,  opened  to  traffic  in  1950  and  was  enormously 
profitable  from  the  outset — so  much  so  that  the  Legis- 
lature decided  to  build  two  more  toll  roads  in  other 
parts  of  the  State. 

In  1945  the  New  Jersey  Legislature  authorized  a 
system  of  free  expressways  and  parkways  to  relieve 
congestion  in  the  densely  settled  New  York-Phila- 
delphia corridor.  The  system  was  started  in  1946, 
but  in  a  few  years  it  became  evident  that  highway 
revenues  were  insufficient  to  complete  the  system  in 
any  reasonable  time.  The  Legislature  then  set  up  the 
New  Jersey  Turnpike  Authority  in  1949  to  build  the 
principal  artery  between  the  George  Washington 
Bridge  and  the  Delaware  River,  a  distance  of  117 
miles.  By-passing  the  New  York  bond  houses,  the 
Authority  sold  its  revenue  bonds  to  a  consortium  of 
53  insurance  companies  in  February  1950.  It  then 
embarked  on  a  round-the-clock  construction  program 
that  finished  the  $285  million  toll  road  in  less  than  3 
years. 

From  the  opening  of  the  first  section  in  1952,  the 
turnpike  was  a  resounding  success  and  by  1953  was 
I'eturning  six  times  the  operating  expenses  for  a  net 
operating  revenue  of  $18.2  million  per  year.     Traffic 


was  22  million  vehicles  during  1953  of  which  only 
about  12  percent  were  trucks  and  buses. 

In  1947  the  New  York  Legislature  authorized 
Westchester  County  to  collect  a  10-cent  toll  on  the 
Hutchinson  River  and  Sawmill  River  Parkways  pro- 
vided the  county  reimbursed  the  Federal  Government 
for  the  $2.15  million  of  Federal-aid  funds  spent  on 
these  parkways.* 

The  Toll  Road  Bandwagon  Begins  to  Roll 

The  Pennsylvania,  Maine,  New  Hampshire  and  New 
Jersey  Turnpikes  showed  rather  conclusively  that  the 
public  was  impatient  with  obsolete,  congested  high- 
ways and  was  willing  to  pay  handsomely  for  modern 
freeways.**  Other  States,  equally  short  of  capital 
funds,  began  to  consider  credit  financing  schemes 
backed  by  tolls.  Oklahoma  in  1953  completed  the 
88-mile  Turner  Turnpike  between  Oklahoma  City  and 
Tulsa.  New  York,  which  had  started  its  thruway  as 
a  free  expressway,  switched  to  toll  financing  in  1954 
to  accelerate  construction.  And  West  Virginia  com- 
pleted a  2-lane  toll  road  from  Charleston  to  Princeton 
in  1954.  Colorado  built  the  17-mile  Denver-Boulder 
Turnpike  in  1952. 


*  The  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of  1934  authorized  the  ex- 
penditure of  Federal-aid  funds  on  "such  main  parkways  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  State  and  approved  by  the  Secretary 
of  Agriculture  as  part  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  system." 

**  In  1953  the  average  State  gasoline  tax  was  about  5  to  6 
cents  per  gallon,  and  the  Federal  tax  was  2  cents  per  gallon. 
Thus,  the  States  and  the  Government  were  collecting  %  cent 
per  mile  for  providing  and  maintaining  the  public  highways. 
On  top  of  this  the  toll  roads  collected  about  1%  cents  per 
mile  in  tolls  so  turnpikes  cost  their  users  about  four  times  as 
much  as  free  roads.  There  were,  of  course,  offsetting  econo- 
mies in  time,  operating  costs,  and  distance  savings  which 
made  the  turnpikes  attractive. 


167 


New  Jersey's  Garden  State  Parkway,  one  of  the  early  examples  of  excellent  design  for  high-speed,  access-controlled  roads. 


Toll  road  authorities  were  created  in  Connecticut, 
Indiana,  Illinois,  Ohio,  Kansas,  Kentucky,  Florida, 
Georgia,  Louisiana,  Massachusetts,  Michigan,  North 
Carolina,  Rhode  Island,  Texas  and  Virginia.  By  the 
end  of  1954,  these  authorities  had  1,382  miles  of  toll 
roads  under  construction  at  costs  estimated  to  total 
$2.3  billion,  and  they  were  making  plans  and  studies 
for  3,314  additional  miles  estimated  to  cost  $3.75  bil- 
lion. The  1,239  miles  of  toll  roads  already  completed 
as  of  January  1955  represented  an  investment  of  $1.55 
billion.^^ 

With  few  exceptions,  these  toll  roads  followed  the 
routes  selected  by  the  PRA  and  the  States  for  the 
Interstate  System,  and  they  represented  the  heaviest 
trafficked  portions  of  that  System  outside  the  cities. 
At  the  height  of  the  toll  road  boom,  the  turnpike 
authorities  were  investing  their  funds  in  interstate 
highways  at  about  three  times  the  rate  of  the  State 
highway  departments. 

It  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  most  of  the 
motoring  public  first  learned  the  safety  and  comfort 
of  driving  on  access  controlled  roads  on  the  turnpikes. 


The  toll  roads  provided  the  example  that  later  led  to 
mandatory  control  of  access  on  the  Interstate  System. 
The  toll  roads  were  high-speed  divided  highways 
with  wide  rights-of-way.  Their  geometric  standards 
equaled  or  bettered  AASHO's  "desirable"  standards 
for  the  Interstate  System.  In  addition,  the  turnpike 
authorities  spent  considerable  sums  to  provide  ameni- 
ties for  their  users — rest  areas,  landscaping,  built-in 
safety  features.  A  few,  notably  New  Jersey's  Garden 
State  Parkway  and  portions  of  the  New  York  Thru- 
way,  were  planned  with  the  two  roadways  totally 
independent  of  and  largely  concealed  from  each 
other — an  advanced  technique  of  highway  design 
pioneered  by  the  PRA  and  the  National  Park  Service 
on  the  Baltimore-Washington  Parkway.  Most  toll 
roads,  however,  were  built  in  the  monotonous  tradi- 
tion of  long  tangents  that  had  dominated  highway 
engineering  for  decades.  Nevertheless,  the  toll  roads, 
as  a  class,  set  a  high  standard  of  excellence  that  was 
hard  for  the  State  highway  departments  with  their 
limited  budgets  to  match.  They  provided  highly 
visible  yardsticks  by  which  to  measure  the  glaring 
inadequacies  of  the  public  highways  and  whetted  the 
public  appetite  for  better  free  roads. 


168 


With  the  great  success  of  many  of 
the  early  turnpikes,  their  excess 
capital  was  used  to  build  and 
support  less  profitable  roads, 
appearing  to  establish  a  never- 
ending  requirement  for  tolls. 


Tolls  Forever 

The  feasibility  of  the  original  Pennsylvania  Turn- 
pike was  assured  by  Federal  grants  of  $29.5  million 
which  greatly  reduced  the  part  of  its  cost  that  would 
have  to  be  financed  by  revenue  bonds  and  recovered 
in  tolls  from  the  road  users.  The  success  of  the  turn- 
pike convinced  many  proponents  of  toll  roads  in  and 
out  of  Congress  that  the  much-needed  improvement 
of  the  main  interstate  highways  could  be  achieved  by 
Federal  subsidy  of  toll  roads,  especially  those  with 
marginal  revenue  potential,  or  even  by  a  system  of 
federally  owned  toll  roads.  A  bill  was  introduced  in 
the  80th  Congress  to  permit  the  use  of  Federal  funds 
on  toll  roads,  along  with  the  perennial  bill  to  authorize 
transcontinental  Federal  toll  expressways.^^ 

These  proposals  were  opposed  by  the  PRA  and  a 
long  list  of  organizations  representing  highway  users. 
The  PRA's  argument  was  that  toll  roads  were  waste- 
ful and  solved  only  a  part  of  the  problem.  To  reduce 
the  cost  of  collecting  tolls,  the  access  points  had  to  be 
spaced  far  apart,  denying  the  use  of  the  road  to  local 
and  short  haul  traffic*  The  States  or  counties  would 
have  to  build  duplicating  parallel  free  roads  to  handle 
this  local  traffic  at  greater  total  expense  than  it  would 
take  to  build  a  free  expressway  originally. 

By  1948  business  was  so  good  on  the  Pennsylvania 
Turnpike  that  toll  collections  were  running  far  ahead 
of  the  requirements  for  retiring  the  bonds.  When  the 
Legislature  authorized  the  100-mile  extension  east  to 
the  Delaware  River,  the  Turnpike  Commission  merged 
the  financing  of  this  extension  with  that  of  the  original 
toll  road  by  floating  new  bonds,  part  of  which  were 
used  to  pay  off  the  original  bond  issue.  Later  other 
extensions  were  all  financially  tied  together  so  that 
revenue  from  the  profitable  sections  of  the  system 
supported  the  weaker  sections. 

This  pattern  of  financing,  long  used  by  the  Port  of 
New  York  Authority,**  was  copied  in  other  States. 


*  On  the  Maine  Turnpike  tlie  distance  between  access  points 
averaged  11  miles. 

**  Tolls  on  the  Port  of  New  York  Authority's  enormously 
profltable  Holland  Tunnel  were  set  at  a  rate  far  higher  than 
was  necessary  to  retire  the  bonds,  and  the  extra  income  was 
used  to  finance  other  undertakings. 


Connecticut  placed  the  income  from  the  Merritt  and 
Wilbur  Cross  Parkways  and  the  Charter  Oak  Bridge 
in  a  revolving  fund  to  support  the  bonds  for  a  new 
toll  expressway  from  Greenwich  to  Killingly.  Maine 
applied  the  income  from  its  first  turnpike  to  finance 
a  northern  extension  to  Augusta. 

This  trend  alarmed  many  State  highway  adminis- 
trators who  foresaw  a  situation  of  perpetual  tolls  on 
their  main  highways.  In  1950  the  Deputy  Director 
of  the  New  York  Department  of  Public  Works  warned 
that  the  proliferation  of  toll  roads  would  stifle  free 
transportation  and  injure  the  national  welfare.^^  The 
Engineering  News-Record  cautioned  against  the  dan- 
ger that  toll  authorities  would  perpetuate  themselves 
long  after  the  original  excuse  for  their  existance 
(shortage  of  funds)  has  passed.  "As  a  result,  the 
publicly  owned  toll  highway  of  today  can  become  just 
as  pernicious  an  evil  as  the  privately  owned  toll  road 
of  a  century  or  more  ago."  ^* 

Congress  Sets  National  Policy  on  Toll  Roads 

In  1954  the  New  York  Thruway  Authority  and  the 
New  Jersey  Highway  Authority  agreed  to  connect 
the  thruway  and  the  Garden  State  Parkway  at  the 
State  line.  However,  trucks  were  prohibited  on  the 
parkway,  which  meant  that  southbound  trucks  on  the 
thruway  would  have  to  exit  at  the  State  line  and  con- 
tinue their  journey  on  the  public  roads.  Critics  of 
toll  roads  pointed  to  this  decision  as  one  of  many 
examples  of  uncoordinated  regional  planning  by  the 
toll  authorities.  The  connection,  they  said,  should 
have  been  made  to  the  New  Jersey  Turnpike  instead 
of  the  parkway,  and  the  decision  as  to  where  to  con- 
nect should  have  been  made  by  the  State  highway 
authorities  in  Albany  and  Trenton  rather  than  by  the 
toll  road  authorities.^^ 

There  was  also  widespread  criticism  of  allowing 
the  toll  roads  to  preempt  the  Interstate  highway 
locations  and  thus  condemn  the  free  roads  in  those 
locations  to  a  generation  of  inadequacy. 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  had  played  a  decisive 
role  in  coordinating  the  regional  planning  of  the 
Federal-aid  system  by  the  States.  However,  the  BPR 
had  no  influence  with  the  toll  authorities  since  they 
had   not   received   any   Federal   ftinds.     One  of  the 


169 


reasons  advanced  by  proponents  of  Federal  aid  for 
toll  roads  was  that  such  aid  would  give  the  Govern- 
ment some  control  over  them — at  least  to  the  extent 
of  requiring  that  the  roads  be  freed  of  tolls  after  the 
bonds  were  paid  off. 

The  83d  Congress  (1953-1954)  considered  the 
thorny  problem  of  Federal  aid  for  toll  roads  but  left 
it  unsettled  by  directing  the  Secretary  of  Commerce 
to  make  a  study  and  report  his  recommendations  to 
the  next  Congress.  This  report,  Progress  and  Feasi- 
hility  of  Toll  Roads  and  Their  Relation  to  the  Fed- 
eral-Aid Program  submitted  to  the  84th  Congress  in 
1955,  showed  that  on  January  1,  1955,  there  were 
1,239  miles  of  completed  "arterial  toll  roads"  in  the 
United  States,  plus  1,382  miles  under  construction 
and  an  additional  3,314  miles  authorized.^®  Many 
hundreds  of  miles  in  the  third  category  had  not  been 
studied,  and  their  possibilities  for  revenue  bond  financ- 
ing were  unknown. 

The  BPR  analyzed  all  highways,  toll  or  free,  that 
were  not  already  adequately  improved  for  future 
traffic  up  to  the  year  1984  or  definitely  scheduled  for 
such  improvement.  The  analysts  found  that  about 
6,900  miles  of  heavy-traffic  roads  were  feasible  for 
revenue  bond  financing,  and  of  these,  6,700  miles  were 
on  the  Interstate  System  routes."  Whether  there 
could  be  additional  self-supporting  toll  roads,  there- 
fore, would  depend  upon  the  policies  of  the  Federal 
Government  and  the  States  in  the  use  of  public  funds 
to  improve  the  Interstate  System.  "Assurance  of 
public  funds  to  provide  reasonably  early  completion 
of  the  system  would  soon  spell  the  end  of  revenue-bond 
financing  of  roads  in  the  system.  Continuation  of  the 
present  inadequate  allocation  of  funds  to  this  system, 
however,  can  only  serve  to  increase  the  mileage  that 
would  be  potentially  feasible  as  tool  roads."  ^^ 

The  report  then  went  on  to  describe  the  inadequate 
local  service  given  by  toll  roads  and  the  resulting 
need  for  parallel  free  highways.  "Thus,  even  though 
a  toll  road  may  be  readily  self-liquidating,  it  can 
never  relieve  some  public  agency  from  the  responsi- 
bility of  continuing  to  provide  local  service  .  .  .  On 
the  other  hand,  a  properly  located  and  designed  free 
road  can  serve  both  the  through  and  local  traffic."  ^^ 

The  Secretary  recommended  that  there  be  no  Fed- 
eral support  or  encouragement  of  new  toll  roads  but 
that  Congress  permit  the  integration  of  existing  toll 
roads  into  the  System  where  they  followed  Interstate 
routes  and  met  Interstate  standards  and  where  there 
were  available  reasonably  satisfactory  alternate  free 
roads.  No  toll  roads  should  be  permitted  on  any  other 
Federal-aid  system. 

Congress  incorporated  these  recommendations  in 
the  new  law,  and  also  authorized  the  use  of  Federal 
funds  on  approach  roads  connecting  acceptable  toll 
roads  to  the  free  portions  of  the  Interstate  System. 
This  last  was  conditioned  on  the  State's  agreement  to 
free  the  benefited  section  of  toll  road  after  retirement 
of  the  original  bonds. 

New  Leadership  for  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 

When  Commissioner  MacDonald  reached  the  statu- 
tory retirement  age  in  1951,  only  a  handful  of  the 
oldest  employees  could  remember  a  time  when  he  had 
not  been  in  charge  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 
The  Bureau's  budget  had  increased  from  $69  million 


in  fiscal  year  1919,  when  he  assumed  control  over 
what  was  then  a  minor  bureau  in  the  Department  of 
Agriculture,  to  $485  million  in  1951 — about  half  of  the 
Commerce  Department's  total  budget.  In  those  32 
years,  MacDonald  had  supervised  the  spending  of  over 
$6.6  billion  of  Federal  aid  and  forest  highway  funds 
without  a  hint  of  impropriety,  although  not  without 
controversy  at  times.  He  had  served  under  six  Presi- 
dents and  up  to  that  time  had  the  longest  continuous 
tenure  of  any  important  policymaking  officer  of  the 
Government. 

Under  "the  Chief,"  as  he  was  known  for  most  of  his 
career,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  had  grown  from 
a  small  but  capable  and  dedicated  group  of  road  ex- 
perts to  the  most  prestigious  highway  organization  in 
the  world. 

When  the  Korean  emergency  developed  into  a  na- 
tional crisis.  President  Truman  recognized  the  confi- 
dence MacDonald  enjoyed  with  the  Congress  and  with 
the  State  highway  departments  by  persuading  Mac- 
Donald to  continue  as  Commissioner  for  the  remainder 
of  his  Administration. 

Commissioner  MacDonald  retired  in  March  1953. 
In  his  farewell  remarks  to  the  press,  he  emphasized 
the  importance  of  continuing  the  traditional  Federal- 
State  partnership: 

'first,  it  is  a  workable  plan  to  accomplish  a  continuing 
program  that  involves  both  local  and  national  services ; 
second,  it  sets  a  pattern  in  harmony  with  the  concepts  of 
federal  government.' 

The  original  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1916,  he  said, 
'recognized  the  sovereignty  of  the  states  and  the  authority 
retained  by  the  states  to  initiate  projects.  All  through 
the  legislation  since  then,  the  same  mechanism  of  checks 
and  balances  has  been  maintained  evenly  so  that  the  states 
and  the  federal  government  both  have  to  agree  before  they 
can  accomplish  a  positive  program.'  °° 

Freed  from  the  inhibitions  of  his  office,  MacDonald 
went  on  to  state  that  the  Federal  gasoline  tax  revenue 
should  be  returned  to  the  States  as  Federal  aid,  and 
that  "it  is  time  to  give  serious  consideration  to  a  charge 
for  use  of  what  we  may  call  extra  facilities  such  as 
controlled  access  express  highways." 

President  Eisenhower  appointed  Francis  V.  duPont 
as  Commissioner  in  April  1953.  A  civil  engineer, 
duPont  had  been  chairman  of  the  Delaware  Highway 
Commission  for  23  years  and  was  thoroughly  familiar 
with  Federal  and  State  road  policies.  In  announcing 
his  appointment.  Secretary  of  Commerce  Sinclair 
Weeks  made  a  point  of  also  declaring  that  the  admin- 
istration had  no  intention  of  recommending  that  the 
Government  retire  from  the  taxation  of  gasoline  as 
had  been  so  loudly  demanded  by  the  1953  Governors 
Conference.  He  also  said  that  there  were  no  plans  to 
make  any  serious  changes  in  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  or  its  functions. 

Mr.  duPont  assumed  control  over  the  Bureau  with 
the  expressed  intention  of  making  changes  slowly, 
and  then  only  after  a  complete  review  of  its  opera- 
tions. In  his  first  appearance  before  the  House  Sub- 
committee on  Roads  he  suggested  few  changes  in 
national  policy.  Toll  roads,  he  said,  were  economically 
feasible  at  only  a  very  few  locations  and  would  not 
solve  the  overall  road  finance  problem.  Congress,  he 
recommended,  should  accelerate  a  solution  to  the  vex- 
ing truck  size  and  weight  problem  not  by  threats,  but 


170 


by  hints  that  Congress  would  act  if  the  States  and 
industry  did  not.  He  thought  the  Federal-aid  ap- 
portionment formula  should  be  changed  to  give  greater 
weight  to  the  population  factor.^^ 

The  Drive  for  More   Federal  Aid 

The  Korean  emergency  coupled  with  the  continuing 
steady  increase  in  vehicle  registrations  imposed  new 
strains  on  the  highways.  Freight  carried  by  highways 
increased  by  one-third  in  a  single  year,  from  107  bil- 
lion ton-miles  in  1949  to  142  billion  ton-miles  in  1950."^^ 
The  traffic  increases  affected  all  classes  of  highways 
but  were  felt  most  acutely  on  the  Interstate  System, 
a  number  of  sections  of  which  were  carrying  over 
50,000  vehicles  per  day. 

Contractors  were  plentiful,  and  construction  prices 
reasonably  stable;  still,  the  States  were  barely  able  to 
keep  up  with  traffic,  especially  in  the  cities.  Some 
States,  with  BPR  approval,  adopted  a  stage  construc- 
tion policy  for  urban  expressways,  building  them  in 
little  pieces  to  "provide  immediate  relief  at  the  most 
seriouslj^  congested  points,  with  a  view  to  subsequent 
construction  of  an  entire  facility.^^ 

The  real  problem  with  all  the  States  was  a  shortage 
of  funds.  Nearly  all  of  them  had  increased  their 
gasoline  taxes  and  registration  fees,  but  these  increases 
barely  offset  the  inflation  in  maintenance  and  construc- 
tion costs.  In  their  straitened  circumstances,  State 
resentment  focused  on  the  Federal  gasoline  tax  which 
had  originally  been  imposed  by  Congress  as  an  emer- 
gency revenue  measure  but  had  been  continued  after 
the  war  and  which  was  yielding  about  $1  billion  an- 
nually. Some  State  governors  also  pointed  to  the 
Federal  excise  taxes  on  automobiles,  trucks,  tires,  oils 
and  greases  which  yielded  another  billion  dollars  to 
the  Government.  Since  Federal  aid  to  the  States  was 
currently  only  half  a  billion  dollars,  this  in  the  eyes 
of  the  governors  was  diversion  of  road-user  funds  on 
a  massive  scale — the  very  practice  penalized  by  the 
1934  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  when  indulged  in  by 
the  States. 


The  congressional  road  committees  held  exhaustive 
hearings  in  1953  in  preparation  for  the  83d  Congress 
biennial  highway  bill. 

The  legislation  that  emerged  in  1954,  without  ac- 
knowledging any  tie  between  Federal-aid  appropria- 
tions and  the  Federal  gasoline  tax,  boosted  the 
appropriations  50  percent  above  any  previous  level, 
to  $875  million  for  fiscal  years  1956  and  1957,  includ- 
ing $175  million  specifically  earmarked  for  the  Inter- 
state System  and  increased  the  Federal  share  on 
Interstate  projects  to  60  percent.  Congress  also  re- 
quested a  comprehensive  study  of  the  costs  of  com- 
pleting the  several  systems  of  highways  in  the  States — 
to  be  completed  along  with  a  new  toll  road  study. 

The  House  Subcommittee  on  Roads  had  argued  the 
jnerits  of  toll  financing,  but  in  the  end,  Congress 
avoided  the  toll  road  problem  in  drafting  the  final 
version  of  the  Federal- Aid  Highway  Act  of  1954  ex- 
cept to  ask  for  a  study  and  to  allow  Connecticut  the 
right  to  charge  tolls  on  its  proposed  expressway  from 
Greenwich  to  Killingly  after  repayment  of  the  Fed- 
eral funds  previously  expended  on  the  road. 

In  the  1954  Act,  Congress,  for  the  first  time,  relaxed 
some  of  the  Government's  tight  control  over  the  spend- 
ing of  Federal-aid  funds.  For  secondary  road  projects 
under  the  Secondary  Road  Plan,  as  it  came  to  be 
known,  the  BPR  was  required  to  approve  only  system 
changes  and  programing  of  funds  and  to  inspect  and 
accept  completed  projects.  By  agreement  between  the 
State  and  the  BPR,  all  other  details  of  planning,  con- 
tracting and  building  secondary  roads  could  be  handled 
by  the  State  without  detailed  Federal  supervision. 
This  relieved  the  BPR  of  much  tedious  detail  and  en- 
abled it  to  concentrate  available  personnel  on  primary 
and  Interstate  projects. 

The  Grand   Plan 

Before  the  Secretary  could  prepare  either  the  toll 
road  study  or  the  highway  cost  study  requested  by 
Congress,  President  Eisenhower  announced  his  own 
plan  for  bridging  the  gap  between  highway  construc- 
tion and  highway  needs.    Choosing  the  annual  confer- 


Inflation  and,  shortage  of 
funds  during  the  Korean 
emergency  made  even  simple 
maintenance  difficult  for 
the  States. 


171 


ence  of  State  Governors  as  his  forum,  the  President 
asked  the  governors  for  their  cooperation  and  help  to 
work  out  the  details  of  "  '.  .  .  a  grand  plan  for  a  prop- 
erly articulated  system  that  solves  the  problems  of 
speedy,  safe,  transcontinental  travel — intercity  com- 
munication— access  highways — and  farm-to-market 
movement  —  metropolitan  area  congestion  —  bottle- 
necks— and  parking.'  "  ^*  To  overcome  the  accumu- 
lated deficiencies,  he  called  for  spending  $5  billion 
per  year  for  10  years,  in  addition  to  normal  expendi- 
tures.^^ * 

The  President's  bold  plan  was  well  received.  The 
conference  appointed  a  Governors  Highway  Commit- 
tee to  advise  the  President,  particularly  in  the  matter 
of  financing  the  program.  The  conference  also  re- 
frained from  further  attempts  to  get  the  Federal 
Government  to  retire  from  gasoline  taxation. 

At  this  time,  the  President  did  not  have  a  detailed 
blueprint  for  his  Grand  Plan,  and  he  realized  that  a 
great  deal  of  study  would  be  needed  before  a  definite 
plan  could  be  presented  to  Congress  for  action.  He 
appointed  a  Federal  Interagency  Committee  to  study 
highway  policy  within  the  Government  and  also  asked 
General  Lucius  D.  Clay,  who  had  served  as  military 
governor  of  Germany,  to  head  up  an  advisory  commit- 
tee of  prominent  citizens  to  determine  the  needs  and 
recommend  a  financing  plan.  The  Clay  Committee, 
as  it  was  thereafter  known,  held  hearings  and  enlisted 
the  help  of  AASHO  and  outstanding  experts  from 
public  agencies,  the  highway  industry  and  highway 
user  groups. 

The  best  estimate  of  needs  came  from  AASHO 
which,  with  the  help  of  the  BPR,  had  updated  its 
estimate  of  the  needs  of  the  Federal-aid  systems  in 
1953.  That  estimate  was  $35  billion  to  make  the 
673,137-mile  Federal-aid  system  adequate  for  1953 
traffic.  Projecting  the  needs  ahead  to  1964  and  add- 
ing an  allowance  for  other  roads  not  on  any  Federal- 
aid  system,  AASHO  and  the  Committee  arrived  at  a 
figure  of  $101  billion  for  the  total  capital  needs  that 
would  have  to  be  met  by  1964.**  The  Committee  esti- 
mated that  the  existing  sources  of  revenue  would  pro- 
duce only  $47  billion  to  meet  these  needs,  leaving  a 
financial  gap  of  about  $54  billion.®* 

The  Clay  Committee   Report 

In  December  1954  the  Governors  Conference  Spe- 
cial Highway  Committee***  submitted  a  report  recom- 
mending that  the  Government  assume  the  entire 
financial  responsibility  for  the  Interstate  System  and 
that  Congress  continue  its  50-50  support  for  the  re- 
maining Federal-aid  systems  so  long  as  the  Govern- 


*  In  calendar  year  1953,  these  normal  expenditures  amounted 
to  $3.5  billion  for  State-administered  highways,  $1.2  billion 
for  local  roads  and  $1.2  billion  for  urban  highways  and 
streets— a  total  of  $5.9  billion.^ 

**  The  BPR's  study  ordered  by  Congress  in  1954  showed  that 
the  total  of  the  needs  to  reach  adequacy  of  all  highways  by 
1964  was  $126.1  billion  ($100.8  billion  for  construction,  $19.4 
billion  for  maintenance  and  $5.9  billion  for  administration)." 

***  This  Committee  was  composed  of  Governor  Walter  J. 
Kohler,  Jr.,  of  Wisconsin,  Chairman,  and  Governors  Frank  J. 
Lausche  (Ohio),  Howard  Pyle  (Arizona),  .Tohn  Lodge  (Con- 
necticut), Lawrence  W.  Wetherby  (Kentucky),  Paul  Patterson 
(Oregon),  Allan  Shivers  (Texas),  and  Robert  F.  Kennon  of 
Louisiana,  Chairman  of  the  1954  Governors  Conference,  ex 
officio." 


ment  continued  to  levy  excise  taxes  on  motor  fuels, 
lubricants  and  motor  vehicles.  The  States  and  local 
governments,  the  report  continued,  should  pay  for  the 
remaining  costs,  amounting  to  about  70  percent  of  the 
total  program.^" 

The  Clay  Committee  agreed  substantially  with  the 
governors  in  this  division  of  the  financial  burden,  but 
recommended  that  the  States  pay  5  percent  of  the  cost 
of  the  Interstate  System.  To  finance  the  Federal 
share,  which  they  estimated  at  $31  billion,*  the  Com- 
mittee recommended  that  Congress  create  a  Federal 
Highway  Corporation  with  authority  to  issue  $20 
billion  in  32-year  bonds,  paying  the  interest  and 
amortization  charges  out  of  the  future  income  from 
the  Federal  taxes  on  fuel  and  lubricants.  The  Com- 
mittee estimated  that  the  cost  of  the  Interstate  System 
financed  by  this  method  plus  the  cost  of  the  regular 
Federal-aid  authorizations  continued  at  the  current 
rate  would  about  equal  the  yield  of  the  fuel  and  lubri- 
cating oil  taxes,  projected  without  increase  in  rates 
to  1987." 

President  Eisenhower  received  the  Clay  Committee 
report,  A  10-Tear  National  Highway  Program,  in 
January  1955.  A  few  months  earlier  he  had  asked 
for  and  received  from  Congress  a  $6  billion  increase 
in  the  national  debt  limit  to  cover  deficits  incurred  in 
the  Administration's  antirecession  program.  The 
President,  therefore,  welcomed  the  Clay  proposal  to 
finance  most  of  the  road  program  outside  the  budget, 
and  he  included  it  as  a  major  feature  of  the  Admin- 
istration's highway  bill  which  he  sent  to  Congress  in 
March  1955. 

Meanwhile,  Senator  Albert  Gore  of  Tennessee, 
Chairman  of  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Roads,  was 
holding  hearings  on  his  own  highway  bill — an  ex- 
panded version  of  the  traditional  biennial  Federal-aid 
authorization  providing  $1.6  billion  annually  of  Fed- 
eral funds  which  the  States  would  be  required  to 
match  with  $1.27  billion. 

Both  the  President's  bill  and  the  Gore  bill  came 
under  strong  attack  in  the  committee  hearings.  For- 
mer Commissioner  duPont  testified  that  the  old  pay- 
as-you-go  system  was  too  little,  too  late  to  meet  present 
needs:  that  it  would  take  32  years  to  complete  the 
Interstate  System  at  the  rate  proposed  by  Senator 
Gore.'^  **  The  new  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads, 
Charles  D.  Curtiss,  said  that  according  to  a  poll  of 
the  State  highway  departments,  only  19  States  would 
be  able  to  match  the  Federal  funds  proposed  in  the 
Gore  bill,  but  43  would  be  able  to  match  the  smaller 
amount  in  the  Administration's  bill.''*  Senator  Harry 
F.  Byrd,  Jr.,  of  Virginia,  chairman  of  the  powerful 
Senate  Finance  Committee  denounced  the  Adminis- 
tration's plan  as  a  scheme  to  evade  the  debt  limit  and 
remove   the   highway   program   from   the   control   of 


*  This  total  was  divided  as  follows :  $25  billion  for  the 
Interstate  System,  including  essential  urlian  arterial  connec- 
tions ;  $3.15  billion  for  the  remainder  of  the  Primary  System ; 
$750  million  for  the  Federal-aid  Urban  System,  $2.10  billion 
for  the  Federal-Aid  Secondary  System  and  $225  million  for 
forest  highways." 

**  Mr.  duPont  resigned  as  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads  in 
December  1954  in  order  to  give  his  full  attention  to  promoting 
the  President's  highway  program.  Charles  D.  Curtiss,  a  long- 
time career  engineer  who  had  served  11  years  as  deputy 
commissioner,  was  appointed  to  the  vacancy  January  14,  1955. 


172 


Congress.  Asserting  that  it  would  cost  $12  billion  in 
bond  interest,  Senator  Dennis  Chavez  of  New  Mexico 
called  the  Administration's  bill  a  "bankers  bill"  rather 
than  a  road  bill.  Rural  interests  branded  the  Admin- 
istration's proposal  to  pledge  all  Federal  gasoline  tax 
revenue  above  $622  million  per  year  to  back  the  Fed- 
eral Highway  Corporation's  bonds  as  a  32-year  strait- 
jacket  for  rural  highways. 

The  Engineering  News-Record  came  out  strongly 
for  the  Administration  bill,  and  particularly  for  the 
10-year  limit  on  completion  of  the  Interstate  System. 
"The  real  crux  of  the  matter  rests  in  the  fact  that  we 
need  a  whole  new  system  of  highways  just  as  soon  as 
we  can  get  it,  and  no  adequate  pay-as-you-go  plan 
has  yet  been  seriously  proposed  to  assure  that  re- 
sult."" Proponents  of  pay-as-you-go  financing,  the 
article  continued  prophetically,  were  gambling  that 
there  would  be  no  inflation  in  the  30  years  or  more  it 
would  take  to  build  the  Interstate  System  from  cur- 
rent revenues. 

Defeat  of  the   President's   Plan 

Tossing  the  President's  Grand  Plan  aside,  the  Sen- 
ate passed  the  Gore  bill,  somewhat  modified,  by  60 
votes  to  31.  As  passed,  the  bill  provided  $13.2  billion 
of  Federal  aid  over  a  5-year  period,  financed  in  part 
by  a  1-cent  boost  in  the  Federal  gasoline  tax.  State 
matching  would  be  $4.8  billion  in  the  5-year  period, 
or  $960  million  per  year. 

The  House  Subcommittee  on  Roads  chaired  by 
Congressman  George  H.  Fallon  brought  out  a  measure 
that  was  somewhere  between  the  Gore  bill  and  the 
Administration  bill.  It  provided  $24  billion  of  Fed- 
eral aid  over  a  12-year  period,  with  increases  in 
Federal  fuel  and  rubber  taxes  to  provide  the  addi- 
tional revenue.  The  Fallon  bill  and  the  Administra- 
tion bill  came  before  the  House  in  the  last  days  of  the 
session,  but  both  went  down  to  defeat — a  stunning 
setback  for  the  supporters  of  the  President's  Grand 
Plan. 

A  New  Highway  Bill 

Although  the  President's  plan  had  been  defeated, 
there  was  still  tremendous  popular  support  for  an 
accelerated  highway  program  when  the  84th  Congress 
returned  for  the  2d  session.  The  Administration  jet- 
tisoned the  Federal  Highway  Corporation  and  en- 
dorsed the  pay-as-you-go  principle.  The  House 
Subcommittee  on  Roads  then  undertook  to  put  to- 
gether a  new  road  bill,  while  the  Ways  and  Means 
Committee  studied  the  financial  aspects  of  the  pro- 
gram. Eventually,  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Roads 
and  the  Senate  Finance  Committee  also  became  in- 
volved with  the  highway  bill.  The  legislation  drafted 
by  these  four  committees  contained  some  notable  de- 
partures from  previous  highway  policy. 

The  most  radical  innovation  was  the  earmarking  of 
Federal  highway-user  revenues  for  Federal  highway 
aid.  Congress  accomplished  this  by  creating  a  High- 
way Trust  Fimd  and  appropriating  into  it  the  pro- 
ceeds of  all  Federal  taxes  on  motor  fuel,  tires  and 
tread  rubber  and  a  portion  of  certain  other  excise 
taxes  such  as  those  on  automobiles,  trucks  and  buses. 

Another  innovation,  sought  by  organized  labor,  was 
a  provision  that  the  Davis-Bacon  Act  of  1935  should 
apply  to  all  contracts  for  the  Interstate  System.    This 


Act,  passed  during  the  Depression,  required  that  the 
Secretary  of  Labor  determine  the  prevailing  wage 
rates  paid  for  similar  work  in  the  area  where  the 
proposed  Federal  project  was  to  be  built.  These  rates 
were  then  set  forth  in  the  contract  and  became  the 
minimum  rates  for  that  job.  The  purpose  of  the  Act 
when  originally  passed  was  to  give  local  workers  a 
chance  to  compete  for  jobs  on  Federal  projects  with- 
out lowering  their  wages  to  match  those  of  cheap 
imported  labor.  However,  its  detractors  said  the  Act 
was  applied  during  the  Roosevelt  Administration  to 
force  prevailing  wages  in  outlying  rural  areas  up  to 
the  level  of  those  won  by  unions  in  the  big  cities. 

Heretofore,  the  Davis-Bacon  Act  had  applied  only 
to  the  Federal  Government's  own  contracts.  Those 
contracts  entered  into  by  the  States  for  Federal-aid 
work  were  subject  only  to  the  regulations  the  BPR 
had  made  pursuant  to  the  original  Federal  Aid  Road 
Act  of  1916.  These  left  the  predetermination  of  job 
labor  rates  up  to  the  States,  whose  labor  laws,  accord- 
ing to  the  Engineering  News-Record^  were  "as  het- 
erogeneous as  their  liquor  laws."  ^® 

Introduction  of  Federal  wage-fixing  into  the  Fed- 
eral-aid program  was  bitterly  resisted  by  AASHO, 
the  Associated  General  Contractors  and  the  American 
Roadbuilders'  Association  who  claimed  that  the  Davis- 
Bacon  Act  had  the  potential  of  boosting  highway 
construction  costs  15  to  40  percent.  Inevitably,  they 
said,  contracts  for  other  Federal-aid  and  State  work, 
not  covered  by  the  Davis-Bacon  Act,  would  be  drawn 
into  its  orbit,  and  there  would  be  a  general  inflation 
of  wages  in  the  highway  construction  industry. 
Spokesmen  for  labor  asserted  that  since  the  proposed 
matching  rate  for  the  Interstate  System  was  90  per- 
cent Federal  and  10  percent  State  funds,  the  real 
employer  was  the  Federal  Government,  and,  therefore, 
its  laws  should  apply.  In  the  end,  the  Davis-Bacon 
Act  became  the  price  for  labor's  support  of  the  high- 
way program,  and  it  was  incorporated  in  the  final  bill. 

The  third  innovation  proposed  by  the  legislators 
was  to  treat  the  Interstate  System  as  a  single  huge 
project,  comparable  to  an  irrigation  or  flood  control 
scheme,  and  provide  in  one  authorization  for  its  in- 
ception and  completion.  Previously,  Congress  had 
viewed  Federal  aid  as  an  open-ended  program  of 
assistance  to  the  States  that  would  continue  forever 
at  a  pace  determined  from  time  to  time  as  circum- 
stances might  dictate.  In  hard  times  highway  con- 
struction was  stepped  up  to  "prime  the  pump,"  and 
at  other  times  cut  back  to  balance  the  budget.  Now 
the  committees  proposed  that  a  limited  national  sys- 
tem of  special  highways  be  built  within  a  fixed  time 
period  of  13  years.  In  concept,  this  scheme  was  prac- 
tically identical  to  that  of  the  Pacific  Railroads  100 
years  previously,  and  for  its  time,  was  on  about  the 
same  scale. 

This  single  huge  project  concept  affected  the  ap- 
portionment of  the  Federal  funds  among  the  States. 
When  Congress  earmarked  funds  for  the  Interstate 
System  in  1954,  it  changed  the  apportionment  factor 
to  give  more  of  the  money  to  the  more  populous 
States.*     The  framers  of  the  new  bill  provided  that 


*  According  to  this  formula,  half  of  the  funds  were  to  be 
apportioned  in  the  ratio  of  each  State's  population  to  the 
total  national  population ;  the  other  half  was  to  be  divided 
according  to  the  classic  Federal-aid  formula  of  1916. 


173 


this  formula  should  be  continued  for  fiscal  years  1957, 
1958,  and  1959,  but  that  thereafter  the  apportionments 
should  be  made  according  to  the  relative  "need"  of 
each  State  to  assure  completing  the  entire  Interstate 
System  at  the  same  time.  Needs  would  be  determined 
by  a  series  of  cost  estimates  to  be  submitted  to  Con- 
gress by  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  and  the  States 
at  dates  set  forth  in  legislation.  The  first  of  these 
estimates  was  due  not  later  than  January  12,  1958, 
and  would  be  used  for  apportioning  authorizations 
for    fiscal    years    1960,    1961,    and    1962.      The   total 


amount  authorized  for  the  Interstate  System  was  $25 
billion  through  fiscal  year  1969. 

The  compromise  bill  developed  by  these  committees 
contained  other  departures  from  previous  highway 
policy,  as  well  as  features  from  both  the  1955  Gore 
bill  and  the  Administration's  original  proposal.  The 
compromise  bill,  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  and 
the  Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956  was  passed  over- 
whelmingly by  both  the  Senate  and  the  House  and 
was  signed  into  law  by  President  Eisenhower  on 
June  29,  1956. 


174 


REFERENCES 

'1970  AuTOMOBix-E  Facts  and  Figures  (Automobile  Manu- 
facturers Association,  Detroit,  1970)  p.  3. 

^Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Highway  Statistics,  1951  (U.S. 
Dep't.  of  Commerce,  Wasliington,  D.C.,  1953)  p.  29. 

'  S.  M.  Shapiro,  The  Long  Island  State  Parkway  System, 
Convention  Group  Meetings,  New  York  City,  September 
24-26,  1947  (AASHO,  Wasliington,  D.C,  1947)  pp.  112-117. 

MO  Stat  1200. 

''J.  G.  McKay,  The  Cook  County  Transportation  Survey, 
Public  Roads,  Vol.  7,  No.  1,  Mar.  1926,  pp.  1-6. 

'A  Stitdy  of  Highway  Traffic  in  the  Cleveland  Regional 
Area,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  9,  No.  7,  Sept.  1928,  pp.  129-138. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1946,  p.  34. 

'  J.  T.  Lynch,  Traffic  Planning  Studies  in  American  Cities, 
Public  Roads,  Vol.  24,  No.  6,  Oct.,  Nov.,  Dec.  1945,  pp.  168, 
169. 

•Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Anni^al  Report,  1945,  p.  12. 

"Federal  Highway  Administration,  Highway  Statistics 
Summary  To  1965,  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Transportation,  Washing- 
ton, D.C,  1967)  p.  85. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  The  Local  Rural  Road  Prob- 
lem  (Dep't.  of  Commerce,  Washington,  D.C,  1950)  p.  31. 

"BPR,  supra,  note  9,  p.  9. 

"  Neio  Local  Higlnoay  Agency  Proposed  in  Congress,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  131,  No.  21,  Nov.  18,  1943,  p.  727. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  7,  p.  13. 

"Title  23,  U.S.  Code,  "Highways,"  Report  of  the  Com- 
mittee ON  Public  Works,  H.  Doc.  1938,  85th  Cong.,  2d  Sess., 
pp.  15,  16. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  7,  p.  9. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  7,  p.  11. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1947,  pp.  5,  7. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  9,  p.  8. 

"4  History  of  the  Interstate  System,  AASHO — The  First 
Fifty  Years,  1914-1964  (American  Association  of  State  High- 
way Officials,  Washington,  D.C,  1965)  p.  184. 

"A  Policy  on  Design  Standards  for  the  National  System  of 
Interstate  Highways,  Policies  on  Geometric  Highway  Design 
(American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washing- 
ton, D.C,  1950)  pp.  1,  2. 

^'  BPR,  supra,  note  7,  p.  4. 

^Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Highway  Statistics,  1949  (U.S. 
Dep't.  of  Commerce,  Washington,  D.C,  1951)   p.  112. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  7,  p.  5. 

"Federal  Aid  to  Local  Roads  Opposed  at  Senate  Hearing, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  142,  No.  19,  May  12,  1949, 
p.  51. 

"Editorial,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  142,  No.  23, 
Jun.  9,  1949,  p.  47. 

"  BPR,  supra,  note  11,  pp.  5,  6,  24. 

"Id.,  p.  30. 

'°  BPR,  supra,  note  18,  p.  41. 

'°Id. 

"C  Shain,  State  Highway  Needs  and  Finances,  Committee 
Proceedings,  Cox\-ention  Group  Meetings,  Papers  and  Dis- 
cussions (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Washington,  D.C.  1948)  pp.  84,  85. 

"H.  Ward,  The  Financial  Aspects  of  the  Engineering  Anal- 
ysis, 'Highway  Needs  of  Michigan',  Committee  Proceedings, 
Con\'ention  Group  Meetings,  Papers  and  Discussions, 
(American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washing- 
ton, D.C,  1948)  p.  63. 

"  Study  Toll  Roads,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  142, 
No.  11,  Mar.  17,  1949,  p.  65. 

"Money,  Aggressiveness,  Legislation  Needed  For  Road 
Progress,  AREA  Told,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  144, 
No.  11,  Mar.  16,  1950,  p.  25. 

"  Transportation — Roadbuilding  Lags,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  144,  No.  12,  Mar.  23,  1950,  p.  108. 

"  States  Seek  Methods  to  Raise  Funds  for  Highway  Con- 
struction and  Repair,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  146,  No. 
20,  May  17,  1951,  p.  27. 


''^Massachusetts  Roads  Scheduled  Swiftly,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  144,  No.  4,  Jan.  26,  1950,  p.  21. 

^Bright  Spot  for  Roads,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol. 
144,  No.  15,  Apr.  13,  1950,  p.  17. 

"^New  York  OK's  Thruivay  Authority,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  144,  No.  13,  Mar.  30,  1950,  p.  19. 

■"'  V.  Boughton,  Toll  Ilighioay  Constriiction  to  Reach  Peak  in 
195Jf,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  152,  No.  1,  Jan.  7,  1954, 
p.  31. 

"1955  Automobile  Facts  and  Figures  (Automobile  Manu- 
facturers Association,  Detroit,  1955)  p.  21. 

*•  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Highway  Statistics  Summary, 
1955   (U.S.  Dep't  of  Commerce,  Washington,  D.C,  1957)  p.  72. 

"  Highway  Needs  of  The  National  Defense,  H.  Doc.  249, 
81st  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  pp.  10-23. 

"  Id.,  pp.  3,  4. 

*"  Road-Aid  Bill  Contains  New  Item  For  Interstate  System, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  144,  No.  10,  Mar.  9,  1950, 
p.  17. 

*'^  Road  Officials  Hit  Federal-Aid  Boost,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  144,  No.  10,  Mar.  9,  1950,  p.  21. 

■"  AASHO,  supra,  note  20,  p.  185. 

^^Pennsylvania  Turnpike  Continues  at  a  Loss,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  134,  No.  8,  Feb.  22,  1945,  p.  53. 

"^Announce  Extension  Route  of  Pennsylvania  Turnpike, 
Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  142,  No.  3,  Jan.  20,  1949, 
p.  63. 

*"  Progress  and  Feasibility  of  Toll  Roads  and  Their  Re- 
lation To  The  Federal-Aid  Program,  H.  Doc.  139,  84th  Cong., 
1st  Sess.,  pp.  6-8. 

''Id.,  pp.  11-14. 

^'Perspective — Controversy  Over  Toll  Roads,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  138,  No.  17,  Apr.  24,  1947,  p.  10. 

"  Supra,  note  46,  p.  21. 

"  Toll  Road  Policy  Needs  Restudy,  Engineering  News- 
Record,  Vol.  144,  No.  13,  Mar.  30,  1950,  p.  26. 

'^  Editorial,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  153,  No.  1,  Jul. 
1,  1954,  p.  96. 

^  H.  Doc,  supra,  note  50,  p.  14. 

"'Id.,  p.  23. 

"^Id.,  p.  24. 

"  Id.,  p.  26. 

°°  MacDonald  Retires  as  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads,  F.  V. 
duPont  Takes  Over,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  150,  No. 
14,  Apr.  2,  1953,  pp.  52-54. 

"'  Changes  in  Federal  Highway  Policies  to  Await  Administra- 
tion's Studies,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  150,  No.  17, 
Apr.  23,  1953,  pp.  21,  22. 

°'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1951,  p.  1. 

^'Id.,  p.  7. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1954,  p.  3. 

^"President  Starts  Ball  Rolling  for  Bigger  Highway  Pro- 
gram, Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  153,  No.  4,  Jul.  22,  1954, 
pp.  21,  88. 

^Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Highway  Statistics,  1953  (U.S. 
Dep't  of  Commerce,  Washington,  D.C,  1954)  pp.  61,  90,  94. 

*' Needs  of  The  Highway  Systems,  1955-84,  H.  Doc.  120, 
84th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  p.  19. 

^Highway  Problem  is  How  to  Raise  $50  Billion,  Engineer- 
ing News-Record,  Vol.  153,  No.  16,  Oct.  14,  1954,  p.  21. 

''  AASHO,  supra,  note  20,  p.  185. 

'"'President  Gets  Governors'  Highway  Report,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  153,  No.  24,  Dec.  9,  1954,  p.  23. 

"  H.  Doc,  supra,  note  67,  p.  21. 

"  AASHO,  supra,  note  20,  p.  186. 

''^Battle  Joined  Over  Rival  Highway  Plans,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  154,  No.  8,  Feb.  24,  1955,  p.  23. 

''*  Highway  Hopes  Dim,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  154, 
No.  16,  Apr.  21,  1955,  p.  26. 

''^Editorial,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  154,  No.  9,  Mar. 
3,  1955,  p.  84. 

"  The  Davis-Bacon  Highway  Compromise,  Engineering 
News-Record,  Vol.  157,  No.  1,  Jul.  5,  1956,  pp.  180-182. 


175 


Thomas  Harris  MacDonald 


"Rugged  integrity"  .  .  .  "Honesty"  .  .  .  "Fairness"  .  .  .  "Inspirational" 
.  .  .  "Sound,  far-sighted  leadership"  .  .  .  "Dedicated  public  servant"  and 
more  were  the  expressions  used  by  many  who  knew  Thomas  Harris 
MacDonald  at  the  time  of  his  retirement  as  Commissioner,  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads.  He  had  been  head  of  the  Bureau  from  1919  to  1953,  and 
during  these  years  of  his  leadership,  this  Nation  expanded  its  roadways 
from  a  scant  i^  of  a  million  miles,  of  which  very  little  was  hard  sur- 
faced, to  31/^  million  miles  of  hard-surfaced,  efficient,  interstate  roads; 
the  Federal-State  partnership  in  roadbuilding  was  developed  and  re- 
fined; the  Alaska  Highway  was  built  and  the  Pan  American  Highway 
was  well  underway;  and  many  of  his  staff  worked  with  other  countries 
in  developing  their  roads  and  further  training  their  engineers.  Under 
MacDonald,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  grew  to  become  a  center  of 
highway  research  with  worldwide  influence. 

Mr.  MacDonald  was  born  in  Leadville,  Colorado,  on  July  23,  1881, 
and  moved  with  his  family  to  Iowa  in  1884.  He  studied  at  Iowa  State 
College  and  I'eceived  his  bachelor's  degree  in  civil  engineering  in  1904. 
While  at  Iowa  State,  he  developed  an  interest  in  highway  engineering 
and,  under  the  supervision  of  Dean  Anson  Marston,  an  early  good 
roads  proponent,  did  his  undergTaduate  thesis  on  the  highway  needs  of 
farmers  and  the  force  required  to  pull  a  wagon  over  different  types 
of  roads. 

In  1904,  the  year  MacDonald  graduated,  the  Iowa  Legislature  desig- 
nated the  State  College  as  a  Commission  to  perform  studies  on  highways 
and  methods  for  their  improvement.  He  took  a  position  as  an  Assistant 
Professor  of  Civil  Engineering  and  was  placed  in  charge  of  road  in- 
vestigations. By  1907,  at  the  age  of  26,  he  was  appointed  State  High- 
way Engineer,  and  in  1913,  with  the  creation  of  a  three-man  State 
Highway  Commission,  he  was  appointed  chief  engineer.  During  his 
tenure  with  the  Iowa  State  Highway  Commission,  Iowa  became  one  of 
the  first  States  in  the  Midwest  to  have  a  statewide  system  of  main  roads, 
with  about  one-third  of  the  designated  6,400-mile  network  permanently 
graded,  drained,  and  provided  with  bridges.  MacDonald  also  developed 
plans  for  the  hard  surfacing  of  the  roads.  His  success  in  improving 
the  difficult  Iowa  roads  attracted  national  attention  among  highway, 
officials  and  the  fledgling  automobile  industry.  He  became  a  leader 
among  the  highway  officials  of  the  'teens  and  took  an  active  part  with 
the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  (AASHO)  in 
their  efforts  to  secure  Federal-aid  highway  legislation.  This  strong  tie 
with  AASHO  and  the  various  State  highway  officials  was  to  remain 
constant  throughout  his  professional  life. 

Then  in  1919,  Thomas  MacDonald  was  called  to  Washington  to  serve 
as  Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  a  position  he  was  to  hold 
through  seven  different  presidents.  President  Wilson  made  his  selection 
based  upon  the  unanimous  recommendations  of  the  American  Associa- 
tion of  State  Highway  Officials.  Though  MacDonald's  title  changed 
over  the  course  of  the  years,  this  original  designation  of  "Chief"  became 
synonymous  with  the  man.  It  ceased  to  be  just  a  title,  but  rather  be- 
came a  personal  designation,  applied  with  affection  and  admiration  by 
an  ever- widening  circle  of  people  around  the  world  that  included  every- 
one with  even  the  slightest  interest  in  roads. 

When  the  Chief  took  office,  the  1916  Federal-Aid  Road  Act  had  been 
passed,  but  a  program  had  not  had  a  chance  to  get  underway.  Mean- 
while, the  first  World  War  had  ended,  and  the  roads  lay  devastated  by 
the  effect  of  traffic,  particularly  that  of  heavy  trucks  and  the  inability 
to  provide  sufficient  maintenance  during  the  war  effort.  In  addition, 
cooperation  between  BPR,  the  States,  and  Congress  was  needed  to  pre- 
pare the  1921  Federal  Highway  Act,  which  was  intended  to  strengthen 
the  1916  Act.  In  general,  in  1919,  man's  maximum  range  of  daily  move- 
ment was  still  only  10  miles,  and  much  work  needed  to  be  done. 


176 


By  March  1953  when  the  Chief  retired,  millions  of  miles  of  hard- 
surfaced,  efficient,  connected  roads  were  built,  and  the  buildino;  of  the 
National  System  of  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways  was  about  to 
begin.  But  the  real  importance  of  his  work,  as  one  of  his  close  friends 
and  associates,  Pyke  Johnson,  former  President  of  the  Automotive 
Safety  Foimdation,  expressed  in  1957,  was  that  it  alloAved  ".  .  .  the  vast 
transportation  revolution"  to  take  "place  in  the  lives  of  all  of  us.  .  .  . 
It  is  enough  to  note,  perhaps,  that  as  of  today  all  but  22  million  of  our 
people  live  in  urban  or  metropolitan  areas.  Isolation  no  longer  is  an 
important  factor  in  our  lives." 

In  the  34  years  that  the  Chief  served,  a  list  of  his  career  milestones 
reads  like  the  history  of  the  movement  for  better  roads  in  this  country 
and  around  the  world.    A  list  of  only  a  very  few  of  these  would  include : 

•  Sponsored  the  organization  of  the  Highway  and  Highway  Trans- 
port Education  Committee  (later  to  become  a  pait  of  the  Highway 
Research  Board),  1920. 

•  Led  in  defeating  the  "Townsend  Plan"  which  called  for  a  very 
limited  system  of  national  highways  to  be  built  and  maintained  by 
the  Federal  Government  and  instead  argued  for  the  continuation 
of  the  Federal-aid  plan  but  restricted  to  a  larger  Federal-aid  high- 
way system  to  be  selected  by  the  States,  themselves.  This  became 
the  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921. 
Chairman,  Joint  Board  of  Interstate  Highways,  1924. 
Sponsored  the  organization  of  the  Pan  American  Highway  Con- 
gress, 1924. 

Sponsored  first  President's  Highway  Safety  Conference,  1945. 
Sponsored  creation  of  the  official  U.S.  Interregional  HighAvay  Com- 
mission, 1946. 

•  Served  as  a  member  of  the  Official  Commission  on  the  Alaska  High- 
way. Later,  he  was  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  building 
this  road. 

•  Throughout  his  term  of  office,  he  served  as  a  member  of  the  Execu- 
tive Committee,  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
and  took  an  active  part  in  all  of  its  deliberations  on  the  part  of  the 
Federal  Government. 

For  his  work,  he  received  most  of  the  honors  that  can  be  bestowed  by 
individuals,  associations,  and  organizations  interested  in  highway  work 
within  the  United  States.  He  was  awarded  an  honorary  degree  in 
engineering  from  Iowa  State  College  in  1929,  and  received  the  Marston 
Medal  for  Achievement  in  Engineering  in  1939.  He  received  the  Medal 
of  Merit  for  outstanding  service  during  World  War  II.  He  received 
the  George  Bartlett  Award  in  1931,  was  designated  an  honorary  mem- 
ber of  the  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers  in  the  late  1940's,  and 
received  the  Award  of  Merit  of  the  Highway  Research  Board  in  1950. 
These  are  but  a  few  of  the  honors  conferred  upon  the  Chief  in  his  own 
country.  In  the  international  field,  his  advice  was  sought,  and  given, 
all  over  the  world.  He  was  awarded  the  Cross  of  the  Legion 
of  Honor  from  the  French  Government,  the  honor  of  Knight  of  the 
First  Class,  Order  of  St.  Olav,  given  by  the  King  of  Norway,  as  well 
as  numei'ous  other  important  recognitions  by  foreign  governments.  All 
of  these  and  the  many  more  awards  he  received  attest  to  his  excellent 
work  and  the  respect  held  for  him  by  those  interested  in  the  betterment 
of  the  highways. 

The  Chief's  49  years  of  active  sei"vice  in  the  betterment  of  our  high- 
ways, first  for  Iowa  and  then  for  the  Nation,  were  motivated  by  a  belief 
in  the  importance  of  sound  transportation  and  the  role  of  highways  in 
the  overall  picture.  Herbert  S.  Fairbank,  a  close  friend  and  a  great 
name  in  the  roads  effort  in  his  own  right,  discussed  MacDonald's  views 
of  transportation 

as  something  much  more  than  the  'service'  it  is  generally  held  to  be,  more 
even  than  the  essential  link  between  supply  and  demand,  or  production  and 
consumption,  and  actually  as,  in  itself,  one  of  the  most  potent  of  the  creative 
forces  that  have  shaped  and  will  continue  to  shape  this  and  all  otlier  countries 
in  almost  every  aspect — in  their  economy,  of  course,  but  also  in  the  spread 
and  concentrations  of  their  population  and  industry,  the  location,  size,  form 
and  character  of  their  cities,  and  the  degree  of  development  of  their  every 
natural  resource. 

177 


In  discussing  the  effect  of  roads  as  a  part  of  this  creative  force, 
MacDonald  believed,  according  to  Fairbank,  that  roads  allowed 
the  population  to  disperse  throughout  the  country  and  away  from  the 
rivers  and  main  rail  lines.  It  served  as  a  great  unifying  force  between 
the  "hayseed"  and  the  "city  slicker"  with  "freer  and  more  frequent 
contacts  of  the  two  which  the  automobile  and  good  roads  facilitated." 
There  was  a  greater  urban  orientation  produced  in  this  country  as  the 
small  towns,  "long  the  centers  of  their  tiny  rural  areas  promptly  be- 
came the  mere  satellites  of  larger  nearby  cities.  .  .  ."  The  cities  were 
also  able  to  reach  out  more  as  people  were  able  to  move  further  from 
downtown  and  finally  to  the  suburbs  as  the  principal  roads  radiating 
out  of  the  city  were  improved.  Good  roads  were  an  important  link  in 
the  creative  force  that  is  transportation  that  started  from  the  water- 
ways, to  the  railways,  to  roadways,  and  on  to  the  airways. 

A  continuing  theme  throughout  the  Chief's  years  with  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads  was  the  importance  of  the  principle  of  Federal-State 
cooperation  in  the  framework  of  our  form  of  government.  Pyke  John- 
son describes  this  belief  as  "the  continued  achievement  of  an  engineering 
job  of  the  magnitude  of  our  highway  program  [that]  must  rest  upon  the 
essential  premise  that  here  we  are  dealing  with  the  lives  of  people.  That 
being  so,  the  people  finally  must  make  their  choice.  The  Federal  Gov- 
ernment cannot  successfully  dictate  to  the  States.  It  must  continue  to 
act  in  cooperation  with  them  and  initiation  of  undertakings  must  remain 
with  the  States." 

MacDonald  was  able  to  achieve  the  essential  close  cooperation  with 
the  States  because  he  never  forgot  his  first  position  as  a  State  highway 
engineer  and  because  of  his  active  participation  in  AASHO.  Thus,  he 
was  and  remained  fully  acquainted  with  the  views  and  sensitivities  of 
State  highway  officials  in  respect  to  the  Federal  legislation  and  the 
Bureau.  But  he  was  also  aware  of  the  shortcomings  of  the  various 
State  highway  departments.    According  to  Fairbank,  MacDonald 

interpreted  literally  the  requirement  of  the  Federal-Aid  Act  that  each  State 
must  have  'a  highway  department  adequate  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary . . . 
to  cooperate  with  the  Federal  Bureau.'  He  was  unceasing,  though  Avithout 
fanfare,  in  his  efforts  to  bring  about  an  elevation  of  the  standards  of  engineer- 
ing and  administrative  proficiency  of  all  the  State  highway  departments.  This 
was  done  as  occasion  offered,  through  letters  to  our  division  and  district 
offices  or  directly  to  the  highway  departments  concerned.  But  he  made  effec- 
tive use  of  personal  contacts  with  the  State  highway  officials  at  meetings  of 
the  AASHO  and  other  gatherings.  He  made  it  a  point  to  become  personally  ac- 
quainted as  quickly  as  possible  with  the  heads  and  principal  officers  of  the 
departments  of  all  the  States  when  they  took  office  after  each  political  turn- 
over, the  frequency  of  which  he  deeply  deplored. 

In  recognition  of  the  sensitivity  of  State  officials,  if  he  could,  he  pre- 
ferred working  through  the  AASHO  committees  in  developing  stand- 
ards and  thereby  avoiding  the  appearance  of  a  Bureau  crusade. 

In  developing  standards,  the  Chief  felt  that  research  and  factfinding 
must  play  a  very  important  role,  but  the  research  that  he  stressed  had 
to  be  of  a  nature  calculated  to  yield  results  promptly  applicable  in  the 
Bureau's  administrative  or  engineering  practice.  Thus,  he  strongly 
supported  the  undertaking  of  soil  studies,  pioneered  by  the  Bureau,  and 
the  impact  and  circular  track  studies  done  to  test  the  wear  on  pavements 
by  wheels  equipped  with  various  kinds  of  tires.  He  gave  enthusiastic 
support  of  statewide  traffic  studies  that  were  carried  out  in  cooperation 
with  various  State  highway  departments  and  which  were  later  expanded 
and  augmented  by  economic  and  financial  studies.  When  research  ex- 
penditures occasionally  came  under  question  by  Congress  or  the  senior 
Executive  Department,  he  Avas  able  to  ward  off  this  challenge  by  point- 
ing to  the  important  results  derived  fi'om  this  aspect  of  the  Bureau's 
work. 

To  many,  MacDonald  was  the  embodiment  of  official  rectitude,  and  a 
stout  defender  of  the  independence  of  the  State  highway  departments, 
as  well  as  the  Bureau,  from  political  interference.  For  the  sake  of  this 
independence,  he  was  quite  willing  to  have  the  Bui-eau  remain  a  sub- 
ordinate branch  of  an  Executive  Department.  He  believed  that  this 
system  would  sufficiently  intei'pose  a  screen  between  executive  action 


178 


and  the  pressures  of  self-seeking-  interests.  However,  at  the  same  time, 
as  Fairbank  wrote,  "He  was  quick  to  oppose  and  resent  any  tendency  of 
the  superior  administrative  agency  to  interfere  in  the  executive  or  ad- 
ministrative policies  of  the  Bureau."  For  the  most  part,  because  of  the 
respect  he  commanded  froni  all  the  Department  heads  under  whom  he 
served,  he  was  remarkably  free  of  any  such  interference. 

In  the  actual  day-to-day  administration  of  the  Bureau,  the  Chief 
could  not  be  considered  one  of  the  great  loaders  of  management  science. 
He  directed  the  Bureau  mainly  througli  individual  conferences  with  a 
relatively  few  men  in  whoni  he  reposed  confidence  and  through  memos 
often  produced  as  a  result  of  these  individual  conferences.  Fairbank 
mentioned  MacDonald's  administrative  style : 

Conferences  with  all  the  division  heads  jointly  were  rare  almost  to  the 
point  of  total  absence  of  occurrence.  In  his  last  years  in  Washington  lie  may 
have  been  persuaded  that  the  idea  of  regular  'staff'  meetings  might  be  worthy 
of  trial,  but  after  a  few  such  'trials,'  his  interest  in  the  idea  (never  very 
keen)  simply  evaporated.  .  .  .  Mr.  MacDonald  was  averse  to  the  employment 
of  most  of  the  devices  now  so  highly  esteemed  by  so-called  'management  con- 
sultants.' He  had  no  interest  in  'Suggestion  Boxes,'  or  the  offering  of  pecu- 
niary rewards  for  employee  suggestions.  If  there  was  overlapping  of  the 
responsibilities  of  the  several  divisions  of  the  organization  or  laclc  of  clarifi- 
cation of  the  definition  of  individual  or  organic  duties,  he  didn't  worry  much 
about  it.  As  he  seemed  to  have  little  or  no  concern  about  his  own  salary,  he 
expected  a  similar  avoidance  of  anything  like  a  request  for  a  raise  on  the 
part  of  every  employee.  Nothing  would  more  certainly  result  in  the  consign- 
ment of  any  member  of  the  organization  to  the  MacDonald  doghouse  than  to 
be  caught  agitating  for  an  increase  in  pay.  To  paraphrase  Lord  Nelson's 
famous  order  the  simple  rule  was :  The  Bureau  expects  that  every  man  this 
day  will  do  his  duty.  And  by  and  large,  by  golly,  they  did.  The  Bureau 
enjoyed  an  e.sprit  de  corps  that  many  a  'scientifically  managed'  organization 
of  these  days  couldn't  purchase  with  all  the  so-called  incentives  and  rewards 
that  the  ingenuity  of  the  doctors  of  management  science  can  devise. 

As  head  of  the  Bureau,  Mr.  MacDonald  was  called  upon  to  participate 
as  a  speaker  on  many  occasions,  be  it  at  a  congressional  hearing,  a  semi- 
nar, or  an  after  dinner  speech.  Yet  in  34  years  of  public  speaking,  the 
Chief  never  developed  a  reputation  for  an  eloquent  style,  and  it  seems 
for  good  reason.  Yet  at  all  these  occasions,  though  his  style  was  not 
eloquent,  it  was,  more  importantly,  effective.  Again,  as  Mr.  Fairbank 
commented, 

His  public  speeches,  especially  those  before  the  AASHO  were  so  heavily 
factual  and  dry  as  to  impose  a  serious  burden  upon  the  attentiveness  of  the 
audience.  These  speeches  he  almost  always  wrote  himself ;  and  he  often 
turned  from  his  written  text  to  interpolate  remarks  which  seemed  unnecessary 
and  which  usually  caused  both  the  speaker  and  the  audience  to  lose  the  thread 
of  what  he  had  been  saying.  But  when  all  this  has  been  said  the  fact  remains 
that  he  somehow  left  his  hearers  in  both  public  and  private  audiences  with  a 
sense  of  his  mastery  of  whatever  the  matter  was  that  was  under  discussion. 
He  was  outstandingly  effective  in  his  relations  with  Congressional  Committees 
and  individual  Congressmen  and  Senators,  often  by  patient  repetition  of  his 
recommendations  and  views  converting  to  their  support  those  who  initially 
opposed  or  even  ridiculed  them. 

The  Chief  retired  from  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  July  1951,  but 
at  the  request  of  President  Truman  stayed  on  as  interim  head  until 
March  31,  1953,  when  Francis  V.  duPont  assumed  the  position.  In  his 
retirement,  however,  the  Chief  continued  to  work  for  better  roads  and 
general  transportation  improvement  from  his  new  j)osition  as  distin- 
guished research  engineer  of  the  Transportation  Institute  of  Texas 
A  &  M  College.  He  saw  new  challenges  in  filling  the  gaps  that  existed 
in  the  knowledge  about  transportation.  Then,  on  April  7,  1957,  the 
Chief  quietly  passed  away. 

His  old  friend,  Pyke  Johnson,  gave  a  close,  personal  look  at  the  man, 
Thomas  H.  MacDonald,  in  an  article  he  wrote  at  the  time  of  the  Chief's 
death. 

A  quiet  and  modest  man,  a  man  of  few  intimates,  a  man  who  found  solace 
in  Bertrand  Russell,  Dr.  Toynbee,  Erie  Stanley  Gardner,  and  A.  Conan  Doyle, 
with  few  writers  in  between ;  a  Imsband,  a  father,  a  clief,  a  photographer,  a 
top  engineer  and  administrator,  a  statesman  who  built  an  enduring  monument 
to  himself  not  so  much  in  roads  and  bridges  as  in  the  lives  of  people. 

Few  knew  him.  But  those  few  knew  him  as  one  of  the  men  of  history, 
who  with  their  associates,  have  profoundly  affected  the  course  of  modern  life. 

Thomas  H.  MacDonald— The  Chief. 

179 


Herbert  Sinclair  Fairbank 


Shortly  after  Francis  V.  duPont  succeeded  Thomas  H.  MacDonald  as 
Commissioner  of  Public  Eoads  in  1953,  he  called  on  Deputy  Com- 
missioner for  Research  Fairbank  to  describe  the  Bureau's  research 
program.  Fairbank  assembled  his  Division  Chiefs  to  meet  the  new 
Commissioner  and  to  permit  each  to  explain  his  part  in  the  research 
effort.  Each  Division  Chief,  bavins:  ^own  up  in  the  Bureau  during 
the  34-year  tenure  of  Mr.  MacDonald,  must  have  approached  this  meet- 
ing with  the  new  Commissioner  with  considerable  trepidation,  and  so 
perhaps  did  Fairbank.  But  the  tension  initially  felt  in  the  atmosphere 
as  the  meeting  convened  was  soon  broken  when  duPont  asked  "Mr. 
Fairbank,  does  the  Bureau  engage  in  fundamental  or  practical  re- 
search?" and  Fairbank  replied,  "Oh,  practical  research — ^by  all  means, 
practical  research,"  and  duPont  responded,  "That's  good  to  hear,  for 
there's  no  point  in  doing  research  if  the  results  can't  be  applied." 

In  reality  the  Bureau's  research  program  went  far  beyond  the  usual 
narrow  definition  of  practical  research.  Fairbank  was  constantly  look- 
ing ahead  and  exploring  how  best  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  future  as  he 
and  his  associates  envisioned  them.  Yet  he  constantly  demanded  that 
the  product  of  this  exploratory  work  be  suitable  for  practical  applica- 
tion. If  any  program  ever  faced  the  need  to  anticipate  and  prepare  for 
practical  problems  resulting  from  rapidly  changing  conditions,  it  was 
the  highway  program.  And  more  than  anyone  else,  it  was  Fairbank 
whose  clear  vision  and  firm  hand  produced  the  basic  facts  needed  to 
guide  the  policies  and  determine  the  programs  and  methods  to  keep 
abreast  or  ahead  of  new  and  changing  demands  that  others  did  not 
foresee.  While  the  research  was  practical,  the  application  of  the  results 
was  fundamental  to  the  success  of  the  program. 

Fairbank's  career  spanned  virtually  the  entire  development  of  the 
modern  highway  system,  from  the  earliest  days  of  the  sand-clay  road 
to  the  authorization  of  the  Interstate  System,  and  in  all  stages  he  took 
a  personal  hand.  Graduating  with  a  civil  engineering  degree  from 
Cornell  University  in  1910,  he  joined  the  staff  of  the  then-Office  of 
Public  Roads  as  a  student  engineer,  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  Bureau's 
trainees,  and  was  assigned  to  the  Road  Improvement  Train. 

Carrying  road  construction  equipment  on  flat  cars  and  exhibits  and 
lectures  in  the  coaches,  the  purpose  of  the  train  was  to  encourage  the 
use  of  local  materials  and  labor  to  improve  access  from  farms  to  the 
freight  stations.  The  road  was  conceived  as  a  benefit  to  the  farmer  and 
the  railroad  alike.  So  in  this  period  Fairbank  became  a  "lecturer,"  and 
as  he  said,  could  deliver  his  lecture  in  his  sleep  as  the  train  stopped  at 
one  small  town  after  another  through  the  south  and  west. 

As  the  next  step  in  his  training,  Fairbank  built  object  lesson  roads 
to  demonstrate  rather  than  just  to  describe  the  roadbuilding  technique. 
One  assignment  was  on  Martha's  Vineyard,  where  the  technique  involved 
mixing  appropriate  amounts  of  sand  and  clay,  a  process  later  achieving 
wide  acceptance  in  other  sections  of  the  country.  By  virtue  of  his  innate 
reserve  and  dignity,  Fairbank  was  not  one  to  whom  a  nickname  would 
ordinarily  be  applied,  but  here  he  had  one.  The  young  engineer  and 
the  road  he  was  constructing  attracted  much  interest  among  a  colony 
of  deaf-mutes  on  the  island,  who  identified  him  by  pointing  with  a 
forefinger  three  times  in  quick  succession,  the  second  and  third  pointings 
each  being  some  six  inches  below  the  one  that  preceded.  His  name  in 
sign  language  was  "3  Buttons,"  reflective  of  a  fashionable  blue  blazer 
with  large  pearl  buttons  he  wore  when  not  on  duty. 

Following  his  early  training  and  engineering  assignments  and  service 
as  an  officer  in  the  Chemical  Warfare  Service  in  1918  and  1919,  he  was 
named  Editor  of  Public  Roads,  the  Bureau's  Journal  of  Highway  Re- 
search. This  was  a  particularly  fitting  assignment,  for  in  those  days 
and  for  many  years  thereafter,  the  editor  was  expected  to  be  not  only  a 
competent  handler  of  the  language  but  also  an  able  appraiser  of  the 
technical  soundness  of  the  reports  submitted  for  publication.    Since  at 


180 


that  time  research  was  virtually  all  related  to  physical  research,  and 
largely  to  soils,  and  since  Fairbank  was  far  and  away  the  finest  writer 
in  the  Bureau's  history,  he  was  eminently  qualified  on  both  counts. 
"Wliether  the  breadth  and  depth  of  his  ability  were  recognized  by  Chief 
MacDonald  at  the  time  or  whether  these  qualities  emerged  as  he  gained 
experience,  Fairbank  was  nonetheless  steadily  accepting  broader  respon- 
sibilities and  became  increasingly  valuable  to  the  Chief  in  the  policy 
area.  The  expanded  responsibilities  were  formally  recognized  in  1927 
when  he  was  made  Chief  of  the  new  Division  of  Information,  a  position 
he  held  until  1943  when  he  was  named  Deputy  Commissioner  for  Re- 
search, another  new  position  and  the  one  he  held  until  his  retirement. 
In  each  case,  the  title  reflected  the  expanding  responsibilities  that  had 
been  given  him  by  Chief  MacDonald,  and,  in  effect,  simply  provided  a 
formal  definition  of  his  area  of  concern. 

In  these  positions  Fairbank's  influence  was  broad  indeed,  though 
seldom  was  his  contribiition  to  knowledge  and  practice  identifiable  as 
his.  He  consistently  urged  othei's  to  carry  on  investigative  work  and 
saw  to  it  that  resources  necessary  to  its  conduct  were  provided.  He 
insisted  on  thoroughness  and  accuracy  in  experiment,  in  analysis  and  in 
writing.  An  excellent  writer  himself,  an  ability  no  doubt  developed 
through  extensive  reading,  he  demanded  high  quality  on  the  part  of 
others  in  all  forms  of  writing.  Careful  indeed  must  be  the  drafter  of  a 
letter  for  his  signature,  for  the  words  not  only  must  mean  exactly  what 
was  intended,  but  could  not  be  construed  to  mean  anything  else.  A 
well-worn  eraser  and  an  equally  well-worn  dictionaiy  were  always  on 
his  desk — two  items,  incidentally,  that  his  successor  preserved  as  graphic 
reminders  to  himself  and  others  of  what  it  takes  to  be  a  good  writer. 

It  was  in  his  perception  of  the  needs  of  the  future  and  his  organiza- 
tion of  research  to  prepare  to  meet  them  that  he  made  his  outstanding, 
though  generally  anonymous,  contributions.  "V^liile  he  built  roads  to 
link  the  farm  and  the  railroad,  he  early  foresaw  the  linkage  of  roads 
themselves  into  systems.  "While  roads  were  being  designed  for  static 
wheel  loads,  and  much  research  was  being  carried  on  to  this  end,  he  was 
urging  and  organizing  investigations  to  study  the  effect  of  impact  and 
dynamic  loading.  While  the  geometries  of  the  road  were  being  designed 
for  the  characteristics  of  individual  vehicles,  he  was  supporting  research 
in  the  geometry  of  mixed  traffic.  In  the  area  of  economics,  even  before 
benefit-cost  comparisons  of  specific  projects  were  generally  accepted,  he 
had  encouraged  investigation  of  how  economic  analysis  might  be  ap- 
plied to  the  design  of  systems.  And  even  before  that  idea  became  ac- 
cepted, he  was  writing  that  social,  environmental  and  land  use  factors 
might  assume  more  importance  than  user  costs  and  benefits.  Wliile 
intercity  and  rural  highway  problems  still  occupied  nearly  the  full 
attention  of  highway  officials,  it  was  Fairbank  who  foresaw  the  prob- 
lems of  highways  in  urban  areas,  problems  that  have  since  developed 
but  could  have  been  avoided  had  his  early  warnings  been  heeded.  In 
short,  when  an  idea's  time  finally  came,  when  it  became  generally  ac- 
cepted, the  Bureau,  thanks  to  Fairbank,  generally  was  ready. 

Certain  areas  were  distinctly  identifiable  as  Fairbank's,  however. 
The  Bureau  library,  one  of  the  most  complete  highway  transportation 
libraries  in  the  world,  bore  his  stamp.  Likewise,  an  exhibit  section  to 
which  he  gave  his  personal  touch  produced  many  instructive  and  pro- 
motional exhibits  for  display  throughout  the  country.  A  series  of 
paintings  depicting  "Highways  of  History"  were  produced  in  the  1930's, 
and  they  were  reassembled  for  a  Bicentennial  exhibit.  A  well-equipped 
photo  laboratory,  staffed  with  skilled  photographers,  produced  slides  and 
movies  describing  the  results  of  research.  Unfortunately,  in  the  name 
of  good  administration  and  economy,  these  functions  were  lost  to  the 
Bureau  as  they  were  taken  over  by  one  or  another  "pai'ent"  organization 
as  the  Bureau  moved  from  one  to  another  in  successive  reorganizations, 
and  their  effectiveness  as  an  arm  of  research  was  largely  lost. 

Of  the  many  areas  of  his  broad  interest,  the  one  most  distinctly  iden- 
tifiable as  Fairbank's  was  the  highway  planning  surveys.  The  breadth 
and  depth  of  this  activity  is  described  elsewhere,  so  suffice  it  to  say  that 
for  perhaps  a  year  before  the  first  field  work  was  started  in  1935, 
Fairbank  had  personally  overseen  the  preparation  of  forms  and  manuals 

181 


of  instruction  for  every  phase  of  the  program.  So  clearly  did  he  per- 
ceive not  only  the  need  for  data,  but  the  detail  in  which  they  should  be 
collected  and  recorded,  that  only  minimal  changes  were  required  as  the 
procedures  were  introduced  into  field  operations.  Of  course,  as  new 
equipment  came  on  the  scene,  as  mapmaking  and  reproduction  processes 
advanced  and  statistical  science  developed,  the  early  manuals  and  pro- 
cedures were  correspondingly  updated,  but  the  basic  format  never  was 
changed. 

"\¥hile  the  facts  assembled  in  the  surveys  eventually  formed  the  base 
of  planning  and  programing  of  all  State  highway  departments,  no  use 
of  the  data  was  more  effective  or  significant  than  their  use,  under 
Fairbank's  direction  and  guidance,  in  forming  national  highway  policy. 
As  the  author,  again  anonymously,  of  Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads  and 
Interregional  Highioays  and  subsequently  in  directing  the  organization 
of  planning  data  for  the  Clay  Committee  and  the  Committees  of  Con- 
gress, Fairbank  saw  the  realization  of  his  1934  vision  in  the  authoriza- 
tion of  the  National  System  of  Interstate  Highways  in  1944  and  the 
start  of  its  construction  under  the  1956  Act.  He  himself  must  have 
regarded  the  conception,  birth  and  maturity  of  highway  planning  as 
his  prime  contribution,  for  in  his  own  words  appearing  in  Who''s  Who 
in  America  he  accorded  that  function  more  prominence  than  any  other 
of  the  many  national  and  international  contributions  he  listed. 

Two  other  areas  distinctly  bore  Fairbank's  mark.  One  was  research 
in  highway  economics  and  finance,  an  area  in  which  it  was  particularly 
difficult  to  interest  State  highway  officials  and  administrators.  He 
pushed  hard  to  develop  research  programs  in  this  area,  setting  up  a  new 
division  in  his  Office  of  Research  for  the  purpose,  and  organizing  and 
serving  as  Chairman  of  the  Department  of  Economics,  Finance,  and 
Administration  of  the  Highway  Research  Board. 

Another  area  to  which  Fairbank  gave  personal  and  identifiable  atten- 
tion was  the  broad  problem  of  deterioration  of  road  surfaces  brought 
about  by  the  great  increase  in  heavy  axle  loads.  He  early  believed  that 
failure  of  road  surfaces  was  caused  as  much  by  the  high  frequency  of 
heavy  loads  still  within  the  legal  limits  as  by  the  illegal  loads.  He 
believed  that  frequently  repeated  load  applications  caused  fatigue  and 
failure  in  concrete  and  organized  university  research  projects  to  test 
and  eventually  to  substantiate  this  concept. 

To  discover  the  effect  of  fatigue  was  one  thing,  but  to  convince  others 
of  its  importance  was  another.  As  an  illustration,  Fairbank  resorted 
to  the  eraser  on  his  desk.  While  he  would  describe  the  research  and 
portray  the  results  before  a  group,  he  would  show  them  he  could  bend 
the  eraser  double  without  its  cracking.  But,  as  he  continued  to  talk,  he 
would  continue  to  flex  the  eraser  not  to  a  180-degree  bend,  but  only 
perhaps  45  to  60  degrees,  and  before  long  a  crack  would  appear  and 
soon  the  eraser  would  break  in  half,  indeed  a  graphic  analogy  even  if 
perhaps  not  convincing  to  a  highway  engineer  that  the  phenomenon 
would  apply  to  a  concrete  slab.  Incidentally,  Fairbank  would  later  use 
each  half  of  the  eraser  for  its  intended  purpose — revising  the  first  drafts 
of  his  writings. 

Acceptance  of  the  theory  was  of  little  value,  however,  unless  the 
phenomenon  could  be  quantified,  and  here  the  Highway  Transport 
Committee  of  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
entered  the  picture,  organizing,  through  the  Highway  Research  Board, 
the  first  of  a  series  of  full-scale  road  tests,  using  an  existing  recently 
constructed  concrete  road  in  Maryland.  As  chairman  of  the  Committee 
and  as  head  of  research  in  Public  Roads,  Fairbank  entered  strenuously 
into  the  conduct  of  that  test  and  the  analysis  of  its  results,  the  details 
of  which  are  described  elsewhere  in  this  history.  Peculiarities  in  the 
rate  of  deterioration  of  different  sections  of  the  test  road  led  to  the 
discovery  of  a  serious  lack  of  uniformity  of  the  specified  subbase  and, 
in  turn,  led  Fairbank  to  insist  on  trenching  both  sides  of  the  road  for 
its  entire  length  in  an  effort  to  explain  the  variations  in  performance, 
an  example  of  his  thoroughness  as  a  researcher.  Finally,  while  the 
next  in  the  series  of  tests  was  being  prepared,  he  personally'  oversaw 
the  development  of  motion  picture  and  exhibit  material  to  be  shown 


182 


before  State  legislatures  and  other  groups  to  promote  the  concept  of 
coordination  between  highway  design  and  traffic  regulation  and  the 
need  for  strict  adherences  to  load  limits. 

The  series  of  tests  culminated  in  the  AASHO  Road  Test  in  Illinois 
where  the  statistically  designed  experiment  produced  the  data  that  per- 
mitted the  development  of  performance  equations  that  showed,  with 
great  precision,  the  effect  of  frequency  of  application  as  well  as  the 
magnitude  of  axle  loads.  Thus,  his  concept  was  completely  validated 
and,  after  his  departure  from  the  scene,  quantified  to  permit  its  appli- 
cation in  highway  design.  It  was  the  product  of  i^ractical  research  of 
fundamental  importance,  however  it  may  have  been  defined. 

Fairbank  accepted  the  almost  invariable  success  of  his  efforts  with 
modesty,  almost  as  though  he  had  but  a  small  part  in  them,  so  it  was 
unfortunate  that  he  took  so  deeply  to  heart  what  he  regarded  as  a  fail- 
ure, one  which  in  his  mind  overshadowed  all  his  contributions.  As  he 
saw  it,  he  failed  to  stop  the  pi'oliferation  of  toll  roads  in  the  early 
1950's.  Along  with  Chief  MacDonald,  he  opposed  the  toll  road  not 
simply  as  a  matter  of  Federal-aid  law  and  policy,  but  on  principle. 
He  wrote  and  spoke  against  toll  financing,  emphasizing  that  the  toll 
roads  with  their  widely  spaced  access  points  offered  only  limited  and 
specialized  service  and  that  the  short  trips,  overwhelming  in  number, 
must  still  be  accommodated  on  the  existing  or  expanded  systems.  He 
saw  duplication  of  facilities  in  individual  corridors  to  accommodate 
both  long  and  short  trips,  dual  charges  for  toll  road  users  and  revenues 
going  to  interest  payments  rather  than  to  mileage  or  maintenance  of 
road. 

Never  wavering  on  principle,  he  could  not  accept  the  political  reality 
that  the  quality  of  road — the  freeway — that  he  had  so  long  and  strongly 
advocated  could  not  then  be  produced  by  "conventional"  financing.  As 
he  saw  it,  he  went  down  fighting.  But  it  is  ironic  that  it  probably  was 
the  rapid  proliferation  of  the  toll  roads  more  than  any  other  single 
factor  that  convinced  the  American  public  that  it  wanted,  and  could 
have,  the  very  thing  Fairbank  had  so  long  advocated.  He  did  not  live 
to  see  the  near  completion  of  the  Interstate  System,  so  he  could  not 
know  that  the  battle  he  thought  he'd  lost  was  but  a  temporary  setback, 
that  the  magnificent  system  he  had  envisioned  as  much  as  40  years 
earlier  would  become  a  reality,  and  in  the  minds  of  many,  his  monument. 

Along  the  way  he  received  many  awards.  Almost  automatically  he 
received  the  Bartlett  Award  and  the  Crum  Award,  and  when  the 
MacDonald  Award  was  established  by  AASHO,  Fairbank,  then  in  re- 
tirement, became  the  first  recipient. 

The  recognition  he  would  have  most  appreciated,  however,  came  after 
his  death  when  the  research  laboratory  at  Langley,  Virginia,  was  named 
in  his  honor  the  Herbert  S.  Fairbank  Research  Station.  It  can  be  hoped 
that  within  its  bounds  there  will  always  be  the  talent,  resources,  and 
time  to  carry  on  research  with  the  thoroughness  he  always  imposed  on 
himself  in  his  own  work. 

An  educated  man,  Fairbank  was  a  lover  of  literature,  a  scholar,  an 
engineer,  totally  honest,  dignified,  modest,  retiring,  friendly — all  these 
terms  fit.  Never  married,  he  lived  in  Baltimore,  in  later  years  with  his 
sister  to  whom  he  was  devoted,  and  commuted  daily  the  40  miles  each 
way  to  Washington. 

He  was  a  genuinely  friendly  man,  but  he  had  few  close  friends,  and 
he  found  it  difficult  to  get  on  casual  or  familiar  terms  with  his  asso- 
ciates. Much  as  did  the  British,  he  referred  to  people  generally  by 
their  surnames,  and  one  whom  he  eventually  called  by  his  first  name 
felt  honored  indeed.  Likewise,  he  was  always  referred  to  as  Fairbank 
or  Mr.  Fairbank,  and  relatively  few  felt  comfortable  in  referring  to 
him  as  Fairbank  in  his  presence.  To  a  few  friends  outside  the  Bureau, 
mostly  in  Baltimore,  he  was  known  as  Herb.  Yet  despite  this  reserve, 
he  was  a  better  friend  to  some  in  need  than  perhaps  they  realized. 

Totally  dedicated  to  the  organization  and  to  his  profession,  he  had 
few  outside  interests.  Each  year  he  took  his  vacation  (he,  like  the 
British,  called  it  his  holiday)  with  his  sister,  often  spending  time  in 
Vermont's  Green  Mountains  and  occasionally  taking  a  trip  abroad.    It 

183 


was  on  their  last  holiday  in  Italy  that  he  contracted  an  illness  that  was 
never  diagnosed  and  from  which  he  never  fully  recovered,  and  ulti- 
mately it  led  to  his  retirement. 

His  leadership  was  by  example,  and  none  who  worked  with  him  could 
fail  to  try  to  follow.  He  encouraged  the  younger  members  of  his  staff 
to  take  the  initiative  and  gave  them  responsibility  as  rapidly  as  they 
could  accept  it.  He  saw  to  it  that  their  contributions  were  recognized 
and,  to  the  extent  possible,  rewarded.  He  never  thought  of  his  sub- 
ordinates as  working  for  him,  but  with  him,  and  referred  to  them  as 
his  colleagues.  But  his  closest  colleagues  would  probably  be  more  ac- 
curately defined  as  disciples. 

What  kind  of  man  was  he?  He  was  a  gentleman,  in  the  truest  sense 
of  the  word.    He  was  a  man  for  his  time. 


184 


Francis  Cutler  Turner 


Francis  Cutler  Turner,  "Frank"  to  his  many  fi'iends  and  associates, 
Administrator  of  the  Federal  Highway  Administration  from  February 
24,  1969,  to  June  30,  1972,  is  the  only  Chief  Executive  of  the  organiza- 
tion and  its  predecessor,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  who  spent  his 
entire  professional  career  in  that  organization.  Turner  graduated  in 
1929  from  the  Texas  Agricultural  &  Mechanical  College,  now  Texas 
A  &  M  University,  and  joined  the  Division  of  Management  of  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  as  a  junior  highway  engineer  immediately 
upon  graduation.  He  was  assigned  to  field  service  in  the  Bureau's 
research  program  in  what  was  then  called  the  Division  of  Management. 
He  was  one  of  a  small  group  of  college  graduates  selected  each  year  to 
enter  a  training  program  involving  the  field  study  of  construction 
methods  (time  and  motion  study  work)  designed  to  reduce  the  costs  of 
highway  construction.  From  this  small  group  of  young  engineers  were 
to  come  an  astonishing  number  of  future  leaders  of  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads.  The  nature  of  their  work  taught  them  to  question  con- 
struction procedures  then  current,  to  be  innovative,  resourceful,  to  re- 
spond to  change,  and  to  make  every  effort  to  obtain  moi'e  road  for  less 
cost  by  expanding  production,  for  it  must  be  remembered  that  highway 
engineering  as  we  know  it  now  was  in  its  infancy  in  1929. 

Turner  was  transferred  in  1933  from  this  type  of  work  to  what  is 
now  the  Arkansas  Division  office  at  Little  Rock,  where  he  was  an  area 
engineer  responsible  for  the  Federal-aid  highway  program  in  a  portion 
of  that  State.  Here  he  became  interested  in  the  performance  of  main- 
tenance operations  and  wrote  a  thesis  on  maintenance  of  highways  as 
affected  by  the  type  and  physical  characteristics  of  base  and  subgrade 
soils,  which  was  accepted  by  Texas  A  &  M  as  the  basis  for  a  graduate 
Civil  Engineering  degree  in  1940. 

In  that  same  year.  Turner  was  transferred  to  the  Division  of  Con- 
struction (now  Office  of  Engineering)  in  the  Washington,  D.C.,  office 
and  a  year  later  was  reassigned  to  what  is  now  the  Region  3  office,  then 
located  in  Washington,  D.C.  Here  he  worked  on  construction  and 
maintenance  and  the  many  wartime  special  projects  dealing  with  defense 
access  roads,  flight  strips,  materials  allocations,  the  inventory  of  trucks 
and  buses,  and  many  other  new  and  special  activities  related  to  the  war 
effort.  In  1943,  his  expertise  in  maintenance  and  his  initiative  and 
leadership  were  recognized,  and  he  was  sent  to  the  Alaska  highway 
project  as  an  expediter  by  Commissioner  Thomas  H.  MacDonald.  Dur- 
ing his  Alaska  assignment  he  pioneered  highway  location,  using  aerial 
reconnaissance.  When  the  Alaska  highway  was  completed,  Mr.  Mac- 
Donald  assigned  him  to  stay  on  the  project  and  work  first  with  the 
War  Department  and  later  with  the  Canadian  and  Territorial  Govern- 
ments to  organize  maintenance  activities  and  procedures.  He  did  not 
return  to  the  United  States  until  the  latter  part  of  1946,  the  last  man 
to  leave  the  Alaska  highway  project,  and  then  on  his  return  to  Wash- 
ington, he  was  met  with  the  news  that  he  had  been  selected  to  head  a 
mission  to  the  Philippines  to  restore  the  war-damaged  roads  and  bridges 
and  to  organize  and  train  a  highway  organization  in  that  country,  a 
program  authorized  by  the  Congress  under  the  Philippine  Rehabilita- 
tion Act  of  1946. 

Turner  went  to  Manila  in  December  1946  and  found  an  almost  hope- 
less mission  confronting  him.  Public  Roads  engineers,  whom  he  needed 
to  staff  the  project,  for  the  most  part  had  only  recently  returned  from 
the  war  and  had  no  desire  for  further  foreign  service.  Furthermore, 
there  were  no  living  accommodations  in  Manila  suitable  for  families, 
and  unless  their  families  could  go,  the  engineers  were  not  interested. 
Upon  arrival  in  Manila,  Turner  attacked  this  staffing  problem  with  his 
customary  zeal  and  enthusiasm.  Eight  other  U.S.  Government  agencies 
had  missions  in  Manila  with  similar  complications,  and  by  common 
consent,  Turner  became  spokesman  for  the  group  and  eventually  was 
designated  by  the  American  Embassy  in  Manila  to  solve  the  problem. 


185 


This  involved  a  return  to  Washington,  consultations  with  the  Depart- 
ment of  State  and  the  Office  of  the  President,  and  the  final  result  of 
Turner's  efforts  was  the  assignment  of  the  Naval  Headquarters  com- 
pound in  Manila,  the  Sea  Frontier,  to  the  agencies  for  housing  and 
headquarters  offices.  Once  staffed.  Turner  turned  his  attention  to  pro- 
curing steel  and  equipment,  employing  a  Filipino  staff  for  training,  and 
preparing  plans  for  the  bridge  replacement  program.  As  rapidly  as 
the  Philippine  Bureau  of  Public  Works  could  be  staffed  and  reorganized 
to  accept  responsibility  for  the  work,  it  was  shifted  to  them.  Once 
again  he  demonstrated  innovation  and  ingenuity  by  refitting  a  naval 
landing  craft,  an  LCI,  first  as  a  survey  ship  to  reach  remote  islands  and 
later  as  a  floating  school  for  training  Filipino  engineers  in  highway 
techniques  throughout  the  archipelago.  In  1949,  he  was  transferred, 
temporarily,  to  the  American  Embassy  to  coordinate  all  the  rehabilita- 
tion programs  of  the  nine  U.S.  Government  agencies.  His  thoughtful- 
ness,  his  courtesy,  his  consideration  for  others,  and  the  high  regard  in 
which  he  was  held  by  the  Philippine  Government  made  the  assignment 
a  highly  successful  one.  His  contribution  to  the  Philippines  was  recog- 
nized by  that  Government's  making  him  a  member  of  the  Legion  of 
Honor  (Officer  Grade)  in  1951. 

Turner  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1950  to  become  assistant  to 
the  Commissioner,  Thomas  H.  MacDonald.  In  this  capacity  he  coordi- 
nated the  work  on  the  Inter-American  Highway  and  the  many  foreign 
missions  engaged  in  highway  activities  in  Ethiopia,  Turkey,  the  Philip- 
pines, Liberia  and  many  others,  as  well  as  taking  on  many  special  as- 
signments. Here  he  brought  into  play  his  tremendous  capacity  for 
work — a  14-  to  18-hour  day  was  not  unusual  for  him — and  his  extra- 
ordinary memory  for  detail.  He  had  the  ability  to  retain  in  his  mind 
everything  that  he  read  and  recall  it  months  later. 

In  1954,  President  Eisenhower  appointed  the  President's  Advisory 
Committee  on  the  National  Highway  Program,  and  Turner  was  ap- 
pointed Executive  Secretary  for  the  Committee.  At  that  time,  the 
highway  program  was  at  a  crossroads  with  many  influential  voices 
seeking  to  establish  a  National  System  of  Toll  Highways.  One  of  the 
responsibilities  of  this  Committee  was  to  recommend  whether  to  make 
the  system,  so  obviously  needed,  toll  or  free.  Turner  worked  unceas- 
ingly to  place  before  the  Committee  all  aspects  of  the  problem,  and  it 
was  largely  due  to  his  influence  upon  the  Committee  members  that  the 
decision  was  to  recommend  a  National  System  of  Interstate  and  Defense 
Highways  to  be  financed  in  part  by  Federal  excise  taxes  on  automotive 
equipment,  parts  and  fuel  set  up  in  a  Trust  Fund  and  in  part  by  match- 
ing funds  supplied  by  the  States.  Upon  conclusion  of  the  Committee 
report.  Turner  worked  in  liaison  with  the  several  congressional  com- 
mittees to  convince  them  of  the  soundness  of  the  recommendations  and 
the  need  for  the  program.  More  than  any  other  single  individual,  he 
may  be  said  to  be  the  "Father"  of  the  Interstate  Highway  System. 
During  his  contacts  with  these  committees,  he  again  exhibited  endless 
patience,  sound  reasoning  and  disregard  of  personal  acclaim  that  had 
always  distinguished  his  career. 

About  this  time,  a  highly  placed  departmental  official  came  into  office 
who  obviously  had  been  directed  to  liquidate  the  highway  oi'ganization 
or  to  severely  diminish  its  activities  and  influence.  As  he  worked  closely 
with  Turner,  it  became  obvious  also  that  his  viewpoint  was  changing, 
and  he  became  one  of  the  strongest  advocates  of  the  organization  and 
its  responsibilities.  Later  he  told  one  of  his  staff,  "I  decided  that  if  an 
organization  could  pi'oduce  a  man  like  Frank  Turner,  there  had  to  be 
some  good  in  it,  and  I'd  better  take  a  real  close  look  at  it  before  I  made 
any  changes." 

From  1957  to  1967,  Turner  served  as  Deputy  Commissioner  and  Chief 
Engineer  for  Public  Roads,  and  upon  his  shoulders  fell  the  major  re- 
sponsibility for  implementation  of  the  legislation  that  had  established 
the  Interstate  Highway  System  and  provided  for  its  funding.  The 
difficulties  and  complexities  of  this  challenge  ai'e  discussed  in  other 
places  in  this  liistory  but  tlie  experience  that  he  had  gained  in  drafting 
the  original  legislation  that  had  established  the  program  stood  in  good 


186 


stead  in  discussing  the  problems  that  arose  as  the  program  proo^essed 
with  the  interested  congressional  committees  and  leaders  and  in  resolv- 
ing individual  problems  as  they  presented  themselves. 

Turner  never  lost  his  interest  in  and  enthusiasm  for  the  role  of  the 
United  States  in  technical  assistance  in  highways  for  foreign  countries. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  U.S.  Delegation  to  the  5th  Pan-American 
Highway  Conference  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1951,  to  the  Extraordinary 
Session  in  Mexico  City  in  1952,  and  to  the  6th  Conference  in  Caracas, 
Venezuela,  in  1954.  He  was  the  Chief  of  the  U.S.  Delegation  at  the 
10th  Pan-American  Highway  Congress  in  Montevideo,  Uruguay,  iu 
1967,  the  11th  Pan-American  Highway  Congress  in  Quito.  Ecuador,  in 
1971,  and  Chief  of  the  U.S.  Highway  Exchange  Delegation  to  the 
Soviet  Union  in  1961.  His  contributions  and  his  leadership  in  the  field 
of  transportation  wei'e  attested  by  silver  and  gold  meritorious  awards 
by  the  Department  of  Commerce  in  1954  and  1956;  by  the  Thomas  H. 
MacDonald  Award  of  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials  in  1962;  by  the  George  S.  Bartlett  Award  of  the  American 
Eoad  Builders'  Association  in  1965;  by  the  Gold  Medal  Award  for 
Outstanding  Achievement  from  the  Department  of  Transportation  in 
1970;  by  the  Special  Secretarial  Medal  and  Award  in  1972;  by  the  Koy 
W.  Crum  Award  of  the  Highway  Research  Board  in  1969;  by  the  Neil 
J.  Curry  Award  for  Leadership  in  Highway  Transportation  in  1970 
of  the  Highway  Users  Federation ;  and  by  the  James  Laurie  prize  for 
leadership  in  highway  transportation  of  the  American  Society  of  Civil 
Engineers  in  1971.  He  received  recognition  from  the  Engineering 
Neics-Record  as  the  Construction  Man  of  the  Year  in  1967  and  1970, 
and  the  World  Highway  Man  of  the  Year  by  the  International  Road 
Federation,  presented  by  Emperor  Haile  Selassie  in  Addis  Ababa  in 
1969.  Of  unusual  interest  is  the  fact  that  he  was  selected  as  a  Distin- 
guished Alumnus  by  two  universities — Texas  A  &  M  University  where 
he  was  graduated  in  1929,  and  the  University  of  Texas  at  Arlington 
where  he  took  his  first  2  years  when  it  was  a  Junior  College.  In  1974, 
he  was  elected  an  Honorary  Life  Member  of  the  American  Society  of 
Civil  Engineers. 

On  February  27,  1967,  his  appointment  as  Director  of  Public  Roads 
was  confirmed  by  the  United  States  Senate  and  he  served  in  that  ca- 
pacity until  February  24,  1969,  when  he  was  confirmed  by  unanimous 
consent  by  the  Senate  as  Federal  Highway  Administrator.  He  served 
with  distinction  in  this  capacity  until  his  retirement  on  June  30,  1972. 

Frank  Turner's  entire  career  was  marked  by  his  professional  ability, 
his  sincerity,  integrity,  modesty,  charm  and  love  of  his  fellow  man. 
During  the  most  pressing  technical  problems,  he  could  and  did  take 
time  out  to  concern  himself  with  whether  the  wife  of  a  member  of  his 
staff  had  enough  doors  in  her  newly  assigned  house  to  make  her  happy. 
His  calmness  under  pressure  was  remarkable;  no  one  ever  saw  him 
excited,  flustered  or  angry.  Although  basically  a  serious  man,  he  pos- 
sesses a  puckish  wit  that  springs  forth  when  least  expected.  From  a 
rather  monotonous,  hesitant  public  speaker  in  his  younger  days,  he 
became  an  urbane,  accomplished  and  witty  after  dinner  speaker.  His 
world  has  been  centered  around  his  family,  his  work,  and  his  church. 
The  American  people  owe  an  undying  vote  of  gratitude  to  Francis 
Cutler  Turner  for  his  lifetime  of  dedicated  public  service,  his  strong 
unerring  leadership,  and  his  determination  to  obtain  a  dollar's  worth 
of  road  for  every  dollar  of  tax  money  spent. 


187 


Joseph  Barnett 


The  belief  that  highways  should  be  pleasing  to  the  eye  and  compatible 
with  the  environment  was  a  new  idea  when  a  foresighted  engineer 
named  Joseph  Barnett  joined  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  1933.  By 
the  time  he  retired  33  years  later  as  Deputy  Director  for  Engineering, 
Barnett  had  made  good  visual  design  a  hallmark  of  American  high- 
ways. His  dedication  to  his  work,  his  forceful  pursuit  of  engineering 
principles  and  his  extensive  and  lucid  technical  publications  played  a 
key  role  in  the  development  of  today's  highway  policies.  He  was  a 
pioneer  in  the  standardization  of  geometric  design — design  of  the  visible 
features  of  a  road;  he  advocated,  long  before  it  was  fashionable,  a  bal- 
anced transportation  system  to  eliminate  urban  traffic  congestion;  and 
he  developed  the  principles  of  controlled  access  in  modern  highway 
construction. 

Barnett  was  born  January  1,  1897,  on  the  lower  east  side  of  Manhattan 
and  attended  public  schools.  At  the  age  of  16  he  received  a  scholarship 
to  Cooper  Union  Institute  and  graduated  with  a  B.S.  in  civil  engineer- 
ing at  19.  After  serving  a  year  as  an  ensign  in  the  U.S.  Navy,  he 
worked  for  consulting  firms  in  the  field  of  structural  design  and  build- 
ing construction  and  with  the  city  of  New  York  in  the  area  of  city 
transit  design. 

In  1925  he  went  to  work  for  the  Westchester  County  Park  Commis- 
sion, taking  part  in  the  pioneering  development  of  the  first  parkways 
and  expressways  in  the  New  York  metropolitan  area.  He  moved  from 
squad  leader  in  structural  design  to  chief  of  the  Engineering  Design 
Division.  In  these  assignments  he  obtained  unique  experience  in  high- 
way flowing  alinement,  parkway  amenities,  free  traffic  operation  and 
controlled  highway  access  which  were  to  become  the  key  features  of 
Interstate  highway  design  in  years  to  come. 

Barnett  joined  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  (BPR)  as  Senior  High- 
way Engineer,  Division  of  Design,  where  his  engineering  experience 
was  put  to  use  in  a  series  of  special  assignments.  During  the  first  2 
years,  he  directed  the  design  of  the  George  Washington  Memorial 
Parkway  on  the  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac  River  from  Memorial 
Bridge  to  Great  Falls. 

Barnett  is  remembered  by  his  colleagues  as  having  a  tremendous 
sense  of  purpose  and  a  terrific  power  of  concentration.  By  the  mid- 
1930's  he  was  applying  himself  to  a  new  idea  in  highway  construction — 
standardization  of  design. 

He  first  brought  order  into  the  design  of  guardrail  types  then  avail- 
able and  set  standards  for  adequacy  and  use  of  the  types  subsequently 
developed.  He  then  organized  a  countrywide  study  of  speed-radius- 
superelevation  on  existing  highway  curves.  Analysis  of  the  data  led 
to  a  new  standard  for  superelevation  design  in  relation  to  vehicle  speed 
and  the  friction  factors. 

Knowing  that  better  highway  designs  resulted  from  spiral  or  transi- 
tion curves,  Barnett  worked  out  a  set  of  practical  spiral  curve  design 
tables  that  could  be  used  by  field  survey  engineers  with  calculations  no 
more  involved  than  those  required  for  simple  radii  curves.  His  curve 
design  manual.  Transition  Curves  for  Highways,  was  first  published  in 
1938.  It  has  been  reprinted  several  times,  translated  into  Spanish,  re- 
computed to  the  metric  system,  and  is  still  used  extensively  both  here 
and  abroad  by  highway  design  professionals. 

Barnett  was  named  Secretary  of  the  Committee  on  Planning  and 
Design  Policies  of  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
(AASHO)  from  its  inception  in  1937  until  his  retirement  at  the  end 
of  1966.  This  Committee  profoundly  influenced  the  design  of  safe  and 
efficient  highways.  The  scope  of  the  series  of  AASHO  standards,  poli- 
cies, and  guides  developed  by  the  Committee  attest  to  Barnett's  leader- 
ship and  unique  qualifications  for  the  innovative  development  work. 
Collectively  these  writings  showed  his  attributes  in  several  forms: 
analyses  of  the  subject  item  to  derive  major  design  principles;  details 


188 


and  values  in  a  form  for  direct  iise  by  designers;  clear,  simply-worded 
texts;  sound  judgment  in  practical  control  and  guide  values;  and  advice 
for  flexible,  thoughtful  applications  to  produce  better  designs.  As  each 
separate  subject  was  completed,  it  was  adopted  and  published  by 
AASHO  and  accepted  by  BPR  for  use  on  Federal-aid  highway  projects. 
The  first  seven  subject  brochures  established  the  concepts  of  highway 
design  and  were  combined  into  one  publication  in  1950  entitled  Policies 
on  Geometric  Highioay  Design.  Subsequent  expansions  in  1954  and 
1965  entitled  A  Policy  on  Geometric  Design  of  Rural  Highivays,  popu- 
larly Icnown  as  "The  Blue  Book,"  have  been  put  into  iise  on  highway 
programs  of  all  agencies,  including  those  in  foreign  countries.  A  second 
major  work  produced  by  the  Committee  was  A  Policy  on  Ar'terial 
Highways  in  Urhan  Areas,  published  in  1957  and  known  as  "The  Red 
Book."  The  advent  of  the  Interstate  System  opened  other  new  areas, 
and  the  1956  Interstate  standards  were  prepared  based  on  the  Commit- 
tee's earlier  work.  These  policies  on  highway  design  matters  have  been 
widely  accepted  by  engineers  in  governmental  and  private  practice. 

Between  1941  and  1943,  Barnett  headed  a  special  BPR  design  team 
that  rapidly  developed  contract  plans  for  the  main  roads,  interchanges 
and  highway  structures  made  necessary  by  the  construction  of  the 
Pentagon  building  in  Arlington,  Virginia.  The  roads  and  bridges 
around  the  Pentagon  were  designed  and  constructed  in  less  than  2  years. 
This  interconnected  system  of  freeways  provided  flexible  connections 
to  the  building,  the  three  Potomac  River  bridges  and  several  Virginia 
arterials.  They  served  through  and  local  traffic  needs  well  until  the 
steadily  increasing  traffic  volume  of  the  1960's  overtaxed  them. 

On  February  14,  1950,  Barnett  was  presented  the  Commerce  Depart- 
ment's Silver  Medal  Award  for  outstanding  contributions  to  the  devel- 
opment of  urban  roads,  including  the  design  of  the  Pentagon  road 
network. 

After  completing  this  task,  Barnett,  always  a  hard  worker,  was  given 
the  responsibility  of  establishing  an  Urban  Roads  Branch  to  administer 
highway  construction  in  urban  areas  under  provisions  of  the  1944 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act.  This  was  a  new,  open  field  inasmuch  as 
most  State  highway  departments  only  had  rural  programs.  Barnett 
spearheaded  the  Federal  assistance  to  establish  State  urban  divisions 
and  to  advise  them  on  the  planning,  location  and  design  of  urban  ex- 
pressways and  other  arterials.  In  this  context,  he  addressed  engineering 
groups,  joined  in  conferences  on  specific  route  problems,  prepared 
papers,  and  directed  the  development  of  design  policies  and  guides. 

In  his  key  Federal  position,  Barnett  was  also  busy  at  this  time  devel- 
oping and  applying  the  principles  of  controlled  access  which  he  had 
absorbed  during  his  Westchester  County  experience.  The  early  park- 
ways demonstrated  the  multiple  advantages  of  controlled  access,  not 
only  in  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  traffic  operations,  but  also  in  the 
opportunities  for  developing  esthetic  facilities  well-fitted  to  their  sur- 
roundings. Barnett  stressed  controlled  access  as  a  practical  tool  to 
relieve  urban  congestion  at  a  time  when  rush  hour  traffic  jams  were 
becoming  a  common  city  experience. 

In  1954  Barnett  was  assigned  broader  administrative  responsibilities 
as  Assistant  Deputy  Commissioner  for  the  Division  of  Engineering. 
He  was  sent  to  Istanbul  and  Ankara,  Turkey,  to  advise  that  country  on 
the  feasibility  of  a  bridge  across  the  Bosporus  and  an  arterial  highway 
system  for  Istanbul. 

In  1961  he  was  made  Deputy  Director  for  Engineering,  a  principal 
decisionmaker  on  Federal-aid  policy  relating  to  engineering  matters 
(which  included  the  eligibility  of  proposed  Avork  for  Federal-aid  funds), 
the  policy  application  on  special  problems,  and  conclusions  on  specific 
highway  section  design  features.  He  received  the  Gold  Medal  for  Dis- 
tinguished Federal  Service  in  1963  from  the  Department  of  Commerce. 

At  the  request  of  the  International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and 
Development  (World  Bank),  he  headed  a  mission  to  Japan  to  study 
and  report  on  the  feasibility  of  extending  the  Tokyo  Expressway  from 
Haneda  to  Yokohama. 

189 


Barnett  was  a  sensitive  man  with  a  dry  wit  who  "liked  to  call  a  spade 
a  spade." 

Even  after  retirement  in  December  1966,  Barnett  remained  active  as 
a  consultant  on  urban  highways.  He  joined  in  the  general  debate  on 
mass  transit  development  in  iirban  areas.  His  1970  paper  on  "Express 
Bus  Mass  Ti'ansit"  presented  a  review  of  the  various  forms  of  transit 
and  outlined  a  practical  concept  for  improving  service  through  ex- 
panded facilities. 

He  belonged  to  the  Tau  Beta  Pi  honorary  engineering  society  and  was 
an  active  member  of  the  American  Society  for  Civil  Engineers.  He 
received  the  ASCE  Arthur  M.  Wellington  Prize  in  1949.  Upon  his 
retirement  he  was  awarded  a  citation  by  AASHO. 

Until  his  death  in  Eoslyn,  New  York,  on  September  30,  1973,  he  be- 
lieved that  better  highways  can  and  should  be  produced  through  the 
design  process.  His  philosophy  was  that  clear  principles  and  guides 
should  be  formulated;  however,  their  application  should  not  be  by  rote, 
but  by  thoughtful  adaptation  to  the  specific  conditions. 

"A  complete  highway  incorporates  not  only  safety,  utility  and  econ- 
omy," he  once  wrote,  "but  beauty  as  well." 


190 


HIGHWAY  ADMINISTRATORS 
General  Roy  Stone      1893-1899 

On  October  3,  1893,  Secretary  of  Ajjriciilture  J.  Sterling-  Morton 
instituted  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry  and  appointed  General  Roy  Stone, 
formerly  secretary  for  the  National  League  of  Good  Roads,  as  Special 
Agent  and  Engineer  for  Road  Inquiry. 

Earlier  in  1893,  the  Office  had  been  authorized  by  a  statute  enacted 
by  the  52d  Congress  and  approved  March  3, 1893,  by  President  Benjamin 
Harrison. 

The  statute  read  in  part: 

To  enable  the  Sccivtary  of  Agriculture  to  make  inquiries  in  regard  to  the 
systems  of  road  management  throughout  the  United  States,  to  malce  investi- 
gations in  regard  to  the  l)est  methods  of  road-making,  and  to  enal)le  him  to 
assist  tlie  agricultural  college  and  experiment  stations  in  disseminating  infor- 
mation on  this  subject. 

General  Stone  was  a  professional  civil  and  mechanical  engineer;  a 
military  hero  who  distinguished  himself  in  the  Civil  War  and  again  in 
the  Spanish-American  War;  an  astute  organizer;  and  the  architect  of 
many  State-aid  laws  for  U.S.  roads. 

He  proposed  the  first  parcel  post,  the  first  rural  free  delivery  service 
and  postal  savings  banks. 


V 


.  ^'   <f** 


-^ 


Martin  Dodge      1899-1905 

Martin  Dodge  was  appointed  Interim  Director  of  the  Office  of  Road 
Inquiry  in  August  1898  when  his  predecessor,  General  Roy  Stone,  va- 
cated the  office  to  serve  in  the  Spanish- American  AA^ar.  General  Stone 
resumed  his  duties  as  Director  on  January  31,  1899.  He  resigned  on 
October  23,  1899,  and  Martin  Dodge  was  reappointed  and  served  until 
1905. 

Mr.  Dodge  was  a  zealous  roadbuilder  and  an  advocate  of  free  roads 
in  the  United  States.  As  a  member  of  the  Ohio  State  Roads  Commis- 
sion, he  was  the  leading  exponent  of  the  first  brick  surfaced  rural  road 
in  this  country. 

The  road  was  laid  on  the  Wooster  Pike  near  Cleveland.  Four  nailes 
of  brick  pavement  were  built  in  the  fall  of  1893  at  a  cost  of  $16,000 
per  mile. 

During  Mr.  Dodge's  tenure,  he  established  an  information  office  to 
furnish  advice  about  roadbuilding  techniques  to  State  and  local  officials 
and  recommended  a  postgraduate  school  for  civil  engineer  graduates  to 
receive  advance  roadbuilding  training,  which  became  a  reality  in  1905. 


Logan  Waller  Page      1905-1918 

Logan  AValler  Page  in  1905  became  the  first  Director  of  the  newly 
created  Office  of  Public  Roads.  The  Congress  had  passed  an  act  that 
consolidated  the  Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries  and  the  Division  of 
Tests  of  the  Bureau  of  Chemistry. 

Five  years  earlier,  Mr.  Page,  a  renowned  geologist  with  the  Massa- 
chusetts State  Highway  Commission,  accepted  the  position  of  Chief  of 
the  Division  of  Tests  in  Washington. 

As  Laboratory  Chief,  his  responsibilities  included  a  study  of  road- 
building on  a  national  scale.  As  a  geologist  in  Massachusetts  he  had 
conducted  the  first  extensive  investigation  of  roadbuilding  materials 
in  America. 

Then  as  the  Director  of  the  Office  of  Public  Roads,  he  began  a  scries  of 
investigations  which  won  international  acclaim  for  the  laboratories  he 
directed. 


191 


Mr.  Page  introduced  a  scientific  movement  in  roadbuilding  that  won 
enthusiastic  national  public  support.  He  initiated  "a  petrographic 
study"  of  roadbuilding  materials;  wrote  the  first  comprehensive  report 
on  the  elements  of  roadbuilding  rocks;  and  improved  French  rock- 
testing  machines  whereby  physical  tests  of  roadbuilding  rocks  became  a 
routine  procedure. 


Thomas  H.  MacDonald     1919-1953 

The  good  roads  and  highways  Americans  travel  and  enjoy  today  are 
a  monument  to  Thomas  H.  MacDonald  who  for  34  years  served  as  Chief 
of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  Commissioner  of  the  Public  Roads 
Administration. 

Affectionately  he  was  loiown  as  "Chief"  by  all  who  kncAv  and  worked 
with  him. 

When  Chief  MacDonald  came  to  Washington  in  1919,  the  office  he 
was  to  head  was  still  in  its  infancy.  The  Bureau  had  direct  supervision 
over  highway  engineering  activities  and  expenditures  of  Federal-aid 
funds. 

The  country  had  scarcely  a  quarter  million  miles  of  public  roads 
when  Chief  MacDonald  took  office — and  very  little  of  that  mileage  was 
hard-surfaced.  Few  bridges  were  adequate  to  carry  heavy  truck  traffic. 
Chief  MacDonald  in  34  years  put  together  an  integrated  system  of  3i/^ 
million  miles  of  hard-surfaced  highways  which  crisscrossed  America. 

Chief  MacDonald  personally  directed  the  major  steps  in  construction 
of  the  Alaska  Highway.  He  also  supervised  fund  expenditures  to  aid 
the  countries  of  Central  America  in  building  the  Inter- American  High- 
way. 


Francis  V.  du  Pont     1953-1955 


Francis  V.  duPont  was  connected  with  the  development  of  highways 
in  America  since  the  early  twenties. 

He  was  appointed  Commissioner  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in 
1953  and  while  serving  as  Commissioner,  advanced  a  highway  program 
that  led  to  legislation  under  which  the  Interstate  Highway  System  was 
constructed. 

Mr.  duPont  was  the  son  of  T.  Coleman  duPont  who  was  the  president 
of  the  giant  chemical  firm  that  bears  that  name  in  Wilmington,  Dela- 
ware. 

From  1922  through  1949,  he  was  a  member  of  the  Delaware  State 
Highway  Commission.    He  also  served  as  chairman  of  the  Commission. 

Mr.  duPont  played  a  major  role  in  the  development  of  the  financing, 
engineering  and  the  initial  construction  of  the  Delaware  Memorial 
Bridge.  When  it  was  opened  to  traffic  on  July  1,  1951,  it  was  the  fifth 
longest  suspension  span  in  the  world. 

He  had  major  accomplishments  in  the  private.  State  and  Federal 
sectors. 

Mr.  duPont  resigned  his  Federal  post  on  January  1,  1956.  During 
his  tenure  as  Commissioner,  he  was  credited  with  stimulating  interest 
in  and  getting  the  Interstate  System  underway. 


192 


Charles  Dwight  (Cap)  Curtiss      1956 

Charles  Dwight  (Cap)  Curtiss  grew  up  with  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  and  the  American  highway  system. 

The  name  "Cap"  came  from  Mr.  Curtiss'  service  as  a  captain  witli 
the  U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  during  World  War  I  in  France. 

Following  the  war,  Cap  Curtiss  joined  the  Bureau  of  Public  Koads 
and  began  a  38-year  public  service  career. 

Along  with  others  in  the  Bureau  who  were  destined  to  give  this  Na- 
tion a  new  concept  in  transportation  at  both  the  State  and  national 
levels,  Cap  Curtiss  aided  materially  in  the  formulation  of  the  policies 
and  procedures  of  the  amendments  and  expansions  of  the  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1916. 

^Vlien  he  became  Commissioner  in  19.56,  plans  for  an  enlai'ged  and 
greatly  expanded  highway  program  reached  out  to  eveiy  corner  of  tlie 
Nation. 

With  the  signing  of  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956  by  Presi- 
dent Eisenhower,  it  became  Cap  Curtiss'  responsibility  to  put  into 
immediate  operation  the  authorization  of  the  largest  public  works  pro- 
gram ever  undertaken  on  a  State-Federal  cooperative  basis. 


John  Anthony  Voipe      1956-1957 


John  Anthony  Volpe,  who  was  to  become  the  Nation's  second  Secre- 
tary of  Transportation,  agreed  to  serve  as  interim  Federal  Highway 
Administrator  from  October  1956  to  February  1957,  pending  confirma- 
tion by  the  U.S.  Senate  of  Bertram  D.  Tallamy  as  Administrator. 

Prior  to  his  appointment  as  Administrator,  Mr.  Volpe  had  served 
nearly  4  years  as  the  Massachusetts  Commissioner  of  Public  Works. 

His  personal  history  reflects  the  success  story  of  the  self-made  man. 

In  1933  he  cashed  a  $300  insurance  policy  and  borrowed  $500  to  begin 
a  construction  firm  that  was  parlayed  into  a  multimillion  dollar  organi- 
zation. 

The  Volpe  firm  established  a  national  reputation  for  construction 
excellence. 

Mr.  Volpe  was  elected  Governor  of  Massachusetts  in  1960,  lost  in 
1962,  and  won  a  second  term  in  1964.  He  then  was  reelected  in  1966 
for  the  first  4-year  term  in  the  State's  history. 

He  was  serving  his  third  term  when  President  Nixon  swore  him  in 
on  January  20,  1969,  as  the  second  Secretary  of  Transportation. 

In  1973  John  Volpe  was  appointed  Ambassador  to  Italy,  realizing 
his  lifelong  ambition. 


Bertram  D.  Tallamy     1957-1961 


Bertram  D.  Tallamy  was  an  advocate  of  esthetic  design  in  the  Inter- 
state System. 

In  administering  the  Interstate  System,  Mr.  Tallamy  wanted  it 
fashioned  after  the  New  York  Tliruway,  which  in  1957  was  generally 
regarded  as  one  of  the  most  magnificent  highways  ever  constructed. 

He  wanted  motorists  to  see  the  country,  to  enjoy  the  scenery,  and 
above  all  to  avoid  monotony.  All  these  things,  he  said,  could  be  accom- 
plished with  an  added  safety  factor  without  adding  to  the  cost. 

Mr.  Tallamy  also  was  in  favor  of  regulated  outdoor  advertising  along 
the  Interstate  System. 

The  first  Senate-confirmed  Federal  Highway  Administrator  vras  born 
and  bred  to  the  engineering  and  construction  fields.  Both  his  father 
and  grandfather  were  general  contractors. 


193 


His  early  construction  training  was  with  a  firm  that  specialized  in 
the  fields  of  watei'works,  dams,  sewage  treatment  plants,  roads  and 
bridges. 

From  the  early  thirties,  he  progressed  through  various  posts  to  where 
he  was  appointed  Superintendent  of  Public  Woi'ks  for  New  York  State 
in  October  1948. 

In  1950  he  became  Chairman  of  the  Xew  York  State  Thruway  Au- 
thority. Overall  construction  costs  for  New  York  State  in  1954  reached 
$928.5  million. 


Rex  Marion  Whitton      1961-1966 

When  Eex  Marion  Wliitton  retired  as  Federal  Highway  Adminis- 
trator on  December  30,  1966,  he  left  behind  a  career  of  public  service 
that  almost  spanned  the  entire  history  of  modern  highway  constniction 
in  the  United  States. 

He  had  completed  more  than  46  years  of  continuous  highway  work, 
of  which  40  were  spent  in  his  native  State  of  Missouri. 

Mr.  Whitton  rose  through  the  ranks,  from  a  member  of  a  highway 
survey  crew  in  1920  to  Chief  Engineer  for  the  State  of  Missouri  in  1951. 

Other  posts  held  by  Mr.  Whitton  included  that  of  assistant  resident 
engineer,  resident  engineer,  chief  of  survey  party,  plans  designer,  as- 
sistant district  engineer,  district  engineer,  and  engineer  of  maintenance. 

During  his  tenure  as  Federal  Highway  Administrator,  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  was  revised  to  inci'ease  operational  efficiency  and  instill 
new  confidence. 

In  1960  he  was  named  one  of  the  top  10  public  works  men  of  the  year 
by  the  American  Public  Works  Association  in  cooperation  with  Kiwanis 
International. 

He  also  was  president  of  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials  (AASHO)  1955-56. 


Lowell  K.  Bridwell      1967-1969 


Lowell  K.  Bridwell,  former  journalist,  acquired  a  reputation  through 
the  years  as  an  authority  on  highway  transportation. 

Mr.  Bridwell  made  his  first  impact  on  the  highway  program  as  a 
journalist. 

A  correspondent  for  the  Associated  Press  and  the  Ohio  State  Journal 
from  1946  to  1950,  he  became  associated  with  Scripps-Howard  News- 
papers in  1950.  He  joined  the  Washington  Bureau  of  Scripps-Howard 
in  1958  as  their  top  writer  on  highways. 

Fi'om  this  vantage  point  he  set  up  close  liaison  witli  both  government 
and  industry.  He  became  well-known  as  an  individual  who  was  excep- 
tionally well  versed  in  the  technical  aspects  of  highway  administration, 
finance  and  construction. 

As  a  representative  for  Scripps-Howard,  Mr.  Bridwell  participated 
in  many  local  and  national  highway  meetings.  These  included  numer- 
ous conclaves  of  State  highway  officials  as  well  as  leading  trade  asso- 
ciations. 

He  assumed  the  helm  of  an  expanded  and  reoriented  Federal  High- 
way Administration  in  1967  in  the  new  U.S.  Department  of  Transpor- 
tation. 

Mr.  Bridwell  was  responsible  for  administering  a  $4.4  billion  highway 
program.  This  figure  dwarfed  everything  else  in  the  Department  of 
Transportation's  $6.6  billion  budget. 


194 


Francis  C.  Turner     1969-1972 


Francis  C.  Turner,  during  his  lifelong  career  with  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads,  won  national  and  international  acclaim  for  his  contribu- 
tions to  both  national  and  international  highway  programs. 

He  joined  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  1929  as  a  junior  highway 
engineer  and  began  a  steady  rise  thiough  the  ranks. 

Fourteen  years  later  he  had  acquired  such  stature  that  he  was  de- 
tailed (1943-1946)  to  Alaska  as  adviser  on  maintenance  of  the  Alaska 
Highway. 

In  the  next  4  years  (1946-1950)  he  served  with  distinction  as  coor- 
dinator of  the  entire  Philippine  Rehabilitation  Program. 

Subsequent  to  this  assignment,  he  held  several  top  positions  with  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads:  Deputy  Commissioner,  Chief  Engineer,  As- 
sistant Federal  Highway  Administrator,  and  Director  of  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads.  Furthermore,  he  was  a  member  of  the  task  force  that 
set  up  the  Department  of  Transportation. 

He  was  named  Federal  Highway  Administrator  on  February  24,  1969. 

During  his  tenure  as  Federal  Highway  Administrator,  new  attention 
was  given  to  the  environment,  accelerated  concern  was  focused  on  high- 
way safety,  and  increased  emphasis  was  placed  on  the  quality  of  life 
for  people  affected  by  highway  construction. 


Norbert  T.  Tiemann      1973— 


Norbert  T.  Tiemann,  former  Governor  of  Nebraska,  is  the  current 
Federal  Highway  Administrator. 

Governor  Tiemann's  term  as  Nebraska's  Chief  Executive,  from  1967 
to  1971,  included  several  major  accomplishments  on  behalf  of  his  State. 
Among  these  were : 

•  First  broad  reorganization  of  the  Department  of  Roads. 

•  First  revenue  bonds  for  highway  construction. 

•  Closing  of  the  Omaha  Gap  on  Interstate  80. 

•  Established  the  first  20-year  plan  for  construction  of  a  comprehen- 
sive expressway-freeway  system. 

•  First  mandatory  driver  examination. 

•  First  motor-vehicle  inspection  program. 

After  completing  his  term  as  Governor,  he  served  as  Vice  President 
for  Corporate  Finance  of  First  Mid- America,  Inc.,  an  investment  bank- 
ing firm  in  Lincoln. 

In  his  position  as  Administrator,  he  was  involved  in  the  obligation 
of  $7.8  billion  in  Federal-aid  highway  funds  in  fiscal  year  1975 — the 
largest  amount  in  the  history  of  the  Federal-State  highway  program. 

Other  accomplishments  have  included  the  close  planning  liaison  be- 
tween FHWA  and  the  Urban  Mass  Transportation  Administration  and 
the  conclusion  of  an  agreement  with  Iran  for  FHU^A  personnel  to 
advise  and  assist  that  country  in  building  a  modem  highway  network. 


195 


EditOfV  note 


In  Part  I  of  the  history  of  the  Federal  interest  in 
the  Nation's  highways,  the  period  from  the  colonial 
days  to  enactment  of  the  Federal -Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1956  has  been  developed  in  a  broad  chronological 
format  of  events.  As  a  result,  there  is  a  mixing  of 
diverse  elements,  such  as  financial  support,  construc- 
tion practices,  research  and  many  others  that  con- 
tributed to  the  continuity  of  highway  development 
as  we  know  it  today.  The  advent  of  the  1956  Federal- 
Aid  Highway  Act  was  a  turning  point  in  highway 
financing,  program  magnitude,  and  administration 
complexity.  For  this  reason.  Part  I  stops  at  the  1956 
Federal- Aid  Highway  Act. 

During  the  years  since  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act 
of  1916,  specialized  knowledge  and  skills  were  required 
to  cope  with  the  expanding  program.  The  prograna 
became  more  complex  with  each  piece  of  highway 
legislation  in  response  to  tlie  need  for  broader  meas- 
ures in  transportation,  the  desires  of  the  public  it 
serves,  and  the  interaction  of  the  highway  program 
with  other  programs  to  serve  the  needs  of  a  growing 
Nation.  Technology  became  so  sophisticated  that,  to 
keep  pace  with  the  demands,  the  program  developed 
special  areas  of  concern.  In  recognition  of  this  sit- 
uation. Part  II  has  been  assembled  according  to  each 
major  specialization  and  its  contribution  to  the  over- 
all program. 

The  chapters  of  Part  II  cover  separately  one  par- 
ticular aspect  of  the  program,  including  a  chapter 
devoted  to  the  development  of  the  Interstate  System. 
The  authors  for  these  chapters  are  recognized  authori- 
ties, and  their  decisions  as  to  what  has  proven  sig- 
nificant in  their  individual  fields  of  expertise  has  been 
left  largely  unchanged. 


196 


Rdmini/tfQtion 
of  the 
FederQl-flid 
Program 


Early  Federal  Government  Interest  in  Roads 

The  first  Federal  financial  aid  specifically  for  the 
construction  of  roads  in  the  States  was  incorporated 
into  the  Ohio  Statehood  Enabling  Act  in  1802  which 
provided  that  5  percent  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of 
public  (Federal)  lands  in  Ohio  was  to  be  set  aside  for 
roads.  Upon  the  insistence  of  the  State  of  Ohio,  the 
Act  Avas  amended  in  1803  to  provide  that  3  percent 
of  the  funds  would  be  available  for  roads  within  the 
State  and  2  percent  of  the  funds  would  be  used  under 
the  direction  of  Congress  for  constructing  roads  to 
and  through  Ohio.^ 

This  form  of  Federal  assistance  Avas  later  extended 
to  all  the  States  that  had  public  lands  when  they 
were  admitted  to  statehood,  but  the  purposes  for 
which  the  funds  could  be  used  were  broadened  to 
include  canals,  levees,  river  improvements,  and  schools. 

In  1806  an  act  authorized  the  Federal  Government 
to  lay  out  and  build  the  famous  Cumberland  Road — 
from  the  head  of  navigation  on  the  Potomac  River 
at  Cumberland,  Maryland,  to  a  point  on  the  Ohio 
River — provided  that  permission  should  first  be  se- 
cured from  the  Legislatures  of  Maryland,  Virginia, 
and  Pennsylvania  to  build  the  road  within  their 
boundaries.  Funding  was  to  be  from  the  Ohio  2  per- 
cent fund. 

The  debate  in  Congress  before  the  Cumberland 
Road  Act  Avas  approved,  centered  on  the  constitutional 
issue  of  AA'hetlier  or  not  the  Federal  Government  had 
the  authority  to  build  roads  at  all,  except  possibly  in 
the  territories.  The  Act  was  finally  passed  Avithout 
resolving  the  constitutional  issue. 


Because  the  Cumberland  Road  deteriorated  badly 
as  a  result  of  heavy  traffic  and  lack  of  funds  for  main- 
tenance, Congress,  in  1822,  passed  a  bill  authorizing 
the  Federal  GoA^ernment  to  collect  tolls  to  be  used  for 
maintenance.  This  bill  was  vetoed  by  President 
Monroe  on  the  constitutional  grounds  that  it  was  an 
unAvarranted  extension  of  the  poAver  vested  in  Con- 
gress to  make  ai^propriations.  Collection  of  tolls,  the 
President  said,  implied  a  power  of  jurisdiction  or 
sovereignty  Avhich  was  not  granted  to  the  Federal 
Government  by  the  Constitution  and  could  not  be 
unilaterally  conA^eyed  by  any  State  Avithout  a  con- 
stitional  amendment.  He  felt  ".  .  .  that  it  Avas  one 
thing  to  make  appropriations  for  public  improvements, 
but  an  entirely  different  thing  to  assume  jurisdiction 
and  sovereignty  OA^er  the  land  Avhereon  those  improA^e- 
ment  were  made."^  President  Monroe's  position  has 
continued  to  be  the  Federal  position  on  higliAvay 
matters  to  the  present  day. 

During  the  next  9  years,  the  Cumberland  Road  con- 
tinued to  deteriorate  despite  a  fcAv  meager  Fedei'al 
appropriations  for  maintenance,  and  it  was  finally 
recognized  that  the  only  solution  Avas  State  operation 
as  a  toll  road.^  In  1831  and  1832  the  Legislatures  of 
Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland  and  Virginia  agreed  to 
accept  and  maintain  their  sections  of  the  Cumberland 
Road.* 

The  Federal  Government  attempted  to  extend  the 
Cumberland  ( National )  Road  AvestAvard  to  the 
^Mississippi  River.  In  1820  Congress  appropriated 
$10,000  to  locate  the  I'oad,  and  subsequent  periodic 
appropriations  Avere  made  for  construction  Avhich  ulti- 
mately totaled  about  $5  million.     The  Ohio  Legisla- 


198 


.-i  section  of  1-70  in  Spotted  Wolf  Canyon  between  Rattlesnake  Bend  and  Saleraters  west  of  Green  River,  Utah. 


ture,  in  1831,  passed  an  act  which  authorized  the  State 
to  take  jurisdiction  of  its  portion  of  the  road  and 
place  it  under  toll  as  each  section  was  completed,''  but 
the  road  was  never  fully  completed  in  either  Indiana 
or  Illinois.  Congress  finally  ceded  all  the  Federal 
interests  in  the  road  to  Indiana  and  Illinois  in  1848 
and  1856,  respectively.'' 

From  the  early  1800's  through  the  1860's,  a  separate 
form  of  federally  funded  road  construction  existed 
in  the  building  of  primitive  military  wagon  roads, 
most  of  them  in  the  territories.  They  consisted  mainly 
of  little  more  than  trails  built  by  troops,  but  they  did 
play  a  big  part  in  opening  up  the  "West.    Late  in  this 

Junction  of  the  old  National  Road  (right)  and  the 
relocated  U.S.  JfO  (left)  near  Piney  Grove,  Md. 


period,  the  Army  improved  some  of  the  more  im- 
portant wagon  trails  to  the  point  that  they  were  used 
for  transcontinental  mail  routes. 

The  last  form  of  Federal  road  assistance  or  sub- 
sidy in  the  19th  century  was  the  granting  of  a  free 
right-of-way  for  public  roads  over  unreserved  public 
lands.  A  number  of  States  and  counties  took  ad- 
vantage of  this  by  declaring  all  section  lines  in  those 
counties  to  be  public  roads,  and,  thus,  they  reserved 
the  right-of-way  before  the  lands  might  become  pri- 
vate property.'' 

No  reasonably  accurate  determination  can  be  made 
of  the  total  amount  of  Federal  funds  that  were  ex- 
pended directly  and  indirectly  for  roads  during  the 
period  from  1776  to  about  1890  because  the  programs 
had  been  so  very  diffuse.  However,  in  terms  of  actual 
appropriations  by  Congress,  the  Yearbook  of  the 
Department  of  Agriculture^  1899  mentions  that  from 
1806  to  1838  a  total  of  about  $7  million  was  appro- 
priated by  Congress  for  the  Cumberland  Eoad  and 
$1.6  million  was  appropriated  for  ".  .  .  twelve  other 
great  national  highways  .  .  .  making  what  was  then 
regarded  a  complete  system  of  roads.  ..."  Large 
Government  expenditures  were  then  curtailed  because 
of  a  monetary  crisis,  but  from  1854  until  the  Civil 
War,  over  $1.6  million  was  appropriated  for  roads 
chiefly  in  the  Territories.^ 

There  was  little  further  Federal  interest  or  recogni- 
tion of  responsibility  concerning  roads  until  the  Good 
Roads  Movement  began  to  reach  national  proportions 
about  1890.  This  movement  had  a  profound  influence 
on  the  States  in  their  initiation  of  State  aid  for  roads 


199 


and  tlie  creation  of  liighway  departments  and  com- 
missions. It  also  began  to  put  pressure  on  Congress 
to  provide  some  form  of  Federal  assistance  for  high- 
ways. 

The  first  State  to  actually  create  a  State  Highway 
Commission  was  Massachusetts  in  1892.  The  Com- 
mission was  given  the  authority  to  establish  a  State 
road  system,  and  beginning  in  1894,  the  Legislature 
appi'opriated  the  first  funds  for  actual  construction. 
The  need  for  State  aid  in  financing  road  construction 
had  been  recognized  as  earl}'  as  1891  when  New  Jersey 
enacted  the  first  State-aid  road  program  in  the  Nation. 
However,  it  was  designed  simply  to  help  the  counties 
finance  their  programs,  and  its  administration  was 
placed  under  the  State's  Department  of  Agriculture. 
It  wasn't  imtil  1894  that  New  Jersey  placed  the  pro- 
gram under  a  Commission  of  Highways. 

The  Office   of  Road   inquiry  is   Created 

In  1892,  the  Senate  passed  a  bill  entitled  the 
National  Highway  Commission  Law,  but  Congress 
adjourned  before  it  was  enacted  into  law.  Then,  in 
the  Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  for  1894,  enacted 
March  3,  1893,  an  item  for  $10,000  was  included  to 
enable  the  Secretary  "to  make  inquiries  in  regard  to 
the  systems  of  road  management  throughout  the  United 
States  ...  to  make  investigations  in  regard  to  the 
best  method  of  roadmaking  .  .  .  and  to  enable  him 
to  assist  the  agricultural  college  and  experiment  sta- 
tions in  disseminating  information  on  this  subject.  .  .  ." 
To  carry  out  the  work  directed  by  Congress,  the  Sec- 
retary created  the  Office  of  Eoad  Inquiry,  the  small 
beginning  from  which  the  world's  largest  highway 
program  was  to  develop. 

Allien  the  Federal  interest  in  roads  was  reinstituted 
in  1893,  the  appropriation  was  made  to  the  Depart- 
ment of  Agriculture  because  the  recognized  problem 
was  in  the  rural  areas — there  were  not  enough  ade- 
quate roads  for  the  farmers  to  get  their  produce  to 
the  railroad  terminals  and  even  nearby  towns.  The 
cities  and  larger  towns  were  considered  to  be  ade- 
quately satisfying  their  own  internal  road  needs. 

The  creation  of  the  Office  did  not  represent  the 
reinitiation  of  Federal  financial  assistance  for  the  con- 
struction of  roads  in  the  States,  since  Congress  pro- 
vided only  $10,000  for  each  of  the  first  3  years  and 
then  dropped  the  appropriation  to  $8,000  for  each  of 
the  next  4  years.  Rather,  it  was  distinctly  an  educa- 
tional and  promotional  effort,  but  it  did  represent  a 
renewal  of  Federal  recognition  of  the  importance  of 
highways  in  the  Nation's  economic  and  social  future. 

For  several  years  the  work  of  the  Office  of  Road 
Inquiry  consisted  almost  wholly  of  collecting  and  dis- 
seminating road  information  through  publications, 
lectures,  and  consultations.  In  1896,  a  new  program 
was  administratively  added.  Short  stretches  of  road 
were  constructed  as  object  lesson  roads  through  con- 
tributed labor  and  materials  and  borrowed  equipment. 
The  only  Federal  cost  was  usually  the  salai-y  and 
expenses  of  a  road  expert  from  the  Office  of  Road 
Inquiry  who  designed  and  supervised  the  work. 

Despite  efforts  to  get  increased  appropriations  to 
expand  the  object  lesson  roads,  additional  funds  were 
not  provided — probably  because  of  some  congressional 
concern  that  construction  of  roads  by  the  Office  of 
Road  Inquiry  might  be  the  opening  wedge  for  rein- 


stitution  of  national  roads  under  Federal  control.  It 
was  not  until  1901  that  the  appropriation  level  was 
increased.  From  then  on,  additional  increases  followed 
almost  every  year,  until  1912  when  the  appropriation 
was  over  $160,000. 

During  the  years  between  1897  and  1912,  the  Office 
broadened  its  activities  to  include  experimental  use  of 
new  materials  in  the  construction  of  short  sections  of 
experimental  roads;  free  tests  of  I'oad  materials  sent 
in  by  private  citizens  from  all  over  the  country;  pro- 
vision of  onsite  assistance  to  State  and  county  high- 
way authorities,  ranging  from  solving  specific  problems 
in  construction  or  maintenance  to  encouraging  enact- 
ment of  road  laws  and  helping  in  the  organization 
of  highway  commissions  or  departments;  institution 
of  a  training  program  for  student  highway  engineers; 
provision  of  specialized  assistance  in  problems  con- 
cerning bridges,  culverts  and  drainage  in  general ;  and 
of  considerable  significance,  in  1909,  launching  into 
the  area  of  economic  research  and  statistical  investi- 
gations,^ the  forenmner  to  the  sophisticated  and  ex- 
tensive programs  of  today. 

Some  accomplishments  had  been  achieved  by  1912 
through  the  joint  efforts  of  the  States,  counties  and 
townships  combined  with  the  leadership  of  the  Office 
of  Public  Roads  and  the  many  good  roads  associations 
and  similar  special  interest  groups.  In  1912  the  ex- 
penditures by  the  States  for  road  work  totaled  ap- 
proximately $43  million,  and  it  was  estimated  another 
$100  million  was  spent  by  counties  and  townships.^" 

A  new  need  was  gaining  recognition — interconnect- 
ing roads  at  the  local,  State  and  national  level.  Few 
States  had  either  the  authority  or  the  necessary  funds 
to  plan  an  interconnected  system  witliin  their  own 
boundaries,  and  each  operated  independently  of  its 
neighboring  States.  A  road  location  in  one  State 
which  was  advantageous  to  that  State  for  topographic, 
economic,  or  geographic  reasons  might  not  fit  the  situ- 
ation just  across  the  State  line,  so  there  was  no  assur- 
ance that  a  road  would  not  simply  end  at  the  State 
line  or  some  local  terminus. 

The  landscaped  median  on  1-19  provides  a  pleasant  exit 
from,  Tucson,  Ariz.,  and  an  effective  headlight  screen 
on  the  curve. 


200 


Federal  Aid  for  the  Construction  of  Rural  Post  Roads 

The  enonnity  of  the  road  problems  and  their 
national  character  gradually  developed  a  recognition 
that  Federal  aid  was  the  only  solution.  Groups,  such 
as  the  National  Good  Roads  Association,  the  American 
Road  Builders,  and  the  American  Highway  Associa- 
tion, were  leaders  in  efforts  to  secure  necessary  legis- 
lation. As  a  result,  during  the  first  6  months  of  the 
session  of  Congress  which  began  in  December  1911, 
over  60  bills  were  introduced  providing  for  some  form 
of  direct  aid  by  the  national  government."  This 
concern  led  to  the  inclusion  in  the  Post  Office  Appro- 
priation Act  for  fiscal  year  1913  of  an  appropriation 
of  $500,000  to  be  expended  by  the  Secretary  of  Agri- 
culture, in  cooperation  with  the  Postmaster  General, 
to  aid  in  the  improvement  of  post  roads  (roads  which 
would  be  used  by  the  Post  Office  in  the  delivery  of 
mail)  in  rural  areas.  It  provided  "That  the  State  or 
the  local  subdivision  thereof  in  which  such  improve- 
ment is  made  under  this  provision  shall  furnish  doiible 
the  amount  of  money  for  the  improvement  of  the 
be  made  under  the  supervision  of  the  Secreary  of 
road  or  roads  so  selected.  Such  improvement  shall 
Agriculture."  The  Act  also  provided  for  a  Joint 
Congressional  Committee  ".  .  .  to  make  inquiry  into 
the  subject  of  Federal  aid  in  the  construction  of  post 
roads  and  report  at  the  earliest  practicable  date.  .  .  ." 

Among  its  other  provisions,  the  1913  Act  also  specif- 
ically directed  the  Joint  Committee  to  consider  the 
problem  of  maintenance  of  the  roads  constructed,  no 
doubt  remembering  the  disastrous  experiences  of  the 
past  Federal  efforts,  and  particularly  the  National 
Road. 

The  significant  features  of  the  Act  were: 

•  It  was  a  direct  appropriation  with  authorization 
to  proceed.  There  was  no  authorization  in  ad- 
vance of  an  appropriation. 

•  The  Act  authorized  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture 
and  the  Postmaster  General  to  determine  where 
the  funds  should  be  used.  It  did  not  specify  how 
the  funds  were  to  be  spread  among  the  States. 


•  The  matching  principle  was  established  by  pre- 
scribing that  project  costs  be  financed  on  a  two- 
thirds  State,  one-third  Federal  basis. 

•  The  funds  were  available  until  expended. 

No  specific  portion  of  the  funds  was  made  available 
for  the  costs  of  administering  the  program  by  the 
Office  of  Public  Roads. 

In  the  administration  of  the  program  launched  by 
the  1913  appropriation  the  principle  of  "apportion- 
ment" was  born.  The  $500,000  was  allocated  by  mak- 
ing available  $10,000  to  each  State  (to  be  matched 
by  at  least  $20,000  State  and  local  funds) ,  and  $20,000 
was  reserved  by  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  to  super- 
vise and  administer  the  program. ^^  However,  only 
13  States  and  28  counties  participated,  and  approxi- 
mately 455  miles  of  road  were  built."  " 

While  the  Federal  financial  interest  in  other  than 
demonstration  and  experimental  roads  was  i-ekindled 
by  this  measure,  the  appropriation  was  made  to  the 
Post  Office  Department  even  though  the  work  was  to 
be  administered  by  the  Department  of  Agriculture. 
Congress  was  still  concerned  with  the  constitutional 
issue  of  Federal  money  going  into  construction  of 
roads  wholly  within  individual  States.  The  national 
character  of  mail  delivery  provided  a  satisfactory 
rationalization,  hence,  the  appropriation  was  made  to 
the  Post  Office  Department. 

The  Joint  Committee  made  its  final  report  on  Fed- 
eral aid  in  the  construction  of  post  roads  on  January 
21,  1915.  The  report  offered  no  particular  plan  for 
Federal  aid  in  the  cost  of  constructing  roads  but  did 
strongly  recommend  such  aid.  Furthermore,  it  pointed 
out  that  a  Federal-aid  highway  program  would  ac- 
complish several  objectives  of  the  Constitution,  namely, 
to  establish  post  roads,  regulate  commerce,  provide 
for  the  common  defense,  and  promote  the  general 
welfare.  ^^ 

During  the  congressional  hearings  which  followed 
the  submission  of  the  report,  there  was  much  debate 
but  not  too  much  opposition  to  the  principle  of  appro- 


Federal  involvement  in  roadbuilding  was  justified  in  1912  because  of  the 
national  character  of  rural  free  delivery  of  the  mail. 


201 


priating  Federal  funds  for  the  development  of  high- 
ways. The  main  issue  was  how  such  funds  should 
be  administered,  and  there  were  three  viewpoints: 
(1)  Those  who  favored  total  Federal  funding  and 
control — a  system  of  national  highways  built,  owned 
and  operated  by  the  Federal  Government  (which 
again  brought  up  the  constitutional  issue)  ;  (2)  those 
who  favored  that  the  Federal  money  be  turned  over 
to  the  States  or  directly  to  some  3,000  counties  in  the 
country  to  spend  as  they  saw  fit  (at  the  time  there 
were  still  17  States  which  had  no  State  agencies  with 
highway  responsibilities;  and  (3)  those  who  favored 
a  cooperative  Federal-State  relationship,  with  the 
States  retaining  jurisdiction  over  the  highways  and 
having  responsibility  for  carrying  out  the  work  under 
general  Federal  approval. 

The  concept  of  a  cooperative  Federal-State  program 
was  finally  adopted  in  the  enactment  of  the  Federal 
Aid  Road' Act  of  1916. 

The  Evolution  of  the  Federal-Aid  Program 

The  4-page  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916  was  a 
simple  document  entitled  "An  Act  To  provide  that 
the  United  States  shall  aid  the  States  in  the  con- 
struction of  rural  post  roads,  and  for  other  purposes." 
From  this  basic  concept  of  building  rural  post  roads, 
as  the  IS'ation  has  grown  and  prospered,  so  too  the 
concept  of  roadbuilding  has  grown  in  terms  of  respon- 
sibilities to  the  economy,  social  and  cultural  needs, 
protection  of  the  environment  and  national  resources, 
and  even  to  international  relations. 

The  State  highway  officials  had  already  joined  to- 
gether in  1914  to  form  the  American  Association  of 
State  Highway  Officials  (AASHO)  to  provide  mutual 
cooperation  and  assistance  to  the  Federal  Government 
on  legislative,  economic  and  technical  subjects  relat- 
ing to  highways.  First  on  the  organization's  agenda 
was  to  direct  the  executive  committee  to  draft  a  bill 
authorizing  Federal  participation  in  the  construction 
of  highways.  Logan  Waller  Page,  the  Director  of 
the  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engineering, 
worked  directly  with  AASHO  on  the  draft,  drawing 
considerably,  no  doubt,  on  the  experience  gained  dur- 
ing the  construction  of  the  rural  post  roads  a  few 
years  before.  The  cooperative  spirit  was  already  evi- 
dent when  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  was  signed  into 
law  on  July  11, 1916. 

The   Federal  Aid   Road  Act  of   1916 

The  basic  philosophies  of  the  Federal-State  rela- 
tionship in  the  administration  of  the  Federal-aid  pro- 
gram were  established  by  the  1916  Act,  and  they  have 
remained  intact  to  the  present  time.    These  included: 

•  Participation  of  any  State  in  the  program  is 
pennissive,  not  mandatory. 

•  If  a  State  elects  to  participate,  it  must  satisfy 
the  requirements  and  comply  with  the  provisions 
of  the  legislation  and  its  implementing  rules  and 
regulations. 

•  The  authority  and  responsibility  for  initiation  of 
proposed  projects,  their  character,  and  method  of 
construction  is  resei'ved  to  the  States;  Federal 
participation  is  dependent  upon  project  approval 
by  the  Federal  authority. 


•  The  State  highway  department,  or  its  equivalent, 
with  proper  legal  authority  to  carry  out  its  func- 
tions shall  represent  the  State  in  its  administra- 
tion of  the  program  in  cooperation  with  the 
Federal  Government  (as  distinguished  from  the 
individual  local  governmental  subdivisions). 

•  A^Hiile  not  specifically  stated  in  the  legislation, 
the  absence  of  any  provisions  to  the  contrary  made 
it  abundantly  clear  that  the  States  retain  full 
and  absolute  ownership  of  the  roads  constructed 
or  improved  with  participation  of  Federal-aid 
funds.  The  States  also  retain  responsibility  for 
their  use  and  operation,  with  the  proviso  that 
they  must  be  free  from  tolls  of  all  kinds. 

This  philosophy  was  to  be  sustained  in  the  1973 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  which  restated  the  intent 
of  Congress  as  follows : 

The  authorization  of  the  appropriation  of  Federal  funds 
or  their  availability  for  expenditure  under  this  chapter 
shall  in  no  way  infringe  on  the  sovereign  rights  of  the 
States  to  determine  which  projects  shall  be  federally 
financed.  The  provisions  of  this  chapter  provide  for  a 
federally  assisted  State  program. 

The  1916  Act  appropriated  the  following  sum  for 
Federal  participation  in  the  construction  of  rural  post 
roads : 

Fiscal  Year  Amount 

1917  $  5  million 

1918  10  million 

1919  15  million 

1920  20  million 

1921  25  million 

In  addition,  the  Act  appropriated  $10  million  for 
construction  of  roads  and  trails  within  or  partly 
within  national  forests  for  the  fiscal  years  1917  through 
1926  at  the  rate  of  $1  million  per  year.  This  action 
established  the  basic  policy  for  providing  for  the  de- 
velopment of  main  roads  serving  federally  owned 
lands,  reservations  or  areas.  Regrettably,  the  Act  per- 
mitted a  wide  dispersion  of  Federal  funds,  with  the 
result  that  there  was  no  assurance  that  a  connected 
system  of  major  roads  would  ever  be  achieved. 

The  Act  also  established  principles  upon  which  fol- 
lowing legislation  would  build.     These  were: 

•  Multiyear  authorizations 

•  Leadtime  apportionment  of  funds 

•  Apportionment  by  a  fixed  formula 

•  Extended  availability  of  funds  for  expenditure 
(1  year  after  the  year  for  which  funds  were 
appropriated) 

•  Definition  of  type  of  roads  for  which  funds  could 
be  used 

•  A  limitation  on  funds  that  could  be  used  by  the 
States  for  engineering  and  contingencies 

•  Permanent  responsibility  was  placed  with  the 
States  for  adequate  maintenance  of  completed 
projects  (the  penalty  being  that  the  State  had 
4  months  to  repair  the  road  or  lose  all  further 
road  project  approvals  in  the  State  until  the  road 
was  repaired) 

Urinnrsota  S!fate  highicaij  61  alono  tJic  rockii  slwrrline  of 
iMkc  Superior.    The  view  from  the  hiphivai/  allows 
the  traveler  to  experience  the  heautii  of  the  lake 
and  the  Superior  National  Forest. 


202 


w 


•  The  costs  of  Federal  administration  of  the  pro- 
gram were  provided  for  by  reservation  of  3  percent 
of  the  appropriated  funds  for  this  purpose 

The  legislators  used  foresight,  too,  in  establishing 
in  the  Act  the  basic  roles  of  the  States  and  the  Fed- 
eral Government  in  project  procedures.  The  Act  first 
defined  the  term  "construction"  and  then  outlined 
these  procedures: 

•  When  proposed  projects  were  approved  by  the 
Federal  agency,  the  State  highway  department 
was  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  plans, 
specifications  and  estimates  (PS&E)  for  review 
and  approval  by  the  Federal  agency. 

•  Upon  Federal  approval  of  the  plans,  specifica- 
tions and  estimates,  the  applicable  Federal  funds 
were  "obligated"  and  reserved  for  future  payment 
to  the  State. 

•  The  construction  work  and  labor  in  each  State 
was  to  be  done  in  accordance  with  its  laws  and 
under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  State  highway 
department,  subject  to  the  inspection  and  approval 
of  the  Federal  agency  and  in  accordance  with  the 
rules  and  regulations  established  under  the  au- 
thority of  the  legislation. 

•  Reimbursements  to  the  States  for  the  Federal 
share  of  State  expenditures  for  projects  could  be 
made  as  work  progressed  subject  to  its  approval 
by  the  Federal  agency. 

•  Upon  completion  of  any  project  in  compliance 
with  the  plans  and  specifications,  final  reimburse- 
ment of  the  Federal  share  of  the  project  costs  was 
to  be  made  upon  approval  of  the  Federal  agency. 

Other  provisions  of  the  1916  Act  included: 

•  Funds  were  appropriated  with  authorization  to 
proceed. 

•  The  matching  ratio  of  State  funds  to  Federal 
funds  was  50  percent. 

Most  of  the  basic  philosophies,  principles,  policies, 
procedures,  and  controls  established  in  the  1916  Act 
still  exist  today. 

Before  work  could  be  started  under  the  1916  Act, 
many  problems  had  to  be  resolved  to  establish  the 
radically  new  Federal- State  partnership.  Eleven 
States  did  not  have  highway  departments  within  the 
meaning  of  the  law  and  required  legislation  to  create 
them.  In  many  others,  some  legislation  was  necessary. 
In  some  States,  the  highway  departments  could  not 
exercise  the  necessary  direct  supervision.  In  others, 
State  and  local  funds  were  not  available  to  match  the 
Federal  funds,  nor  could  adequate  maintenance  assur- 
ance be  given.  All  the  States  had  to  assent  to  the 
provisions  of  the  1916  Act  through  their  legislatures 
or  temporarily  through  their  Governors  if  they  wished 
to  participate.  In  spite  of  all  these  problems,  by 
June  30,  1917,  all  States  but  one*  had  a  highway 
department  and  had  agreed  to  the  requirements  and 
terms  of  the  Act.^" 

Recognizing  that  some  States  would  not  have  agen- 
cies empowered  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the  Act, 
Congress  provided  that  the  availability  of  the  Federal 


funds  to  those  particular  States  could  be  extended  for 
an  additional  2  years.  This  gave  those  States  not  hav- 
ing a  State  highway  department  both  the  incentive 
and  the  time  to  take  the  necessary  legislative  or  ad- 
ministrative action  to  establish  one.  A  "forfeiture" 
feature  provided  that  any  funds  not  expended  by  the 
end  of  their  availability  would  be  reapportioned  among 
all  the  States.  Obviously,  it  was  advantageous  for  the 
States  to  create  State  highway  departments  if  they 
did  not  already  have  them. 

The  rules  and  regulations  for  carrying  out  the  Fed- 
eral Aid  Road  Act  were  issued  by  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture  on  September  1,  1916.  "In  them  he  desig- 
nated the  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engineer- 
ing as  his  representative  in  the  administration  of  all 
[sections]  of  the  act  except  Section  8,  which  applied 
to  roads  in  national  forests."  Section  8  was  assigned 
to  the  Forest  Service  for  apportionment  of  funds  and 
the  selection  of  projects,  although  surveying  and  con- 
struction work  on  the  forest  roads  was  to  be  performed 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Office  of  Public  Roads 
and  Rural  Engineering  (OPRRE).^* 

Implementation  of  the  1916  Act  had  just  gotten  well 
underway  when  the  United  States  entered  World  War 
I  in  April  1917.  The  war  curtailed  road  construction 
but  did  not  bring  it  to  a  complete  halt.  Efforts  were 
made  to  limit  construction  of  roads  to  those  needed 
for  military  purposes  or  war  industry. 

By  the  end  of  the  war,  roads  had  deteriorated  from 
inadequate  maintenance  and  heavy  traffic,  and  an  ac- 
celerated program  was  necessary.  It  was  also  believed 
that  there  would  be  extensive  unemployment  as  a  re- 
sult of  demobilization  of  the  Armed  Forces  and  war 
industry.  Congress  responded  by  including  in  the 
Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  for  1920  an  appropria- 
tion of  $200  million  for  additional  Federal  aid  under 
the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916.  Of  this  amount, 
$50  million  was  available  immediately  for  fiscal  year 
1919  and  $75  million  for  each  of  the  fiscal  years  1920 
and  1927.  The  Act  also  provided  an  additional  $9 
million  for  forest  roads  at  the  rate  of  $3  million  for 
each  of  the  fiscal  years  1919,  1920  and  1921.  An  addi- 
tional Federal  subsidy  to  the  road  program  was  in- 
cluded by  the  transfer  of  surplus  war  materials  and 

Hoist  and  dump  body,  built  by  the  Washiiigton  State  Highway 
Department,  are  mounted  on  a  ly^-ton  Kelly  Springfield 
truck  which  was  WW  I  Army  surplus.    Equipment 
such  as  this  aided  the  accelerated 
postwar  highway  program. 


*  Indiana's  lii^liway  commission  later  was  challonffed  on  its 
constitutionality  which  postponed  its  participation  until  1919." 


204 


equipment  to  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  for  dis- 
tribution to  the  State  hio-]iway  departments  for  use 
on  Federal-aid  roads.  The  Secretary  Avas  authorized 
to  retain  10  percent  of  the  material  for  the  Depart- 
ment's use.  The  value  of  the  surplus  materials  turned 
over  to  the  States  totaled  $139  million  by  July  1,  1922, 
when  the  distribution  was  essentially  completed." 

The  transfer  of  surplus  war  equipment  played  a 
major  role  in  lamiching-  the  postwar  construction. 
Many  States  were  able  to  continue  highway  construc- 
tion and  maintenance  durino-  that  time  only  because 
they  I'eceived  the  surplus  equipment.-" 

The   Federal   Highway  Act  of   1921 

The  appropriations  for  Federal  aid  for  roads  ex- 
tended only  through  fiscal  year  1921.  Consequently, 
Congress,  in  1921,  had  to  make  a  decision  whether  or 
not  to  continue  the  program,  and  this  provided  a 
chance  to  reevaluate  the  entire  concept.  There  was 
considerable  debate  as  to  whether  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment should  construct  a  system  of  national  highways 
directly  or  continue  with  the  Federal-State  coopera- 
tive plan.     Again,  the  constitutional  issue  was  raised. 

Controversy  also  developed  about  what  type  of 
roads  should  be  built  with  Federal -aid  funds.  One 
position  was  that  the  funds  should  be  used  for  inter- 
state highways  which  would  serve  as  main  lines  for 
the  State  and  county  road  networks.  The  other  posi- 
tion was  that  the  most  important  roads  for  the  welfare 
of  the  country  were  the  local  roads  connecting  the 
farmer  with  his  market  and  that,  therefore,  those 
should  be  built  before  the  interstate  roads  which 
seemed  to  serve  mostly  the  tourists. 

These  issues  were  decided  in  the  1921  Act.  The 
Federal  aid  concept  in  a  Federal-State  cooperative 
program  was  reaffirmed. 

The  "character  of  road"  issue  was  resolved  by  a 
most  important  new  i*equirement — that  Federal-aid 
fimds  should  be  expended  only  upon  a  federally  ap- 
proved, State  selected  s^'stem  of  main  connecting 
interstate  (primary)  and  intercounty  (secondary) 
rural  roads,  limited  to  7  percent  of  a  State's  total  road 
mileage.  The  7  percent  limitation  was  based  on  a 
concept  that  the  system  should  be  limted  to  a  mileage 
which  could  be  constructed  in  a  reasonable  period  of 
time.  Once  the  State  had  provided  for  the  construc- 
tion and  maintenance  of  highways  equal  to  7  percent, 
then  mileage  could  be  added  to  either  system  as  funds 
became  available  and  with  the  approval  of  the  Secre- 
tary of  Agriculture.  The  Act  further  provided  that 
not  more  than  three-sevenths  of  the  total  mileage 
could  be  used  for  the  primary  system,  thus,  a  balanced 
program  was  assured.  Xo  more  than  60  percent  of 
any  State's  Federal-aid  apportionment  could  be  spent 
on  the  primar\^  system,  except  with  the  appi'oval  of 
the  Secretary,  thus,  establishing  the  principle  of  cate- 
gorical funding  (using  Federal-aid  funds  only  for 
specific  purposes  or  programs). 

Another  new  requirement  in  the  1921  Act  was  that 
when  the  States  were  preparing  their  design  standards 
and  specifications  for  higliway  projects,  they  should 
take  into  consideration  the  durability  of  the  type  of 
surface  and  kinds  of  materials  that  would  best  suit 
each  locality  and  that  would  adequately  meet  the 
existing  and  the  "probable  character  and  extent  of  the 


Section   of   Missouri   route   79   south   of   Hannibal   in   "Mark 
Twain"  country.     The  gorge  had  become  a  dump  but  was 
reclaimed  for  the  new  road  site.    Scenic  turnouts  allow 
the  traveler  to  enjoy  the  rustic  beauty  of  the  area. 

future  traffic,"  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Federal 
agency.  This  was  apparently  addressed,  in  part  to 
those  States  that  had  been  concerned  about  the  mean- 
ing of  a  provision  of  the  1916  Act  that  "...  the 
Secretary  of  Agriculture  shall  approve  only  such 
projects  as  may  be  substantial  in  character.  .  .  ." 

The  1921  Act  strengthened  several  other  provisions 
of  the  1916  Act  by : 

•  Broadening  the  requirement  for  a  State  highway 
department,  or  equivalent,  to  require  that  such 
organization  be  suitably  equipped  and  organized 
to  administer  the  program  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  Federal  agency. 

•  Providing  that  the  State  must  have  already 
made  provisions  for  the  State's  share  of  funds 
required  each  year  for  construction,  reconstruc- 
tion and  maintenance  of  all  Federal-aid  highways 
within  the  State  and  that  these  funds  must  be 
under  the  direct  control  of  the  State  highway  de- 
partment before  any  project  submitted  by  a  State 
could  be  approved  by  the  Secretary. 

•  Liberalizing  the  50  percent  Federal-State  match- 
ing funds  by  increasing  the  Federal  share  of 
project  costs,  on  a  sliding  scale  computed  by 
formula,  in  those  States  having  large  Federal 
public  land  areas. 

•  Amending  the  availability  of  funds  for  expendi- 
ture to  provide  that  funds  would  be  available  for 
expenditure    until    the   end    of    the    second    fiscal 


205 


year  following  the  fiscal  year  for  which  they  were 
appropriated. 

•  Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  Agriciilture  to  pro- 
ceed to  place  any  road  in  a  proper  state  of  main- 
tenance if  any  State  failed  to  do  so  within  90 
days  after  having  been  notified  to  do  it  and  to 
charge  the  costs  of  such  work  against  the  Federal 
funds  allotted  to  that  State.  Furthermore,  it 
stipulated  that  no  other  propects  would  be  ap- 
proved until  the  State  reimbursed  the  Federal 
Government  for  the  costs  of  the  repairs  and  that 
the  money  paid  would  be  reapportioned  among 
all  the  States  for  construction  of  roads.  The 
Secretary,  then,  could  approve  further  projects 
submitted  by  that  State. 

•  Providing  that  funds  deducted  for  costs  of  ad- 
ministration could  be  used  for  highway  research 
and  investigational  studies  independently  or  in 
cooperation  with  the  State  highway  departments 
and  other  agencies. 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921,  as  it  amended 
and  supplemented  the  1916  Act,  constituted  the  re- 
mainder of  the  basic  philosophies,  principles,  policies, 
procedures  and  controls  which  still  exist  for  the  pro- 
gram. 

The  appropriations  in  the  1921  Act  provided  funds 
for  forest  roads  and  trails  in  the  amount  of  $5  million 
for  fiscal  year  1922  and  $10  million  for  fiscal  year 
1923,  but  it  appropriated  Federal-aid  system  funds 
only  for  fiscal  year  1922  in  the  amount  of  $75  million. 

Contract  Authority 

However,  when  the  Post  Office  Appropriation  Act 
for  1923  was  approved  June  19,  1922,  it  contained 
provisions  amending  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of 
1916  to  provide  for  the  continuance  of  the  highway 
program  through  fiscal  years  1923,  1924,  and  1925. 
Important  new  language  was  used  in  the  Act — instead 
of  providing  appropriations  for  the  3  years,  it  stated 
"...  there  is  hereby  authorized  to  be  appropriated, 
.  .  .  the  following  additional  sums.  .  .  ." 

This  language  meant  that  it  was  still  necessary  to 
go  through  the  appropriation  process  by  further  legis- 
lation. The  actual  funding  of  the  authorization  then 
became  a  matter  for  consideration  later  by  the  appro- 
priations committees.  In  this  instance  the  "authorized 
to  be  appropriated"  language  was  used  in  an  Appro- 
priation Act — however,  the  following  additional  pro- 
vision was  included  regarding  the  funds  for  fiscal 
year  1923: 

Provided,  That  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  shall  act 
upon  projects  submitted  to  him  under  his  apportionment 
of  this  authorization  and  his  approval  of  any  such  project 
shall  be  deemed  a  contractual  obligation  of  the  Federal 
Government  for  the  payment  of  its  proportional  contri- 
bution  thereto. 

The  principle  thus  established  is  commonly  called 
"contract  authority,"  which  meant  that  the  full  sum 
of  money  authorized  in  the  Act  could  Ix^  obligated 
hefore  any  legislation  had  been  passed  to  provide 
liquidating  cash  to  pay  the  amounts  claimed  by  the 
States. 


The  impact  of  this  change  in  the  method  of  au- 
thorizing and  funding  the  Federal-aid  highway  pro- 
gram was  vast  because: 

•  It  was  essential  that  the  States  be  provided  ample 
time  to  prepare  to  participate  in  the  program. 

•  It  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  States  to 
proceed  with  preparatory  work  and  costs  without 
assurance  from  the  Federal  Government  that  the 
apportionments  would  be  fimded. 

•  It  was  essential  that  Federal  funds  be  available 
for  prompt  payment  of  State  claims  for  reim- 
bursement. 

•  It  was  not  efficient  money  management  to  appro- 
priate the  full  program  funds  for  a  2-  or  3-year 
I^eriod  awaiting  annual  api^ortionment  and  an 
additional  5  or  more  years  before  a  given  fiscal 
year's  need  for  actual  reimbursement.  Under  this 
system,  large  sums  would  be  tied  up  awaiting 
eventual  disbursement. 

•  It  was  assurance  of  the  continuity  of  the  program 
because  the  program  was  then  dependent  only 
upon  obtaining  future  authorizations. 

The   Federal-State   Relationship 

A^nhien  Federal  assistance  for  the  development  of 
highways  was  first  considered,  there  was  no  "model 
program"  to  copy.  AVliile  Congress  must  be  given 
the  final  credit,  many  of  the  pioneer  leaders  in  the 
emerging  State  highway  departments,  highway  in- 
dustries and  associations,  and  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  in  the  Department  of  Agriculture  all  played  a 
major  part  in  developing  the  legislation.  Among  all 
major  Federal  assistance  programs,  the  Federal-aid 
highway  program  has  been  one  of  the  most  successful 
in  its  effectiveness,  efficiency  and  its  cooperative  ad- 
ministration by  the  Federal  Government  and  the 
States. 

The  very  limited  role  of  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry, 
when  it  was  created  in  1893,  was  strictly  spelled  out 
in  Secretary  of  Agriculture  J.  Sterling  Morton's  letter 
appointing  General  Roy  Stone,  a  prominent  New 
York  civil  engineer  and  Secretary  of  the  League  of 
National  Roads,  to  the  position  of  Special  Agent  and 
Engineer  for  Road  Inquiry.  The  Secretary  cautioned : 
"The  Department  is  to  furnish  information,  not  to 
direct  and  fonnulate  any  system  of  organization,  how- 
ever efficient  or  desirable  it  may  be.  Any  such  effort 
on  its  part  would  soon  make  it  subject  to  hostile  criti- 
cism. .  .  ."  ^^ 

^Vliile  the  role  of  the  Federal  Government  was  to 
be  greatly  strengthened  and  broadened  both  by  legisla- 
tion and  the  personal  policy  of  future  highway  ad- 
ministrators, the  underlying  philosophy  behind  the 
original  directive  has  survived. 

Of  great  significance  in  the  shaping  of  the  Federal- 
State  relationship  in  the  administration  of  the  Federal- 
aid  highway  program  was  the  appointment  of  Thomas 
H.  MacDonald  as  the  Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  on  May  3,  1919.  At  the  time  of  his  appoint- 
ment, Mr.  MacDonald  was  the  Chief  Engineer  of  the 
Iowa  State  Highway  Commission  and  had  been  a 
member  (since  1915)  of  the  Executive  Committee  of 
AASHO  which  was  created  late  in  1914.  It  was 
on  the  recommendation  of  State  highway  officials  that 
Mr.  MacDonald  was  selected  to  succeed  Logan  Waller 
Page  who  died  unexpectedly  in  December  1918. 


206 


Mr.  MacDoiiald,  known  tliron<ihout  liis  oaroer  with 
the  Bureau  as  "tlie  Chief,"  was  hir<>-oly  responsible 
for  tlie  (levelopinont  and  success  of  llie  Federal-aid 
higlnvay  pro<irani  and,  so  important  to  that  success, 
the  buildino;  of  a  cooperative  Federal-State  relation- 
ship founded  on  mutual  respect.  The  American  Asso- 
ciation of  State  IIi<>hway  Oilicials  (AASIIO)  declared 
in  1964  its  view  of  Mr.  MacDonald's  role  as  follows: 

There  were  spokosmpii  for  botli  plans*  and  they  were 
articulate.  It  \vas  in  no  small  part  due  to  Mr.  MacDonald's 
efforts  that  the  Federal-aid  program  was  the  one  that 
was  adopted.  It  was  his  contention  that  such  a  program 
would  encourage  development  of  highway  technolosy  and 
the  creation  of  a  great  networlc  of  highways  throughout 
the  Nation,  instead  of  a  few  Federal  routes  and  some 
spiderweb  highway  systems  within  the  individual  States. 
The  results  prove  that  contention  was  correct. 

He  felt  that  without  the  encouragement  and  stabilizing 
influence  of  Federal-aid,  some  of  the  States  would  have  a 
difficult  time  developing  adequate  and  competent  Highway 
Departments  and  effective  highway  programs. 

It  was  his  belief  that  the  States  must  retain  the  initia- 
tive in  administering  the  Federal-aid  highway  programs, 
and  that  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  should  make  such 
checks  as  necessary  to  protect  the  Federal  interest." 

During   his    entire    administration    of    the    Bureau 
(1919-1953),  Mr.  MacDonald.  clearly  ran  the  oro-aniza- 


*  "National"   highways  vs.   federally  assisted,   State  admin- 
istered progi-am. 

Wasliiugton,  D.C.,  ivas  as  popular  icith  tourists  at  the 
turn  of  the  century  as  it  is  today. 


w 


IMAfiouND  Washinoioh  AuiD  Co." 
.Stiuliwi  lUlliI    ll\l>.i.A\V.NW.        i 


tion.  There  was  never  any  (piestion  who  was  "Chief." 
He  did  not  believe  in  staff  meetings  or  internal  group 
decisionnudving.  lie  discussed  policies  and  problems 
nornuilly  on  a  oiuvto-one  basis  with  a  very  small 
group  of  his  most  trusted  assistants,  but  in  the  end, 
he  made  the  policy  and  he  made  the  decisions. 

In  his  external  relationshii)s,  Mr.  MacDonald  was  a 
strong  believer  in  committee  or  group  action.  He  did 
everything  possible  to  strengthen  the  policynuiking 
role  of  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials  and  its  numerous  technical  committees.  Sim- 
ilarly, he  suppoi-ted  the  organization,  cooperation  and 
interaction  of  other  special  interest  and  professional 
groups  who  were  interested  in  or  affected  by  the  Na- 
tion's highway  program.* 

There  was  no  paradox  in  Mr.  IMacDonald's  diamet- 
rically different  approach  to  internal  and  external 
administration  of  the  highway  program.  He  could 
control  the  Federal  internal  policies — and  this  ex- 
tended beyond  him  through  the  Federal  department 
level  to  the  pertinent  congressional  couuiiittees.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  external  elements  of  the  total 
highway  industiy  and  interests  were  so  widespread 
and  diverse  that  independent  and  singular  views  could 
well  lead  to  chaos,  inaction  and  conflict.  His  solution 
was  organized  group  policy  and  decisionmaking,  inter- 
communication, interaction,  compromise,  all  toward 
common  goals. 

Mr.  MacDonald's  administrative  skill,  his  strong 
sense  of  direction,  his  dedication,  and  his  long  tenure 
in  office — spanning  34  years — permitted  the  basic 
Federal-State  working  relations  to  become  fully  estab- 
lished and  to  demonstrate  their  worth.  During  his 
tenure,  agency  personnel  were  well-trained  in  the 
MacDonald  philosophy  that  the  Bureau  should  main- 
tain as  low  a  pi'ofile  as  possible  while  quietly  maintain- 
ing a  role  of  encouragement,  leadership  and  protection 
of  the  national  interest. 

Reflecting  on  the  pioneers  on  the  State  side  of  the 
Federal-State  relationship,  major  personal  contribu- 
tions were  made  by  many  individuals  over  the  years. 
G.  P.  Coleman,  HigliAvay  Commissioner  for  the  State 
of  Virginia,  was  perhaps  the  individual  who  played 
the  most  important  part  in  the  actual  creation  of 
AASHO  in  1914. 

Mr.  Coleman,  in  turn,  singled  out  A.  G.  Batchelder, 
Executive  Secretary  to  the  American  Automobile  Asso- 
ciation, for  special  credit.  Mr.  Coleman  also  gave 
much  credit  to  the  assistance  of  some  16  other  heads 
of  State  highway  departments  or  commissions  for  the 
creation  of  AASHO.  In  any  event,  the  creation  of 
the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
w^as  a  "cornerstone"  upon  which  the  successful  Federal- 
State  relationship  was  to  be  built. 

Over  the  years  there  have  been  a  great  many  out- 
standing and  influential  heads  of  the  various  State 
highway    departments   and   commissions   who   played 


*  These  included,  but  were  not  limited  to :  The  American 
Road  Builders'  Association,  Associated  General  Contractors, 
Automotive  Safety  Foundation,  National  Highway  Users  Con- 
ference, National  Safety  Council,  American  Trucking  Associa- 
tion, National  Association  of  County  Engineers,  American 
Public  Works  Association,  American  Municipal  Association, 
Institute  of  TraflSc  Engineers,  and  the  Highway  Research 
Board  which  played  a  very  special  role  in  highway  develop- 
ment. 


207 


major  roles  in  strengthening^  AASHO  and  in  shaping 
the  Federal-aid  highway  program.  These  men  are  too 
numerous  to  cite  individually,  but  collectively,  much 
of  the  success  of  the  Federal-State  relationship  must 
be  attributed  to  their  wisdom  and  leadership. 

The   Interaction   of  AASHO  and    BPR 

Since  the  framers  of  the  1916  Act  agreed  that  the 
key  to  a  successful  Federal-State  relationship  in  the 
administration  of  the  Fedei'al-aid  highway  program 
at  the  policy  level,  at  least,  was  interaction  and  co- 
operation of  the  Federal  Government  with  a  "federa- 
tion" of  the  States,  the  appropriate  instrument  to 
accomplish  this  was  the  American  Association  of  State 
HighAvay  Officials. 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  became  a  "member 
department"  of  AASHO  in  1919  and,  through  Mr. 
MacDonald,  a  member  of  the  Executive  Committee. 
By  the  terms  of  the  AASHO  revised  Constitution, 
the  Federal  Highway  Administrator  became  an  ex 
officio  member  of  the  Executive  Committee  in  1957.*  ^^ 
During  this  long  period  of  time,  cooperative  effort 
toward  common  goals  has  been  the  basis  of  the  re- 
lationship between  the  Federal  agency  and  AASHO 
with  each  organization  fully  respecting  the  right  of 
the  other  to  hold  individual  viewpoints. 

The  fact  that  in  1923  AASHO  located  its  headquar- 
ters office  in  Washington  in  the  charge  of  an  Executive 
Secretary,  who  traditionally  has  been  a  strong  and 
capable  representative  of  all  the  States,  provided  both 
BPR  and  AASHO  with  the  opportunity  for  effective 
day-to-day  communication. 

The  principal  interaction  between  AASHO  and  the 
Bureau  at  the  Washington  level  has  been  in  the  areas 
of  proposed  legislation;  interpretation  of  the  effects 
of  legislation  on  the  States  and  plans  for  its  imple- 
mentation; assurance  of  a  viable  AASHO  committee 
structure;  the  agenda  for  the  annual  AASHO  and 
regional  AASHO  meetings;  joint  consideration  of  re- 
lationships with  the  many  other  national  associations 
that  have  been  involved  in,  or  have  an  interest  in,  the 
highway  program;  and  other  subjects  of  mutual  in- 
terest that  are  best  handled  on  a  national  basis  rather 
than  Avith  the  individual  States. 

Following  the  extensive  hearings  which  preceded 
enactment  of  the  1944  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act,  con- 
gressional highway  leaders  requested  that  in  the  future 
the  States  develop  their  policy  statements  on  highway 
legislation  jointly  through  the  AASHO  mechanism 
as  a  basis  for  testimony  by  an  AASHO  spokesman 
rather  than  appear  individually  to  present  State  view- 
points. This  policy  continues,  though  upon  rare  occa- 
sions a  State  has  asked  permission  from  a  congressional 
committee  to  appear  individually.^* 

A  very  extensive  and  highly  important  area  of  in- 
teraction and  cooperation  between  AASHO  and  the 
Bureau  has  been  in  the  establishment  and  activities 
of  the  various  committees  of  AASHO.  At  the  top 
of  the  AASHO  committee  structure,  as  defined  in  the 
1914  Constitution,  was  the  Executive  Committee  which 


*  To  carry  out  the  broader  requirements  of  new  leRislation 
and  the  impetus  of  changed  social  values,  AASHO  officially 
changed  its  name  to  tlie  American  Association  of  State  High- 
way and  Transportation  Officials  (AASHTO)  in  1973.  The 
reconstitution  of  AASHO  resulted  in  the  Secretary  of  Trans- 
portation's designation  as  the  Federal  member. 


was  responsible  for  legislative  matters  of  a  national 
character.  In  addition,  the  Constitution  provided  for 
a  Finance  Committee,  a  Committee  on  Tests  and  In- 
vestigations for  evaluating  various  kinds  of  materials, 
and  a  Committee  on  Standards  for  establishing 
methods  of  construction  and  maintenance.  Eventually, 
as  circumstances  required,  other  standing  committees 
were  formed,  some  with  working  subcommittees.  Spe- 
cial committees  and  joint  committees  have  been  estab- 
lished whenever  the  need  for  such  committees  became 
apparent. 

The  AASHO  committee  system,  supported  by  BPR 
personnel,  has  been  a  strong  factor  in  the  successful 
and  invaluable  contributions  made  to  improving  high- 
way administrative  and  engineering  technology.  For 
many  years,  BPR  staff  members  chaired  many  of  the 
AASHO  committees  and  served  as  secretaries  on  many 
others.  Later  the  policy  was  changed  to  name  State 
officials  as  chainnen  and  BPR  officials  as  secretaries 
when  such  practice  was  mutually  beneficial  to  the 
highway  program. 

Through  refinement  of  the  state-of-the-art  in  all 
aspects  of  highway  engineering  and  administration — 
which,  in  turn,  insured  continual  improvement  in  the 
quality,  effectiveness,  and  efficiency  of  program  imple- 
mentation— the  committee  activities  of  AASHO  have 
proven  to  be  the  Association's  greatest  strength. 

BPR   and   the   Highway  Research   Board 

The  need  for  a  national  program  of  highway  re- 
search was  recognized  in  1919.  It  was  envisioned  as 
a  national  program  of  highway  research  that  would 
be  coordinated  by  the  National  Research  Council  (of 
the  National  Academy  of  Sciences)  with  participation 
by  such  organizations  as  AASHO,  BPR,  the  engineer- 
ing colleges  and  experiment  stations,  municipal  testing 
laboratories,  manufacturers'  research  departments  and 
associations,  commercial  laboratories,  technical  soci- 
eties, and  consulting  engineers.^'^  "Wlien  the  National 
Advisory  Board  on  HigliAvay  Research*  was  estab- 
lished in  1920,  its  purpose  was  "To  prepare  a  compre- 
hensive national  program  for  highway  research;  to 
assist  existing  organizations  to  coordinate  their  ac- 
tivities therein;  and  to  collect  and  distribute  informa- 
tion of  completed  and  current  research."  ^^ 

From  the  very  beginning,  the  Board  was  organized 
into  a  series  of  committees  headed  by  an  Executive 
Director.  Under  the  Board's  bylaws,  ex  officio  mem- 
bers were  designated  from  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
and  the  National  Research  Council  Division  of  En- 
gineering. In  1945  the  Executive  Secretary  of 
AASHO  was  also  made  an  ex  officio  member  of  the 
Highway  Research  Board  (HRB). 

During  the  early  years,  the  Board  was  supported 
largely  by  the  BPR,  both  in  terms  of  dollars  and  in 
staff  effort.  During  the  first  year,  BPR,  through  a 
contractual  agreement,  supplied  $12,000  of  the  total 
$14,500  budget  and  continued  financial  support  aver- 
aging about  62  percent  of  the  total  operational  budget 
for  the  first  24  years.  Many  of  the  States  had  no 
legal  authority  to  make  funds  available  to  the  HRB 
unless  the  funds  were  to  be  used  for  research  projects 
within    their   own    States.-'      Gradually   this   problem 


*  Tlie  name  of  the  organization  was  changed  to  the  Highway 
Researcli  Board  in  .January  192.'")  and  to  Transportation  Re- 
search Board  in  March  1974. 


208 


was  resolved,  and  since  1945  the  BPR's  support  of 
the  HRB's  operational  budget  has  averaged  about  14 
percent  and  that  from  the  State  liighway  departments 
about  60  percent.  The  balance  has  come  from  in- 
dustry and  cooperating  organizations  and  associa- 
tions. ^^  Incidentally,  the  operational  budget  of  the 
HUB  does  not  include  the  cost  of  the  actual  research 
activities  the  HRB  may  administer— such  funds  are 
provided  separately  for  specific  projects  by  the  BPR, 
the  States,  and,  as  appropirate,  private  industry  on 
a  project-by-pi'oject  basis. 

Among  the  various  regular  ongoiiig  programs  of 
HRB,  the  committee  activities  have  been  the  most 
important.  Committees  have  been  organized  within 
subject  matter  areas  and  can  be  created  or  terminated 
as  needs  dictate.  The  membership  of  the  committees 
have  always  included  technical  specialists  from  BPR 
and  the  States;  often  these  specialists  have  been  se- 
lected to  serve  as  either  the  committee  chairman  or 
secretar}'.  Membership  on  the  committees  has  also 
included  specialists  from  universities  and  colleges, 
technical  and  professional  associations,  and  the  pri- 
vate sector  in  the  wide  scope  of  tlie  liighway  industry. 
By  1926  six  committees  had  been  formed  on  economic 
theory  of  highway  improvement,  structural  design  of 
roads,  character  and  use  of  road  materials,  highway 
traffic  analj'sis,  highway  finance,  and  maintenance. 

Since  1922  the  Board  has  held  annual  meetings. 
These  meetings  have  provided  a  forum  for  the  pres- 
entation of  technical  and  administrative  research 
papers  and  have  presented  an  invaluable  opportunity 
to  all  segments  of  the  industry  interested  in  highway 
reseai'ch  to  assemble  and  exchange  information  on  the 
latest  research  developments.     Attendance  at  the  an- 


nual meetings  has  shown  an  almost  continuous  increase 
from  the  30  who  attended  the  first  meeting  in  1922 
to  a  level  that  approaclies  3,500  today.  From  the 
beginning  until  1962,  the  technical  papers  presented 
at  the  HRB  annual  meetings  were  published  in  the 
IIRB  Proceedings.  Other  HRB  publications  have 
served  over  the  yeai'S  to  distribute  research  informa- 
tion. 

A  highway  Research  Information  Service  (HRIS) 
was  instituted  in  1930  for  a  broader  means  of  re- 
search exchange.  At  one  point  the  Director  of  HRB, 
Roy  W.  Crum  (1928-1951),  said  he  had  always  felt 
that  HRB  was  an  educational  institution  and  that 
"The  end  product  of  our  work  is  usable  technical  in- 
formation, but  it  will  be  of  no  value  to  anyone  unless 
it  is  learned  and  put  to  use  by  the  technical  man."  ^^ 
In  addition,  HRB  has  produced  Ilighioay  Research 
Absti-acts,  IIRB  Bihliography^  Annual  Report.,  and 
many  other  publications  on  highway  and  transporta- 
tion research,  which  effectively  carries  out  its  mission 
"to  collect  and  distribute  information." 

In  1945,  the  HRB  inaugurated  the  Highway  Re- 
search Correlation  Service  (HRCS)  which  greatly 
strengthened  its  role  in  implementing  the  concept 
upon  which  it  was  created.  The  method  of  operation 
of  the  HRCS  was  "for  a  staff  of  competent  engineers 
and  other  technologists  who  can  work  in  the  various 
areas  of  interest,  travel  about  the  country,  and  find 
out  the  things  we  need  to  know  about  facilities,  per- 
sonnel, and  needed  information.  They  will  carry  in- 
formation from  one  State  to  another,  or  to  other 
research  agencies.  In  the  progress  of  this  work  they 
will    gather    for    dissemination    much    valuable    and 


A  typical  "trumpet"  interchange  providing  service  to  and  from  1-80  (approaching  irom  left)  and  local  route  111  nearDes  Moines,  Iowa. 


209 


usable  information.^"  Meanwhile,  it  had  been  deter- 
mined that  the  States  could  use  a  portion  of  their 
114  percent  Federal-aid  planning  apportionments  for 
participation  in  the  HRCS  so  long  as  State  matching 
funds  were  also  provided.  The  timing  of  the  creation 
of  the  HRCS  coincided  with  the  initiation  of  the 
greatly  expanded  postwar  Federal-aid  highway  pro- 
gram. This  permitted  the  growth  of  HRB  at  a  time 
when  it  was  needed  most  to  keep  pace  with  the  needs 
of  the  highway  program. 

In  1962  the  National  Cooperative  Highway  Re- 
seai'ch  Program  (NCHRP)  was  established  through 
which  a  national  program  of  highway  research  could 
be  developed  jointly  by  the  States  (through  AASHO), 
the  BPR  and  the  HRB,  under  a  plan  of  pooled  fi- 
nancing by  the  States  and  BPR.  This  program  came 
soon  after  the  initiation  of  the  Interstate  program 
when  many  new  problems  were  beginning  to  emerge. 

Between  1964  and  1967,  the  HRB  initiated  an 
automated  Highway  Research  Information  Service 
(HRIS).  Items  selected  for  HRIS  processing  fell 
into  two  general  categories,  research-in-progress  re- 
ports and  abstracts  of  published  research  articles  or  re- 
ports. The  program  was  extended  to  include  foreign 
research-in-progress  and  foreign  language  research 
reports  through  cooperative  exchange  agreements  ar- 
ranged with  international  organizations  and  other 
nations.  Presently,  from  computer  storage,  HRIS 
provides  abstracts  of  published  works  and  summaries 
of  ongoing  i-esearch  projects  in  response  to  specific 
inquiries. 

A  research  library  was  initiated  in  1946.  Today, 
it  plays  a  very  important  role  in  not  only  providing 
the  specialized  professional  library  services  the  TRB 
requires  for  its  activities,  but  it  also  maintains  an 
awareness  of  the  subject  content  of  other  libraries  and 
other  institutions  that  may  possess  material  of  TRB 
interest.  Copies  of  all  TRB  publications  are  also 
maintained  by  the  library. 

Current  Status   of  the   Federal-State   Relationship 

The  unique  Federal-State  partnership  in  the  Fed- 
eral-aid highway  program  still  exists  despite  the  con- 
strictions placed  upon  it  by  the  changing  climate  in 
which  the  highway  program  must  be  administered. 

^Vhen  one  speaks  today  about  the  Federal  side  of 
the  Federal-State  relationship  in  the  administration 
of  the  Federal-aid  highway  program,  actually  the 
Federal  Highway  Administration  is  no  longer  the 
only  Federal  agency  involved.  Many  other  Federal 
agencies  are  now  legally  involved  in  the  program,  e.g., 
the  Environmental  Protection  Agency;  the  Depart- 
ments of  the  Interior,  Commerce,  Labor,  Housing  and 
Urban  Development,  and  Justice;  the  Occupational 
Safety  and  Health  Administration;  the  Office  of  Eco- 
nomic Opportunity;  the  Urban  Mass  Transportation 
Administration ;  the  National  Highway  Traffic  Safety 
Administration ;  the  Corps  of  Engineers ;  and  a  num- 
ber of  Federal  councils,  commissions,  and  boards. 

Somewhat  the  same  situation  exists  when  one  speaks 
about  the  State  side  of  the  Federal-State  relationship. 
Many  of  the  provisions  of  recent  Federal  (and  some 
State)  legislation  require  the  States  to  coordinate  with 
their  local  subdivisions  and  State  and  regional  plan- 


ning groups  and  commissions.  In  some  program 
categories,  project  initiation  is  vested  with  the  local 
subdivisions. 

The  increasing  complexity  of  Federal  highway  legis- 
lation and  other  interrelated  and  interacting  Federal 
legislation  obviously  have  had  an  inevitable  impact  on 
the  administration  of  the  Federal-aid  program.  The 
early  procedures  were  strikingly  simple  by  comparison 
with  today's  requirements.  The  problem  then  was  the 
extensive  centralization  of  final  authority  at  the  Fed- 
eral level  in  Washington.  Over  the  years  this  pi'oblem 
was  gradually  corrected  by  decentralization,  but  in- 
tricate programs  and  project  processing  requirements 
were  substituted  by  other  important,  but  sometimes 
conflicting,  programs,  making  accomplishments  tedi- 
ously slow. 


Lansing,  Mich.,  street  scene  about  1930.    Note  the  brick 
pavement,  railroad  warning  device  and  the  municipal  bus. 

Legislative  Developments* 

Many  additions  and  changes  in  the  Federal-aid 
highway  program  evolved  through  continuing  Federal 
legislation  after  1921.  Most  of  these  have  increased 
the  effectiveness  of  the  program  but  have  resulted  in 
more  complex  procedures  for  administering  the  pro- 
gram. 

During  the  Depression  years  larger  regular  author- 
izations and  special  appropriations  were  made  to  pro- 
vide employment  opportunities,  and  special  regulations 
were  necessary  to  insure  that  this  purpose  was 
achieved.  For  the  first  time,  Federal-aid  funds  were 
made  available  for  extensions  to  the  Federal-aid  sys- 
tem into  and  through  municipalities  and  also  for 
secondary  feeder  roads. 

In  1934,  11/^  percent  of  apportioned  funds  were 
made  eligible  for  surveys,  planning,  and  engineering 
investigations.  Later  this  was  broadened  to  include 
highway  research  and  statewide  highway  plannmg 
surveys.  Special  funds  were  provided  for  the  elimina- 
tion of  hazardous  railroad  grade  crossings. 

In  1944  the  Federal-aid  system  was  expanded  to 
include  a  secondary  system  of  farm-to-market  roads 
and  an  urban  program  of  extensions  of  primary  routes 
in  urban  areas  of  5,000  population  or  more.  In  addi- 
tion   a    40,000-mile    National    System    of    Interstate 


*  This  section  is  a  very  lirief  summary  of  the  legislation 
to  identify  major  trends.  Many  of  these  points  are  discussed 
in  more  detail  later  in  this  and  other  chapters. 


210 


The  1965  Higlncarj  Bcautification  Act  gave  neio  emphasis   to 
programs  of  landscaping  and  scenic  enhancement 
on  Federal-aid  highways. 

Highvi-ays  was  called  for  but  no  funds  were  pro^dded 
for  its  construction.  The  1944  legislation  also  per- 
mitted the  use  of  Federal-aid  funds  for  acquiring 
highway'  rights-of-way. 

By  1950  highwa3's  were  being  planned  or  built  on 
more  new  locations.  To  allay  fears  of  community 
economic  depressions,  legislation  was  enacted  which 
required  States  to  hold  local  public  hearings  with  re- 
spect to  any  proposed  project  that  would  bypass  any 
city  or  town. 

The  Interstate  System  routes  in  each  State  were 
approved  in  1947,  but  it  Avas  not  until  the  1952  legis- 
lation that  specific  funding  was  authorized  for  Inter- 
state construction,  and  then,  only  in  token  amounts. 

Congress  provided  substantial  long-term  funding  in 
1956  to  complete  the  National  System  of  Interstate 
and  Defense  Highways.  The  funding  authorizations 
in  the  1956  Act  were  increased  from  $175  million  to 
$2.2  billion  per  year  for  fiscal  year  1957  with  addi- 
tional sums  for  other  years.  To  finance  the  program, 
Congress  established  the  Highway  Trust  Fund.  The 
1956  Act  planned  for  the  completion  of  the  Interstate 
System  in  16  years,  thus,  accelerating  construction 
work  in  all  States.  It  increased  administrative  re- 
quirements by  pi-oviding  for  utility  relocations,  estab- 
lishing vehicle  size  and  weight  limits  on  Interstate 
highways,  providing  for  archaeological  and  paleonto- 
logical  salvage,  and  applying  the  provisions  of  the 
Davis-Bacon  Act  of  prevailing  wage  rates  to  Inter- 
state construction  projects. 


The  tremendous  expansion  of  the  Federal-aid  high- 
way program  by  the  1956  Act,  together  with  its  new 
provisions  and  added  complexity,  made  necessai'y  an 
intensive  efl'ort  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and 
the  States  (through  AASHO)  to  simplify,  standard- 
ize, and  expedite  procedures.  Of  most  importance 
was  a  complete  reorganization  by  Public  Roads,  to- 
gether with  an  increased  decentralization  of  respon- 
sibility and  authority  to  its  field  offices.  The  basic 
separate  Federal-State  roles  were  not  changed  by  the 
1956  Act,  but  additional  and  more  complex  project 
steps  had  to  be  inti'oduced  to  satisfy  the  new  legisla- 
tive provisions. 

The  highway  acts  and  other  interacting  legislation 
after  1956  provided  fui*ther  program  expansion,  par- 
ticularly for  the  basic  Federal-aid  systems,  and  in- 
jected mox'e  refinements,  additions,  and  controls  into 
the  px'ogram  which  complicated  the  Federal-State  re- 
lationship and  introduced  new  procedures.  One  such 
requirement  in  1962  was  the  continuing,  comprehensive, 
cooperative  transportation  planning  process  (known 
as  the  3C  process)  that  required  States  and  local 
communities  to  develop  cooperatively  long-range  high- 
way plans  and  programs  in  urban  areas  of  more  than 
50,000  population  and  to  properly  coordinate  them 
with  the  programs  for  other  forms  of  transportation. 
Another  requirement  in  the  1962  Federal-Aid  High- 
way Act  was  that  the  State  highway  departments 
furnish  satisfactoi-y  assurance  that  advisory  assistance 
was  provided  for  families  displaced  by  Federal-aid 
highway  consti*uction.  It  also  provided  that  limited 
amounts  of  Federal-aid  funds  could  be  used  to  defray 
the  costs  of  relocating  families  and  businesses.  This 
program  was  broadened  later  and  culminated  in  the 
Uniform  Relocation  Assistance  and  Real  Property 
Acquisition  Policies  Act  of  1970  making  relocation 
assistance  applicable  in  all  federal  assisted  programs. 

In  1965  an  amendment  to  the  1956  Highway  Act 
prescribed  measures  to  be  taken  to  slow  the  rate  of 
traffic  accidents.  These  endeavors  led  ultimately  to 
the  enactment  of  the  Highway  Safety  Act  of  1966 
and  the  TOPICS  program  (Traffic  Operations  Pro- 
gram to  Increase  Capacity  and  Safety)  in  1968.  The 
Highway  Bcautification  Act  of  1965  established  two 
new  programs  on  control  of  junkyards  and  landscaping 
and  scenic  enhancement  and  expanded  the  scope  of 
the  outdoor  advertising  control  program. 

Equal  employment  oppoi'tunity  provisions  were  re- 
quired to  be  included  in  the  advertised  specifications 
for  contracts  on  Federal-aid  projects  in  1968. 

Legislation  in  1970  established  a  program  for  eco- 
nomic growth  centers  designed  to  revitalize  rural  and 
small  urban  areas,  a  new  iirban  highway  system,  and 
a  bridge  replacement  program  for  safety  improve- 
ments to  bridges  considered  structually  deficient  and 
functionally  obsolete.  In  addition,  there  were  new 
requirements  for  construction  of  replacement  housing, 
noise  standards  to  be  developed  and  requirements 
resulting  from  the  Clear  Air  Act. 

By  1973  the  requirements  of  highway  legislation 
and  other  legislation  liaving  a  direct  bearing  on  the 
highway  program  were  so  complex  that  establishing 
procedures  to  be  sure  the  requirements  were  being 
carried  out  was  a  monstrous  task.  Many  new  pro- 
grams often  had  separate  funding  which  meant  sep- 


211 


^ 


irl5    . 


JMSf 


\ 


'iiSSK. 


arate  budgeting  procedures,  as  well  as  separate 
reporting  and  accounting  procedures.  The  States 
and  the  FHWA  were  inundated  with  statistics. 

But  in  1973  major  highway  legislation  was  enacted 
Avhich  established  more  new  programs:  (1)  Safety 
construction — a  separate  program  for  safer  roads, 
roadside  obstacles,  high-hazard  locations,  and  pave- 
men  markings;  (2)  priority  primary  routes — high 
traffic  routes  on  the  Primary  S_ystem  which  connected 
to  the  Interstate  System;  and  (3)  urban  high  den- 
sity— high  traffic  routes  in  urbanized  areas  which  con- 
nected to  Interstate  routes.  Furthermore,  highway 
projects  on  Interstate  and  Urban  Systems  could  be 
traded  for  transit  projects.  In  addition,  bicycle  and 
pedestrian  pa'ths  could  be  constructed  along  highways, 
curb  ramps  for  the  handicapped  were  required,  and 
special  provisions  were  included  to  encourage  car- 
pooling. 

In  197-1:  requirements  for  transporting  the  elderly 
and  handicapi^ed  were  enacted,  along  with  enforced 
higher  limitations  on  sizes  and  weights  of  trucks 
and  buses  and  a  national  speed  limit  of  55  m.p.h. 
Funding  was  also  permitted  for  road  impi'ovements 
not  on  a  Federal-aid  system  for  the  first  time  since 
1921. 

It  would  normally  be  expected  that  such  a  large 
and  complex  program  would  require  a  large  and  com- 
plex organization  to  manage  the  program.  This  is 
not  the  case  in  the  highway  program,  primarily  for 
three  reasons.  The  first  is  the  unique  Federal-State 
partnership  which  has  already'  been  discussed.  The 
second  reason  is  that  as  the  program  has  grown,  more 
responsibilities  and  authority  have  been  decentralized 
to  the  FH'WA  field  offices  which  work  closely  with 
the  State  highway  departments.  The  third  reason  is 
that,  since  1893,  the  Federal  agency  responsible  for 
administering  the  highway  program  has  had  a  strong 
interest  in  training  and  initiated  its  first  formal  train- 
ing program  in  1905.  Since  then,  the  organization  has 
kept  pace  with  the  program  by  revising  and  updating 
its  training  program  as  new  requirements  arose. 

Management  of  the   Federal-Aid   Program 

The   Federal  Agency 

To  compi-ehend  the  management  of  such  a  large 
Fedei'al-aid  program,  it  is  necessary  first  to  under- 
stand the  Federal  agency  charged  with  the  respon- 
sibility for  administering  the  Federal  interest  in  the 
Nation's  principal  highway  programs  for  more  than 
80  years. 

The  original  agency  was  established  in  the  Depart- 
ment of  Agriculture  in  October  1893  by  Secretary 
J.  Sterling  Morton  as  a  result  of  the  $10,000  appro- 
priation in  the  Depax-tment's  Appropriation  Act.  It 
is  believed  that  the  original  Office  of  Road  Inquiry 
consisted  of  the  Special  Agent  and  Engineer  for  Road 
Inquiry,  General  Roy  Stone,  and  one  secretary. 

The  Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  for  fiscal  year 
1897  added  authority  to  investigate  the  l:»est  kinds  of 

Coticern  ■for  -lafpty  chnmcicrizea  tocJay's  Federal-did  prof/rams. 
This  new  section  of  U.S.  25  replaces  a  steep,  loinrling  tioo-lane 
route  built  in  1920  near  Greenville,  f?.C.    Xoio  the  highway 
ha^s  a  maximum  of  6  percent  grade  and  concrete  median 
barriers  between  opposing  traffic  lanes  where  necessary. 


roadmaking  materials  in  the  several  States.  Through 
cooperation  with  the  Division  of  Tests  in  the  Bureau 
of  Chemistry  (Department  of  Agriculture),  a  labora- 
tory was  established  by  the  Office  of  Public  Road  In- 
quiries in  1900  where  any  citizen  interested  in  the 
construction  of  public  highways  cotdd  have  road  ma- 
terials tested  free  of  charge.  The  Appropriation  Act 
for  1902  put  this  testing  work  directly  under  the 
Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries  by  giving  it  an  appro- 
priation for  the  investigation  of  the  chemical  and 
physical  character  of  road  materials.  Furthermore, 
by  1901  the  idea  of  field  representation  had  been 
established  with  the  country  divided  into  four  seg- 
ments with  a  part-time  special  agent  for  each  division. 
This  field  representation  over  the  years  has  been  of 
great  benefit  by  supporting  the  Federal-State  rela- 
tionship, and  as  the  Federal-aid  program  expanded, 
the  necessary  interaction  at  the  operational  level  was 
greatly  enhanced. 

In  1905  the  agency's  name  changed  again  to  the 
Office  of  Public  Roads  and,  by  laAv,  it  was  permitted 
to  retain  10  employees.  To  carry  out  its  major  func- 
tions, the  work  was  organized  into  three  divisions: 
HigliAvays,  Laboratory  Tests  and  Investigations,  and 
Information.  It  is  significant  that  a  program  of 
hiring  student  engineers  (at  $600  per  year)  was  ini- 
tiated in  1905  with  the  express  purpose  of  training 
them  for  career  highway  engineer  positions  in  the 
Office  of  Public  Roads  and  in  the  State  highway 
departments. 

During  1911  part-time  Special  Agents  were  ap- 
pointed for  each  State  to  improve  the  collection  and 
reporting  of  information. 

By  then  the  Federal  agency  had  already  under- 
gone three  name  changes  and  there  were  others  to 
come.  Since  the  identity  of  the  Federal  agency  re- 
sponsible for  the  Federal-aid  highway  program  be- 
comes rather  obscure  when  the  program  becomes  so 
complex  and  interrelated  with  other  Federal  agencies, 
the  following  table  is  a  chronological  listing : 


Title  of 

Date  of 

Organization 

Parent 

Top 

Creation 

Title 

Organization 

Executive 

Oct.  3,  1893 

Office  of  Road 

Dept.  of 

Special 

Inquiry 

Agriculture 

Agent  and 

Engineer 

(1897 

became 

Director) 

FY  1899 

Office  of 

Dept.  of 

Director 

Public  Road 

Agriculture 

Inquiries 

July  1,  1905 

Office  of 

Dept.  of 

Director 

Public 

Agriculture 

Roads 

July  1,  1915 

Office  of 

Dept.  of 

Director 

Public 

Agriculture 

Roads  and 

Rural 

Engineering 

July  1,  1918 

Bureau  of 

Dept.  of 

Director 

Pul)lic 

Agriculture 

(1919 

Roads 

became 
Chief) 

July  1,  1939 

Pul)lic  Roads 

Federal  Works 

Commis- 

Administra- 

Agency 

sioner 

tion 

213 


Date  of 
Creation 


Organization 
Title 


Parent 
Organization 


Title  of 

Top 
Executii^e 


July  1,  1949 


Aug.  20,  1949 


Bureau  of 
Public 
Roads 

Bureau  of 
Public 
Roads 


General 
Services 
Admin- 
istration 

Dept.  of 
Commerce 


Apr.  1,  1967 


Federal  High- 
way Admin- 
istration 


Dept.  of 
Transpor- 
tation 


Commis- 
sioner 


Commis- 
sioner 
(1956 
became 
Federal 
Highway 
Admin- 
istrator* ) 

Admin- 
istrator 


*Tliis  was  a  new  position  above  the  Commissioner's  position 
on  a  level  with  an  Assistant  Secretai-y  of  Commerce.  The 
position  of  Commissioner  was  retained  until  1961. 

Following  the  enactment  of  the  Federal  Aid  Road 
Act  on  July  11,  1916,  with  its  initiation  of  the  coopera- 
tive Federal-aid  higliAvay  prograna,  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  and  Rural  Engineering  (OPRRE)  created  a 
formal  field  organization.  The  field  work  was  or- 
ganized into  10  districts,  each  headed  by  a  District 
Engineer.  At  the  Washington  headquarters  level,  all 
of  the  existing  divisions  Avere  grouped  into  two 
branches — the  Engineering  Branch  and  the  Manage- 
ment and  Economics  Branch — headed  by  a  Chief  En- 
gineer and  a  Chief  of  Management,  respectively.  In 
addition,  two  General  Inspectors,  independent  of  the 
branches,  reported  directly  to  the  Director  of  OPRRE. 
This  reorganization  in  fiscal  year  1917  established  the 
firist  formal  field  structure  of  the  OPRRE  with  dele- 
gated operating  responsibility  and  authority. 

Because  of  the  large  amount  of  forest  road  work  in 
the  West  and  the  passage  of  the  1921  Federal  High- 
way Act  enlarging  the  Federal-aid  program,  a  Avestern 
regional  office  under  a  Depvity  Chief  Engineer,  Dr. 
L.  I.  Hewes,  was  created  in  1921  to  supervise  the  work 
in  the  11  western  States  and  to  dispose  of  a  large 
number  of  routine  matters  Avithout  reference  to  Wash- 
ington. In  effect,  the  Western  Headquarters,  as  it  was 
called,  was  an  extension  of  the  Washington  Office  lo- 
cated in  San  Francisco.  This  permitted  more  efficient 
communication  on  matters  needing  the  Secretary's  ap- 
proval and  reduced  travel  costs. 

Another  organizational  change  made  in  1921  to  help 
meet  the  demands  of  the  accelerating  program,  Avas  to 
divide  the  Engineering  Branch  in  Washington  into  a 
Division  of  Design  to  handle  all  applications  and 
steps  preliminary  to  the  execution  of  the  Project 
Agreement,  including  the  review  and  approval  of  the 
plans,  specifications  and  estimates  (PS&E),  and  a 
Division  of  Construction  to  monitor  the  construction 
Avork  in  progress,  to  check  construction  estimates  (re- 
imbursement claims)  submitted  by  the  States,  and  to 
monitor  the  maintenance  of  roads  after  construction. 
A  Division  of  Control  was  also  established  to  include 
all  program  and  project  accounting,  budget  activities, 
fiscal  accounting,  payrolling,  purchasing,  and  e(|uip- 
ment  and  supplies.  By  June  30,  1922,  the  staff  of 
BPR  had  reached  a  total  of  784,  representing  297  in 
Wasliiiiirton  and  487  in  the  field. 


In  fiscal  year  1925  an  office  Avas  established  in  Hawaii 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Western  Headquarters 
and  in  fiscal  year  1930,  because  of  the  reconnaissance 
survey  proposed  for  the  Inter- American  HigliAvay,  an 
office  Avas  set  up  in  Panama.  Later  diA'ision  offices 
Avere  established  in  each  of  the  Central  American 
countries.  As  of  April  1930,  the  BPR  had  a  total 
permanent  staff  of  976  persons,  of  Avhom  461  Avere 
engineers.  ^^ 

An  Eastern  Parks  and  Forests  District  Avas  created 
in  January  1934  to  handle  all  forest  and  park  Avork 
east  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  together  with  miscella- 
neous direct  Federal  construction  Avork  in  the  East  for 
other  Federal  agencies. 

The  Federal-Aid  HigliAvay  Act  of  1944  authorized 
a  greatly  expanded  postAvar  highway  program  pro- 
viding authorizations  for  fiscal  years  1946,  1947  and 
1948  at  the  unprecedented  level  of  $500  million  per 
year,  plus  $25  million  per  year  for  forest  highways. 
Recognizing  that  a  considerably  larger  staff  and  ex- 
tensive decentralization  Avould  be  necessary  in  the  field, 
a  major  reorganization  of  the  Public  Roads  Admin- 
istration was  initiated  July  1,  1945. 

In  July  1953  a  further  decentralization  move  Avas 
taken  to  delegate  approval  authority  to  the  lowest 
practicable  level,  thereby  eliminating  or  reducing  the 
duplication  of  checking  and  revicAving  project  docu- 
ments at  the  successive  layers  of  organization.  This 
delegation  Avent  to  the  BPR  District  Engineer  in  each 
State  for  final  approval  of  plans,  specifications  and 
estimates. 

The  Inter- American  Highway  lohich  today  is  complete 
except  for  the  segment  in  the  Darien  Gap 
between  Panama  and  Colombia. 


214 


Maurice  Owen  Eldridge 


It  wasn't  idle  flattery  when  the  EngineeHng  Neios-Recwd  referred 
to  Maurice  Owen  P^ldridge  as  an  "engineer  and  road  expert"  in  an- 
nouncing his  death  on  April  28,  1951,  at  age  77.  The  announcement 
further  stated  Mr.  Eldridge,  who  was  called  "M,0."  had  retired  in  1946 
after  52  years  as  a  roadbuilder. 

"Road  expert"  was  the  official  title  given  to  key  staff  members  of  the 
Office  of  Road  inquir}'  in  its  early  days.  Few  were  as  well-qualified  to 
hold  it  as  M.O.  Eldridge. 

He  was  proficient  in  many  fields:  roadbuilding,  road  research,  high- 
way economics,  highway  finance  and  taxation,  highway  safety,  promo- 
tion of  good  roads,  and  program  administration.  He  was  a  well-known 
lecturer,  an  author  and  editor  of  reports,  articles,  and  technical  papers. 

Eldridge  was  a  man  of  broad  vision,  strong  convictions,  great  zeal, 
dedication,  and  dogged  determination.  These  good  qualities  sometimes 
got  him  into  trouble  Avith  his  superiors,  but  subsequent  events  nearly 
always  vindicated  him. 

His  dream  of  good  roads  was  based  on  good  common  sense  and  sound 
economics.  He  not  only  lived  to  see  it  come  true,  but  was  an  active 
participant  in  its  fulfillment. 

Basically,  his  dream  was  that  the  Federal  Government  and  the  States 
would  join  together  in  a  cooperative  program  of  road  improvement. 
This  dream  became  a  reality  with  the  enactment  of  the  Federal  Aid 
Road  Act  on  July  11,  1916. 

Eldridge  was  an  active  participant  in  developing  rules  and  regula- 
tions for  implementing  the  new  program  and  in  preparing  much  of  the 
background  information  which  eventually  led  to  the  passage  of  the 
Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921. 

M.O.  Eldridge  was  born  July  3,  1873,  on  a  farm  near  Lenoir,  Tenn. 
Many  anecdotes  are  told  about  Eldridge,  some  verifiable,  some  not. 

He  went  to  a  log  schoolhouse  where  the  seats  were  made  by  splitting 
logs  in  two  and  the  flat  sides  were  used  as  seats  and  backs.  His  teacher 
was  a  Baptist  preacher  named  Pope  who  believed  that,  in  addition  to 
being  taught  such  classical  subjects  as  Greek  and  geometry,  his  students 
should  be  taught  manual  dexterity.  He  showed  them  how  to  make 
their  own  compasses  and  to  use  poke  and  other  berries  from  the  nearby 
woods  to  color  designs  they  had  traced.  Eldridge's  interest  in  drawing 
and  drafting  got  him  his  first  job  in  1894  with  the  Office  of  Road  In- 
quiry in  "Washington,  D.C. 

"\\1iile  attending  the  University  of  Tennessee,  Eldridge's  talents  came 
to  the  attention  of  University  President  Charles  W.  Dabney  who  shortly 
became  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture.  The  Department  of  Agricultiire 
was  a  small  organization  and  when  a  man  was  wanted  to  draw  some 
maps.  Secretary  Dabney  knew  the  right  individual  to  get  and  that  is 
how  M.O.  Eldridge  began  his  roadbuilding  career  at  a  princely  salary 
of  $60  a  month. 

Returning  to  Washington  from  a  trip  to  Tennessee,  M.O.  was  looking 
pensively  out  the  train  window  at  the  drab,  sodden  countryside  on  a 
rainy  November  day  in  1902,  when  the  train  stopped  at  Jonesboro  in 
eastern  Tennessee.  He  saw  an  acquaintance.  Congressman  W.  P.  Brown- 
low,  board  the  train.  They  got  into  a  conversation  with  another  pas- 
senger. District  Judge  Hal  Haines,  who  joined  them  on  the  train  at 
Bristol. 

The  subject  of  conversation  turned  to  the  deplorable  condition  of  the 
roads;  inspiration  was  the  view  outside  the  train  windows. 

"What  could  be  done  to  improve  them?  Eldridge  pointed  out  that 
most  rural  and  small-town  residents  took  such  paralyzing  road  condi- 
tions for  granted,  not  knowing  hoAv  to  go  about  improving  them.  But, 
said  Eldridge,  improvement  was  possible,  and,  in  his  opinion,  the  Fed- 
ei'al  Government  should  not  only  take  the  initiative  in  showing  the 
people  how  to  build  good  roads,  it  should  cooperate  Avith  them  in  doing 
it. 

215 


He  cited  as  an  example  an  operation  in  New  Jersey  under  which  the 
State  cooperated  with  counties  and  local  units  in  financing  and  building 
"mainline"  intercity  roads. 

Both  Representative  Brownlow  and  Judge  Haines  agreed  with 
Eldridge's  position.  The  Congressman  then  directed  Eldridge  to  draft 
a  bill  that  would  incorporate  his  ideas  and  Representative  Brownlow 
would  introduce  it. 

So  M.O.  Eldridge  went  back  to  his  Government  desk,  outlined  the 
plan  to  his  chief,  Martin  Dodge,  who  approved.  They  i-ewrote  the 
New  Jersey  law  to  fit  the  national  situation.  Mr.  Brownlow  introduced 
the  bill  and  thus  was  sown  the  idea  of  Federal-aid  roads. 

The  speech  was  made  in  January  1903  and  was  printed  in  the  Con- 
gressional Record.  It  attracted  a  lot  of  attention  and  found  supporters, 
but  not  in  the  Administration.  The  leaders  in  the  Congress  were  against 
it.  The  Administration  was  against  it.  James  Wilson,  then  Secretary 
of  Agriculture,  was  against  it. 

Then  one  day  a  telegram  was  delivered  to  the  Roads  Office  for 
Eldridge.  It  was  signed  by  A.  R.  Shattuck  who  requested  Eldridge 
to  come  to  New  York  to  see  him. 

Shattuck  was  an  executive  of  an  organization  that  had  just  come  into 
existence — a  forerunner  of  the  American  Automobile  Association.  This 
organization  believed  in  the  idea  of  Federal  aid  for  good  roads.  And 
it  wanted  to  help  the  idea  along.    What  could  it  do  ? 

Eldridge  suggested  the  greatest  need  was  to  educate  the  public. 
Eldridge  was  provided  $10,000  a  year  for  publicity.  He  said  he  couldn't 
do  anything  through  the  Roads  Office  but  something  might  be  accom- 
plished outside. 

The  arrangement  was  made.  Eldridge  hired  an  office,  a  publicity 
man  and  a  stenograjDher. 

The  major  promotion  campaign  was  to  have  a  million  copies  of  the 
Brownlow  speech  printed  at  cost  by  the  Government  Printing  Office, 
as  can  be  done  in  such  cases.  These  were  mailed  out  under  Government 
frank  by  friendly  congressmen  to  a  million  people.  On  a  single  day  a 
solid  carload  of  mail  went  out  of  Washington. 

It  was  a  thorough  campaign.  The  people  responded  and  Congressmen 
were  showered  with  questions  on  good  roads  from  their  constituents. 

Questions  arose  on  who  was  responsible  for  this  campaign. 

Finally,  it  was  found  out  that  M.O.  Eldridge  was  responsible.  He 
was  called  in  on  the  carpet  and  summarily  dismissed  from  service. 

He  was  a  sacrifice  for  this  early  advocacy  of  a  policy  that  a  dozen 
years  later  became  a  national  enthusiasm  in  the  passage  of  the  1916  Act. 

Eldridge's  friends  in  Congress  went  to  bat  for  him  and  they  succeeded 
in  getting  him  reinstated — at  a  reduced  salary  and  loss  of  his  rank  as 
second  in  command  in  the  office. 

Eldridge  might  have  directed  the  office,  but  he  had  pushed  a  right 
idea  before  its  time. 

Wlien  the  United  States  entered  World  War  I,  Eldridge  and  the 
entire  staff  of  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engineering  were 
diverted  from  peacetime  activities  to  supporting  the  Avar  effort. 

For  example,  he  and  Prevost  Hubbard  of  the  Office  staff  served  as 
Public  Roads  representatives  on  a  subcommittee  of  the  United  States 
Highway  Council  which  reviewed  7,307  applications  for  approval  of 
road  construction  projects  between  June  18  and  December  31,  1918. 

M.O.  received  many  commendations  for  the  work  he  did. 

One  of  his  assignments  with  the  Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries  was 
to  construct  experimental  and  demonstration  roads,  using  locally  avail- 
able materials.  Ernest  F.  Acheson,  member  of  Congress  from  Pennsyl- 
vania, wrote  on  February  1,  1901,  concerning  a  demonstration  road 
built  under  Eldridge's  direction  in  Washington  County,  Pennsylvania: 

...  I  wish  to  say  that  the  experiments  niarlt>  .  .  .  last  fall  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Mr.  Eldridge  awakened  a  deej)  interest  anions  the  farmers,  and  has 
done  a  great  deal  to  promote  the  cause  of  good  roads.  .  .  . 


216 


In  1919  he  joined  the  Washington  staff  of  the  American  Avitoniobile 
Association.  He  served  in  many  capacities,  inchiding  editor  of  the 
Association  magazine,  American  Motorist;  Director  of  Roads,  AAA 
Good  Roads  Board;  and  subsequently,  Executive  Chairman  of  the 
Association. 

Leaving  the  AAA  in  1925,  Eldridge  joined  the  staff  of  the  District  of 
Cohimbia  government  to  become  the  first  Director  of  Traffic  for  the 
City  of  Washington.  At  the  time  of  his  retirement  on  December  31, 
1946,  he  was  the  Assistant  Director  of  the  D.C.  Department  of  Vehicles 
and  Traffic. 

Eldridge  was  a  prolific  writer.  Mention  of  only  a  few  of  his  efforts 
will  indicate  the  breadth  of  his  interests  in  highway  matters. 

For  the  1899  Year-hook  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  he 
wrote  on  the  "Progress  of  Road  Building  in  the  United  States."  To 
Hhtoric  Highxoays  of  America,  volume  15,  entitled  "The  Future  of 
Road-Making  in  America,  A  Symposium  by  Archer  Butler  Hulbert  and 
Others,"  published  in  1905,  he  contributed  Chapter  III  on  "Good  Roads 
for  Farmers." 

He  provided  two  articles  for  the  Third  Annual  Edition  (1922)  of 
the  Ilightcays  Green  Book,  published  by  the  American  Automobile 
Association.  These  related  to  "Highway  Financing  and  Taxation"  and 
"Accident  Prevention  Suggestions."  Part  II  of  the  1925  Proceedings 
of  the  National  Safety  Council  contains  a  paper  by  him  on  "Traffic 
Control  Systems."  Also,  the  1935-36  Convention  Proceedings  of  the 
American  Road  Association  includes  a  paper  he  prepared  on  "Should 
Pedestrian  Traffic  Be  Regulated?" 


217 


The  Edward  M.  Gatliff  Memorial  Bridge  is  on  Kentucky  route  90  at  Cumberland  Falls,  Ky.    It  was  completed  inl95^  to 
replace  a,  ferry  crossing  operation.     The  stone  facing  was  obtained  from  a  local  quarry. 


Early  in  1955  it  seemed  apparent  that  Congress 
would  soon  enact  legislation  which  would  provide 
funding  authorizations  for  the  construction  of  the  In- 
terstate System  which  had  been  designated  in  1947. 
The  contemplated  workload  and  manpower  needs  for 
such  a  program  were  staggering.  Since  an  adequate 
supply  of  qualified  engineers  was  not  then  available 
to  administer  the  program,  a  task  force  was  appointed 
to  study  the  problem  and  develop  recommendations. 
As  a  result  of  the  studies,  the  field  structure  again 
was  reorganized  and  further  redelegation  of  respon- 
sibilities and  authorities  was  given  to  the  field  offices. 
This  decentralization  to  the  field  was  the  most  im- 
portant and  beneficial  change  made  by  BPR  in  its 
administration  of  the  highway  program  since  the  crea- 
tion of  the  first  operating  field  offices  in  1917.  The 
total  BPR  employment  as  of  June  30,  1966,  totaled 
3,646,  a  reduction  from  the  postwar  peak  of  4,239  as 
of  June  30,  1949. 

In  June  1957  a  very  important  functional  addition 
was  made  in  the  Washington  headquarters  by  the 
creation  of  a  Project  Examination  Division  in  the 
Office  of  Administration.  The  new  division  initiated 
a  broad  internal  and  external  management  audit  pro- 
gram in  BPR  designed  to  ensure  compliance  with 
program  policies  and  procedures  as  well  as  to  monitor 
program  effectiveness  and  integrity  at  both  the  Fed- 
eral and  State  levels. 

In  December  1961,  as  a  result  of  a  consultant's  study 
of  the  progi'am's  management  and  operations  under- 
taken in  1960,  an  Office  of  Planning  was  established 
as  a  separate  unit.  Previously  this  function  was  com- 
bined Avith  research.  The  separate  office  greatly 
strengthened  the  planning  function  in  BPR  and 
speeded  the  implementation  of  the  3C  planning  process 


when  it  became  a  requirement  in  the  1962  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act.  By  now  the  total  full-time  employ- 
ment of  BPR  was  4,521,  including  206  temporary 
employees  and  188  stationed  in  foreign  countries. 

During  the  next  several  years  broadening  program 
responsibilities  and  functions  were  to  make  rather 
frequent  reorganizations  of  the  Washington  head- 
quarters necessary.  For  example,  a  reorganization  in 
1962  created  an  Office  of  Right-of-Way  and  Location 
to  assume  functions  formerly  a  responsibility  of  the 
engineering  staff.  A  very  significant  change  in  terms 
of  pi'Ogram  development  was  the  creation  of  an  Office 
of  Audits  and  Investigations  by  transferring  the 
Project  Examination  Division  and  the  external  audit 
functions  of  the  Finance  Division  from  the  Office  of 
Administration. 

It  became  necessary  to  add  certain  specialists  to  the 
organization  over  the  years  as  the  requirements  of 
the  various  highway  acts  and  other  legislation  affect- 
ing the  highway  program  were  enacted  by  Congress, 
and  the  Bureau  became  something  more  than  just  an 
engineering  organization  to  oversee  the  construction 
of  highways.  These  specialists  included  economists, 
landscape  architects,  real  estate  appraisers,  behavioral 
scientists,  planners,  historians,  ecologists,  contract 
specialists,  safety  experts,  and  civil  rights  specialists. 
By  December  31,  1966,  total  employment  was  4,839, 
including  temporary  employees  and  157  persons  in 
foreign  countries. 

The  Department  of  Transportation  Act  enacted 
October  15,  1966,  consolidated  more  than  30  transpor- 
tation agenices  or  functions  that  had  been  scattered 
throughout  the  Government.  At  its  inception,  the  De- 
partment encompassed  more  than  90,000  emploj-ees 
and  an  annual  budget  of  approximately  $6  billion, 


218 


the  bulk  of  it  being  $4  billion  of  highway  programs.^^ 
The  purpose  of  the  Act  was: 

The  Congress  therefore  finds  that  the  establishment  of 
a  Department  of  Transportation  is  necessary  in  the  public 
interest  and  to  assure  the  coordinated,  effective  admin- 
istration of  the  transportation  programs  of  the  Federal 
Government ;  to  facilitate  the  development  and  improve- 
ment of  coordinated  transportation  service.   .   .   . 

On  April  1,  1967,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  be- 
came a  bureau  within  the  Federal  Highway  Admin- 
istration (FHWA)  in  the  new  Department.  Other 
functions  transferred  to  FHWA  were  the  regulatory 
motor  carrier  safety  functions  from  the  Interstate 
Commerce  Commission  and  the  highwaj-  safety  and 
the  traffic  and  motor  vehicle  safety  functions  created 
by  congressional  legislation  in  1966  from  the  Depart- 
ment of  Commerce.  The  other  organizational  ele- 
ments of  the  new  Department  of  Transportation 
(DOT)  were  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration, 
Federal  Railroad  Administration.  U.S.  Coast  Guard, 
and  the  St.  Lawrence  Seaway  Development  Corpora- 
tion. The  Urban  INIass  Transportation  Administra- 
tion was  transferred  to  the  Department  from  the 
Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  on 
July  1,  1968. 

As  of  December  31.  1967,  the  end  of  the  first 
calendar  year  following  creation  of  the  new  FHWA, 
its  employment  (including  the  three  bureaus — Public 
Roads,  Motor  Carrier  Safety,  and  the  Xational  High- 
way Safety  Bureau)  totaled  5,366,  including  tempo- 
rary employees  and  140  i>ersons  in  foreign  countries. 

In  March  1970  the  Xational  Highway  Safety 
Bureau  was  separated  from  the  Federal  Highway  Ad- 
ministration to  become  the  seventh  DOT  operating 
administration  and  was  renamed  the  Xational  High- 
way Traffic  Safety  Administration.  All  of  the  Safety 
Bureau's  functions  went  with  it  except  that  respon- 
sibility for  specified  highway-oriented  safety  standards 
assigned  to  the  Federal  Highway  Administration. 

With  the  separation  of  the  Xational  Highway 
Safety  Bureau,  FHWA  again  was  reorganized.  The 
reorganization  that  became  effective  August  10,  1970, 
abolished  the  "Bureau  of  Public  Roads"  as  an  iden- 
tifiable separate  organizational  component  of  FHTWA. 
Instead  of  the  former  bureau  structure,  FHWA  was 
divided  into  six  new  components  made  up  of  Planning, 
Research  and  Development.  Right-of-Way  and  En- 
vironment, Engineering  and  Traffic  Operations,  Motor 
Carrier  and  Highway  Safet)',  and  Administration, 
each  to  be  headed  by  an  Associate  Administrator. 
Staff  offices  directly  responsible  to  the  Administrator 
were  the  Offices  of  Chief  Counsel,  Program  Review 
and  Investigations,  Public  Affairs,  and  Civil  Rights, 
each  headed  by  a  Director.  In  1971,  the  National 
Highway  Institute  was  added  as  the  fifth  staff  office. 

From  August  1970  to  March  1975,  there  were  con- 
tinual minor  organizational  changes  in  the  Federal 
Highway  Administration  to  keep  abreast  of  the  ever- 
broadening  scope  of  FHWA's  programs  and  respon- 
sibilities. However,  the  total  employment  of  FHWA 
as  of  December  31.  1974,  was  5,134,  including  tempo- 
rary employees  and  39  persons  in  foreign  countries 
and  28  persons  in  territories  of  the  United  States. 
Comparing  the  1974  employment  level  with  the  784 
employees  in  Jinie  1922  when  the  Federal-aid  highway 
pi'Ogram  was  just  getting  underway  and  the  growth 


of  a  program  from  $80  million  at  that  time  to  over 
$6  billion  in  1974,  the  current  level  of  staffing  is  re- 
markable in  terms  of  efficient  program  administration. 

The   Operational   System 

In  order  to  proceed  with  the  implementation  of  the 
program  provided  by  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of 
1916,  much  had  to  be  done  at  both  the  State  and  Fed- 
eral levels.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  States  had  to 
enact  legislation  to  satisfy  the  administrative  require- 
ments of  organization,  authorities,  methods  of  fi- 
nancing the  new  Federal-aid  matching  requirements 
and  future  maintenance  responsibilities,  and  the  ad- 
ministrative and  financial  relationships  with  the  States' 
local  governmental  subdivisions. 

At  the  Federal  level,  the  small  Office  of  Public 
Roads  and  Rural  Engineering  (OPRRE)  had  to  de- 
velop the  implementing  rules  and  regulations  required 
by  the  Act  and  develop  the  necessary  plan  and  organi- 
zation for  its  role  in  administering  the  program,  not 
only  in  the  Washington  Headquarters,  but  also  at  the 
field  level  in  all  the  States. 

The  initial  project  procedures  that  were  established 
under  the  Federal  rules  and  regulations  for  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  Federal-aid  program  were  i^ela- 
tively  simple  and  direct.     These  procedures  included: 

•  A  Project  Statement  or  application  was  sub- 
mitted to  the  OPRRE  District  Engineer  describ- 
ing the  location,  nature  and  estimated  cost  of  the 
work.  Upon  review  and  an  onsite  inspection  by 
the  District  Engineer,  he  forwarded  the  Project 
Statement  with  his  recommendations  to  Washing- 
ton for  review  by  the  Engineering  Branch  of  the 
OPRRE  and  the  approval  by  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture. 

•  Upon  approval,  the  State  was  authorized  to  pro- 
ceed with  the  preparation  of  detailed  plans,  spec- 
ifications and  estimates  (PS&E).  The  District 
Engineer  reviewed  the  PS&E  and  made  another 
onsite  inspection  with  "plans  in  hand,"  and  for- 
warded everything  with  his  recommendations  to 
Washington  for  final  review  and  approval. 

•  A  Project  Agreement  was  prepared  for  signature, 
first  by  the  authorized  State  official  and  then  by 
the  Secretary  of  Agriculture,  which  represented 
the  contractual  agreement  betAveen  the  State  and 
Federal  Government.  The  Project  Agreement 
established  the  maximum  amount  of  the  Federal 
participation  and  the  State's  responsibility  for 
adequate  maintenance  of  the  completed  project. 
When  this  document  was  executed,  the  State  was 
free  to  proceed  with  construction. 

•  Direct  supervision  of  the  construction  was  the 
responsibility  of  the  State.  However,  a  staff 
member  of  the  OPRRE  District  Office  made 
monthly  inspections  and  reported  his  evaluation 
of  the  work  to  Washington.  These  reports  were 
used  as  the  basis  for  approval  of  requests  for 
progress  payments  to  the  State.  Progress  pay- 
ments could  not  exceed  the  Federal  share  of  the 
cost  of  the  work  and  materials  actually  put  in 
place  in  accordance  with  the  plans  and  specifica- 
tions. 

•  Upon  completion  of  the  project,  the  OPRRE 
District  Engineer  made  a  final  onsite  inspection 


219 


and  prepared  a  detailed  final  inspection  report 
for  the  AVashino;ton  office.  The  final  payment  of 
the  remainino;  Federal  share  of  the  project  costs 
was  continjrent  iipon  the  final  acceptance  of  the 
work  by  the  District  Engineer. 

•  jNIaintenance,  the  State's  responsibility  with  no 
Federal  fxinding,  was  monitored  by  the  ORPPE 
District  Enjjineer's  staff  through  annual  inspec- 
tions and  reports  to  the  "Washington  office.  At 
the  local  level,  deficiencies  were  discussed  and 
corrective  action  was  normally  initiated  promptly 
by  the  State. 

The  project  costs  not  eligible  for  Federal  participa- 
tion were: 

•  Administrative  costs  of  maintaining  the  State 
highway  department  and  its  staff,  except  those 
direct  costs  involved  in  providing  the  engineering 
supervision  of  the  work  after  construction  was 
initiated  by  contract  or  the  actual  costs  of  con- 
struction by  force  account  (costs  of  labor,  equip- 
ment, materials  and  overhead). 

•  Cost  of  surveys  and  preparing  the  plans,  specifica- 
tions and  estimates. 

•  Costs  of  advertising  projects  for  construction  ty 
contract. 

•  Costs  of  necessary  right-of-way  related  damage 
costs. 

•  Costs  incurred  as  a  result  of  acceptance  of  other 
than  the  lowest  bid  unless  the  acceptance  of  a 
higher  bid  Avas  justified  and  concurred  in  by  the 
Federal  agency. 

•  Costs  of  work  not  included  in  the  approved  PS&E 
or  changes  that  were  not  approved  by  the  Federal 
agency. 

•  Engineering  inspection  and  contingency  costs  in 
excess  of  10  percent  of  project  estimate. 

•  Costs  in  excess  of  the  amount  provided  for  in  the 
Project  Agreement. 

After  enactment  of  the  Federal  Highway  Act  of 
1921,  two  significant  changes  were  made  in  the  rules 
and  regulations :  ( 1 )  Because  the  States  were  required 
in  1921  to  designate  a  limited  State  highway  system 
of  main  roads.  Project  Statements  submitted  by  a 
State  for  proposed  construction  thereafter  were  lim- 
ited to  routes  or  sections  of  routes  that  were  a  part 
of  the  approved  system  and  (2)  when  the  PS&E  for 
an  approved  project  was  recommended  for  approval 
by  the  local  Federal  District  Engineer,  the  State  was 
authorized  to  proceed  immediately  with  initiating  the 
steps  leading  to  construction. 

In  addition  to  selecting  their  Federal-aid  systems, 
each  State  was  required  to  prepare  an  annual  program 
of  those  specific  highway  improvements  it  wished  to 
undertake  with  available  Federal  assistance  during  the 
year  and  their  costs.  This  measiire  was  required  to 
assure  an  orderly  development  of  projects. 

Another  step  not  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  was 
the  requirement  that  if  a  project  Avas  to  be  built  on  a 
new  location,  rather  than  an  improvement  of  an  exist- 
ing road,  the  State  would  have  to  study  alternative 
locations  to  decide  the  best  route  and  the  most  eco- 
nomical type  of  road  to  construct.  In  the  early  days 
of  the  program,  this  step  did  not  come  up  too  often 


because  the  major  portion  of  the  work  was  the  im- 
provement of  existing  roads.  However,  the  location 
of  a  new  road  was  another  item  needing  Federal 
approval  before  the  project  could  be  designed.  The 
project  design  might  also  have  several  alternative  de- 
signs in  order  that  the  most  economical  and  serviceable 
product  could  be  obtained. 

These  procedures  were  relatively  simple  and  re- 
mained so  until  the  1950's.  The  separate  roles  of  the 
States  and  the  Federal  Government  in  the  step-by-step 
project  procedures  that  were  thus  established  set  the 
basic  pattern  for  the  cooperative  administration  of  the 
Federal-aid  program.  For  many  years  thereafter  an 
evolutionary  period  existed  during  which  the  States 
and  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  (BPR)  were  continuously 
developing  methods  and  ways  to  improve,  simplify 
and  expedite  the  movement  of  projects  through  the 
various  steps.  Some  of  the  more  important  efforts  and 
actions  taken  were: 

•  The  authority  of  the  States  to  proceed  with  con- 
struction upon  recommendation  of  the  District  En- 
gineer was  extended  to  include  subsequent  major 
revision  of  the  plans,  even  when  the  changes 
would  require  additional  Federal-aid  funds. 

•  Arrangements  for  "sectionalizing"  projects  were 
developed  to  give  the  States  wide  latitude  in  plac- 
ing work  under  contract  by  sections  and  com- 
pleting sections  independently  of  each  other.  At 
the  same  time,  the  number  of  Project  Statements 
and  Project  Agreements  was  substantially  reduced. 

•  Project  Agreements  were  prepared  in  Washington 
for  the  signature  of  the  Secretary  before  they 
were  sent  to  the  State  for  signature  to  expedite 
subsequent  Federal  payments. 

•  A  separate  division  was  established  in  the  BPR 
Washington  office  to  handle  the  review  and  ap- 
proval of  Federal-aid  payment  vouchers;  a  mini- 
mum voucher  amount  of  $1,000  was  established; 
and,  to  avoid  sending  vouchers  back  to  the  States 
for  correction  of  small  errors,  a  practice  was 
adopted  using  a  5  percent  retent  or  withholding 
to  cover  as  many  of  these  errors  as  possible. 

•  The  principle  of  using  stage  construction  on 
Federal-aid  construction  was  adopted,  e.g.,  ap- 
proval of  a  project  for  grading  and  drainage  only, 
with  deferral  of  paving  until  a  later  time  when 
justified. 

To  assure  uniform  quality  of  the  roads  and  to  speed 
up  the  detailed  work,  both  at  the  State  level  and  the 
Federal  level,  some  standardization  was  needed : 

•  Standard  specifications  and  format  were  developed 
by  most  States,  eliminating  the  need  for  the  de- 
velopment and  submission  of  individual  specifica- 
tions for  each  project. 

•  Standards  were  developed  jointly  between  State 
and  BPR  engineers  for  uniform  methods  of  sam- 
pling, testing  and  reporting  on  road  materials, 
and  the  standards  were  published  in  a  department 
bulletin. 

•  Through  AASHO  committee  action,  minimum  de- 
sign standards  were  developed  for  various  classes 
of  roads  and  structures. 

•  Standard  forms  of  various  types  were  developed 
and  approved  for  use,  such  as  bid  forms  incor- 


220 


BPR   officials   examining  a  traffic  counter  in   the  late  JQ^O's. 
Traffic  volume  is  often  a  factor  in  determining  highivag  needs. 

poratino-  re(]uired  oenoral  provisions,  contract 
fornas,  performance  and  payment  bonds,  contractor 
qualification  forms,  Project  Agreement  forms,  etc. 

"\^liile  the  basic  principle  of  State  initiation  and 
Federal  review  and  approval  I'emained  intact,  the 
continuing  enactment  over  tlie  years  of  new  highway 
legislation  with  new  programs  and  new  provisions 
inevitably  led  to  increasingly  complex  step-by-step 
project  procedures  to  a  degree  that  never  could  have 
been  imagined  in  1921. 

"With  the  passage  of  the  1956  Federal-Aid  Highway 
Act  came  new  procedural  requirements  which  were 
inserted  into  their  logical  sequence  of  project  steps  to 
obtain  Federal  approvals. 

The  first  of  these  was  the  requirement  to  hold  public 
hearings,  originally  called  for  in  the  1950  Federal-Aid 
Highwaj'  Act  for  liighway  projects  bypassing  a  city 
or  town,  but  later  extended  to  all  Federal-aid  projects 
to  be  responsive  to  the  goals  and  objectives  of  the  local 
community.  The  term  "public  hearings"  is  always 
used  in  the  plural  because,  although  at  first  it  was 
required  only  at  the  corridor  or  location  stage,  for 
many  years  it  was  administratively  determined  that  a 
second  public  hearing  was  necessary  at  the  design 
stage.  In  recent  years  a  more  flexible  approach  per- 
mits the  requirement  for  public  participation  to  be 
met  in  whatever  way  is  considered  most  suitable  in  a 
specific  situation. 

Another  procedural  change  resulted  from  a  provi- 
sion in  the  1956  Highway  Act  that  permitted  Federal 
reimbursement  for  costs  of  relocating  public  or  private 
utilities.  Accommodation  of  utilities  within  the  riffht- 
of-way  IS  permitted  as  long  as  they  do  not  hamper 
the  safe  flow  of  traffic. 

The  1956  Act  also  required  that  the  Davis-Bacon 
Act  of  1935  would  apply  to  Interstate  projects.  This 
involved  the  preparation  and  Federal  approval  of 
minimum  labor  wage  rates  to  be  paid  to  contractor 
construction  employees  on  an  individual  project  basis. 
The  minimum  rate  is  established  by  the  U.S.  Depart- 
ment of  Labor  and  varies  by  geographic  area.  Later, 
the  1968  Act  required  extension  of  the  Davis-Bacon 
coverage  to  all  Federal-aid  highway  projects. 


By  1962  highway  projects  in  cities  were  numerous 
and  concern  for  the  integration  of  the  highway  with 
other  modes  of  ti'ansportation,  with  the  growtli  of  the 
cities,  and  the  potential  needs  of  the  future  came  to 
the  fore.  Federal  assistance  for  planning  had  been 
available  since  1934,  but  in  1962,  legislation  required 
that  after  July  1965  all  Federal-aid  highway  projects 
within  urban  areas  of  more  than  60,000  population 
nuist  be  based  on  the  results  of  a  continuing,  compi-e- 
hensive,  cooperative  transportation  planning  process. 
Planning  was  extended  further  in  1968  by  the  Inter- 
governmental Cooperation  Act  which,  as  implementxid 
by  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget  BOB,*  in  Circular  A-95, 
Notification  Procedure,  required  that  all  proposed 
highway  projects  be  submitted  to  State  and  areawide 
clearinghouse  agencies  for  review  and  comments.  The 
aim  was  to  insure  that  all  Federal  and  federally 
assisted  projects  were  coordinated  with  the  develop- 
ment plans  of  other  public  agencies.  Thus,  two  general 
procedures  were  added  to  the  already  growing  re- 
quirements before  any  physical  work  could  begin  on  a 
highway  project. 

Another  emerging  social  concern  in  1962  was  the 
plight  of  those  persons  required  to  move  because  of 
highway  construction.  At  first  the  States  were  re- 
quired to  provide  counseling  for  those  whose  property 
or  dwelling  place  was  taken,  but  in  1968  limited  fi- 
nancial reimbursement  was  authorized.  In  1970  the 
Uniform  Relocation  Assistance  and  Real  Property 
Acquisition  Policies  Act  was  passed  to  protect  the  dis- 
placed people,  and  Federal  review  and  approval  were 
required  before  right-of-way  could  be  taken  on  any 
Federal-aid  project. 

Over  the  years  concern  had  been  developing  for 
preserving  our  social,  cultural  and  historical  heritage. 
As  early  as  1956,  Federal  funds  could  be  used  for 
archeological  paleontological  salvage.  However,  in 
1966  the  Department  of  Transportation  Act  mandated 
protection  of  parklands,  historic  sites  and  other  public 
conservation  lands.  Although  this  provision  doe^  not 
apply  in  the  vast  majority  of  highway  projects,  where 
taking  these  types  of  lands  is  contemplated,  it  results 
in  considerable  extension  of  preconstruction  planning 
and  review  time. 

Since  about  1965  not  only  the  number  of  categorical 
highway  programs  have  increased,  but  also  the  high- 
way-related considerations  involved  in  carrying  out 
highway  programs.  As  a  direct  consequence  of  the 
Nation's  changing  social  values  and  quality  of  life 
standards,  Congress  enacted  legislation  responsive  to 
the  increasing  demands  of  those  adversely  affected  by 
highway  locations.  Much  of  this  legislation  necessarily 
had  an  impact  upon  the  highway  program  and  the 
complexity  of  its  administration.  Some  of  the  per- 
tinent legislation  included : 

Civil  Rights  Acts  of  1964  and  1968 

Highway  Beautification  Act  of  1965 

National  Environmental  Policy  Act  of  1969 

Uniform  Relocation  Assistance  and  Real  Property 

Acquisition  Policies  Act  of  1970 

Clean  Air  and  Noise  Control  Acts  of  1970 

Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Act  of  1972 


*  Now    known    as    the    Office    of    Management    and    Budget 
(0MB). 


221 


The  Casselman  River  Bridge,  built  in  1813  on  the  National  Road  near  Orantsville,  Md., 
has  been  preserved  us  a  historic  site. 


"Wlien  the  1964  Civil  Eights  Act  was  passed,  it  pro- 
hibited discrimination  on  the  grounds  of  race,  color, 
creed  or  national  origin  under  any  program  or  activity 
receiving  Federal  financial  assistance.  (In  1973  the 
Highway  Act  added,  for  the  first  time,  prohibition  of 
sex  discrimination.)  The  1964  Civil  Rights  Act  and 
Executive  Order  11246,  promulgated  in  1965,  led  to 
the  eventual  establishment  of  a  formal  civil  rights 
and  equal  employment  opportunity  (EEO)  program 
within  FHWA.  The  development  of  this  program 
was  slowed  by  the  fragmentation  of  internal  and  ex- 
ternal concerns.  In  the  beginning,  the  internal  con- 
cerns were  assigned  to  the  Office  of  Administration 
and  the  external  concerns  to  the  Office  of  Audits  and 
Investigations. 

Two  important  factors  contributed  to  the  advance- 
ment of  the  agency's  civil  I'ights  and  equal  opportu- 
nity program.  Congress  enacted,  as  part  of  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1968,  the  requirement 
that  States  submit  assurances  that  employment  and 
training  in  connection  with  proposed  Federal-aid 
projects  would  be  provided  without  regard  to  race, 
creed,  or  national  origin.  This  legislation  was  fol- 
lowed in  January  1969  by  civil  rights  and  equal  oppor- 
tunity hearings  held  by  the  Subconunittee  on  Roads 


of  the  Public  Works  Cormnittee  of  the  Senate.  As  a 
result  of  these  hearings,  the  Senate  Subcommittee 
made  several  recommendations.  Foremost  among 
these  recommendations  was  that  the  Federal  Highway 
Administration  should  assume  leadership  in  showing 
to  all  levels  of  the  agency  and  the  States  the  im- 
portance attached  to  equal  employment  opportunity 
efforts. 

In  response,  FHWA  took  three  important  steps. 
First,  the  Administrator  appointed  a  Special  Assistant 
for  Equal  Opportunity  in  March  1969.  Second,  he 
created  the  Office  of  Civil  Rights  in  June  with  respon- 
sibility for  both  internal  and  external  concerns.  Third, 
he  elevated  the  former  Special  Assistant  to  Director 
of  the  new  Office  of  Civil  Rights. 

The  newly  established  Office  began  monitoring 
FHWA's  own  internal  employment  practices  and 
established  and  maintained  minority  group  statistics. 
The  initial  operations  of  the  Office  were  strengthened 
by  the  issuance  of  Executive  Order  11478  in  1971 
which  served  as  the  basis  for  the  development  of 
affirmative  action  plans  and  procedures  for  processing 
discrimination  complaints  and  EEO  counseling  ac- 
tivities. This  led  to  the  formation  in  1972  of  an  In- 
ternal   Division    with    a    system    for    self -evaluation. 


222 


To  study  the  bcluiviur  uf  asphalt  in  service,  an  FIIWA  analyst 
is  usiiiy  a  i-acuuni  distillntioii  tcchniii'uc  to  remove  the  bulk 
of  the  solvent  from  solutions  of  asphalts 
extracted  from  pavements. 

The  FHWA  Federal  Women's  Proorani  was  estab- 
lished in  1971.  In  the  eai'ly  part  of  1974,  the  Spanish- 
Speaking  Program  was  established  to  deal  with  the 
emplovment  concerns  and  problems  of  Hispanics  em- 
ployed by  the  FHWA. 

Meanwhile  two  major  changes  in  the  EEO  civil 
rights  program  took  place.  First,  the  1970  Federal- 
Aid  Highway  Act  gave  the  agency  authority  to  add 
on-the-job  training  aimed  at  furthering  equal  employ- 
ment opportunity.  Goals  were  set  for  specified  num- 
bers of  persons  to  receive  training  on  selected  construc- 
tion projects,  and  supportive  services  for  on-the-job 
training  were  provided  the  following  year.  Second, 
the  Department  of  Transportation  published  rules 
and  regulations  in  1970  to  implement  Title  VI  of  the 
Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964  prohibiting  discrimination 
based  on  race,  color,  or  national  origin  in  federally 
assisted  programs. 

Because  of  FHWA's  highly  decentralized  organ- 
izational approach,  inost  of  FHWA's  EEO  respon- 
sibilities are  carried  out  at  the  field  level.  The 
Headquarters  develops  overall  policy  and  monitors 
the  results  through  review  of  reports  of  Title  VI  and 
Title  VIII  (Fair  Housing)  activities,  contract  com- 
pliance, special  programs  (minority  business  enter- 
prise, summer  youth  opportunity  program,  on-the-job 
training,  and  supportive  services),  and  the  internal 
employment  practices  of  FHWA  offices.  The  FHWA 
Headquarters  and  field  EEO  staffs  also  make  onsite 
Federal-aid  project  reviews  and  onsite  reviews  of  State 
highway  agencies. 

In  FHWA's  direct  construction  program,  directives 
were  issued  specifj'ing  that  a  clause  be  included  in  all 
contracts  requiring  contractors  to  take  affirmative  ac- 
tion to  recniit  and  employ  the  disadvantaged,  including 
minorities  and  women,  and  to  achieve  positive  equal 
employment  opportunity  results  on  constiniction  proj- 
ects. These  directives  were  followed  by  additional 
procedures  for  monitoring  and  evaluating  the  con- 
tractors' compliance  with  EEO. 

In  June  1973,  a  directive  to  implement  the  Minority 
Business  Enterprise  Program  was  issued.  This  di- 
rective requires  that,  where  feasible,  dii-ect  Federal 
projects  shall  be  set  aside  for  contract  negotiation  and 


subsequent  award  to  a  minority-owned  firm  under  the 
requirements  of  section  8(a)  of  the  Small  Business 
Act  of  1958  (P.L.  85-536).  The  FHWA  field  and 
Headquarters  offices  have  taken  the  initiative  to  im- 
plement this  pi'ogram  to  develop  minority  contractors 
with  the  capability  to  perform  highway  construction 
or  perform  highway  I'esearch  studies. 

Since  1899  when  the  River  and  Harbor  Act  was 
passed  requiring  permits  to  build  bridges  over  navi- 
gable waters,  coordination,  considtation  or  I'eceipt  of 
permits  froni  other  agencies  has  been  required  for 
highway  projects  as  the  result  of  various  legislation. 
In  1958  the  Fish  and  Wildlife  Coordination  Act  was 
passed,  in  1966  the  Historic  Preservation  Act,  and  in 
1968  the  Wild  and  Scenic  River  Act.  Since  then  many 
new  acts  and  requirements  have  emerged,  such  as: 

Federal  Water  Pollution  Control  Amendment  of 
1972 

Coastal  Zone  Management  Act  of  1972 

Marine   Protection,  Research   and   Sanctuaries — 

1972 

Endangered  Species  Act  of  1973 

Archeological  and  Historic  Preservation  Act  of 

1974 

As  their  titles  imply,  these  requirements  protect 
navigable  waterways,  marine  and  animal  wildlife,  the 
physical  environment,  air  and  water  pollution  impacts, 
floodplains,  etc.  This  is  not  a  complete  list,  but  it  does 
indicate  the  extent  of  Federal  safeguards  against  un- 
desirable impacts.  Compliance  with  these  new  legisla- 
tive requirements  is  very  time  consuming  and  may  take 
up  to  18  months  to  accomplish.  This  is  one  of  the 
reasons  why  it  takes  much  longer  now  from  conception 
of  a  highway  project  until  it  is  completed  and  open  to 
traffic.  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  all  of  these 
specific  coordination  and  permit  requirements  are  in 
addition  to  the  basic  environmental  impact  evaluations 
required  for  all  highway  projects  since  1970. 

As  may  be  presumed,  the  Federal-aid  highway  pro- 
gram has  not  been  without  its  legal  complications 
which  ultimately  have  wound  up  in  courts  of  law. 
For  example,  a  legal  issue  arose  out  of  the  Federal 
Water  Pollution  Control  Act  of  1972.  Section  404 
of  the  Act  provided  that  permits  from  the  Army 
Corps  of  Engineers  would  be  required  for  dredge  and 
fill  activities  in  navigable  waters.  A  District  Court 
order  in  March  1975  interpreted  the  term  "navigable 
waters"  as  meaning  all  waters  of  the  United  States 
and  thus  subject  to  the  Corps  of  Engineers  jurisdiction 
in  regard  to  the  need  for  section  404  permits.  Since 
almost  all  highway  projects  touch  some  body  of  water 
in  the  expanded  sense,  this  could  conceivably  include 
a  need  for  a  permit  for  a  highway  crossing  wetlands 
or  even  a  stream.  Congressional  hearings  have  been 
held  to  alleviate  this  problem,  but  to  date  no  satis- 
factory solution  has  emerged. 

As  a  result  of  the  enactment  in  1969  of  the  National 
Environmental  Policy  Act  and  related  provisions  con- 
tained in  the  1970  Highway  Act,  each  proposed  high- 
way project  must  be  evaluated  to  determine  its  impact 
on  the  environment.  The  States  were  first  required 
to  develop  and  use  an  approved  process  to  assure  that 


223 


x^tiiii'-J 


W    W"" 


adequate  consideration  was  being  given  to  possible 
social,  economic  and  environmental  effects  of  proposed 
highway  projects.  Guidelines  were  issued  by  FHWA, 
and  the  States  developed  Action  Plans  that  document 
the  process  for  assessing  the  en\ironmental  impacts. 
The  Action  Plan  explains  how  social,  economic,  and 
environmental  factors  are  identified  and  studied,  how 
the  assistance  of  a  wide  range  of  professional  skills 
is  obtained  and  utilized,  and  how  interested  groups 
and  citizens  are  involved  or  can  participate  in  the 
highway  development  process. 

As  an  integral  part  of  the  location  study  process, 
the  State  highway  department,  in  consultation  with 
the  FHWA  Division  Engineer,  nuist  first  determine 
whether  the  highway  project  will  be  a  major  action 
requiring  an  evaluation  of  its  potential  environmental 
impact.  For  those  projects  found  to  be  major  under 
established  criteria,  a  study  will  be  conducted  to  see  if 
the  environmental  impact  is  significant.  If  it  is  deter- 
mined that  a  significant  impact  may  occur,  then  a 
draft  environmental  impact  statement  (EIS)  is  pre- 
pared prior  to  corridor  public  hearings.  The  draft 
is  distributed  for  comments  to  interested  State  and 
Federal  agencies.  After  comments  from  the  reviewing 
agencies  and  from  the  public  hearings  are  available, 
a  final  version  of  the  EIS  is  prepared  and  made  avail- 
able to  the  general  public.  The  final  statement  insures 
that  appropriate  consideration  has  been  given  to  the 
views  expressed  and  to  the  anticipated  effects.  Only 
after  the  final  EIS  is  approved  can  the  route  locations 
be  approved.  If  it  is  found  during  the  environmental 
evaluation  that  there  is  no  significant  impact,  a  nega- 
tive declaration  is  prepared  to  document  this  con- 
clusion. 

In  the  beginning  a  major  issue  arose  as  to  whether 
or  not  the  States  could  prepare  environmental  impact 
statements  under  Federal  supervision.  At  first  the 
Second  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  said  no,  that  it  was 
the  responsibility  of  the  Federal  Highway  Adminstra- 
tion  to  prepare  the  EIS's.  Later  this  was  changed 
by  act  of  Congress  to  permit  the  States  to  prepare  the 
EIS's  under  the  guidance  and  supervision  of  the  in- 
volved Federal  agency. 

Highway  system  statutory  management  requirements 
that  do  not  involve  Federal  funding  have  expanded 
also  since  1956.  Initially,  as  already  mentioned, 
the  States  were  only  required  to  properly  maintain 
federally  assisted  projects.  Since  1956  the  States  are 
also  required  to  enforce  maximum  weight  and  width 
limits  for  vehicles  opei-ating  on  the  Interstate  System 
and  to  certify  annually  to  FHWA  that  they  are  doing 
so.  In  January  1975  a  provision  was  added  to  high- 
way law  effecting  a  nationwide  maximum  speed  limit 
of  55  m.p.h.  for  all  public  highways,  and  the  States 
must  certify  annually  that  they  are  enforcing  this 
speed  limit.  In  addition,  all  States  are  required  to 
have  an  approved  highway  safety  program  designed 
to  reduce  the  frequency  and  severity  of  traffic  accidents 

A  tranquil  spot  for  fishing — one  of  over  100  lakes  in  the  "Chain 
0  Lakes"  alonf/  ISO  in  Xehrnska.    These  lakes  resulted  from 
borrow  pits,  used  during  the  highicni/  construction.    They 
have  sitice  been  developed  into  water  oriented 
recreation  areas  and  icildlife  sanctuaries. 


and  which  must  meet  certain  Federal  performance 
criteria.  Inventories  of  accident  locations,  bridge 
structural  conditions  and  railroad-highway  crossings 
ai-e  required  to  assure  funding  of  highway  priority 
needs.  Each  State  must  have  a  schedule  for  updating 
ti-affic  signs,  signals  and  pavement  mai'kings  to  meet 
uniform  standards. 

As  the  Federal  Highway  Administration  turned  its 
attention  to  the  administration  of  the  foregoing  re- 
quirements, the  States  progressively  assumed  effective 
design  and  construction  responsibility  without  close 
Federal  supervision.  This  is  the  significant  result  of 
the  successful  Federal -State  partnership. 

The  Secondary   Road   Plan 

Legislation  enacted  in  1954  permitted  the  first  major 
change  since  1916  in  the  basic  Federal-State  roles  in 
project  procedures  through  the  initiation  of  The  Sec- 
ondary Road  Plan.  Under  the  Plan,  any  State  could 
request  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  to  relinquish  most 
of  its  engineering  and  administrative  review  and  ap- 
proval responsibilities  for  secondary  road  system 
projects  by  accepting  a  certification  by  the  State  that 
the  projects  had  been  designed  and  constructed  in 
accordance  with  State  standards  and  procedures  estab- 
lished for  general  application  to  all  projects  on  the 
Secondary  System.  To  qualify  for  this  procedure,  a 
State  had  to  submit  its  Secondary  Road  Plan  for  re- 
view and  approval  by  BPR.  The  BPR  review  and 
concurrence  actions  under  the  Plan  were  limited  to 
system  changes,  programs  of  proposed  projects,  pro- 
gram changes,  project  agreement,  a  final  inspection, 
and  a  fiscal  review  and  audit  of  voucher  claims.  All 
the  States  adopted  this  greatly  simplified  plan,  al- 
though one  State  has  since  dropped  it. 

The  philosophy  beliind  the  Secondary  Road  Plan 
was  to  let  the  States  assume  more  independent  re- 
sponsibility and  to  permit  the  BPR  staff  to  devote  its 
principal  efforts  to  the  more  nationally  significant 
Primary  System,  including  the  National  System  of 
Interstate  Highways  which,  it  was  anticipated,  would 
soon  be  authorized  funds.  Secondary  projects  ac- 
counted for  30  percent  of  all  Federal-aid  projects  ad- 
ministered by  the  BPR  in  1954  prior  to  enactment 
of  legislation  permitting  the  Secondary  Road  Plan. 

Certification  Acceptance 

The  Secondary  Road  Plan  not  withstanding,  by  the 
1970's  a  growing  sentiment  was  developing  among  the 
State  highway  administrators,  FHWA  officials,  and 
the  involved  congressional  committees  that  something 
had  to  be  done  to  reduce  the  complexity  and  red  tape 
that  was  rapidly  growing  in  the  administration  of 
the  Federal-aid  highway  program.  At  the  same  time, 
however,  support  for  the  protection  of  social  values 
was  becoming  stronger  and  much  more  vocal.  As  it 
gained  momentum,  considerable  anti-highway  senti- 
ment arose.  The  many  additional  controls,  require- 
ments, considerations  and  clearances  added  to  the 
administration  of  the  highway  program  in  response 
to  the  public  demands  were  inescapable. 

Congress  reflected  its  definite  awareness  of  the  prob- 
lems by  including  in  the  1973  Highway  Act  a  new 
procedure   called   Certification   Acceptance,   an   effort 


225 


yl  secondary  road  project  through  the  mountains  of  northwestern  Montana. 


to  reduce  FHWA  monitoring  of  projects  by  extending 
the  Secondary  Road  Plan  concept  to  all  projects  on 
Federal-aid  systems  except  the  Interstate  System. 

The  Certification  Acceptance  procedures  superseded 
the  highly  successful  Secondary  Road  Plan,  but  un- 
fortunately, it  did  not  succeed  very  well.  The  success 
of  the  Secondary  Road  Plan  lay  in  the  fact  that  the 
State  was  certifying  that  ".  .  .  the  plans,  design,  and 
construction  for  such  projects  are  in  accord  with  the 
standards  and  procedures  of  such  State  applicable  to 
projects  in  this  category  .  .  ."  [italics  supplied]  which 
the  Federal  Government  (Secretary  of  Commerce)  had 
approved.  The  Certification  Acceptance  procedure 
required  the  State  to  certify  that  ".  .  .  such  projects 
will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  State  Jaws, 
regulations,  directives,  and  standards  establishing  re- 
quirements at  least  equivalent  to  those  contained  in,  or 
issued  pursuant  to,  [title  23]."  [Italics  supplied.] 
Thus,  Federal  program  demands  and  complexities  still 
governed.  It  also  presciibed  that  the  new  optional 
pi'ocedure  would  not  affect  or  discharge  any  respon- 
sibility or  obligation  of  the  FHWA  imder  any  Federal 
law  outside  of  title  23,  U.S.  Code,  such  as  the  environ- 
jnental    impact    statements,    right-of-way    acquisition 


methods,  relocation  assistance,  minimum  wage  rates, 
etc.  None  of  the  complexities  were  eliminated  since 
the  States  had  to  have  requirements  equivalent  to 
Federal  laws.  Because  the  secondary  road  system 
now  came  under  the  Certification  Acceptance  pro- 
cedure, more  work  actually  was  generated.  As  a  result. 
States  did  not  elect  to  use  Certification  Acceptance 
procedures. 

Congress  then  took  another  look  at  the  situation, 
and  in  the  1976  Highway  Act,  the  Certification  Ac- 
ceptance section  of  title  23,  U.S.  Code,  was  amended 
by  striking  out  ".  .  .  establishing  requirements  at 
least  equivalent  to  those  contained  in,  or  issued  pur- 
suant to,  this  title"  and  substituting  ".  .  .  which  will 
accomplish  the  policies  and  objectives  contained  in  or 
issued  pursuant  to  this  title."  In  addition,  the  Act 
reinstated  the  Secondary  Road  Plan. 

It  is  too  soon  to  know  just  how  or  to  what  extent  the 
amended  Certification  Acceptance  procedure  will  be 
accepted  by  the  States.  Ilowevei-,  the  States  and 
FHWA  are  continuing  to  work  together  to  reduce 
paperwork,  needless  duplication,  and  unnecessary  de- 
lays in  administering  tlie  highway  i)rogram.  giving 
fiUl  recognition  to  the  capabilities  of  State  organiza- 


226 


tions    and    the    limited    need    for    detailed    Federal 
involvement. 

The  operational  system  or  technical  administration 
of  the  physical  program  is  only  half  of  the  story  of 
the  management  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  program. 
Since  the  Federal  agency  is  responsible  for  protecting 
the  Federal  Govemment's  investment  in  the  highway 
program,  the  other  half  is  concerned  with  tlio  financial 
management  of  funds  and  the  accounting  for  ex- 
penditures. This,  too,  involves  very  complex  proce- 
dures that  are  not  independent  of  the  operational 
system  procedures. 

Financial   Management 

The  sj^stem  that  has  evolved  over  the  years  for  au- 
thorizations, apportionments  among  the  States,  and 
the  overall  funding  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  pro- 
gram has  been  prescribed  largely  by  the  Federal  legis- 
lation. "WHiile  it  was  developmental  in  the  sense  that 
its  concepts  were  developed  in  bits  and  pieces,  the 
basic  rules  or  principles  were  established  early  in  the 
history  of  Federal-aid  legislation.  The  one  major 
new  element  was  the  creation  of  the  Highway  Trust 
Fund  in  1956. 

The  ground  rules  used  in  the  legislative  and  finan- 
cial administration  of  the  program  comprise  the  steps, 
principles,  authorities,  and  limitations  that  must  be 
followed  in  administering,  or  managing,  the  Federal- 
aid  highway  funds  that  are  made  available  by  con- 
gressional legislation.  The  system  is  integrally  related 
to  the  operational  system ;  i.e.,  the  technical  admin- 
istration of  the  physical  progx'am. 

The  system  for  the  financial  administration  of  the 
Fedei"al-aid  highway  program  is  unique  in  relation  to 

CONGRESSIONAL  PROCEDURES 

(SIMPLIFIED,  TYPICAL  PROCESS ) 


HOUSE  OF 
REPRESENTATIVES 


PUBLIC  HEARINGS 


TESTIMONY  BY  THE  EXECLTHVE  BRANCH, 
MEMBERS  OF  CONGRESS,  INTERESTED 
ORGANIZATIONS, ETC.,  BEFORE  THE 
APPROPRIATE  SUBCOMMITTIES 


SENATE 


PUBLIC  HEARINGS 


SURFACE  I  TRANSPORTATION 
ISUBCOMMITTEE 


TBANSPORTATION  |  SUBCOMMITTEE 


MARK-UP  SESSION 
SUBCOMMITTEE  BILL) 


COMMITTEE  BIU 


FLOOR  ACTION 


SUBCOMMITTEE  DISCUSSION  - 
PREPARATION  Of  BILL 


SUBCOMMnTEE  BIU  DISCUSSED. 
AMENDED,  AND  VOTED  ON  BY  FULL 
COMMITTEE  -  SENT  TO  THE  FLOOR  OF 
EACH  HOUSE  OF  CONGRESS 


DEBATE.  AMENDMENT.  PASSAGE 


MARK-UP  SESSION 
(SUBCOMMITTEE  BILL) 


COMMITTEE  BIU 


FLOOR  ACTION 


HOUSE  BILL 


SENATE  BILL 


OVERRIDE  VETO 


FLOOR  ACTION 


MEMBERS 
SELECTED  BY 
CHAIRMEN  OF 
FULL  COMMITTEE 


COMPROMISE 
ARRIVED  AT  BY 
CONFEREES 


BOTH  HOUSES 
DEBATE,  PASS 
CONFERENCE  BIU 
-  AMENDMENTS 
NOT  PERMITTED 


most  other  Federal  assistance  programs  in  that  it  has 
recognized  that  the  States  must  know  what  to  expect 
from  the  Federal  Government  with  a  substantial  lead- 
time  to  provide  for  their  own  adequate  legal,  fiancial, 
and  administrative  planning. 

The  legislative  process  has  not  changed  nuich  over 
the  years.  The  Administration  submits  its  proposed 
program  to  Congress  and  individual  members  of  Con- 
gress may  also  submit  bills.  Extensive  committee 
hearings  are  held,  and  eventually  the  House  and 
Senate  committees  develop  and  report  out  proposed 
bills  for  consideration  by  the  whole  Congress.  Differ- 
ences are  resolved  by  conference  committee  made  up 
of  members  of  both  Houses.  After  final  approval  by 
both  the  House  and  the  Senate,  the  bill  is  sent  to  the 
President  for  signature  which  constitutes  enactment. 

Traditionally,  the  Administration  has  submitted  its 
proposed  highway  legislation  to  Congress  shortly 
after  the  first  of  each  even-numbered  year.  This  was 
an  endeavor  on  the  part  of  Congress  to  assist  the 
States  in  their  planning  for  participation  in  the  pro- 
gram, since  most  State  legislatures  convene  on  a  bi- 
ennial basis  in  the  odd-numbered  years.  Thus  the 
coming  availability  of  Federal  funds  to  the  States 
was  known  in  advance  so  that  the  State  legislatures 
could  provide  their  highway  moneys,  including  the 
State  matching  funds  and  the  advance  funds  which 
the  States  needed  to  first  pay  highway  contractors 
and  which  would  be  later  reimbursed  from  the  Federal 
Government. 

The  committee  hearings  usually  have  been  initiated 
in  Congress  in  the  spring,  and  the  highway  act  is 
usually  enacted  any  time  from  early  summer  to  the 
end  of  the  year.  Over  the  years,  there  have  been 
exceptions  to  this  timing,  but  the  pattern  has  been 
fairly  consistent. 

"When  the  1916  and  1921  Highway  Acts  were  passed, 
they  appropriated  funds  for  the  new  highway  pro- 
gram. This  appropriated  money  had  specific  limita- 
tions as  to  amount,  purpose,  and  duration.  In  addition, 
these  Acts  specified  that  a  percentage  of  the  appropria- 
tion was  to  be  set  aside  for  administering  the  program 
and  for  research.  It  also  specified  how  the  money  was 
to  be  apportioned,  or  divided,  among  the  States  based 
on  a  prescribed  formula  in  the  law.  By  appropriating 
the  funds,  Congress  provided  budget  authority  which 
allowed  the  Bureau  to  incur  obligations  (a  commit- 
ment by  the  Bureau  to  pay  out  the  money). 

After  a  State  received  its  certificate  of  apportion- 
ment from  BPR  telling  it  how  much  money  the  Fed- 
eral Government  was  committing  for  its  use,  the  State 
was  free  to  go  ahead  with  obligations  for  work  to  be 
performed.  AVTien  the  Project  Agreement  had  been 
executed  and  signed  by  the  Secret aiy  of  Agriculture, 
the  Secretary  notified  the  Treasury  Department,  and 
the  money  was  thus  reserved  for  payment  of  the 
State's  voucher  when  received  and  approved  by  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 

The  Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  for  fiscal  year 
1923  did  not  appropriate  any  funds  directly  because 
it  only  "authorized  [sums]  to  be  appropriated."  This 
was  the  beginning  of  contract  authority  for  the  Fed- 
eral-aid highway  program  which  permitted  obligations 
of  the  full  authorized  amounts  before  any  legislation 
had  been  passed  to  provide  liquidating  cash  to  pay  the 


227 


amounts  on  the  vouchers,  "\\naen  the  appropriations 
committees  met  to  consider  the  estimated  total  of 
funds  that  would  be  I'equired  during  the  coming  year 
to  pay  the  claims  submitted  by  the  States,  they  had 
simply  to  evaluate  the  accuracy  of  the  estimate  and 
provide  the  monej'  in  the  legislation  that  the  Federal 
Government  had  already  made  a  legal  commitment  to 
pay. 

Subsequent  to  1923,  the  Federal-aid  highway  legis- 
lation generally  contained  some  or  all  of  the  follow- 
ing: (1)  Permission  to  start  new  or  to  revise  existing 
pi'Ograms;  (2)  permission  for  specific  project  demon- 
strations or  requests  for  reports;  and  (3)  funding  for 
the  highway  operations  programs. 

The  dollar  amounts  in  these  acts  have  always  been 
provided  for  specific  fiscal  years.  These  amounts 
were  usually  a^jportioned  or  divided  among  the  States 
by  a  formula  established  by  law.  The  apportionments 
had  to  be  made  at  least  6  months  before  the  fiscal 
year  for  which  they  were  authorized  and  were  avail- 
able for  obligation  for  a  period  of  2  years  after  the 
end  of  the  fiscal  year  for  which  authorized,  at  which 
time  they  lapsed.  Therefore,  sums  apportioned  were 
usually  available  for  obligation  for  a  minimum  of 
3I/2  years.  What  had  been  authorized,  apportioned, 
and  made  available  was  the  authority  to  incur  obliga- 
tions on  behalf  of  the  U.S.  Government.  No  cash  had 
yet  exchanged  hands. 

Not  all  funds  were  apportioned,  however.  Some 
funds  are  not  governed  by  a  legislatively  mandated 
apportionment  formula.  In  these  cases,  the  sums  are 
divided  among  the  States  at  the  discretion  of  the 
Secretary  of  the  department  or,  as  in  the  case  of 
emergency  relief  moneys,  sums  of  money  are  triggered 
by  events.  These  discretionary  or  administrative  divi- 
sions are  called  allocations,  as  compared  to  the  statu- 
tory formula  divisions  or  apportionments. 

Although  funds  were  authorized  for  specific  Federal- 
aid  systems  and  programs,  it  was  recognized  that  the 
apportionment  formulas,  equitable  as  they  may  be, 
would  not  always  provide  funds  in  the  relative  propor- 
tions that  States  required  them.  Therefore,  Congress 
provided  flexibility  in  the  use  of  apportionments  by 
permitting  transfers  between  funding  categories. 

From  1923  to  1956  there  were  no  significant  changes 
in  the  basic  system  of  legal  and  financial  administra- 
tion of  the  program.  Some  new  categories  of  funds 
were  created  and  special  apportionment  formulas  were 
prescribed  for  specific  funds,  but  the  basic  system  re- 
mained intact. 

AMien  the  1956  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  was 
passed,  it  became  title  I  of  a  two-part,  piece  of  legisla- 
tion, the  second  part,  title  II,  being  the  Highway 
Revenue  Act  of  1956.  Title  II  created  the  Highway 
Trust  Fund  from  which  Federal-aid  highway  appro- 
priations were  to  be  drawn  as  well  as  the  BPR  ad- 
ministrative and  research  funding.  The  Highway 
Revenue  Act  also  provided  for  the  revenue  sources  to 
support  the  Fund. 

Prior  to  the  1956  Act,  all  appropriations  for  the 
Federal-aid  highway  program  came  from  the  General 
Fund  of  the  Treasury.  Although  Federal  taxes  on 
motor  fuels  and  automotive  products  were  in  existence, 
there  was  no  relationship  between  the  level  of  I'evenues 


obtained  from  these  excises  and  the  level  of  funding 
for  the  highway  program.  The  Highway  Revenue 
Act  increased  some  of  the  previously  existing  highway 
user  taxes,  established  a  number  of  new  ones,  and 
provided  that  most  of  the  revenues  would,  be  credited 
to  the  Highway  Trust  Fund  and  dedicated  solely  to 
the  financing  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  program. 

The  change  in  the  method  of  financing  the  Federal- 
aid  highway  program  was  dictated  primarily  by  the 
legislative  decision  contained  in  title  I  to  provide  au- 
thorizations for  the  completion  of  the  National  System 
of  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways  by  June  30,  1972. 
Title  I  provided  Interstate  authorizations  for  fiscal 
years  1956  through  1969  totaling  almost  $25  billion. 
In  addition,  the  Act  greatly  increased  the  level  of 
authorizations  for  the  regular  primary,  secondary  and 
urban  programs.  The  creation  of  the  Highway  Trust 
Fund  made  it  possible  for  the  public  to  accept  the 
increased  and  new  highway  user  taxes  by  placing  the 
program  on  a  wholly  user-supported,  pay-as-you-go 
basis. 

Other  significant  changes  made  by  the  1956  Act  in 
the  system  of  financial  administration  applicable  only 
to  the  Interstate  System  were: 

•  The  Federal  share  of  the  cost  was  90  percent  plus 
a  computed  increase  for  the  public  lands  States 
to  a  total  not  to  exceed  95  percent. 

•  The  apportionments  of  authorizations  to  the 
States,  beginning  with  fiscal  year  1960,  were  to 
be  made  "...  on  a  date  as  far  in  advance  of  the 
beginning  of  the  fiscal  year  for  which  authorized 
as  practicable  but  in  no  case  more  than  eighteen 
months  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  fiscal  year 
for  which  authorized." 

•  Beginning  with  the  authorization  for  fiscal  year 
1960,  the  apportionment  to  the  States  was  pre- 
scribed to  be  ".  .  .  in  the  ratio  which  the  esti- 
mated cost  of  completing  the  Interstate  System 
in  each  State  .  .  .  bears  to  the  sum  of  the  estimated 
cost  of  completing  the  Interstate  System  in  all 
of  the  States."  The  cost  estimates  were  to  be 
prepared  at  frequent  intervals  to  assure  that  no 
State  was  given  more  than  was  required  to  com- 
plete the  System  within  that  State  and  ideally 
to  assure  the  completion  of  the  System  in  all 
States  at  an  approximately  uniform  rate. 

•  The  States  were  authorized  to  proceed  with  the 
construction  and  completion  of  Interstate  projects 
beyond  the  total  of  their  currently  available  Fed- 
eral apportionments,  but  they  could  not  expect 
reimbursement  for  the  Federal  share  of  costs  of 
these  projects  until  the  State  was  apportioned 
additional  Interstate  funds. 

•  If  the  Interstate  apportionments  were  unobli- 
gated at  the  end  of  the  second  fiscal  year  after  the 
fiscal  year  for  which  they  were  authorized,  the 
apportionments  would  be  reappoi*tioned  to  all  the 
other  States  and  become  a  part  of  the  new  obli- 
gational  authority  for  that  particular  year  with 
the  same  availability. 

In  addition  to  the  creation  of  the  Highway  Trust 
Fund  and  its  sources  of  revenue,  tlie  Highway  Revenue 
Act  of  1956  also  prescribed  how  the  Fund  should  be 


228 


A  charming  relic  of  another  age.    Although  an  orthotropic  steel  deck  for  structural  safety  is  concealed  by  careful  design, 
this  covered  bridge  at  West  Cornwalk,  Conn.,  makes  the  motorist  a  bit  nostalgic. 


manaj^ed  by  the  Secretary  of  tlie  Treasury.    The  most 
significant  features  were: 

•  Repayable  advances  from  tlie  General  Fund  to 
the  Highway  Trust  Fund  were  authorized  to  be 
made  as  might  be  needed  to  meet  expenditure  de- 
mands on  the  Trust  Fund  in  excess  of  available 
balances  during  a  fiscal  year.  However,  this 
feature  was  suspended  by  the  next  one. 

•  Before  the  apportionment  of  the  Interstate  au- 
thorizations for  any  fiscal  year,  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  had  to  determine  that  anticipated 
revenues  to  be  credited  to  the  Trust  Fund  by  the 
end  of  the  fiscal  year  would  be  adequate  to  meet 
the  expenditure  requirements.  If  deficits  were 
projected,  then  the  Interstate  apportionment  had 
to  be  reduced  to  meet  anticipated  revenues.  This 
feature  placed  the  program  on  a  "pay-as-you-go" 
basis  by  permitting  apportionments  to  be  made 
only  to  the  extent  that  revenues  would  be  avail- 
able to  reimbiirse  obligations  and  by  prohibiting 
the  Trust  Fund  from  entering  into  a  deficit 
condition. 

The  provision  in  the  1956  Act  for  short-term  loan 
provisions  froni  the  General  Fund  of  the  Treasury 
was  in  effect  nullified  by  the  pay-as-you-go  require- 
ment added  to  the  Act  before  final  passage. 

However,  in  1958  the  United  States  found  itself  in 
the  grip  of  an  extended  economic  recession,  and  one 
way  to  hasten  recovery'  seemed  to  be  through  an  ac- 
celeration of  the  Federal-aid  liighway  program.  For 
this  and  other  reasons,  the  1958  HigliAvay  Act  in- 
creased the  annual  Interstate  authorizations.  It  also 
set  aside  the  pay-as-you-go  provision  of  the  1956  Act 
for  2  years  and  directed  apportionment  to  the  States 


of  the  full  amounts,  but  these  provisions  were  not 
matched  by  a  commensurate  provision  for  the  neces- 
sary additional  revenue. 

The  effect  of  the  1958  Act  was  that  the  Federal-aid 
program  annual  expenditures  exceeded  annual  Trust 
Fund  revenue,  making  it  necessary  for  the  BPR  to 
institute  reimbursement  planning.  This  was  a  new 
procedure  establishing  a  limitation  on  the  total  dollar 
amount  of  Federal-aid  project  obligations  that  could 
be  incurred  in  a  given  year,  regardless  of  the  unobli- 
gated balance  of  apportionments  that  were  available 
to  the  States.  This  new  program  control  was  to  insure 
that  obligations  incurred  by  the  States  did  not  exceed 
the  amounts  that  could  be  subsequently  paid  from 
currently  available  Highway  Trust  Fund  revenues 
when  work  was  done  and  the  States  claimed  reimburse- 
ment for  the  Federal  share. 

In  1961  the  pay-as-you-go  principle  was  reinstated. 

The  Highway  Trust  Fund  is  not  a  physical  de- 
pository in  which  its  dedicated  revenues  are  actually 
deposited.  It  exists  only  in  the  accounting  records 
of  the  U.S.  Treasury.  Estimated  Trust  Fund  reve- 
nues are  transferred  by  an  accounting  transaction 
from  the  General  Fund  to  the  Trust  Fund  early  in 
each  month  and  then  adjusted  later  on  the  basis  of 
the  actual  tax  receipts. 

It  is  important  to  recognize  that  even  though  the 
Highway  Trust  Fund  was  created  specifically  to  fi- 
nance the  Federal-aid  highway  program,  the  revenues 
that  accrue  to  the  Trust  Fund  cannot  be  used  to  pay 
any  of  the  costs  of  the  highway  program  until  they 
are  made  available  for  expenditure  by  enactment  of 
appropriations  acts  by  Congress  as  was  the  case  be- 
foi-e   the  creation   of   the   Trust   Fund.     The  budget 


229 


estimates  for  appropriations  from  the  Highway  Trust 
Fund  must  be  confined  to  the  estimated  availability 
by  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  of  sufficient  revenues  in 
the  Fund  to  finance  the  appropriations. 

With  a  few  exceptions,  the  Federal  Government 
does  not  pay  for  the  entire  cost  of  Federal-aid  high- 
way projects.  Originally  the  States  were  required 
to  match  the  Federal  funds  on  a  50/50  basis,  except 
in  States  with  large  areas  of  public  lands  where  there 
have  been  statutoi\y  increases  in  the  Federal  share. 
In  1973  the  matching  basis  was  revised  for  most 
projects,  other  than  Interstate,  to  be  funded  on  a  70 
percent  Federal/30  percent  State  basis.  The  Inter- 
state System  has  been  funded  90/10  since  the  1956 
Act,  again  with  an  increased  Federal  share  in  public 
lands  States. 

Although  the  Federal  share  of  a  project's  cost  was 
established  by  law,  there  were  periods  when  this  pro- 
vision was  waived  or  temporarily  suspended.  In  1932, 
to  aid  in  fighting  the  Depression,  Congress  authorized 
$120  million  which  could  be  used  to  provide  the  State 
share  of  a  project's  cost.  This  advance  of  funds,  or 
suspension  of  the  matching  requirements,  was  to  be 
repaid  over  a  10-year  period  beginning  with  fiscal 
year  1938  by  deductions  from  regular  apportionments. 
There  were  several  other  acts  authorizing  additional 
funds  during  the  Depression. 

In  1958,  again  to  fight  a  recession,  additional  au- 
thorizations for  the  Primary  and  Secondary  Systems 
and  their  urban  extensions  were  enacted.  The  Federal 
share  for  these  supplemental  funds  was  raised  but  a 
separate  authorization  was  also  made  to  assist  the 
States  in  providing  matching  funds.  The  amounts 
used  to  increase  the  Federal  share  had  to  be  repaid 
from  future  apportionments. 

The  latest  example  of  increasing  the  Federal  share 
occurred  in  1975,  and  a  recession  was  again  the  reason 
for  it.  In  this  instance,  all  matching  was  waived  for 
a  6-month  period  in  1975  with  the  proviso  that  the 
State  share  be  repaid  by  January  1,  1977.  This  re- 
payment provision  was  extended  by  the  1976  Act  to 
provide  for  a  staggered  repayment  to  be  completed 
by  January  1,  1979. 

The  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (0MB)  of 
the  Executive  Office  of  the  President  has  authority  to 
establish  obligational  limitations  for  the  highway  pro- 
gram and  to  specify  the  maximum  amount  of  obliga- 
tions to  be  incurred  in  a  given  fiscal  year.  The  0MB 
limitation  also  may  specify  the  rate  at  which  obliga- 
tions can  be  pennitted  to  be  incurred. 

The  0MB  limitation  on  obligations  does  not  apply 
to  any  particular  fiscal  year's  apportionment,  but 
rather  applies  to  the  sum  of  all  obligations  within  a 
particular  fiscal  year.  Because  of  the  multiyear  avail- 
ability of  funds,  if  funds  for  a  fiscal  year  are  not 
obligated  in  that  fiscal  year,  they  are  still  available 
until  they  lapse  according  to  the  law. 

The  highway  program,  like  other  Federal  programs, 
is  subject  to  overriding  national  concerns,  such  as  the 
rising  i-ate  of  inflation  which  has  led  to  controls  being 
placed  on  highway  spending.  From  fiscal  year  1966 
through  fiscal  year  1975,  the  Office  of  Management 
and  Budget,  thi'ough  authority  delegated  to  it  by  the 
President,   regulated   the   rate   at   Avhich   Federal-aid 


highway  funds  were  obligated  in  a  given  time  period. 
It  must  be  stressed  that  limitation  on  obligations, 
or  impoundment,  of  highway  program  funds  is  some- 
what different  from  impoundments  for  other  Federal 
programs  since  there  is  no  refusal  to  spend  funds, 
only  a  slowing  down  in  the  rate  at  which  funds  may 
be  spent. 

The  appropriations  acts  usually  contain  the  wording 
"not  otherwise  provided"  because  not  all  of  the  high- 
way programs  are  reimbursed  from  the  Highway 
Trust  Fund.  For  example,  until  the  1970  Highway 
Act,  the  forest  highways  and  public  lands  highway 
programs  were  not  funded  from  the  Trust  Fund,  but 
had  separate  funding  authorizations  irom  the  General 
Fund.  There  are  still  numerous  safety  and  other 
highway-related  programs  with  separate  funding  ac- 
counts, some  with  contract  authority  and  some  that 
must  await  each  annual  appropriations  act  for  budget 
authority  to  spend  money.  Thus,  the  appropriations 
acts  provide  liquidating  cash  with  which  to  reimburse 
the  States  under  the  normal  Federal-aid  highway 
programs,  provide  budget  authority  for  certain  other 
programs,  and  may  provide  limitations  on  obligations 
equivalent  to  previous  Executive  Branch  impound- 
ments for  specific  programs. 

Although  most  Federal-aid  highway  programs  ob- 
tain their  budget  authority  in  the  form  of  contract 
authority  rather  than  through  appropriations  acts,  in 
recent  years  Congress  has  made  several  major  changes. 
The  one  that  may  have  the  most  impact  on  the  high- 
way program  was  enactment  of  the  Congressional 
Budget  and  Impoundment  Control  Act  of  1974  (Public 
Law  93-344)  which  was  an  effort  to  gain  budgetary 
control  over  "backdoor  spending,"  spending  not  sub- 
ject to  year-to-year  congressional  or  executive  scrutiny. 
The  contract  authority  exercised  by  the  Federal  High- 
way Administration  is  considered  a  form  of  "backdoor 
spending."  The  Budget  Act  requires  that  future 
Federal-aid  highway  acts  contain  provisions  limiting 
new  budget  authority  to  the  estimated  amount  pro- 
vided in  appropriations  acts,  and  this  was  first  done 
in  the  1976  Federal- Aid  Highway  Act. 

This  requirement  would  seem  to  negate  all  contract 
authority,  but  Congress,  recognizing  that  some  pro- 
grams require  advance  knowledge  of  the  size  of  future 
Federal  funding  commitments,  permitted  several  ex- 
ceptions. One  of  these  exceptions  relates  to  progTams 
whose  new  budget  authority  is  derived  from  trust 
funds,  90  percent  or  more  of  whose  receipts  are  user 
related  taxes.^^  The  Highway  Trust  Fund,  which  is 
wholly  supported  by  user  taxes,  meets  the  requirement, 
but  its  life  term  has  been  limited  by  law  since  1956.  Its 
term  has  been  extended  nmnerous  times,  the  latest,  in 
1976,  extended  the  Fund  to  September  30,  1979. 
Should  the  Trust  Fund  be  terminated,  or  its  uses  or 
revenue  altered  so  that  it  no  longer  meets  the  exception 
requirements,  the  highway  program  would  have  to 
obtain  its  budget  authority  through  appropriations 
acts  as  other  Federal  agencies  do.  Of  course,  the 
appropriations  acts  could  provide  for  nuiltiyear  fund- 
ing, but  this  would  be  in  opposition  to  the  principle 
of  annual  review  of  expenditures. 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1976  has  made 
other  changes  in  the  legal  and  financial  juanagement 


230 


of  the  highway  program.    Some  of  the  more  important 
points  are: 

•  Apportionments  and  allocations  are  now  available 
for  obligation  for  a  total  of  4  years.  Interstate 
apportionments  are  made  1  year  in  advance  of 
the  beginning  of  the  fiscal  year  for  which  they  are 
authorized  and  remain  available  until  2  years 
after  that  fiscal  year  ends.  Non-Interstate  appor- 
tionments are  made  on  the  first  day  of  the  fiscal 
year  for  which  authorized  and  remain  available 
until  3  yeai*s  after  that  fiscal  year  ends. 

•  In  the  future  there  will  be  greater  flexibility  in 
the  expenditure  of  highway  funds,  such  as  sub- 
stitution of  programs  and  transfer  of  funds. 

•  Some  highway  programs  were  consolidated,  but 
instead  of  reducing  the  number  of  separate  fund- 
ing accounts,  several  new  ones  were  added. 

In  summary,  the  legal  and  financial  management 
cycle  can  be  considered  to  begin  with  the  authorizing 
legislation.  These  acts  set  the  ujiper  limits  on  Federal 
commitments  which  can  be  incurred  for  Federal-aid 
highways.  Deductions  from  the  authorized  levels  are 
then  made  for  administration  of  the  program  and 
urban  transportation  planning,  with  additional 
amounts  earmarked  for  other  planning  and  research 
activities.  These  normally  amount  to  about  4  or  5 
percent  of  the  authorizations. 

The  remaining  amounts  are  then  apportioned  or 
allocated  (divided)  aniong  the  States.  Apportion- 
ments and  allocations  are  considered  "new  obligational 
authority"  and,  when  added  to  the  unobligated  balances 
of  previous  apportionments  and  allocations,  constitute 
the  total  amount  of  obligational  authority  available  to 


the  States.     This  is  not  money,  but  authority  to  incur 
obligations. 

Apportionments  are  available  for  obligation  for  a 
total  period  of  4  years. 

The  States  may  obligate  funds  subject  to  the  avail- 
ability of  apportionments  and  allocations  and  to  any 
limitations  on  obligations  which  may  have  been  im- 
posed for  that  fiscal  year.  These  liuiitations  regulate 
the  rate  of  obligations  by  imposing  a  maximum 
amount  on  obligations  which  can  be  incurred  during 
a  given  fiscal  year. 

Once  funds  are  obligated  and  a  project  is  underway, 
pi'ogress  payments  may  be  made  to  the  States  for 
completed  work.  This  liquidating  cash  is  appro- 
priated annually  by  Congress  aiul  is  derived  from 
revenues  accruing  to  the  Highway  Trust  Fund. 

The  final  step  in  the  legal  and  financial  administra- 
tion of  the  Federal -aid  highway  program  is  reimburse- 
ment to  the  States  for  the  Federal  share  of  the  cost 
of  approved  pi'ojects  or  programs. 

Initially  the  States,  or  their  local  governmental 
subdivisions,  finance  the  costs  of  Federal-aid  projects. 
After  authorization  by  the  Division  Administrator, 
work  can  proceed  on  a  Federal-aid  project.  Once  the 
Project  Agreement  has  been  executed  between  the 
State  and  FHWA,  the  State  can  submit  progress 
vouchers  claiming  reimbursement  for  the  Federal  share 
of  costs  of  work  satisfactorily  completed  and  for  ma- 
terials stockpiled  for  use  on  the  project. 

After  the  project  has  been  completed  and  final 
FHWA  acceptance  has  been  issued  by  the  Division 
Administrator,  the  State  submits  a  final  voucher  for 
the  project.     The  final  voucher  summarizes  the  final 


FINANCIAL  PROCEDURES 


HIGHWAY  ACT 


AUTHORIZATIONS 


UP  TO  3V.  PERCENT  OF  THE  AUTHORIZATIONS 
FOR  ADMINISTERING  THE  PROGRAM  PLUS  AN 
ADDITIONAL  V,  PERCENT  FOR  URBAN 
TRANSPORTATION  PLANNING 


DEDUCTIONS 


BEGINNING  OF  FISCAL  YEAR 


APPORTIONMENTS 
& 
ALLOCATIONS 


DIVISION  OF  THE  REMAINING  SUMS 
AMONG  THE  STATES:  APPORTIONMENTS 
BY  LEGISLATIVE  FORMULA  ALLOCATIONS 
ADMINISTRATIVELY  DETERMINED 


HAVE  ANY  FUNDS 
LAPSED? 


NEW  OBLIGATIONAL 
AUTHORITY 


ARE  THEY 

INTERSTATE" 

FUNDS? 


AUTHORITY 
TO  OBLIGATE 
THE  FUNDS  IS 
WITHDRAWN 


POOFI 


FUNDS  ARE 
REAPPORTIONED 
TO  OTHER  STATES 


AUTWORrTY  TO 
OBLIGATE  THE 
LAPSED  FUNDS 
IS  GIVEN  TO  THE 
NON-LAPSING 
STATES 


UNOBLIGATED  BALANCE 

OF 

PRIOR  APPORTIONMENTS 

AND  ALLOCATIONS 


•WTIBSTATE  ■COMPLETED  "  FUNDS [Z3  USC  104  Ibl  151  IaT]; 


TOTAL  AVAILABLE 

OBLIGATIONAL 

AUTHORITY 


PLUS  THE  UNUSED 
PORTIONS  OF  PRIOR 
APPORTIONMENTS 
AND  AUOCATIONS 


EQUALS  THE  NEW 
AMOUNT  AVAILABLE 
FOR  OBLIGATION 
DURING  THE  FISCAL 
YEAR 


TOTAL  AVAILABLE 
OBLIGATIONAL  AUTHORITY 


CEILING  ON  HIGHWAY 

PROGRAM  -  SPECIFIES  I T 

THE  MAXIMUM  I  *  I 

AMOUNT  WHICH  CAN  '      LIMITATION      H" 
BE  OBUGATED  DURING  I  I 

THE  PRESENT  ' • 

FISCAL  YEAR 


HAS  UMITATION 
BEEN  REACHED  7 


_YES__J_ 


YES 

r 

I  NO  ADDITIONAL  I 
lOBLIGATIONS  THISJ 
i      RSCALYEAR      I 


NO 


OBLIGATION 


FROM  HIGHWAY 
USER  TAXES 

REVENUES 

1 

DEPOSITORY 
FOR  REVENUES 

HIGHWAY 
TRUST  FUND 

PROVIDES  CASH 

NECESSARY  TO 

REIMBURSE  ESTIMATED 

VOUCHER  SUBMITTALS 

DURING  RSCAL  YEAR 

APPROPRIATION 
ACT 

VOUCHER 
SUBMITTAL 


PAYMENT 


COMMITMENT  BY  FEDERAL 
GOVERNMENT  TO 
REIMBURSE  STATE  FOR 
FEDERAL  SHARE  OF 
TOTAL  PROJECT  COST 


BEGIN 
PROJECT 


STATE  REQUESTS 
REIMBURSEMENT  FROM 
FEDERAL  GOVERNMENT  - 
PROGRESS  PAYMENTS 
MAY  BE  MADE  PRIOR  TO 
PROJECT  COMPLETION 


STATE  IS  REIMBURSED 
FOR  FEDERAL  SHARE  OF 
WORK  COMPtrrED 


•  UMITATION  MAY  BE  INITIATEO  BY  THE  EXECUTIVE  BRANCH  OR  THE  CONGRESS 


231 


project  costs  in  accordance  with  the  contract,  change 
orders,  extra  work  orders  and  the  project  agreement. 

Final  vouchers  are  subject  to  a  complete  fiscal  and 
engineering  and  right-of-way  review.  A  number  of 
projects  are  subjected  to  in-depth  engineering  and 
fiscal  audit  by  FHWA  to  insure  the  integrity  of  the 
State's  project  administration  and  documentation. 

In  1921  when  Cliief  MacDonald  was  organizing  the 
Bureaii  for  the  basic  Federal-aid  highway  program, 
he  included  a  Division  of  Control  responsible  for  pro- 
gram and  project  accounting,  budget  activities,  fiscal 
accounting,  payroll,  purchasing,  and  equipment  and 
supplies. 

The  accounting  activity  was  the  only  functional  ele- 
ment that  was  specifically  created  by  law.  Until  1921 
the  Bureau  had  kept  program  and  fiscal  records,  but 
the  function  was  fragmented  and  treated  as  a  routine 
clerical  operation.  Congress,  recognizing  that  admin- 
istration of  the  Federal-aid  highway  program  would 
require  detailed  accounting  records,  directed  in  the 
1921  Act  that  an  accounting  division  be  established. 
This  later  was  to  become  the  Finance  Division  and  the 
Program  Analysis  Division  in  the  Bureau.  Over  the 
years,  the  function  has  progressed  from  a  routine 
bookkeeping  operation  to  a  very  professional  financial 
management  organization. 

Because  of  the  need  to  maintain  very  detailed  finan- 
cial and  project  records,  a  records  section  was  estab- 
lished in  1921  with  the  primitive  data  processing 
equipment  of  the  day — a  tabulating  machine,  a  key 
punch  and  a  sorter.  As  the  data  processing  technology 
and  equipment  developed  and  became  more  sophisti- 
cated, the  increased  data  processing  capability  became 
one  of  the  primary  tools  in  the  administration  of  the 
highway  program  and  made  it  possible  to  cope  with 
the  program  without  a  corresponding  growth  in  the 
staffing  requirements. 

The  finance  function  in  the  Bureau  extended  beyond 
the  Bureau's  internal  financial  management  operations 
to  the  development  of  the  financial  management  opera- 
tion in  the  States.  The  American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials  created  a  Subcommittee  on  Uniform 
Accounting  in  1926  to  assist  the  States  in  developing 
a  uniform  system  of  highway  accounting,  but  little 
progress  was  made  because  of  the  diversity  among  the 
States.  By  1936  BPR  had  joined  in  this  effort,  but 
no  formal  procedures  were  established  before  World 
War  II  suspended  operations  of  the  AASHO  Sub- 
committee. 

It  was  not  until  1955  that  the  AASHO  Executive 
Committee  directed  that  work  resume  on  a  uniform 
accounting  system  and  that  a  uniform  accounting 
manual  be  developed.  Between  1957  and  1960  a  uni- 
form accounting  manual  was  developed,  and  today 
virtually  all  the  States  have  adopted  the  principles 
of  this  manual. 

After  the  passage  of  the  1956  Highway  Act,  it  be- 
came evident  that  the  State  highway  departments 
would  need  assistance  in  modernizing  their  accoimting 
systems  and  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  would  have 
to  improve  its  own  internal  accounting  system.  In 
1959,  a  special  stafll'  was  created  to  develop  and  im- 
plement a  cooperative  financial  management  improve- 
ment pi-ogram  with  the  States  and  to  strengthen  the 
Bureau's  accounting  operations. 


The  cooperative  financial  management  improvement 
program  with  the  States  focused  its  immediate  atten- 
tion on  the  modernization  of  the  State  highway  de- 
partments' accounting  systems,  particularly  in  the 
areas  of  establishing  reimbursement  claims  and  sub- 
stantiating them,  and  in  providing  advice  to  the  States. 
This  program  was  called  "current  billing."  Current 
billing  is  a  concept  whereby  the  States  were  encouraged 
to  centralize  their  financial  operations  and  relate  all 
highway  construction  costs  to  i^rojects  through  project 
cost  accounting  techniques.  To  achieve  this,  it  was 
necessary  to  revise  their  accounting  procedures,  install 
sophisticated  data  processing  systems,  and  make  some 
organizational  changes.  An  important  feature  of  cur- 
rent billing  was  the  computer-produced  tabulation  of 
costs  supporting  the  billing  voucher  to  the  Bureau  for 
reimbursement  of  the  Federal  share.  All  50  States, 
Puerto  Eico,  and  the  District  of  Columbia  have  im- 
plemented current  billing  procedures. 

The  adoption  of  current  billing  enabled  the  Bureau 
auditors  to  change  their  audit  techniques.  Formerly, 
it  was  necessary  to  audit  the  transactions  of  each 
project  due  to  the  lack  of  adequate  centralized  cost 
accounting  techniques.  This  resulted  in  portions  of 
claims  being  prepared  from  other  than  the  States' 
accounting  records,  costs  being  omitted,  variations  in 
cost  methods  and  controls  from  project  to  project,  and 
similar  peculiarities  in  the  States'  accounting  systems. 
As  a  result  of  the  impi'ovements  made  under  the  cur- 
rent billing  concept,  the  auditors  were  able  to  con- 
centrate their  reviews  on  the  States'  procedures  and 
controls,  thus  substantially  eliminating  the  time-con- 
suming examination  of  project  documentation. 

Under  the  authority  and  direction  of  the  Budget 
and  Accounting  Act  of  1950,  the  U.S.  General  Account- 
ing Office  (GAO),  an  administrative  support  tool  of 
the  Congress,  initiated  comprehensive  management- 
type  audits  of  the  departments  and  agencies  in  the 
Executive  Branch.  These  audits  were  designed  to 
evaluate  for  Congress  the  administration  and  effective- 
ness of  agency  operations  and  programs.  The  provi- 
sions of  the  Act  also  encouraged  the  agencies  and 
departments  to  initiate  their  own  internal  audit  or 
review  programs.  As  a  result  of  these  review  efforts, 
the  GAO  approved  FHWA's  accounting  systems  and 
procedures  in  1967,  one  of  the  few  to  receive  GAO's 
approval  up  to  that  time. 

Of  course,  the  financial  operation  includes  cost  ac- 
counting, but  the  information  necessary  for  this  func- 
tion is  so  complex  that  early  in  the  highway  program, 
a  special  division  was  created  to  maintain  the  data 
on  project  obligations  on  a  nationwide  project-by- 
project  basis. 

Program  analysis  is  the  continuous  maintenance  of 
the  official  records  of  the  current  status  of  all  Federal- 
aid  and  other  FHWA  program  authorizations  to- 
gether with  the  current  status,  cost,  and  physical 
characteristics  of  each  project  authorized  for  financing. 
Over  and  beyond  this  generalization,  it  also  includes 
the  determination  of  the  apportionments  of  authoriza- 
tions (and  obligational  limitations)  which  are  made 
available  to  the  individual  States;  the  control  and 
maintenance  of  the  record  of  transfers  of  funds  be- 
tween apportionments;  the  determination  of  the  maxi- 
mum percentage  of  Federal  participation  on  Federal 
aid,  emergency  relief  and  other  special  categories  of 


232 


funds;  the  monitorship  of  the  interrelationship  of 
obligations  and  disbursements  and  the  development 
of  data  to  control  the  rate  of  obligations  within  the 
limit  of  funds  available  in  the  Highway  Trust  Fund ; 
the  maintenance  of  the  official  project  obligation  rec- 
ords; and  the  management,  at  all  levels,  with  inter- 
pretations and  evaluations,  of  progi-am  progress  by 
States,  by  funds,  by  limitations,  by  highway  systems, 
by  classes  of  projects,  etc. 

The  records  for  the  program  analysis  function  are 
maintained  by  computer.  Before  the  days  of  the  elec- 
tronic and  digital  computers,  tlie  scope  of  the  informa- 
tion for  each  project  was  necessarily  quite  limited  in 
comparison  with  the  current  data  that  is  maintained. 
However,  because  of  the  sophistication  and  flexibility 
of  modern  computers,  a  vast  amount  of  data  is  col- 
lected, stored  in  the  computer  and  used  on  a  day-to-day 
basis  to  monitor  the  progress  of  the  program  and  in- 
sure compliance  with  all  legal  and  administrative 
requirements. 

The  total  program  is  implemented  through  indi- 
vidual projects  tln-ougliout  the  50  States,  the  District 
of  Columbia,  Puerto  Rico  and  the  American  terri- 
tories. There  are  nearly  40  categories  of  funds  or 
programs  for  which  records  must  be  kept  separately. 
The  total  number  of  active  projects  at  any  given  time 
is  approximately  30,000.  For  each  project  the  physical 
characteristics  and  fiscal  data  must  be  maintained  on 
a  current  basis. 

This  record  information  is  not  one-time  data — 
rather,  much  of  it  is  "fluid"  and  changes  to  reflect 
current  status  as  the  projects  progress  through  the 
project  steps  from  initial  authorization  to  final 
completion. 

An  innovative  feature  of  the  system  is  the  method 
used  to  obtain  the  computer  input  data.  A  "shuttle 
form"  is  used.  "When  a  project  first  enters  the  system 
at  the  obligation  stage,  a  form  is  completed  by  the 
FHTWA  field  division  office  reporting  all  the  currently 
available  project  data,  and  it  is  sent  to  Washington. 
The  data  is  recorded  in  the  system  and  a  printout 
confirming  form  is  sent  back  to  the  field,  reflecting 
the  data  which  has  been  recorded.  The  field  office 
holds  the  form  imtil  the  next  action,  change  or  addi- 
tion takes  place  at  which  time  the  form  is  pulled, 
the  changes  or  additions  are  indicated  on  the  form, 
and  it  is  again  sent  to  AVashington.  The  new  data  is 
recorded  and  another  printout  is  sent  back  to  the  field 
for  verification  and  storage  until  the  next  change  in 
status  occurs.  This  "shuttle  system"  continues  until 
the  project  is  finally  completed.  Each  month  a  sum- 
mary printout  reflecting  the  basic  project  data  for  all 
projects  in  the  State  is  sent  to  each  FHWA  division 
office.  This  system  eliminates  the  need  for  duplicate 
project  records. 

The  program  analysis  work  and  the  mass  of  detail 
stored  in  the  computer  are  vital  to  the  effective  admin- 
istration of  the  highway  program.  A  case  in  point  is 
the  need  for  the  operating  records  for  l)udget  pur- 
poses. The  FHWA  budget  office  not  only  serves 
FHWA,  but  sei'ves  indirectly  as  a  ])udget  office  for 
all  the  States  since  it  must  accurately  provide  the 
budget  estimates  for  liquidating  cash  for  all  Fedei-al- 
aid  highway  programs.  This  is  a  unique  budget 
responsibility,  especially  in  view  of  the  complex  pro- 


cedures used  for  the  financial  administration  of  the 
Federal-aid  highway  program. 

The  key  to  the  economic  and  eii'ective  opei-ation  of 
FHWA's  budget  office  is  the  use  of  program,  fiscal 
and  personnel  i-ecords  which  must  be  maintained  by 
other  offices.  Following  World  War  II,  the  budget 
process,  content  and  format  prescribed  by  the  Bureau 
of  the  Budget  became  more  detailed  and  sophisticated. 
The  preparation  of  the  various  budget  schedules, 
especially  for  "personal  services,"  became  very  time- 
consmning  and  required  extensive  compilation  and 
analysis.  At  the  time,  the  Public  Roads  Administra- 
tion was  already  using  automatic  data  processing 
(ADP)  equipment  to  pi-epare  its  payroll  and  to  main- 
tain its  employment  and  personnel  records.  Since  the 
bulk  of  the  source  data  required  for  budget  purposes 
already  existed  in  the  ADP  records  in  raw  form,  the 
budget  office  decided  in  1947  to  develop  an  ADP 
system  which  would  use  the  same  records,  but  supple- 
mented with  the  additional  data  required  for  budget 
purposes.  The  system  proved  to  be  i-emarkably  effec- 
tive and  provided  practically  any  data  or  personal 
services  which  might  be  requii-ed  with  accurate  sta- 
tistics to  support  the  budget  statements  and  schedules. 
Significantly,  no  additional  staffing  was  required  in 
the  operating  offices  to  do  the  minimal  amoimt  of 
additional  coding  that  was  required,  and  the  budget 
office  today,  although  responsible  for  an  annual 
budget  of  over  $6  billion,  operates  with  a  total  staff 
of  11  people. 

Auditing 

Within  the  Federal  Highway  Administration,  ex- 
ternal audit  is  concerned  with  the  means  and  methods 
used  by  the  States  to  administer  the  Federal  assistance 
program.  The  ultimate  objective  is  to  ensure  FHWA 
management  that  (1)  financial  operations  of  the  States 
are  properly  conducted;  (2)  that  financial  reports  and 
claims  are  presented  fairly;  and  (3)  that  the  States 
are  othei-wise  complying  with  applicable  law,  regula- 
tions and  administrative  requirements. 

Internal  audit  is  concerned  with  an  intensive  per- 
formance-compliance-effectiveness program  audit  of  an 
organizational  unit  of  FHWA  or,  perhaps,  of  a  func- 
tional program  phase  through  all  levels  of  the  or- 
ganization. The  internal  audit  is  a  management-type 
activity  designed  to  evaluate  operational  effectiveness, 
and  it  normally  involves  review  of  some  State  records 
and  files  and  discussions  with  State  officials  as  a  neces- 
sary part  of  the  evaluation  of  FPIWA's  own  program 
administration. 

A  third  functional  area,  investigations  and  special 
inquiry,  became  a  part  of  the  audit  complex  in  more 
recent  years  and  is  concerned  with  investigations  of 
allegations  of  irregularities,  fraud,  bribery,  collusion, 
impropriety,  etc.,  involving  employees  of  FHWA,  the 
States,  their  political  subdivisions,  contractors  or  others 
dealing  with  funds  for  FPIWA  administered  programs. 

From  the  inception  of  the  Federal-aid  program  until 
1953,  the  audit  activities  of  the  Bureau  were  confined 
to  the  external  audit  of  State  claims  for  reimburse- 
ment, normally  at  the  final  voucher  stage.  These 
audits  were  made  after  the  engineering  staff  (and 
later  also,  the  right-of-way  specialist)  had  reviewed 
the  physical  aspects  of  the  work  and  accepted  the 
completed  project  as  having  been  built  in  accordance 


233 


with  the  approved  plans  and  specifications.  Follow- 
ing the  passa<>:e  of  the  1956  Highway  Act,  financial 
audit  was  also  made  of  the  costs  of  any  railroad  or 
utility  changes  that  were  involved  in  the  project.  This 
audit  was  made  at  the  accounting  offices  of  the  rail- 
road and  utility  companies. 

As  the  size  of  the  Federal-aid  program,  and  the 
resulting  audit  workload,  increased  over  the  years,  the 
organizational  arrangement  for  accomplishing  the 
audit  necessarily  changed.  Originally  all  external 
audit  was  performed  by  auditors  attached  to  the 
AVashing-ton  headquarters,  and  they  traveled  out  of 
"Washington  to  make  the  audits.  In  the  next  evolu- 
tionary stage,  the  very  small  group  of  auditors  were 
headquartered  at  various  geographically  strategic  lo- 
cations in  the  field  to  reduce  travel  costs — however, 
they  still  reported  to  the  Washington  headquarters. 
At  the  next  stage,  at  least  one  auditor  was  placed  in 
each  regional  office.  At  the  end  of  World  War  II, 
as  a  part  of  the  major  reorganization  for  the  greatly 
expanded  postwar  highway  program,  the  audit  func- 
tion was  decentralized  to  the  district  offices  which  were 
established  in  each  State.  During  this  evolutionary 
period,  there  was  no  significant  change  in  the  concept 
or  form  of  the  audit. 

The  external  financial  audit  program  experienced 
many  progressive  changes  over  the  years  to  keep  the 
Bureau's  audit  program  consistent  iwth  the  latest  and 
most  sophisticated  audit  concepts  and  procedures  as 
they  were  developed. 

It  was  not  until  1954  that  the  Reodonal  Enigneers, 
for  the  first  time,  were  delegated  authority  to  approve 
payment  of  final  construction  vouchers,  and  those  only 
if  they  did  not  include  any  costs  for  rights-of-way  or 
railroad  or  utility  work.  This  was  a  significant  step 
because  it  involved  making  the  final  evaluation  and 
decision  on  audit  findings. 

In  1961  the  current  billing  and  concurrent  audit 
procedure  was  developed  and  authorized.  This  con- 
cept permitted  those  States  using  electronic  data 
processing  equipment  to  make  a  single  consolidated 
monthly  claim  for  reimbursement  of  the  Federal  share 
of  all  project  earnings.  Under  this  procedure,  BPR 
auditors  utilized  a  "system  audit"  or  concurrent  audit 
concept  in  lieu  of  a  voucher  and  record  audit.  It  con- 
stituted an  audit  of  the  State's  total  accounting  system, 
including  the  flow  of  source  data  and  the  State's  own 
auditing  processes  rather  than  an  audit  of  individual 
projects.  Under  the  new  system,  the  final  audit  was 
essentially  complete  when  the  final  voucher  was  re- 
ceived and  only  a  minimum  of  additional  review  was 
required. 

In  1968  operational  auditing  was  initiated  to  fur- 
ther supplant  the  traditional  audit  procedures.  Op- 
erational auditing  is  a  continuing  and  comprehensive 
audit  of  the  administrative,  accounting,  and  opera- 
tional procedures  and  controls  employed  by  the  State 
in  the  administration  of  the  Federal-aid  jH'ogram.  It 
allowed  the  auditor  to  express  an  opinion  on  costs 
claimed  as  representations  of  the  system  rather  than 
having  to  use  claims  as  the  medium  through  which 
audits  were  conducted. 

In  1971  a  single  audit  concept  was  authorized  where 
the  State  agi-eed  to  perform  an  independent  audit  of 
the  Federal  ])rogram.  Tlie  FITWA  auditors  reviewed 
and  accepted  the  State-perfoimed  audits. 


In  1974,  as  a  condition  of  receiving  funds,  the  States 
were  asked  to  perform  an  internal  financial  audit  of 
all  Federal-related  activities  at  least  biennially.  If  the 
reports  and  work  papers  were  available  for  review, 
if  audit  standards  under  which  the  work  was  done 
were  adequate,  and  if  they  otherwise  met  Federal  re- 
quirements, FHWA  auditors  were  directed  to  use  and 
rely  on  it  in  lieu  of  Federal  audits. 

The  professional  development  and  continuous  im- 
provement of  the  external  financial  audit  activities 
of  FHWA  were  possible  only  because  the  States'  fi- 
nancial jnanagement  and  audit  activities  kept  pace 
with  FHWA's  objectives.  This  required  a  great  deal 
of  Federal-State  cooperation  and  responsive  profes- 
sional leadership  on  both  sides. 

As  mentioned  earlier,  the  Budget  and  Accounting 
Act  of  1950  encouraged  the  establishment  of  internal 
audit  programs  in  the  agencies  and  departments.  Ac- 
cordingly, in  1953  BPR  established  an  internal  review 
office  in  the  Audits  and  Accounts  Division  of  the 
Washington  headquarters. 

At  first  the  new  internal  review  activities  were 
mainly  confined  to  the  administrative  areas  of  pro- 
gram management,  but  the  office  provided  a  staff  capa- 
bility to  evaluate  and  recommend  action  on  the  General 
Accounting  Office  comprehensive  audit  reports  of  ele- 
ments of  the  highway  program. 

Following  enactment  of  the  1956  Federal-Aid  High- 
way Act,  the  internal  review  program  was  broadened 
and  a  project  examination  office  was  created  in  1957, 
which  included  the  internal  review  functions. 

The  new  project  examination  office  was  given  broad 
and  independent  responsibility  to  review  program  and 
project  administration  at  all  levels  of  the  Bureau  and 
in  the  State  highway  departments.  The  reviews  were 
to  be  made  by  four-man  teams  consisting  of  a  profes- 
sional investigator  who  was  in  charge  of  the  team, 
an  engineer,  a  right-of-way  specialist,  and  a  fiscal  or 
administrative  auditor.  An  intensive  and  highly  se- 
lective recruiting  effort  was  put  forth  to  obtain  well- 
qualified  professional  civil  and  criminal  investigators, 
a  skill  until  then  not  utilized  in  BPR.  The  emphasis 
on  investigative  talent  was  two  fold:  (1)  It  was  antici- 
pated that  the  large  sums  of  money  that  would  be 
involved  in  the  construction  of  the  Interstate  System, 
in  combination  with  the  greatly  expanded  highway 
program  in  general,  would  require  close  vigilance  to 
preA'ent  scattered  incidents  of  irregularities,  collusion, 
bribery,  etc. ;  and  (2)  it  was  believed  that  professional 
investigators  would  be  particularly  skilled  in  the  plan- 
ning and  conduct  of  investigative  reviews,  while  the 
subject  matter  specialists  would  provide  the  required 
program  evaluation  and  compliance  expertise. 

The  creation  of  the  project  examination  office  proved 
most  timely.  Problems  of  irregularities  involving 
highway  department  employees,  contractors,  and  others 
did  in  fact  develop  and,  in  many  instances,  were  first 
identified  by  the  project  examination  reviews.  Un- 
favorable publicity  which  followed  these  incidents  re- 
sulted in  congressional  interest  and  the  creation  in 
1959  of  a  Special  Investigative  Subconunittee  on  the 
Federal-Aid  Hi.<i:hway  Program  under  the  House 
Public  AVorks  Committee.  The  Subcommittee  was 
under  the  chairmanship  of  the  Honorable  John  A. 
Blatnik  of  IMinnesota  and  became  commonly  known 
as  the  Blatnik  Conunittee.     A  well-qualified  and  ex- 


234 


Interstate  10  thioiif/h  the  ruf/c/ed  Texas  hill  country  icest  of  KrrrriUr  blouJs  iritli  the  terrain  because  care  has  been  takoi  to 
preserve  the  natural  vegetation  and  to  make  the  highicay  and  interchange  dcsig)i  compatible  ivith  their  surroundings. 


perienced  investigative  staff  was  employed  by  the 
Blatnik  Committee.  In  the  ensuino-  months  and  years, 
the  Committee  became  very  active  in  terms  of  both 
investigations  and  public  hearings. 

To  augment  the  limited  resources  of  the  project 
examination  office  and  the  efforts  of  the  Blatnik  Com- 
mittee staff,  an  active  effort  of  encouragement,  per- 
suasion and  professional  guidance  was  initiated  by 
the  Bureau  to  get  the  States  to  initiate  their  own  pro- 
grams of  internal  review  and  investigation.  The 
leadership  in  AASHO  actively  supported  this  effort 
with  the  result  that  many  States  instituted  their  own 
internal  review  processes. 

In  1962,  as  an  administrative  action  designed  to 
strengthen  the  independence  of  BPR's  internal  and 
external  audit  and  investigative  programs,  a  new 
office  was  established  with  its  Director  reporting  di- 
rectly to  the  Federal  Highway  Administrator.  This 
change  separated  the  audit  and  accounting  functions 
which  had  been  organizationally  combined  since  the 
creation  of  an  accounting  section.  The  responsibility 
for  the  financial  audit  of  State  reimbursement  vouchers 
remained  at  the  field  level  while  the  headquarters  office 
provided  technical  direction,  leadership,  and  guidance 
in  all  financial  audit  activities.  In  1971  the  internal 
audit  function  was  absorbed  into  a  centralized  depart- 
mental internal  audit  office. 

Training 

A  key  to  the  successful  administration  of  the  Fed- 
eral-aid highway  program  has  been  the  outstanding 
people  in  most  of  the  top  positions  in  the  organization 
and  a  strong  supporting  staff  with  a  remarkably  low 
employee  turnover  rate — recently  running  at  an  annual 
rate  of  11  percent,  about  half  that  of  the  Federal 
Government  as  a  whole. ^^  Part  of  the  reason  for  this 
was  that  the  program  itself  attracted  bright  young 
engineers  but  also  because  the  Bureau  offered  spe- 
cialized training. 

A  strong  interest  in  training  dates  back  to  1893 
when  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry  was  estaV)lished.  One 
of  the  primary  purposes  of  that  organization  was 
education,  but  mainly  in  the  external  sense.  This  in- 
cluded encouraging  the  colleges  and  imiversities  to 
teach  highway  engineering  since,  at  that  time,  there 
were  few  academically  trained  highway  engineers. 


In  the  Annual  Report  for  fiscal  year  1903,  Director 
Martin  Dodge  recommended  the  establishment  in  the 
Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries  of  a  post-graduate 
national  school  of  roadbuilding  similar  to  the  L'Ecole 
Nationale  des  Ponts  et  Chaussees  that  was  established 
in  Paris  in  1747.  No  action  was  taken  on  this  recor.i- 
mendation,  although  the  idea  resurfaced  many  times 
in  later  years. 

In  1905  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  (OPR)  initiated 
its  first  formal  internal  training  progi'am.  Graduates 
of  engineering  colleges  were  appointed  after  a  com- 
petitive civil  service  examination  to  the  position  of 
civil  engineering  student  at  a  salary  of  $600  per  year. 
A  course  of  instruction  included  experience  in  the  con- 
struction of  object  lesson  or  experimental  roads,  in- 
struction in  the  office  routine,  laboratory  work  and 
theoretical  instruction  through  lectures  and  reading 
assignments.  After  completing  the  year's  training,  the 
students  were  promoted  to  the  position  of  jimior  high- 
way engineer  in  OPR  at  $900  per  year.  This  px-ogram 
continued  until  1916  with  the  number  of  appointees 
ranging  from  4  to  10  per  year.^'  During  the  period 
of  this  first  engineer  training  program,  a  total  of  78 
students  were  appointed.^'^ 

In  1921  the  engineer  training  program  was  rein- 
stituted.  The  emphasis  in  this  program  was  quality 
recruitment.  Most  students  were  recruited  dui'ing 
their  junior  year  of  college  and  placed  on  a  production 
cost  study.  They  were  evaluated  for  future  employ- 
ment and,  if  they  met  the  desired  standards,  were 
appointed  to  a  junior  engineer  position  after  gradua- 
tion. They  were  then  given  a  2-  to  3-year  period  of 
training  throughout  the  country  in  production  cost 
studies,  equipment  development  and  design,  and  eco- 
nomic studies.  The  program  was  gradually  phased 
out  by  1936  because  of  economic  conditions.  Dui'ing 
the  span  of  this  second  training  program,  approx- 
imately 150  college  graduates  were  appointed."  A 
high  percentage  of  these  men  ultimately  moved  into 
key  positions  in  the  Bureau,  the  most  notable  of  whom 
was  Francis  C.  Turner  who  became  the  Federal  High- 
Avay  Administrator  in  1969. 

At  the  end  of  World  Was  II,  the  Junior  Engineer 
Training  Program  was  reactivated  and  administered 
by  a  professional  training  officer.     For  the  first  time, 


235 


Public  Roads  had  a  specific  organizational  unit  re- 
sponsible for  training. 

The  new  Junior  Engineer  Training  Program  was 
planned  to  provide  3  years'  training  in  rotational 
assignments  in  different  parts  of  the  country  and  to 
give  the  trainees  the  best  possible  foundation  for  a 
career  in  Public  Roads.  Subject  to  satisfactory  per- 
formance, the  trainees  received  a  scheduled  promotion 
during  training  and  a  promotion  upon  gi-aduation 
and  a  regular  assignment.  Recruiting  was  directed 
toward  graduating  senioi's  in  colleges  and  universities, 
bi;t  highway  engineers  within  Public  Roads  could  be 
selected  for  entry  into  the  program. 

The  Highway  Engineer  Training  Program  (HETP) , 
as  it  is  now  called,  has  continued  without  interruption 
since  1946.  Recruitment  started  modestly  with  an 
annual  quota  of  approximately  15 ;  from  1949  through 
1956,  the  anniial  recruitment  averaged  about  33  per 
year.  Following  enactment  of  the  Federal-Aid  High- 
way Act  of  1956  with  its  greatly  expanded  program, 
76  individuals  were  enrolled  in  1957  and  170  in  1958. 

In  1961  a  master's  18-month  training  program  was 
added  to  provide  a  training  vehicle  for  approximately 
10  candidates  with  master's  degrees  per  year.  This 
prograni  was  directed  toward  development  of  a  quality 
source  of  individuals  for  positions  in  research,  plan- 
ning and  structures.  From  1961  to  1972,  the  recruit- 
ment for  both  programs  avei'aged  about  75  new 
trainees  per  year.  Since  then  the  average  has  been 
about  60  trainees  per  year  in  both  programs. 

From  1946  through  1974,  a  total  of  approximately 
1,600  individuals  have  entered  the  Highway  Engineer 
Training  Program.  Approximately  85  percent  of  all 
graduates  have  remained  with  the  organization.  A 
number  of  these  graduates  have  reached  key  positions 
in  the  FHWA  organization :  six  of  nine  Regional 
Administrators  are  HETP  graduates;  two  of  six 
Associate  Administrators;  and  33  of  52  Division  Ad- 
ministrators. The  FHWA  Executive  Director,  Lester 
P.  Lamm,  was  a  1960  graduate. 

To  insure  that  the  program  would  continue  to  be 
responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  Bureau  and  the  career 
development  of  its  engineers,  there  have  been  periodic 
searching  reviews  of  the  entire  program.  Two  other 
major  management  efforts  have  contributed  to  the 
effectiveness  of  the  HETP  in  providing  engineering 
inanpower  consistent  with  the  Bureau's  projected  needs. 
The  first  of  these  occurred  in  1961  when  a  task  force 
was  named  to  conduct  a  manpower  utilization  study 
on  field  engineers.  Engineering  manpower  needs — 
numbers  and  skills — were  projected  10  years  into  the 
future.  In  1974  a  similar  task  force  conducted  a  com- 
plete manpower  utilization  study  of  the  entire  orga- 
nization and  projected  FHWA's  personnel  needs  and 
skills  over  the  next  10  to  15  years.  The  anniial  re- 
cruiting quotas  for  the  HETP  have  been  based  largely 
on  the  two  studies. 

Until  1953  formal  inservice  training  was  limited  to 
the  Highway  Engineer  Training  Program.  In  that 
year,  inservice  ti-aining  was  formalized  and  greatly 
expanded.  Field  enigneers  were  encouraged  to  attend 
courses  and  conferences  held  in  the  Washington  head- 
quarters. Tlien  in  1955  an  annual  comprehensive  in- 
service  and  outservice  agencywide  training  program 
was  initiated  to  assess  training  needs  on  a  priority 
basis. 


With  enactment  of  the  Government  Employees 
Training  Act  of  1958,  an  active  outservice  training 
program  began.  The  Act  not  only  authorized  the  use 
of  agency  funds  for  training  in  Government  and  non- 
Government  facilities,  but  it  prescribed  that  all  agen- 
cies must  establish,  operate  and  maintain  a  program 
and  plans  for  the  training  of  their  employees.  The 
two  major  new  areas  of  training  which  were  opened 
up  as  a  result  of  this  Act  wei-e:  (1)  Full-time  or  part- 
time  enrollment  in  colleges  and  universities;  and  (2) 
attendance  at  meetings,  conferences,  seminars,  etc., 
that  would  contribute  to  improved  performance  of  the 
employees'  duties  and  responsibilities. 

The  Bureau  immediately  initiated  an  extensive 
Full-Time  Graduate  Study  Program.  Over  a  period 
of  approximately  18  years,  240  employees  have  en- 
rolled in  full-time  graduate  study. 

As  the  program  has  grown  both  in  size  and  into 
disciplines  other  than  engineering,  the  Bureau  has 
added  several  other  professional  career  intern  pro- 
grams structured  basically  on  the  format  established 
for  the  successful  Highway  Engineer  Training  Pro- 
gram. The  procedures  were  the  same,  that  is,  to 
employ  outstanding  college  and  university  graduates 
and  to  provide  rotational  training  assignments  during 
a  formal  training  curriculum.  Other  employee  career 
development  programs  have  also  been  instituted  for 
employees  in  all  grade  levels. 

These  programs  have  included  formal  curriculums 
for  management  specialists  (1960),  right-of-way 
officers  (1962),  auditors  (1964),  civil  rights  specialists 
(1969),  and  a  national  upward  mobility  program  for 
administrative  and  professional  type  positions  (1974). 
Other  areas  of  career  development  have  included  ex- 
ecutive development,  environmental  specialists,  and 
motor  carrier  safety  investigators.  As  a  part  of 
FHWA's  equal  employment  opportunity  action  plan, 
an  upward  mobility  education  program  was  begun  in 
1973  to  assist  lower  grade  employees  to  attend  courses 
so  that  they  may  be  qualified  to  compete  for  better 
positions. 

Obviously,  the  strong  emphasis  on  training  within 
FHWA  has  influenced  the  economical  staffing  of  the 
Federal  agency  that  administers  the  Federal-aid  high- 
way program.  CongTess  saw  the  validity  of  this 
philosophy  and,  in  the  1970  Highway  Act,  authorized 
the  creation  of  a  National  Highway  Institute  (NHI) 
with  the  express  purpose  to  ".  .  .  develop  and  ad- 
minister, in  cooperation  with  the  State  highwaj'  de- 
partments, training  programs  of  instruction  for  Fed- 
eral Highway  Administration  and  State  and  local 
highway  department  employees  engaged  or  to  be  en- 
gaged in  Federal-aid  highway  work." 

The  XHI  is  not  a  physical  facility,  such  as  a  school 
with  classrooms,  but  is  an  administrative  organiza- 
tional element.  Its  operating  costs  are  funded  from 
FHWA's  regular  appropriation  for  administrative 
expenses,  which  tends  to  limit  the  amount  of  direct 
training  that  the  Institute  can  undertake. 

The  Institute  has  established  itself  as  a  significant 
source  of  training  in  the  highway  field.  During  fiscal 
year  1974,  the  NHI  sponsored  10  separate  courses  and 
workshops  at  various  locations  throughout  the  United 
States,  involving  about  5,500  State,  local,  and  FHWA 


236 


personnel.  In  most  instances,  the  workshops  and 
courses  were  developed  and  conducted  by  universities 
and  training  consultants  under  contracts  funded  and 
supervised  by  the  NHI. 

Under  the  terms  of  the  1970  Act,  the  States  may 
use  up  to  14  percent  of  their  appoi'tionod  Federal 
funds  for  highway  purposes  (except  Interstate  funds) 
for  education  and  training  of  State  and  local  highway 
department  employees  witli  two  conditions:  (1)  The 
States  may  not  pay  more  than  TO  percent  of  the  costs 
of  tuition  and  direct  educational  expenses  from  tliis 
fund,  which  leaves  the  States  to  provide  at  least  30 
percent  of  the  costs;  and  (2)  no  Federal  funds  can 
be  used  for  travel,  subsistence,  or  salaries  of  the  em- 
ployees being  trained. 

One  of  the  major  efforts  of  the  Institute  has  been 
to  encourage  tlie  States  to  take  advantage  of  this 
optional  program  to  broaden  their  own  training  pro- 
grams. Since  this  Federal  financial  assistance  is  not 
an  independent  source  of  fmids — it  is  highway  con- 
struction funds  being  used  for  training  purposes — the 
States  have  been  slow  to  take  advantage  of  this  oppor- 
tunity. Presently,  approximately  20  States  are  pro- 
graming a  portion  of  their  eligible  Federal  funds  for 
training  and  educational  activities. 

However,  the  XHI  program  for  fellowsliip  and 
scholarship  awards  to  FHWA,  State,  and  local  em- 
ployees has  been  very  successful.  Currently,  the 
Institute  is  awarding  approximately  40  annual  fellow- 
ships in  highway  transportation  research  and  educa- 
tion and  40  in  highway  safety  at  $5,000  each,  and 
about  50  scholarships  are  awarded  annually  in  high- 
way technology  at  $2,500  each. 

At  the  time  the  Institute  was  established,  it  was 
assigned  the  responsibility  for  administering  FH"\VA's 
ongoing  orientation  and  training  pi-ograms  for  foreign 
highway  officials  and  engineei^s,  which  had  been  han- 
dled by  the  Foreigii  Projects  Division  along  with  its 
foreign  constmction  program.  The  activities  arranged 
by  the  Institute  for  the  foreign  groups  range  in  dura- 
tion and  depth  from  a  1-day  meeting  with  selected 
officials  to  a  year  or  more  of  academic  study  at  a  uni- 
versity offering  the  type  of  highway-related  curriculum 
desired.  In  fiscal  year  1974,  the  XHI  arranged  pro- 
grams for  a  total  of  763  foreign  officials  and  engineers 
from  56  different  countries. 

The  XHI  also  serves  as  a  clearinghouse  of  useful 
information  related  to  training  and  education  of  high- 
way employees.  It  seeks  to  assist  the  States  in  iden- 
tifying particular  types  of  training  and  maintains  a 
referral  service  of  training  aids. 

To  give  direction  to  the  extensive  training  effort  of 
FHWA,  the  Administrator  has  moved  lately  toward 
establishing  national  training  goals,  or  areas  of  train- 
ing emphasis,  for  managers  throughout  the  FHWA. 
While  these  national  training  goals  are  pointed  toward 
the  development  of  FIHVA  employees,  they  also  liave 
implications  for  State  liighwa}'  and  transportation 
officials  in  two  ways.  In  one  instance,  the  FHWA 
employees  will  be  using  their  new  knowledges  and 
skills  to  assist  the  States  with  their  liigliway  and 
transportation  missions.  In  the  other  instance,  the 
State  officials  will  be  invited  to  make  use  of  courses 
developed  to  achieve  the  FHWA's  national  training 
goals. 


Training  has  been  one  of  the  key  elements  to  the 
successful  administration  of  the  Federal-aid  highway 
program  tlirougliout  the  years.  It  will  most  likely 
continue  to  be  a  main  support  of  the  gi'eatest  public 
works  program  in  the  world. 

REFERENCES 

'A.   HULBEKT,   IIlSTOlUC   HIGHWAYS  OF  AitERICA,  ThE  CliMHEK- 

i,ANi)  KoAi),  Vol.  10  (Artliur  H.  Clark  Co.,  Cleveland,  1!)04) 
p.  19. 

"•Id.,  PI).  57-61. 

'  Id.,  p.  64. 

*Id.,  p.  199. 

'  Id.,  pp.  73,  86,  92. 

"P.  JoKDAN,  The  National  Road  ( Bobbs-Merrill  Co.,  Indian- 
apolis, 1948)  p.  175. 

'43U.S.C.,  Sec.  218  (1964). 

^  M.  O.  Eldridge,  Proffrcsti  of  Road  Building  in  the  United 
Stairs,  Yearbook  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  1899 
(GPO,    Washington,   D.C.,    1900)    pp.   374,   375. 

°  W.    Holt,    Service    Monographs    of    the    United    States 

(iOVERNMENT,     ThE     BUREAU     OF    PlTBLIC     ROADS,     No.     26     (.ToIUlS 

Hopkins  Press,  Baltimore,  1923)    pp.  7-13. 

"  Id.,  p.  13. 

"Hearing  on  S.J.  Res.  10G  Before  the  Comm.  on  Agriculture 
and  Forestry  United  States  Senate,  62d  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  p.  5 
(1912). 

"  Joint  Report  of  the  Progress  of  Post-Road  Improvement, 
H.  Doc.  204,  63d  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  p.  3. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1914,  p.  4. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1916,  p.  2 

"Federal  Aid  to  Good  Roads,  H.  Doc.  1510,  63d  Cong.,  3d 
Sess.,  p.  14. 

"  W.  Holt,  supra,  note  9,  pp.  19,  20. 

"AASHO— The  First  Fifty  Years,  1914-1964  (American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C.,  1965) 
p.  239. 

"  W.  Holt,  supra,  note  9,  p.  19. 

''  Id.,  pp.  22-24. 

""C.  Borth,  Mankind  On  the  Move  (Automotive  Safety 
Foundation,  Washington,  D.C.,  1969)  p.  199. 

^'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1893,  p.  586. 

"^  A.  E.  Johnson,  History  of  the  Origin,  Development  and 
Operation  of  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials,  AASHO— The  First  Fifty  Years,  1914-1964  (Amer- 
ican Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C., 
1965)  pp.  52,  53. 

^^  Supra,  note  17,  pp.  5,  6. 

"A.  Johnson,  supra,  note  22,  p.  56. 

"  Ideas  and  Actions  :  A  History  of  the  Highway  Research 
Board,  1920-1970  (Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C., 
1971)   p.  133. 

'°  Id.,  p.  105. 

"  Id.,  pp.  25,  135. 

"^Id.,  p.  136. 

^^  Id.,  p.  53. 

^"Id.,  pp.  .57,  58. 

"  P.  Wilson,  Organization  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
(file  copy  of  article  prepared  for  U.S.  Daily,  Apr.  1930). 

^^  Dept.  of  Transportation,  The  United  States  Department 
OF  Transportation — Its  Organization  and  Functions  (GPO, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1967)  p.  1. 

'''  P.L.  93-344,  Sec.  401  (d)(3)(B)). 

^*  Federal  Highway  Administration,  Manpower  Utilization 
Study— 1974  (Dept.  of  Transportation,  Washington,  D.C.,  1974) 
p.  VI-4. 

"  W.  Holt,  supra,  note  9,  p.  12. 

^  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Report  On  the  Junior  Engineer 
Training  Program — July  1,  1946  to  October  1,  19.55  (Dept.  of 
Commerce,  Washington,  D.C.,  1955)   p.  1. 

"Id. 


237 


Finance 

and 

Economic/ 


During  the  early  days  of  the  Republic,  road  man- 
agement was  amateur  in  most  rural  areas,  and  little 
money  changed  hands.  The  "statutory  labor  system" 
prevailed  in  most  States.  Under  this  arrangement,  a 
"poll"  or  per-capita  tax  was  usually  levied.  The 
rural  citizen  could  pay  it  in  cash  or  work  it  out  either 
by  laboring  on  the  road  himself  or  by  hiring  a  substi- 
tute. If  he  provided  a  team  and  wagon,  his  credit  for 
work  done  went  up. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  average  town  or  city  dweller 
was  not  his  own  boss.  Unlike  the  farmer,  he  could 
not  arrange  to  set  his  own  work  aside  to  work  a  speci- 
fied number  of  days  on  the  road.  Consequently,  in 
most  municipalities,  the  residents  were  taxed  for  the 
improvement,  maintenance,  and  management  of  streets 
through  property  taxes,  poll  levies,  or  some  other  form 
of  local  tax.  In  the  downtown  areas  of  some  of  the 
larger  places,  businesses  were  taxed  or  they  contrib- 
uted voluntarily  to  the  more  highly  improved  streets. 

During  most  of  the  19th  century,  the  chief  source 
of  funds  for  financing  city  and  town  streets  was  some 
form  of  real  estate  tax,  which  fell  into  three  major 
classes : 

•  Property  taxes  levied  against  all  real  property 
for  general  purposes,  the  proceeds  going  into  the 
general  funds,  from  which  appropriations  were 
made  for  highway  and  other  j)urposes. 

•  Property  taxes  levied  against  all  real  property 
specifically  for  street  purposes. 

•  Special  assessments  of  many  kinds  levied  against 
specific  parcels  of  real  property  for  street  pur- 
poses. 

In  many  places,  taxes  were  also  imposed  on  various 
types  of  personal  propei'ty,  a  portion  or  all  of  the 
proceeds  being  applietl  to  street  purposes. 


The  level  of  total  annual  expenditures  on  rural 
roads  by  all  governniental  agencies  seldom,  if  ever, 
exceeded  $75  million  before  1904.  By  far  the  largest 
portion  of  this  money  came  from  property  taxes,  al- 
though a  considerable  amount  also  came  from  poll 
and  "labor"  taxes. 

The  so-called  labor  taxes  were  those  imposts  adopted 
to  replace  the  requirement  of  a  labor  contribution. 
Actual  labor  contributions  remained  important  in  the 
building  and  upkeep  of  rural  roads  in  some  sections 
of  the  country  for  a  long  time.  In  1914,  18  States 
reported  considerable  use  of  statutory  labor.  Al- 
though only  four  States,  all  in  the  South,  reported 
the  use  of  convict  labor,  it  is  known  to  have  been 
more  prevalent  than  this.  The  practice  is  still  in  use 
in  a  few  areas  today,  but  the  cost  of  such  labor  is  not 
eligible  for  Federal-aid  reimbursement,  although  it 
can  be  used  in  the  case  of  emergency  construction 
following  a  disaster  without  disqualifying  the  entire 
project. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  automobile  era,  the  street 
networks  of  the  incorporated  places  in  the  United 
States  were  in  a  much  higher  state  of  development 
than  were  the  rural  roads.  It  has  been  estimated  that 
in  1906,  when  annual  expenditures  on  rural  roads 
were  at  the  $75  million  level,  expenditures  on  city 
and  village  streets  were  averaging  about  $300  million 
per  year.  Borrowing  to  finance  large  construction 
projects  of  all  kinds,  seldom  resorted  to  in  rural  areas 
at  that  time,  was  a  connnon  practice  in  cities,  es- 
pecially in  the  larger  ones. 

For  highway  purposes,  borrowing  in  anticipation 
of  future  tax  revenue  was  a  local  practice  at  first,  but 
in  1893  Massachusetts  became  the  first  State  govern- 
ment to  contract  debt  to  finance  highways,  although 
the  territory   of   Idaho  issued   wagon   road  bonds  as 


238 


The  gas  station  represents  the  major  source  of  highway  finan- 
cial income  today.  Will  it  he  able  to  support  future  highway 
construction  and  maintenance? 

early  as  1890.  Other  States,  notably  New  York,  Cali- 
fornia, Maryland,  and  Connecticut,  soon  followed  the 
lead  of  Massachusetts,  and  State  borrowing  began  a 
long  period  of  steady  increase. 

Before  1914,  county  and  local  road  bonds  were  con- 
centrated in  a  relatively  few  States,  exceeding  $10 
million  in  only  seven:  Ohio,  Texas,  Pennsylvania, 
Indiana,  California,  New  Jersey,  and  Tennessee. 

State  Aid  for  Roadbuilding 

State  participation  in  the  financing  of  road  con- 
struction was  an  accomplished  fact  before  the  motor 
vehicle  became  a  practical  means  of  transportation. 
It  began  with  a  law  enacted  in  New  Jersey  in  1891 
providing  for  the  appointment  of  Township  Commit- 
tees to  inspect  the  roads  in  their  townships  annually 
and  to  develop  a  systematic  improvement  plan  for 
them.  The  committees  were  empowered  to  employ 
engineers  or  other  competent  persons  as  consultants 
and  to  i^repare  plans  and  estimates.  The  financing 
plan  obligated  the  State  to  pay  one-third  of  the  cost 
of  improvements;  adjacent  property  owners,  one- 
tenth;  and  the  county  in  which  the  improvement  was 
made,  the  remaining  57  percent.  To  the  county  be- 
longed the  responsibility  for  road  maintenance. 

Middlesex  County,  the  first  to  take  advantage  of 
the  new  plan,  borrowed  some  $50,000  to  $60,000  to  pay 
the  cost  of  three  projects  totaling  nearly  11  miles. 
On  December  27,  1892,  the  State  paid  its  share  of  the 


construction  cost,  almost  $21,000,  "the  first  money 
paid  by  the  State  of  New  Jersey  for  improved  road- 
ways." ^ 

The  State  aid  idea  caught  on  rapidly,  and,  by  the 
close  of  1917,  all  48  States  had  enacted  such  laws, 
though  the  patterns  of  aid  varied  widely  from  State 
to  State,  some  at  first  providing  only  advice  to  the 
localities. 

With  the  spread  of  State  aid  came  the  development 
of  State  highway  systems.  The  first  such  system  was 
established  in  Massachusetts  in  1893  and  the  last  in 
Mississippi  in  1924.  In  the  early  days.  State  laws 
granted  varying  degrees  of  State  control  over  these 
systems:  Some  States  had  none  at  all;  others  had  full 
responsibility  for  them. 

The  highway-user  tax,  which  was  to  become  the 
great  provider  for  large-scale  highway  development 
in  this  country,  appeared  inconspicuously,  first  in 
New  York  in  1901  with  a  registration  fee  of  $1.00  per 
vehicle  for  regulatory  purposes.  In  1906,  New  Jersey 
established  an  annual  license  fee  classified  on  the 
basis  of  vehicle  horsepower.  The  rate  was  $3.00  for 
vehicles  of  less  than  30  HP  and  $5.00  for  those  of  30 
or  more.  The  next  year,  Connecticut  provided  for  a 
more  steeply  graduated  scale  of  charges. 

Thus,  the  user  charge  was  in  existence  at  the  be- 
ginning of  this  century  but  not  exploited  as  a  source 
of  significant  amounts  of  revenue  for  highways.  Its 
role  as  part  of  a  system  of  motor-vehicle  imposts 
dedicated  to  furnishing  a  consistent,  dependable  flow 
of  revenue  for  long-term  highway  financing  was  not 
foreseen  at  this  stage  of  highway  development. 


239 


The  highway-user  tax  derived  from  the  registration  of  vehicles, 
in  this  case  a  1905  cadillac. 


The  Federal   effort   to   improve  rural  post  roads   was   rather 
disappointing  since  only  IS  States  participated  in  the  project. 


An   Experiment  in   Federal  Aid 

The  growing  demand  for  highway  improvement 
was  reflected  in  the  more  than  60  bills  introduced  in 
the  Congress  in  1912  providing  for  some  form  of 
Federal  aid  for  this  purpose.^  Activities  leading 
toward  development  of  a  plan  for  nationwide  Federal 
aid  for  highways  first  bore  fruit  in  1912,  when  Con- 
gress, in  passing  the  Post  Office  Appropriations  Act, 
took  two  steps:  (1)  It  created  an  investigating  com- 
mittee to  study  the  feasibility  of  providing  Federal  aid 
for  improving  rural  post  roads,  and  (2)  it  appro- 
priated $500,000  to  aid  the  immediate  building  of  such 
roads. 

The  Postmaster  General  and  the  Secretary  of  Agri- 
culture were  to  administer  the  program  jointly,  and 
they  were  directed  to  select  and  improve  certain  roads 
for  mail  delivery.  The  States  and  their  subdivisions 
were  to  pay  two-thirds  of  the  cost  of  the  improve- 
ments and  the  Federal  Government,  one-third.  The 
$500,000  in  Federal  funds  for  immediate  construction 
was  supplemented  with  $1.3  million  of  State  and  local 
funds. 

Although  the  funds  were  provided  through  the 
Post  Office  Appropriation  Act,  direct  responsibility 
for  operating  the  program  was  assigned  to  the  Office 
of  Public  Roads.  For  want  of  a  better  basis,  the 
funds    were    apportioned    equally    among   the    States, 


Early  use  of  trucks  was  limited  to  local  industry  because  of 
poor  road  conditions  and  few  interconnecting  roads. 


about  $10,000  to  each.  This  approach  failed  miser- 
ably. Some  States  refused  outright  to  participate, 
some  were  unable  to  do  so  because  of  constitutional 
and  other  limitations,  and  others  simply  did  not  re- 
spond to  the  offer. 

The  Public  Roads  officials,  together  with  coopera- 
tive State  and  local  officials,  then  selected  projects 
that  they  believed  to  be  representative  in  such  char- 
acteristics as  topography,  soil  condition,  and  climate. 
The  first  project  to  be  built  under  this  Act  extended 
for  about  30  miles  from  Florence  to  Waterloo  in 
Lauderdale  County,  Alabama.  A  total  of  455  miles 
of  road  located  in  the  13  States  that  elected  to  take 
advantage  of  the  program  were  improved  under  this 
arrangement,  successfully  demonstrating  the  possi- 
bilities of  a  Federal-State  cooperative  road  improve- 
ment program. 

The   Federal  Aid   Road  Act  of   1916 

Two  years  before  the  landmark  Federal  Aid  Road 
Act  of  1916,  revenue  for  rural  roads  and  bridges  had 
risen  from  $80  million  in  1904  to  $240  million,  a 
threefold  increase.*     The  number  of  motor  vehicles 


*  In  1904  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  began  a  policy  of  ob- 
taining road  mileage  and  revenue  data  at  5-year  intervals. 
In  1904  the  data  were  published  in  Bulletin  No.  32  of  the 
U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture.  The  data  for  the  third  such 
investigation  (1914)  are  presented  in  HIGHWAY  STATIS- 
TICS: SUMMARY  TO  1965,  issued  by  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  in  1967,  which  is  the  general  source  of  the  financial 
and  motor  vehicle  data  in  this  chapter. 


240 


registered  had  increased  from  55,000  in  1904  to  nearly 
2  million  in  1914.^  But  this  increase  is  not  as  great 
as  it  appears  to  be,  since  it  represents  a  larger  number 
of  States  requiring  vehicle  registration  in  the  later 
year — 47  as  compared  with  only  13  in  1904.  Imposts 
on  motor  vehicles,  rapidly  growing  in  importance  as 
a  source  of  State  income  for  highways,  provided  $12 
million  of  the  $75  million  spent  by  the  States  for  that 
purpose. 

Of  the  almost  2.5  million  miles  of  rural  roads  in 
1914,  only  257,000  were  surfaced  and  a  mere  14,000 
miles  had  a  high  type  of  surface : 

Bituminous  10,500  miles 

Brick  1,600  miles 

Concrete  2,300  miles 

By  1916,  3.4  million  autos  were  registered  and  1 
truck  for  every  14  autos.  Roads  were  not  equipped 
to  meet  the  needs  of  this  growing  vehicle  population. 
Probably  because  of  the  poor  condition  of  most  rural 
roads  and  their  discontinuity,  the  use  of  trucks  was 
limited  almost  entirely  to  cities  and  their  close-in 
suburbs.  Although  trucks  were  beginning  to  be  used 
for  intercity  transportation,  this  use  was  not  yet 
economically  significant  and  was  largely  restricted  to 
the  household  moving  industry. 

Yet  the  potential  of  trucking  was  recognized ;  and 
farmei"s,  railroads,  and  others  joined  the  ranks  of  the 
auto  owners  and  wheelmen  (bicyclists)  who  were  dis- 
satisfied with  the  progress  being  made  and  who  were 
pressing  for  better  roads.  One  of  their  loudest  com- 
plaints was  about  the  lack  of  completed  intercounty 
and  interstate  improved  routes. 

County  and  local  authorities  tended  to  improve 
those  roads  that  were  the  objects  of  the  greatest  local 
pressure  or  were  best  suited  to  the  needs  of  the  local 
economy  in  nari'ow  terms,  with  little  regard  for  the 
requirements  of  the  traffic  going  to  and  from  other 
jurisdictions.  Nor  did  the  States  usually  make  a 
serious  effort  to  gear  their  road  improvements  to 
those  of  adjoining  States. 

A  step  forward  in  progress  toward  connected  road 
systems,  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916  contained 
some  of  the  most  important  principles  still  in  effect 
today.  The  Act  reserved  to  the  States  the  right  to 
initiate  projects  and  determine  their  characteristics 
and  to  perform  the  work  dix'ectly  or  by  contract. 
Completed  projects  were  to  be  federally  inspected  and 
approved  for  reimbursement  to  the  extent  of  50  per- 
cent of  the  funds  expended,  not  to  exceed  $10,000  a 
mile.  The  policy  of  the  United  States  Government 
favoring  a  tax-supported  highway  system  was  ex- 
pressed in  a  provision  that  "All  roads  constructed 
under  the  provision  of  this  Act  shall  be  free  from 
tolls  of  all  kinds." 

While  the  Act  itself  did  not  require  that  Federal 
aid  be  spent  upon  designated-system  routes,  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  requested  that  each  State 
highway  department  designate  a  limited  system  to 
which  it  would  confine  its  Federal  aid.  Maintenance 
was  made  a  State  and  local  responsibility. 

In  recognition  of  the  longer  time  span  required  for 
financing  large  capital  improvements,  funds  were  ap- 
propriated for  a  5-year  program  and  wei'e  apportioned 
among  the   States  according  to  a  formula  based   on 


area,  population,  and  post  road  mileage.  Thus,  the 
eligibility  of  roads  for  improvement  with  Federal-aid 
money,  adopted  from  the  earlier  post  road  Act,  car- 
ried forward  the  justification  of  Federal  aid  on  the 
basis  of  the  use  of  roads  for  carrying,  the  mail,  al- 
though the  provision  Avas  so  broad  as  to  enable  almost 
any  rural  road  to  qualify. 

World   War  I   and   Its  Aftermath 

At  the  end  of  1917,  all  48  States  had  formed  high- 
way departments  adequate  to  meet  the  I'equirements 
of  "the  1916  Act,  and  26  States  had  submitted  for 
approval  92  projects  involving  948  miles  of  road,  ex- 
pected to  cost  about  $5  million.  With  United  States' 
participation  late  in  World  War  I  came  general  eco- 
nomic dislocations  because  of  the  draining  of  man- 
power and  materials  to  the  war  effort.  By  the  1918 
fiscal  year,  all  Federal-aid  work  was  limited  to  proj- 
ects essential  to  that  effort.  Even  so,  the  required 
projects  were  such  that  the  amonut  of  P'ederal-aid  con- 
struction completed  and  under  agreement  continued  to 
grow. 

Following  the  Armistice  on  November  11,  1918,  the 
public  began  to  clamor  for  a  speedup  in  the  regular 
Fedei"al-aid  program.  In  1919,  Congress  increased 
the  appropriation  for  the  period  1916-1921  from  $75 
million  to  $200  million.  In  spite  of  the  handicaps  of 
shortages  and  high  costs  of  materials  and  labor, 
strikes,  and  unrest,  the  work  accomplished  during 
fiscal  year  1920  exceeded  by  25  percent  all  work  done 
previously  under  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act. 

During  the  year,  a  survey  was  launched  to  obtain 
data  needed  to  establish  a  classified  system  of  high- 
ways. At  the  same  time.  Federal  officials  were  co- 
operating with  the  War  Department  in  selecting  a 
system  of  highways  of  military  importance. 

Before  the  First  World  War,  the  military  estab- 
lishment exhibited  little  interest  in  trucks  and  truck 
transi^ortation.  In  1911  the  Army  began  experi- 
menting with  their  use.  In  1912  it  tried  out  trucks 
of  11  different  makes  in  a  cross-country  operation 
from  AVashington,  D.C.,  to  Atlanta,  Georgia,  and 
thence  to  a  camp  near  Sparta,  Wisconsin.  Only  one 
vehicle,  an  all-wheel  drive  truck,  finished  the  journey. 
The  resulting  Army  report  approved  the  use  of  trucks 
for  field  and  supply  purposes,  but  nothing  came  of  it. 

By  this  time,  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  had  be- 
come interested  in  the  possibilities  of  overland  truck 
transportation.  In  1911,  the  agency  participated  in 
the  first  coast-to-coast  journey  made  by  a  truck  by 
designating  the  driver  as  a  special  agent  of  the  Office 
of  Public  Roads.  Although  the  trip  was  accomplished 
in  two  entirely  separate  operations,  it  reached  both 
coasts  and  demonstrated  that  trucks  could  negotiate 
the  nearly  impassable  roads  and  rugged  terrain. 

World  War  I  was  the  first  "motorized"  war,  and 
thousands  of  trucks  were  built  by  American  factories 
for  military  use.  In  1919  a  convoy  of  20  Army  trucks 
was  sent  from  Washington,  D.C.,  to  San  Francisco  to 
further  demonstrate  the  capability  of  such  vehicles 
for  wartime  transportation.  It  took  56  days  to  com- 
plete the  trip.  One  of  the  officers  making  the  journey 
was  Captain  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower,  who  became 
greatly  impressed  wuth  the  possibilities  of  highway 
transportation. 


241 


One  of  the  significant  roles  of  highways  in  freight 
movement  has  been  to  serve  "as  extenders  and  con- 
nectors for  other  transportation  modes."  One  high- 
way extension  of  rail  service,  now  called  "piggyback," 
began  in  a  primitive  form  in  the  19th  century  when 
circus  wagons  and  wagons  carrying  farm  produce  and 
livestock  were  transported  on  flatcars,  starting  and 
finishing  their  journeys  on  their  own  wheels. 

As  now  used,  the  term  piggyback  service  means 
transporting  cargo  by  both  rail  and  highway,  in  or  on 
highway  trailers  and  principally  in  van-sized  contain- 
ers. Beginning  in  the  1920's  and  extending  into  the 
1930's,  extensive  experimenting  with  piggyback  serv- 
ice was  carried  on  in  an  effort  to  increase  the  use  of 
motor  vehicles  in  moving  freight  by  overcoming  the 
limitations  imposed  by  poor  roads  in  disconnected 
systems.  Conditions  of  the  time  did  not  support  the 
effort,  and  it  was  left  to  the  future. 

Uncertainty  and   Crisis   in  the  States 

Failure  of  the  Congress  to  enact  a  new  highway 
bill  before  January  1921  precipitated  a  major  finan- 
cial crisis  in  most  States.  Having  no  assurance  that 
a  Federal-aid  highway  bill  would  be  passed,  the  States 
had  to  cut  back  severely  on  work  underway  and  con- 
templated. Contracts  in  progress  were  modified  or 
canceled.  Requests  for  bid  proposals  were  with- 
drawn. Clearly  a  capital  program  of  this  magnitude 
required  the  regular  commitment  of  funds  over  the 
relatively  long  period  from  planning  to  the  comple- 
tion of  construction. 

The  States,  seeking  new  ways  to  bolster  their  reve- 
nues, had  begun  to  look  to  the  motor  vehicle  as  a 
potentially  productive  source.  As  motor  vehicles  be- 
came more  numerous  on  the  highways  and  their  dam- 
aging effects  on  lightly  constructed  road  surfaces 
became  evident  during  the  war  period  of  1917-1918, 
the  practice  of  graduating  registration  fees  with  the 
weight  or  capacity  of  the  vehicle  grew  until  it  had 
spread   to   all   States.     By   1917   all   States   required 


motor  vehicles  to  be   registered  at  fees  averaging  a 
little  jnore  than  $7.00  per  vehicle. 

In  1919  the  State  of  Oregon  levied  the  first  tax  on 
the  sale  of  fuel  for  motor  vehicles.  The  tax  was 
adopted  by  other  States  because  it  proved  at  least  a 
rough  measure  of  highway  use,  was  relatively  pain- 
less to  the  taxpayer,  and  easy  for  the  State  to  admin- 
ister. But  in  1921  this  tax,  which  later  became  the 
prime  revenue  producer  for  highways,  brought  in 
only  $5  million,  compared  with  $116  million  for  reg- 
istration fees. 

AASHO   Recommendations 

Shortcomings  of  the  1916  Act  began  to  be  evident 
by  1919,  and  the  annual  report  of  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  for  the  1920  fiscal  year  contained  rec- 
ommendations made  by  the  American  Association  of 
State  Highway  Officials  for  modifying  some  of  the 
financial  provisions  of  the  law : 

•  Federal  appropriations  should  be  at  least  $100 
million  a  year  in  order  to  carry  out  the  program. 

•  The  Federal-State  50-50  matching  ratio  should 
be  modified  to  increase  the  Federal  share  in  States 
where  more  than  10  percent  of  the  area  was 
public  lands. 

•  The  application  of  Federal  aid  should  be  re- 
stricted to  those  roads  that  would  expedite  com- 
pletion of  a  national  highway  system. 

•  Federal  appropriations  for  forest  roads  should 
be  continued  for  10  years  at  the  level  of  $10 
million  a  year. 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921  provided  for 
only  a  1-year  continuation  of  the  cooperative  Federal- 
State  financing  plan  by  appropriating  $75  million  for 
the  1922  fiscal  year.  But  the  next  year,  Congress 
began  the  practice  of  authorizing  Federal  aid  for  suc- 
ceeding periods  of  2  or  3  years.  These  funds  were 
then  apportioned  to  the   States  in   accordance  with 


The  corner  of  Dearborn  and  Randolph  Streets  in  Chicago,  1910. 

IIIWIP! 


242 


the  previously  existing  formula  with  two  modifica- 
tions :  one  for  small  States  and  the  other  for  the  large 
public  land  States. 

For  small  States,  which  were  receiving  virtually 
meaningless  amounts  of  aid  (for  example,  less  than 
$25,000  apiece  for  Delaware,  Xew  Hampshire,  Rhode 
Island,  and  Vermont  in  1917),  a  floor  of  at  least  one- 
half  of  1  percent  of  the  total  apportionment  was 
established.  For  the  large  western  States,  whose  ex- 
tensive areas  of  untaxable  federally  owned  land  put 
them  at  a  serious  disadvantage,  the  remedy  was  to 
increase  the  Federal  share  of  highway  funds  above 
50  percent  in  proportion  to  the  ratio  of  public  lands 
to  the  total  area  of  the  State.  The  areas  within  na- 
tional forests,  parks,  and  monuments  were  excluded 
from  the  calculation. 

To  insure  that  Federal  funds  would  be  spent  on 
roads  of  more  than  strictly  local  importance,  the  Act 
required  that  all  Federal-aid  funds  be  expended  on  a 
primary  system  of  highways  limited  to  7  percent  of 
the  State's  total  highway  mileage  on  November  9, 
1921.  This  interconnected  system  included  two  classes 
of  highways:  (1)  Primary  or  interstate  highways, 
comprising  %  of  the  system,  and  (2)  secondary  or 
intercounty  highways,  comprising  the  remainder.  No 
more  than  60  percent  of  the  funds  apportioned  were 
to  be  expended  on  the  primary  or  interstate  highways. 

City  residents  began  to  benefit  from  the  highway 
improvement  program  long  before  the  expenditure  of 
Federal-aid  highway  funds  on  municipal  streets  was 
authorized.  By  focusing  attention  upon  the  improve- 
ment of  intercity  and  interstate  routes,  the  creation 
of  the  Federal-aid  primary  system  under  the  1921 
Act  stimulated  more  travel  over  greater  distances- 
than  had  been  possible  before. 

Urban  automobile  owners  began  to  venture  beyond 
the  city  limits  on  "joy  rides,"  and  commercial  and 
intercity  trucking  developed.  On  the  other  hand,  al- 
though farm-to-market  truckino'  of  ajrricultural  com- 


modities became  common  in  many  areas,  the  horse 
and  wagon  was  still  an  important  factor  in  such 
movements. 

Highways  a   Local   Program 

The  highway  program  was  still  essentially  a  local 
one  in  1921,  financed  largely  from  property  taxes  and 
general-fund  revenues  and  concentrated  on  county  and 
local  roads.  If  the  work-relief  expenditures  of  the 
thirties  are  excluded,  the  estimated  capital  outlay  of 
$337  million  for  county  and  local  roads  in  1921  was 
not  equaled  until  the  early  fifties.  At  the  same  time, 
almost  three-fourths  ($771  million)  of  the  more  than 
$1  billion  of  total  current  revenue  (i.e.,  exclusive  of 
bond  proceeds)  available  for  road  and  street  purposes 
was  obtained  from  county  and  local  sources.  The 
Federal  and  State  governments  furnished  the  remain- 
ing $285  million,  of  which  $123  million  (43  percent) 
came  from  State  imposts  on  motor  vehicles. 

Bond  proceeds  of  $353  million  increased  the  current 
(exclusive  of  bond  receipts)  highway  funds  available 
by  about  one-third.  The  county  and  rural  local  gov- 
ernments borrowed  about  57  percent  of  this  sum  ($202 
million)  and  the  States  the  remainder.  Borrowing 
by  municipalities  was  not  reported. 

Increasing   Role   of  Credit  Financing 

It  was  conunon  practice  to  issue  highway  bonds 
secured  by  a  general  pledge  of  the  taxing  power  of 
the  issuing  authority.  These  general  obligation  or 
full  faith  bonds  are  still  predominant  among  the 
obligations  issued  to  finance  toll-free  capital  projects. 

As  the  revenue  potential  of  highway-user  taxes 
came  to  be  realized,  the  practice  of  issuing  State 
highway  bonds  gathered  momentum.  Those  highway 
administrators  who  advocated  credit  financing  con- 
tended, with  much  justification,  that  the  savings  to 
highway  users  brought  about  by  acceleration  of  the 
road-improvement  program  would  more  than  compen- 
sate for  the  interest  charges  on  the  bond  issues. 


The  same  corner  in  1966. 


248 


■liiHaaaiEi 


A    1922    deluxe   coach   manufactured    by   the   Superior  Motor 
Coach  Body  Company. 


During  the  period  from  1921  to  1930,  bond  proceeds 
contributed  from  25  to  40  percent  of  all  State  con- 
struction funds.  This  was  the  first  great  period  of 
accelerated  bond  financing.  Illinois,  for  example, 
authorized  bond  issues  totaling  $160  million ;  Missouri, 
$135  million;  and  North  Carolina,  $115  million.  In 
these  States,  and  others  with  similar  programs,  bond 
issues  formed  the  bulk  of  highway  construction  funds 
during  the  decade. 

A  number  of  States  that  did  not  or,  because  of 
constitutional  limitations,  could  not  issue  bonds  did 
not  hesitate  to  make  use  of  the  borrowing  power  of 
the  counties,  townships,  and  road  districts.  These 
units  in  numerous  States  either  borrowed  to  build 
roads  that  later  became  State  highways  or  supplied 
bond  proceeds  to  the  State  highway  departments. 

Beginning  in  the  1920's,  many  States  undertook  to 
reimburse  the  counties  for  these  contributions  to  State 
highway  systems.  These  obligations  usually  took  one 
of  two  forms:  (1)  An  agreement  between  the  State 
and  its  local  governments  whereby  the  State  would 
reimburse  the  local  governments  in  annual  amounts 
for  costs  incurred  initially  in  building  roads  that 
later  become  part  of  the  State  systems  or  (2)  an  agree- 
ment whereby  the  State  would  pay  to  its  counties  an 
annual  amount  equal  to  the  interest  and  principal  on 
local  highway  bonds  issued  for  such  purposes.  The 
security  for  this  type  of  obligation  was  somewhat 
obscure  except  when  the  State  had  funded  or  refunded 
the  obligation  from  the  proceeds  of  its  own  bond 
issues. 

The  practice  of  transferring  funds  between  levels 
of  government  complicates  the  pattern  of  highway 
finance  in  other  ways.  The  States  not  only  provide 
financial  aid  to  counties  and  cities,  but  they  spend 
money  directly  on  county  roads  and  city  streets. 
There  are  also  arrangements  whereby  one  unit  of 
government  performs  certain  services  (maintenance, 
for  example)  for  another  and  is  reimbursed  for  the 
cost  of  the  services. 


Most  of  the  Federal  expenditures  for  highways  in 
1921  were,  of  course,  in  the  form  of  aid  to  the  States, 
amounting  to  $78  million.  The  States  also  received 
$33  million  from  county  and  local  rural  governments 
and  transferred  $22  million  to  them — a  net  increase 
of  $11  million  in  State  funds  and  a  corresponding 
decrease  in  the  county  and  local  funds  available  for 
expenditure  on  roads. 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921  confirmed  the 
Federal  Government's  policy  against  tolls  on  federally 
aided  facilities  expressed  in  the  1916  Act.  But  large 
bridges  and  other  crossing  facilities,  because  of  their 
semi-monopoly  position  and  their  costliness,  had  long 
been  widely  accepted  as  suitable  for  toll-revenue 
financing.  The  use  of  revenue  bonds  payable  solely 
from  the  earnings  of  the  facility  (tolls)  began  with 
the  Port  of  New  York  Authority  bond  issues  in  1926. 

In  1927  Federal  policy  with  respect  to  tolls  was 
modified  by  the  Oldfield  Act  (now  23  U.S.C.  129(a)), 
which  allowed  the  States  or  their  instrumentalities  to 
use  Federal  funds  to  construct  or  acquire  toll  bridges, 
provided  that  net  revenues  would  be  applied  to  the 
capital  costs  of  the  facility  or  the  retirement  of  its 
debt  and  provided  that  the  facility  would  be  toll  free 
upon  retirement  of  its  outstanding  indebtedness.  This 
Act  had  the  effect  of  discouraging  the  construction  of 
privately  owned  facilities  and  did  not  lead  to  any 
significant  amount  of  toll  bridge  construction. 

From   War  to   Depression 

The  period  following  passage  of  the  Federal  High- 
way Act  of  1921  was  one  of  considerable  accomplish- 
ment, as  improvements  on  the  designated  Federal-aid 
system  moved  forward.  Annual  Federal  authoriza- 
tions remained  at  $75  million  through  1930  and  the 
onset  of  the  Great  Depression. 

Total  expenditure  for  highways  by  all  levels  of 
government  grew  rapidly,  reaching  $2.5  billion  by 
1930.  State  income  for  highway  purposes  had  risen 
steadily  since  1920.     The  yield  of  State  motor  fuel 


244 


taxes  constituted  only  3  percent  of  State  and  local 
imposts  on  motor  vehicles  in  1921.  By  1926  they 
totaled  $188  million,  which  was  40  percent  of  user-tax 
collections,  though  still  well  below  the  $258  million 
received  from  registration  fees. 

In  1929,  the  fii'st  year  in  which  all  the  States  and 
the  District  of  Columbia  levied  the  motor  fuel  tax, 
its  yield  exceeded  that  of  registration  fees.  By  1931 
it  produced  $538  million,  nearly  three  times  tlie  1926 
yield  and  close  to  twice  the  income  from  registration 
fees  of  $298  million. 

In  1923,  when  37  States  imposed  a  motor  fuel  tax, 
the  average  rate  was  under  2  cents  a  gallon.  In  1929 
it  averaged  approximately  3.7  cents. 

A  new  fee  was  added  to  the  user-tax  family  in  the 
twenties.  Vehicle-operator  and  chauffeur  licensing 
began  in  most  States  in  the  early  part  of  the  decade. 
In  1925  the  States  obtained  nearly  $10  million  from 
this  fee,  which  is  not  considered  a  prime  source  of 
revenue  for  road  purposes. 

As  the  decade  of  the  thirties  opened,  the  Depression 
triggered  by  the  1929  stock  market  crash  was  begin- 
ning to  be  felt  in  liighway  financing,  but  there  was  a 
delayed  response  to  economic  conditions  so  that,  for 
a  time,  the  pattern  of  highway  finance  continued  very 
much  as  it  had  before.  The  Federal-aid  program  had 
been  moving  forward  at  a  rapid  rate.  Federal  aid 
for  highways  of  $273  million  in  1931  was  nearly  three 
times  the  1921  figure.  Together,  Federal  and  State 
funds  were  providing  half  of  all  current  income  avail- 
able for  roads  and  streets.  The  equivalent  of  most  of 
the  Federal-aid  funds  received  by  the  States  was 
passed  on  to  the  counties  and  local  governments.  Only 
$50  million  of  these  funds  was  spent  by  the  States 
themselves. 

State  taxes  on  motor  vehicles  and  their  use  were 
now  a  major  element  in  the  tax  structure.  Totaling 
$848  million  in  1931,  they  were  93  percent  of  all  State 
revenue  for  highways  obtained  from  State  sources. 
They  provided  nearly  seven  times  their  1921  yield 
and  constituted  about  36  percent  of  the  total  of  $2.3 
billion  available  in  that  year  for  highway  and  street 
expenditure  by  all  levels  of  government.  State  bond 
proceeds  added  another  $351  million  to  the  available 
State  funds. 

On  the  expenditure  side,  the  total  by  all  levels  of 
government  began  to  decline  sharply  in  1930  until  it 
reached  a  low  level  of  about  $1.7  billion  in  1933. 
Although  declining,  State  current  expenditures  (ex- 
cluding debt  retirement)  of  $1  billion  in  1931  were 
still  more  than  2i/^  times  their  1921  level.  On  the 
income  side,  on  the  other  hand,  average  State  regis- 
tration fees  and  related  imposts  began  to  decline  only 
slightly  after  1931,  largely  because  of  the  adoption  of 
graduated  fee  schedules  lowering  the  rates  for  certain 
types  of  vehicles,  notably  passenger  cars  and  light 
trucks. 

For  county  and  local  roads,  expenditures  from 
regular  highway  funds  had  reached  $700  million  in 
1930,  nearly  $100  million  more  than  they  were  in  1921. 
Expenditures  for  city  and  village  streets  showed  much 
greater  growth,  rising  from  $337  million  to  a  high 
point  (if  Federal  work-relief  expenditures  are  omit- 
ted)   of   about   $800   million.     Taken   together,   these 


1930  expenditures  by  the  counties  and  localities,  rural 
and  urban,  weie  more  than  11/^  times  their  1921  level. 
During  the  10-year  period  since  1921,  a  change  in 
emphasis  had  taken  place  in  the  financing  of  local 
I'oads  and  streets.  In  1930  the  counties  and  local 
rural  units  of  government  were  spending  more  to 
maintain  and  administer  their  roads  and  to  pay  in- 
terest on  the  debt  incuri'ed  for  highways  than  they 
were  spending  for  new  construction.  Expenditure  for 
construction  by  the  urban  governments  exceeded  those 
of  the  rural  governments  by  close  to  $200  million,  a 
foretaste  of  the  effects  of  the  great  population  move- 
ment to  the  cities. 

Failure  of  the   Property  Tax 

Motor  vehicle  imposts  were  relatively  unaffected  by 
the  Depression.  The  major  problem  in  highway 
finance  arose  from  the  failure  of  the  property  tax  to 
fulfill  its  customary  role  in  support  of  the  highway 
function,  which  had  been  a  major  recipient  of  prop- 
erty tax  income  in  most  States.  The  municipalities 
were  almost  totally  dependent  on  the  property  tax 
for  road  and  street  funds,  and  the  counties  and  local 
rural  governments  only  a  little  less  so. 

As  income  from  farming  and  other  sources  declined, 
unemployment  soared,  and  prices  (especially  farm 
prices)"  skidded  downward,  taxpayers  began  to  de- 
fault on  their  mortgage  and  tax  payments.  Delin- 
quency rates  rose  rapidly,  and  mortgage  foreclosures 
and  tax  sales  became  common. 

State  laws  were  enacted  providing  for  increased 
leniency  toward  tax  delinquents.  Limits  were  placed 
on  tax  rates,  the  levy  of  taxes  on  propei'ty  for  certain 
purposes  was  sometimes  forbidden,  and  homeowner 
and  other  exemptions  were  introduced. 


Laying  a  new  stone  block  surface  at  East  23d  and  Broadway 
in  New  York  City  in  the  late  1920's. 


245 


Much  automobile  travel  loas  evident  in  the  1930's  despite  the 
Depression,  thus,  the  need  for  new  autos  to  replace  old  ones. 

In  1931,  the  States  faced  difficulty  in  matching 
their  Federal-aid  apportionments.  To  ease  the  effects 
of  the  Depression,  annual  Federal  highway  authori- 
zations were  increased  to  $205  million  in  1931,  reduced 
somewhat  to  $125  million  in  1932,  and  increased  again 
to  $229  million  in  1933.  But  the  lack  of  matching 
funds  was  only  partly  the  result  of  these  large  in- 
creases above  the  $75  million  a  year  previously 
authorized.  Nor  did  it  arise  from  declining  State 
revenues  from  motor  vehicle  imposts,  since  these  reve- 
nues declined  very  little  at  any  time  during  the  De- 
pression. Eather,  it  stemmed  from  the  large  sums 
used  by  the  States  to  replace  local  revenues  from 
property  taxes  in  financing  local  roads  and  city  and 
village  streets.  Moreover,  substantial  amounts  were 
diverted  from  highways  to  meet  the  rising  demand 
for  expenditures  for  other  purposes. 

Many  States  took  action  to  provide  tax  relief  by 
reducing  or  eliminating  property  taxes  as  a  source  of 
revenue  for  highways.  In  four  States  (Delaware, 
North  Carolina,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia),  re- 
sponsibility for  administering  and  financing  all  county 
and  local  rural  roads  was  transferred  to  the  States, 
except  that  in  Virginia  the  counties  were  allowed  the 
option  of  retaining  control  of  their  highways.  Fol- 
lowing the  transfers,  local  property  taxes  for  highways 
were  customarily  reserved  for  servicing  debt  already 
outstanding  and  sometimes  for  bridge  construction. 

Indiana  was  representative  of  States  that  left  sec- 
ondary and  local  roads  under  local  control  but  pro- 
vided for  the  transfer  of  State  motor-vehicle  user 
taxes  to  the  local  jurisdictions  for  the  support  of 
roads.  In  these  States,  imposition  of  property  taxes 
for  highways  was  usually  forbidden  except  for  bond 
service.  Most  of  the  remaining  States  adopted  a 
middle  course,  transferring  some  roads  from  local  to 
State  responsibility  or  providing  increased  State  aid 
for  secondary  or  local  roads. 


Emergency  Federal  Aid 

In  an  act  passed  on  December  30,  1930,  Congress 
advanced  $80  million  to  the  States  for  matching  regu- 
lar Federal-aid  apportionments.  As  conditions  wors- 
ened, the  Emergency  Relief  and  Construction  Act  of 
1932  made  a  further  advance  of  $120  million.  It  also 
provided  for  1 -percent  additions  to  the  Federal-aid 
highway  systems  that  were  originally  limited  by  the 
Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921  to  7  percent  of  total 
State  highway  mileage,  as  these  systems  were  com- 
pleted according  to  standards  acceptable  to  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads. 

Unemployment  grew  to  crisis  proportions,  and  Con- 
gress was  forced  to  turn  from  the  regular  Federal- 
aid  program  to  other  types  of  financing,  emphasizing 
projects  that  would  provide  for  as  much  direct  labor 
as  possible.  Thus,  the  regular  Federal-aid  authori- 
zations were  replaced  with  emergency  appropriations. 
The  Federal  Government  made  available  a  total  of 
$1  billion  of  such  funds  for  the  fiscal  years  1934^1936, 
far  more  than  ever  before  for  a  like  period  of  time. 

The  National  Industrial  Recovery  Act  of  1933, 
while  not  primarily  a  highway  bill,  included  several 
provisions  affecting  the  financing  of  highways.  The 
President  was  authorized  to  make  grants  of  not  less 
than  $400  million  to  State  highway  departments  to 
provide  for  the  emergency  construction  of  highways. 
The  use  of  these  funds  did  not  carry  with  it  the 
customary  restrictions  on  the  use  of  Federal-aid  high- 
way funds.  The  funds  were  to  be  available  without 
matching  by  the  States.  They  could  be  used  for 
projects  on  the  urban  extensions  of  Federal-aid  sys- 
tem routes;  for  paying  as  much  as  100  percent  of  the 
costs  of  preliminary  engineering;  for  projects  asso- 
ciated with  highway  safety,  such  as  building  foot- 
paths or  eliminating  highway-railroad  grade  cross- 
ings; and  for  construction  on  secondary  and  feeder 
roads  off  the  Federal-aid  system. 


246 


Seven-eighths  of  these  emergency  funds  were  to  be 
apportioned  according  to  the  regular  Federal-aid 
formula  and  the  remainder  on  the  basis  of  population 
alone.  The  Act  did  not  specify  how  the  funds  were 
to  be  allocated  to  the  highway  systems.  An  adminis- 
trative decision  was  made  to  allocate  about  50  percent 
to  the  rural  Federal-aid  system,  25  percent  to  its 
urban  extensions,  and  25  percent  to  secondary  and 
feeder  roads. 

Some  $95  million  of  the  authorized  $400  uiillion 
went  to  highway  projects  on  secondary  or  feeder 
roads  not  then  on  the  approved  systeui  of  Federal-aid 
highways  but  which  were  either  part  of  State  high- 
way systems  or  important  local  highways  leading  to 
shipping  points  on  roads  that  would  permit  the  ex- 
tension of  existing  transportation  facilities.  This  was 
the  first  major  Federal  action  directed  towards  sec- 
ondary or  farm-to-market  roads.^ 

The  Hay  den-Cart  wright  Act  of  1934  authorized  a 
highway  appropriation  of  $200  million  to  be  appor- 
tioned to  the  States  immediately  according  to  the 
revised  fonnula  of  the  National  Industrial  Recovery 
Act.  No  less  than  25  percent  of  the  apportionment 
to  an}'  State  was  to  be  applied  to  secondary  or  feeder 
roads. 

The  States  were  relieved  from  repayment  through 
deductions  from  future  Federal-aid  apportionments 
previously  advanced  for  emergency  unemployment 
relief.  Matching  by  the  States  was  not  required,  and 
the  money  could  be  used  to  pay  for  such  preconstruc- 
tion  expenses  as  surveys  and  the  preparation  of  plans. 

The  effect  of  the  1934  Act  was  to  incorporate  as  a 
matter  of  continuing  Federal-aid  highway  policy  the 
provisions  for  using  Federal  funds  to  improve  sec- 
ondary and  feeder  roads  and  to  eliminate  such  traffic 
hazards  as  railroad-highway  grade  crossings.  The 
Act  also  provided  for  withholding  sums  up  to  one- 
third  of  their  subsequent  Federal-aid  highway  ap- 
portionments from  States  using  motor-vehicle  revenue 
for  nonhighway  purposes,  except  in  those  instances 
provided  for  by  State  laws  in  force  at  the  time  the 
Hayden-Cartwright  Act  was  passed.  This  was  the 
genesis  of  many  State  so-called  "antidiversion"  amend- 
ments. 

State  governments  have  often  dedicated  income 
from  particular  sources  to  particular  purposes.  This 
practice,  which  is  embodied  in  State  constitutions  and 
statutes,  has  the  effect  of  removing  "earmarked"  reve- 
nues from  the  regular  annual  or  biennial  review  of 
the  legislature.  Carried  to  an  extreme,  it  allows  no 
flexibility  in  applying  income  to  the  governmental 
services  determined  to  be  necessary  at  any  given  time, 
so  that  a  case  could  be — and  was — made  for  the  point 
of  view  that  the  special  commitment  of  funds  to 
highway  purposes  had  no  valid  significance — that  all 
governmental  revenues  should  be  general  revenues  and 
all  expenses  should  be  defrayed  out  of  general  funds. 

AAHiile  it  was  generally  acknowledged  that  the  non- 
highway  purposes  to  which  highway-user  revenues 
had  been  directed  were,  for  the  most  part,  essential 
functions  for  which  money  must  be  obtained  from 
some  source,  nevertheless  the  antidiversionists  pointed 
to  the  fact  that  the  State  highway-user  tax  schedules 


had  been  predicated  on  the  concept  that  in  paying 
these  taxes  the  highway  user  was  contributing  his 
due  share  to  the  support  of  the  highway  system. 
Highway-user  taxes  being  measured  by  the  require- 
ments for  highway  expenditures,  the  product  of  these 
taxes,  it  was  argued,  should  be  used  for  the  purpose 
that  determines  their  magnitude. 

Historically,  the  highway  function  in  this  country 
had  always  partaken  of  the  nature  of  a  public  utility, 
with  aspects  both  of  a  private-enterprise  and  a  gov- 
ernmental activity.  Before  the  coming  of  the  motor 
vehicle,  local  taxpayers  could  not  meet  the  demand 
for  land  transportation  over  long  distances,  and  it 
was  left  to  private  capital  to  provide  these  facilities. 
For  a  while,  the  pricing  mechanism  was  tolls,  and  the 
user-tax  principle  was  partially  developed  during  the 
period  of  the  early  toll  roads.  These  roads  were  soon 
put  out  of  business  by  the  railroads,  roads  once  more 
becoming  a  local  governmental  function.  Highway- 
user  taxes,  then,  could  with  justification  be  linked  to 
the  benefits  received  from  the  service  to  which  they 
were  dedicated,  inasmuch  as  they  provided  an  indi- 
rect pricing  of  the  benefits  of  highway  use. 

With  the  development  of  the  road-user  tax  struc- 
ture and  its  growing  importance  as  a  source  of  high- 
way funds  during  the  1930's,  a  number  of  States 
followed  the  lead  of  New  Mexico,  the  first  State  to 
issue  general  obligation  bonds  secured  by  a  specific 
pledge  of  road-user  tax  revenue.  Bonds  backed  by 
this  type  of  security  proved  to  be  a  more  attractive 
investment  than  bonds  secured  by  the  general  taxing 
power  of  the  State. 

Although  no  regular  Federal-aid  authorizations 
were  made  for  the  fiscal  years  1934  or  1935,  Federal 
funds  continued  to  be  authorized  for  forest  highways 
(begun  in  1917)  and  public  lands  highways  (begun 
in  1931).  Other  highway  funds  not  administered  by 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  were  made  available 
through  the  National  Park  Service,  the  Forest  Serv- 
ice, and  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs.  Allocations 
for  Indian  reservation  roads  were  made  for  the  first 
time  in  1933. 

Although  1934  was  a  mid-Depression  year,  the  in- 
dicators of  highway  use  were  on  the  upswing.  Motor 
vehicle  registrations  were  already  close  to  full  re- 
covery. 

Present  patterns  of  automobile  use  were  fairly  well 
established  at  that  time.  More  automobile  trips  were 
made  for  earning  a  living  than  for  any  other  purpose, 
and  most  auto  trips  were  within  a  radius  of  less  than 
10  miles  from  home.  Average  annual  automobile 
travel  was  generally  least  in  the  rural  agricultural 
areas  and  highest  in  middle-sized  cities. 

As  motor  vehicle  ownership  increased  and  private 
automobile  travel  became  more  convenient  and  de- 
pendable, other  available  passenger  service  began  to 
dwindle  and,  in  some  cases,  essentially  disaj)pear. 
Among  the  casualties — mainly  after  1930 — were  the 
electric  interurbans,  local  railroad  passenger  service, 
and  local  comnmter  bus  and  trolley  service.  By  the 
late  1930's,  many  connnunities  were  left  with  no  pub- 
lic passenger  transportation  service  at  all. 


247 


Moving  people  and  goods:  the  trolley  line,  the  highway,  the 
canal,  and  the  railroad.  By  late  1930's,  the  trolley  lines 
and  the  canals  had  become  casualties  of  the  transport  war 
between  highways  and  railroads. 


The  transportation  of  goods  by  highway,  on  the 
other  hand,  was  becoming  increasingly  important 
economically,  so  much  so  that  by  the  late  1930's  the 
railroads,  beginning  to  view  intercity  truck  transpor- 
tation as  a  competitive  threat,  called  for  a  study  of 
truck  taxation.  In  1936,  the  first  year  such  calcula- 
tions wei'e  attempted  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads, 
the  average  truck  was  estimated  to  have  been  driven 
about  10,000  miles  a  year,  and  total  travel  of  all  trucks 
was  estimated  at  41  billion  vehicle-miles. 

Special  fees  and  taxes  had  begun  to  be  levied  in 
connection  with  registration  fees  on  for-hire  carriers 
of  persons  and  property.  By  the  mid-thirties,  such 
imposts  were  in  effect  generally  in  the  States,  although 
they  were  not  great  revenue  producers.  Their  im- 
portance lay  in  their  usefulness  as  a  means  of  regula- 
tion and  of  applying  concepts  of  equity  to  the  tax 
schedules. 

The  1933  low  point  of  $1.7  billion  in  total  expendi- 
tures for  highways  was  followed  by  an  erratic  in- 
crease, which  peaked  at  almost  $2.7  billion  in  1938. 
Then  the  Federal  emergency  funds  began  to  run  out. 
But  the  expenditures  from  funds  normally  available 
for  highways  continued  a  gradual  upward  trend  until 
World  War  II  stringencies  began  to  force  a  reduction. 
Federal  work-relief  expenditures,  although  continued 
through  1942,  reached  a  maximum  in  1938,  when  the 
amount  spent  on  covmty  and  local  rural  roads  reached 
$389  million  and  on  city  and  village  streets,  $367 
million. 

The  late  1930's  saw  what  may  be  said  to  be  the 
beginning  of  the  modern  toll  road  movement  with  the 
construction  of  the  Pennsylvania  Turnpike  from  1937 
to  1939.  The  State  turned  to  this  method  of  financing 
because  of  insufficient  funds  to  improve  existing  roads 


to  adequate  standards.  But  the  turnpike  was  not 
financed  as  a  wholly  self-supporting  facility.  Federal 
Public  Works  Administration  grants  totaling  $295 
million  were  supplemented  by  $40.8  million  of  bonds 
sold  to  the  Reconstruction  Finance  Corporation.  The 
turnpike  suffered  badly  because  of  wartime  restric- 
tions in  the  1940's,  and  it  operated  at  a  loss  most  of 
the  time  until  the  end  of  the  war. 

Although  the  total  governmental  debt  for  highways 
included  such  large  revenue  bond  issues  as  those  for 
the  Pennsylvania  Turnpike,  the  San  Francisco  Bay 
Bridge,  and  the  Port  of  New  York  Authority's  bridge 
and  tunnel  program,  the  period  of  the  1930's  produced 
slightly  diminished  State  highway  borrowing.  The 
dominance  of  Federal-aid  funds  during  this  period 
of  depression  and  recovery  reduced  the  relative  con- 
tribution of  bond  proceeds  to  about  20  percent  of  the 
funds  used  to  finance  highways.  But  the  reliance  on 
borrowing  shifted  from  the  local  governments  to  the 
State.  In  1926  State  highway  bond  issues  exceeded 
those  of  county  and  rural  local  governments  for  the 
fii'st  time  and,  with  several  exceptions,  have  annually 
dominated  the  highway  bond  market. 

The  Federal  Government's  anti-toll  policy  was  once 
again  written  into  the  statutes  with  the  passage  in 
1937  of  a  law  authorizing  Federal-aid  funds  to  be 
used  for  freeing  toll  bridges  on  the  Federal-aid  sys- 
tem. It  authorized  the  payment  of  Federal  money 
up  to  50  percent  of  the  cost  of  labor  and  materials 
actually  used  in  the  construction  of  any  toll  bridge 
built  after  1927  on  the  Federal-aid  system.  In  return, 
the  recipients  had  to  agree  to  reuiove  the  tolls. 

At  the  close  of  the  1930's,  highways  had  not  fully 
recovered  from  the  eft'ects  of  the  Depression.  World 
War  II  was  raging,  and  the  possibility  of  an  end  to 
United  States  neutrality  was  on  the  horizon. 


248 


Highway   Development   During   World   War   I! 

The  Federal  Hijrhway  Act  of  1940  became  law  more 
than  a  year  before  the  Pearl  Harbor  incident  made 
the  United  States  an  active  belligerent.  The  Act 
provided  that,  on  request  of  the  Secretaries  of  War 
and  Navy  or  the  head  of  any  other  official  national 
defense  agency  and  by  order  of  the  Federal  Works 
Administrator,  Federal-aid  highway  funds  previously 
authorized  could  be  used,  without  matching,  to  pay 
for  preliminary  engineering  and  for  supervising  the 
construction  of  projects  essential  to  the  national 
defense. 

The  decade  of  the  1940's  was  marked  by  two  con- 
trasting developments:  (1)  The  cessation  of  normal 
highway  construction  during  World  War  II  folloAved 
by  (2)  accelerated  construction  expenditure  accom- 
panied by  an  increase  in  borrowing  for  highway 
purposes  after  the  war.  At  the  outset,  the  Nation 
was  entering  a  period  of  wartime  economic  boom  that 
hastened  what  might  otherwise  have  been  a  long,  slow 
pull  out  of  the  Depression.  But  the  boom  foimd 
materials,  equipment,  and  labor  for  normal  civilian 
purposes  in  short  supply. 

In  1941,  78,000  miles  of  highway  were  designated 
as  the  strategic  network  developed  in  cooperation 
with  the  War  Department  and  used  in  selecting  high- 
priority  projects  for  construction.  Approximately  20 
percent  of  the  mileage  in  this  network  was  found  to 
be  seriously  inadequate,  and  the  proportion  was  found 
to  be  even  higher  on  other  essential  roads,  such  as 
those  providing  access  to  war  industries,  ammunition 
depots,  and  military  establishments. 

The  Defense  Highway  Act  of  1941  appropriated 
funds  for  construction  on  the  strategic  network,  to  be 
apportioned  according  to  the  standard  formula  but 
with  State  participation  limited  to  not  more  than  25 
percent  of  the  project  cost.  Funds  were  authorized, 
without  apportionment,  for  projects  on  access  roads, 
these  funds  to  be  available  with  or  without  State 
matching  and  usable  for  purchasing  right-of-way  and 
for  ofi-stx'eet  parking. 

Policy  for  the  conservation  of  critical  materials 
called  for  (1)  deferring  all  nonessential  highway 
construction  that  would  consume  large  amounts  of 
such  materials;  (2)  substituting  less  critical  materials, 
where  possible;  and  (3)  deferring  construction 
through  maintenance  operations.  These  practices 
plus  the  inability  of  govei'nments  to  stretch  the  avail- 
able resources  in  materials  and  manpower  to  cover 
routine  maintenance  added  to  the  large  volume  of 
unmet  highway  needs  that  had  been  accumulating 
since  the  early  1930's. 

Highway  expenditures,  which  had  not  yet  returned 
to  their  pre-Depression  level,  again  began  to  decline. 
County  and  local  governments,  both  rural  and  urban, 
were  receiving  from  45  to  47  percent  less  from  their 
own  sources  than  they  had  in  1930.  Though  in  1941 
State-collected  highway  revenues  were  36  percent 
above  their  1931  level  and  the  States  had  stepped  up 
their  aid  to  rural  local  governments,  still  the  funds 
available  for  local  roads  were  substantially  below  the 
1931  figure.  Construction  expenditures  for  county 
and  rural  local  roads  reached  a  low  i^oint  of  $72  mil- 
lion in  1944. 


In  1943  and  1944,  total  expenditures  on  city  and 
village  streets  reached  their  lowest  level  ($321  million) 
since  1920.  The  principal  cause  was  the  war-imposed 
curtailment  of  construction,  which  totaled  only  $71 
million  in  1943.  Expenditures  at  the  Federal  and 
State  levels  also  declined  until  the  close  of  World 
War  11. 

The  1943  Highway  Act  amending  the  Defense 
Highway  Act  of  1941  served  as  a  bridge  between 
wartime  and  postwar  programs.  It  extended  the 
emergency  funding  programs  of  the  1941  Act  and 
amended  the  definition  of  construction  in  order  to 
continue  the  use  of  Federal-aid  highway  funds  for 
the  purchase  of  right-of-way.  It  also  broadened  the 
provisions  related  to  reimbursing  the  States  and  other 
governments  for  road  damage  resulting  from  national 
defense  and  other  war-related  activities. 

Executive  Order  8989  of  December  18,  1941,  created 
the  Office  of  Defense  Transport  (ODT)  as  a  wartime 
agency  to  assure  continued  essential  operations  and 
maximum  use  of  domestic  transport  facilities  for  the 
successful  prosecution  of  the  war.  The  ODT's  High- 
way Transport  Division,  supervising  motor  transpor- 
tation, pursued  the  objective  of  the  order  through 
issuance  of  orders  governing  full  loading,  delivery 
schedules,  and  interchange  of  freight.  It  also  pressed 
for  allocations  of  fuel,  tires,  and  other  critical  items 
in  short  supply  to  enable  domestic  truck  transporta- 
tion to  perform  its  service. 

Postwar  Problems 

When  the  war  ended  in  1945,  highway  agencies 
entered  the  postwar  period  under  conditions  of  great 
difficulty.  It  had  become  apparent  that  during  the 
period  j)receding  the  war,  insufficient  effort  was  put 
into  the  construction  and  maintenance  of  roads  and 
streets  to  insure  that  the  quality  and  condition  of  the 
highway  plant  would  keep  pace  with  the  demands  of 
traffic.  The  agencies  were  therefore  faced  with  the 
necessity  of  a  widespread  modernization  and  recondi- 
tioning of  highway  facilities,  both  rural  and  urban. 
The  problem  was  complicated  by  the  fact  that  con- 
struction and  maintenance  costs,  which  rose  very  ma- 
terially during  the  war  period,  become  inflated  with 
the  general  rise  in  prices  that  followed. 

The  Federal  Government's  grand  plan  of  attack  on 
postwar  highway  problems  was  embodied  in  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944,  which  added  some 
important  new  provisions: 

•  A  new  National  System  of  Interstate  Highways, 
not  to  exceed  40,000  miles  in  length,  was 
authorized. 

•  A  specific  system  of  secondary  Federal-aid  high- 
ways, not  limited  in  size,  was  provided  for. 

•  Recognition  was  given  for  the  first  time  to  a 
system  of  urban  extensions  of  rural  Federal-aid 

highways. 

•  Authorizations  were  made  by  systems  in  a  45-30- 
25  ratio  for  primary,  secondary,  and  urban 
(ABC)  systems  for  each  of  3  successive  years. 
No  funds  were  specifically  authorized  for  the 
Interstate  System. 

The  apportionment  formula  adopted  for  the  Primary 
System   was   continued,   giving  equal   weight  to   the 


249 


three  factors  of  population,  area,  and  post  road  mile- 
age. The  formula  adopted  for  the  Secondary  System 
was  the  same  except  that  rural  instead  of  total  popu- 
lation was  used.  The  urban  apportionment  was  based 
on  the  sole  factor  of  population  of  municipalities  and 
other  urban  areas  of  5,000  or  more. 

The  Act  added  to  the  law  a  provision  authorizing 
the  States  to  use  10  percent  of  apportioned  Federal 
funds  without  matching  to  eliminate  hazards  of  high- 
way-railway crossings  on  the  Federal-aid  systems. 
The  railroads  were  to  contribute  10  percent  of  the 
construction  cost  of  those  projects  benefiting  them. 

Postwar  TaxaHon   for  Highways 

During  the  1940's,  the  States  strove  to  improve 
their  revenue  positions  by  increasing  the  tax  rates  on 
motor  fuel.  In  1947,  8  States  raised  their  rates,  and 
the  average  rate  for  all  States  rose  from  4.16  to  4.25 
cents  a  gallon.  During  1949,  13  States  increased  their 
rates,  bringing  the  average  State  rate  to  4.52  cents. 

Regardless  of  what  originally  precipitated  the 
adoption  of  user  taxes,  no  carefully  worked  out  theory 
preceded  their  adoption.  The  theoretical  foundation 
was  built  after  the  tax  framework  was  erected.  The 
structure  of  highway  taxes  was  an  evolution  brought 
about  over  a  long  time  by  balancing  the  demands  of 
conflicting  interests  with  the  necessities  for  the  de- 
velopment and  support  of  highways. 


The  Rio  Grande  Gorge  Bridge,  located  near  Taos,  N.  Mex. 
carries  the  highway  over  the  Rio  Grande  650  feet  beloiv. 
Originally,  Federal  aid  was  limited  to  $10,000  per  mile  for 
bridges  under  20  feet  and  50  percent  of  the  cost  for  bridges 
over  20  feet.  Because  bridges  are  so  costly  to  build,  many 
are  financed  through  bonds  or  as  toll  facilities. 


Part  of  the  pressure  that  led  to  the  development  of 
a  more  organized  body  of  highway  tax  theory  during 
this  period  was  produced  by  a  changed  attitude  on 
the  part  of  the  railroad  industry.  The  industry  had 
been  a  supporter  of  highway  development  in  the  be- 
ginning, viewing  road  improvements  as  a  means  of 
providing  better  feeders  to  their  lines.  At  that  time 
they  paid  taxes  without  complaint.  But  as  highways 
encouraged  long-distance  freight  movement  by  truck, 
they  began  to  realize  that  they  were  facing  serious 
competition.  Fearful  of  the  results  of  growing  di- 
version of  traffic,  they  became  active  critics  of  both 
the  operating  and  the  business  practices  of  highway 
carriers  and  of  the  extent  to  which  such  carriers  paid 
taxes  to  support  the  government  expenditures  made 
in  their  behalf,  i.e.,  the  extent  of  the  public  subsidy 
of  the  motor  carrier  industry. 

The  framework  of  highway  tax  theory  is  founded 
on  the  principle  that  taxation  for  the  support  of 
highways  should  be  assessed  in  proportion  to  benefits 
received.    There  had  been  nearly  universal  acceptance 


250 


of  the  concept  that  the  provision  of  highway  facilities 
serves  three  major  interests  finding  a  parallel  in  three 
principal  sources  of  highway  revenue  : 

•  The  interest  of  access  to  land  and  improvements, 
a  service  indispensable  to  personal,  family,  and 
business  activity  (taxes  on  land). 

•  The  f)ublic  interest  or  general  welfare,  represented 
by  the  use  of  roads  in  such  public  activities  as 
national  defense,  police  and  fire  protection,  access 
to  schools,  and  conservation  of  natural  resources 
(appropriations  from  general  funds). 

•  The  interest  of  the  motor-vehicle  user  in  provid- 
ing facilities  upon  which  the  private  automobile 
may  be  used  in  recreational,  social,  and  personal 
business  activities  and  the  commercial  vehicle 
ma}'  be  operated  in  gainful  pursuits  (motor- 
vehicle  user  taxes). 

The  fact  that  the  owners  and  occupants  of  adjacent 
and  nearby  property  received  special  benefits  from 
highway  improvements  had  long  been  recognized  by 
the  common  practice  of  imposing  special  assessments 
for  such  improvement.  Benefits  to  property  through- 
out a  given  area  were  recognized  in  taxes  upon  prop- 
erty in  general,  and  the  general  property  tax  was 
also  recognized  as  representing  community  benefits  as 
well  as  those  directly  assignable  to  the  land. 

The  fact  that  the  benefit  principle  was  firmly  im- 
bedded in  the  earlier  period  of  highway  financing 
probably  paved  the  way  for  the  adoption  of  motor- 
vehicle  registration  fees  and  gasoline  taxes  as  means 
of  taxing  the  motor-vehicle  owner  for  benefits  re- 
ceived. Thus,  the  gasoline  tax,  during  the  period 
when  it  was  being  eagerly  adopted  by  State  after 
State,  was  commonly  described  as  a  "metered  tax," 
and  one  State,  New  Hampshire,  continued  to  call  its 
gasoline  tax  the  "road  toll." 

The  further  fact  that  the  rapidly  developing  use  of 
motor  vehicles  was  bringing  about  the  necessity  for 
greater  and  greater  highway  expenditures  was  also  a 
very  potent  factor  in  popularizing  the  imposition  of 


After  WW  II  it  teas  evident  that  greater  highway  expenditures 
would  he  needed  to  cope  with  the  volume  of  traffic.  Highway 
taxation  had  to  he  determined  on  an  equitable  assignment 
of  tax  responsihility  among  beneficiary  groups  in  proportion 
to  the  benefits  received. 


user  taxes.  Thus  the  concepts  that  underlie  the  later 
investigations  of  the  highway  tax  problem  had  a 
natural  evolution  in  the  history  of  highway  develop- 
ment. 

The  central  problem  of  highway  taxation  was  one 
of  determining  an  equitable  assignment  of  tax  re- 
sponsibility among  various  beneficiary  groups  in  pro- 
portion to  the  benefits  received  or  highway  costs 
occasioned  by  each  of  these  groups.  The  problem 
divided  itself  into  two  parts:  (1)  The  allocation  of 
the  highway  tax  burden  among  the  major  classes  of 
beneficiaries  of  highway  expenditures  and  (2)  once 
the  equitable  portion  assignable  to  motor- vehicle  users 
was  determined,  the  allocation  of  the  motor-vehicle 
user  share  among  vehicles  of  different  sizes,  weights, 
and  classes  of  use.  A  number  of  methods  with  sup- 
porting concepts  were  devised  for  making  these  de- 
terminations and  were  used  by  many  States  for 
revising  their  tax  schedules. 

Vehicle   Registrations  and   Fuel   Consumption 

Largely  because  of  the  effects  of  motor  fuel  ration- 
ing, motor  vehicle  registrations  declined  only  13  per- 
cent during  World  War  II,  compared  with  decreases 
of  37  and  33  percent,  respectively,  in  travel  and  fuel 
consumption.  Until  the  1940's  the  rate  of  growth  in 
fuel  consumption  per  vehicle  closely  paralleled  the 
rate  in  total  fuel  consumption.  But  after  1946,  the 
rate  per  vehicle  rose  more  slowly  than  that  of  total 
consumption,  because  of  the  growing  density  of  motor 
vehicle  ownership.  While  ownership  of  more  than 
one  car  increases  the  total  miles  of  driving,  the  in- 
crease is  not  proportionate  to  the  number  of  vehicles 
owned.  Thus,  a  household  with  one  car  averaging 
12,000  miles  of  driving  annually  does  not  double  that 
mileage  by  buying  a  second  car  but  may  increase  it  to 
perhaps  15,000  or  18,000  miles.  Fuel  consumption  in 
1946  averaged  about  746  gallons  per  vehicle  per  year.^ 

New  Directions   in   Borrowing 

The  venerable  custom  of  borrowing  money  and 
paying  interest  on  it  has  its  motivation  in  the  simple 
economic  fact  that  money  in  hand  always  has  more 
value  than  an  equal  amount  in  prospect.  The  exist- 
ence of  a  net  advantage  to  be  derived  from  the  use  of 
funds  now  rather  than  in  the  future  is  the  criterion 
justifying  public  borrowing. 


251 


The  most  favorable  condition  for  credit  financing 
is  that  of  a  truly  accelerated  program  contemplating 
a  relatively  short  period  of  abnormally  high  capital 
outlay,  during  which  the  highway  plant  progresses 
rapidly  toward  a  condition  of  adequacy.  A  subse- 
quent lull  in  consti'uction  activity,  during  which  the 
need  for  replacements  accumulates  very  slowly,  pro- 
vides the  opportunity  for  retirement  of  the  bonds. 

Conditions  following  the  end  of  the  war  wei'e  ripe 
for  such  a  program.  The  need  for  greatly  increased 
expenditures  to  permit  reaching  a  standard  of  ade- 
quacy was  recognized  in  most  States.  The  demands 
for  highway  capital  funds  for  financing  particular 
urgently  needed  facilities  or  statewide  "catch-up" 
programs  encouraged  the  circumvention  of  constitu- 
tional barriers  to  State-created  debt,  either  by  the 
more  direct  but  less  frequent  method  of  amendment 
or  referendum  or  by  the  speedier  and,  hence,  more 
popular  device  of  the  nonguaranteed  bond  that  does 
not  have  recourse  to  the  full  taxing  power  of  the 
issuing  government  and  does  not  require  approval  of 
the  electorate. 

Because  they  command  higher  interest  rates,  non- 
guaranteed  bonds  almost  always  carry  with  them  a 
higher  cost  to  the  public.  But  the  additional  cost 
may  be  a  justifiable  premium  to  pay  for  avoiding  the 
consequences  and  delays  of  seeking  voter  approval. 

During  the  5-year  period  1946-1950,  the  States,  in- 
cluding special  State  authorities  and  commissions, 
issued  over  $1  billion  in  highway  bonds  (not  includ- 
ing refunding  issues)  ;  the  counties  and  other  rural 
local  units  issued  $429  million;  and  the  cities  and 
other  incorporated  places  issued  $635  million.  The 
combined  total  was  $2.2  billion  of  a  total  outstanding 
debt  at  the  end  of  1950  of  about  $4.5  billion. 

The  debt  issued  during  this  period  tended  to  be 
concentrated  along  the  Eastern  Seaboard,  where  so 
much  of  the  population,  industry,  and  heavy  traffic 
volume  were  also  concentrated.  These  States  ac- 
counted for  80  pei'cent  of  the  total. 

The  toll  road  movement  was  the  most  dramatic 
development  in  highway  financing,  particularly  in 
credit  financing,  in  the  years  immediately  following 
World  War  II.  The  success  of  the  Pennsylvania 
Turnpike  with  the  public,  despite  its  war-induced 
financial  difficulties,  stimulated  a  boom  in  toll  road 
construction.  These  roads  proved  to  be  feasible  where 
the  traffic  potential  was  high  and  where  the  parallel 
free  roads  were  either  in  poor  condition  as  to  grades, 
curves,  or  surfaces  or  where  they  were  inadequate  to 
serve  the  traffic  in  the  corridor. 

The  growth  in  toll  road  bond  financing  in  the 
period  1946-1951  was  striking.  To  the  $54  million  of 
toll  road  bonds  outstanding  at  the  beginning  of  the 
period,  issues  totaling  $449  million  were  added.  Re- 
demptions during  the  period  were  a  slim  $12  million, 
leaving  $491  million  outstanding  at  the  end  of  1951. 

The  postwar  period  was  one  of  variety  and  experi- 
mentation in  the  credit  financing  of  highways,  and 
by  no  means  all  of  the  toll  roads  were  financed  by  the 
issue  of  revenue  bonds  payable  solely  from  the  earn- 
ings of  the  facility.  The  first  fully  self-supporting 
issue  of  toll  road  revenue  bonds  was  marketed  in 
1946  by  the  Maine  Turnpike  Authority.  Elsewhere, 
general  obligation  bonds  were  sometimes  issued,  and 


the  building  of  the  15-mile  New  Hampshire  Turnpike 
was  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  90-day  renewable 
notes  purchased  by  Boston  banks.  By  this  device  of 
short-term  financing,  not  extensively  employed  by  the 
States  in  financing  highway  capital  expenditures,  the 
State  of  New  Hampshire  was  able  to  save  in  interest 
expense  by  drawing  down  funds  only  as  needed. 

Bridge  Tolls 

In  general,  the  Federal  Government  continued  to 
look  upon  toll  financing  with  disfavor.  In  the  late 
1940's,  a  Federal  statute  was  enacted  to  encourage  the 
removal  of  bridge  tolls.  The  General  Bridge  Act  of 
1946  required  that,  within  20  years  of  construction  or 
acquisition,  tolls  be  removed  from  all  bridges  subject 
to  the  Act  (i.e.,  interstate  bridges).  Bridges  wholly 
inside  a  State  or  those  between  the  United  States  and 
foreign  countries  were  not  covered  by  this  legislation. 

In  1948  the  Act  was  amended  to  extend  the  period 
for  removing  tolls  to  30  years.  Meantime,  the  1937 
law  authorizing  the  use  of  Federal  funds  to  free  toll 
bridges  on  the  Federal-aid  system  expired.  During 
the  time  it  was  in  force  (1937-1947),  nearly  $9  mil- 
lion had  been  spent  to  free  30  bridges  in  five  States. 

While  the  number  of  toll  facilities  owned  by  coun- 
ties and  local  governments  is  relatively  small,  in  the 
1940's  toll  charges  provided  a  greater  portion  of  the 
income  from  county  and  local  imposts  upon  highway 
users  than  any  other  single  impost.  Most  of  the  in- 
come derived  from  these  toll  charges  was  spent  for 
highway  purposes,  chiefly  maintenance  and  operation 
of  the  facilities  and  retirement  of  the  debt  incurred 
when  they  were  built. 

The   Federal   Role   in   Borrowing 

In  the  wake  of  the  rapid  development  of  toll  roads, 
the  Federal  Government  had  not  abandoned  its  belief 
in  toll-free  highways.  Accordingly,  a  section  of  the 
Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  of  1950  (section  122,  title 
23,  U.S.  Code)  provided  that  any  State  or  local  gov- 
ernment that  issued  bonds  and  used  the  proceeds  to 
accelerate  construction  of  toll-free  facilities  on  the 
Federal-aid  Interstate  or  Primary  Systems  or  on  ex- 
tensions of  Federal-aid  systems  within  urban  areas 
might  apply  authorized  Federal  funds  to  retire  such 
bonds.  Federal  funds  might  not  be  claimed  for  the 
Federal-Aid  Secondary  System,  either  in  reimbui*se- 
ment  of  interest  payments  or  for  bond  proceeds  ex- 
pended on  that  system. 

The  Act  made  the  following  stipulations: 

•  The  proceeds  of  the  bonds  qualifying  under  the 
law  must  have  actually  been  expended  in  the  con- 
struction of  Federal-aid  systems. 

•  The  construction  must  have  been  completed  in 
accordance  with  plans  and  specifications  approved 
in  advance  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 

•  Payments  could  not  exceed  the  pro  rata  Federal 
share  specified  by  law. 

•  Payments  must  be  made  from  funds  authorized 
by  the  Congress. 

That  this  provision  was  useful  to  the  States  in  ac- 
celerating highway  programs  was  shown  by  tlie  fact 
that  at  the  end  of  December  1961  bond-financed  pro- 
grams totaled  nearly  $395  million,  of  which  the 
Federal-fund  share  was  more  than  $253  million. 


252 


This  bridge  was  designed  and  built  with  the  emphasis  on  con- 
cern for  the  natural  environment.  The  task  was  accom- 
plished by  using  prestressed  concrete  and  minor  disturbance 
to  the  rock  outcroppings  and  boulders,  thus  producing  an 
economical,  as  well  as  an  esthetically  pleasing  bridge. 


253 


This  program  was  in  no  sense  a  Federal  lending 
device;  rather,  it  had  the  effect  of  postponing  reim- 
bursement of  the  Federal  share  of  authorized  Federal- 
aid  projects.    It  had  two  advantages  to  the  States: 

•  Programs  involving  Federal-aid  work  could  be 
planned  and  financed  in  advance  of  the  avail- 
ability of  Federal  funds. 

•  Federal  funds  might  be  claimed  at  times  and  in 
amounts  determined  by  the  maturity  schedule  of 
the  bond  issue,  reducing  the  demand  for  current 
State  tax  revenue  for  debt  service  during  the 
time  the  bonds  were  maturing. 

Financial  Status  in   1951 

By  1951,  the  postwar  pattern  of  highway  financing 
was  well  established,  except  for  the  changes  to  come 
with  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1966.  The 
States  were  providing  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  funds 
(exclusive  of  borrowings)  applied  to  the  highway 
program  (about  $2.7  billion),  and  motor- vehicle  user 
taxes,  including  tolls,  accounted  for  about  97  percent 
of  these  funds. 

Contributions  from  Federal  general  funds  were 
$492  million.  This  amount  was  about  $60  million 
less  than  was  available  from  this  source  in  1941,  but 
the  1941  amount  had  come  largely  from  special  un- 
employment relief  appropriations  rather  than  from 
regular  sources  of  highway  aid. 

Funds  provided  by  rural  and  urban  local  govern- 
ments had  recovered  to  approximately  the  level  of 
1931 :  $483  million  in  local  revenues  of  the  rural  gov- 
ernments and  $585  million  in  local  municipal  revenues. 

Bond  issues  for  road  and  street  purposes  during 
1951  totaled  $794  million,  of  which  $635  million  was 
State  borrowings.  Beginning  in  1948,  the  States  re- 
sorted to  heavy  borrowing  to  expedite  their  accelerated 
highway  improvement  programs. 

By  1951,  the  program  for  catching  up  on  deferred 
maintenance  and  capital  outlay  was  well  underway. 
Total  capital  outlay  on  all  systems,  which  bottomed 
out  at  $362  million  in  1944,  had  reached  a  level  of 
$2.5  billion  and  was  climbing  rapidly.  Maintenance 
expenditures  had  recovered  from  a  wartime  low  of 
$640  million  to  a  total  of  $1.6  billion  in  1951.  Total 
highway  expenditures  were  $4.6  billion. 

Federal-Aid  Funds  and  the  1956  Highway  Legislation 

Between  1944  and  1956,  Federal  legislation  dictated 
few  major  policy  changes.  The  first  Interstate  Sys- 
tem construction  was  specifically  authorized  in  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1952,  which  provided 
for  apportionment  of  $26  million  on  the  basis  of  a 
50-50  Federal-State  matching  ratio  in  each  of  the 
fiscal  years  1954  and  1965.  These  authorizations  were 
increased  to  $176  million  each  year  for  fiscal  1956  and 
1957  by  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1954,  which 
also  raised  the  Federal  share  of  project  costs  to  60 
percent. 

The  twin  1956  Acts — the  Federal-Aid  Highway 
Act  and  the  Highway  Revenue  Act — are  a  major 
landmark  in  the  highway  history  of  the  United  States. 
This  legislation  broke  with  tradition  and  established 
some  new  principles : 


•  It  authorized  and  provided  for  financing  an  en- 
tire highway  network,  now  designated  the  Na- 
tional System  of  Interstate  and  Defense  Hghways. 

•  It  departed  from  the  traditional  50-50  sharing 
of  project  costs  and  the  fixed  formula  for  ap- 
portionment. 

•  It  established  a  Highway  Trust  Fund  fed  from 
the  proceeds  of  Federal  excise  taxes  on  motor- 
vehicle  users,  which  thus  directly  linked  to  high- 
way expenditures. 

The  Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956  continued  the 
biennial  authorizations  of  Federal-aid  primary,  sec- 
ondary, and  urban  highways  (popularly  termed  the 
ABC  program).  But  the  policy  of  authorizing 
Federal  aid  to  the  States  for  highways  for  1-  to  3-year 
periods  was  augmented  by  one  of  authorizing  funds 
for  a  long-range  program  to  complete  the  Interstate 
Highway  System. 

A  total  of  $27  billion  was  authorized  for  the  Inter- 
state System,  to  be  apportioned  on  the  basis  of  90-10 
percent  Federal-State  shares  of  project  costs.  For 
the  first  3  years  of  the  program,  apportionments 
among  the  States  were  to  be  made  on  the  basis  of 
total  population  (one-half).  After  this,  the  funds 
were  to  be  apportioned  according  to  the  proportion 
that  the  estimated  cost  in  each  State  bore  to  the  total 
cost  of  completing  the  entire  System. 

It  was  recognized  that  some  States  might  be  willing 
and  able,  with  current  revenue  or  bond  proceeds,  to 
build  their  portions  of  the  Interstate  System  faster 
than  the  annual  Federal-aid  apportionment  would 
permit.  The  1966  Act  therefore  provided  for  "ad- 
vance" construction  by  arranging  for  later  reimburse- 
ment to  the  State  for  the  Federal  share  of  the  project 
costs  from  apportionments  of  succeeding  years.  Fed- 
eral aid  was  also  made  available  for  the  cost  of  re- 
locating utilities  displaced  by  federally  aided  highway 
construction. 

In  linking  Federal  excise  taxes  on  highway  users 
and  Federal  aid  for  highways,  this  Act  sought  to 
accomplish  three  objectives:  To  finance  the  long-range 
Federal-aid  program,  to  provide  the  revenue  wholly 
from  user-tax  revenues,  and  to  preserve  the  program 
on  a  pay-as-you-go  basis.  Although  automotive  ex- 
cise taxes  of  one  type  or  another  have  been  levied  by 
the  Federal  Government  since  1917,  except  for  the 
period  1928-1932,  no  part  of  the  proceeds  of  these 
taxes  was  earmarked  for  highways  before  1956.  Be- 
fore that  date,  Federal  aid  for  highways  was  appro- 
priated from  the  General  Fund  of  the  Treasury  and 
was  not  related  to  the  income  from  taxes  on  motor 
vehicles  or  their  operation. 

In  the  Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956,  Congress 
provided  revenues  for  a  program  of  highway  expendi- 
tures on  the  Interstate  and  other  Federal-aid  highway 
systems.  The  mechanism  by  which  this  was  done  was 
to  create  a  Highway  Trust  Fund  into  which  were  di- 
rected the  proceeds  of  certain  existing  excise  taxes  on 
motor  vehicles  and  automotive  products  and  certain 
additional  taxes  imposed  by  the  Act  itself. 

In  particular,  the  Federal  gasoline  tax  was  in- 
creased from  2  to  3  cents  and  became  the  principal 
source  of  revenue  of  the  Highway  Trust  Fund.  In 
order  to  provide  more  revenues,  certain  changes  wei'e 


254 


made  by  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1959,  in- 
cluding an  increase  in  the  motor- fuel  tax  from  3  to  4 
cents  a  gallon. 

The  creation  of  the  Highway  Trust  Fund  resulted  in 
the  direction  of  the  greater  part  of  the  Federal  auto- 
motive tax  proceeds  into  that  fund  but  not  all  of 
them.  Remaining  as  General  Fund  revenues  were  the 
proceeds  of  the  10-percent  Federal  excise  tax  on  auto- 
mobiles and  motorcycles  and  the  8-percent  tax  on 
parts  and  accessories.  There  is  also  a  tax  of  6  cents 
per  gallon  on  lubricating  oil.  Since  only  about  60 
percent  of  the  lubi'icating  oil  is  estimated  to  be  con- 
sumed in  highway  vehicles,  this  tax  was  ordinarily 
not  as  closely  associated  with  motor  vehicles  and  their 
use  as  are  the  taxes  on  motor  vehicles,  tires  and  tread 
rubber,  and  motor  fuels. 

Although  nearly  all  of  the  income  of  the  Highway 
Trust  Fund  was  derived  from  excise  taxes  paid  by 
highway  users,  certain  amounts  were  derived  from 
nonhighway  sources.  The  largest  such  amounts  were 
receipts  from  taxes  paid  on  gasoline  used  in  aircraft, 
motorboats,  and  industrial  use,  but  in  this  case  2  of 
the  4  cents  per  gallon  tax,  if  claimed,  was  subject  to 
refund  to  the  taxpayer.  The  proceeds  of  the  tax  on 
tires  used  off  the  highway   (5  cents  per  pound)   was 


also  placed  in  the  Ti-ust  Fund,  as  was  the  small 
amount  of  income  obtained  from  automotive  excise 
taxes  paid  by  the  Department  of  Defense  on  behalf 
of  highway-type  vehicles  used  entirely  in  off-highway 
service.  Although  such  vehicles  were  exempt  from 
motor-fuel  taxes,  payment  of  taxes  on  the  purchase  of 
trucks,  buses,  trailers,  tires,  and  inner  tubes  was 
required. 

Because  Federal-aid  expenditures  for  highways 
were  now  directly  related  to  the  income  from  certain 
highway  user  taxes,  the  equity  of  tax  payments  in 
relation  to  benefits  and  the  highway  costs  occasioned 
by  various  types  of  vehicles  had  to  be  considered. 
The  1956  Act,  therefore,  called  for  a  highway  cost 
allocation  study  similar  to  those  conducted  by  the 
States  but  on  a  nationwide  basis  in  order  to  bring 
about  "an  equitable  distribution  of  the  tax  burden 
among  various  classes  of  persons  using  the  Federal- 
aid  highways  or  otherwise  deriving  benefit  from  such 
highways." 


U8-169  northeast  of  Paola,  Kan.,  is  a  modern  two-lane  high- 
way built  on  right-of-way  acquired  for  a  four-lane  express- 
way. A  second  pair  of  lanes  can  be  added  in  a  few  years 
when  the  traffic  volume  warrants  it. 


By  the  end  of  the  1957  fiscal  year,  approximately 
$1.5  billion  had  been  deposited  in  the  Trust  Fund,  of 
which  $3  million  came  from  interest  earned  on  in- 
vestments and  the  remainder  from  Federal  automo- 
tive excise  taxes.  From  this  total,  nearly  $966  million 
was  disbursed  for  work  on  the  Interstate  and  ABC 
programs,  but  there  was  a  balance  of  obligations  of 
apportioned  highway  funds  of  nearly  $2  billion. 

The  1956  Act  also  marked  the  first  exercise  of  Fed- 
eral limitations  on  commercial  vehicle  sizes  and 
weights.  It  established  maximum  width  and  weight 
limitations  on  the  Interstate  Highway  System  to  pro- 
tect the  Federal  investment  in  this  system  and  to 
prevent  overstressing  of  bridges  for  safety  purposes. 

Toll   Roads  and   the   Interstate  System 

Inclusion  of  toll  facilities  on  the  Interstate  System 
has  been  a  major  issue  since  the  accelerated  program 
was  authorized  in  1956.  Of  the  40,000  miles  of  high- 
ways approved  for  the  System  in  the  early  1950's, 
1,100  were  toll  facilities.  A  1955  report  by  the  Presi- 
dent's Advisory  Committee  on  a  National  Highway 
Program  indicated  that  about  5,000  miles  of  toll  roads 
planned,  being  constructed,  or  in  actual  operation  in 
23  States  would  either  parallel  or  coincide  with  the 
proposed  Interstate  Highway  System. 

The  Highway  Act  of  1956  adopted  a  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads'  recommendation  for  incorporating  toll 
roads  into  the  Interstate  Highway  System.  The  pro- 
hibition against  the  use  of  Federal  funds  for  con- 
sti'ucting  toll  facilities  was  modified  only  to  the  extent 
of  permitting  their  use  on  the  approaches  to  toll  roads, 
with  two  provisos : 

•  If  the  only  use  of  the  access  road  was  to  serve  as 
an  approach  to  a  toll  road,  the  toll  road  must  be 
made  toll  free  upon  retirement  of  the  outstanding 
debt. 

•  Satisfactory  alternate  free  routes  for  bypassing 
the  toll  sections  must  be  available. 

Seven  toll  facilities  have  received  Interstate  funds 
on  condition  that  the  tolls  be  removed  upon  retirement 
of  the  debt : 

Indiana  Toll  Road 

Northern  Illinois  Toll  Highway 

Kentucky  Turnpike* 

Maine  Turnpike 

New  York  Thi'uway 

Ohio  Turnpike 

Richmond-Petersburg  Turnpike 

Because  of  the  legal  complexities  and  contractual 
requirements  under  which  the  various  toll  facilities 
were  established,  a  feasible  means  of  freeing  those  on 
the  Interstate  Highway  System  remains  one  of  the 
paramount  unresolved  issues.  Many  of  the  toll  fa- 
cilities operating  as  part  of  the  Interstate  System 
have  outstanding  debt  secured  by  toll  I'evenues  with 
redemption  dates  beyond  the  year  2000.  In  a  number 
of  cases,  statutory  provisions  require  tolls  on  such 
facilities  to  be  collected  indefinitely,  beyond  the  time 
when  the  toll-secured  debt  is  retii'ed. 


*  Tolls    were    removed    from    the    Kentucky    Turnpike    on 
.Tune  30,  1975. 


In  some  cases,  debt  proceeds  and  revenues  related 
to  both  highway  (including  Interstate)  and  nonhigh- 
way  facilities  have  been  commingled  and  are  not 
readily  identifiable.  Toll  revenues  are  primarily  used 
for  operating  the  toll  facilities  and  retiring  the  out- 
standing indebtedness  but  are  also  used  in  some  in- 
stances for  other  public  services  (more  often  in  the 
case  of  toll  bi^idges  than  toll  roads).  Thus,  the  loss 
of  revenue  for  other  purposes  has  to  be  taken  into 
account. 

Since  1956,  the  Federal  Highway  Administration 
has  refused  to  approve  the  location  of  free  routes  on 
the  Interstate  System  in  at  least  three  cases  where 
the  routes  would  parallel  toll  facilities  determined  to 
be  adequate  for  traffic  needs  until  1975,  where  the 
financial  structure  of  the  toll  facilities  was  in  danger 
of  being  adversely  affected. 

Bond   Financing   in   the   1950's 

Toll  revenue  bond  financing  was  employed  by  29  of 
the  39  borrowing  States  during  the  decade  of  the 
1950's,  and  in  six  States — California,  Illinois,  Indiana, 
Oklahoma,  Texas,  and  Virginia — ^it  was  the  only 
major  type  of  bond  financing  used.  Although  revenue 
bond  financing  occupied  a  position  of  prominence, 
road-user  tax  bonds  and  other  limited  obligations 
evidenced  a  most  significant  increase.  The  seven 
Northern  and  Eastern  States  that  issued  $200  million 
or  more  of  general  and  limited  obligation  bonds  ac- 
counted for  nearly  two-thirds  of  all  such  bonds  issued. 

Municipal  highway  debt  showed  a  much  faster  rate 
of  growth  than  that  of  the  counties  and  other  rural 
local  governments.  If  the  debt  outstanding  at  the 
beginning  of  1950  is  assigned  a  value  of  100,  the  com- 
parative volume  of  municipal  debt  outstanding  at  the 
end  of  1960  would  be  215.5  and  rural  local  debt,  148. 
The  more  pervasive  demand  for  credit  financing  by 
the  municipalities  was  partly  caused  by  the  relatively 
greater  State  financial  assistance  to  rural  govern- 
mental units  and  also  to  the  rapid  growth  of  metro- 
politan areas  and  urban  traffic  volumes  during  the 
1950's.  General  obligation  bonds  were  the  predomi- 
nant type  of  local  issues. 

The   Public   Corporation   Device 

Although  the  device  was  not  new  even  in  the  high- 
way field,  beginning  in  the  1940's  and  continuing 
through  the  1950's,  public  corporations  (authorities) 
came  into  extensive  use.  The  features  that  distinguish 
the  authority  device  are  not  always  clear-cut.  For  ex- 
ample, a  number  of  State  highway  departments — and 
local  governments  too — directly  finance  and  operate 
toll  projects.  But  this  is  not  the  primary  function  of 
a  highway  public  works  department.  The  term 
"authority"  is  generally  reserved  for  (1)  those  in- 
strumentalities whose  primary  responsibility  is  the 
financing  of  highway  facilities  with  revenue  or  lim- 
ited obligation  bonds,  for  which  specific  revenues  are 
pledged,  and  (2)  those  that  do  not  rely  upon  general 
tax  support  or  that  themselves  have  the  power  to 
levy  taxes. 

Between  1940  and  1960,  authorities  became  an  eco- 
nomic phenomenon  of  considerable  consequence.  Dur- 
ing this  time,  45  of  them  were  created  in  the  highway 
field,  bringing  to  75  the  number  active  on  January  1, 
1961. 


266 


Of  the  19  toll  road  authorities,  17  sold  bonds 
amounting  to  $4  billion  during  the  1950's.  This 
amount  was  two-thirds  of  all  debt  incurred  by  au- 
thorities. One  of  the  two  not  included  among  these 
debt  issues  in  the  1950's — the  Turnpike  Authority  of 
Kentucky — entered  the  bond  market  in  1961  and  by 
early  1962  had  sold  $186  million  of  Turnpike  revenue 
bonds. 

The  authority  concept  flourished  because  in  most 
instances  it  proved  successful  as  (1)  a  means  of 
financing  capital  projects  so  as  not  to  conflict  with 
constitutional  limitations  upon  the  creation  of  debt; 
(2)  a  flexible  instrument  to  manage  "commercial"  or 
self-supporting  enterprises;  and  (3)  an  effective 
agency  for  administering  joint  governmental  proj- 
ects— international,  interstate,  or  intercommunity. 

Economic   Effects 

Thomas  H.  MacDonald  commented  on  the  relation- 
ship between  advances  in  highway  transportation,  on 
the  one  hand,  and  economic  growth  and  raised  stand- 
ards of  living,  on  the  other,  in  these  words : 

We  were  not  a  wealthy  Nation  when  we  began  improv- 
ing our  highways  .  .  .  but  the  roads  themselves  helped  us 
create  a  new  wealth,  in  business  and  industry  and  land 
values.  ...  So  it  was  not  our  wealth  that  made  our  high- 
ways possible.  Rather,  it  was  our  highways  that  made 
our  wealth  possible.' 

The  nature,  size,  and  composition  of  the  Nation's 
output,  the  industrial  structure  within  which  it  is 
produced,  and  the  distribution  of  the  corresponding 
income  flows,  both  geographically  and  among  the 
Nation's  families,  are  all  dependent  in  some  degree 
upon  transportation  facilities:  their  availability,  lo- 
cation, and  adequacy.  Population  mobility  could  not 
have  been  achieved  without  them. 

The  movement  of  goods  and  people  is  reflected  in 
different  ways:  the  movement  of  goods  by  truck  and 
trailer,  the  movement  of  people  by  bus  transit  and 
private  automobile,  or  the  movement  and  expansion 
of  physical  facilities  and  factories  across  the  land. 
To  the  extent  that  highways  have  aided  in  the  more 
efficient  allocation  of  resources  through  their  influence 
on  this  mobility,  they  have  changed  the  pattern  of 
land  use  and  development  in  the  United  States. 

In  the  early  1960's,  it  was  estimated  that  approxi- 
mately one  out  of  every  five  individuals  moved  to 
another  home  in  any  single  year,  and  one-third  of 
these  individuals  moved  to  a  different  county  in  re- 
sponse to  economic  and  social  opportunities.  Almost 
34  million  persons  moved  in  1960. 

The  travel  propensities  of  Americans  were,  and  are, 
reflected  in  the  number  of  mobile  homes  in  the  United 
States.  The  Mobile  Home  Manufacturer's  Associa- 
tion estimated  that  in  1958  almost  98,000  mobile  homes 
and  nearly  31,000  trailei-s  were  produced,  and  that  1.2 
million  mobile  homes  in  the  United  States  housed 
some  3.0  million  persons. 

The  emphasis  on  mobility  is  also  illustrated  by  the 
investment  of  Americans  in  motor  vehicles.  In  1961, 
motor  vehicles  numbered  more  than  76  million,  an 
increase  of  about  190  percent  over  a  30-year  period, 
during  which  population  increased  by  about  45  per- 
cent. Thus,  motor-vehicle  ownership  had  increased 
at  a  rate  more  than  four  times  that  of  population 
growth. 


Goods  Movement  by  Highway 

Truck  use  of  highways  aids  productivity  in  at  least 
two  ways:  by  expanding  market  areas  and  by  lower- 
ing distribution  costs.  In  goods  movement,  the  re- 
duction of  unit  transport  costs  is  a  direct  benefit  to 
shippers.  Whether  these  savings  are  passed  on  to  the 
consumer  or  are  partially  absorbed  by  shippers  or 
their  employees,  significant  savings  are  realized  by 
the  national  economy.  Between  1958  and  1968,  the 
ton-miles  moved  by  highway  increased  by  60  percent, 
nearly  twice  the  36  percent  increase  for  rail. 

In  1963,  panel  trucks,  station  wagons,  and  pickup 
trucks  constituted  nearly  60  percent  of  the  total  num- 
ber of  trucks  in  the  United  States  but  carried  less 
than  10  percent  of  the  tonnage.  Tractor-semitrailers, 
on  the  other  hand,  represented  only  5  percent  of  the 
number  of  trucks  but  handled  32  percent  of  the  ton- 
nage. 

Piggyback   Revived 

The  fact  that  no  single  mode  of  transportation  is 
capable  of  moving  all  kinds  of  freight  with  equal 
efficiency  suggests  that  the  roles  of  the  various  modes 
should  be  more  complementary  than  competitive  in 
many  areas.  A  system  enabling  each  mode  of  trans- 
portation to  perform  the  service  for  which  it  has  the 
greatest  inherent  advantage  would  contribute  to  more 
efficient  use  of  resources,  the  greatest  need  of  today. 
The  development  is  as  yet  in  an  early  stage,  since  the 
setting  is  highly  institutionalized  and  the  American 
transportation  industry  has  always  been  aggressively 
competitive. 

The  highway-rail  piggyback  service  that  had  been 
the  subject  of  experimentation  in  the  previous  two 
decades  had  all  but  disappeared  by  the  late  1940's. 
A  revival  of  efforts  to  inaugurate  piggyback  service 
followed  an  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  (ICC) 
ruling  in  the  New  Haven  case  in  1954  that  railroads 
could  haul  trailers  on  flat  cars  (TOFC)  under  the 
provisions  of  rail  tariffs  without  having  a  motor  car- 
rier certificate.  As  a  result,  32  railroads  offered  TOFC 
service  by  January  1,  1955.  The  number  of  TOFC/ 
COFC  (container-on-flatcar)  rail  cars  loaded  in  that 
year  was  168,000.  This  was  the  first  significant  break 
through  the  wall  of  aggressive  intermodal  competitive- 
ness that  has  characterized  the  American  transporta- 
tion industry. 

Piggyback  combines  the  flexibility  and  low  cost  of 
truck  pickup  and  delivery  and  terminal  service  with 
the  low  cost  of  rail  line-haul  operations.  Because  of 
its  significantly  lower  costs,  it  has  grown  most  rapidly 
in  the  transport  of  goods  having  a  high  value  over 
medium  and  long  distances. 

Diversion  to  rail  from  highway  freight  transpor- 
tation is  most  likely  to  occur  along  high-traffic  corri- 
dors between  major  metropolitan  centers,  and  its 
magnitude  was  not  sufficient  to  have  much  dampening 
effect  on  the  total  volume  and  growth  of  truck  traffic. 

Through  the  1950's  the  frequency  of  heavy  gross 
vehicle  loads,  especially  for  vehicles  of  50,000  pounds 
or  moi'e,  showed  a  steady,  strong  upward  trend.  From 
1950  to  1959,  the  frequency  of  trucks  in  this  weight 
class  increased  from  58  to  227  per  1,000  trucks  and 
combinations,  loaded  and  empty,  a  nearly  fourfold 
gain.    New  truck  registrations  by  weight  class  showed 


257 


Trailers  being  transported  on  flatcars. 

a  very  strong  trend  in  the  direction  of  increasing- 
frequency  of  heavier  trucks  and  decreasing  frequency 
of  medium  weight  trucks. 

Since  1955,  an  especially  heavy  public  investment 
has  been  made  in  highways,  much  of  it  concentrated 
on  high-grade  intercity  highways  designed  to  carry 
large  volumes  of  heavy  truck  traffic.  Capital  outlay  for 
this  purpose  by  Federal,  State,  and  local  governments 
totaled  nearly  $136  billion  between  1955  and  1971. 

By  1970,  the  mileage  of  divided  highways  of  four 
or  more  lanes  with  partial  or  full  control  of  access 
had  increased  eightfold  since  1956,  the  first  year  when 
highways  were  so  classified.  About  80  percent  of  this 
increase  was  on  intercity  routes.  Such  controlled- 
access  highways  on  the  Federal- Aid  Primary  System 
increased  from  somewhat  over  4,000  to  nearly  41,000 
miles,  from  2  to  nearly  16  percent  of  the  total  system 
mileage. 


A  40-ton  capacity  straddle-lift  crane  transfers  containers  from 
piggyback  flatcars  to  a  highway  carrier  for  shipment  to 
destination. 


As  these  high-grade  highways  have  been  provided, 
intercity  motor  freight  transportation  has  grown 
rapidly.  Truck  ton-miles  were  89  percent  higher  in 
1971  than  in  1955.  During  the  same  period,  popula- 
tion grew  25  percent.  The  gross  national  product 
(GNP)  in  constant  dollars  was  up  69  percent  and  in- 
dustrial production,  81  percent.  The  ton-miles  ac- 
counted for  by  carriers  regulated  by  the  Interstate 
Commerce  Commission  more  than  doubled  from  1955 
to  1970,  compared  with  a  73  percent  increase  for  car- 
riers not  under  regulation.  The  nonregulated  carriers 
accounted  for  an  increasing  share  of  all  intercity 
freight  ton-miles,  9  percent  in  1955  compared  with  11 
percent  in  1970. 

Urban  goods  movement  is  a  major  element  in  the 
economy  of  the  United  States  and  especially  in  the 
urban  economies.  Practically  all  freight  moving  in 
rural  areas  either  originates  or  terminates  within 
urban  areas.  Moreover,  urban  areas  are  the  points  of 
meeting  between  carriers  of  different  sizes,  between 
regulated  and  nonregulated  carriers,  and  between 
different  modes  of  transportation. 

The  movement  of  goods  in  urban  areas  is  performed 
primarily  by  trucks,  and  truck  travel  in  these  areas 
increased  during  the  1960's  even  more  than  passenger 
car  travel:  80  compared  with  74  percent.  A  1965 
study  of  the  tri-State  area  comprising  New  York 
City,  New  Jersey,  and  Connecticut  indicated  that 
trucks  moved  over  75  percent  of  the  tonnage  and 
accounted  for  97  percent  of  the  value  of  freight 
moved. 

Trucking  and   Other  Modes 

In  the  intercity  freight  market,  significant  impedi- 
ments to  free  market  forces  are  at  work  determining 
the  relative  shares  taken  by  each  transportation  mode. 
Airlines  and  railroads  in  particular  are  subject  to 
more  pervasive  and  stringent  economic  regulations 
than  trucking.  In  1970,  only  about  41  percent  of 
truck  and  7  percent  of  water  ton-miles  were  regulated. 

Nationwide  data  for  1970  indicate  that  truck  freight 
expenditures  were  almost  evenly  divided  between 
local  haul  (49.4  percent)  and  intercity  haul  (50.6 
percent).  The  intercity  hauls  usually  terminate  in 
urban  areas  and  become  part  of  the  urban  traffic. 

Trucks  haul  primarily  commodities  of  medium 
value,  but  compete  strongly  with  railroads  and  water 
carriers  for  the  high  value  ($1,000  per  ton)  less-than- 
truck-load  business.  Trucks  dominate  when  hauls  are 
less  than  400  miles.  Yet  for  individual  commodities, 
the  median  lengths  of  haul  by  rail  and  truck  are 
rather  close. 

In  1970,  the  Nation's  estimated  total  transportation 
expenditure  amounted  to  over  $181  billion,  97  percent 
of  which  was  spent  on  domestic  transportation. 
Highway-oriented  expenditures  accounted  for  82  per- 
cent. 

The  dominance  of  highway-oriented  modes  becomes 
even  more  evident  in  view  of  the  fact  that  1970  ex- 
penditures on  intercity  freight  moved  by  truck  ($20 
billion)  were  greater  than  those  for  the  rail,  air, 
water,  and  pipeline  modes  combined.  Highway  pas- 
senger travel  accounted  for  42  percent  of  total  na- 
tional transportation  expenditures. 


258 


The  concept  of  "gross  product  originating"  (GPO) 
is  a  useful  one  for  measuring  the  amount  of  gross 
national  product  (GNP)  accounted  for  by  transpor- 
tation. The  GNP  equals  the  sum  of  GPO  across  all 
sectors  of  the  economy.  For  transportation,  the  GPO 
refers  to  the  value  added  by  transportation  service. 

The  estimates  for  gross  product  originating  in 
transportation  show  a  decline  to  8.9  percent  of  gross 
national  product  in  1970  from  9.1  percent  in  1965,  but 
the  sector  changes  have  not  been  uniform.  For  ex- 
ample, value  added  by  commercial  airlines  increased 
by  nearly  84  percent  compared  with  7  percent  for 
intercity  buses.  Value  added  by  railroads  increased 
by  less  than  half  of  1  percent,  whereas  trucking  in- 
creased by  a  little  over  10  percent. 

Commercial  trucking  accounted  for  about  13  per- 
cent of  the  total  value  added  by  transportation  in 
1970.  Private  trucking  in  freight  accounted  for  17 
percent,  and  nonfi'eight  private  trucking  for  27  per- 
cent. Value  added  by  railroads  declined  from  almost 
12  percent  to  10  percent  of  the  total  transportation 
GPO. 

In  1971,  the  railroads  still  remained  the  principal 
intercity  freight  carriers,  but  their  revenue  position 
declined  because  of  the  loss  of  much  productive  traffic 
to  other  modes  of  transportation.  The  trucks  and  the 
airlines  had  captured  much  of  their  highest  class 
traffic,  and  the  pipelines  were  carrying  a  large  pro- 
portion of  the  movement  of  petroleum  products. 

The  Motor  Vehicle  Manufacturers  Association  esti- 
mated that  in  1974  trucks  were  hauling  the  following 
percentages  of  important  products : 


Fruits  and  vegetables 

73 

Cattle  and  calves 

to  major 

99 

Hogs 

markets 

100 

Sheep  and  lambs 

98 

Sand  and  gravel 

92 

Crushed  stone 

75 

Portland  cement 

83 

Motor  vehicles 

48 

Kefined  petroleum  pro 

ducts 

39 

The  ICC-regulated  general  freight  haulers  are  the 
most  conspicuous  of  all  for-hire  carriers  seen  on  the 
highway's  because  of  the  large  number  of  vehicles  and 
combinations  used,  mainly  van  trucks  with  van  trail- 
ers and  tractors  with  semitrailers  and  full  trailers. 
Their  cargos  consist  principally  of  general  merchan- 
dise, such  as  food  products  and  manufactured  articles. 

The  operation  for  small  shipments  is  similar  in 
many  respects  to  former  railroad  less-than-carload 
(LCL)  freight  handling.  The  shipments  are  picked 
up  directly  from  the  shipper,  taken  to  a  freight 
terminal  for  consolidation  with  other  shipments  going 
in  the  same  direction,  and  loaded  into  over-the-road 
vehicles  for  the  journey  to  the  destination  terminal, 
where  the  procedure  is  reversed. 

Financing   Highways   in   the   1960's  and    1970's 

By  1961,  the  principal  change  in  highway  revenues 
was  the  infusion  of  much  higher  levels  of  Federal 
aid,  mostl}'  drawn  from  imposts  on  highway  users  as 
a  result  of  the  1956  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act.  The 
Act  of  1961  continued  the  temporary  increase  in  the 


A  container  being  loaded  aboard  a  ship. 


An  industry-government  project  called  INTACT  (intermodal 
air  cargo  test)  demonstrates  the  loading  and  unloading  of 
intermodal  containers  on  an  Air  Force  Galaxy  (C-5A). 

Federal  tax  on  motor  fuels  from  3  to  4  cents  that  was 
enacted  in  1959  and  due  to  expire  on  June  20,  1961. 
The  rate  was  continued  to  the  expected  year  of  com- 
pletion of  the  Interstate  System  in  1972  and  since  has 
been  further  extended. 

Net  Federal  aid  to  other  governments  of  $2.7  billion 
in  1961  more  than  trebled  the  1956  figure,  and  it  was 
increased  to  $4.9  billion  in  1973.  All  Federal  revenue 
applied  to  highways  rose  from  $1  billion  in  1956  to 
$7.4  billion  in  1973. 

A   demonstration  at  Colorado  Springs,   Colo.,  of  a  helicopter 
lifting  an  intermodal  container. 


259 


State  current  income  used  for  roads,  most  of  which 
came  from  highway-user  taxes,  exceeded  $5.5  billion 
in  1961  and  $13  billion  in  1973,  the  1973  figure  being 
nearly  21^  times  the  1956  level.  The  net  Federal  aid 
received  by  the  States  rose  dramatically  from  $776 
million  in  1956  to  $4.5  billion  in  1973. 

Income  of  local  governments  from  all  sources  to  be 
used  for  roads  and  streets  grew  rapidly  after  the  end 
of  World  War  II,  relatively  more  rapidly  in  urban 
than  in  rural  areas.  Net  aid  to  rural  governments, 
largely  from  the  State  and  Federal  Governments,  in- 
creased from  $675  million  in  1956  to  $844  million  in 
1961  to  $1.9  billion  in  1973.  The  amounts  received  by 
urban  governments  were  at  a  lower  level  in  1956  ($258 
million),  and  rose  to  $357  million  in  1961  and  almost 
$1.4  billion  in  1973,  an  increase  over  the  entire  period 
of  371  percent  compared  with  181  percent  for  rural 
units.  Revenues  from  local  sources  also  made  signifi- 
cant gains  as  property  tax  yields  grew  and  larger 
sums  were  made  available  from  general  funds.  Cur- 
rent revenues  of  the  rural  units  available  for  roads 
rose  from  $647  million  in  1956  to  $1.5  billion  in  1973. 
For  urban  governments,  the  comparable  figures  were 
$881  million  in  1956  and  $2.7  billion  in  1973. 

Expenditures  for  highway  capital  improvements 
responded  to  the  growth  in  available  revenues.  State 
capital  outlay  (including  that  for  toll  facilities)  went 
up  from  $3.9  to  $9.5  billion  between  1956  and  1973. 
Before  1965,  most  of  the  increase  after  passage  of  the 
Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956  is  attributable  to 
the  Interstate  System.  By  1965,  Interstate  invest- 
ments stabilized,  while  non-Interstate  expenditures 
increased  from  $3.3  billion  to  $5.6  billion. 

Rural  and  urban  local  governments  spent  nearly 
the  same  amount  ($1  billion)  for  capital  improve- 
ments in  1973.  In  the  case  of  the  rural  units,  this 
expenditure  represented  a  125-percent  increase  over 
1956,  and  in  the  case  of  the  urban  units,  a  90-percent 
increase. 

Historically,  capital  costs  have  represented  the  ma- 
jor share  of  total  annual  disbursements  for  highways 
by  all  levels  of  government.  But  with  increasing 
noncapital  demands  due  to  such  related  requirements 
as  providing  for  public  safety,  highway  and  vehicle 
law  enforcement,  higher  interest  on  indebtedness,  and 
increasing  requirements  for  maintenance  and  opera- 
tion of  the  highway  plant,  by  1975  the  proportion  of 
public  funds  available  for  capital  improvements  had 
declined  to  less  than  one-half  of  the  dollars  spent. 

Inflation  has  had  a  serious  effect  on  the  Nation's 
economy.  The  cost  of  highway  construction  has 
doubled  since  1967,  and  the  miles  of  highway  put  in 
place  per  dollar  have  shrunk  considerably.  Total 
capital  outlay  of  $13  billion  expended  in  1974  is  only 
$6.5  billion  in  terms  of  constant  dollars  (1967  base), 
a  figure  approximately  equal  to  the  constant-dollar 
value  for  1957. 

The  Nation's  total  expenditures  for  highways  have 
exhibited  a  pattern  of  steady  growth  since  the  end  of 
World  War  II,  growing  from  $1.7  billion  in  1945  to 
$4.5  billion  in  1950,  $10.8  billion  in  1960,  and  $20.8 
billion  in  1970.  This  rate  of  growth  was  36  percent 
faster  than  that  of  the  gross  national  product  (GNP). 
For  1975,  total  highway  expenditures  were  nearly  $26 
billion. 


But,  if  the  actual  amounts  are  corrected  to  remove 
the  effects  of  inflation,  the  recent  picture  of  highway 
finance  looks  less  optimistic.  In  terms  of  1967  dollars, 
total  disbursements  for  highways  by  all  levels  of 
government  peaked  in  1971  and  have  since  been  de- 
clining. Wliereas  current-dollar  disbursements  in 
1971  were  more  than  twice  those  of  1960,  the  increase 
in  terms  of  constant  dollars  was  only  about  one-third. 
Total  disbursements  per  registered  vehicle  have  de- 
clined from  $199  in  1971  to  an  estimated  $189  in 
1974.  In  terms  of  constant  dollars,  the  decline  began 
in  1969  at  $161  per  registered  vehicle  and  dropped  to 
an  estimated  $110  in  1974. 

Related  to  vehicle-miles  of  travel,  disbursements 
have  fluctuated  since  1971  and  are  now  on  the  rise. 
But  expressed  in  constant  dollars,  total  disbursements 
per  million  vehicle-miles  of  travel  have  been  declining 
since  1961.  Thus,  although  the  amount  of  travel  has 
greatly  increased,  expenditures  for  highway  facilities 
related  to  this  travel  have  declined. 

Before  World  War  II,  highway  construction  rep- 
resented a  more  significant  share  of  the  gross  national 
product  than  it  has  at  any  time  since.  In  1939  it 
equalled  1.72  percent  of  that  year's  GNP.  The  high- 
est postwar  percentage  was  in  1958,  when  it  reached 
1.42.  For  5-year  periods,  the  average  percentages  of 
GNP  are  as  follows : 

1945-1950 0.58 

1950-1955 0.92 

1955-1960 1.27 

1960-1965 1.28 

1965-1970 1.19 

The  1974  highway  share  of  GNP  (0.85)  was  less  than 
half  that  of  1939. 

It  would  appear  that,  while  the  demand  for  high- 
way services  has  been  accelerating,  it  has  not  been 
accompanied  by  a  corresponding  increase  either  in 
the  supply  or  in  the  quality  of  highway  facilities. 
The  demand  for  travel,  which  has  grown  in  recent 
years,  is  expected  to  increase  in  the  future,  although 
at  a  reduced  rate,  despite  such  constraints  as  increased 
fuel  costs,  fuel  conservation  efforts,  and  modal  shifts 
from  automobile  travel  to  various  forms  of  mass 
transit.  It  is  possible  that  the  performance  of  the 
highway  system,  which  is  directly  affected  by  invest- 
ment, not  only  is  not  keeping  pace  with  demand  but 
is  actually  deteriorating. 

Broadening   the   Highway  Program 

The  surge  of  statewide  planning  activity  that  be- 
gan at  the  close  of  World  War  II  included  planning 
for  urban  areas,  and  the  rate  of  roadbuilding  in  these 
areas  was  greatly  accelerated  after  passage  of  the 
1956  Act.  The  development  of  urban  transportation 
from  1960  to  1970  was  marked  by  a  28-percent  in- 
crease in  municipal  highway  mileage. 

Despite  the  stepped-up  population  movement  to  the 
suburbs  that  occurred  in  the  postwar  period,  the  cen- 
tral cities  of  the  larger  metropolitan  areas  were  still 
considered  to  be  the  focal  points  of  the  local  trans- 
portation network,  and  growing  commuting  and  other 
traffic  was  expected  to  pour  more  and  more  vehicles 
into  these  areas.  As  increased  long-distance  com- 
muting into,  out  of,  and  through  central  cities  pro- 
duced heavier  automobile  traffic,  the  circular  action- 


260 


TOTAL  RECEIPTS  FOR  HIGHWAYS,  BY  GOVERNMENTAL  UNITS 

1921-1974 


FIGURE  13 


25 


□  FEDERAL  GOVERNMENT 
STATE  GOVERNMENTS 
COUNTY  GOVERNMENTS 

13  MUNICIPAL  GOVERNMENTS 


t921 


192E     1931      1936      1941      1946      1951      1956      1961      1966     1971      1976 


reaction  of  declining  transit  patronage  and  increased 
fares  intensified  the  downward  spiral  of  those  utilities 
toward  insoh'ency. 

Although  circumferential  and  bypass  highways  were 
expected  to  drain  off  traffic  that  did  not  need  to  go 
downtown,  still  large-scale  highway  building  was 
thought  to  be  required,  and  plans  for  it  generated 
little  opposition  at  first.  Businessmen  and  city  offi- 
cials generally  encouraged  automobile  commuting  to 
in-town  employment  and  did  not  oppose  providing 
daytime  storage  space  for  the  vehicles. 

But  as  problems  of  city  street  congestion  led  to 
greater  penetration  of  rural  liighways  into  the  heart 
of  central  cities,  more  people  were  affected  by  the  tak- 
ing of  right-of-way  and  by  the  construction  and  opera- 


tion of  highways.  Organized  opposition  to  the  urban 
highway  improvement  program  became  a  major  factor 
in  determining  the  course  of  Federal  and  State  high- 
way transportation  legislation  in  the  1960's. 

A  new  political  activism  characterized  this  period 
that  expressed  new  needs  and  priorities  that  were 
reflected  in  Federal  legislation  between  1962  and  1970 
and  that  broadened  the  role  of  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment in  the  administration  of  highway  construction 
programs.  The  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  of  1962 
provided  Federal  reimbursement  to  those  States  that 
could  pay  limited  relocation  allowances  to  persons 
and  businesses  affected  by  highway  construction,  and 
the  1968  Act  provided  all  relocatees  with  Federal 
relocation  payments. 


TOTAL  DISBURSEMENTS  FOR  HIGHWAYS,  BY  FUNCTION 
1921-1974 


FIGURE  12 


30 


25 


20  — 


DEBT  RETIREMENT 

ADMINISTRATION,  HIGHWAY  PATROL,  AND  BONO  INTEREST 
Q     MAINTENANCE 
^     CAPITAL  OUTLAY 


1921      1926     1931     1936     1941     1946     1951      1956     1961     1966     1971      1976 


261 


Two  new  programs  were  added  in  1965.  One  was 
designed  to  aid  the  States  in  the  Appalachian  region 
in  building  main  and  feeder  roads  to  assist  in  their 
economic  development.  The  second  was  a  program 
of  landscaping  and  scenic  enhancement  of  the  Federal- 
aid  highway  systems,  including  the  control  of  outdoor 
advertising  and  junkyards. 

A  major  development  in  1966  was  the  enactment  by 
the  Congress  of  legislation  embracing  broad  new 
highway  and  motor  vehicle  safety  programs.  Funds 
for  these  programs  were  to  be  appropriated  from 
general  funds  rather  than  from  the  Highway  Trust 
Fund. 

The  1968  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  established 
programs  known  as  TOPICS  for  improving  highway 
traffic  operations  in  urban  areas.  Specific  funds  were 
authorized  to  provide  for  making  better  use  of  exist- 
ing highways  through  the  application  of  traffic  engi- 
neering techniques.  The  Act  also  created  a  right-of- 
way  revolving  fund  and  authorized  additional  funds 
for  the  Federal-Aid  Primary  and  Secondary  System 
in  rural  areas.  A  program  was  authorized  for  fringe 
parking  area  demonstration,  allowing  the  use  of  Fed- 
eral-aid funds  to  construct  parking  facilities  adjacent 
to  the  rights-of-way  of  Federal-aid  highways.  Such 
parking  projects  became  a  continuing  part  of  the 
regular  Federal-aid  highway  program  in  1970. 

The  1970  Highway  Act  provided  for  the  establish- 
ment of  a  Federal- Aid  Urban  System  (the  D  system) 
in  the  "urbanized"  areas  (a  census-defined  metropoli- 
tan area  for  statistical  purposes).  The  Act  changed 
the  Federal  share  of  ABC  funds  from  50  to  70  per- 
cent, effective  July  1,  1973,  and  provided  that  two- 
thirds  of  the  funds  authorized  for  safety  programs 
for  the  1972  and  subsequent  fiscal  years  be  appropri- 
ated from  the  Trust  Fund.  The  funds  for  all  of  these 
programs  formerly  came  from  general  funds.  The 
1970  Act  also  authorized  a  program  to  demonstrate 
that  highways  can  aid  in  the  development  of  "growth 
centers,"  areas  with  a  high  potential  for  economic 
growth.  This  program  was  changed  by  the  1973  Act 
to  become  a  regular  part  of  the  Federal-aid  highway 
program. 

The  1973  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  introduced 
several  changes  in  highway  policy : 

•  Highway  Trust  Fund  apportionments  could  be 
used  for  public  mass  transportation  systems,  in- 
cluding the  purchase  of  buses,  in  1975  and  for 
rail  transit  facilities  in  1976. 

•  Bicycle  facilities  and  pedestrian  walkways  could 
be  financed  from  Federal-aid  funds. 

•  The  Trust  Fund  could  be  used  to  pay  the  cost  of 
parkways  located  on  a  Federal-aid  system. 

•  The  Trust  Fund  would  henceforth  support  the 
entire  cost  of  highway  and  motor  vehicle  safety 
programs. 

During  1972,  no  apportionment  of  Federal-aid 
highway  funds  was  made,  because  the  Federal  Aid 
Highway  Act  was  not  passed  until  1973.  But  during 
1973,  $4,743  million  of  Federal-aid  funds  were  ap- 
portioned to  the  States  for  fiscal  year  1974  as  follows : 


Afp  ortionment 

(Millions  of 

Dollars) 

System 

2,544 

Interstate 

671 
376 

752 

Rural  primary 
Rural  secondary 
Urban 

Urban  extensions: 

280 
97 
23 

Primary  and  secondary  systems 
Priority  primary  routes 
Metropolitan  planning  funds 

A  new  program  for  constructing,  reconstructing, 
and  improving  roads  that  are  not  located  on  any 
Federal-aid  system  was  launched  under  provisions  of 
the  Federal  Aid  Highway  Amendments  of  1974.  The 
$200  million  made  available  for  this  program  was 
distributed  according  to  a  formula  based  on  such 
factors  as  land  area,  rural  population,  and  off-system 
road  mileage. 

Since  the  mid-1960's,  the  Office  of  Management  and 
Budget  of  the  Executive  Office  of  the  President  has 
deferred  portions  of  Federal  aid  for  highways,  which 
may  have  constrained  the  total  program  level.  But 
there  is  no  conclusive  evidence  that  the  States  would 
have  maintained  their  100-percent-State  programs  at 
the  recorded  levels  during  this  period  if  full  Federal- 
aid  authorizations  were  available. 

On  February  11,  1975,  President  Ford  released  an 
additional  $2  billion  of  impounded  Federal-aid  funds 
for  the  1975  fiscal  year  in  order  to  stimulate  employ- 
ment. In  April  of  the  same  year.  Congress  ended 
the  deferral  of  the  remaining  funds,  permitting  State 
obligation  of  greater  sums  from  the  unobligated  bal- 
ances of  their  apportioned  and  allocated  funds. 

Further,  Congress  passed  and  the  President  ap- 
proved a  measure  allowing  the  temporary  suspension 
of  the  Federal-aid  matching  requirement  and  removed 
restrictions  on  the  transferability  among  non-Inter- 
state program  funds.  These  measures  resulted  in  the 
obligation  of  $7.6  billion  of  Federal-aid  highway 
funds  in  fiscal  year  1975,  the  highest  level  of  obliga- 
tion in  the  history  of  the  Federal-aid  program. 

Indicators  of  Highway  Growth — the  Long  Term 

The  use  of  the  roads  as  indicated  by  vehicle  regis- 
trations, fuel  consumption,  and  travel  has  increased 
substantially  in  the  last  half  century.  Registered 
motor  vehicles  totaled  3.6  million  in  1916  and  about 
125  million — one  vehicle  for  every  1.7  inhabitants — in 
1973.  Put  another  way,  the  1973  total  represents  an 
average  of  nearly  two  vehicles  for  every  one  of  the 
Nation's  67  million  households.  The  increase  in  ve- 
hicle registrations  has  far  outstripped  the  rate  of 
population  growth. 

In  1916  approximately  3  million  automobiles  and 
250,000  trucks  and  buses  were  registered,  i.e.,  about 
14  passenger  cars  to  every  truck  or  bus.  In  1973,  the 
registrations  had  risen  to  102  million  automobiles,  23 
million  trucks,  and  426,000  buses.  This  is  equivalent 
to  about  4  automobiles  for  every  truck  and  240  for 
each  bus.  Preliminary  data  for  1974  indicate  that  the 
number  of  registered  vehicles  has  reached  nearly  130 
million,  with  passenger  cars  about  105  million,  trucks 
numbering  about  25  million,  and  buses  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  445,000. 


262 


It  should  be  noted  that  the  number  of  motor  ve- 
hicles registered  is  not  the  same  as  the  number  in 
service  at  any  given  time,  but  it  is  a  reasonable  ap- 
proximation. Registrations  tend  to  exceed  the  number 
of  vehicles  in  service  for  a  number  of  reasons : 

•  Registrations  are  cumulative  throughout  the  year. 
Vehicles  registered  in  January  may  not  be  in 
service  in  December. 

•  Vehicles  moved  by  the  owner  from  one  State  to 
another  may  be  registered  in  both  States  during 
that  year. 

•  Vehicles  scrapped  during  the  year  are  not  de- 
leted from  the  registrations  of  that  year. 

Estimating  the  number  of  vehicles  in  use  is  becom- 
ing increasingly  difficult  as  the  States  change  from  a 
fixed  date  beginning  the  registration  j^ear  to  some 
anniversary  month,  such  as  the  birth  month  of  the 
owner  or  the  month  of  purchase  of  the  vehicle. 

Beginning  with  1936,  nationwide  estimates  of  motor 
vehicle  travel,  classified  by  vehicle  type  and  road 
system,  became  available  for  the  first  time.  Over  the 
37-year  period  between  that  year  and  1973,  no  signifi- 
cant increase  in  the  iise  of  passenger  cars  is  indicated 
by  the  estimates  of  average  annual  travel.  But  when 
the  density  of  automobile  ownership  is  considered, 
multicar  ownership  is  shown  to  have  kept  average 
travel  per  vehicle  down,  while  average  travel  per 
household  increased  significantly.  From  5.25  persons 
per  vehicle  in  1936  (0.7  passenger  cars  per  household), 
the  density  of  ownership  increased  to  only  2.06  per- 
sons per  vehicle  (1.5  automobiles  per  household)  in 
1973.  AMiile  fuel  consumption  per  automobile  in- 
creased by  about  one-third  during  the  period,  fuel 
consumption  per  household  nearly  tripled. 

In  1973,  the  average  annual  travel  of  an  individual 
truck  was  11,500  miles,  a  small  increase  over  1936, 
when  a  truck  averaged  10,000  miles.  Single-unit 
trucks  averaged  9,900  miles  per  truck  per  year,  while 
the  average  for  combinations  was  nearly  47,000  miles. 

Between  1916  and  1973,  trends  in  total  motor  fuel 
consumption  and  travel  have  roughly  paralleled  each 
other,  and,  as  might  be  expected,  both  have  related 
rather  closely  to  the  trend  in  motor  vehicle  registra- 
tions. By  1973,  annual  fuel  consumption  per  vehicle 
had  risen  to  only  about  890  gallons  from  750  in  1946 
and  800  in  1966. 

The  upward  creep  of  average  automobile  operating 
speed  that  took  place  between  1947  and  1972  has  im- 
plications for  fuel  consumption  and  is  indicative  of 
the  improvement  in  highways  that  has  occurred  over 
the  years.  Speed  increased  from  45  to  62  miles  per 
hour  on  main  rural  highways.  Stated  another  way, 
only  30  percent  of  the  passenger  cars  observed  in 
1945  were  traveling  more  than  50  miles  an  hour,  but 
by  1972  nearly  90  percent  were  doing  so. 

Today,  after  almost  60  years'  experience  with  Fed- 
eral aid  to  and  State  management  of  major  highways, 
primary  responsibility  for  about  75  percent  of  the 
Nation's  highway  mileage  rests  with  about  35,000 
units  of  government  below  the  level  of  the  States 
(excluding  the  District  of  Columbia).  But,  with 
some  notable  exceptions,  the  roads  under  county  and 
local  jurisdiction,  for  the  most  part,  carry  relatively 


light   traffic   accounting   for   a   small   portion   of   the 
total. 

In  contrast,  the  36,300  miles  of  the  Interstate  Sys- 
tem open  to  traffic  on  January  1,  1975,  constituting 
less  than  1  percent  of  the  total  miles  of  roads  and 
streets,  are  carrying  about  16  percent  of  the  nation- 
wide total  highway  traffic.  Adding  the  6,200  miles 
of  highway  carrying  the  traffic  where  the  System  is 
incomplete,  the  percentage  of  total  traffic  carried  by 
Interstate  routes  is  19  percent  of  the  total  carried  by 
all  highways. 

The  coming  of  the  Interstate  Highway  System  took 
the  steam  out  of  the  toll  road  movement,  and  today 
most  of  the  major  toll  roads  carry  Interstate  routes 
over  a  considerable  portion  of  their  length,  though 
Federal  Interstate  funds  were  not  used  to  build  the 
sections  for  which  tolls  are  charged.  There  were  56 
public  toll  roads  in  operation  in  1973,  with  net  toll 
mileage  of  a  little  over  4,000  miles. 

Over  the  57-year  period  between  1916  and  1973, 
road  and  street  mileages  in  the  contiguous  United 
States  increased  nearly  36  percent,  from  approxi- 
mately 3  million  to  a  little  less  than  4  million.  While 
this  increase  can  be  attributed  partly  to  improved 
mileage  inventories,  most  of  it  came  from  new  con- 
struction. 

Changes  in  rural  road  mileage,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  municipal  mileage,  on  the  other,  resulted  from 
transfers  of  rural  roads  to  urban,  as  cities  grew  and 
the  Nation's  population  became  predominantly  urban. 
^Vhereas  rural  road  mileage  increased  by  about  29 
percent  (700,000  miles),  municipal  mileage  grew  by 
about  80  percent  (300,000  miles). 

With  all  the  participating  units  of  government 
drawing  as  heavily  as  possible  upon  all  other  avail- 
able sources  of  income,  the  task  of  developing  our 
modern  highway  network  would  have  been  impossible 
had  it  not  been  for  the  ability  of  certain  govern- 
mental units  to  tap  a  lucrative  source  of  revenue — 
the  motor  vehicle.  It  is  to  this  source  of  revenue,  as 
much  as  to  any  other  single  factor,  that  the  United 
States  owes  the  extent  and  quality  of  its  highway 
systems. 

REFERENCES 

^  Early  History  in  American  Road  Building,  AASHO — The 
First  Fifty  Years,  1914-1964  (American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C.,  1965)   p.  32. 

^  C.  Hayden,  The  History  of  Federal-Aid  Highway  Legisla- 
tion (unpublished  work  in  the  Federal  Highway  Administra- 
tion) p.  4. 

'Federal  Highway  Administration,  Highway  Statistics 
Summary  to  1965  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Transportation,  Washington, 
D.C.,  1967),  p.  23. 

*  W.  Evans,  A  Legislative,  Program  Eligibility  and  Policy 
Review  of  Federal  Highway  Programs,  unpul)lished  part  of  a 
support  study  for  the  1974  NATIONAL  HIGHWAY  NEEDS 
STUDY  (Federal  Highway  Administration,  Washington,  D.C., 
1973),  p.  6. 

"  Federal  Highway  Administration,  Press  Release,  Table 
MF-221  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Transportation,  Washington,  D.C.) 
Jan.  13,  1976. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Highway  and  Economic  and 
Social  Change  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce,  Washington,  D.C, 
1964),  p.  1. 


263 


Planning 


What  Do   We  Mean — Highway  Planning? 

Everyone  plans.  One  may  spend  hours  and  days 
planning  a  vacation  trip  abroad.  A  housewife  plans 
constantly — from  the  trip  to  the  store  for  the  week's 
supply  of  groceries  to  the  time  to  put  the  vegetables 
on  the  stove  for  dinner.  Engineers  locate  and  design 
a  section  of  road  and  portray  their  results  by  a  con- 
struction plan.  And  perhaps  the  ultimate  example 
is  the  successful  result  of  planning  to  land  a  man  on 
the  moon  and  return  him  to  earth. 

Highway  planning,  however,  is  different.  In  most 
cases  the  individual,  or  even  a  huge  organization  such 
as  the  National  Aeronautical  and  Space  Administra- 
tion, is  planning  something  he  or  it  expects  to  do. 
The  ultimate  result  of  highway'  planning,  more  re- 
cently broadened  to  be  called  highway  transportation 
planning,  is  the  development  of  a  highway  system  to 
provide  for  the  movement  of  vehicles — vehicles  not 
under  the  control  of  the  planner  but  of  the  great 
number  of  individuals  who  drive  them.  Highway 
transportation  is  mostly,  up  to  96  percent,  people 
driving  themselves  or  transporting  their  goods  in 
their  own  vehicles.  The  highway  planner  plans  a 
system  and  the  engineer  builds  and  maintains  it,  but 
they  do  not  provide  highway  transportation.  A  rail- 
road company  provides  transportation;  an  airline 
provides  transportation;  a  transit  company  provides 
transportation;  but  the  highway  agency  provides  for 
transportation. 


From  another  viewpoint,  the  question  sometimes  is 
raised  as  to  whether  we  in  the  United  States  do  any 
highway  planning.  It  is  reasoned  that  there  were 
over  2,350,000  miles  of  rural  roads  and  city  streets  at 
the  time  of  the  advent  of  the  automobile,  so  what  we 
have  been  doing  for  some  75  years  is  highway  im- 
provement planning.  Literally  that  is  nearly  true, 
for  most  of  the  mileage  added  has  been  in  the  expand- 
ing suburban  areas,  with  little  planning,  at  least  by 
highway  planners,  and  most  of  the  planning  has  been 
directed  toward  upgrading  the  early  roads  on  or  close 
to  their  original  locations.  Notable  exceptions  are 
seen  in  the  Interstate  System,  which  surely  is  a  system 
planned  by  highway  planners  for  highway  transpor- 
tation, and  in  the  great  undeveloped  State  of  Alaska 
where  new  routes  are  being  laid  out  to  permit  devel- 
opment of  its  natural  resources.  So  compared  to  the 
many  underdeveloped  countries,  the  United  States  has 
in  effect  been  doing  not  highway  planning,  but  high- 
way improvement  planning. 

Even  in  view  of  these  qualifications,  however,  for 
the  purposes  of  this  chapter,  the  term  highway  plan- 
ning will  be  used  in  a  generic  sense  and  will  include 
whatever  is  done  by  the  higlnvay  planners  in  facili- 
tating highway  transportation,  coordinating  it  with 
other  modes,  and  helping  make  it  compatible  with 
social  and  community  values,  whether  the  community 
be  the  smallest  town,  a  metropolitan  area,  or  the 
entire  Nation. 


264 


m^^ 


The  coordination  between  the  California  DOT  and  the  Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  District, 

from  planning  through  construction  of  over  11  miles  of  rail  and  highway  facilities, 

saved  the  taxpayers  millions  of  dollars,  caused  a  minimum  of  disruption  to  the 

communities,  and  made  the  best  use  of  the  land  by  evaluating  shared 

social  values  and  esthetics  for  the  benefit  of  all. 


Early  Highway  Planning 

This  discussion  of  highway  planning  will  be  de- 
voted primarily  to  the  period  beginning  in  1934,  the 
year  of  the  passage  of  the  Hayden-Cartwright  Act 
(Senator  Carl  Hayden  of  Arizona  and  Representative 
Wilburn  Cartwright  of  Oklahoma)  that  made  high- 
way planning  possible  on  an  organized  and  formal 
basis.  Yet  planning  obviously  was  an  essential  fea- 
ture of  highway  develoi:)ment  even  in  colonial  days. 

Before  the  railroads  put  a  temporary  end  to  high- 
way development,  roads  were  definitely  planned  to 
meet  such  specific  needs  as  connecting  principal  cities 
and  opening  new  territory  to  development  or  for 
military  purposes.  The  birth  of  highway  transpor- 
tation as  we  know  it  probably  can  be  dated  as  1893, 
when  J.  Frank  Duryea  first  drove  his  gasoline  buggy 
on  the  streets  of  Springfield,  ^Massachusetts.  Roads 
until  then  were  being  improved  generally  in  short 
sections  radiating  from  towns  and  railroad  shipping 


points  and  were  primarily  for  the  movement  of  farm 
products.  The  availability  of  the  automobile,  first 
usable  only  in  towns  and  cities  and  as  "pleasure" 
vehicles,  soon  brought  demands  for  improvement  of 
larger  sections,  and  esi^ecially  in  the  eastern  States, 
connecting  the  towns  with  one  another. 

It  was  this  demand  for  connecting  or  trunk  roads 
that  brought  about  the  first  real  differences  among 
highway  users,  and  what  might  be  called  the  first 
highway  planning — whether  to  concentrate  on  the 
trunk  roads  or  continue  to  extend  the  radius  of  the 
farm-to-market  roads.  The  question  was  settled  early 
in  the  small  eastern  States  in  favor  of  the  former 
rather  than  the  farmer.  In  1903  Rhode  Island 
adopted  a  definite  system  of  State  highways  for  con- 
struction by  the  State  Board  of  Public  Roads.  A 
similar  proposal  in  Connecticut  in  1901  was  finally 
enacted  in  1913,  while  Maryland  in  1908  adopted  an 
intercounty  seat  trunkline  system,  the  first  to  be  placed 
under  State  control  for  both  construction  and  main- 


265 


tenance.  Similar  actions  in  the  central  and  western 
States  followed,  only  slowly,  however,  where  towns 
were  farther  apart  and  service  to  farms  generally 
more  important  than  tnmkline  roads. 

Again,  as  noted  in  earlier  chapters,  pressure  devel- 
oping from  farm  groups,  city  "pleasure"  vehicle  own- 
ers and,  almost  strangely,  the  League  of  American 
A^Hieelman  led  the  Congress  in  1916  to  authorize  funds 
for  the  improvement  of  rural  post  roads. 

Two  outstanding  features  of  the  1916  Federal  Aid 
Road  Act  were  the  basis  of  apportionment  of  Federal 
funds  and  the  requirement  that  the  States  must  have 
or  establish  a  State  highway  department  adequately 
equipped  to  receive  and  administer  the  funds.  The 
apportionment  formula  prevented  any  "pork  barrel" 
distribution  of  funds  by  the  Federal  agency  (but  not 
necessarily  at  State  level).  The  requirement  of  a 
State  agency  through  which  funds  would  be  applied 
to  road  improvement  was  with  the  intent  of  bringing 
about  the  progressive  development  of  a  connected  sys- 
tem of  roads.  These  provisions  were  included  as  a 
result  of  the  experience  of  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry 
and  several  of  the  States  that  had  already  designated 
State  highway  systems.  At  that  time,  however,  the 
Congress  was  not  ready  to  accept  as  a  requirement 
that  all  States  must  have  State  highway  systems. 

The  importance  of  the  system  concept  still  ranked 
high  in  the  thinking  of  the  Office  of  Public  Roads, 
however,  and  in  reaching  toward  this  concept,  the 
Secretary  of  Agriculture  required  all  States  to  submit 
programs  of  improvements  proposed  over  the  5  years 


of  the  original  authorization  of  Federal-aid  funds  for 
highways  and  also  to  file  with  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  a  "tentative"  system  on  which  the  improve- 
ments would  be  made.  So  to  this  small  degree,  plan- 
ning was  already  in  evidence. 

Hardly  had  the  program  gotten  underway  when 
came  World  War  I.  To  read  at  this  time  a  recitation 
of  the  effect  of  the  war  on  the  highway  program  is  to 
recall  how  well  these  same  words  could  have  been 
used  in  describing  the  effect  of  World  War  II  on  the 
highway  program  of  that  period.  In  a  speech  before 
the  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers,  Mr.  Mac- 
Donald  said:* 

The  Federal-aid  work  had  scarcely  begun,  however, 
when  the  world  war  intervened  and  practically  put  a 
stop  to  all  operations ;  and  the  war  did  a  number  of  other 
things  to  the  existing  improved  roads  which,  however 
disastrous  they  may  have  appeared  at  the  time,  have 
turned  out  to  blessings  in  disguise.  At  the  outset  the 
construction  and  maintenance  of  highways  were  declared 
to  constitute  a  non-essential  industry.  As  a  consequence 
new  construction,  except  as  required  for  the  immediate 
service  of  the  army,  was  greatly  curtailed.  Maintenance 
also  was  greatly  hampered  by  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 
the  necessary  materials  and  the  scarcity  and  high  wages 
of  labor.  At  the  same  time  there  was  released  upon 
roads  generally  inadequate  to  stand  it  an  unprecedented 
traffic  of  heavy  motor  trucks.  To  this  experience  and 
the  heavy  damage  which  followed  we  owe  the  develop- 
ment of  most  of  the  sound  principles  and  policies  which 
now  govern  the  improvement  of  highways. 


*  This  quotation  and  much  of  the  material  for  the  early 
history  of  highway  planning  are  drawn  primarily  from  papers 
of  Chief  MacDonald  and  Mr.  H.  S.  Fairbank. 


The    trucks    rolled    on,    but    the 

scarcity  of  materials  and  men 

for  maintenance   made   it   an 

impossible  task  for  these  two 

men  to  accomplish  much 

more  than  to  clear  the 

culvert  of  debris. 


266 


The  first  result  was  a  strong  reaction  against  the  use 
of  heavy  motor  trucks.  There  were  large  numbers  of 
people  who,  forgetting  that  a  road  is  of  service  only  in 
so  far  as  it  accommodates  the  need  for  economical 
transportation,  demand  that  the  manufacture  and  op- 
eration of  vehicles  too  heavy  for  the  existing  roads  be 
prohibited.  As  few  of  the  roads  were  designed  to  carry 
motor  truck  traffic,  to  have  taken  this  course  would  have 
amounted  to  the  throttling  of  a  new  development  in 
transportation  before  it  had  a  chance  to  demonstrate  its 
utility,  and  it  was  rightly  opposed  with  great  energy  by 
the  manufacturers  of  motor  vehicles.  The  latter,  on  the 
other  hand,  took  a  position  at  the  opposite  extreme  from 
which  they  demanded  the  right  to  manufacture  and  sell 
vehicles  of  large  capacity  and  heavy  weight,  without  re- 
gard to  the  strength  of  the  roads,  on  the  theory  that  the 
greater  the  capacity  of  the  vehicle  the  smaller  would  be 
the  cost  of  operation  per  unit  of  capacity.  The  slogan 
was,  'build  the  roads  to  carry  loads,'  and  this  was  met  by 
the  opposite  party  with  the  equally  dogmatic  demand  that 
the  loads  should  be  limited  to  the  capacity  of  the  existing 
roads. 

The  issue  thus  joined,  the  principals  to  the  controversy — 
highway  officials  on  the  one  side  and  the  manufacturers 
on  the  other — wisely  agreed  to  submit  their  differences 
to  the  test  of  mutual  discussion ;  and  out  of  the  series  of 
conferences  which  ensued  there  came  an  agreement  upon 
certain  fundamental  facts  and  principles  which  have 
served  as  the  basis  for  a  harmonious  cooperation  of  the 
two  groups,  and  which  now  constitute  the  foundations  of 
highway  improvement  policy  in  all  States. ' 

The  wartime  experience  was  felt  in  another  way 
also.  It  was  during  this  period  that  an  intrepid  team 
drove  a  truck  from  Detroit  to  Washington  to  demon- 
strate the  value  to  the  military  of  motor  transport. 
This  journey,  almost  an  expedition  in  those  days, 
represents  the  birth  of  a  new  concept  of  mobility.  It 
demonstrated  the  value  of  a  connected  system  of  high- 
ways. As  much  as  any  other  factor,  it  brought  about 
what  is  now  recognized  as  the  most  significant  feature 
of  Federal  aid  to  highways,  the  requirement  that 
funds  be  expended  only  on  a  Federal-aid  system  recom- 
mended by  the  States  and  approved  by  the  Secretary 
of  Agriculture,  the  Department  within  which  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  was  then  located. 

This  requirement  was  set  forth  in  the  1921  Federal 
Highway  Act,  and  reflected  the  acceptance  of  the 
earlier  views  as  to  the  essentiality  of  concentrating 
highway  expenditures  on  a  limited  system,  then  set 
at  7  percent  of  the  total  highway  mileage  of  each 
State.  The  Act  also  recognized  another  national  pur- 
pose for  Federal  aid^ — ^to  serve  possible  military  needs. 
"V\Tiile  later  it  came  to  be  accepted  that  the  highway 
system's  military  value  lay  more  in  aiding  in  the 
movement  of  the  materials  and  products  of  war  in- 
dustries than  in  the  movement  of  strictly  military 
vehicles,  this  Act  inspired  the  selection,  by  cooperative 
action  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  the  War 
Department,  of  a  system  of  routes  of  military  im- 
portance to  be  included  in  the  Federal-aid  system. 
This  system,  ultimately  portrayed  in  the  "Pershing 
Map"  (General  Pershing  accepted  the  responsibility 
for  this  effort)  served  as  the  basis  for  the  so-called 
"strategic  network"  on  which  Federal-aid  funds  were 
to  be  concentrated  during  World  War  II.  Thus,  the 
1921  Act  opened  the  door  to  another  planning  effort — 
the  selection  of  principal  highway  systems,  statewide 
and  national. 


World  War  I  also  opened  the  door  to  another  plan- 
ning area,  economic  planning.  The  "harmonious  co- 
operation" of  roadbuilders  and  truck  manufacturers 
had  led  to  the  adoption  of  a  limit  of  7i/^  tons  as  the 
capacity  of  vehicles  for  future  production,  a  figure 
deemed  fair  to  both  (the  user  being  omitted  from 
consideration,  evidently).  Again  quoting  Chief  Mac- 
Donald  : 

...  It  was  recognized  clearly  for  the  first  time  that  the 
cost  of  highway  transportation  is  made  up  of  the  cost  of 
the  highways  and  the  cost  of  operating  the  vehicles  over 
the  highways,  and  it  was  agreed  that  the  common  pur- 
pose of  the  public  highway  officials,  vehicle  manufacturers 
and  operators  should  be  to  reduce  the  total  cost  of  trans- 
portation rather  than  one  or  the  other  of  the  elemental 
costs.  It  could  be  proved  that  the  number  of  large- 
capacity  trucks  already  using  some  of  the  highways,  prin- 
cipally those  radiating  from  and  connecting  the  larger 
cities — had  already  grown  to  the  point  where  the  combined 
savings  in  operating  cost  would  more  than  balance  the 
greater  cost  of  providing  highway  service  for  them.  As 
to  those  highways  there  could  be  little  doubt  of  the  wis- 
dom and  economy  of  building  a  type  of  surface  adequate 
for  the  heavy  truck  traffic.  Other  roads,  similarly  located 
with  respect  to  cities,  had  not  yet  developed  a  sufficient 
amount  of  the  heavy  traffic  to  repay  the  additional  cost 
of  the  stronger  construction,  but  it  was  not  difficult  to 
foresee  that  such  a  condition  would  develop  in  the  future. 
On  the  majority  of  the  roads  however,  the  development 
of  traffic  of  sufficient  weight  to  justify  the  higher  types 
of  construction  was  very  remote ;  and  it  was  apparent 
that  the  one-time  prevailing  condition  of  uniformity  of 
traffic  on  all  roads  had  been  definitely  broken  down.  In- 
stead, a  new  and  much  different  condition  had  arisen 
under  which  the  main  inter-city  roads  were  found  to  be 
carrying  traffic  far  in  excess  of  the  much  greater  mileage 
of  local  roads. 

Under  the  new  condition  the  economic  justification  for 
the  improvement  of  the  main  roads  lay  to  a  far  greater 
extent  than  formerly  in  the  reduction  of  transportation 
costs  and  to  a  lesser  degree  in  the  effect  upon  the  value 
of  property.  The  main  roads  had  become  through  traffic 
arteries,  as  distinguished  from  the  more  numerous  local 
roads  which  continued  to  be  of  value  primarily  through 
the  service  they  render  in  giving  access  to  the  land. ' 

From  the  point  of  view  of  highway  planning,  one 
other  important  feature  emerged  from  the  war  and 
early  postwar  experience — the  matter  of  highway  fi- 
nance. Recognition  that  State  highways  accom- 
modated most  through  traffic  and  that  the  level  of 
their  improvement  should  be  based  on  total  trans- 
portation cost  gave  responsibility  for  financing  the 
improvement  logically  to  users,  to  be  supported  by 
motor-vehicle  license  fees  and  excise  taxes  and  the 
motor- fuel  taxes  then  beginning  to  come  into  more 
widespread  acceptance.  Local  roads  primarily  serving 
farms  were  considered  to  be  the  responsibility  of  prop- 
erty owners  served,  with  the  financing  coming  pri- 
marily from  real  estate  taxes,  either  on  the  property 
served  or  on  the  entire  community. 

The  experience  gained  during  the  first  decade  fol- 
lowing the  1916  Act  pointed  the  direction  highway 
planning  would  take.  The  earliest  efforts  were  in  the 
area  of  traffic  counting.  Observations  included  not 
only  the  numbers  of  vehicles,  but  their  classification 
(passenger  cars  and  trucks  of  various  sizes)  to  aid 
in  road  design  and  State  of  registration  to  provide 
some  gage  of  lengths  of  trips  and  the  proportion  of 
travel  that  was  interstate  in  character  as  a  measure 
of  the  propriety  of  Federal  aid.  The  findings  of 
these  surveys  coupled  with  results  of  the  physical  re- 
search being  undertaken,  described  in  Chapter  4,  gave 


267 


Connecticut  conducted  this  traffic 
census  during  the  period 
September  1922-1923. 


the  means  to  get  on  with  the  early  economic  studies 
perceived  to  be  so  important  in  decisions  with  respect 
to  degree  of  improvement  to  be  provided  and  to  the 
appropriate  sharing  of  the  costs. 

Traffic  counting  is  not  modern  phenomenon,  dating 
back  at  least  to  the  Romans.  But  modern  traffic  vol- 
ume counting  began  not  too  long  after  the  beginning 
of  the  automobile  era.  Certainly  by  the  early  1920's 
many  States  and  cities  were  making  at  least  sporadic 
traffic  counts.  Maine,  for  example,  as  early  as  1916 
began  counting  traffic  for  one  week  each  year  at  58 
stations  and  was  one  of  the  first  States  to  make  a  state- 
wide survey  (in  1924)  for  the  purpose  of  developing 
the  State  highway  system.  California  has  a  long  his- 
tory of  counting  at  hundreds  of  stations  for  one  day 
each  summer,  using  maintenance  crews,  a  practice 
continued  well  after  the  automatic  traffic  counter  had 
come  into  general  use. 

Concern  was  not  limited  to  rural  areas,  for  Cook 
County  in  Illinois,  with  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
cooperating,  conducted  a  traffic  survey  in  1924  and 
used  the  results  to  develop  a  constructive  program. 
Ohio,  following  generally  the  Maine  method,  carried 
out  a  full  year  statewide  survey  in  1925.  The  first 
metropolitan  area  traffic  counting,  also  with  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads  cooperation,  was  conducted  in  the 
Cleveland  area  in  1927. 

With  this  background,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
entered  into  agreements  with  several  States  in  the  late 
1920's  for  cooperative  traffic  surveys,  the  Bureau  us- 
ually supplying  the  supervision  and  the  States  the 
coimting  personnel.  The  New  England  States  were 
among  the  early  participants  in  these  cooperative 
studies,  presumably  because  of  their  relatively  higher 
traffic  volumes,  but  the  most  ambitious  survey  of  this 
period  involved  the  11  western  States*  in  a  simul- 
taneous program.  Here  the  Bureau  joined  with  the 
States  in  providing  field  supervision  and,  in  the  Wash- 
ington Office,  did  much  of  the  analysis  and  forecasting 
of  traffic  volumes.  Efforts  to  move  on  from  the 
traffic  volumes  forecast  route  by  route  to  recommended 
programs  to  meet  the  traffic  demands  proved  to  be 
considerably  less  than  successful,  however,  primarily 
because  of  uncertainties  in  forecasting  (the  use  of 
motor-fuel  consumption  as  a  good  indicator  of  traffic 
growth  was  still  in  trial  stage)  and  inadequate  knowl- 
edge of  the  capacities  and  condition  of  existing  road- 
ways. 


♦Washington,  Oregon,   California,  Montana,   Idaho,  Nevada, 
Wyoming,    Utah,   Arizona,   Colorado,   and   New   Mexico. 


The   Highway  Planning   Surveys 

With  the  growing  recognition  of  the  need  for  more 
facts  about  highway  program  accomplishments  to  date 
and  to  establish  a  basis  for  estimating  the  direction 
and  financial  magnitude  of  future  programs,  the  Bu- 
reau of  Public  Roads  and  some  States  had  been  con- 
sidering the  possibility  of  a  broad  data  collection  effort. 
Their  deliberations  bore  fruit  by  the  inclusion  in  the 
1934  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  the  following 
wording : 

Sec.  11.  With  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  Agri- 
culture, not  to  exceed  1%  per  centum  of  the  amount  ap- 
portioned for  any  year  to  any  State  .  .  .  may  be  used  for 
surveys,  plans,  and  engineering  investigations  of  projects 
for  future  construction  in  such  State,  either  on  the  Fed- 
eral-aid highway  system  and  extensions  thereof  or  on 
secondary  or  feeder  roads. 

Though  the  word  "planning"  does  not  appear  in 
this  section,  it  is  the  basic  and  still  controlling  legis- 
lation that  authorizes  the  ongoing  highway  (or  now- 
termed  highway  transportation)  planning  process. 
The  percentage  figure  has  remained  the  same,  but  the 
"may"  has  been  changed  to  "shall."  In  addition,  an 
optional  14  percent  of  all  funds,  except  Interstate, 
has  been  made  available  for  planning  and  research 
purposes.  To  avoid  the  appearance  of  directing  how 
a  State  shall  expend  its  own  funds,  with  the  change 
from  "may"  to  "shall"  was  added  the  provision  "with 
or  without  State  matching."  AVhile  in  the  early  years 
one  State  or  another  did  not  match  Federal  aid,  these 
were  the  exceptions  and  now  all  States  at  least  fully 
match,  and  many  "over  match,"  Fedei-al-aid  planning 
funds,  indicating  the  essentiality  of  the  planning  func- 
tion. 

But  to  get  to  the  avoidance  of  the  word  "planning," 
the  reason  lay  in  the  fact  that  the  word  had  come  into 
disrepute  in  many  sections  of  the  counti'y,  and  even 
in  Washington,  due  no  doubt  to  the  increasing  cen- 
tralization of  authority  in  Washington  as  the  country 
was  still  struggling  to  emerge  from  the  Depression. 
So  the  words  "surveys,  plans,  and  engineering  in- 
vestigations of  projects  for  future  construction"  were 
in  effect  a  euphemism  for  the  word  "planning."  "\\^iile 
some  States  tried  to  interpret  the  wording  as  author- 
izing the  funds  for  preliminary  surveys  and  prep- 
aration of  construction  plans,  the  intent  of  those 
supporting  the  legislation  and  of  the  Public  Works 
Committees  of  the  Congress  was  clear,  and  Chief 
MacDonald  yielded  at  no  time  to  the  use  of  the  funds 
for  anything  less  than  the  broad  planning  process 
envisioned  by  the  Bureau. 


268 


The  1934  Act  contained  another  provision  of  im- 
mense importance  to  the  rural  residents,  an  importance 
probably  not  fully  appreciated  at  the  time.  In  the 
paragraph  authorizing  appropriations  appeared  the 
words : 

Provided  further,  That  not  less  than  25  per  centum  of 
the  apportionment  to  any  State  shall  be  applied  to  second- 
ary or  feeder  roads,  including  farm  to  market  roads, 
rural  free  delivery  mail  roads,  and  public-school  bus 
routes  .  .  . 

As  in  the  1916  Act,  there  was  no  requirement  for 
the  designation  of  a  system,  the  authorization  being 
simply  for  roads  of  particular  classifications  with  no 
limit  as  to  mileage.  The  Congress  did  not  until  years 
later  specifically  authorize  or  require  the  designation 
of  a  secondary  system,  for  the  authorizations  reg- 
ularly continued  were  for  "secondary  or  feeder  roads." 
The  Defense  Highway  Act  of  1941,  however,  evidently 
assuming  that  the  roads  had  formed  a  system,  au- 
thorized the  extension  of  the  Federal -aid  system  and 
the  Secondary  Road  System  to  include  all  roads  on 
the  strategic  network  to  permit  the  application  of 
Federal-aid  highway  funds  for  their  imj^rovement. 
It  was  not  until  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of 
1944  that  the  Congress  ^'Provided,  That  these  funds 
shall  be  expended  on  a  system  of  such  roads  selected 
by  the  State  highway  departments  in  cooperation  with 
the  coimty  supervisors,  county  commissioners,  or  other 
aj^propriate  local  road  officials  and  the  Commissioner 
of  Public  Roads."  Nevertheless,  with  the  experience 
of  1916  to  1921  still  fresh  in  mind,  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  administratively  determined  that  the 
States  must  designate  systems  on  which  the  secondary 
funds  might  be  programed,  initially  setting  the  mile- 
age limit  at  10  percent  of  the  rural  highway  mileage. 
The  1944  Act  in  effect  confirmed  this  early  admin- 
istrative decision  and  at  the  same  time  acceded  to  the 
growing  pressure  from  local  officials  to  have  a  say 
in  the  selection  of  routes  to  be  improved  with  second- 
ary funds. 

It  was  under  these  conditions  in  1934  and  1935, 
with  highway  planning  formalized  by  legislation,  that 
H.  S.  Fairbank  began  planning  for  planning.  Fair- 
bank,  who  impressed  all  who  knew  him  as  a  brilliant 
man,  a  man  of  broad  vision,  the  most  fluent  writer 
of  Public  Roads'  history,  was  an  engineer  and  a 
scholar,  j^et  a  practical  man.  He  was  indeed  the 
"father"  of  highway  planning.  He  personally  sketched 
out  the  data  collection  and  analytical  processes,  leav- 
ing only  the  details  to  be  worked  out  by  his  subordi- 
nates (whom  he  preferred  to  think  of  as  colleagues). 
And  through  the  early  years  he  wrote  and  spoke 
strongly  and  often  in  behalf  of  the  planning  concept 
and  in  encouraging  not  only  its  adoption  but  its  use 
in  policy,  administrative,  and  engineering  decisions. 

Fairbank  made  it  clear  that  the  early  work  was  not 
planning  but  the  collection  and  analysis  of  data  to 
be  used  in  planning,  and  the  agreements  between  the 
States  and  the  Bureau  were  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
ducting highway  planning  surveys  of  three  broad 
types — road  inventory,  traffic,  and  financial  and  road 
use.  As  a  parenthetical  note,  it  is  when  one  advances 
from  data  collection  and  analysis  to  forecasting  the 
future  that  one  advances  from  surveying  to  planning. 


Tlie  inventory  phase  involved  driving  over  every 
mile  of  rural  highway,  recording  its  width,  type,  and 
condition ;  on  the  more  important  rotttes  the  geometric 
features  such  as  curves,  grades  and  sight  distances; 
all  farms,  residences,  businesses,  industrial  plants, 
schools,  hospitals,  and  any  other  cultural  feature  that 
the  roads  must  serve.  All  the  information  was  to  be 
recorded  on  inch-to-the-mile  county  maps,  and  the 
data  tabiilated  in  a  variety  of  ways  for  analytical  use. 

The  traffic  surveys  were  built  on  the  cooperative 
traffic  surveys  described  earlier  but  imderwent  con- 
siderable improvement  in  method  as  automatic  traffic 
counting  equipment,  a  better  understanding  of  road 
design  requirements,  and  improved  statistical  pro- 
cedures became  available.  Basically  they  involved 
intensive  traffic  volume  counting  on  main  routes,  less 
intensive  counting  on  secondary  roads  and  spot  checks 
on  lightly  traveled  local  roads.  At  all  stations,  ve- 
hicles were  classified  as  to  type,  and  on  the  main  roads 
a  sampling  of  commercial  vehicles  was  weighed  on 
portable  scales,  their  cargoes  classified,  their  origins 
and  destinations  ascertained,  and  their  tare  weights 
recorded  where  known.  Origins  and  destinations  of 
passenger  cars  were  also  sampled.  All  these  data 
were  to  be  tabulated  in  various  ways  and  shown  on 
appropriate  maps.  They  served  to  show  the  service 
highways  were  providing,  the  vehicle  miles  of  travel 
and  ton  miles  of  goods  and  products  moved,  the 
lengths  and  purposes  of  trips,  and  average  and  peak 
hour  volumes  for  design  purposes.  WTien  coupled 
with  the  road  inventory  data,  they  showed  the  ade- 
quacy of  the  existing  roads  to  provide  for  the  move- 
ment of  traffic  and  to  serve  the  needs  of  rural  land 
use,  particularly  farms.  They  permitted  estimates  of 
the  cost  of  bringing  road  conditions  up  to  a  standard 
regarded  as  suitable  for  current  traffic  and,  to  the  ex- 
tent it  could  be  forecast,  future  traffic. 

The  third  general  area  involved  the  recording  of 
expenditures  and  revenues  for  highways  and  all  other 
purposes  from  all  units  of  government,  including 
special  districts,  to  ascertain  the  degree  to  which  user 
and  other  taxes  were  being  applied  to  road  purposes 
by  the  individual  units  and,  more  generally,  by  the 
various  levels  of  government.  These  studies  would 
show  the  degree  to  which  the  main  roads  were  in 
fact  supported  by  the  users  as  the  theorists  then 
thought  appropriate,  and  the  local  roads  by  property 
or  general  taxes.  Today  it  is  recognized  that  it  is 
only  at  the  extremes  that  the  theory  can  fully  operate 


Measuring  sight  distances  and  curvature  on  existing 
highways  to  get  data  to  be  used  in  planning. 


269 


New  Mexico  participated  in  an 
ambitious  traffic  survey  in  1930 
with  10  other  States. 


— freeways  as  a  user  responsibility  and  the  dead  end 
road  or  street  as  a  land  service  or  community  respon- 
sibility— with  the  great  mass  of  roads  in  between  de- 
serving some  support  from  each  source  since  all  such 
roads  serve  both  purposes.  In  1934,  however,  there 
were  no  facts  at  all  on  which  even  to  estimate  the 
propriety  of  highway  finance  of  the  day.  In  addition, 
the  financial  survey  included  road-use  studies  which 
determined  from  a  sample  of  owners  of  vehicles  in 
places  of  A'^arious  sizes  the  usage  they  made  of  roads 
in  the  different  systems.  This  might  show,  for  ex- 
ample, the  use  of  rural  roads  by  urban  residents  com- 
pared to  the  use  of  city  streets  by  rural  residents, 
to  the  end  of  appraising  the  propriety  of  the  alloca- 
tion of  funds  collected  by  various  levels  of  govern- 
ment to  the  several  road  systems.  Also  included  in 
the  financial  surveys  were  road  life  studies,  which  per- 
mitted estimates  of  the  physical  life  of  the  roads 
constituting  the  highway  "plant." 

Obviovisly,  carrying  out  Fairbank's  bold  plan  would 
be  an  enormous  task  requiring  much  manpower,  and 
it  might  well  not  have  been  begun  had  not  at  least 
three  significant  items  conjoined. 

First,  the  country  was  still  deep  in  the  Depression. 
"Make  work"  programs  were  being  sought,  and  funds 
for  highway  improvements  were  being  made  available 
as  works  relief  programs.  One  and  one-half  percent 
of  these  funds  added  to  similar  percentages  of  regular 
funds  then  made  available  under  the  Hayden-Cart- 
wright  Act  provided  substantial  funding  from  high- 
way sources. 

Second,  the  works  relief  funds  for  white-collar  proj- 
ects offered  Work  Projects  Administration  (WPA) 
officials  the  opportunity  to  place  many  needy  people 
in  jobs. 

Third,  the  surfacing  of  the  Federal-aid  systems  in 
most  States  was  well  along  toward  completion,  and 
administrators  were  feeling  pressures  to  extend  road 
improvements  to  the  less  important  roads.  The  1934 
Act  gave  them  this  opportunity,  but  by  requiring  that 
the  States  select  a  secondary  system,  the  need  for  the 
planning  survey  was  obvious.    In  fact,  Fairbank  sug- 


gested that  providing  facts  on  which  to  select  the 
secondary  system  would  be  a  main  object  of  the  effort. 
But  at  the  same  time  Fairbank  bore  down  heavily  on 
the  idea  that  roads  were  never  "completed"  but  must 
be  maintained,  surfaces  replaced,  and  the  whole  sys- 
tem upgraded  to  meet  new  demands  of  a  growing 
traffic.  And  the  planning  surveys  were  to  provide  the 
data  that  would  permit  planning  this  continuing 
process. 

So  with  the  need  for  this  new  concept — planning — 
constantly  emphasized  by  the  Bureau,  with  the  pro- 
cedures formulated,  and  with  funding  and  manpower 
at  hand,  work  was  begun.  The  first  State  to  get 
underway  was  Pennsylvania  in  September  1935,  closely 
followed  by  Ohio  in  October  of  that  year,  and  other 
States  joining  in  quickly  thereafter. 

With  this  planning  survey  process  new  and  not 
uncomplicated,  it  was  expected  that  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  would  be  able  to  help  the  States  by 
sending  people  experienced  in  the  earlier  cooperative 
traffic  surveys  to  assist  in  starting  the  field  work, 
anticipating  that  States  would  accept  the  new  concept 
but  slowly,  perhaps  five  or  six  States  in  a  year.  But 
once  begim,  States  followed  one  another  in  quick 
succession,  some  appreciating  the  need  and  the  oppor- 
tunity to  meet  it,  and  others  influenced  by  the  growing 
number  of  other  States  undertaking  the  work.  In  fact 
officials  of  one  State  remarked  that  "We  heard  that 

[State  name  omitted  by  choice]  was 

starting  one  of  these  planning  surveys  and  so  we 
thought  we  should  have  one  too,  whatever  it  is."  But 
for  whatever  reason,  by  September  1936,  only  a  year 
after  the  first  survey  was  launched,  38  States  had 
come  into  agreement  with  the  Bureau  and  actually 
started  field  work.  The  schedules  varied  considerably. 
Fairbank  had  envisioned  completing  the  field  work 
in  one  year  (the  traffic  survey  required  that  long 
anyway  to  cover  seasonal  variations)  and  spending 
another  year  in  analysis.  Some  States  did  virtually 
complete  all  tlie  field  work  in  a  year,  but  more  com- 
monly the  several  phases  Avere  spread  over  a  longer 
period,  and  in  no  case  was  the  analysis  completed  in 


270 


a  year.  Even  with  the  stretched-out  approach,  how- 
ever, a  great  deal  of  manpower  was  involved.  In 
Ohio,  for  example,  over  600  men  were  in  the  field 
within  2  months  after  the  work  got  underway,  some 
occupied  for  a  full  year  and  others  a  shorter  time. 
There  probably  never  was  a  tabulation  of  the  total 
number  of  people  employed  in  the  early  work,  but  it 
seems  safe  to  say  that  at  the  height  of  the  field  work 
at  least  15,000  men  were  given  employment,  almost 
all  from  the  relief  rolls  or  the  ranks  of  the  unem- 
ployed. Thus,  leaving  out  the  benefits  of  the  planning 
surveys  to  highway  administration,  the  work  repre- 
sented a  major  accomplishment  in  the  constructive  ex- 
penditure of  work  relief  funds  in  a  period  of  great 
distress  in  the  country. 

But  this  sudden  acceptance  of  highway  planning 
had  a  considerable  impact  on  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  as  well,  for  on  it  fell  the  task  of  aiding  the 
States  in  launching  and  supervising  the  work.  The 
few  Bureau  people  who  had  worked  on  the  coopera- 
tive traffic  surveys  hardly  provided  a  nucleus  from 
which  to  start.  So  the  Bureau  set  up  a  training  pro- 
gram for  highway  planning  supervisors,  drawing  not 
only  from  the  Washington  staff,  but  recruiting  from 
the  field  offices  and  the  forest  and  park  programs  as 
well.  The  response  was  good,  mostly  from  the  younger 
and  perhaps  more  imaginative  employees,  many  from 
graduates  of  the  ongoing  Bureau's  junior  engineer 
training  program.  With  word  of  the  training  pro- 
gram getting  around,  States  also  began  sending  pro- 
spective supervisors  to  take  the  training  courses. 
'\^niile  the  number  "processed"  through  the  training 
program  was  probably  never  tabulated,  what  is  more 
important  the  program  marked  the  creation  of  a  new 
discipline — highway  planning — the  scope  and  impor- 
tance of  which  surely  could  not  have  been  foreseen 
at  that  time. 


One  of  the  maps  prepared  as  a  result  of 
the  1930  western  traffic  survey. 


Thus  were  launched  the  highway  planning  surveys, 
and  simply  keeping  them  on  course  during  their 
early  years  was  a  major  concern  of  the  Bureau.  Data 
collection  procedures  were  steadily  improved,  and  the 
many  problems  that  developed  in  tabulating,  recon- 
ciling, and  summarizing  data  were  met  and  solved. 
But  the  harder  part  was  in  moving  from  summaries 
of  data  to  reports  and  from  reports  to  administrative 
and  policy  decisions.  It  was  to  this  aspect  that  Fair- 
bank  wrote  and  spoke  so  frequently  in  the  years  before 
World  War  II. 

Perhaps  his  most  pi-eceptive  writing  was  in  the  area 
of  taxation,  for  he  foresaw  financing  as  the  most 
critical  problem  of  the  future.  In  the  "depression 
psychology"  of  the  era,  in  which  the  official  views 
held  that  the  country  had  reached  its  pinnacle  of 
development,  that  there  would  be  permanent  unem- 
ployment and  our  problem  would  be  the  equitable 
distribution  of  limited  resources,  neither  he  nor  any- 
one else  could  foresee  the  great  upsui'ge  in  the  economy 
and  even  more  in  highway  transportation  that  in 
1956  made  relatively  easy  the  financing  of  the  Inter- 
state System — the  greatest  public  works  program  in 
history. 

Planning  the  Interstate  System 

Wliile  the  States  were  absorbed  in  collecting  and 
analyzing  highway  planning  data,  and  Fairbank  par- 
ticularly saw  the  need  to  develop  a  "climate"  in  the 
States  that  would  encourage  them  to  carry  on  from 
the  easier  stage  of  surveying  to  the  more  difficult  one 
of  planning,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  almost  im- 
mediately had  need  to  use  the  data  for  planning. 
Early  in  1937  President  Roosevelt  called  Chief  Mac- 
Donald  into  his  office  and  handed  him  a  map  of  the 
United  States  on  which  he  (the  President)  had  drawn 
three  lines  ea^t  and  west  and  three  north  and  south 
across  the  country.  He  reasoned  that  with  the  increas- 
ing use  of  the  automobile  the  need  for  more  and  better 
highways  for  long  distance  travel  would  be  needed, 
and  suggested  that  the  six  routes  he  had  sketched  on 
the  map  might  be  built  and  financed  through  the  col- 
lection of  tolls.  And  he  asked  Chief  MacDonald  to 
study  the  possibility.  Again,  such  a  program  would 
not  only  benefit  the  motor  vehicle  user  but  constitute 
a  desirable  public  works  program  to  provide  employ- 
ment. It  can  be  said  that  this  map  is  the  lineal  an- 
cestor of  the  Interstate  System,  truly  a  document  of 
first  importance  in  highway  history. 

Returning  from  the  White  House,  Chief  MacDonald 
handed  the  map  to  Mr.  Fairbank  and  asked  him  to 
get  on  with  the  study.  Thus,  began  the  first  assembly 
of  detailed  information  on  traffic  flow  on  a  national 
basis,  possible  only  because  of  the  rapid  i^rogress  by 
the  States  on  the  highway  planning  surveys.  Wliile 
data  were  still  not  available  for  all  States,  enough 
States  had  progressed  far  enough  to  supply  the  data 
needed  for  a  reasonable  appraisal  of  the  feasibility 
of  the  President's  suggestion.  As  a  first  step,  a  traffic 
flow  map  of  the  United  States  was  prepared,  finished 
in  January  1938  and  later  updated  to  January  1939 
and  refined  as  more  States  could  supply  data.  For 
the  first  time  a  picture  of  travel  on  all  main  routes 
was  available. 


271 


Although  the  map  of  the  original  six  routes  cannot  be  found,  this  map  was  authenticated  in  1951  by  Mr.  Fairbank  as  having  also 
been  drawn  by  President  Roosevelt  and  sent  to  the  Bureau  in  1938  to  indicate  the  routes  on  which  modern  express  highways  should 
be  built.    This  m,ap  shows  three  lines  east  and  west  and  five  north  and  south. 


This  map  showed  in  striking  manner  the  buildup 
of  traffic  near  the  cities  and  the  relatively  low  volumes 
between  them.  This  visual  picture  was  reinforced  by 
results  of  the  origin-destination  studies  already  com- 
pleted in  several  States,  which  showed  the  small  per- 
centage of  long  trips  and  how  the  volumes  even  on 
the  longer  stretched  between  cities  were  made  up 
largely  of  successions  of  short  trips.  The  small  amount 
of  really  long  distance  travel — transcontinental — is 
shown  in  the  report  of  the  study  Toll  Roads  and  Free 
Roads^  by  a  map  indicating  the  origins  and  destina- 
tions of  traffic  crossing  a  cordon  line  running  through 
the  States  of  Idaho,  Nevada,  and  Arizona.  Here  on 
all  the  main  routes  crossing  this  line  only  300  vehicles 
in  an  average  day  were  traveling  from  the  Pacific 
coast  States  to  the  Atlantic  seaboard  States,  indicating 
that  transcontinental  travel  was  almost  negligible. 
Only  20  trips  from  the  west  coast  reached  Florida,  a 
figure  interestingly  close  to  a  finding  of  23  trips  that 
were  destined  to  the  west  coast  from  Florida,  as  shown 
by  a  similar  cordon  on  the  Florida  border.  Figures 
such  as  these  gave  early  evidence  that  long  distance 
travel  would  not  be  sufficient  to  justify  the  financing 
through  tolls  of  the  six  suggested  routes.  But  it  was 
surmised  that  certain  sections  might  be  self-liqui- 
dating. So  the  investigation  proceeded  to  ascertain 
the  most  desirable  location  of  the  six  routes  from  the 
points  of  view  of  attracting  travel  and  feasibility  of 
construction  and  to  estimate  their  costs  and  probable 
toll  revenues. 


The  six  routes  totaled  14,336  miles  in  length,  di- 
vided into  75  sections  for  estimates  of  cost  and  poten- 
tial revenue.  Section  lengths  ranged  from  just  over 
30  miles  to  one — Spokane,  Washington,  to  Fargo, 
North  Dakota — extending  1,160  miles.  Mile-by-mile 
estimates  were  made  of  construction,  maintenance,  op- 
erating and  debt  service  costs,  aggregated  by  sections 
and  matched  against  estimated  toll  revenues,  assuming 
that  travel  by  1960  would  be  2.5  times  the  1937  figure. 
The  comparison  confirmed  the  early  surmise ;  the  reve- 
nue for  the  period  1945  (when  the  system  would  be 
completed)  to  1960  equaled  less  than  40  percent  of 
the  cost  for  the  entire  system  and  the  report  concluded 
the  toll  system  was  not  feasible.  Yet  one  section, 
Jersey  City  to  New  Haven,  showed  revenues  equaling 
104  percent  of  the  cost  and  adjoining  sections  from 
Washington  to  Portland,  Maine,  near  enough  to  the 
break-even  point  to  indicate  feasibility  of  the  entire 
length.  Other  feasible  sections  were  found  running 
east  from  Chicago  and  in  southern  California. 

While  the  report's  conclusion  was  unfavorable  to 
the  toll  concept,  the  detailed  study  led  to  a  finding 
that  a  master  plan  for  highways  in  the  United  States 
called  for  appropriate  action  by  the  Federal  and 
State  governments  for  "the  construction  of  a  special, 
tentatively  defined  system  of  direct  interrregional 
highways,  with  all  necessary  connections  through  and 
around  cities,  designed  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
the  national  defense  in  time  of  war  and  the  needs  of 
a  growing  peacetime  traffic  of  longer  range."  With 
the  "abundant  data"  supplied  by  the  States  from  the 


272 


This    draioing    of    a    typical    grade 
separation,  access  roads,  and  toll  booths 
for  a  4-lane  road  was  included 
in  the  toll  road  study. 


.""■■jiiJtgiBg 


This   sketch   of   a  proposed   express 

highway  and  bypass  route  around 

Baltimore  was  a  part  of  the  master 

plan  for  free  hightcay  development 

in  the  toll  road  study. 


planning  surveys,  the  report  examined  the  desirability 
of  a  longer  system  not  for  toll-paying  traffic  but  for 
general  use,  totaling  26,700  miles  and  serving  all  prin- 
cipal cities  and  regions  of  the  country,  and  found 
it  ".  .  .  now  desirable  by  law  to  establish  this  or  a 
closely  similar  System  as  the  Primary  Highway  Sys- 
tem of  the  United  States."  Much  of  the  justification 
of  this  system  lay  in  its  service  to  the  cities,  and  in- 
deed, the  report  devoted  many  pages  to  a  suggested 
plan  for  higliways  in  an  urban  area,  Fairbank  using 
his  home  city,  Baltimore,  as  an  example.  Thus  was 
suggested  the  two  major  new  directions  Federal  high- 
way aid  would  take  in  the  years  ahead — the  Interstate 
System  and  acceptance  of  responsibility  of  the  Fed- 
eral Government  and  the  States  in  the  areas  of  urban 
transportation. 

Aware  of  the  study  being  made  by  the  direction  of 
the  President,  the  Congress  to  show  its  support  for 
the  investigation  (and  perhaps  to  insure  that  it  would 
receive  the  report)  included  in  the  Federal- Aid  High- 
way Act  of  1938  the  following  provision : 

The  Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  is  hereby  di- 
rected to  investigate  and  make  a  report  of  his  findings 
and  recommend  to  the  Congress  not  later  than  February 
1,  1939,  with  respect  to  the  feasibility  of  building,  and 
cost  of,  superhighways  not  exceeding  three  in  number, 
running  in  a  general  direction  from  the  eastern  to  the 
western  portion  of  the  United  States,  and  not  exceeding 
three  in  number,  running  in  a  general  direction  from  the 
northern  to  southern  portion  of  the  United  States,  includ- 
ing the  feasibility  of  a  toll  system  on  such  roads. 


Approved  on  June  8,  1938,  the  Congress  gave  the 
Bureau  only  8  months  to  complete  the  investigation 
and  report,  thus  recognizing  it  was  well  on  the  way  to 
completion  at  the  time.  The  report  was  transmitted 
to  the  Congress  by  the  President  on  April  27,  1939. 

The  1939  report  soon  had  an  impact.  In  April  1941 
President  Roosevelt  appointed  the  National  Interre- 
gional Highway  Committee  "to  investigate  the  need 
for  a  limited  system  of  national  highways  to  improve 
the  facilities  now  available  for  interregional  trans- 
portation, .  .  .  and  [later  became  a  study  for]  the 
possibility  of  utilizing  some  of  the  manpower  and 
industrial  capacity  expected  to  be  available  at  the 
end  of  the  war."  *  While  there  is  no  documentation 
to  support  it,  it  seems  fair  to  assume  that  the  action 
by  the  President  stemmed  from  representations  orig- 
inating within  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 

The  Committee  first  met  in  June  1941  and  imme- 
diately laid  plans  for  a  major  study  to  be  carried 
out  by  the  staff  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  The 
Committee  also  enlisted  the  cooperation  of  the  State 
highway  departments.  Subsequently  Public  Law  146, 
approved  July  13,  1943  (an  amendment  to  the  De- 
fense Highway  Act  of  1941)  again  alined  the  Legis- 
lative Branch  witli  the  Executive  Branch  of  the 
Federal  Government  by  authorizing  and  directing 
Commissioner  MacDonald  to  study  and  report  on  the 
needs  for  interregional  highways. 


273 


While  both  Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads  and  Inter- 
regional Highways,  the  title  of  this  second  major  re- 
port, were  prepared  under  the  direction  of  H.  S. 
Fairbank  by  the  staff  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
and  with  the  substantial  assistance  of  the  State  high- 
way departments,  there  was  a  significant  difference. 
Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads  was  a  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  product ;  Interregional  Highways  was  the  prod- 
uct of  the  National  Interregional  Highway  Committee 
and  submitted  to  President  Roosevelt  as  such.  He  in 
turn  transmitted  the  report  to  the  Congress  to  meet 
its  requirement  of  Commissioner  MacDonald. 

The  composition  of  the  Committee  is  particularly 
important.  Invited  by  the  President  to  serve  on  the 
Committee  (all  of  whom  accepted)  were  three  men 
from  the  highway  field — Commissioner  MacDonald, 
G.  Donald  Kennedy  from  Michigan  who  was  incom- 
ing President  of  the  American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials,  and  Charles  H.  Purcell,  State 
Highway  Engineer  from  California;  two  were  from 
the  city  planning  field — Harland  Bartholemew,  prom- 
inent city  planner  from  St.  Louis  and  Rexford  Guy 
Tugwell,  Chairman  of  the  New  York  City  Planning 
Commission;  rounding  out  the  Committee  were 
Frederic  A.  Delano,  Chairman  of  the  National  Re- 
sources Planning  Board  and  a  political  leader,  and 
Bibb  Graves,  former  Governor  of  Alabama.  The 
Committee  elected  Mr.  MacDonald  as  chairman,  and 
he  in  turn  appointed  Mr.  Fairbank  as  secretary. 

The  composition  of  the  Committee  clearly  shows  the 
importance  then  attached  to  the  city  and  its  problems 
in  developing  a  framework  for  national  highway 
development.  The  Committee  met  repeatedly,  and 
while  the  words  of  Interregional  Highways  were  dis- 
tinctly Fairbank's,  the  principles  expounded  were 
those  discussed  and  agreed  upon  by  the  Committee 
and  which  received  its  unanimous  approval. 

This  was  indeed  a  comprehensive  study,  beginning 
with  the  meeting  of  the  Committee  in  June  1941  and 
extending  until  the  submittal  of  the  report  on  Jan- 
uary 1,  1944.  The  system  finally  recommended  was 
selected  by  the  Committee  after  examination  of  several 
other  systems,  greater  or  less  in  mileage,  as  best 
meeting  the  requirements  laid  down  by  the  President 
and  the  Congress.  The  report  was  transmitted  to  the 
Congress  on  January  12,  1944,  and  the  designation 
of  the  system,  identified  as  the  National  System  of 
Interstate  Highways,  was  authorized  by  the  Congress 
in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  that  year.  After 
much  study  and  discussion,  the  routes  of  the  system 
as  proposed  by  the  several  States,  substantially  as 
recommended  by  the  Committee,  were  approved  by  the 
Federal  Works  Administrator  in  August  1947.  But 
it  was  not  until  the  passage  of  the  Federal-Aid  High- 
way Act  of  1956  that  work  on  the  system  began  in 
earnest. 

Without  doubt  Inteiv^egional  Highways  was  and  re- 
mains the  most  significant  document  in  the  history 
of  highways  in  the  United  States.  Several  character- 
istics of  the  report  make  it  particularly  significant. 

First  is  the  composition  of  the  Committee  that  pro- 
duced it.  The  report  was  the  product  of  highway 
officials  and  planners  with  broad  interests  working 
together. 


Second,  the  system  was  not  selected  simply  on  the 
basis  of  its  traffic  usage.  It  was  recognized  from  the 
beginning  that  the  purpose  of  the  system  was  to  pro- 
vide for  highway  transportation  to  serve  the  economic 
and  social  needs  of  the  Nation.  Systems  were  devised 
to  serve  the  Nation's  agricultural  production,  its  min- 
eral production,  its  forest  products,  its  manufac- 
turing centers  and,  of  course,  its  population  centers 
and  defense  establishments.  Without  the  help  of 
computers,  all  these  factors  were  laboriously  shown 
by  shading  county  by  county  on  maps,  or  by  similar 
devices,  and  the  different  systems  "eyeballed"  through 
the  areas  of  heaviest  shading  or  largest  circles.  It 
was  not  until  the  final  choice  of  the  recommended 
routes  was  made  by  the  Committee  that  traffic  volumes 
to  be  expected  were  brought  into  the  picture,  and 
then  only  to  be  used  as  a  means  to  estimate  costs  and 
relative  economic  benefits. 

Third,  the  importance  of  the  system  within  the 
cities  was  given  much  attention,  with  a  major  portion 
of  the  report  devoted  to  "Locating  the  Interregional 
Routes  in  Urban  Areas."  Here  principles  of  route 
location,  still  sound  today,  were  proposed  and  illus- 
trated. A  paragraph  from  this  report  of  30  years 
ago  is  worth  quoting.     It  reads  as  follows: 

In  choosing  these  locations  for  the  arterial  routes,  how- 
ever, it  should  be  recognized  that  the  undeveloped  lands 
which  lie  so  favorably  for  highway  purposes  also  present 
opportunities  equally  favorable  for  other  purposes  of  city 
planning.  Properly  preserved  and  developed,  they  can 
become  the  needed  parks  and  playgrounds  for  residents 
of  adjacent  populated  areas.  Alternatively,  they  can  be 
developed  as  new  residential  communities  in  the  modem 
manner,  unhampered  by  previous  commitment  to  the  tra- 
ditional rectangular  street  plan.  It  is  highly  desirable, 
therefore,  that  the  location  and  plan  of  the  new  highways 
in  these  areas  shall  be  developed  in  harmonious  relation 
with  other  appropriate  uses  of  the  now  vacant  land. 
Wherever  possible,  plans  for  all  uses  of  the  land  should 
be  jointly  developed  and  acquisition  for  all  purposes  of 
public  uses  should  proceed  simultaneously." 

Fourth,  the  need  for  coordination  with  other  modes 
was  emphasized  with  the  words  "However,  it  is  at  the 
cities  .  .  .  that  the  closest  attention  should  be  paid  to 
the  possibilities  of  common  location,  and  also  to 
such  location  of  the  highways  as  will  best  and  most 
conveniently  serve  to  promote  their  use  in  proper 
coordination  with  other  transportation  means."  ® 

Fifth,  the  Committee  recognized  clearly  the  limita- 
tions of  the  system.     To  quote  again. 

Obviously,  it  is  not  possible  by  any  limited  highway 
system,  whatever  the  relative  importance  of  its  constituent 
routes,  to  serve  all  the  needs  of  the  Nation's  traffic.  Nor 
is  it  reasonable  to  assume  that  in  and  near  the  cities  the 
routes  included  in  such  a  limited  system  will  if  improved, 
provide  a  complete  solution  to  the  serious  problem  of 
city  traffic  congestion.  ...  In  this  connection  the  Com- 
mittee has  been  restricted  in  its  choice  because  the  Presi- 
dent directed  it  to  select  an  interregional  rather  than  a 
local  system,  and  to  consider  national  above  local  needs. 
...  it  is  important,  both  locally  and  nationally,  to  recog- 
nize this  recommended  system  ...  as  that  system  and 
those  routes  which  best  and  most  directly  join  region 
with  region  and  major  city  with  major  city.' 

Sixth,  the  Committee  recognized  the  need  for  full 
cooperation  at  all  levels  of  government  (still  to  be 
fully  attained,  it  seems)  by  the  words  ".  .  .  the  par- 
ticular locations  of  those  routes  [must]  be  agreed  upon 
in  common  by  Federal,  State,  and  municipal  author- 
ities who  will  share  the  responsibility  for  arterial  high- 


274 


way  improvement,  tliat  the  desirable  standards  for 
that  improvement  may  be  established  and  commonly 
accepted.  .  .  ."  ® 

Finally,  the  Committee  reiterated  the  recommenda- 
tion of  "Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads"  for  the  creation 
of  a  Federal  Land  Authority,  with  powers  of  excess 
condemnation  to  aid  in  recoupment  of  increases  in 
land  values  resulting  from  construction  of  the  system. 
It  also  recommended  creation  of  similar  authorities 
in  the  States,  with  the  thought  that  a  Federal-aid  plan 
might  be  developed  to  finance  immediate  acquisition 
of  land  and  to  permit  amortization  of  the  costs  by 
State  and  local  authorities  over  a  long  period  of  time.® 

It  is  perhaps  of  interest  that  President  Roosevelt  in 
transmitting  the  report  to  the  Congress  added  in  his 
own  words  to  the  transmittal  letter  prepared  in  Public 
Roads  the  following  paragraph: 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  while  the  courts  of  the  different 
States  have  varied  in  tlieir  interpretations,  the  principle 
of  excess  condemnation  is  coming  into  wider  use  both 
here  and  in  other  countries.  I  always  remember  the 
instance  of  the  farmer  who  was  asked  to  sell  a  narrow 
right-of-way  through  his  farm  for  a  main  connecting 
highway.  From  an  engineering  point  of  view  it  would 
have  been  as  feasible  to  build  the  new  highway  across 
the  dirt  road  that  ran  in  front  of  his  house  and  barn. 
Actually  the  owner  received  from  a  jury  an  amount 
equal  to  the  whole  value  of  the  farm.  The  road  was 
built.  The  owner  of  the  land  thereby  acquired  two  new 
frontages.  He  sold  lots  on  one  frontage  for  the  former 
value  of  his  farm.  A  year  or  two  later  he  sold  the  other 
frontage  for  the  farm  value  of  his  farm.  The  result 
was  that  he  still  had  his  house  and  barn  and  90  percent 
of  his  original  acreage,  and  in  addition  he  had  received 
in  cash  three  times  the  value  of  what  the  whole  place 
was   worth   in   the  first   instance.i" 

This  recitation  of  what  was  in  fact  the  early  period 
in  urban  highway  j^lanning  is  simply  to  demonstrate 
that  highway  officials  at  that  time  were  ready  to  join 
with  those  in  other  disciplines  who  could  help  in  de- 
v^eloping  the  Nation's  needed  transportation  system, 
and  that  the  principles  then  established  are  still  valid. 
^^^lat  has  been  done  since  has  been  built  on  this  solid 
foundation,  and  is  no  less  a  sound  structure  for  con- 
tinued extension  and  growth  of  national,  State,  and 
urban  transportation  from  here  on. 

Planning   in   Wartime 

"Wliile,  of  course,  not  even  suspected  at  the  time,  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1940  authorized  the  last 
apportionments  for  the  regular  Federal-aid  highway 
program  to  be  made  until  toward  the  end  of  World 
"War  II.  The  next  Federal-aid  act  was  entitled  the 
Defense  Highway  Act  of  1941,  approved  on  November 
19,  1941,  less  than  3  weeks  before  Pearl  Harbor. 
^AHiile  the  country  was  not  yet  at  war,  the  possibility 
of  United  States'  involvement  was  recognized  in  the 
year  preceeding  to  be  sufficient,  at  least  in  the  highway 
program,  to  give  life  to  the  adage  "In  time  of  peace, 
prepare  for  war."  The  Defense  Highway  Act  in  effect 
placed  the  road  program  on  a  war  footing,  too  little 
and  too  late  perhaps,  but  at  least  a  start. 

The  effect  of  war  preparations,  and  later  the  war 
itself,  was  felt  in  two  principal  ways,  first  in  the  need 
to  reconstitute  the  States'  highway  pi'ograms  to  con- 
centrate on  road  improvements  important,  and  later 
essential,  to  the  war  effort,  and  second  to  carry  on  the 
restructured  program  in  the  face  of  material  shortages, 


loss  of  key  personnel  to  the  military  services,  and  re- 
duced road  user  revenues  at  State  level.  The  Congress 
responded  to  these  problems  to  some  degree,  at  least, 
by  authorizing  75  percent  instead  of  50  percent  partic- 
ipation in  projects  on  the  strategic  network  and  accept- 
ance of  the  full  cost  of  providing  access  to  military 
establishments  and  essential  industrial  plants.  In  the 
area  of  critical  material  shortages,  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  developed  working  relationships  with 
the  succession  of  agencies  responsible  for  allocating 
critical  materials  to  try  to  gain  for  the  States  the 
authorizations  to  draw  from  the  available  supplies 
enousrh  material  to  meet  the  need  on  the  most  essential 
projects. 

It  was  a  period  of  great  distress,  of  course,  with 
States  seeing  their  road  systems  deteriorating  under 
the  burden  of  heavy  wartime  loads.  Materials  were 
allocated  on  the  basis  of  priorities  established  by  the 
War  Production  Board,  and  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the 
proof  of  need  in  the  highway  sphere  could  not  have 
been  established  without  the  data  available  or  collected 
as  needed  by  the  statewide  highway  planning  surveys. 

Priorities  were  granted  after  a  project  by  project 
review,  centralized  in  Washington,  under  which  each 
application  was  examined  in  detail,  and  its  essentiality 
rated  not  only  against  other  highway  and  transporta- 
tion needs,  but  against  needs  in  other  areas — housing, 
manufacturing,  farming,  and  in  fact  every  activity. 
Precise  information  on  the  number  of  war  connected 
trips  over  proposed  projects,  the  volumes  of  goods 
and  war  material  to  be  moved,  the  residences  of  em- 
ployees, and  many  other  facts  related  to  the  use  of 
the  proposed  projects  had  to  be  assembled,  analyzed 
and  funneled  to  Washington.  There  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  could  begin  the  torturous  process  of 
gaining  an  allocation  of  the  required  steel,  rubber, 
cement,  asphalt  or  other  critical  material.  Suffice  it 
to  say  that  with  the  highway  planning  survey  data, 
enough  cases  could  be  supported  to  prevent  a  break- 
down in  highway  transportation. 

As  Fairbank  once  remarked,  if  in  time  of  peace, 
prepare  for  war,  then  in  all  logic  in  time  of  war  one 
should  prepare  for  peace.  And  whether  it  may  have 
been  that  the  long  duration  of  the  war  could  not  have 
been  foreseen,  preparations  for  peace  indeed  began 
early  in  the  war.  The  fact  that  work  went  steadily 
forward  on  preparation  of  the  Interregional  High- 
uiays  report  was  itself  an  indication  of  the  long-range 
view  of  planning  for  postwar  needs.  This  effort 
absorbed  a  large  share  of  the  planning  resources  of 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  not  directly  involved  in 
the  war  effort  planning. 

Another  aspect  of  postwar  preparation  came  in  an 
amendment  to  the  Defense  Highway  Act,  approved 
on  July  13,  1943,  that  permitted  the  States  to  use  any 
funds  still  remaining  from  the  apportionment  under 
the  1940  Federal- Aid  Highway  Act  not  only  for  the 
"engineering  and  economic  investigations"  authorized 
in  1934,  but  also  for  the  preparation  of  plans,  speci- 
fications, and  estimates  (PS&E).  The  purpose  here 
was  to  keep  the  process  of  collection  of  essential  data 
going  and  also  to  provide  a  reservoir  of  "plans  on  the 
shelf"  to  permit  immediate  start  of  highway  construc- 
tion once  the  emergency  ended.  This  latter  provision 
illustrated  that  the  "depression   psychology"  of  the 


275 


1930's  was  not  entirely  dispelled  from  official  thinking 
even  by  the  exigencies  of  war.  The  view  then  held, 
and  reflected  even  in  Interregional  Highways^  was  that 
the  return  of  the  troops  after  the  war  and  the  sudden 
cessation  of  war  industry  would,  without  advance  prep- 
arations, produce  massive  unemployment  and  perhaps 
even  a  depression  such  as  followed  World  War  I. 
No  one  could  foresee  that  the  pent-up  demand  for 
consumer  goods,  so  long  missing  or  in  short  supply, 
and  the  desire  for  new  products  on  the  market  as  a 
result  of  advances  in  technology  associated  with  war 
production  would  take  years  to  satisfy.  And  this 
same  psychology,  parenthetically,  probably  accounted 
for  the  persistent  underestimating  of  traffic  growth 
for  several  years  after  the  war. 

Another  area  of  preparation  for  peace  during  war 
is  seen  in  the  growing  concern  for  the  problems  of 
urban  transportation.  The  predominantly  short  range 
of  highway  trips  and  the  buildup  of  traffic  in  and 
near  the  cities  disclosed  in  the  studies  for  Toll  Roads 
and  Free  Roads  were  emphasized  and  further  quan- 
tified by  the  early  studies  of  the  National  Interre- 
gional Highway  Committee.  These  findings  led 
Fairbank  to  repeatedly  urge  State  highway  officials 
and  other  groups  to  recognize  the  urban  problems 
they  soon  would  be  facing  and  to  gain  the  cooperation 
of  city  officials  in  an  approach  to  what  he  saw  as  a 
mutual  responsibility.  Beyond  that  he  saw  the  need 
for  gaining  an  understanding  of  urban  transportation 
needs  and  characteristics  paralleling  what  the  high- 
way planning  surveys  were  producing  for  the  rural 
areas.  And  he  called  on  his  staff  to  devise  appro- 
priate study  procedures. 

Obviously  many  of  the  techniques  fully  satisfactory 
in  rural  areas  could  not  be  applied  in  cities.  Pro- 
cedures for  counting  traffic  and  determining  origins 
and  destinations  of  trips  in  rural  areas  could  not 
simply  be  transferred  to  the  networks  of  closely 
spaced  city  streets.  While  traffic  volumes  on  rural 
roads  where  traffic  had  little  choice  of  route  were 
indicative  of  improvement  needs,  volumes  on  city 
streets,  with  traffic  having  almost  infinite  choices  of 
routes,  had  little  significance.  Traffic  often  followed 
the  improvement  program,  shifting  from  one  street 
to  another  as  the  relative  capacity  or  riding  quality 
shifted  with  the  construction  and  maintenance  pro- 
grams. Wliat  was  needed  was  information  that  would 
reveal  the  composition  of  traffic  as  shown  by  the  por- 
tions that  were  throiigh  trips  as  contrasted  with  the 
longer-range  trips  within  the  area  and  the  short- 
range  neighborhood  trips,  and  trips  not  only  by  motor 
vehicle  but  by  transit  as  well.  Generally  these  were 
all  being  accommodated  on  the  same  streets,  and  the 
need  was  obvious  for  street  systems  that  would  permit 
separation  of  trips  with  their  disparate  interests  and 
permit  the  design  of  the  different  elements  of  the 
system  to  be  compatible  with  the  type  of  service  they 
would  provide.  Origins,  destinations  and  purposes 
of  trips  were  required,  and  stopping  even  a  small 
sample  of  vehicles  to  interview  the  drivers,  as  could 
easily  be  done  in  rural  areas,  could  hardly  be  prac- 
ticable on  busy  city  streets.  Beyond  that,  the  closely 
spaced  network  would  permit  easy  avoidance  of  an 
interview  station.  And  interviewing  transit  passen- 
gers presented  new  and  not  easy  problems. 


After  exploring  a  variety  of  methods,  some  theo- 
retically and  some  on  the  ground,  with  little  prospect 
for  satisfying  results,  the  home-interview  method  was 
accepted  as  a  possible  approach.  George  Gallup  was 
having  considerable  success  in  his  early  opinion  polls. 
His  method  involved  interviewing  the  right  number, 
as  determined  statistically,  of  representative  members 
of  the  different  occupational  groups  comprising  the 
total  population,  such  as  doctors,  plumbers,  teachers, 
housewives,  laborers  and  even  unemployed.  This  ap- 
proach offered  serious  problems  in  attempting  to 
adapt  it  on  a  scale  necessary  to  a  transportation  sur- 
vey. Fortunately  the  Bureau  of  the  Census  at  that 
time  was  exploring  means  of  reducing  the  costs  of  its 
complete  censuses  by  the  use  of  sampling  methods. 
It  was  its  view  that  by  preselected  geographic  sam- 
ples, say  one  house  in  ten,  a  representative  sample  of 
occupational  groups  would  be  obtained.  That  ap- 
proach would  also  provide  a  geographic  spread  of 
interviews  for  origins  and  destinations  of  trips  needed 
in  travel  studies.  So  the  Bureau  of  the  Census,  while 
exploring  for  their  own  purposes  and  finding  in  the 
highway  field  a  companion  interest,  agreed  to  assist 
by  joining  in  assaying  the  statistical  soundness  of  the 
samples  and  to  assist  in  supervising  one  or  two  early 
studies  so  selected.  Thus  was  born  the  home-interview 
approach,  the  basis  of  today's  urban  transportation 
planning  process.  While  still  in  wartime,  1944,  the 
first  home-interview  studies  to  ascertain  urban  travel 
habits  were  launched  (not  without  some  trepidation 
to  be  sure)  nearly  simultaneously  in  Tulsa,  Oklahoma 
and  Little  Rock,  Arkansas.  Certainly  the  State  and 
city  officials  deserve  a  great  deal  of  credit  in  agreeing 
to  undertake  such  a  novel  program  on  the  basis  of 
assertions  of  belief  by  three  Washington  Office  repre- 
sentatives that  the  approach  would  work!  But  work 
it  did,  and  from  there  it  grew. 

The   Federal-Aid   Highway  Act  of   1944 

All  these  preparations  for  peace  in  time  of  war, 
mostly  in  the  planning  area,  led  to  the  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1944.  With  all  the  Federal-aid  acts 
since  1916,  it  is  difficult  and  probably  not  useful  to 
try  to  single  out  one  or  a  few  that  are  the  most  sig- 
nificant. The  1916  Act,  the  first,  was  organic  legisla- 
tion that  got  it  all  started.  The  1921  Act  stands  out 
by  introducing  the  system  concept.  More  recently  the 
1956  Act,  setting  up  the  Highway  Trust  Fund  and 
authorizing  funds  to  complete  the  Interstate  System, 
must  be  one  of  the  most  significant.  But  none  can 
stand  out  above  the  1944  Act  as  "landmark"  legisla- 
tion. 

First,  it  authorized  apportionments  for  a  3-year 
period  beginning  at  the  termination  of  the  war  emer- 
gency or  at  the  concurrent  resolution  of  the  two  houses 
of  Congress,  and  it  authorized  a  large  amount  ($1.5 
billion). 

Second,  it  authorized  funds  specifically  for  expendi- 
ture on  the  "Federal-aid  highway  system  in  urban 
areas,"  not  for  a  Federal-aid  urban  system.  (Origi- 
nally the  routes  were  "extensions"  of  the  rural  Fed- 
eral-aid or  Federal-aid  secondary  I'outes,  and  later 
"portions"  of  those  routes.) 

Third,  it  required  the  selection  of  a  Federal-aid 
secondary  system  for  which  secondary  funds  were 
earmarked. 


276 


Fourth,  it  divided  the  funds  as  follows:  45  percent 
for  the  Federal-aid  system  (it  was  not  yet  designated 
as  the  "primary"  system,  and  the  45  percent  could  be 
expended  on  rural  or  urban  portions  at  the  States' 
election);  30  percent  for  the  secondary  system;  and 
25  percent  for  the  routes  in  ui'ban  areas.  This 
45  :30 :25  ratio  was  to  prevail  until  1973. 

Fifth,  it  authorized  the  designation  of  the  National 
System  of  Interstate  Highways,  following  almost 
exactly  the  recommendations  of  tlie  National  Inter- 
regional Highway  Committee.  The  system  was  to  be 
".  .  .  so  located  as  to  connect  by  routes,  as  direct  as 
practicable,  the  principal  metropolitan  areas,  cities, 
and  industrial  centers,  to  serve  the  national  defense, 
and  to  connect  at  suitable  border  points  with  routes 
of  continental  importance  in  the  Dominion  of  Canada 
and  the  Republic  of  Mexico.  .  .  ."  (Although  it  was 
later  to  become  an  issue,  nowhere  did  the  Congress 
indicate  that  the  system  should  be  expected  to  accom- 
modate purely  local  traffic,  such  as  urban  commuting 
movement.) 

Sixth,  it  provided  that  on  any  highway  or  street 
thereafter  constructed  with  Federal  aid  ".  .  .  the  loca- 
tion, form,  and  character  of  informational,  regulatory, 
and  warning  signs,  curb  and  pavement  or  other  mark- 
ings, and  traffic  signals  installed  or  placed  by  any 
public  authority,  or  other  agency,  shall  be  subject  to 
the  approval  of  the  State  highway  department  with 
the  concurrence  of  the  Public  Roads  Administra- 
tion  " 

Seventh,  it  added  to  the  authorization  of  the  II/2 
percent  highway  planning  funds  the  words  "and  for 
highway  research  necessary  in  connection  therewith." 
It  was  the  view  of  the  Public  Roads  Administration 


that  research  in  the  structure  and  geometries  of  the 
highway  was  proceeding  well  under  State  financing 
or  with  Public  Roads  administrative  funds,  but  that 
not  enough  effort  was  being  applied  to  research  in  the 
areas  of  economics  and  administration.  Once  research 
in  these  areas  became  established,  the  restriction  was 
lifted  by  subsequent  legislation,  but  through  the  late 
forties  and  the  fifties  Commissioner  MacDonald  stood 
firm  against  the  use  of  any  II/2  percent  funds  for  the 
generally  more  favorably  viewed  physical  research. 

Indeed  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944 
stands  as  landmark  legislation;  and  most  of  its  for- 
ward looking  provisions  stemmed  directly  from  the 
highway  planning  efforts  so  strongly  advocated  and 
ably  administered  by  Fairbank  and  MacDonald.  It 
was  a  mandate  for  the  future. 

Planning   in   the  Postwar  Period 

Statewide   Highway   Planning 

During  the  war,  highways  were  officially  regarded 
as  expendable,  and  they  were  pretty  well  spent.  The 
most  noticeable  resulting  deficiencies  were  probably 
on  the  State  primary  systems,  and  even  though  Fed- 
eral-aid funds  authorized  in  the  1944  Act  were  avail- 
able, it  was  soon  apparent  that  funds  at  both  State 
and  Federal  levels  would  not  be  adequate  to  stay 
even  with  growing  needs,  to  say  nothing  of  recouping 
the  wartime  losses.  Traffic  volumes  were  greatly  de- 
pressed by  gasoline  rationing  and  the  suspension  of 
passenger  car  production  during  the  war,  dropping 
to  about  half  their  1941  level  in  1943  and  1944.  It 
was  generally  expected  that  traffic  would  recover,  but 
slowly,  and  that  time  would  be  on  the  side  of  the 


THE  NATIONAL  SYSTEM  OF  INTERSTATE  AND  DEFENSE  HIGHWAYS 


■  COMPLETED  OR 
IMPROVED  AND  OPEN  TO  TRAFFIC 

CpUltd   I.   (all  .r   .cc.pl.bl*   It.Bd.M..  .r   inpra.cd   I.   ■I.nd.rdi 
*d*«..l.  for  pr<t*Dt  Ir.rr.c.  ba>ll  «>l1i  liKr.lal*  or  olbtr  p.btk  FnBd*. 

'  MAJOR  TOLL  ROADS 

UNDER  CONSTRUCTION 
•  PRELIMINARY  STATUS  OR  NOT  YET  IN  PROGRESS 


The  Interstate  System  is  the  only  completely  planned  highway  system  in  the  United  States. 


277 


highway  officials  in  organizing  their  catch-up  pro- 
grams. But  this  was  not  to  be.  Traffic  volumes  re- 
covering from  their  1943  low  point  reached  the  1941 
level  again  in  1946,  not  somewhere  around  1960  as 
perhaps  wishful  thinking  had  forecast.  By  1948  they 
had  reached  the  prewar  trend  line,  having  thus  com- 
pletely recovered  in  only  5  years,  and  the  volumes 
continued  to  push  vigorously  upward,  following  al- 
most exactly  the  equally  unexpected  surging  economic 
growth. 

To  try  to  establish  with  the  State  legislatures  the 
need  for  more  funds,  many  highway  officials  reasoned 
that  if  highway  planning  facts  were  convincing  to 
the  War  Production  Board  in  allocation  of  critical 
materials,  they  might  be  equally  convincing  to  State 
legislators  as  evidence  of  highway  needs  in  their  own 
States.  Some  States  did  use  the  data  to  develop  pro- 
grams for  bringing  the  State  highway  systems  back 
to  reasonable  service  levels,  hopeful  of  receiving  leg- 
islative approval  and  necessary  funding.  But  in- 
variably they  met  disappointment.  The  programs 
were  thought  to  be  self-serving,  that  State  highway 
needs  were  emphasized  at  the  expense  of  county  and 
local  roads;  or  that  they  gave  insufficient  attention  to 
the  needs  of  the  cities;  or  that  the  needs  were  over- 
stated; or  that  the  program  would  require  increased 
tax  rates.  Out  of  this  confusing  and  often  frustrat- 
ing situation  came  the  statewide  highway  needs 
studies.  The  first  in  California,  completed  in  1946, 
set  the  stage  for  what  might  be  called  an  era  of  such 
studies. 

California's  postwar  highway  problems  were  per- 
haps the  most  severe  of  any  State,  stemming  largely 
from  the  huge  population  increases  during  and  im- 
mediately following  the  war.  Responding  to  the 
challenge,  the  State  legislature  enacted  the  Collier- 
Burns  Act,  so  named  for  its  authors  Senator  Collier 
and  Assemblyman  Bums,  the  chairmen  of  the  respec- 
tive highway  committees.  The  Act  laid  down  condi- 
tions perceived  as  needed  for  a  successful  survey  of 
highway  deficiencies  and  which  became  virtually 
"principles"  that  were  generally  adopted  by  other 
States  as  they  followed  California's  lead. 

The  first  "principle"  the  Act  specified  was  the  es- 
tablishment of  a  legislative  commission  to  whom  the 
report  was  to  be  made  and  which  could  observe  the 
procedures  and  conduct  of  the  work,  thereby  assuring 
consideration  of  the  report  by  the  legislature. 

Second,  it  provided  for  a  survey  of  all  roads  and 
streets,  not  just  the  State  highway  system,  so  no  level 
of  government  could  feel  that  its  needs  were  ignored. 

Third,  it  called  for  the  survey  to  be  conducted  by 
engineers  from  outside  the  State  to  avoid  any  possible 
inference  of  favoring  one  system  or  one  government 
level  over  another. 

Fourth,  it  called  for  a  classification  and  grouping 
into  systems  of  all  roads  and  streets  according  to  their 
functions,  toward  the  end  of  assigning  to  the  appro- 
priate government  levels  the  responsibility  for  admin- 
istering and  financing  the  improvement  programs  on 
the  different  systems. 

Fifth,  it  called  for  estimates  of  cost  and  recom- 
mendations of  programs  to  bring  the  entire  network 
up  to  desirable  standards. 


In  seeking  "outside"  engineering  assistance,  Cali- 
fornia came  into  agreement  with  the  Automotive 
Safety  Foundation  (ASF).  This  nonprofit  founda- 
tion, sponsored  by  the  automotive  and  associated  in- 
dustries, such  as  oil  and  rubber,  had  been  organized 
to  work  with  public  and  other  private  agencies  toward 
the  improvement  of  highway  safety.  Its  principal 
purpose  was  to  serve  as  a  rallying  point  for  activity 
in  the  field  of  highway  and  traffic  safety  and,  through 
educational  programs,  sponsorship  of  conferences  and 
meetings,  and  financial  support  of  projects,  to  mobi- 
lize resources  for  a  concerted  attack  on  the  accident 
problem.  It  had  become  convinced  that  improvement 
in  the  engineering  of  the  highway,  not  simply  to  pro- 
duce safer  designs  but  to  relate  the  design  standards 
to  the  function  and  capacity  requirements  of  the 
routes,  would  constitute  an  important  element  in  its 
program.  In  this  position  the  Foundation  received 
the  strong  endorsement  of  the  Public  Roads  Admin- 
istration and  with  the  Foundation's  President,  Pyke 
Johnson,  and  Commissioner  MacDonald  lending  their 
strong  and  steady  personal  support,  technical  and 
financial  resources  from  public  and  private  sectors 
were  deftly  marshalled  in  an  attack  on  specific  aspects 
of  the  overall  problems.  Thus,  the  Automotive  Safety 
Foundation,  through  its  engineering  division  organ- 
ized under  G.  Donald  Kennedy,  formerly  Highway 
Commissioner  of  Michigan  (the  only  elected  Commis- 
sioner among  the  State  highway  administrators), 
undertook  to  serve  as  the  engineering  consultant  for 
the  California  survey.  This  first  effort  led  to  increas- 
ing ASF  involvement  in  highway  needs  studies  over 
many  years  to  come. 

The  engineers  did  not  conduct  the  surveys.  Basic 
data  came  from  the  highway  planning  surveys  or, 
where  more  data  were  needed,  they  were  collected  by 
the  States,  counties  or  cities  as  required.  The  engi- 
neers, with  the  aid  of  technical  committees  represent- 
ing the  various  levels  of  government,  developed 
standards  against  which  street  and  highway  adequacy 
might  be  judged.  Cost  estimates  were  prepared  for 
needed  improvements  to  attain  the  agreed  upon  stand- 
ards, estimates  of  revenue  were  made,  and  from  the 
mass  of  data,  construction  programs  were  prepared. 
Usually  alternatives  were  proposed  to  show  the  gov- 
ernmental units  responsible  for  the  various  systems 
what  would  be  required  to  "catch  up"  with  needs  in 
periods  of  10,  15  or  20  years,  so  the  State  legislature 
and  other  governing  bodies  could  choose  how  rapidly 
they  might  or  could  bring  their  roads  and  streets  to 
adequacy.  Through  the  whole  process,  the  legislative 
commission  could  observe  the  work  as  it  progressed, 
and,  thus,  both  political  and  technical  leaders  had  had 
a  part  in  the  preparation  of  the  report. 

Here  perhaps  a  word  on  the  meaning  of  "highway 
needs"  is  in  order.  The  phrase  has  become  a  part  of 
our  vocabulary,  as  shown  by  legislation  at  both  Fed- 
eral and  State  levels.  The  term  is  unfortunate  per- 
haps in  that  it  may  lead  to  criticism  that  what  has 
been  proposed  is  not  to  satisfy  "needs"  but  "desires," 
and  the  forecast  of  "needs"  is  a  self-fulfilling  forecast 
in  that  if  a  highway  is  built  it  will  be  used,  and  thus 
the  "need"  demonstrated.  Actually  in  the  highway 
needs  studies,  two  sets  of  standards  were  generally 
used,  one  called  "tolerable"  and  the  other  "desirable." 


278 


The  needs  study  might  accept  as  not  needing  im- 
provement sections  that  were  barely  adequate  for  cur- 
rent traffic  or  meeting  "tolerable"  standards.  But 
when  any  section  was  found  to  be  below  that  level 
and  was  recommended  for  construction,  the  design 
was  based  on  what  would  be  required  to  meet  traffic 
volumes  of  20  years  beyond  the  expected  date  of  con- 
struction, with  all  desirable  safety  and  environmental 
factors  included — the  "desirable"  standard. 

TNTiat  really  is  done  is  to  establish  a  "level  of  serv- 
ice" that  would  in  effect  be  a  measure  of  the  quality 
of  traffic  flow — speed,  comfort  and  safety  all  included. 
The  higher  the  design  standard,  the  higher  the  level 
or  quality  of  service,  but  also  the  higher  the  cost. 
Thus,  the  criterion  becomes  the  degree  to  which  the 
desirable  level  of  service  can  be  attained,  limited 
generally  by  finances  but  sometimes,  as  in  urban  areas, 
by  physical  or  environmental  factors  as  well.  The 
level  of  service  to  be  used  as  a  goal  can  and,  in  fact, 
generally  must  be  the  subject  of  some  trade-offs  be- 
tween desirable  and  tolerable  sendee.  That  is  the 
way  in  which  "need"  should  be  interpreted  in  the 
needs  studies.  It  is  the  amount  of  mobility  and  safety 
that  the  public  is  willing  to  buy,  given  the  potential 
traffic  volumes,  and  the  costs  in  money,  environmental 
impact,  and  nonuser  social  and  economic  factors  in- 
volved. Once  the  technical  and  administrative  or 
political  leaders  concerned  have  agreed  upon  the  level 
of  service  that  is  appropriate  for  the  routes  or  systems 
to  be  studied  under  the  particular  conditions  involved, 
the  cost  estimate  is  simply  the  cost  to  achieve  it. 
Question  as  to  whether  it  is  to  satisfy  a  "need"  or  a 
"desire"  disappears,  for  the  target  generally  lies 
somewhere  in  between. 

Through  the  next  decade,  from  the  publication  of 
the  report  for  California  in  1946  up  to  the  launching 
of  the  Interstate  program  by  the  1956  Act,  the  Foun- 
dation assisted  19  States  in  conducting  their  needs 
studies,  not  all  as  complete  as  in  California  but  all 
using  the  same  format  with  respect  to  the  request  by 
the  State  legislature  for  the  study  and  the  committee 
structure  involving  both  technical  and  political  lead- 
ers. Of  course  in  all,  dependence  for  facts  fell  on  the 
highway  planning  surveys. 

Despite  the  visible  success  in  the  early  studies,  in- 
terest was  slow  in  building  up  in  many  States,  and 
the  pressures  to  overcome  the  immediate  problems  of 
the  wai'wom  highway's  were  enough  to  give  many 
States  reasons  for  not  worrying  about  long-range 
plans  or  programs.  Attention  even  to  keeping  the 
planning  data  up  to  date  lagged.  In  this  atmosphere 
Fairbank  pressed  even  harder  to  bring  to  the  States 
the  importance  of  planning  ahead.  In  one  speech, 
for  example,  he  closed  with  these  words : 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  motor  vehicle  manufactur- 
ers, by  a  concerted  action  to  improve,  and  more  exactly 
define  the  designed  capacity  of,  their  vehicles,  and 
through  the  recent  invaluable  assistance  of  the  Automo- 
tive Safety  Foundation,  of  which  they  are  the  principal 
support,  should  be  taking,  as  they  are,  a  leading  part  in 
bringing  about  the  needed  multilateral  cooperation  toward 
many  of  the  objectives  of  highway  transportation  plan- 
ning as  here  defined. 

Such  cooperation  and  broad  planning  is  being  achieved 
State  by  State,  one  after  another.  The  results  that  have 
issued  from  it  in  California,  the  even  more  gi-atifying 
results  soon  to  appear  in  Michigan  are  certain  to  inspire 
similar  effort  in  many  States. 


The  Public  Roads  Administration  is  willing  and  anxious 
to  take  its  part.  It  was  for  this  use,  exactly,  that  the 
highway  planning  surveys  were  conceived ;  to  these  ends 
every  item  of  the  recommended  outline  of  needed  fact 
gathering  was  directed.  A  recent  General  Administra- 
tive Memorandum  (No.  319,  issued  September  24,  1947) 
renews  our  promise  of  cooperation,  and  repeats  an  earlier 
suggestion  of  the  manner  in  which  information,  that  can 
be  well  assembled  only  by  the  highway  planning  surveys, 
can  he  addressed  to  the  ends  of  highway  transportation 
planning. 

The  State  highway  departments  cannot,  if  they  would, 
avoid  the  responsibility  of  major  contribution  to  such 
planning  effort  when  it  is  undertaken,  as  surely,  soon  or 
late  it  will  be,  in  every  State.  The  State  highway  plan- 
ning surveys  will  be  the  expected  source  of  most  of  the 
facts  required  in  that  planning. 

May  I,  in  closing,  suggest  to  the  head  of  each  State 
highway  department  here  attending,  that  he  take  a  fresh 
look  at  his  highway  planning  survey  after  the  approach- 
ing holidays ;  that,  patiently,  for  it  will  require  patience, 
he  read  the  full  text  of  General  Administrative  Mem- 
orandum No.  319 ;  and,  facing  toward  the  west  from 
whence  a  new  wind  is  blowing,  decide  for  himself, 
whether  he  is  going  to  be  ready,  as  the  inevitable  occa- 
sion will  require,  to  fulfill  the  requirements  of  this  thing 
called  highway  transportation  planning." 

With  the  steady  pressure  of  surging  traffic  growth, 
the  continued  urging  from  Washington,  and  the  suc- 
cess of  the  early  needs  studies  carried  on  with  the  aid 
of  the  Automotive  Safety  Foundation,  35  States  had 
followed  California's  lead  by  1959  in  preparing  for 
their  future.  Not  all  studies  covered  all  aspects  of 
the  problem,  other  consultants  entered  the  field,  and 
in  some  States  repeat  studies  were  carried  out  to 
measure  the  effectiveness  of  programs  adopted  as  a 
result  of  the  original  studies  or  to  up  date  the  earlier 
recommendations  in  light  of  unanticipated  changes  of 
conditions,  notably  the  rate  of  traffic  growth.  With 
the  attention  given  to  the  highway  needs  studies,  the 
use  of  statewide  highway  planning  data  had  come 
into  its  own  in  the  decade  after  the  war  and  estab- 
lished highway  planning  as  an  essential  function  of 
the  highway  departments. 

Urban   Transportation   Planning 

The  postwar  decade  saw  wide  expansion  of  the 
urban  transportation  planning  process  that,  as  noted 
earlier,  emerged  in  Tulsa  and  Little  Rock  in  1944. 
The  methods  were  unique,  untried,  and  the  cost  of 
data  collection  high.  The  figure  of  10  cents  per  capita 
originally  estimated  proved  to  be  far  too  low,  but 
even  so  it  represented  amounts  well  beyond  any 
figures  that  had  been  thought  of  as  the  cost  of  an 
urban  traffic  survey. 

Even  as  the  data  collection  process  was  new,  so  too 
were  new  analytical  procedures  required.  The  origins 
and  destinations  of  trips  for  a  representative  day 
were  recorded  in  the  sample  households  and  expanded 
on  the  basis  of  the  sample  size  to  represent  the  total 
travel  for  the  entire  area.  Recognizing  that  the  par- 
ticular route  of  travel  was  determined  by  the  layout 
of  the  street  network  and  the  capacity  and  condition 
of  the  streets,  no  attempt  was  made  to  trace  the  actual 
routes,  but  rather  to  show  on  a  map  the  direct  line 
between  origin  and  destination.  With  the  sample 
households  grouped  into  zones  of  similar  characteris- 
tics, or  sometimes  simply  geographically  delimited, 
all  trips  between  each  zone  and  each  other  zone  were 
shown   by   bands   of   varying   widths.     These  bands 


279 


This  map  shows  the  major  "desire  lines"  that  resulted  from  a 
transportation  study  made  in  Baltimore  in  1938. 


came  to  be  known  as  "desire  lines,"  showing  the  de- 
sired paths  of  all  trips,  either  by  private  vehicle  or 
transit  in  the  area.  The  heaviest  bands  then  gave 
indication  of  the  desirable  location  of  arterial  routes 
(whether  or  not  feasible)  and  the  traffic  volumes  the 
trips  would  produce.  As  a  check  on  the  accuracy  of 
the  survey,  the  number  of  trips  crossing  a  natural 
screen  line,  such  as  a  river,  as  shown  by  the  desire 
lines  could  be  compared  with  actual  vehicle  counts. 
Generally  a  high  accuracy  was  found,  often  over  90 
percent  agreement,  but  where  the  sample  produced 
too  few  trips  (seldom  did  the  interviews  produce  too 
many)  the  screen  line  counts  provided  a  basis  for 
adjustment. 

It  is  important  to  recall  what  was  recognized  then^ — 
that  the  process  was  a  survey.  It  did  not  produce  a 
plan  nor  even  the  future  volumes  for  design  purposes. 
The  only  way  to  estimate  future  travel  was  to  assume 
that  if  the  planners  expected  the  population  to  in- 
crease by  say  50  percent,  then  50  percent  should  be 
added  to  all  current  origins  and  destinations.  It  was 
known  that  that  wasn't  right,  for  certainly  population 
or  industry  would  grow  more  in  some  zones  than  in 
others,  but  it  was  better  than  not  increasing  them  at 


all,  which  some  planners  were  then  urging.  It  be- 
came apparent  early  in  the  game  that  a  relationship 
existed  between  the  use  of  the  land  and  the  travel  it 
produced  or  attracted — and  that  it  could  be  measured. 
But  means  to  use  this  relationship  in  developing  plans 
for  the  future  were  rudimentary  at  best.  The  earliest 
effort  to  apply  this  approach  was  probably  in  San 
Juan,  Puerto  Rico,  where  the  travel  to  and  from  the 
existing  airport  was  transferred  to  the  expected  loca- 
tion of  a  new  airport  in  developing  a  freeway  plan. 

It  remained  for  the  development  of  the  computer 
to  permit  exploitation  of  the  land  use-transportation 
relationship,  given  its  first  major  test  in  Detroit. 
This  new  computer  technology  marked  the  turning 
from  surveying  to  planning.  But  the  application  of 
the  new  technology  could  not  have  occurred  without 
the  resources  of  the  highway  department's  I14  percent 
HPR  funds  being  made  available.  And  it  could  not 
have  been  implemented  without  conversion  of  the 
land  use  inventories  and  projections,  then  usually 
shown  on  maps  by  zones  of  different  colors,  from  a 
qualitative  to  a  quantitative  basis.  It  was  necessary 
to  Icnow  the  trip  producing  characteristics  of  each 
type  of  land  use.    It  was  important  to  know  not  that 


280 


a  zone  was  industrial,  but  what  kind  of  industry  was 
there,  for  a  shoe  factory  would  produce  far  different 
numbers  of  trips  than  a  steel  mill,  for  example.  And 
in  residential  zones  income  levels  were  important  be- 
cause they  were  a  factor  in  numbers  of  trips  and 
choice  of  modes.  This  in  turn  induced  the  highway 
departments  and  interested  cooperating  cities  to  bring 
into  the  planning  process,  up  until  then  carried  on 
largely  by  engineers,  professionals  from  other  dis- 
ciplines— such  as  planning,  geography,  mathematics, 
and  sociology — better  equipped  by  ti-aining  to  deal 
with  the  factors  of  urban  growth,  to  which  transpor- 
tation facilities  must  be  related. 

This  tremendous  breakthrough  in  planning,  a  de- 
velopment which  put  land  use  and  general  planning 
as  well  as  transportation  planning  on  a  quantitative 
basis,  can  be  attributed  to  three  factors,  each  essen- 
tial— the  introduction  of  the  computer,  the  availabil- 
ity of  resources  never  before  within  reach  of  planners, 
and  the  bringing  into  the  planning  process,  in  many 
cases  with  responsibility  for  the  direction  of  the  work, 
of  professionals  from  other  than  the  engineering  dis- 
cipline. But  these  factors  themselves  would  not  have 
produced  the  result  had  it  not  been  for  strong  urging 
of  the  Public  Roads  Administration  and  the  technical 
advances  developed  by  its  staff'  and  the  willingness  of 
many  of  the  State  highway  departments  and  inter- 
ested cities  to  participate  in  this  major  pioneering 
effort.  And  it  also  required  a  liberal  interpretation 
of  what  is  a  highway  purpose,  for  the  use  of  highway 
funds  both  at  Federal  and  State  level  are  restricted 
by  law  to  expenditures  for  highway  purposes.  High- 
way oflScials  had  one  ally,  however,  and  a  strong  one, 
in  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget,  which  informally  urged 
leaning  as  far  as  possible  in  the  financing  of  land  use 
and  general  planning.  The  logic,  of  course,  is  that 
one  can  hardly  produce  a  transportation  plan  without 
a  land  use  plan  reflecting  the  form  of  city  or  region 
the  local  citizens  will  probably  have  if  not  necessarily 
what  they  desire,  and  it  was  on  this  basis  that  high- 
way officials,  sometimes  with  justifiable  concern  as  to 
its  legality,  agreed  to  finance  considerably  more  than 
what  might  be  narrowly  construed  as  highway  plan- 
ning. In  plain  fact,  land  use  from  the  beginning  of 
the  modern  planning  process,  has  been  accepted  as  the 
base  from  which  urban  transportation  planning  must 
start.  And  perhaps  more  recently  but  no  less  strongly 
accepted  is  the  fact  that  transportation  can  be  an 
important  factor  in  determining  land  use.  The  two 
are  interrelated. 

In  the  matter  of  financing  of  the  land  use  portion 
of  the  process,  tribute  must  be  paid  to  the  Housing, 
and  Home  Finance  Agency  (HHFA)  and  its  officials 
which,  as  the  "701"  planning  assistance  funds  became 
available,  joined  in  the  effort  as  full  partners  at  the 
Federal  level.  The  cordial  and  effective  cooperation 
of  the  staffs  of  HHFA  and  the  Public  Roads  Admin- 
istration and  the  direction  of  much  of  the  701  money 
to  the  cooperative  (sometimes  called  hyphenated) 
land  use-transportation  planning  process  must  rank 
well  up  with  the  highway  contribution  in  the  success 
of  the  process. 

"\Miile  highway  departments  were  placing  major 
emphasis  on  planning  arterial  routes  in  urban  areas, 
city  street  congestion  was  steadily  worsening.  Ar- 
terial  highway    improvements   even   though   planned 


were  not  appearing  because  of  lack  of  funds,  and  it 
became  increasingly  obvious  that  even  when  built  they 
would  still  leave  heavy  congestion  on  city  streets, 
particularly  in  the  downtown  areas.  The  fact  that 
the  highway  departments'  efforts  seemed  to  be  result- 
ing in  plans  but  not  pi'Ograms  was  leading  to  expres- 
sions of  quite  divergent  philosophies.  Many  city 
officials,  particularly  traffic  engineers  and  public  works 
directors,  began  urging  de-emphasis  on  freeways  and 
concentration  on  traffic  engineering  type  of  improve- 
ments and  minor  construction  programs  as  an  imme- 
diate aid  to  lessening  congestion.  Highway  officials, 
at  least  in  some  cases,  held  the  view  that  such  localized 
improvements  were  stopgap  at  best,  and  that  urban 
officials  should  give  greater  attention  to  getting  on 
with  what  the  highway  officials  saw  as  the  essential 
long-range  improvements.  It  was  in  this  atmosphere 
that  the  National  Committee  on  Urban  Transporta- 
tion (NCUT)  was  created  in  1954,  initiated  and 
sponsored  by  the  Automotive  Safety  Foundation. 
Its  purpose  was  "to  help  cities  do  a  better  job  of 
transportation  planning  through  systematic  collection 
and  analysis  of  basic  facts  .  .  .  [to]  afford  the  public 
the  best  possible  transportation  service  at  the  least 
possible  cost  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  aid  in  accomplishing  desir- 
able goals  of  urban  renewal  and  sound  suburban 
growth."  ^^ 

The   list   of   organizations   which   formally   named 
representatives  to  constitute  the  National  Committee 
is  impressive  in  its  inclusion  of  virtually  every  asso- 
ciation  concerned   with   transportation   in   the   urban 
area.    The  list  is  as  follows : 
The  American  Municipal  Association 
The  American  Public  Works  Association 
The  International  City  Managers'  Association 
The  National  Institute  of  Municipal  Law  Officers 
The  American  Society  of  Planning  Officials 
The  Municipal  Finance  Officers  Association 
The  Canadian  Federation  of  Mayors  and  Munici- 
palities 
The  National  Association  of  County  Officials 
The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 

Among  the  consultants  to  the  Committee  were 
Ralph  Bartelsmeyer,  then  Chief  Highway  Engineer 
of  Illinois,  who  represented  the  American  Association 
of  State  Highway  Officials,  and  George  Anderson, 
Vice  President  of  the  American  Transit  Association. 
Ben  West,  Mayor  of  Nashville  was  the  first  chairman 
of  the  Committee,  later  succeeded  by  Glenn  Richards, 
Commissioner  of  Public  Works  of  Detroit. 

The  assembly  of  this  Committee  not  only  exempli- 
fied the  ability  of  the  Foundation  to  marshall  re- 
sources to  bear  on  a  specific  problem,  but  also  marked 
the  beginning  of  the  cooperative  approach  to  urban 
transportation  problems. 

The  Committee  enlisted  a  great  many  experts  in 
various  areas  of  urban  transportation  to  prepare  a 
series  of  technical  manuals  covering  all  phases  of 
data  collection  and  processing,  as  well  as  recom- 
mendations for  developing  the  plan,  carrying  out  the 
plan  and  improving  transportation  administration. 
A  count  of  the  members  of  the  subcommittees  and 
their  consultants  and  advisors  adds  up  to  142,  all 
recognized  experts  or  leaders  in  their  respective  fields. 
It  was  an  unparalleled  volunteer  effort,  from  1954 
through  to  the  publication  of  the  book  Better  Trans- 


281 


portation  for  Tour  City  by  the  Public  Administration 
Service  in  1958.  This  guide  and  the  17  procedural 
manuals  became  "best  sellers,"  for  the  Public  Ad- 
ministration Service  and  went  through  several  print- 
ings. The  guide  and  manuals  formed  the  basis  for 
Action  Program  of  Urban  Transportation  Planning 
which  is  discussed  later. 

It  was  during  the  preparation  of  the  NCUT  guide 
and  manuals  that  the  divergent  philosophies  of  urban 
transportation  improvement  began  to  merge.  In  the 
Committee's  early  deliberations,  strong  representations 
were  made  that  the  planning  effort  by  the  States,  then 
often  termed  the  "Bureau  Method,"  was  too  expensive 
and  produced  no  data  for  localized  traffic  engineering 
improvement.  There  was  considerable  sentiment  that 
the  Committee  take  a  firm  stand  in  recommending 
diversion  of  effort  from  the  long-range  to  the  short- 
range  studies  and  planning.  Finally  it  was  recog- 
nized that  it  would  be  most  unwise  to  look  on  the  two 
approaches  as  competitive  and  that  the  city  interests 
should  join  with  the  States  in  total  studies,  long  and 
short  range.  This  decision  solidified  the  Committee's 
attack  on  the  problem,  and  the  product  of  its  work 
soon  brought  the  Public  Roads  Administration  into 
the  activity  as  a  financial  sponsor  along  with  the 
Automotive  Safety  Foundation.  And  upon  its  com- 
pletion, the  program  proposed  by  the  Committee  was 
endorsed  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  and  by  the 
Joint  Committee  on  Highways  that  had  by  then  been 
named  by  the  American  Municipal  Association  and 
the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials. 
The  Bureau  also  found  that  "In  general,  the  studies 
embraced  in  the  program,  if  included  in  the  statewide 
highway  planning  survey  of  any  state  .  .  .  are  eligible 
for  financing  assistance  from  federal-aid  highway 
funds  apportioned  to  the  states. . . ."  " 

Thus,  this  volunteer  effort  not  only  produced  tech- 
nical documents  of  lasting  importance,  but  sparked 
a  significant  gain  in  Federal-State-local  relationships 
and  opened  a  channel  for  Federal  aid  to  cities  in 
solving  their  local  transportation  problems.  And, 
incidentally,  the  Committee  having  completed  its 
work  in  1958,  voluntarily  disbanded,  not  a  common- 
place occurrence  in  Washington. 

Planning   in   the   Washington   Office 

The  increasing  activity  in  the  area  of  highway 
needs  studies  and  the  urban  travel  habit  surveys 
placed  a  considerable  burden  on  the  Washington 
Office  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  Although  a 
Federal  planning  engineer  was  located  in  each  State 
and  in  each  field  region,  their  responsibilities  were 
primarily  administrative.  Most  of  the  technical  as- 
sistance and  reviews  of  the  ongoing  planning  activi- 
ties in  the  States  came  from  Washington,  especially 
where  innovative  methods  and  pilot  projects  preceded 
the  more  general  adoption  of  new  procedures  or  in- 
vestigation of  new  areas.  Even  so,  much  effort  went 
into  advancing  the  art  of  planning,  or  as  later  more 
explicitly  defined  to  satisfy  the  accounting  office,  re- 
search in  the  planning  method. 

The  highway  needs  study  procedures  offers  one 
example.  The  accepted  procedure  in  the  State  studies 
was  to  estimate  the  deficiencies  in  the  highway  system 
route  by  route  as  they  existed  at  the  time  of  the  sur- 
vey and  as  they  were  expected  to  appear  as  traffic 


continued  to  grow  and  roads  continued  to  wear  out 
or  become  inadequate  in  capacity.  Then  the  year  by 
year  requirements  to  overcome  these  deficiencies  were 
accumulated  to  show  the  total  need  by  systems  or  for 
the  entire  State. 

Even  before  the  highway  planning  surveys  were 
organized,  work  was  being  done  under  agreement  be- 
tween the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  the  Iowa  State 
University  on  what  were  called  road  life  studies. 
This  study  accepted  that  just  as  the  average  life  of 
human  beings,  or  public  utility  installations,  or  rail- 
road ties  could  be  forecast  by  actuarial  methods,  so 
too  could  the  life  of  road  surfaces.  Plotting  the 
curve  of  the  actual  lives  of  road  surfaces  from  the 
time  of  placement  until  they  were  retired  from  service 
by  reconstruction  or  for  other  reasons,  including  dif- 
ferent surface  types,  would  give  characteristic  curves 
based  on  actual  experience.  In  many  States  bond 
issue  financing  provided  funds  for  a  large  mileage  of 
road  to  be  built  in  a  very  short  period,  all  or  most  of 
which  would  have  to  be  rebuilt  or  otherwise  taken 
from  service  at  some  future  time.  Provision  must  be 
made  for  this  replacement  cost,  and  by  matching  the 
curve  of  retirements  after,  say,  10  years  since  con- 
struction with  a  curve  that  had  been  developed  by 
experience  of  similar  surfaces  over,  say,  a  30-year 
period,  the  replacement  needs,  year  by  year,  could  be 
forecast.  This  forecast  did  not  reveal  which  par- 
ticular sections  would  be  retired,  but  it  would  give  a 
reasonable  estimate  of  the  total  replacement  program 
to  be  anticipated  in  any  year  for  financial  planning. 
The  success  of  this  approach  led  to  its  adoption  as  a 
part  of  the  highway  planning  survey  package  in  all 
States.  Replacement  of  a  road  surface  on  the  same 
location  did  not  retire  the  whole  value  of  the  original 
investment,  however.  The  right-of-way  and  probably 
much  of  the  grading  and  drainage,  still  were  usable, 
perhaps  depreciated  but  still  an  asset.  So  it  was 
reasoned  that  a  curve  of  investment  life,  similar  to 
the  road  surface's  structural  life,  could  also  be  viewed 
on  an  actuarial  basis.  While  there  was,  then  at  least, 
no  statistical  relationship  between  investment  in  the 
system  and  demands  upon  it  as  shown  by  traffic 
volumes  accommodated,  it  was  further  reasoned  that 
the  depreciated  investments  in  the  highway  plant 
should  keep  pace  with  traffic  growth.  This  view  was 
fully  supported  by  the  facts  in  the  decade  of  the 
thirties  when  the  curve  of  traffic  growth  and  the  curve 
of  the  value  of  the  depreciated  investment  did  almost 
exactly  coincide.  Indeed,  it  has  been  reasoned  and 
may  well  be  true  that  our  highway  systems  in  that 
period  came  nearer  to  meeting  the  demands  of  the 
traffic  of  its  time  than  at  any  period  before  or  since, 
for  it  was  in  this  decade  that  public  works  programs 
were  strongly  financed  as  unemployment  relief  pro- 
jects to  the  great  benefit  of  the  highway  systems. 
With  highway  construction  virtually  stopped  during 
the  war,  investment  had  barely  recovered  to  its  1940 
level  by  1950,  while  traffic  had  grown  by  50  percent. 
These  curves  showed  at  a  glance,  by  their  vertical 
separation,  how  far  the  investment  fell  below  the 
need — 50  percent.  And  by  their  horizontal  separation, 
they  showed  how  far  behind  traffic  the  investment 
lagged  in  years — 9  years,  at  the  projected  rate,  to 
catch  up  even  to  1950  needs,  to  say  nothing  about 
recovering  lost  ground. 


282 


When  this  approach  was  tested  in  a  number  of 
States  in  which  the  needed  investment  by  years  to 
achieve  the  accepted  level  of  service  had  been  calcu- 
lated by  accumulating  the  route-by-route  needs,  the 
agreement  in  the  total  figures  was  indeed  remarkable. 
The  investment  life  approach  could  not  replace  the 
detailed  survey,  for  it  could  not  be  directed  toward 
particular  routes  or  sections  necessary  to  program 
construction  expenditures.  But  it  gave  a  check  on  the 
detailed  engineering  method  and  also  provided  a 
simple,  easily  understood  means  of  keeping  abreast  of 
progress  year  by  year  as  the  highway  program  pro- 
ceeded. 

In  somewhat  the  reverse  of  the  highway  needs  sit- 
uation, traffic  volume  forecasting  was  usually  ap- 
proached on  an  areawide  basis.  The  classic  procedure 
was  to  estimate  population,  motor  vehicle  ownership 
per  capita,  and  annual  miles  per  vehicle  over  the  years 
and  from  these  estimates  calculate  the  total  vehicle 
miles  of  travel  to  be  expected.  In  the  "depression 
psychology'"  still  persisting,  estimates  in  all  three  ele- 
ments generally  were  too  pessimistic,  with  the  multi- 
plication of  all  three  producing  far  too  low  estimates 
of  traffic  on  which  to  base  future  highway  needs  cal- 
culations. In  one  case  of  a  highway  needs  study,  the 
level  estimated  for  10  years  ahead  had  been  reached 
before  the  report  was  printed.  In  exploring  this  sit- 
uation to  try  to  find  a  more  realistic  basis  for  fore- 
casting, it  was  discovered  that,  for  the  decade  of  the 
thirties,  traffic  had  been  growing  at  almost  the  same 
rate  as  the  national  economy  and  that,  once  the  aber- 
rations of  the  war  were  behind  us,  parallel  growth 
was  resumed.  On  the  strength  of  that  finding,  in 
1950  it  was  suggested  by  E.  H.  Holmes,  Chief  of  the 
Highway  Transport  Branch  of  BPE,  that  this  rela- 
tionship was  entirely  logical  and  that  in  planning 
ahead  it  would  be  unwise  to  anticipate  a  growth  rate 
below  that  of  the  last  two  decades— 4  percent  per  year 
compounded.  (This  rate  of  growth  would  see  traffic 
double  in  171/2  years;  it  did  double  in  I614.)  This 
forecast  was  greeted  with  skepticism,  to  put  it  mildly, 
perhaps  not  because  of  doubts  as  to  the  relationship, 
but  more  by  doubts  that  that  rate  of  economic  growth 
could  continue.  It  was  not  until  1954  that  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  formally  accepted  the  sound- 
ness of  this  relationship  and  raised  its  sights  accord- 
ingly. Actually  over  the  past  two  decades,  the  gross 
national  product  has  been  growing  at  about  3  percent 
annually  while  traffic  has  continued  its  4  percent  rate, 
presumably  as  our  economy  shifts  from  an  industrial 
to  a  service  oriented  society  and  with  a  generally 
higher  economic  level. 

But  even  the  more  realistic  approach  to  traffic 
growth  forecasting  on  an  areawide  basis  was  of  little 
help  in  estimating  probable  volumes  on  specific  routes. 
With  the  aid  of  selected  States,  origin  and  destination 
studies  were  carried  on  before  and  after  major  route 
improvements  were  made,  and  studies  were  made 
comparing  parallel  routes,  such  as  toll  roads  and 
parallel  existing  routes.  These  studies  disclosed  that 
the  traffic  on  the  new  routes  could  be  segregated  into 
four  groups:  trips  "diverted"  from  other  routes  by 
the  higher  level  of  service;  trips  "generated"  simply 
because    the   new    routes    offered    a    convenience    not 


previously  available;  "development"  trips  resulting 
from  new  development  along  the  routes;  and  finally, 
some  trips  simply  resulting  from  "general  traffic 
growth."  Wliile  subsequent  research  has  refined  this 
approach,  estimates  using  these  four  general  divisions 
of  composition  of  the  traffic  stream  were  generally 
the  basis  on  which  the  States  estimated  needs,  route 
by  route,  required  for  the  important  studies  to  be 
conducted  in  1954  and  1955. 

These  were  examples  of  developing  and  improving 
planning  techniques  through  research.  During  this 
period,  great  advances  were  made  in  processing, 
analyzing  and  interpreting  data  collected  in  the  urban 
travel  habit  studies.  As  noted  earlier,  with  the  data 
processing  equipment  then  available,  the  survey 
method  was  validated  in  the  early  studies.  Travel 
could  be  accurately  reproduced  through  home  inter- 
views. But  to  project  travel  into  the  future,  the  re- 
lationships between  travel  and  land  use  had  to  be 
established,  and  as  also  noted,  it  took  the  computer 
and  the  introduction  of  new  disciplines  into  the 
process  to  do  it. 

What  emerged  from  this  effort  were  a  series  of 
relationships,  called  models  in  computer  terminology, 
that  first  showed  the  trips  that  might  be  expected 
from  a  zone  of  known  land  use  to  other  zones  of 
loiown  land  uses,  as  determined  from  the  actual  travel 
in  the  area.  Then  with  the  number  of  trips  from 
each  zone  to  each  other  zone  calculated,  another  series 
of  models  to  permit  the  "assigning"  of  the  trips  to  the 
links  of  an  existing  or  proposed  network  of  routes, 
either  highway  or  transit,  was  developed.  The  first 
series  of  models  employed  economic  and  social  factors 
available  by  zones  from  census  records,  such  as  occu- 
pation, income  level,  and  number  in  the  family  and 
their  ages.  The  second  included  physical  factors  such 
as  the  purpose,  time  and  distance  of  trips  by  various 
routings,  costs  of  parking  if  that  were  involved,  cost 
of  travel  by  transit,  and  other  factors  to  predict  the 
mode  and  probable  route  of  travel.  The  intensive 
work  in  this  area  led  to  a  computer  program  "pack- 
age" of  models  that  permitted  the  estimation  of  trips 
and  their  routing  with  satisfying  (to  some,  surpris- 
ing) accuracy.  In  application  of  these  models  to 
estimate  future  travel  and  transportation  facility 
needs,  future  land  use  had  to  be  estimated.  Research 
showed  that  computer  simulation  could  also  be  used 
to  predict  the  probable  use  of  land,  basing  the  models 
largely  on  theory  and  testing  them  against  actual 
changes  in  land  use  as  the  urban  areas  expanded. 
In  that  success  it  may  be  said  that  the  quantitative 
approach  had  been  brought  to  urban  planning  by  the 
transportation  planners.  The  use  of  these  models,  in 
combination,  can  show  what  transportation  facilities 
are  required  to  provide  a  desired  level  of  service  for  a 
given  land  use;  they  will  also  show  what  density  of 
land  use  may  be  allowed  if  a  desired  level  of  trans- 
portation service  on  a  given  transportation  network 
is  to  be  maintained.  These  models,  refined  as  they 
have  been  over  the  years,  can  appraise  the  effect  of 
land  use  on  transportation,  as  well  as  the  reverse,  the 
effect  of  transportation  on  land  use.  They  can  show 
how  to  achieve  balance  between  transportation  and 
other  development. 


283 


Edward  H.   "Ted"  Holmes 


In  1906,  Ted  Holmes  was  born  in  Kingston,  Massachusetts,  close  by 
to  Plymouth.  By  the  time  he  was  10,  the  Federal- Aid  Road  Act  of 
1916  had  become  the  first  national  Federal-aid  program.  Holmes  knew 
nothing  of  it  at  the  time,  nor  did  he  realize  that  he  later  would  join  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  what  would  become  an  intimate  partnership 
lasting  40  years.  The  value  of  that  merger  is  still  reflected  in  the  qual- 
ity of  highway  programs  both  in  the  United  States  and  abroad. 

Holmes  graduated  with  a  degree  in  civil  engineering  from  the  Massa- 
chusetts Institute  of  Technology  in  1928.  Having  spent  a  summer  as  a 
student  engineer  making  time  studies  for  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads, 
he  returned  to  the  Bureau  after  graduation  as  a  trainee,  the  launching 
pad  for  most  BPR  engineers.  Holmes  once  remarked  that  at  this  point 
he  probably  envisioned  his  future  as  that  of  a  highway  contractor  or 
superintendent. 

That  vision  changed,  however,  when  he  was  chosen  in  1929  for  a 
fellowship  in  the  new  field  of  traffic  engineering  at  Harvard  University, 
from  which  he  graduated  with  a  master's  degree  in  1930.  From  that 
time  on,  Ted  Holmes  was  to  devote  his  entire  career  to  highway  re- 
search and  planning. 

From  his  earliest  endeavors,  he  pioneered  in  the  development  of  work- 
able solutions  for  both  short-  and  long-range  demands.  His  early  efforts 
in  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  included  the  planning,  adaptation,  and 
design  of  equipment  and  scientific  techniques  to  measure  the  traffic 
characteristics  essential  to  sound  traffic  planning,  design  and  engineer- 
ing. The  now  common  practice  of  counting  traffic  with  pneumatic 
detectors  was  just  one  of  the  revolutionary  steps  that  stemmed  from 
these  studies.  In  the  mid-1930's  he  had  a  major  role  in  establishing  the 
Federal-aid  statewide  highway  planning  surveys  which  provided  an 
appropriate  foundation  for  the  continuing  Federal  and  State  highway 
programs. 

Among  his  goals  were  the  pursuit,  development  and  encouragement 
of  a  supporting  staff.  Individually  and  collectively,  those  men  were  or 
became  outstanding  experts  in  their  fields.  This  was  due  in  principal 
measure  to  Holmes'  ability  to  forge  effective  teams  from  talented  indi- 
viduals and  to  give  each  one  an  opportunity  to  reach  his  potential. 

Holmes'  direction  and  counsel  were  invaluable  throughout  the  many 
years  when  highway  research  and  planning  served  as  the  keystone  of 
the  Nation's  highway  transportation  programs.  Through  the  1940's 
and  1950's,  he  guided  the  development  of  the  urban  factual  surveys  and 
analyses  of  traffic  and  urban  development.  These  later  evolved  into  a 
scientific  linking  of  transportation  to  land  use  which  is  now  known 
internationally  as  the  "3  C"  (comprehensive,  continuing,  cooperative) 
State-local  planning  process.  This  innovation  in  urban  transportation 
planning,  perhaps  the  most  notable  of  all  Ted  Holmes'  many  contribu- 
tions, was  subsequently  extended  to  statewide  planning.  The  key  to 
the  success  of  that  endeavor  was  the  development  of  a  high  degree  of 
cooperation  among  Federal,  State,  and  local  officials  that  pei'haps 
reached  its  high  point  with  the  Williamsburg  Conference  in  1965,  which 
he  chaired. 

Holmes'  efforts  covered  many  diverse  subjects  related  to  transport. 
Among  these  was  his  discovery  of  a  significant  parallel  between  trends 
in  vehicle  mileage  (VMT)  and  the  Gross  National  Product.  In  a 
speech  in  1950,  he  advised  his  audience  that  they  should  expect  an  in- 
crease in  traffic  over  the  next  15  years  of  at  least  4  percent  annually. 
Although  at  the  time  this  forecast  met  with  almost  universal  doubt,  in 
1965  the  aA^erage  rate  had  been  4.1  percent.  Not  all  forecasters  have 
been  that  fortunate ! 


284 


Many  of  the  great  landmark  reports  to  Congress  bore  his  mark,  among 
them  the  Interregional  Highways  report  of  1944  and  a  series  of  national 
needs  studies.  They  formed  the  framework  for  the  National  System  of 
Interstate  and  Defense  Highways  and  the  balance  of  the  Federal-aid 
system  and,  as  such,  are  basic  to  the  knowledge  of  the  histor}''  of  national 
highway  development  in  the  United  States. 

Thomas  H.  MacDonald,  long  the  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads, 
conunented  befoi-e  his  retirement  in  1953:  "At  no  time  in  the  last  25 
years  has  there  been  a  report  from  Research  which  did  not  have  the 
stamp  of  genius  in  it."  As  understudy  to  H.  S.  Fairbank,  Deputy 
Commissioner  of  Research,  Holmes'  thoughts  permeated  all  research 
activities.  For  example,  for  years  he  guided  the  applied  research  and 
development  of  new  planning  policy  procedures.  These  were  imple- 
mented in  the  Federal-aid  highway  program,  which  provided  continual 
stimulation  for  the  physical,  economic,  and  resource  development  of  the 
Nation. 

In  1956  Holmes  became  Director  of  Research  for  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads.  As  such  he  fostered  the  development  of  the  National  Coopera- 
tive Highway  Research  Program  within  the  Highway  Research  Board. 
He  also  deserves  credit  for  many  activities  between  various  levels  of 
government  affecting  the  Nation's  highway  transport  program.  Ex- 
amples include  his  leadership  in  determining  appropriate  sizes  and 
weights  of  commercial  vehicles  and  a  rational  allocation  of  highway 
costs  between  users  and  nonusers. 

When  Research  and  Planning  were  divided  into  separate  offices  in 
1962,  Ted  Holmes  decided  to  go  with  Planning  as  its  Director  because, 
as  he  later  remarked,  he  saw  there  "the  greater  opportunity  for  improv- 
ing our  transportation  and  our  society."  In  1967  he  assumed  the  re- 
sponsibility of  Director  of  Policy  Planning  for  the  Federal  Highway 
Administration  in  the  new  Department  of  Transportation  and,  with  the 
reorganization  of  the  FHWA,  became  Associate  Administrator  for 
Planning. 

Perhaps  a  fitting  description  of  Ted  Holmes  is  that  of  an  "imag- 
ineer" — one  who  is  able  to  link  creative  talent,  engineering  judgment, 
and  administrative  finesse.  His  has  always  been  an  inquiring  mind, 
restless,  seeking  solutions  soundly  anchored  in  analysis  of  relevant  facts, 
yet  always  cognizant  and  respectful  of  opinions  differing  from  his  own. 
To  his  associates,  he  always  pressed  one  significant  point — "How  well 
we  carry  on  our  work  will  be  judged  not  by  this  generation,  but  by 
those  future  generations  to  follow." 

His  writings  lace  the  literature  of  traffic  engineering,  highway  and 
transportation  research,  and  planning.  His  "Man  in  California,  1980's" 
paper,  as  so  many  others,  reflects  the  range  and  brilliance  of  his  thought. 
Following  his  retirement  from  Federal  service  in  1971,  he  undertook  a 
study  of  urban  transportation  planning  for  the  International  Road 
Federation.  His  1974  report.  The  Coordination  of  Urban  Developvient 
and  the  Planning  and  Development  of  Transportation  Facilities,  is  a 
basic  source  document  on  urban  transportation  and  development  plan- 
ning practices  in  selected  major  countries  around  the  world. 

Holmes'  accomplishments  have  been  recognized  in  many  quarters. 
Some  of  the  principal  honors  he  has  earned  include  the  Department  of 
Commerce  Meritorious  Service  Award,  presented  in  1950,  and  the  De- 
partment's gold  medal  for  Exceptional  Service  in  1962.  He  was  pre- 
sented the  Roy  W.  Crum  Award  for  distinguished  service  by  the 
Highway  Research  Board  in  1958.  He  received,  in  1968,  the  Thomas 
H.  MacDonald  Award  "For  Outstanding  Service  in  Highway  Engi- 
neering," from  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  and 
in  1970,  the  Theodore  M.  Matson  Award  for  Outstanding  Contributions 
to  Traffic  Engineering.  At  the  close  of  his  official  service  to  the  Depart- 
ment of  Transportation  in  1971,  Secretary  John  A.  Volpe  presented 
Mr.  Holmes  with  the  Department's  Silver  Medal  for  Meritorious 
Achievement  in  a  retirement  ceremony  attended  by  several  hundred  of 
his  friends  and  colleagues  from  government  and  many  private  organi- 
zations in  the  Washington  area. 

285 


Mr.  Holmes  has  also  received  acclaim  from  abroad.  In  1965  he  was 
honored  with  an  invitation  to  deliver  the  Sixth  Reese  Jeffreys  Triennial 
Lecture,  Looking  25  Years  Ahead  in  Highway  Development  in  the 
United  States^  to  the  Town  Planning  Institute,  London,  England.  He 
was  also  invited  to  be  the  principal  speaker  at  the  Australian  Road 
Research  Board  Conference  in  1972  and  at  the  South  African  Institu- 
tion of  Civil  Engineers  in  1973. 

Ted  Holmes  is  home  again  in  Kingston,  Massachusetts,  hard  by 
Plymouth.  He  lives  there  with  his  wife  of  40  years,  the  former  Eliza- 
beth Boynton  of  San  Francisco.  The  Holmeses  have  two  sons,  Joseph 
and  David,  who  still  reside  in  the  Washington,  D.C.  area. 

Greatly  respected  and  honored  in  all  his  fields  and  activities,  Ted 
Holmes  is  a  highly  knowledgeable,  yet  modest,  man  with  almost  limit- 
less energy,  practical  sense,  good  humor,  and  rare  analytical  talent. 
He  has  also  been  a  leader  with  exceptional  foresight  and  a  unique 
capability  for  understanding  people  and  for  organization  and  manage- 
ment. As  Senator  Jennings  Randolph  stated  in  the  Congressional 
Record,  "He  performed  a  major  role  in  improving  the  lot  of  his  fellow 
men  by  helping  to  provide  the  highway  facilities  a  mobile  society  de- 
mands. He  has  left  an  indelible  mark  on  the  Nation's  highway  pro- 
gram." 


When    a    segment    of    1-35    was    built    through    this 

residential    section    of    Minneapolis,    Minn.,    the 

continuity  of  the  communitii  teas  preserved  by 

providing  bridge  structures  for  pedestrians 

and  local  streets  over  I-S5. 


286 


I 


''♦^     *4 


m«* 

ii?^  - 

^^'*NlaBiS*!'t^^' 

^    4 

•i 

...JIJiI  "n  -^  -i^f 

-^jg- 

.■■.^.*»': 


^.t-^-f^i 


*C 


Reports  to  Congress 

Since  1938,  responding  to  the  direction  of  the  Con- 
gress for  reports  on  various  aspects  of  the  highway 
problem  was  sufficiently  demanding  almost  to  be 
called  a  regular  activity  in  itself.  While  not  all  re- 
ports were  prepared  by  the  planning  staff,  planning 
data,  available  or  collected  as  necessary,  were  involved 
in  all. 

In  response  to  Section  2  of  the  Federal-Aid  High- 
way Act  of  1948,  the  Commissioner  was  directed  to 
report  on  the  "current  conditions  and  deficiencies"  of 
the  Interstate  System  that  had  been  finally  designated 
only  on  August  2  of  the  previous  year.  The  report 
Highway  Needs  of  the  National  Defense^'^  showed 
graphically  the  use  made  of  the  highway  system  dur- 
ing the  war,  still  fresh  in  memory.  It  covered  mili- 
tary traffic  on  the  highways,  and  even  a  safe  emer- 
gency landing  of  an  airplane  on  the  highway.  It 
gave  examples  of  heavy  traffic  service  for  employees 
of  industrial  plants.  One  plant  was  opened  on  a  road 
on  which  the  average  traffic  of  700  vehicles  was 
swelled  to  14,000  when  the  plant  reached  full  produc- 
tion. It  described  many  examples  of  accidents  result- 
ing from  inadequate  highways   and  unsafe  bridges. 


But  especially,  it  documented  not  only  the  great  in- 
crease in  truck  movement,  but  the  greatly  increased 
loads  on  the  average  truck.  Motor  truck  vehicle 
mileage  more  than  doubled  during  the  war  years,  and 
the  axle  loads  exceeding  18,000  pounds  increased  from 
12  per  thousand  trucks  prewar  to  nearly  70  per 
thousand  trucks  in  1945.  With  this  twelvefold  in- 
crease in  heavy  axle  loads,  it  is  small  wonder  that  the 
highways  emerged  from  the  war  badly  battered. 
What  was  made  abundantly  clear  was  that  under  the 
circumstances  of  World  War  II,  the  use  of  the  high- 
ways for  military  vehicles  was  very  little  indeed 
compared  to  highway  use  for  moving  employees  to 
and  from  warplants  and  military  establishments  and 
for  the  movement  of  goods  and  manufactured  pro- 
ducts for  the  war  effort.  That  in  fact  the  highway 
became  literally  a  part  of  the  assembly  line  is  most 
strikingly  illustrated  by  the  movement  by  truck  of 
airplane  fuselages  from  Michigan  to  Texas  for  final 
assembly.  The  actual  experiences  of  war  demon- 
strated the  sound  judgment  of  military  and  highway 
officials,  when  recommending  the  routes  of  the  Inter- 
state System  in  1941,  that  the  greatest  value  of  the 
system  to  the  military  would  lie  in  its  part  in  keeping 
war  industry  at  maximum  production  levels. 


War  production  could  he  undertaken  anywhere. 

This  PT  boat  was  on  its  way  to  sea 

from  an  inland  "shipyard." 


This  damaged  WW  II  transport  plane,  having  made  an 
emergency  landing  on  the  highway,  was  towed  to 
the  nearest  airport.     The  wings  were  removed 
for  safe  transport  along  the  route. 


■fT>iMi-: 


I 


Trucks  became  a  necessary 
part  of  the  WW  II 
production  line. 


288 


The  Interstate  System  was  examined  mile  by  mile 
for  the  first  time  since  its  designation  to  measure  its 
deficiencies.  Inadequate  widths,  excessive  grades  and 
curvatures,  short  sight  distances  and  especially  weak 
or  narrow  bridges  and  narrow  tunnels  wei-e  recorded, 
and  estimates  made  to  bring  all  deficient  sections, 
using  the  standards  recommended  for  the  Intei'state 
System  in  Interregional  Highioays,  up  to  adequacy 
for  1948  traffic. 

Just  why  the  study  estimated  the  cost  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  1948  traffic  while  recognizing  the  con- 
tinuing increase  in  traffic  volumes  and  truck  weights 
is  not  stated,  but  perhaps  because  the  Congress  gave 
no  specific  year  in  the  future  to  which  to  direct  the 
estimate.  In  any  event,  the  estimate  totaled  $11.2 
billion,  about  half  to  correct  deficiencies  in  rural  areas 
and  half  in  cities  of  population  above  5,000.  In  esti- 
mating the  cost  at  1948  price  levels,  it  was  noted  that 
prices  inight  well  decline  in  the  years  ahead,  again 
reflecting  the  still  persisting  "depression  psychology." 
The  report  further  recommended  that  the  system  be 
brought  to  adequacy  in  no  more  than  20  years,  which 
indicated  an  annual  program  of  not  less  than  $500 
million.  And  then  in  1968  it  would  be  adequate  only 
for  1948  traffic.  But  this  proposed  program,  seem- 
ingly a  "too  little-too  late"  endeavor,  must  be  viewed 
in  light  of  the  fact  that  at  that  time  improvements 
by  the  States  on  the  Interstate  System  were  totaling 
only  about  $75  million  annually,  and  the  report  rec- 
ommended nearly  a  sevenfold  program  increase.  It 
further  recommended  that  a  much  more  rapid  im- 
provement program  would  be  reflected  in  economic 
and  social  benefits  as  well  as  meeting  defense  needs 
more  quickly  and  proposed  consideration  of  advanc- 
ing the  rate  of  construction  by  a  bond  issue.  And  it 
definitely  proposed  that  the  Federal  participation  in 
projects  on  the  Interstate  System  should  be  raised 
above  the  50  percent  State-Federal  matching  figure. 
Other  recommendations  proposed  a  revolving  fund 
for  emergency  construction  not  only  for  military 
emergencies,  but  for  civil  disasters  as  well,  and 
authorization  to  acquire  and  stockpile  critical  ma- 
terials. 

"\^Tiile  the  authorizations  for  regular  Federal  aid 
were  increasing  somewhat  in  each  biennial  act  (the 
Congress  had  by  then  indicated  an  informal  linkage 
between  authorization  level  and  the  revenue  from  the 
Federal  motor-fuel  tax),  no  specific  provision  was 
made  by  the  Congress  for  accelerating  work  on  the 
Interstate  System  until  $25  million  was  authorized 
for  each  year  1952  and  1953.  In  the  1954  Act  a  some- 
what more  liberal  provision  Avas  made  by  authorizing 
$175  million  for  that  year  and  1955.  It  apportioned 
the  funds  somewhat  differently,  half  on  the  basis  of 
primary  system  apportionments  and  the  other  half  on 
the  basis  of  State  population.  In  addition  it  changed 
the  matching  ratio  to  60  percent  Federal,  40  percent 
State.  So  if  Commissioner  MacDonald's  recommen- 
dation of  $500  million  annual  authorization,  made  in 
1949,  now  seems  low,  it  took  the  Congress  5  years  to 
come  up  to  one-third  of  that  level. 

There  were  probably  two  reasons,  at  least,  for  the 
apparent  reluctance  of  Congress  to  press  ahead  on 
improving  the  Interstate  System.  First  the  States, 
with  limited  funds  (the  highway  needs  studies  had 
yet  to  yield  much  fruit)  and  with  deficiencies  on  all 


roads,  were  reluctant  to  apply  funds  to  the  Interstate 
System  on  which  the  design  standards  were  much 
hiffher  than  on  other  roads  and  where  much  less  mile- 
age  per  dollar  could  be  produced.  In  fact,  many 
States  were  strongly  opposed  to  the  "high"  standards. 
The  other  reason  was  the  general  pressure  for  more 
attention  to  secondary  and  farm-to-market  roads,  with 
the  rural  strength  in  State  legislatures  and  in  the 
Congress  always  evident. 

The  second  reason  is  given  visibility  by  a  letter  of 
May  27,  1949,  from  the  Committee  on  Public  Works 
of  the  Senate  to  Commissioner  MacDonald,  asking 
for  a  report  on  the  condition  of  rural  local  roads. 
This  report  The  Local  Rural  Road  ProMem  was  sub- 
mitted to  Congress  in  January  1950  and  offered  little 
support  for  the  advocates  of  more  aid  for  local  roads. 

Calling  on  the  road  inventory  and  traffic  volume 
and  classification  data  from  the  highway  planning 
surveys,  detailed  studies  were  made  of  rural  road 
service  in  all  States.  Such  items  as  the  extent  of  road 
surfacing;  the  distances  of  rural  residents  from  all- 
weather  roads;  the  road  usage  (from  the  road  use 
studies)  of  rural  roads  by  farmers  and  other  rural 
residents;  the  average  traffic  volumes;  the  adequacy 
of  schoolbus  and  mail  delivery  I'outes;  the  motor  ve- 
hicle ownership;  and  the  social  functions  permitted 
by  the  road  system  were  studied. 

With  the  aid  of  State  and  county  engineers,  esti- 
mates were  made  of  the  cost  to  bring  the  entire  net- 
work up  to  acceptable  standards.  And  finally  the 
question  of  highway  finance  and  administration  were 
studied. 

In  capsule  summary,  it  was  found  that  funds  allo- 
cated to  local  rural  roads  in  1947  amounted  to 
$834,976,000 — 4  percent  from  Federal  sources,  56  per- 
cent from  State  sources  and  40  percent  from  local 
sources.  Local  support  had  dropped  steadily  to  that 
level  from  81  percent  in  1927,  with  reason  to  believe 
the  trend  toward  increasing  support  from  the  higher 
government  levels  would  continue.  Against  this 
amount  of  available  funds  was  an  estimate  of  annual 
construction,  maintenance  and  administrative  costs  of 
$894  million  to  reach  adequacy  for  the  entire  network 
in  20  years.  The  gap  between  revenue  and  program 
costs  in  1947  was  only  $60  million  with  evidence  that 
the  revenue  was  steadily  increasing.  In  the  same 
year  that  $835  million  was  being  applied  to  local 
roads,  the  amount  applied  to  all  State  primary  and 
secondary  roads  was  only  about  $1.4  billion. 

The  report  concluded  local  rural  roads  were  not  only 
in  good  shape  relative  to  roads  in  the  other  system, 
they  were  in  good  shape  in  absolute  terms  in  that  funds 
in  sight  were  sufficient  to  put  the  whole  system  in  ac- 
ceptable condition.  The  report  also  concluded  that  local 
road  administration  was  generally  inefficient  because 
the  many  small  units  were  unable  to  own  and  operate 
suitable  equipment  or  to  retain  competent  engineering 
staffs,  and  it  recommended  consolidation  of  local  units 
and  close  cooperation  between  State,  county  and  local 
officials  in  cariying  on  the  county  and  local  road 
programs. 

If  the  Congress  and  the  State  legislatures  were 
apathetic  with  I'espect  to  improving  the  Interstate 
System,  the  automobile  driving  public  was  not.  If 
better  roads  were  not  to  be  provided  through  the 
usual  procedures,  other  means  were  sought,  and  the 


289 


means  proved  to  be  the  second  toll  era  in  the  United 
States.  The  Pennsylvania  Turnpike,  opened  just  be- 
fore the  war,  proved  to  be  a  great  boom  to  military 
convoy  and  general  truck  movement  during  the  war 
period,  if  less  beneficial  to  the  bond  holders.  After 
the  war  when  the  upsurge  of  traffic  brought  in  more 
than  ample  revenue,  pressures  for  toll  roads  appeared 
in  other  States.  The  Pennsylvania  Turnpike's  suc- 
cess was  accepted  with  some  reservation  because  of 
the  peculiarly  favorable  contrast  with  the  existing 
routes,  for  the  Turnpike  tunneled  through  several 
ridges  that  the  old  road  had  to  climb,  utilizing  the 
tunnels  of  a  railroad  line  never  actually  completed. 
But  the  New  Jersey  Turnpike,  opened  in  its  full 
length  in  1952  with  no  advantages  of  terrain,  proved 
to  be  a  bonanza  and  thereafter  the  toll  road  movement 
swept  through  State  after  State. 

The  toll  road  movement  not  only  produced  roads; 
it  sparked  an  interest  in  Congress  that  had  not  been 
ignited  by  the  reports  of  1944  or  1948.  In  the  Fed- 
eral-Aid Highway  Act  of  1954,  under  section  13  the 
"Secretary  of  Commerce  [was]  authorized  and  di- 
rected to  make  ...  a  study  of  the  costs  of  completing 
the  several  systems  of  highways  in  the  several  States 
and  of  the  progress  and  feasibility  of  toll  roads  with 
particular  attention  to  the  possible  effects  of  such  toll 
roads  upon  the  Federal-aid  highway  programs  .  .  ." 
The  report,  to  be  submitted  by  February  1,  1965, 
actually  was  prepared  in  two  parts.  The  toll  road 
portion  was  transmitted  on  April  14,  1955,  still  a 
remarkably  short  time  considering  that  the  Act  was 
not  approved  until  May  6,  1954.  For  those  States  in 
which  needs  studies  had  been  completed,  the  informa- 
tion required  for  the  report  was  not  too  difficult,  but 
for  those  States  which  had  not  developed  needs 
studies,  a  heavy  workload  was  imposed. 

Looking  first  at  the  toll  road  study  transmitted  in 
the  report  entitled  Progress  and  Feasibility  of  Toll 
Roads  and  Their  Relation  to  the  Federal-Aid  Pro- 
gram^^  it  found  conditions  far  different  than  those 
in  the  late  thirties  when  Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads 
was  prepared.  Traffic  volumes  had  increased,  of 
course,  not  only  in  magnitude,  but  in  relation  to  the 
adequacy  of  the  road  systems  with  its  lagging  im- 
provement programs.  And  16  years  later  there  was 
actual  toll  road  experience  to  go  on. 

With  these  favorable  conditions,  analyses  were 
made,  for  which  some  data  already  had  been  col- 
lected, to  show  the  characteristics  of  the  traffic  using 
the  toll  roads.  The  origins  and  destinations  of  trips, 
their  purposes,  the  time  and  distances  involved  in  the 
use  of  toll  roads  in  comparison  with  alternate  free 
routes,  the  tolls  paid,  and  the  proportion  of  travel 
on  the  existing  roads  that  was  diverted  to  the  toll 
route  indicate  the  types  of  information  used  in  the 
analyses.  Factors  developed  from  these  analyses 
were  applied  to  all  sections  of  the  Interstate  System 
and  other  routes  believed  by  the  States  to  have  toll 
potential  to  estimate  probable  use  of  toll  roads  and 
the  revenue  the  traffic  would  produce  compared  with 
the  costs  of  maintaining,  operating  and  amortizing 
the  investment  in  the  toll  facilities.  Any  proposed 
toll  sections  that  showed  revenues  over  the  amortiza- 
tion period  equaling  II/2  times  the  total  cost  were 
considered  feasible  of  toll  financing.     (The  investment 


bankers  of  the  time  insisted  on  a  "coverage"  of  1.5. 
In  the  Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads  study,  toll  financ- 
ing was  assumed  to  be  justified  when  the  revenue  and 
cost  were  equal  to  a  "coverage"  of  1.0.  Thus,  the 
1954  study  was  conservative  and  in  line  with  current 
practice.) 

With  the  changes  over  the  16  years,  however,  6,700 
miles  were  found  to  be  feasible  of  toll  financing  com- 
pared to  the  few  hundred  that  might  have  been  self- 
liquidating  in  1938.  All  but  200  miles  were  found  to 
be  on  the  lines  of  the  Interstate  System,  attesting 
again  to  its  prime  importance.  Should  it  be  desired 
to  pool  revenues  from  different  routes,  as  did  some 
States  such  as  Pennsylvania,  with  the  stronger  one 
helping  to  carry  those  not  quite  feasible,  additional 
mileage  not  measured  in  the  study  could  have  been 
included  in  the  total. 

At  the  time  of  the  1954  study,  1,239  miles  of  toll 
road  were  open  and  1,382  miles  under  construction. 
In  addition  3,314  miles  had  been  authorized  and  an- 
other 2,253  miles  proposed,  exceeding  somewhat,  in 
their  total  of  8,188  miles,  the  6,700  miles  estimated  to 
be  feasible  in  the  study. 

Looking  back  to  the  1938  study,  it  is  of  interest  that 
every  one  of  the  toll  roads  in  use  or  under  construc- 
tion in  1954  that  lay  along  one  of  the  six  routes 
studied  in  1938  was  on  a  section  of  those  routes  then 
found  to  be  among  the  highest  in  feasibility.  While 
the  magnitudes  had  changed  over  the  16-year  period, 
the  relative  positions  had  not.  This  change  again 
exemplifies  the  psychological  effect  of  the  Depression. 
The  1938  report  noted  that  nearly  everyone  who 
could  afford  a  car  owned  one,  that  their  average  in- 
comes were  low  and  that  they  could  ill  afford  to  take 
long  trips,  to  say  nothing  of  paying  tolls.  That  po- 
sition was  buttressed  by  the  road  use  studies  showing 
that  only  1  percent  of  trips  exceeded  100  miles  in 
length.  (Even  so  they  were  important,  for  they  pro- 
duced 25  percent  of  the  vehicle  miles. ) 

But  1954  was  a  boom  period.  Cars  were  better, 
incomes  higher  and  rising  and  the  new  toll  roads 
were  giving  opportunity  for  more  long  trips.  (More 
recent  figures  show  that  the  percentage  of  trips  of 
over  100  miles  has  doubled,  indicating  that  freeways, 
toll  or  free,  have  opened  a  new  market  for  the  high- 
way product,  and  expanded  the  horizons  of  American 
society.) 

With  6,700  miles  estimated  as  feasible  of  toll  financ- 
ing, more  if  "pooling"  within  a  State  were  permitted 
and  perhaps  still  more  if  "pooling"  on  a  regional  or 
national  basis  were  accepted,  one  may  wonder  why 
the  report  did  not  recommend  at  least  some  measure 
of  toll  financing  in  the  face  of  such  unmet  highway 
needs  and  the  good  public  acceptance  of  toll  roads. 
This  question  was  argued  intensely  in  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads,  but  in  the  end  it  was  decided  not  to 
recommend  any  change  in  the  1921  provision  "That 
all  highways  constructed  or  reconstructed  under  the 
provisions  of  this  act  shall  be  free  of  tolls  of  all 
kinds." 

Partly  it  is  likely  that  the  Bureau  did  not  wish  to 
depart  from  such  a  long-standing  provision  without 
some  indication  of  congressional  interest ;  and  partly 
it  was  the  strong  belief  that  a  toll-financed  system 
was  not  desirable.     It  was  reasoned  that  toll  roads, 


290 


generally  with  widely  spaced  entrance  and  exit  points, 
would  not  accommodate  the  predominant  short  trips, 
and  that  the  States  would  have  to  provide  duplicate 
facilities  or  at  least  continue  to  maintain  the  existing 
ones.  It  was  further  reasoned  that  toll  collection 
could  not  fit  well  into  the  urban  scene,  and  there  lay 
at  least  half  the  cost  and  far  more  than  half  the  prob- 
lem of  the  Interstate  program.  It  was  reasoned  that 
tolls  simply  added  to  user  cost  and  that  a  free  system 
in  the  long  run  would  be  cheaper  and  more  effective. 
And  it  was  also  reasoned  that  some  States,  as  a  matter 
of  policy,  did  not  favor  toll  financing  (California  as 
the  prime  example),  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  have  a 
national  system  part  toll  and  part  free.  The  collect- 
ing and  pooling  of  tolls  on  a  national  basis  for  partial 
support  of  the  system,  even  though  so  doing  would 
result  in  a  very  direct  user  charge,  was  not  seriously 
considered.  Thus,  Recommendation  No.  1  of  the  1954 
report  was  that  "The  present  law  forbidding  the  col- 
lection of  tolls  on  highways  constructed  with  Federal- 
aid  funds  should  be  continued." 

Recommendation  No.  2,  however,  offered  somewhat 
of  a  compromise  in  allowing  the  inclusion  of  toll 
roads  in  the  Interstate  System  provided  adequate 
roads  of  another  Federal-aid  system  allowed  for  con- 
tinuous  travel    without    traversing   the   toll    sections. 


This  provision  recognized  the  ridiculous  situation  that 
would  result  if  a  State  must  parallel  an  existing  toll 
road  with  another  road  built  to  Interstate  standards 
in  order  to  provide  a  complete  freeway  system.  Yet 
it  did  provide  for  continuity  of  travel  on  free  Federal- 
aid  roads  should  the  traveler  make  that  his  choice. 
Adoption  of  this  recommendation  moreover  would 
remove  the  ambiguity  resulting  from  question  as  to 
whether  the  law  prohibited  the  collection  of  tolls  on 
any  "highway"  to  which  Federal-aid  funds  were  ap- 
plied, or  only  to  specific  projects  on  such  a  highway. 

At  any  rate  the  report  was  extremely  timely.  The 
second  toll  road  era  had  been  in  a  boom  period,  and 
might  well  have  continued  were  it  not  for  congres- 
sional action  to  greatly  increase  the  Interstate  pro- 
gram. With  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars  at  stake, 
the  Interstate  program  was  almost  on  dead  center. 
Highway  administrators  could  hardly  program  pro- 
jects on  sections  where  a  toll  road  was  under  construc- 
tion, nor  could  toll  road  authorities  do  so  if  there 
were  a  prospect  of  approval  of  a  major  increase  in 
Interstate  funding  by  Congress. 

What  the  Congress  faced  in  meeting  the  challenge 
was  conveyed  in  the  second  study  required  by  the 
1954  Act,  Needs  of  the  Highway  Systems,  1955-8Jt., 
which  was  transmitted  March  25,  1955.^® 


Tlie  Post  Office  in  Chicago,  III.,  was  built  several  years  before,  but  the  city  plan  called  for  a  highway  to  run  through  the  building. 

The  highway,  open  to  traffic  in  1956,  completes  the  plan. 


291 


In  the  1944  report  recommending  the  designation 
of  the  Interstate  System,  no  attempt  was  made  to 
estimate  its  cost,  simply  because  of  insufficient  infor- 
mation or  experience  at  that  time.  In  1948  the  cost 
of  improving  the  Interstate  System  was  estimated  at 
about  $11  billion,  roughly  half  rural  and  half  urban. 
Under  that  proposal,  the  system  in  1968  would  have 
been  brought  to  adequacy  for  1948  traffic.  In  1950 
an  estimate  was  made  of  the  cost  of  bringing  the 
local  rural  roads  to  a  state  of  adequacy.  But  now 
for  the  first  time  the  Congress  called  for  an  estimate 
of  the  cost  of  "completing"  all  systems  of  roads  and 
streets.  And  for  the  first  time  the  estimate  could  be 
made  with  a  reasonably  realistic  projection  of  the 
rate  of  traffic  growth  based  on  the  experience  of  the 
first  postwar  decade  (although  even  this  projection 
proved  to  be  low).  To  interpret  Congress  mean- 
ing of  "completing"  and  believing  that  considerable 
urgency  was  now  being  expressed,  it  was  decided  that 
the  plan  would  call  for  completing  the  Interstate 
System  by  1964  and  all  others  by  1974,  10  to  20  years 
respectively.  It  was  further  decided  to  plan  the 
Interstate  System  to  be  adequate  in  1964  for  1974 
traffic  and  the  others  adequate  for  the  current  traffic 
at  the  time  of  completion.  As  in  present  highway 
needs  studies,  the  concept  of  "tolerable"  and  "desir- 
able" standards  was  used  for  the  systems  other  than 
Interstate,  that  is  accepting  sections  that  would  still 
be  adequate  at  the  proposed  date  of  completion  of  the 
system,  but  constructing  any  that  would  be  inade- 
quate to  standards  for  adequacy  for  20  years  beyond 
the  assumed  date  of  construction.  Construction  pro- 
grams to  accomplish  these  ends  were  grouped  into 
5 -year  periods. 

With  the  conditions  spelled  out,  the  States  were 
once  again  called  on  for  a  massive  data  collection, 
compilation,  and  analysis  task,  seeking  the  aid  of  the 
cities  and  counties  to  assist  in  the  areas  of  their  inter- 
est. It  could  be  expected  that  States  that  had  built  a 
considerable  mileage  of  high-standard,  controlled- 
access,  divided  highways  could  make  realistic  esti- 
mates of  cost,  but  many  such  standards  were  difficult 
to  visualize,  and  some  States  having  no  legal  right  to 
control  access  saw  no  reason  to  estimate  on  that  basis. 
Even  so,  however,  the  cost  to  complete  the  Interstate 
System  was  estimated  at  $23.2  billion,  and  for  the 
first  10  years'  program  for  all  other  systems  $78.6 
billion,  for  a  total  cost  for  the  10-year  period  a 
"staggering"  sum  of  $101.8  billion.  In  the  next  20 
years  new  construction  and  some  reconstruction  on 
all  systems  would  add  $114.4  billion  more,  for  a  total 
construction  cost  over  the  30-year  period  of  $216.2 
billion. 

As  noted  earlier,  $216  billion  can  hardly  be  re- 
garded as  a  "need."  It  is  simply  the  result  of  the 
addition  of  the  best  estimates  that  could  be  made  of 
the  cost  of  achieving  the  level  of  service  accepted  as 
the  basis  of  the  estimate  of  "completing"  the  system 
to  that  standard. 

With  no  realistic  chance  of  meeting  all  the  "needs" 
on  all  the  systems,  however,  the  $101  billion  figure 
for  the  10-year  program  (roughly  i/4  for  the  Inter- 
state System  which  represented  only  1  percent  of  the 
total  highway  mileage)  focused  attention  of  the  cost 
and  iirgency  of  getting  on  with  this  most  important 
of  all  the  systems.    The  report  was  to  have  its  effect. 


The  1956  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 

Although  the  steps  leading  to  the  launching  of  the 
Interstate  program  are  described  in  Chapter  9,  con- 
sideration of  some  aspects  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
planning  efforts  were  used  in  reaching  the  final  deci- 
sion seems  in  order,  even  at  the  risk  of  some  repetition. 
While  the  most  immediate  use  of  results  of  the  1954 
study  was  in  connection  with  legislation  relating  to 
the  Interstate  System,  that  report  was  by  no  means 
the  single,  or  even  the  most  important,  factor  in  the 
ultimate  congressional  action.  It  did,  however,  pro- 
vide the  basic  information  on  which  two  other  major 
attacks  on  the  highway  problem  were  based. 

The  first  factor  was  the  appointment  of  a  committee 
of  the  Governors  Conference  to  study  the  highway 
program,  no  doubt  to  some  degree  at  least  inspired 
by  representations  from  their  highway  administrators. 
This  committee  had  easy  access,  of  course,  to  the  re- 
sults of  the  needs  studies  the  States  were  making  in 
response  to  requirements  of  the  1954  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act. 

Paralleling  this  move,  action  again  became  evident 
in  the  White  House,  with  the  appointment  by  Presi- 
dent Eisenhower  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  a 
National  Highway  Program,  not  only  recognizing  the 
deficiencies  of  the  highway  system,  but  emphasizing 
again  the  national  responsibility  for  highway  trans- 
portation. This  committee,  appointed  in  September 
1954,  quickly  became  known  as  the  Clay  Committee, 
for  President  Eisenhower  named  General  Lucius  D. 
Clay  as  its  chairman.  General  Clay  had  become 
acutely  aware  of  transportation  problems  by  virtue 
of  having  had  responsibility  for  creating  and  operat- 
ing the  successful  Berlin  Airlift  but  a  few  years 
earlier. 

Thus,  once  again,  a  presidentially  appointed  com- 
mittee was  charged  with  consideration  of  the  Nation's 
highway  needs.  In  contrast  to  the  National  Inter- 
regional Highway  Committee  created  13  years  earlier, 
which  was  a  planning  committee,  the  Clay  Committee 
was  an  action  committee.  The  Interregional  High- 
way Committee  spent  3  years  in  a  massive  data  as- 
sembly and  analysis  program  culminating  in  a  plan, 
but  only  in  the  most  general  recommendations  for  its 
implementation  through  a  program.  The  Clay  Com- 
mittee, in  a  period  of  little  more  than  3  months,  in 
effect  recommended  an  action  program  to  implement 
the  earlier  committee's  plan.  But  both  depended  al- 
most entirely  on  planning  data  assembled,  as  a  result 
of  acts  of  Congress,  by  the  cooperating  efforts  of  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  the  State  highway  de- 
partments. 

The  composition  of  the  Clay  Committee  evidenced 
this  contrast.  The  Interregional  Highway  Commit- 
tee, as  described  earlier,  was  heavily  "planning" 
oriented.  The  Clay  Committee,  in  addition  to  its 
chairman,  included  Stephen  I.  Bechtel,  head  of  a 
large  and  successful  contracting  organization;  David 
Beck,  president  of  the  Teamsters  Union;  S.  Sloan 
Colt,  a  member  of  a  New  York  investment  banking 
firm;  and  William  A.  Roberts,  president  of  a  com- 
pany manufacturing  large  construction  machinery. 
With  these  sharp  differences  in  background  and  out- 
look influenced  by  the  difference  in  the  Committee's 
charge,  there  was  one  important  similarity.  In  each 
case   the   secretary   was   provided   by   the   Bureau   of 


292 


Public  Roads — H.  S.  Fairbank  for  the  Interregional 
Highway  Committee  and  Francis  C.  Turner,  then 
Assistant  to  Commissioner  duPont  (later  to  be  Fed- 
eral Highway  Administrator),  for  the  Clay  Commit- 
tee. And  in  each  case,  through  the  secretary,  came 
demands  on  the  Public  Roads  stail  for  more  data  or 
data  compiled  or  summarized  in  different  ways,  the 
pace  deliberate  in  the  case  of  the  earlier  committee 
and  feverish  in  the  case  of  the  latter. 

In  developing  its  recommendations,  tlie  Committee 
not  only  had  the  massive  array  of  data  already  men- 
tioned, but  sought  the  ad\-ice  and  aid  of  a  group 
of  technical  experts  representing  professional  groups 
and  associations  of  users  and  of  the  officials  of  other 
levels  of  government.  It  also  received  offerings  from 
22  national  associations  in  hearings  covering  several 
days  in  the  fall  of  1954.  Significant  in  its  recom- 
mendations were  the  recognition  of  the  problem 
and  an  estimate  of  the  programs  needed  to  meet 
it  that  pretty  much  corroborated  the  conclusions  of 
other  groups  thinking  about  the  same  matters.  What 
stood  out  as  markedly  different  was  the  proposal  for 
financing  the  program.  Accepting,  as  did  others  gen- 
erally, that  the  cost  should  be  met  by  user  taxes,  it 
proposed  accelerating  tlie  program  by  resorting  to  a 
bond  issue.  And  it  proposed  the  establishment  of  a 
new  and  separate  Federal  corporation  to  administer 
the  program,  the  actual  construction  of  which  would 
still  be  the  responsibility  of  the  States  and  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads. 

That  the  proposal  for  financing  the  program  was 
unique  should  not  have  been  unexpected.  For  one 
thing,  even  in  the  face  of  obvious  highway  needs  over 
many  years,  adequate  funding  had  not  been  authorized 
by  conventional  methods.  For  another,  the  investment 
banking  influence  within  the  Committee,  and  the  fact 
that  Francis  V.  duPont,  then  Commissioner  of  Public 
Roads,  was  experienced  in  the  financial  world  and  one 
not  reluctant  to  break  with  tradition,  argued  that 
since  conventional  methods  had  not  worked,  a  differ- 
ent and  possibly  more  dramatic  approach  might  suc- 
ceed. In  any  event,  the  Clay  Committee's  report  to 
the  President  was  transmitted  with  his  strong  en- 
dorsement to  the  Congress  on  February  22,  1955,  a 
month  ahead  of  the  report  called  for  by  Congress  in 
the  1954  Act.  And  soon  after  the  "Administration 
bill,"  incorporating  the  recommendations  of  the 
Committee,  went  from  the  Wliite  House  to  the 
Congress. 

The  Clay  Committee's  report  for  the  reasons  de- 
scribed in  Chapter  9  did  not  receive  favorable  accept- 
ance in  the  Congress.  But  without  doubt  it  did 
proWde  the  spark  that  ignited  congressional  action, 
and  the  ultimate  authorization  of  the  greatest  public 
works  program  in  history  can  be  attributed  more  to 
Commissioner  duPont  and  the  Clay  Committee  than 
to  any  other  single  factor. 

Recognizing  the  upswinging  public  demand  for 
improving  highway  transportation,  brought  into  focus 
by  the  Clay  Committee's  work  and  its  attendant  pub- 
licity, the  Roads  Subcommittee  (of  the  Senate  Com- 
mittee on  Public  Works),  under  Senator  Albert  Gore 
from  Tennessee,  began  hearings  early  in  February. 
Senator  Gore's  hearings  were  more  extensive  and 
more  penetrating  than  any  hearing  previously  held 
on   the   highway   program.     Every   interested   group 


was  heard,  and  the  Subcommittee  went  deeply  into 
all  facets  of  the  problem,  constantly  calling  for  data 
on  one  subject  after  another,  and  questioning  critically 
all  the  material  supplied.  Commissioner  duPont  as- 
signed Frank  Turner  to  act  as  liaison  with  the  Public 
Works  Committee,  and  he  participated  in  virtually 
all  its  meetings,  open  or  in  executive  session.  Regu- 
larly he  called  the  Bureau  at  the  noon  recess  to  say 
that  the  Committee  wanted  certain  information  "for 
this  afternoon's  session"  and  again  in  late  afternoon 
to  say  that  the  Committee  "needs  this  information  by 
tomorrow  morning."  Many  Public  Roads  people 
worked  well  into  many  nights  to  meet  these  requests ! 

Eventually  came  the  "Gore  bill"  authorizing  the 
needed  expanded  program  and  calling  for  its  admin- 
istration by  a  commission  separated  from  the  Depart- 
ment of  Commerce.  In  a  very  informal  session  after 
the  hearings.  Senator  Gore  remarked  that  at  the  start 
of  the  hearings  he  had  been  opposed  to  heavy  par- 
ticipation with  Federal  funds  in  a  program  that  he 
then  saw  as  primarily  for  the  benefit  of  the  States, 
but  that  the  mass  of  evidence  had  "turned  him  around 
360  degrees."  Commissioner  duPont  observed  that 
that  could  only  mean  that  he  was  back  where  he 
started !  But  Senator  Gore  replied  that,  of  course, 
he  meant  180  degrees,  for  he'd  turned  completely  in 
the  opposite  direction.  It  was  in  this  good-humored 
atmosphere  that  the  lengthy  hearings  ended,  with  the 
legislative  and  executive  branches  together  and  in 
harmony.  It  was  planning  data  that  "turned  the 
Senator  around." 

The  Senate  hearings  caused  some  ruffled  feelings  at 
the  other  end  of  the  Capitol,  for  there  it  was  main- 
tained that  highway  legislation  traditionally  origi- 
nated on  the  House  side  and  that  by  jumping  into 
hearings  so  early,  the  Senate  had  usurped  the  respon- 
sibility of  the  House.  So  perhaps  not  to  be  outdone, 
the  House,  not  taking  the  evidence  produced  by  the 
Gore  Subcommittee,  held  its  own  and  nearly  equally 
lengthy  hearings  later  in  the  session.  And  ultimately 
it,  too,  proposed  a  bill,  also  for  a  greatly  expanded 
program  with  heavy  Federal  participation,  but  fol- 
lowing more  conventional  lines  of  administration. 

Thus,  toward  the  very  end  of  the  session  with  three 
alternatives  and  with  apparently  some  confusion  in 
signals  between  the  Wliite  House  and  the  "Hill,"  the 
proposed  program,  so  heavily  supported  by  the  public, 
went  down,  not  so  much  by  defeat  as  by  default. 

The  highway  interests  were  dejected.  It  was  rea- 
soned that  the  2d  session  of  the  79th  Congress  would 
be  in  an  election  year  and  that  there  was  little  pros- 
pect of  enactment  or  approval  of  a  big  money  bill 
in  1956.  The  program,  it  was  reasoned,  would  have 
to  await  the  new  Congress  in  1957.  But  the  seers 
evidently  reckoned  without  the  public,  for  when  Con- 
gress reconvened  in  1956,  pressure  to  get  on  with  the 
highway  program  was  obvious  and  heavy.  The  rep- 
resentatives had  heard  from  their  constituents  during 
their  stay  at  home  between  sessions.  As  described  in 
Chapter  9,  the  Committee  on  Public  Works  and  the 
Committee  on  Ways  and  Means  collaborated  in  pro- 
viding the  two-titled  Act  of  1956.  The  Interstate 
program  conceived  by  President  Roosevelt,  planned 
by  the  Interregional  Highway  Committee,  galvanized 
by  the  Clay  Committee,  and  finally  shaped  by  the 
Congress,  was  about  to  be  realized. 


293 


Planning  After  1 956^Statewide 
and  National 

Reimbursement  for  Toll   Roads 

Among  the  many  and  far-reaching  effects  of  the 
1956  Act,  none  was  felt  more  immediately  than  its 
impact  on  toll  road  construction.  The  modern  toll 
road  era  ended  abruptly.  With  the  promise  of  ade- 
quate funding  coming  primarily  from  Federal  rather 
than  State  user  taxes  for  early  improvement  of  most 
of  the  mileage  feasible  of  toll  financing,  justification 
for  that  method  no  longer  existed.  This  toll  road  era, 
in  contrast  to  the  early  era,  ended  not  in  disaster  and 
bankruptcy,  but  in  a  substantial,  and  still  financially 
sound,  contribution  to  the  Nation's  highway  trans- 
portation needs. 

The  Congress  gave  serious  consideration  to  the 
problems  that  would  arise  if  most  of  the  toll  road 
mileage  were  incorporated,  as  anticipated,  into  the 
system.  There  was  much  pressure  from  the  user 
groups  to  make  them  free  of  tolls,  but  that  raised 
questions  as  to  how  the  bonds  could  be  retired  far 
ahead  of  maturity,  even  should  the  bond  holders 
agree.  The  toll  road  authorities  were  hardly  favor- 
able to  going  out  of  business  so  quickly  after  they 
had  launched  their  mostly  successful  ventures.  As 
a  matter  of  national  policy,  there  was  inequity  in 
users  of  the  Interstate  System  having  to  pay  tolls  in 
some  States  but  not  in  others,  as  discussed  earlier  in 
the  1955  report  to  Congress.  But  what  was  perhaps 
not  generally  nor  fully  recognized,  the  1956  Act  did 
not  provide  for  constructing  the  Interstate  System 
but  for  completing  it.  It  was  expected  that  routes 
or  sections  already  adequate,  or  that  could  be  made 
so,  for  1975  traffic  under  the  Interstate  standards 
would  be  included  in  the  System.  Any  Federal-aid 
projects  in  this  category  would  have  received  Federal 
aid  anyway,  even  if  at  the  50-50  or  the  later  60^0 
ratio,  but  the  toll  roads  had  no  Federal  aid  nor  State 
road-user  funds  applied  to  their  construction.  Never- 
theless States  such  as  Pennsylvania  and  New  York, 
with  large  percentages  of  their  Interstate  System  al- 
ready completed  by  the  toll  road  authorities,  felt 
short  changed  in  relation  to  States  in  which  small 
mileage  met  the  Interstate  standards  and,  thus,  were 
scheduled  to  receive  relatively  larger  amounts  of 
"90-10"  money. 

In  this  atmosphere  the  Congress,  by  Section  114  of 
the  1956  Act,  called  for  a  report  to  be  made  by  the 
Secretary  of  Commerce,  in  cooperation  with  the  State 
highway  departments  and  other  agencies  as  required 
to  aid  the  Congress,"  ...  to  determine  whether  or  not 
the  Federal  Government  should  equitably  reimburse 
any  State  for  a  portion  of  a  highway  which  is  on  the 
Interstate  System,  whether  toll  or  free,  the  construc- 
tion of  which  has  been  completed  subsequent  to 
August  2,  1947,  or  which  is  either  in  actual  use  or 
under  construction  by  contract,  for  completion, 
awarded  not  later  than  June  30,  1957  .  .  ." 

The  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Of- 
ficials, appointed  a  committee  to  work  with  the  Bureaii 
of  Public  Roads  in  planning  the  study,  and  all  States 
provided  the  needed  information.  The  findings,  re- 
sulting from  the  summarization  of  voluminous  data, 
could  be  briefly  expressed. 


In  short,  the  study  disclosed  that  10,859  miles  met 
the  requirement  for  inclusion  in  the  System,  either 
fully  meeting  the  standards  for  1975  traffic  or  being 
suitable  for  upgrading  to  meet  the  standards.  Less 
than  2,000  miles  were  found  to  be  fully  adequate, 
however.  Included  in  the  total  were  1,950  miles  of 
toll  roads  in  26  States  and  8,909  miles  of  free  roads 
in  47  States. 

The  cost  of  the  improvements  that  had  been  made 
within  the  10-year  period  specified  (representing  the 
time  between  the  approval  of  the  Interstate  System 
and  the  effective  beginning  of  the  Trust  Fund  financ- 
ing) was  estimated  at  $6.09  billion,  $2.59  billion  for 
toll  roads  and  $3.50  billion  for  free  roads.  The  de- 
preciated value  was  also  calculated,  the  depreciation 
being  very  little  since  the  roads  were  so  recently  built. 
Right-of-way  was  assumed  not  to  depreciate  in  value; 
grading  and  drainage  was  assumed  to  depreciate  at  a 
rate  of  1  percent  per  year  (a  life  of  100  years),  struc- 
tures at  2  percent,  and  pavement  at  3  percent.  On 
this  basis  the  depreciated  value  became  $5.92  billion, 
$2.52  billion  for  toll  roads  and  $3.40  billion  for  free 
roads. 

The  Congress  faced  something  of  a  dilemma  when 
receiving  the  report  in  January  1958.  To  decide  to 
reimburse  would  be  to  reverse  its  decision  of  1956  to 
provide  for  the  "completion"  of  the  System,  and  in- 
stead, accept  90  percent  of  its  total  cost,  including 
sections  already  built.  Probably  the  practical  prob- 
lem of  finding  $6  billion  overrode  any  feeling  of 
"inequity,"  however,  and  the  decision  was  to  defer 
consideration  until  later  in  the  program.  That  time 
has  not  yet  come,  and  one  can  wonder  whether  it  will. 

The  Continuing   Needs  Studies 

Congress  in  1954,  in  calling  for  the  report  on 
Needs  of  the  Highway  Systems^  1955-1981^^  set  in  mo- 
tion what  proved  to  be  nearly  continuous  examination 
of  the  physical  and  financial  problems  in  the  highway 
transportation  area  and  the  development  of  plans  for 
the  years  ahead.  The  report  listed  the  highway  needs 
for  all  roads  and  streets  over  the  30-year  period  at 
$216  billion.  This  figure,  later  under  changing  condi- 
tions found  to  be  at  least  50  percent  too  low,  was  still 
a  staggering  amount  and  one  patently  out  of  reach. 
The  first  result  of  the  study  was  reflected  in  the  1956 
Act.  Title  I,  The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act,  author- 
ized the  program  to  complete  the  Intei'state  System, 
the  authorizations  extending  through  1969,  13  years 
ahead.  In  the  same  Act  the  so-called  ABC  program 
for  primary,  secondary,  and  urban  roads  was  author- 
ized for  3  years,  through  1959,  instead  of  for  the 
customary  biennium.  Thus  in  this  way  the  Congress 
picked  out  of  the  whole  package  of  needs  on  all  sys- 
tems, the  Interstate  System  as  the  most  urgent,  and 
provided  for  it  authorizations  unprecedented  both  in 
length  of  time  and  amount. 

That  the  Congress  did  not  overlook  the  broader 
needs  situation,  however,  is  seen  in  Title  II,  The 
Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956,  that  imposed  the 
higher  tax  schedules  to  finance  the  program  enacted 
in  Title  I.  As  noted  before,  it  was  the  joint  consid- 
eration of  liighway  needs  by  the  Committee  on  Public 
Works  and  the  Committee  on  Ways  and  Means  in 
1956,   also   unprecedented,   that  cleared   the   way   for 


294 


passage  of  the  legislation.  But  the  Ways  and  Means 
Committee  did  not  stop  there.  Under  section  210,  it 
authorized  and  directed  the  Secretary  of  Commerce, 
in  cooperation  with  the  State  highway  departments 
to  make  an  investigation  and  report  to  give  the  Con- 
gress ".  .  .  information  on  the  basis  of  which  it  may 
determine  what  taxes  should  be  imposed  by  the  United 
States,  and  in  what  amounts,  in  order  to  assure,  inso- 
far as  practicable,  an  equitable  distribution  of  the  tax 
burden  among  the  various  classes  of  persons  using  the 
Federal-aid  highways  or  otherwise  deriving  benefits 
from  such  highways."  INIoreover,  it  specifically  di- 
rected that  the  study  should  be  coordinated  with  the 
AASHO  Road  Test,  and  with  other  research  activities 
of  the  Bureau,  and  it  authorized  funds  "as  may  be 
necessary"  to  carry  out  the  investigation. 

The  final  report  was  due  in  1959  but  was  delayed 
until  1961,  and  even  then,  the  conclusions  were  based 
on  preliminary  performance  equations  derived  by  the 
Road  Test  staff  from  the  still  unfinished  AASHO 
Road  Test  specifically  for  the  section  210  study.  A 
supplementary  report  was  made  to  Congress  in  1965 
once  the  final  equations  were  available,  although  the 
differences  between  the  final  and  preliminary  equations 
were  so  slight  as  to  make  unnecessary  any  revision  of 
the  "210"  study  conclusions.  In  all,  the  series  of  re- 
ports, including  four  progress  reports,  occupied  940 
pages  in  printed  form.^'^ 

The  "210"  report  surely  equaled  in  stature  the  re- 
ports on  transportation  of  earlier  years,  the  Eastman 
Report  and  the  Report  of  the  Board  of  Investigation 
and  Research^  but  in  its  narrower  scope  and  with 
much  more  data  available,  it  far  exceeded  them  in 
accuracy  and  precision  of  the  information  on  which 
to  base  highway  policy. 

By  the  time  the  1959  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 
was  passed,  the  more  precise  engineering  estimates 
of  the  cost  of  completing  the  Interstate  System 
had  shown  an  increase  in  cost  from  the  $27  billion 
of  the  1956  Act,  based  on  the  1954  planning  esti- 
mate, to  $41  billion.  Accompanying  the  Federal- 
Aid  Highway  Act  was  an  amendment  to  Title  II,  the 
Highway  Revenue  Act,  to  provide  the  added  funds 
then  seen  as  needed.  Lacking  the  expected  results  of 
the  "210"  study,  the  motor-fuel  taxes  Avere  increased 
one  cent  per  gallon  above  the  levels  set  in  1956  as  a 
temporary  measure.  By  1961  the  Congress  had  re- 
ceived the  "210"  report  entitled  Highway  Cost  Allo- 
cation Study ^  with  its  estimates  of  the  cost  responsi- 
bility of  the  various  classes  of  vehicles  based  on  the 
preliminary  equations  from  the  AASHO  Road  Test. 
The  Ways  and  Means  Committee,  accepting  the  cost 
responsibility  as  calculated  by  the  "incremental 
method"  and  still  striving  to  finance  the  completion 
of  the  System  by  1972,  recommended  continuing  the 
temporary  increase  in  the  tax  on  fuel,  made  other 
adjustments  of  minor  nature  and,  more  significantly, 
increased  the  tax  on  trucks  from  $1.50  to  $3.00  per 
year  for  each  1,000  pounds  over  26,000  pounds  in  gross 
weight.  (This  in  effect  applied  to  all  trucks  with 
more  than  2  axles  and  all  tractor  truck  semitrailers 
and  full  trailers.)  With  the  continued  higher  fuel 
tax,  applicable  to  all  vehicles,  the  result  was  that  pas- 
senger cars  were  taxed  at  just  about  the  rate  to  cover 
their  cost  responsibility  and  in  line  with  the  benefits 
they  were  receiving  from  the  program.     The  tax  on 


the  heaviest  trucks,  on  the  other  hand,  despite  the 
large  increase  in  their  weight  tax,  did  not  come  up  to 
the  level  of  the  cost  they  occasioned,  but  exceeded 
somewhat  the  calculable  benefits  they  were  receiving. 
The  decision  on  the  truck  taxes  seemingly  was  consist- 
ent with  the  wording  of  section  210  in  the  1956  Act 
which  called  under  paragraph  (b)  (2)  for  a  determi- 
nation of  the  "proportionate  share"  of  the  highway 
costs  and  paragraph  (b)  (3)  for  the  benefit  of  the 
"use"  of  the  highways  by  the  vehicles  of  the  various 
classes.  The  curve  of  taxes  in  relation  to  gross  weights 
resulting  from  the  Committee  action  lay  just  about 
midway  between  the  curves  of  costs  and  benefits,  and 
perliaps  surprisingly,  evoked  no  great  objection  from 
the  trucking  industry.  (One  reason  that  the  industry 
was  not  unwilling  to  accept  the  higher  taxes  was  the 
strongly  implied  commitment  by  the  Congress  that 
once  sufficient  mileage  of  the  Interstate  System  was 
open  to  traffic,  the  size  and  weight  limits  imposed  for 
the  first  time  in  Federal  legislation  in  the  1956  Act 
would  be  relaxed  to  the  degree  the  higher  design 
standards  would  permit.  Subsequent  legislation  to 
effectuate  this  understanding  failed  of  passage,  how- 
ever, until  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendments  of 
1974  when  modest  increases  in  axle  weights  and  gross 
vehicle  weights  were  allowed.)  It  might  be  noted 
also  that  section  210  of  the  1956  Act  called  for  a 
determination  of  direct  or  indirect  benefits  other  than 
from  the  use  of  the  highways.  Wiile  the  "210"  report 
clearly  showed  such  benefits,  the  Congress  decided  to 
assess  the  entire  cost  of  the  program  on  the  users. 
The  user  rates  set  in  1961  still  apply,  soundly  derived 
from  the  results  of  the  AASHO  Road  Test.  While 
the  AASHO  Road  Test  was  undertaken  to  aid  in 
highway  pavement  design,  the  first  use  of  its  results 
was  in  connection  with  highway  economics  and 
finance,  and  that  use  alone  may  well  have  justified  its 
cost. 

The   Functional   Classification   Study 

But  it  became  obvious  that  planning  for  highways, 
at  least  after  completion  of  the  Interstate  System  if 
not  earlier,  must  be  undertaken,  planning  not  only  for 
programs  to  meet  the  upcoming  needs,  but  to  finance 
them.  One  of  the  striking  facts  to  come  out  of  the 
1954  estimate  of  cost  of  completing  the  several  high- 
way systems,  updated  by  the  section  210  study,  was  the 
inadequacy  of  the  Secondary  System  in  relation  to  the 
rural  Primary  System  and  urban  portions  of  the  Pri- 
mary and  Secondary  Systems.  Also  revealed  was  the 
disparity  among  the  States  as  to  the  mileage  of  the 
Federal-Aid  Secondary  System,  varying  from  as  little 
as  6  percent  of  the  rural  highway  mileage  in  one 
State  to  39  percent  in  another.  Obviously  the  concept 
of  what  should  constitute  a  Federal-aid  secondary 
route  needed  definition.  While  the  national  total  had 
little  significance  except  to  illustrate  the  problem,  it 
is  of  interest  that  the  estimate  of  highway  needs 
prepared  in  connection  with  the  210  study  showed 
the  needs  from  1956  to  1971  on  the  Federal-aid 
primary  routes,  other  than  Interstate,  in  relation  to 
the  needs  on  the  Federal-aid  secondary  roads  under 
State  control  (about  what  the  1944  Act  called  princi- 
pal secondary  and  feeder  roads)  to  be  in  the  ratio  of 
43.5  :17.6,  compared  to  the  authorization  ratio  of  45 :30 
then  still  in  effect.  Obviously  two  aspects  needed 
investigations. 


296 


FOR  A  TYPICAL  CITY  OF  1,000,000  POPULATION 


OF  ALL  APPROACHING  TRAFFIC 


ONLY  307o 
GOES  TO 
HEART  OF 
CITY 


TO  HEART  OF  CITY 


70%  GOES  ELSEWHERE 


In  1960  intercity  travel  studies  showed  this  basic  travel  pattern. 

First  the  roads  to  be  included  in  the  Federal-aid 
system  should  be  designated  under  a  functional  classi- 
fication definition  applicable  to  all  States,  and  second 
the  general  level  of  Federal  aid  for  rural  secondary 
roads  in  relation  to  that  for  other  systems,  particu- 
larly in  the  urban  area,  needed  review.  It  could  be 
considered  a  restudy  and  perhaps  a  restatement  of 
purpose  of  the  Federal-aid  secondary  program  after 
its  20-year  history. 

These  thoughts  and  others  were  brought  to  the  at- 
tention of  the  States  by  Federal  Highway  Adminis- 
trator Rex  "Whitton  in  a  1963  speech.  He  outlined 
some  of  the  problems  and  sketched  the  planning  effort 
that  would  be  required  to  analyze  them  and  hopefully 
reach  a  concensus  on  how  to  meet  them.  AASHO 
authorized  a  high-level  committee  to  cooperate  with 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  to  carry  out  the  necessary 
studies  and  develop  appropriate  recommendations  to 
be  presented  in  a  report  to  the  Congress. 

The  Cooperating  Committee,  as  it  was  designated, 
met  with  its  Bureau  counterparts  in  the  spring  of 
1964  and  agreed  upon  a  format  for  the  study.  It  was 
to  be  the  most  intensive  study  of  highway  needs  yet 
undertaken,  covering  all  roads  and  streets.  The  most 
significant  new  aspect  was  functional  classification, 
with  roads  and  streets  segregated  in  three  broad 
classes — arterial,  collector,  and  local.  Freeways  would 
be  a  special  category  of  the  arterial  group.  The 
classification  would  be  determined  route  by  route  by 
its  estimated  future  traffic,  not  simply  by  volume  alone 
but  by  the  character  of  the  traffic,  trip  length  being 
an  important  determinant.  This  basis  of  classification 
had  been  used  in  a  preliminary  way  in  an  earlier 
study  by  AASHO  and  the  National  Association  of 
County  Officials  (NACO)  in  a  review  of  rural  high- 
way needs,  but  little  experience  was  available  as  a 
guide  to  urban  street  classification  and  none  at  all 
in  areas  yet  to  be  urbanized.  Since  the  period  to  be 
covered  extended  from  1972  to  1990  and  with  the 
rapidly  increasing  urbanization  of  the  country,  this 
latter  situation  presented  a  considerable  problem. 
Fortunately,  however,  the  urban  transportation  studies 
had  by  then  progressed  sufficiently  in  about  100  cities 
to  permit  the  development  of  models  that  would  show. 


on  the  basis  of  area  and  population,  the  number  of 
lane-miles  of  streets  needed  in  each  category.  So 
where  the  urban  studies  would  not  permit  detailed 
estimates,  at  least  gross  figures  could  be  produced 
by  resorting  to  the  models.  With  facts  thus  as- 
sembled, estimates  could  be  made  of  the  desirable 
extent  of  systems  on  a  functional  basis  that  could  be 
compared  with  the  systems  then  designated  as  "ad- 
ministrative" systems.  (The  study  eventually  con- 
firmed that  the  Primary  Systems  in  most  States  were 
well  selected,  but  that  as  anticipated,  the  Secondary 
Systems  as  administratively  designated  in  many 
States  were  badly  distorted.) 

On  the  basis  of  the  agreed  upon  format,  the  Bureau 
staff,  with  advice  from  the  Committee  as  needed,  pre- 
pared the  necessary  manuals,  and  approval  to  begin 
the  study  came  in  the  summer  of  1964.  The  target 
date  for  the  report  to  Congress  was  set  as  January 
1967. 

Then  began  a  cooperative  approach  to  data  collec- 
tion on  a  national  basis,  heretofore  unequaled  in  the 
transportation  field.  The  National  League  of  Cities 
and  the  National  Association  of  Counties  formally 
designated  members  to  form  a  joint  committee  with 
AASHO  to  oversee  the  work  of  data  collection  and 
analysis.  At  its  first  meeting  in  early  1965,  one  mem- 
ber remarked  that  it  was  significant  that  for  the  first 
time  officially  designated  representatives  of  State, 
county,  and  city  governments  had  convened  in  a 
formal  meeting.  It  was  further  significant  that  it 
met  in  the  offices  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  It 
reflected  intergovernmental  cooperation  in  fact,  not 
just  in  theory.  While  ultimately  an  important  pro- 
duct emerged  from  this  initial  meeting,  its  bright 
promise  was  never  fully  realized. 

It  was  during  the  period  of  this  study  that  several 
factors  appeared  to  complicate,  delay,  and  confuse 
the  planning  of  highway  programs  after  1972,  the 
scheduled  date  of  completion  of  the  Interstate  pro- 
gram. It  might  be  said  that  prior  to  this  study, 
highways  had  been  planned  in  isolation.  "Wliile  the 
major  planning  studies,  particularly  in  urban  areas, 
recognized  the  need  for  coordination  between  highway 
and   other   modes   of  transportation   and  took  those 


296 


modes  into  consideration,  the  highway  program  as 
authorized  by  the  Congress  had  gone  ahead  as  an 
independent  program.  It  was  during  this  period  that 
questions  began  to  be  raised  as  to  whether  there  should 
be  "alternatives"  to  the  highway  program.  Transit 
interests  began  to  speak  with  a  stronger  voice  in  the 
Congress,  as  evidenced  by  the  establishment  in  1964 
of  the  Urban  Transportation  Administration  in  the 
Housing  and  Home  Finance  Agency  (in  1965  this 
Agency  became  a  part  of  the  Department  of  Housing 
and  Urban  Development  (HUD)).  The  larger  cities 
began  to  see  their  overall  needs  for  transportation, 
and  even  for  streets  and  highways,  diverging  from 
the   programs   envisioned   by   the   States. 

As  noted  earlier,  each  of  the  major  reports  on 
highway  needs — 1939,  1944,  and  1955 — had  been  ini- 
tiated by  the  executive  branch,  but  each  had  the  added 
strength  of  being  carried  on  by  the  paralleling  direc- 
tion of  an  act  of  Congress.  So  too  in  the  1964  study 
was  the  paralleling  action  initiated  by  the  Public 
AVorks  Committee  of  the  House,  which  passed  unani- 
mously a  bill  calling  for  a  report  on  the  highway  needs 
of  the  Nation  to  be  submitted  in  January  1967,  the 
target  date  of  the  AASHO  study  of  which  the  Com- 
mittee was  well  aware.  That  bill  died  in  the  Senate, 
which  reasoned  that  the  organic  legislation  required 
annual  reports  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  any- 
way, so  no  specific  legislation  was  needed.  The  fol- 
lowing year,  1965,  Representative  George  H.  Fallon, 
then  Chairman  of  the  House  Public  Works  Commit- 
tee, introduced  a  somewhat  similar  bill,  which  finally 
emerged  as  a  Joint  Resolution,  S.J.  Res.  81,  instruct- 
ing the  Secretary  of  Commerce,  acting  through  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  to  ".  .  .  report  to  Congress 
in  January,  1968,  and  in  January  of  every  second 
year  thereafter,  his  estimate  of  the  future  highway 
needs  of  the  Nation."  Thus,  it  appeared  that  the  way 
was  cleared  for  the  cooperative  studies  to  continue  by 
the  traditional  coordinated  direction  of  the  legislative 
and  executive  branches  of  the  Federal  Government. 
The  highway  program,  it  was  assumed,  would  con- 
tinue to  be  an  independently  authorized,  although 
cooperatively  developed,  program. 

If  the  Congress  accepted  that  the  program  planned 
cooperatively  could  best  be  authorized  independently, 
that  view  was  not  necessarily  accepted  by  the  execu- 
tive branch.  The  Bureau  of  the  Budget,  through 
which  all  reports  to  Congress  involving  Federal  funds 
in  any  amount  then  must  pass,  as  early  as  1961  when 
the  "210"  report  was  being  reviewed,  reasoned  that 
any  emphasis  on  the  nonuser  benefits  might  encourage 
the  application  of  general  funds  rather  than  exclu- 
sively road-user  funds  to  support  the  program  and 
that  to  do  so  would  be  in  the  direction  of  unbalancing 
the  Federal  budget.  This  position  was  taken  even 
though  the  Congress  in  authorizing  the  study  had 
specifically  called  for  an  investigation  of  benefits  to 
other  than  highway  users. 

Meanwhile  as  the  plans  for  the  study  moved  ahead, 
it  became  apparent  that  with  the  massive  data  collec- 
tion and  analyses  required  for  the  functional  classifi- 
cation of  all  roads  and  streets  in  all  jurisdictions, 
completion  of  a  report  by  1967  was  out  of  the  question. 
Yet,  with  the  final  apportionments  for  the  Interstate 
program  to  be  made  in  1969  to  meet  the  scheduled 


completion  date,  there  was  real  urgency  to  provide 
facts  to  the  Congress  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  post- 
Interstate  program  because  extensive  hearings  and  a 
searching  review  of  highway  needs  comparable  to  that 
of  1955  and  1956  were  anticipated.  The  AASHO  Co- 
operating Committee,  renamed  by  then  the  Committee 
on  the  Continuing  Plighway  Program,  concluded  that 
the  Congress  must  be  furnished  at  least  gross  estimates 
of  foreseeable  needs  as  soon  as  possible  and  decided 
to  ask  the  States  to  provide  estimates  not  on  the  basis 
of  functional  systems  to  be  designated  as  a  result  of 
the  study,  but  on  the  basis  of  the  current  administra- 
tive systems.  This  estimate  would  be  furnished  as  an 
"introductory"  or  "preliminary"  report  to  give  scale 
to  the  magnitude  of  the  needed  program,  with  refine- 
ments, once  the  functional  classification  could  be  com- 
pleted. On  the  basis  of  this  decision,  ratified  by  the 
AASHO  executive  committee  in  Atlanta  at  the  annual 
meeting  in  1964,  new  manuals  were  prepared  and 
work  moved  quickly  ahead  on  the  truncated  study. 
This  was  followed  by  the  much  more  deliberate  and 
complex  work  of  functional  classification  and  related 
studies  of  other  aspects  of  future  needs,  including 
such  elements  as  the  greater  attention  to  safety  and 
environmental  considerations  and  bases  for  apportion- 
ment of  funds  not  only  among  the  systems,  but  among 
the  States  and  local  jurisdictions.  This  decision  was 
made  fully  workable  by  the  passage  of  S.J.  Res.  81 
a  few  months  later.  As  a  result,  it  became  possible 
to  furnish  information  to  the  Congress  on  different 
aspects  of  the  upcoming  problems  on  a  continuing 
and  timely  basis  at  the  biennial  intervals  specified  in 
the  resolution  rather  than  in  a  massive  single  report 
comparable  to  the  1961  Highioay  Cost  Allocation 
Study  (the  210  study). 

Highway  planning  at  statewide  and  national  levels 
seemed  to  be  launched  on  a  course  that  would  lead  to 
regular  reporting  to  the  Congress  of  needs  for  high- 
way transportation,  determined  cooperatively  by  Fed- 
eral, State  and  local  officials,  keeping  abreast  of 
changing  technology  in  all  transportation  modes  and 
of  changing  social  and  economic  conditions.  Most 
importantly,  the  study  efforts  provided  the  ground- 
work and  guidelines  for  the  broader  studies  embracing 
all  modes  of  transportation  that  would  be  undertaken 
in  the  future. 

The  Movement  Toward  Transportation  Studies 

Before  the  1968  report  had  been  completed,  another 
change  at  the  Federal  level  further  complicated 
the  longstanding  relationship  between  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads,  the  Congress,  and  the  State  highway 
departments — the  establishment  of  the  Department  of 
Transportation.  Later  the  relationships  were  to  be- 
come still  more  complex  as  departments  of  transpor- 
tation were  created  in  many  States,  a  factor  having 
an  especially  trying  effect  on  the  Bureau's  longtime 
partner,  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials,  which  eventually  absorbed  or  was  absorbed 
by  the  State  DOT  officials  as  the  name  of  the  organi- 
zation was  changed  to  the  American  Association  of 
State  Highway  and  Transportation  Officials.  The 
cordial  relations  between  the  Bureau,  the  States,  and 
the  Congi-ess  of  earlier,  simpler  times  was  lost,  per- 
haps never  to  be  regained. 


297 


Among  the  functions  included  in  the  new  Depart- 
ment were  those  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  which 
together  with  a  new  National  Highway  Safety  Bureau 
formed  the  Federal  Highway  Administration;  of  the 
Federal  Aviation  Agency,  formerly  an  independent 
agency,  which  became  the  Federal  Aviation  Adminis- 
tration; of  the  Urban  Mass  Transportation  Adminis- 
tration, transferred  bodily  from  the  Department  of 
Housing  and  Urban  Development;  and  the  functions 
of  a  new  unit,  the  Federal  Railroad  Administration. 
All  these  were  termed  "modal"  administrations  headed 
by  "modal"  administrators.  The  purpose  was,  of 
course,  to  bring  about  better  coordination  of  the  Fed- 
eral effort  in  the  different  modes  under  a  national 
transportation  policy  to  be  developed  by  the  Secretary. 
The  first  incumbent  of  that  office  was  Allen  Boyd, 
formerly  Under  Secretary  for  Transportation  in  the 
Department  of  Commerce,  and  with  the  change  in 
administration  in  1969,  he  was  succeeded  by  John 
Volpe,  formerly  Federal  Highway  Administrator  and, 
at  that  time.  Governor  of  Massachusetts.  Both  men 
were  qualified  by  solid  experience  in  transportation 
and  in  administration. 

While  the  assembly  of  transportation  functions  in 
a  single  department  of  the  executive  branch  was  a 
forward  step,  coordination  of  programs  could  hardly 
be  fully  effective  so  long  as  three  different  congres- 
sional committees  on  each  end  of  the  Capitol  retained 
jurisdiction  over  the  different  functional  areas.  And 
to  complicate  coordination  still  more,  three  adminis- 
trations were  "modal"  in  fact,  aviation,  railroads,  and 
highways.  But  urban  mass  transportation  was  not 
modal  at  all,  but  geographic  and  functional  in  its 
area  of  responsibility. 

In  the  planning  area,  still  another  complicating 
factor  was  the  establishment  within  the  Federal  High- 
way Administration  of  the  Office  of  Policy  Planning. 
This  office  was  not  to  take  any  functions  from  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads'  Office  of  Planning,  but  to 
work  with  other  modal  administrations,  with  the 
Secretary's  staff,  and  with  other  agencies  such  as  the 
Bureau  of  the  Budget  in  general  policy  matters.  One 
function  was  shepherding  reports,  such  as  the  1968 
Highway  Needs  Report,  to  Congress  through  the  ap- 
proval channels  within  the  Department  and  the 
Bureau  of  the  Budget.  The  office  was  also  expected 
to  consider  and  propose  long-range  policy  and  action 
programs  in  the  areas  of  highways  and  highway 
safety,  but  for  various  reasons,  principally  inability 
to  staff  the  office  adequately,  it  never  quite  reached 
its  anticipated  potential.  The  major  efforts  in  plan- 
ning remained,  as  intended,  within  the  Bureau.  Sub- 
sequently a  reorganization  under  Secretary  Volpe 
brought  the  functions  together,  as  Francis  Turner, 
who  served  as  Director  of  Public  Roads  under  Lowell 
Bridwell,  the  first  Federal  Highway  Administrator 
under  the  Secretary  of  Transportation,  succeeded 
Bridwell  with  the  change  in  administration.  The 
new  Office  of  Planning  was  organized  in  two  sub- 
offices  each  under  a  director,  one  called  Policy  Plan- 
ning that  dealt  generally  with  long-range  planning 
and  relationships  with  other  government  agencies  and 
the  Congress,  and  one  called  Highway  Planning  that 
dealt  primarily  with  the  cooperative  planning  and 
programing  activities  of  the  States  and  local  jurisdic- 


tions. It  was  within  the  Office  of  Highway  Planning 
that  research  and  development  in  the  planning  method 
produced  the  striking  advances  in  transportation 
planning,  particularly  at  metropolitan  scale,  but  also 
extended  the  statewide  and  national  scale  as  well. 

Even  with  all  these  complicating  factors,  the  1968 
National  Highway  Needs  Report^*  was  transmitted 
to  Congress  by  Secretary  Boyd,  the  report  having 
been  approved  by  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget  on  Jan- 
uary 31,  1968,  meeting  the  requirements  of  S.J.  Res. 
81.  In  line  with  the  AASHO  decision,  it  included  a 
gross  estimate  of  costs,  as  estimated  by  the  State 
highway  departments,  of  bringing  the  administrative 
systems  up  to  standards  agreed  upon  by  the  joint 
AMA-AASHO-NACO*  committees  and  the  Federal 
agencies,  including  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget.  By 
emphasizing  that  the  estimate  was  that  of  the  State 
highway  departments.  Federal  endorsement  was 
avoided,  and  perhaps  with  justification,  considering 
that  the  cost  of  improvements  needed  to  meet  the  ac- 
cepted standards  totaled  $294  billion  for  the  20-year 
period  1965  to  1985.  There  was  concern  that  the  sheer 
magnitude  of  the  estimate,  without  similar  estimates 
of  20-year  needs  in  other  modes,  might  induce  such 
substantial  increase  in  Federal  authorizations  for 
highways  that  other  modes  might  suffer,  relatively  at 
least,  if  not  absolutely. 

The  $294  billion  figure  was  indeed  a  staggering 
figure,  although  not  so  startling  when  considered  on 
the  basis  of  cost  per  vehicle-miles  of  travel  as  later 
studies  reported,  and  it  stood  in  sharp  contrast  to  the 
cost  estimated  by  the  States  in  the  1954  study  of  $216 
billion  for  the  30-year  period  of  1955  to  1984.  The 
difference  reflected  higher  design  standards,  higher 
urban  costs  brought  about  by  the  unanticipated  urban- 
ization of  the  country,  higher  unit  construction  prices, 
and  just  the  added  costs  occasioned  by  delays  in  meet- 
ing current  needs  as  they  developed. 

In  general  terms  the  report  outlined  a  desirable 
direction  of  future  policy  as  follows : 

1.  Continuing  assistance  to  the  States  for  improving 
the  efficiency  and  safety  of  the  highway  system  in 
both  rural  and  urban  areas.  (Studies  would  be  neces- 
sary to  redefine  the  Federal-aid  systems  and  enable 
sound  economic  analyses  to  reveal  how  and  where  the 
investment  of  Federal  funds  would  be  most  beneficial 
in  terms  of  national  objectives;  general  economic  and 
social  benefits;  and  transportation  service  to  people 
and  commerce.) 

2.  Greater  stress  than  in  the  past  on  the  improve- 
ment of  urban  transportation  and  the  development  of 
transportation  plans  calculated  to  raise  the  quality 
and  satisfaction  of  urban  life. 

3.  Additional  emphasis  on  the  coordination  of  high- 
ways with  other  modes  of  transport,  both  intra-  and 
interurban,  to  ensure  the  optimum  provision  of  the 
best  features  of  all  modes  and  continuing  emphasis 
on  making  the  highway  a  salutary  influence  on  the 
environment,  both  in  rural  and  urban  areas. 


*  American  Municipal  Association-American  Association  of 
State  Highway  Officials-National  Association  of  County 
Officials. 


298 


Land  and  air  transportation  cross  paths  at  Stapleton  International 

Airport  over  Interstate  70  in  Denver,  Colo. 


More  specifically  the  1968  National  Highway  Needs 
Report  discussed  the  need  for  a  functional  classifica- 
tion study  and  gave  considerable  attention  to  trans- 
portation needs  in  urban  areas,  quite  reminiscent  of 
similar  discussions  in  the  reports  of  1939  and  1944. 
It  also  explored  in  a  limited  way  the  problems  of 
developing  highway  or  other  transportation  programs 
at  metropolitan  scale  and  suggested  specifically  that 
the  planning  agencies  responsible  for  the  urban  trans- 
portation planning  process  in  those  areas  be  required 
to  develop  5-year  construction  programs  based  on  the 
planning  data.  Under  the  proposal,  the  State  high- 
way department  could  include  in  its  program  for  any 
area  only  projects  included  in  the  5-year  program. 
It  would  not  be  required  to  program  any  projects  in 
the  area,  but  it  could  not  program  projects  in  the  area 
that  were  not  in  the  5-year  program.  This  proposal 
was  calculated  to  insure  that  any  improvements  car- 
ried out  by  a  highway  department  in  a  metropolitan 
area  would  be  in  harmony  with  the  needs  of  the  area. 
At  the  same  time,  the  metropolitan  officials  could  not 
infringe  on  the  responsibility  of  the  State  highway 
department  in  developing  its  statewide  programs. 
Hopefully  this  would  reduce  the  areas  of  disagree- 
ments between  the  States  and  local  and  neighborhood 
interests  within  the  metropolitan  areas,  already,  in  an 
increasing  number  of  cases,  becoming  irritating  if  not 
actually  destructive  of  implementation  of  long-range 
plans. 

This  proposal  was  the  first  attempt  at  the  Federal 
level  to  bring  metropolitan  area  officials  directly  into 
the  programing  of  projects,  and  was  entirely  consist- 
ent with  section  9  of  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1962,  in  which  the  Congress  in  establishing  the 
"3C"  (continuing,  cooperative,  comprehensive)  process 
directed  that  ".  .  .  the  Secretary  shall  cooperate  with 
the  States  ...  in  the  development  of  long-range  high- 
way plans  and  programs  .  .  ."  By  that  time  the  plan- 
ning process  was  well  in  hand  but  little,  virtually 


nothing  in   fact,  was  being  done  cooperatively  with 
respect  to  programs. 

The  Congress  received  the  report  and  published  it 
as  a  "Committee  Print,"  not  giving  it  the  stature  of 
the  previous  reports  that  were  published  as  House 
Documents.  The  only  specific  action  it  took  with 
respect  to  the  report,  however,  was  to  affirm  what  the 
States  and  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  already  had 
in  progress,  the  functional  classification  of  all  roads 
and  streets.  Section  17  of  the  Federal- Aid  Highway 
Act  of  1968  stated : 

The  Secretary  of  Transportation  shall,  in  the  report  to 
Congress  required  to  be  submitted  by  January  1970  .  .  . 
include  the  results  of  a  systematic  nationwide  functional 
highway  classification  study  to  be  made  in  cooperation 
with  the  State  highway  departments  and  local  govern- 
ments .  .  .  desirable  as  one  of  the  bases  for  realigning 
Federal  highway  programs  to  better  meet  future  needs 
and  priorities. 

This  section,  by  specifically  including  local  govern- 
ments in  the  planning,  in  effect  required  exactly  what 
A  ASHO  and  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  had  under- 
taken in  establishing  the  Cooperative  Committee  in 
1964  and  which  by  then  was  well  along  toward  a  con- 
clusion. The  provision  in  the  Act  assured  that  the 
information  as  assembled  by  the  States  and  local 
governments  would  reach  the  Congress. 

Review  of  the  major  studies  during  the  30  years 
following  the  1939  report  and  the  subsequent  actions 
of  Congress  show  clearly  that  the  significant  changes 
in  policy  followed  careful  review  of  deliberate  plan- 
ning studies  by  the  Congress.  While  Federal  Highway 
Administrator  Bridwell  chose  to  separate  the  function 
called  policy  planning  from  program  planning,  the 
planning  that  had  been  carried  on  under  the  Hayden- 
Cartwright  Act  of  1934,  in  retrospect,  was  in  itself 
policy  planning,  although  conceived  more  to  aid  in 
developing  sound  construction  and  financial  programs 
in  the  State,  the  results  when  assembled  on  a  neutral 


299 


basis  gave  Congress  the  facts  on  which  to  base  its 
policy  decisions.  Of  course,  times  were  simpler  and 
the  program  then  could  be  considered  almost  in  isola- 
tion. In  more  recent  years  urbanization,  environ- 
mental considerations,  competition  among  modes,  and 
other  factors  have  complicated  planning  and  action, 
and  with  the  greatly  enlarged  programs,  the  stakes 
are  much  higher.  However,  review  of  the  Federal - 
aid  highway  acts  from  about  1968  onward  shows  clear 
evidence  that  the  Congress  has  been  responding  to 
outside  pressures  to  an  increasing  degree  and  relying 
less  on  the  product  of  planning.  Perhaps  the  com- 
mittees tend  to  disregard  the  results  of  planning,  or 
perhaps  planning  does  not  or  cannot  respond  to  the 
accelerated  pace  of  current  life.  "Wliatever  the  reason, 
planning  seems  to  have  played  a  smaller  part  in  guid- 
ing the  highway  program  in  the  last  few  years  than 
in  earlier  decades.  While  advances  were  made  in 
planning  at  the  metropolitan  level,  particularly  in  the 
area  of  intermodal  coordination  (at  the  direction  of 
Congress  and  with  added  funding  for  that  specific 
purpose),  similar  insistence  on  broad  planning  as  a 
prelude  to  national  decisionmaking  seems  to  be  in 
abeyance. 

It  is  difficult  to  know  when  history  should  end,  as 
it  merges  gradually  into  contemporary  life,  and  when 
reporting  begins.  In  this  chapter,  the  purpose  was  to 
describe  how  the  planning  process  developed  and  how 
the  results  of  the  planning  aided  or  led  to  policy 
decisions  and  action  programs.  But  in  view  of  the 
confusion  with  respect  to  both  policy  and  action  at 
the  Federal  level  in  the  last  5-  or  6-year  period,  and 
without  the  damping  effect  of  time  to  permit  viewing 
recent,  almost  contemporary,  actions  in  reasonable 
perspective,  it  seems  presumptuous  to  try  to  attach 
historic  significance  to  recent  actions.  True,  the 
Congress  has  had  the  benefit  of  the  periodic  reports  it 
directed  to  be  made,  and  in  the  past  few  years,  it  has 
also  directed  the  executive  branch  to  make  many  spe- 
cial studies  and  has  generally  taken  some  action  as  a 
result.  But  most  often  these  studies  applied  to  spe- 
cial problems  of  a  particular  State  or  area,  to  pro- 
posals advanced  by  special  interest  groups,  or  to  fringe 
or  minor  aspects  of  broader  programs.  AVhile  a  reci- 
tation of  the  impact  on  planning  of  some  of  these 
actions  is  of  interest  in  revealing  the  course  of  Federal 
action,  it  is  simply  that — a  recitation,  not  an  account 
of  history. 

The  1970  Highway  Needs  Study 

The  1970  Highway  Needs  Report  was  transmitted 
to  Congress  in  January  1970.  This  report  listed, 
State-by-State,  all  road  and  street  mileage  classified 
in  two  ways,  by  administrative  system  and  by  func- 
tional systems,  the  latter  as  best  it  could  be  deter- 
mined by  general  criteria  in  the  time  available.  As 
expected,  the  comparison  showed  reasonably  good 
coincidence  between  the  Federal-Aid  Primary  System 
and  the  system  of  principal  arterials  in  the  rural  areas 
of  113,000  miles  so  classified,  104,000  miles  being  on 
the  Federal-Aid  Primary  System.  Of  the  mileage 
not  on  the  Primary  System,  5,400  miles  were  on  the 
Federal-Aid  Secondary  System  and  3,600  miles  were 
not  on  either,  indicating  the  desirability  of  some  re- 
visions upward  of  those  routes  in  system  hierarchy. 


On  the  other  hand,  some  21,000  miles  of  collector 
routes,  at  best  candidates  for  secondary  status,  were 
on  the  Federal-Aid  Primary  System,  and  75,000  miles 
of  strictly  local  routes  had  been  included  administra- 
tively in  a  Federal-aid  system,  74,400  miles  on  the 
Secondary  and  600  miles  inexplicably  on  the  Primary 
Systems. 

More  detailed  review  of  the  figures  would  show  the 
disparity  between  functional  and  administrative  clas- 
sification to  be  far  greater  in  some  States  than  in 
others — as  noted  earlier,  the  rural  Federal-Aid  Sec- 
ondary System  as  a  percentage  of  all  rural  roads  in 
the  State  ranged  from  6  to  39  percent.  This  disparity 
simply  resulted  from  State  policies  of  selecting  the 
most  heavily  traveled  routes  not  on  the  Primary 
System  (and  some  no  doubt  qualifying  for  that 
System)  and  improving  them  to  high  standards. 
Other  States  preferred  to  spread  their  secondary 
funds  as  widely  as  possible.  This  situation,  35  years 
after  the  first  authorization  of  secondary  funds,  was 
a  far  cry  from  the  role  of  secondary  road  construction 
envisioned  by  Fairbank  and  MacDonald  when  they 
proposed  holding  the  system  to  10  percent  of  the  rural 
mileage.  With  no  clear  support  from  Congress  for  a 
limitation  on  system  mileage,  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  adopted  a  policy  of  approving  most  of  what 
the  States  requested  in  system  additions,  holding  the 
additions  hopefully  to  a  mileage  to  give  "program 
latitude"  rather  than  requiring  more  specific  criteria. 
But  after  35  years  some  hard  rethinking  appeared  to 
be  in  order. 

Although  disparity  in  rural  classification  existed, 
that  in  the  urban  areas  was  far  more  pronounced, 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  Federal  aid  in  urban 
areas  was  still  limited  to  projects  on  extensions  of 
rural  Federal-aid  primary  or  secondary  routes.  As 
should  be  expected,  while  32,000  miles  of  urban  ar- 
terials were  on  the  Federal-Aid  Primary  System  and 
22,000  on  the  Secondary  System,  some  40,000  miles 
were  not  on  either.  This  situation  was  the  result  of 
the  concept  of  authorizing  Federal  aid  in  urban  areas 
only  for  segments  of  statewide  systems  that  lay  geo- 
graphically in  those  areas.  Even  that  concept  was  a 
considerable  advance  from  the  original  total  prohibi- 
tion of  any  Federal  aid  within  urban  areas  of  over 
2,500  population.  The  Congress  had  never  previously 
viewed  Federal  aid  as  appropriate  for  improving  an 
arterial  system  for  local  urban  travel. 

The  Movement  to  Support  Urban  Needs 

The  Congress  by  the  1968  Act,  responding  to  con- 
tinued urging  to  give  greater  support  to  urban  needs, 
authorized  a  new  program,  the  Urban  Area  Traffic 
Operations  Improvement  Program.  This  program 
quickly  became  known  as  the  TOPICS  program,  an 
accronym  for  Traffic  Operations  Program  to  Improve 
Capacity  and  Safety.  It  recognized  that  extension  of 
the  freeway  system  into  urban  areas  had  relieved 
traffic  congestion  on  many  arterials  but,  by  the  loca- 
tion and  design  of  interchanges,  had  imposed  heavier 
volumes  on  other  arterials  or  city  streets  on  which 
cities  were  not  prepared  to  finance  improvements. 
Congress  also  recognized  that  generally  the  traffic 
operations  systems  in  urban  areas  were  not  receiving 


300 


the  full  advantage  of  modern  traffic  engineerino:  tech- 
niques, due  primarily  to  lack  of  funds.  To  alleviate 
these  conditions,  $200  million  was  authorized  for  each 
of  fiscal  years  1970  and  1971,  with  the  normal  match- 
ing rates.  And  the  Act  required  that  projects  to  be 
included  in  the  program  be  based  on  the  results  of  the 
"3C"  process. 

The  TOPICS  program  was  slow  in  getting  started, 
and  complaints  were  heard  that  the  requirement  for 
relation  to  the  nature  and  cost  of  the  projects.  Be- 
studies  prescribed  by  the  Act  was  too  exacting  in 
yond  that,  the  "3C"  process  applied  to  urbanized  areas 
(those  with  populations  of  50,000  or  more),  and  the 


TOPICS  program  was  applicable  to  all  urban  areas, 
so  many  new  studies  had  to  be  undertaken.  Subse- 
quently, the  authorizing  legislation  was  amended  to 
require  the  application  of  the  "3C"  process  only  to 
projects  within  the  urbanized  areas. 

By  1970  urban  pressures  had  become  still  heavier, 
and  calls  for  Federal  aid  for  public  transportation  in 
the  larger  cities  were  becoming  louder  and  stronger. 
Many  voices  urged  diverting  funds  from  the  Highway 
Trust  Fund  to  aid  mass  transportation,  particularly 
rail  rapid  transit  where  capital  costs  were  so  high. 
Congress  responded  in  small  measure  through  the 
Federal-Aid   Highway   Act   of   1970   in   two   specific 


This  is  South  Street  in  Pittsfleld,  Mass.,  which  has  been  improved 

under  the  TOPICS  program.    Items  eligible  for  such  funding 

include  construction  of  the  islands  and  smoother  alinement, 

installation  of  signals  and  lights,  pavement  markings  for  left  and  right  turns 

and  crosswalks,  and  channelization  for  turning  traffic, 

all  of  which  improve  traffic  flow  and  safety. 


ways — authorization  of  a  new  system,  the  Federal- 
Aid  Urban  System,  and  of  expenditures  of  funds  on 
exclusive  bus  lanes. 

The  authorization  of  the  Urban  System  presumably 
was  attributable,  at  least  in  part,  to  the  finding^s  of 
the  1970  Highway  Needs  Study,  which  focused  atten- 
tion on  the  disparity  between  functional  and  adminis- 
trative systems  in  urban  areas,  as  well  as  to  the 
increasing  demands  of  city  officials  for  more  Federal 
aid.  The  study  in  effect  confirmed  their  position. 
Thus  the  new  system  concept  was  established.  The 
Federal-Aid  Primary  and  Secondary  Systems  would 
still  extend  into  and  through  urban  areas'to  form  a 
connected  statewide  network.  The  Urban  System 
would,  in  urbanized  areas,  serve  the  heaviest  corridors 
and  major  centers  of  activity  to  aid  intra-city  move- 
ment. No  route  on  the  Urban  System  could  be  on 
another  Federal-aid  system,  and  each  route  must  con- 
nect with  another  route  on  the  Urban  System  or  one 
of  the  other  Federal-aid  systems.  And  the  System 
must  be  selected  by  the  appropriate  local  officials  and 
the  State  highway  departments  in  cooperation  (the 
local  officials  appeared  first,  it  may  be  noted)  and  on 
the  basis  of  the  "3C"  process. 

That  this  step  in  recognition  of  urban  street  and 
highway  needs  was  taken  rather  gingerly  is  seen  in 
the  funding  authorized  for  the  different  programs. 
Funds  were  continued  for  the  fiscal  years  1972  and 
1973  at  its  same  level  as  for  1970  and  1971  for  the 
"ABC"  program,  and  with  the  traditional  45-30  dis- 
tribution between  them.  The  $1.1  billion  authoriza- 
tion was  divided  45  percent  for  projects  on  the 
Primary  System,  and  30  percent  for  those  on  the 
Secondary  System,  each  available  for  either  rural  or 
urban  portions.  The  remaining  25  percent  was  avail- 
able only  for  sections  on  either  system  within  urban 
areas.  In  addition,  $100  million  was  authorized  for 
each  year  for  the  new  Urban  System,  but  as  an  offset, 
the  authorization  for  TOPICS  was  reduced  from 
$200  million  to  $100  million.  As  another  apparent 
offset  to  this  foot-in-the-door  approach  to  aiding 
urban  areas,  $125  million  was  authorized  for  projects 
on  the  Federal-Aid  Primary  and  Secondary  Systems 
only  outside  urban  areas,  60  percent  on  the  Primary 
and  40  percent  on  the  Secondary  Systems.  Finally 
50  percent  of  the  authorization  for  Federal-aid  pri- 
mary and  secondary  funds  for  use  in  urban  areas 
could  be  applied  to  the  Urban  System. 

The  other  significant  departure  from  tradition  was 
seen  in  section  111  of  the  1970  Act  which  authorized 
the  use  of  Federal-aid  funds  for  the  construction  of 
exclusive  or  preferential  bus  lanes,  and  for  facilities 
such  as  bus  loading  areas,  shelters,  and  fringe  or  cor- 
ridor parking  areas  to  serve  bus  or  other  mass  trans- 
portation passengers.  This  action  gave  specific 
authorization  to  a  program  for  encouraging  the 
greater  use  of  buses,  an  idea  that  had  been  urged  for 
several  years  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.^**  Ad- 
ministratively the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  had  held 
that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  reserve  a  lane  for  the 
exclusive  use  of  buses  if  so  doing  permitted  the  move- 
ment of  more  passengers  than  would  result  from  its 
general  use  by  all  vehicles.  Despite  Bureau,  and  later 
Federal  Highway  Administration,  urging,  few  State 
highway  departments  had  been  sympathetic  to  this 


approach  to  aiding  urban  public  transportation,  Cali- 
fornia and  Wisconsin  being  notable  exceptions. 

By  the  time  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1973 
was  approved  on  August  13  of  that  year,  the  4-system 
hierarchy,  initiated  in  the  1970  Act,  had  become  firmly 
established,  and  authorizations  were  made  in  terms 
of  the  new  concept.  With  the  Interstate  System 
funds  authorized  under  earlier  legislation,  the  old 
ABC  45-30-25  relationship  was  finally  dropped,  and 
authorizations  made  separately  for  the  Federal-aid 
highway  rural.  Federal-aid  secondary  rural,  and  Fed- 
eral-aid urban  programs.  The  annual  amounts  for 
the  last  2  years,  1975  and  1976,  of  the  3-year  authori- 
zation, built  up  slightly  from  1973,  were  $700  million 
for  primary  rural,  $400  million  for  secondary  rural, 
and  $800  million  for  urban.  In  addition  $300  million 
was  authorized  for  extensions  of  the  Federal-Aid 
Primary  and  Secondary  Systems  within  urban  areas. 

Other  provisions  of  the  1973  Act  showed  more 
positive  concern  over  the  urban  program.  The  au- 
thority to  construct  highway  facilities  for  public  bus 
transportation  was  extended  to  include  participation 
in  the  purchase  of  buses,  and  after  July  1,  1975,  for 
the  construction  of  fixed-rail  facilities  and  the  pur- 
chase of  rolling  stock  from  Federal-aid  urban  funds. 
No  new  authorization  of  funds  was  provided,  how- 
ever, and  to  benefit  from  such  applications  of  funds, 
a  city  must  have  the  project  included  in  the  program 
of  the  State  highway  department. 

A  more  significant  departure,  however,  permitted  a 
State,  at  the  request  of  local  officials  and  when  found 
to  be  in  accordance  with  the  results  of  the  "3C"  pro- 
cess, to  delete  Interstate  System  links  and  apply  the 
amount  of  funds  thus  saved  to  a  nonhighway  public 
transportation  system.  The  funds  involved  would  not 
come  from  the  Highway  Trust  Fund,  however,  but 
would  be  drawn  in  the  same  amount  from  general 
funds. 

Another  provision  authorized  $50  million  for  each 
of  3  years  for  a  "special  urban  high  density  traffic 
program,"  for  the  construction  of  highways,  not  more 
than  10  miles  in  length,  connecting  to  the  Interstate 
System,  if  conforming  to  the  results  of  the  "3C" 
process,  in  areas  of  high  population  density  and  heavy 
traffic  congestion  that  will  serve  the  urgent  needs  of 
commercial,  industrial,  airport,  or  national  defense 
installations. 

Still  another  section  of  the  1973  Act  redefined  the 
manner  of  selecting  the  Urban  System  by  requiring 
not  that  it  be  selected  by  local  officials  and  the  State 
highway  departments  in  cooperation,  but  by  ".  .  .  the 
appropriate  local  officials  .  .  .  with  the  concurrence  of 
the  State  highway  departments  .  .  .  ,"  thus  moving  a 
step  beyond  the  1970  Act  in  enlarging  the  authority 
of  the  local  officials.  The  System  still  must  be  in 
conformity  with  the  "3C"  process,  however,  which  is 
a  cooperative  process. 

These  provisions  and  others  relating  to  special  in- 
terests or  matters  of  local  concern  cannot  help  but 
leave  the  impression  that  the  Congress  was  acting 
more  on  the  basis  of  accommodating  different  groups 
or  interests  in  program  details  or  in  minor  expansion 
of  traditional  boundaries  of  highway  policy  than  on 
the  basis  of  long-range  plan  or  policy  goals.     That 


302 


the  periodic  needs  studies  were  not  without  their  in- 
fluence, however,  is  seen  in  the  provision  in  section  148 
of  the  1973  Act  that  called  upon  the  States  to  desig- 
nate three  Federal-aid  systems.  The  first  was  to  be 
the  Federal-Aid  Primary  System,  including  exten- 
sions into  and  through  urban  areas.  The  second  was 
to  be  the  Federal- Aid  Secondary  System,  now  to  be 
confined  to  rural  areas.  And  the  third  was  to  be  the 
Federal-Aid  Urban  Sj'stem  in  all  urbanized  areas  and 
in  smaller  urban  areas  that  the  State  highway  depart- 
ment might  want  to  designate.  The  systems  were  to 
be  designated  on  the  basis  of  their  functional  use  as 
anticipated  in  1980,  which  necessitated  perceptive 
planning  of  routes  by  function  in  areas  yet  to  be 
urbanized  or  developed  in  other  ways.  All  the  system 
designations  were  to  be  effective  after  June  30,  1976. 

In  a  requirement  for  earlier  action,  another  section 
of  the  1973  Act  called  for  the  designation  of  "Priority 
Pi'imary  Routes."  These  routes  were  to  be  high  traffic 
sections  to  supplement  the  Interstate  System  by 
".  .  .  furnishing  needed  adequate  traffic  collector  and 
distributor  facilities  .  .  ."  These  routes  were  to  be 
selected  by  the  State  highway  departments  in  "consul- 
tation" (not  cooperation)  with  appropriate  local 
officials.  The  States  were  to  make  an  initial  selection 
of  such  routes  and  estimate  and  report  to  Congress 
by  July  1974  their  cost.  Without  specific  mileage 
limitation,  this  provision  was  as  open-ended  as  the 
initial  authoi-ization  of  the  Federal-Aid  Secondary 
System.  But  funds  increasing  from  $100  million  in 
1974  to  $300  in  1976  were  authorized. 

Perhaps  the  most  significant  policy  statement  of 
this  or  other  recent  acts  was  the  "Declaration  of 
Policy"  under  section  107.  This  section  declared  that 
".  .  .  since  the  Interstate  System  is  now  in  the  final 
phase  of  completion  it  shall  be  the  national  policy 
that  increased  emphasis  be  placed  on  construction  and 
reconstruction  of  the  other  Federal-aid  systems  .  .  . 
in  order  to  bring  all  of  the  Federal-aid  systems  up  to 
standards  and  to  increase  the  safety  of  these  systems 
to  the  maximum  extent."  This  policy  declaration 
presumably  would  curtail,  and  hopefully  end,  the  bit- 
by-bit  extensions  of  the  Interstate  System.  The 
Interstate  System  upon  its  completion,  delayed  and 
in  some  areas  curtailed  as  it  was,  will  be  fulfilling 
admirably,  even  beyond  expectations  as  to  its  traffic 
services  and  economic  benefits,  the  concept  laid  down 
by  Congress  in  1944.  It  was  in  antici^^ation  of  this 
that  AASHO  and  Public  Roads  began  the  post- 
Interstate  studies  in  1964,  studies  that  reached  frui- 
tion, at  least  in  part,  by  this  provision  nearly  a  decade 
later. 

Statewide   Highway  Planning 

At  State  level  following  passage  of  the  Federal- Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1956,  planning  efforts  began  rapid 
expansion.  The  planning  entailed  in  the  early  stages 
of  the  Interstate  program,  particularly  in  the  urban 
areas,  a  greatly  enlarged  scope  of  responsibility — in 
addition  to  the  amount  of  work  involved,  its  broad- 
ened planning  to  encompass  financial  and  economic 
areas  and  increasingly,  the  consideration  of  social  and 
environmental  aspects  of  the  highway  programs. 
Fortunately,  because  planning  funds  available  were 
a    fixed    percentage    of    the    apportionments,    the    in- 


creased amounts  apportioned  for  construction  under 
the  1956  Act  meant  substantial  increases  in  planning 
funds.  Certainly  no  other  general  planning  or  trans- 
portation planning  program  ever  was  so  strongly 
funded  in  relation  to  current  planning  needs.  Even 
though  in  the  early  years  of  the  post- 1956  period 
funds  quite  amply  met  the  needs,  as  more  and  more 
elements  were  added  to  the  planning  responsibility, 
this  relative  affluence  soon  disappeared. 

All  States  accepted  as  a  matter  of  course  the  neces- 
sity for  keeping  planning  data  current,  and  many 
utilized  the  facts  collected  in  response  to  studies  called 
for  by  Congress  as  a  basis  for  developing  statewide 
plans  and  programs  embracing  all  road  systems. 
Many  reviewed  their  system  designations,  and  some 
repeated  their  earlier  statewide  needs  studies.  More 
attention  was  paid  to  long-range  programing  and 
efforts  were  made  to  provide  analytical  bases  for 
project  annual  improvement  needs  for  the  10-  and 
20-year  program  periods. 

Many  States  adopted  the  "sufficiency  rating"  ap- 
proach, which  rated  each  road  section  on  the  basis  of 
its  traffic  capacity,  structural  adequacy,  and  safety. 
This  approach  was  based  partly  on  planning  data, 
but  more  on  visual  observation  of  current  conditions 
by  an  annual  inventory.  It  resulted  in  a  listing  of 
projects  on  the  basis  of  their  current  adequacy,  or 
"sufficiency,"  as  opposed  to  the  longer  range  "deficien- 
cies," more  commonly  reported  in  the  broader  needs 
studies.  Knowing  the  funds  to  be  available  for  a 
coming  year,  a  State  could  develop  a  construction 
program  simply  by  going  down  the  list  of  sections 
starting  with  the  one  currently  least  sufficient  until 
the  available  funds  were  all  committed.  While  this 
was  perhaps  not  planning,  in  that  it  emphasized  only 
current  conditions,  it  was  a  useful  administrative  tool 
because  it  permitted  the  highway  department  to  dem- 
onstrate to  the  public  that  its  current  program  was 
directed  toward  correcting  the  most  severe  deficien- 
cies, as  determined  on  an  objective  rating  scale.  Ob- 
jections to  this  approach  were  that  it  did  not  reveal 
the  real  future  needs,  but  simply  provided  an  orderly 
way  to  distribute  currently  available  funds. 

Other  States,  after  the  completion  of  the  AASHO 
Road  Test  in  Illinois,  made  efforts  to  adapt  to  their 
programing  procedures  the  methods  used  by  the  road 
test  staff  to  determine  when  a  section  had  been  so 
badly  damaged  as  to  justify  its  being  retired  from 
further  testing,  or  in  short,  failed.  The  method  em- 
ployed a  profilometer  or  a  roughometer  to  measure 
periodically  the  deterioration  in  riding  quality,  sec- 
tion by  section.  These  readings  did  more  than  pro- 
vide an  objective  basis  for  deciding  that  a  section  had 
failed.  It  was  found  in  analysis  that  the  trends  in 
current  riding  quality  measurements,  called  the  "pres- 
ent serviceability  rating,"  could  also  be  used  as  a 
reliable  prediction  of  when  failure  would  occur.  It 
offered,  in  effect,  a  different  approach  to  the  life  ex- 
pectancy of  pavements  by  an  analytical  rather  than 
by  the  earlier  actuarial  approach  and  section  by  sec- 
tion rather  than  simply  by  pavement  types.  Some 
States  reasoned  that  similar  trends  of  serviceability 
ratings  could  show  when  particular  sections  of  routes 
on  their  highway  systems  would  need  replacement, 
and  saw  in  that  approach  a  means  not  only  of  antici- 


303 


pating  annual  program  needs  for  several  years  ahead, 
but  possibly  another  approach  to  developing  long- 
range  plans — a  synthesis  approach — and  with  coop- 
eration from  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  explored 
the  area  with  some  success.  One  of  the  early  applica- 
tions of  this  approach  was  made  by  the  New  York 
Thruway  Authority  in  estimating  its  long-range  major 
maintenance  and  replacement  programs. 

By  various  approaches  individual  States  were  suc- 
cessful in  developing  and  keeping  reasonably  current 
long-range  plans  and,  to  a  less  satisfactory  degree, 
medium  and  short-range  programs,  generally  based 
on  objective  planning  processes.  States  probably 
were  then  and  now  are  better  able  than  the  national 
government  to  develop  transportation  policies  objec- 
tively. 

Increasingly  States  are  gearing  their  transportation 
policies  and  plans  to  general  land  use  development 
policies.  Connecticut  and  Wisconsin  offer  early 
examples  of  transportation  considerations  as  a  key 
element  in  implementing  desirable  land  use  policies, 
with  the  highway  departments,  and  more  recently  in 


some  cases  transportation  departments,  joining  with 
other  State  departments  in  developing  the  long-range 
goals  and  policies.  Wisconsin  also  offers  an  early 
example  of  forecasting  transportation  needs  by  a  so- 
phisticated simulation  model  developed  as  an  out- 
growth of  the  urban  transportation  models  expanded 
to  statewide  scope.  Illinois  was  another  State  enter- 
ing early  into  the  use  of  statewide  simulation  models. 
Increasingly  States  are  coming  to  accept  the  futility 
of  attempting  any  longer  to  develop  a  highway  policy 
in  isolation  from  other  modes  of  transportation,  or  to 
develop  a  transportation  policy  except  as  an  integral 
element  of  an  overall  land  use  development  policy,  a 
view  the  Congress  has  yet  to  accept. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  the  question  was 
raised  as  to  whether  in  the  United  States  any  high- 
way planning  was  carried  on  or  whether  what  is 
called  highway  planning  more  realistically  is  highway 
improvement  planning.  Alaska  was  cited  as  an  ex- 
ception. It  so  happened  that  an  opportunity  to 
illustrate  this  distinction  came  with  the  Alaska  High- 
way Study. 


In  the  early  1930's,  engineers  planned  to  make  the  St.  Croix  River  a  part  of  a  proposed  Lake  Superior-Mississippi  Rii'er  canal. 
However,  in  1968  Congress  made  the  Upper  St.  Croix  part  of  the  national  system  of  wild  a7id  scenic  rivers.  Later  the  Wisconsin 
Division  of  Highways  developed  a  wayside  and  canoe  landing  along  State  hightvay  35  and  negotiated  scenic  casements  to  assure 
that  a  200-foot  strip  along  the  river  and  the  highway  will  remain  in  its  natural  state. 


304 


Under  section  13  of  the  Federal- Aid  Hicrhway  Act 
of  1962,  the  Secretaiy  of  Commerce  was  authorized, 
in  cooperation  with  the  State  of  Alaska,  to  make  a 
study  of  the  adequacy  of  the  Federal-aid  hicrhway 
system,  to  make  specific  recommendations  for  con- 
struction of  roads  through  undeveloped  areas,  and  to 
recommend  a  feasible  program,  including  the  sharing 
of  cost  responsibilities,  for  implementing  the  recom- 
mendations. Although  the  Act  authorized  funds,  no 
funds  were  appropriated  in  that  year,  so  the  study 
could  not  be  undertaken  until  $400,000,  half  the 
original  authorization,  were  appropriated  in  1963. 
Through  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  two  consultants 
were  employed,  qualified  by  experience  in  economic 
and  engineering  areas  and  by  previous  work  in 
Alaska.  Their  report,  completed  early  in  1966,  was 
forwarded  to  Congress  in  May  of  that  year. 

Briefly  the  consultants  found  that  the  current 
Federal-aid  systems,  primary  and  secondary,  ade- 
quately served  the  population  in  Alaska,  in  fact  more 
nearly  meeting  desirable  standards  than  in  any  of  the 
"lower  48"  States.  It  could  be  anticipated  that  the 
entire  system  could  be  brought  up  to  desirable  stand- 
ards within  16  years  with  the  continuation  of  the 
current  rate  of  authorizations.  As  to  highway  needs 
in  undeveloped  areas,  the  consultants  found  virtually 
none.  Although  it  was  recognized  that  natural  re- 
sources would  be  developed,  what  specific  resources 
in  what  specific  areas  would  warrant  development 
could  not  be  forecast.  Thus,  the  consultants  con- 
cluded that  a  small  amount  of  funds  should  be  avail- 
able to  draw  upon  when  and  if  a  potential  resource 
development  prospect  appeared. 

"WTiat  Alaska  needed  most  was  assistance  in  fund- 
ing maintenance.  Extraordinary  maintenance  prob- 
lems existed  because  of  snow  and  cold,  and  the  use  of 
Federal  aid  for  maintenance  was,  as  elsewhere,  pro- 
hibited by  law.  Because  of  its  great  area,  Alaska 
received  a  large  amount  of  Federal  aid  in  relation  to 
other  States.  Alaska's  matching  ratio,  because  of  the 
preponderance  of  land  in  public  holding,  was  about 
5  percent  State  and  95  percent  Federal,  relatively 
little  State  matching  in  contrast  to  other  States.  How- 
ever, with  small  population  and  few  vehicles,  even 
with  relatively  high  road-user  taxes,  virtually  all 
highway  revenue  was  required  to  match  Federal  aid, 
and  maintenance  had  to  be  financed  from  general 
funds. 

The  reasoning,  perhaps  unexpected,  with  respect  to 
the  place  of  the  highway  in  resource  development, 
was  interesting  and  could  well  be  an  example  for 
those  promoting  development  in  other  areas.  Alaska 
is  tremendously  rich  in  natural  resources,  but  little 
was  then  economically  feasible  for  development  due  to 
its  remoteness  from  population  centers  and  its  depend- 
ence upon  highway  transportation.  Its  timber  re- 
sources are  close  to  tidewater.  At  the  time  of  the 
study,  oil  production  was  close  to  or  in  tidewater. 
Exploration  of  the  vast  potential  of  the  North  Slope 
would  not  be  brought  on  simply  by  the  existence  of  a 
highway,  although  if  other  factors  made  its  explora- 
tion feasible (  as  now  has  occurred),  a  highway  to 
permit  pipeline  construction  and  maintenance  would 
be  a  necessity.     Similarly  the  Rampart  Dam,  when 


and  if  justified,  would  require  a  highway  connection, 
but  building  a  highway  to  the  site  would  hardly 
initiate  its  construction.  Tourism,  a  growing  factor 
of  the  economy  despite  high  prices  and  the  great 
distance  from  population  centers,  would  require  no 
new  highway  development,  for  most  of  its  scenic 
features,  its  glaciers  and  moimtain  peaks,  and  its 
hunting  and  fishing  areas  are  within  easy  reach  of  the 
present  system.  And  there  is  no  way  to  judge  whether 
any  of  the  widely  scattered  mineral  resources  would 
be  feasible  for  development  simply  as  a  result  of  high- 
way improvement.  Thus,  the  recommendation  of  a 
small  "drawing  account"  for  development  roads  should 
resource  development  in  unanticipated  locations  be 
found  feasible. 

The  consultants  proposed  three  alternates.  The 
first  would  authorize  additional  appropriations  from 
general  funds  to  aid  the  State  in  maintenance  and  in 
constructing  tertiary  non-Federal-aid  system  develop- 
ment roads  where  and  when  opportunity  appeared. 
The  second  would  allow  the  use  of  regular  Federal- 
aid  funds  for  tertiary  road  construction.  Both  alter- 
nates would  provide  also  for  improvement  in  the 
ferry  system,  as  the  "marine  highway"  system  is 
economically  more  desirable  than  attempting  to  pro- 
vide land  transportation  between  certain  points,  such 
as  connecting  Juneau,  the  capital,  to  other  parts  of 
the  State.  The  third  alternate  simply  would  authorize 
the  use  of  a  portion  of  i-egular  Federal-aid  funds  for 
maintenance.  All  three  alternates  contemplated  spe- 
cial authorizations  for  a  5-year  period. 

The  Department  of  Commerce  rejected  the  first 
alternate  as  not  complying  "with  the  President's 
guidelines  for  budgetary  ceilings  and  fiscal  manage- 
ment." It  recommended  the  acceptance  of  the  second 
and  third  alternates.  Agreement  could  not  be  reached 
within  the  Administration,  which  held  that  to  make 
special  concession  to  Alaska  was  inconsistent  with  a 
policy  of  equal  treatment  to  all  States  and  that  au- 
thority to  use  Federal-aid  funds  on  nonsystem  roads 
or  for  improving  the  ferry  system  was  not  appro- 
priate. It  was  also  held  by  some  that  the  10  percent 
of  construction  funds  for  maintenance  was  excessive, 
but  perhaps  any  construction  funds  unutilized  might 
be  used  for  maintenance,  only  at  a  rate  declining  from 
all  of  that  amount  in  the  first  year  to  none  after  5 
years. 

Finally  when  no  agreement  could  be  reached  within 
the  Administration,  Congress  brought  pressure  to 
produce  the  report  which  led  the  Secretary  of  Com- 
merce to  transmit  the  report  in  May  1966  with  his 
recommendations  unchanged,  but  included  in  the  re- 
port a  letter  to  him  from  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget 
explaining  its  disagreement. 

The  controversy  proved  quite  academic,  however, 
by  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1966,  which  was 
enacted  4  months  later.  The  Congress  accepted  the 
evidence  of  need  as  described  in  the  report  by  au- 
thorizing Federal-aid  funds  for  development  roads, 
and  increasing  the  amount  of  "construction  and  main- 
tenance" by  $14  million  annually  for  a  5-year  period, 
1968  through  1972,  to  be  appropriated  from  general 
funds,  not  the  Highway  Trust  Fund. 


305 


Planning  In   Urban  Areas  After   1956 

While  the  1956  Act  ushered  in  a  new  era  in  highway 
transportation  with  major  emphasis  on  completing 
the  Interstate  System,  its  effect  was  but  little  less  on 
the  problems  of  the  urban  areas.  Funds  had  been 
available,  even  if  in  relatively  small  amounts,  for 
expenditure  only  in  urban  areas  since  1944.  Many 
State  highway  departments  had  engaged  in  the  urban 
transportation  studies  with  the  cooperation  of  the 
cities.  But  the  States  were  few  indeed  that  had  ac- 
cepted the  role  they  ultimately  must  in  working  with 
the  cities  to  aid  in  solving  tJieir  transportation  prob- 
lems. While  many  States  sought  the  cities'  advice 
and  cooperation  in  connection  with  programs  in  urban 
areas,  their  concern  generally  (and  quite  naturally) 
was  more  with  getting  the  highway  through  the  city 
in  an  acceptable  manner  than  in  contributing  to  a 
solution  of  the  city's  internal  transportation  problems. 
For  the  next  decade  the  problems  of  the  States  in 
carrying  on  the  Federal-aid  program  in  urban  areas 
were  far  more  severe  in  the  areas  of  organization  and 
administration  than  in  the  technical  or  even  financial 
areas.  But  if  the  States  were  not  prepared  to  work 
together  with  the  cities,  the  cities  were  no  better  pre- 
pared to  join  with  the  States  in  a  full,  cooperative 
manner. 


Early  in  1957,  sensing  well  the  problems  that  would 
arise,  Pyke  Johnson,  President  of  the  Automotive 
Safety  Foundation,  following  the  role  it  often  played 
of  getting  people  with  common  interests  together, 
arranged  to  meet  with  the  Executive  Secretary  of  the 
American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Alfred  E.  Johnson,  and  Patrick  Healy,  Executive 
Director  of  the  American  Municipal  Association,  in 
the  Office  of  the  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads,  C.  D. 
Curtiss.  In  short  order  it  was  agreed  that  a  top-level 
committee,  seven  from  each  association,  would  be 
formed  to  explore  the  State-city  problems  and  to  act 
as  a  catalyst  in  working  toward  solutions.  Confirm- 
ing their  representatives'  action,  AASHO  named  its 
President,  its  Executive  Secretary,  the  Director  of 
Planning  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  four 
other  key  chief  administrative  officers.  The  AMA 
named  its  President  and  six  other  top  mayors  or  city 
engineers  to  the  committee,  known  as  the  AMA- 
AASHO  Committee  on  Highways.  Public  Roads 
provided  the  committee  secretary. 

The  gap  between  the  two  groups  at  the  first  meet- 
ing was  clearly  evident,  although  a  good  rapport  was 
established.  One  incident  illustrates  the  differences. 
The  AMA  group  asked  the  AASHO  representatives 


The  Grand,  Avenue  Overpass  makes  a  graceful 
split  to  avoid  the  Albuquerque  Convention 
Center  and,  at  the  same  time,  provides 
space  for  off-street  parking. 


V  ^w^-^--'. 


•v*(pf"      f  _^ 


Tj[»  •  :i  ■  •  ^'»  ip' 


T^^i 


£,-  V\»<^ 


„;  ^'  Jgi'*-^^'^?--  >  "jbH^lfe 


vr 

Silvl 

T 

^^ 

■Ail.     ■''^ 

U 

.^«H^— 


,#»«'• 


,       t       I       » 


to  recommend  that  the  States  each  organize  an  "urban 
division"  to  give  undivided  attention  to  urban  prob- 
lems, paralleling  the  secondary  roads  division  each 
State  had  set  up  in  response  to  an  earlier  provision 
of  the  Federal-aid  highway  legislation.  The  AASHO 
group  demurred  and  the  proposal  was  again  intro- 
duced at  the  next  meeting.  But  instead  of  being 
accepted,  it  was  settled  by  a  statement  by  Jasper 
Womack,  Chief  Highway  Engineer  of  California. 
Cutting  through  all  the  verbiage,  he  observed  that 
the  urban  problems  had  become  so  widespread  in 
California  that  he  might  say  that  the  whole  Division 
of  Highways  was  an  urban  division,  and  that  there 
was  no  way  in  which  one  particular  unit  could  deal 
with  all  facets  of  State-city  relations,  that  the  whole 
department  must  be  involved.  General  acceptance  of 
that  view  cleared  the  air  and  led  to  a  mutual  under- 
standing and  a  truly  cooperative  spirit  that  persisted 
for  many  years. 

The  First  National  Conference  on  Highways  and  Urban 
Development 

One  of  the  first  activities  in  which  the  Committee 
was  engaged  was  the  cosponsoring,  along  with  the 
Highway  Research  Board,  of  the  first  National  Con- 
ference on  Highways  and  Urban  Development.  At 
that  time  the  Automotive  Safety  Foundation  was 
supporting  the  staff  activity  of  the  Highway  Research 
Board  Committee  on  Urban  Research  (later  to  be- 
come the  Urban  Research  Department  of  the  Board 
under  the  chairmanship  of  Pyke  Johnson,  by  then 
retired  from  the  Automotive  Safety  Foundation). 
Through  this  Committee,  the  Foundation  provided 
financial  support  and  technical  assistance  for  the 
Conference. 

The  AMA-AASHO  Committee  made  sure  that  key 
highway  and  city  officials  would  participate.  The 
HRB  Committee  arranged  for  participation  by  key 
transit  officials,  planners,  and  other  professionals  and 
appropriate  leaders  from  the  business  and  academic 
communities.  The  Executive  Director  of  AASHO 
agreed  to  serve  as  General  Chairman,  and  ran  the 
Conference  with  a  finn  hand.  In  October  1958  the 
first  National  Conference  on  Highways  and  Urban 
Development  was  held  at  Sagamore,  a  conference 
center  operated  by  Syracuse  University. 

Had  there  been  any  doubt  as  to  the  sincerity  with 
which  the  conferees  would  go  about  their  task,  it  was 
quickly  dispelled  in  the  situation  in  which  they  found 
themselves — living,  eating,  and  working  together  for 
a  full  week  in  the  total  isolation  of  the  Adirondack 
Mountains. 

In  his  foreword  to  the  Report,  Chairman  Johnson 
says. 

The  frank  discussions  of  basic  issues  produced  many 
useful  >?uidelines  for  developing  sound  cooperative  plans 
and  for  expediting  action.  Recognizing  the  great  interest 
in  this  subject  throughout  the  country,  the  Conference 
felt  that  these  constructive  ideas  should  be  given  the 
widest  possible  circulation  as  an  aid  to  the  many  officials 
and  civic  leaders  who  have  the  responsibility  of  moving 
the  highway  program  and  for  coordinated,  planned  urban 
development  i)ut  who  were  not  privileged  to  attend  the 
Sagamore  Conference.'" 


In  the  early  stages  of  the  discussions,  parochial 
views  were  expressed  and  professional  jealousy  was 
sometimes  apparent,  but  after  all  views  were  fully 
aired. 

The  Conference  agreed  that  the  final  choice  among 
possible  alternatives  in  highway  location  and  design 
should  be  guided  by  a  'grand  accounting'  of  costs  and 
benefits.  Advantages  and  disadvantages  of  each  alterna- 
tive— in  terms  respectively  of  the  highway  user  and  the 
community — sliould  be  added  up  and  evaluated,  in  com- 
parison with  the  total  cost  entailed." 

Even  as  of  1958,  thoughful  highway  and  city  officials 
found  themselves  together  on  the  need  for  a  "gi-and 
accounting"  and  on  the  need  for  considering  "com- 
munity values."  Probably  no  one  present,  however, 
had  any  notion  of  the  difficulty  of  measuring  the 
community  costs  and  benefits. 

Agreement  on  principles  was  not  difficult.  High- 
way officials  urged  that  their  departments  "should  be 
staffed  with  personnel  experienced  in  urban  problems" 
and  that  "State  Highway  Departments,  in  coopera- 
tion with  the  local  governments,  should  develop  a 
tentative  program  of  urban  highway  improvement 
for  a  period  of  at  least  five  years  in  advance  .  .  ."  ^^ 

This  latter  step  was  agreed  to  by  the  highway  engi- 
neers present  only  after  considerable  discussion  be- 
cause of  the  unfortunate  experience  of  some  that 
programs  announced  in  advance  led  to  land  specula- 
tion and  skyrocketing  costs  of  right-of-way  acquisi- 
tion. It  was  finally  accepted  as  a  concession  that 
must  be  made  if  the  cities  were  to  be  able  to  gear 
their  programs  to  those  of  the  States. 

The  State  representatives  agreed  that  the  depart- 
ments "should  consult  with  local  authorities  on  a 
continuing  basis  in  highway  planning"  and,  what  was 
probably  far  more  significant  than  then  realized,  that 
"it  would  be  helpful  to  send  engineers  to  seminars  in 
city  planning."  ^^ 

On  their  part,  the  city  officials  and  planners  ac- 
cepted their  responsibility  for  developing  "tools  and 
plans  which  can  be  of  inestimable  value  in  planning 
the  urban  highway  program."  ^*  These  tools  included 
a  land  use  plan,  transportation  plan,  capital  improve- 
ment program  zoning  ordinance,  subdivision  regula- 
tions, and  others.  It  was  agreed  that  some  of  the 
purposes  such  tools  could  serve  were : 

Zoning  and  subdivision  controls  can  help  achieve  econ- 
omy in  road  development  and  protect  the  service  values 
of  the  facilities  after  they  are  built  .  .  .  City  planners 
need  to  develop  and  use  factual  material  to  support  sug- 
gested controls  for  orderly  community  development  as 
related  to  highways.  However,  the  community  must 
stand  behind  and  support  these  controls  to  obtain  such 
benefits  and  economies." 

(It  is  fair  to  ask  whether  the  planners  and  elected 
city  officials  have  even  now  succeeded  or  made  real 
effort  to   meet  this   responsibility,  accepted  by  their 
representatives. ) 
It  was  noted  that 

Urban  planning  can  aid  in  determining  the  scale  and 
character  of  the  highway  program  by  providing  highway 
officials  with  estimates  of  urban  growth  and  development 
likely  to  take  place  in  a  metropolitan  area  in  the  next 
two  decades  or  more.  If  new  highways  are  to  accomplish 
their  purpose  and  not  become  obsolete  soon  after  com- 
pletion, their  planning  must  take  into  consideration  the 
patterns  of  community  growth,  as  well  as  the  urbanizing 
influence  of  the  highway  itself.^ 


307 


The  conference  concluded  on  an  optimistic  note. 
The  conferees,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  had  obtained 
a  good  Imowledge  of  the  total  problem  and  were  re- 
solved to  do  their  agreed  upon  parts  to  solve  it.  The 
question,  of  course,  remained  as  to  how  to  impart  to 
other  officials  and  professionals  and  civic  leaders  the 
understanding  reached,  the  principles  accepted,  and 
the  responsibilities  that  must  be  assumed. 

The  first  requirement  of  dissemination  was  the 
publication  of  a  report  of  the  meeting,  and  this  the 
Automotive  Safety  Foundation  handled  in  admirable 
fashion,  with  the  report  "Guidelines  for  Action"  re- 
ceiving wide  distribution  and  general  acclaim.  More 
important,  however,  was  the  followup  to  get  the  guide- 
lines put  to  use.  Because  of  the  high  caliber  of  the 
conferees  and  their  stature  in  their  own  organizations, 
channels  to  provide  for  this  followup  were  available 
and  open.  Among  the  55  participants  were  included 
four  highway  officials  who  had  served  or  were  to  be 
the  heads  of  their  respective  State  highway  depart- 
ments. Two  of  the  mayors  had  served  or  were  to 
serve  as  presidents  of  AMA,  and  several  other  par- 
ticipants held  or  were  to  hold  office  as  presidents  of 
their  respective  national  professional  organizations — 
planners,  traffic  engineers  and  public  works  directors, 
for  example.  Their  participation  in  the  conference 
and  their  endorsement  of  the  findings  were  important, 
especially  to  members  of  their  own  groups. 

An  Action   Program 

The  urban  travel  habit  studies  described  earlier 
were  by  then  being  carried  on  in  most  large  cities. 
Major  efforts  in  research  in  ongoing  studies  in  Detroit, 
Chicago  and  Philadelphia,  for  example,  were  breaking 
new  ground  in  techniques  for  relating  transportation 
demand  to  land  use  and  developing  models  for  pre- 
dicting future  land  use  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  plans 
for  future  transportation  facilities.  But  the  great 
bulk  of  the  cities  in  the  medium  population  group 
were  not  active  in  preparing  for  their  future  trans- 
portation needs. 

It  was  in  this  atmosphere  that  the  AMA-AASHO 
Committee  continued  to  work  through  their  parent 
organizations  to  stimulate  greater  effort  and  a  higher 
degree  of  coordination  between  State  and  local  of- 
ficials. Appearances  of  speakers  at  one  another's 
meetings  helped,  as  did  releases  describing  advances 
in  technology  and  improved  administrative  and  or- 
ganizational approaches.  It  was  ultimately  concluded 
by  the  Committee,  however,  that  a  more  specific  attack 
must  be  organized,  and  at  its  meeting  in  Kansas  City 
in  January  1962,  adopted  the  "Action  Program." 

This  program  as  developed  by  the  Committee  called 
for  a  series  of  regional  meetings  to  which  all  State 
highway  departments  and  all  cities  would  be  invited 
to  send  representatives.  At  these  meetings  the  coop- 
erative planning  process  would  be  described,  the 
sources  of  funds  to  undertake  the  studies  outlined, 
and  the  availability  of  technical  assistance  noted. 
Through  the  regional  engineers  of  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads,  each  State  in  the  region  was  asked  to 
select  in  advance  of  the  meeting  for  that  region  a 
"pilot  city,"  generally  in  the  pojjulation  range  of 
50,000  to  250,000,  for  it  was  felt  that  most  of  the 
larger  cities  were  already  engaged  in  the  cooperative 


process.  The  pilot  city  would  then  serve  as  an  ex- 
ample for  officials  of  other  cities  in  the  State,  where 
they  might  observe  how  the  process  was  carried  out 
with  the  hope  of  their  undertaking  similar  work  in 
their  own  areas. 

The  program  as  developed  by  the  AMA-AASHO 
Committee  was  quickly  endorsed  by  their  respective 
parent  organizations,  and  by  the  National  Association 
of  County  Officials  (NACO)  which  was  invited  to 
join  with  the  AMA  and  AASHO  as  a  sponsor.  The 
program,  laiown  thereafter  as  the  AMA-AASHO- 
NACO  Action  Program  was  launched  in  May  1962 
with  the  first  regional  meeting  in  Chicago.  As  was 
the  case  in  all  regional  meetings,  the  regional  engi- 
neer and  all  division  engineers  of  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  participated  by  direction  of  Rex  "Whit- 
ton,  then  Federal  Highway  Administrator.  The 
chief  administrative  officer  from  each  State  highway 
department,  along  with  staff  personnel,  attended. 
Mayors  or  other  representatives  from  many  cities 
were  there,  along  with  a  number  of  county  officials. 
Staff  members  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  the 
American  Municipal  Association  helped  organize  that 
and  the  other  conferences.  Representatives  of  the 
Housing  and  Home  Finance  Agency  (HHFA)  took 
part  in  this  and  all  other  conferences  to  explain  how 
"701"  planning  assistance  funds*  could  be  made  avail- 
able to  the  cities  to  aid  them  in  meeting  their  share 
of  the  cost  of  the  cooperative  endeavor. 

The  series  extended  into  June  1963  before  the  entire 
country  was  covered.  During  this  period,  over  1,500 
State  and  local  officials  were  brought  face-to-face  with 
planning,  many  for  the  first  time.  But  during  the 
series  came  the  1962  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act,  which 
changed  somewhat  the  emphasis  of  the  series  of  meet- 
ings. Instead  of  encouraging  a  voluntary  effort,  the 
purpose  became  one  of  explaining  the  requirements 
of  Section  9  of  the  Act,  now  known  as  Section  134  of 
title  23. 

There  was  no  change  in  principle,  however,  nor  in 
the  approach  to  the  problem  as  a  result  of  the  1962 
Act.  Prior  to  that  it  was  emphasized  to  the  partici- 
pants that  while  the  program  was  being  described  by 
Federal  officials,  it  was  "your"  program,  one  developed 
and  officially  endorsed  by  "your"  organizations.  The 
Federal  role  was  to  describe  and  help  demonstrate 
how  the  program  could  help  to  give  technical  assist- 
ance and  to  aid  in  the  funding. 

The  1962  Act  was  not  a  new  congressionally  con- 
ceived requirement,  but  rather  an  endorsement  of  a 
process  already  being  proved  effective  in  many  areas. 
The  Act  simply  required  its  extension  to  all  urban 
areas  of  50,000  or  more  population.  The  language  of 
the  Act  bears  this  out  in  the  first  and  last  of  the  three 
sentences  that  comprise  section  9.  The  first  sentence 
reads  as  follows : 

It  is  declared  to  be  in  tlie  national  interest  to  encourage 
and  promote  the  development  of  transportation  systems, 
embracing  various  modes  of  transport,  in  a  manner  that 
will  serve  the  States  and  local  communities  effectively 
and  efficiently. 


*  Grants  to  State  and  local  governments  for  planning  coordi- 
nated transportation  systems  authorized  by  the  Housing  Act 
of  1961  (75  Stat  149,  170). 


308 


Cincinnati's    1948    Master    Plan   included    certain    specific 
expressway  recommendations.    Exhaustive  studies  were 
made  on  this  section  of  1-71  to  preserve  the  historic 
Lytic  Park  area.    Two  3-lane  tunnels  for  ramp  traffic 
plus  special  lighting,  ventilati07i,  and  flood  and  fire 
protection  were  all  included.    These  tunnels  also  provide 
a  base  for  restoring  Lytic  Park  and  the  private  development 
of  a  multimilUon  dollar  apartment  complex. 


That  is  exactly  why  the  Action  Program  had  been 
undertaken.  It  is  exactly  what  was  recommended  at 
Sagamore  4  years  earlier. 

Then  the  third  sentence  reads : 

After  July  1,  1965  the  Secretary  shall  not  approve  .  .  . 
any  program  of  projects  In  any  urban  area  of  more  than 
50,000  population  unless  he  finds  that  such  projects  are 
based  on  a  continuing  comprehensive  transportation 
planning  process  carried  on  cooperatively  by  the  States 
and  local  communities  in  accordance  with  the  objectives 
stated  in  this  section. 


309 


And  how  to  meet  that  requirement  was  exactly  the 
procedures  that  were  being  described  in  the  regional 
meetings,  although  initially  the  requirement,  of  course, 
was  not  contemplated.  At  the  meetings  subsequent 
to  the  passage  of  the  1962  Act,  it  was  pointed  out 
that  no  Federal  planning  is  involved,  nor  in  fact  is 
any  planning  required  if  no  projects  are  to  be  pro- 
gramed in  a  given  urban  area.  But  if  the  States  did 
expect  to  program  projects,  they  could  do  so  only  on 
the  basis  of  planning  adequately  performed  by  the 
States  and  local  communities  themselves.  This  sec- 
tion said  it  all  in  a  few  words.  It  put  congressional 
muscle  behind  an  ongoing  effort — to  make  a  require- 
ment of  a  program  generally  being  carried  on  that 
had  been  developing  effectively  but  too  slowly  on  a 
voluntary  basis. 

The    Hershey    Conference    on    Freeways    in    the    Urban 
Setting 

The  year  1962  saw  also  the  setting  of  another 
benchmark,  the  Hershey  Conference  on  Freeways  in 
the  Urban  Setting.  By  that  time  the  Interstate  pro- 
gram had  progressed  far  enough  to  make  generally 
apparent  the  impact  it  could  have  on  urban  areas. 
Criticism  was  being  heard  of  the  appearance  of  the 
highway,  particularly  of  its  overhead  structures,  and 
of  the  way  in  which  it  blended  or  failed  to  blend  into 
the  neighborhoods  it  traversed.  While  it  was  regarded 
beforehand  as  primarily  an  engineering  conference, 
it  had  planners  as  participants  and  its  product  was 
an  important  planning  factor.  As  expressed  in  the 
Foreword  of  the  report : 

The  Highway  program  being  carried  out  under  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956  constitutes  the  largest 
form  of  federal  assistance  to  urban  development.  The 
state  highway  administrators  charged  with  responsibility 
for  this  program,  and  the  federal  agencies  involved,  are 
aware  of  the  significant  role  freeways  will  play  in  making 
the  city  an  attractive  and  desirable  place  to  live  and 
work.  This  conference  was  called  to  solicit  positive 
contributions  of  the  professional  groups  who  share  with 
local,  state  and  federal  officials  the  concern  that  freeways 
be  of  widest  possible  benefit  to  the  city." 

In  the  Background  Statement,  it  was  noted  that 
"Since  Sagamore,  very  substantial  progress  has  been 
made  in  cooperative  efforts  between  state  highway 
departments  and  local  officials  in  the  planning  of 
highways  and  land  use  in  urban  areas."  After  com- 
menting on  specific  areas  of  progress  since  Sagamore, 
it  was  observed  that  ".  .  .  the  concept  that  urban 
highway  systems  should  be  planned  in  conjunction 
with  comprehensive  community  planning  is  now  gen- 
erally and  widely  accepted."  ^^ 

The  sponsors  of  the  conference  were  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads,  the  Housing  and  Home  Finance  Agency 
and  the  Automotive  Safety  Foundation,  which  again 
provided  financial  support  and  staff  help  in  organiz- 
ing and  reporting  upon  the  conference.  They  set  up 
a  Steering  Committee  representing : 

The  American  Institute  of  Architects 

The  American  Institute  of  Planners 

The  American  Municipal  Association 

The  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers 

The  American  Society  of  Landscape  Architects 

The  Automotive  Safety  Foundation 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 

The  Housing  and  Home  Finance  Agency 


With  the  heavy  representation  of  professional 
groups,  the  Hershey  effort  in  the  freeway  design  field 
closely  paralleled  the  earlier  successful  approach  of 
the  National  Committee  on  Urban  Transportation  in 
the  more  general  area  of  overall  urban  transportation. 

Among  the  professional  groups,  the  architects  were 
most  promimently  represented,  although  other  profes- 
sions and  professionals  of  other  disciplines  who  were 
there  as  representatives  of  official  agencies  provided 
a  good  cross  section  of  the  technical,  as  distinguished 
from  the  administrative,  participants  in  urban  high- 
way development.  Unfortunately,  the  highway  field 
was  not  well  represented. 

The  early  discussions  were  revealing  of  strong  biases 
held  by  some  of  the  participants.  Some  architects 
protested  that  the  highway  engineers  invited  them 
into  the  act  only  to  provide  a  "cosmetic"  treatment  to 
structures  beyond  salvation  as  to  appearance.  They 
were  critical  of  highway  standards,  especially  of 
curvature,  which  they  said  demanded  unnecessary  and 
undesirable  destruction  of  the  fabric  of  the  city.  On 
their  part,  highway  engineers  protested  that  archi- 
tects commissioned  to  design  structures  too  often 
produced  costly  designs  difficult  to  construct  simply 
to  produce  unnecessarily  refined  esthetic  effects. 

Nevertheless,  the  conferees  by  the  conclusion  of  the 
meeting  came  together  on  a  series  of  findings  and 
recommendations.  Among  the  findings,  perhaps  the 
most  important  was : 

Freeways  cannot  be  planned  independently  of  the  areas 
through  which  they  pass.  The  planning  concept  should 
extend  to  the  entire  sector  of  the  city  within  the  environs 
of  the  freeway.  The  impact  of  the  freeways  must  be 
considered  in  terms  not  merely  of  limiting  adverse  effects 
but  also  of  achieving  positive  opportunities  for  apprecia- 
tion of  value,  for  development  of  new  land  uses,  and  for 
changing  land  use  through  urban  renewal  and  redevelop- 
ment.^" 

Following  on  the  findings  came  a  series  of  recom- 
mendations, sound  then  and  still  sound,  for  unfortu- 
nately most  of  them  remain  still  to  be  carried  out. 
Among  them,  three  stand  out.     They  were: 

There  is  a  fundamental  need  for  teamwork  in  freeway 
planning  and  design.  This  means  teamwork  during  the 
preliminary  planning  phase  between  the  state  highway 
departments  who  have  responsibility  for  the  planning  and 
development  of  highways,  and  the  municipal  agencies 
responsible  for  the  planning  and  development  of  the  city. 
It  also  means  teamwork  during  the  design  phase  among 
highway  engineers,  architects,  city  planners,  landscape 
architects  and  other  specialists. 

Effective  participation  in  design  by  these  professions 
means  participation  from  the  very  beginning  when  the 
first  choices  as  to  location,  roadway  alignments,  right-of- 
way  cross  sections  and  structures  are  being  studied. 
The  full  realization  of  the  contribution  of  the  design 
professions  cannot  be  obtained  unless  this  is  done. 

More  effective  programs  for  informing  the  public  and 
obtaining  community  participation  in  freeway  develop- 
ment must  be  undertaken  by  state  highway  departments 
and  local  governments.  A  freeway  program  cannot  ob- 
tain in  any  other  way  the  community  concensus  neces- 
sary to  its  successful  execution.  Members  of  the  design 
professions  and  other  specialists  may  render  valuable 
assistance  by  indicating  tlieir  concurrence  with  the  design 
and  planning  objectives  presented  to  the  public  by  the 
highway  officials.'" 

That  problems  would  arise  in  implementing  the 
findings  of  the  conference  evidently  was  anticipated 
as  noted  in  recommendation  number  7,  which  recog- 


310 


nized  the  limited  talent  and  experience  needed  to 
cope  with  the  problem  and  recommended  educational 
and  inservice  training  programs.  In  recommendation 
8,  it  recognized  the  complexity  of  the  urban  problem, 
and  the  ".  .  .  imperfect  and  incomplete  knowledge  of 
the  desires  and  needs  of  families  who  live  in  cities 
and  the  mechanics  of  the  functioning  of  urban  com- 
plexes" and  recommended  larger  and  more  intensive 


research  into  all  aspects  of  urban  design  and  urban 
living.  But  perhaps  the  most  fundamental  reason  that 
progress  was  (and  still  is)  difficult  is  seen  in  recom- 
mendation 9,  the  import  of  which  is  well  expressed 
in  its  first  sentence :  "The  necessity  for  compromise 
among  conflicting  philosophies  and  design  objectives 
often  nmst  be  recognized  in  urban  and  freeway 
design."^^ 


A  complex  viaduct,  crossing  several  streets  and 

rail  lines,  serves  as  an  entrance  way  to 

Eugene,  Oreg.    Hoivever,  the  local  street  system 

remains  intact,  and  attractive  park  areas 

provide  neighborhood  contacts  for  pedestrians. 


There  was  little  followup  of  the  Hershey  Confer- 
ence, The  findings  and  recommendations  were  sound 
and  far-reaching,  the  report  was  well  prepared  and 
widely  distributed.  But  there  was  no  group  with 
muscle  to  get  behind  the  promotion  of  the  results  of 
Hershey  as  did  the  AMA-AASHO  Committee  in  the 
case  of  Sagamore.  And  the  professional  groups,  the 
predominant  participants  at  Hershey  could,  even  had 
they  tried,  have  had  little  impact  on  the  official  agen- 
cies. State  or  local,  unless  they  were  receptive. 

Transition  into  the  "post-'62"  period  was  not  diffi- 
cult. Passage  of  the  Act,  of  course,  brought  imme- 
diate acceleration  of  planning  effort  by  the  States,  for 
the  effective  date  of  the  application  of  the  re'quire- 
ments  of  the  Act,  July  1,  1965,  was  less  than  3  years 
from  the  date  of  its  enactment.  The  first  step  in 
implementing  the  Act  was  to  spell  out  the  planning 
requirements  that  it  placed  on  the  States  and  the  local 
communities.  The  wording  of  the  Act,  that  its  intent 
was  to  encourage  the  development  of  long-range 
plans  and  programs,  made  clear  that  the  cooperation 
between  the  State  highway  departments  and  the  local 
communities  must  be  evidenced  by  agreement  between 
the  highway  departments  and  those  in  the  local  com- 
munities who  had  responsibility,  the  elected  officials, 
for  committing  those  communities  to  a  program. 
This  interpretation  left  many  city  planners  unhappy, 
for  they  had  generally  been  responsible  to  planning 
commissions  which  were  often  independent  of  the 
local  elected  officials.  But  they  generally  had  no 
commitment  authority.  How  the  States  were  to  come 
into  agreement  with  the  multitude  of  local  jurisdic- 
tions in  the  larger  areas  presented  real  problems,  but 
the  means,  differing  in  one  way  or  another,  were 
reached  in  all  areas. 

As  to  the  technical  requirements  for  a  planning 
process  adequate  to  meet  the  intent  of  the  Act,  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  turned  to  the  AMA-AASHO 
Committee  as  representatives  of  the  State  and  local 
communities  for  advice  and  assistance.  The  Commit- 
tee designated  a  small  task  group  to  work  with  the 
Bureau,  and  after  much  deliberation  and  testing 
among  knowledgable  people  in  both  associations,  a 
BPR  Instructional  Memorandum  was  distributed  in 
March  1963.  Because  of  the  thoroughgoing  writing 
and  rewriting  of  this  memorandum,  it  still  stands 
with  only  minor  niodifications,  as  the  basic  urban 
transportation  planning  document.^^  It  is  perhaps 
not  amiss  to  recall  that  it  provided  specifically  that 
attention  be  given  to  social  and  community  value 
factors — preservation,  enhancement,  and  extension  of 
parks  and  open  space,  preservation  of  historic  build- 
ings and  sites,  avoidance  of  disruption  of  neighbor- 
hoods, and  appearance  of  the  facility  both  from  the 
viewpoints  of  its  users  and  its  neighbors — all  items 
brought  out  at  the  Hershey  Conference. 

The  need  for  rapid  expansion  of  the  planning  pro- 
cess across  the  Nation  led  to  the  employment  of  con- 
sultants for  the  basic  data  collection  and  processing 
in  many  areas.  And  it  required  the  rapid  formation 
of  policy  committees  or  groups  by  other  names,  rep- 
resenting the  States  and  the  local  communities  in 
each  urban  area,  complicated  by  the  fact  that  many 
urban  areas  extended  across  State  lines.  As  a  result 
most  of  the  policy  direction  was  by  ad  hoc  groups, 


hopefully  to  be  superseded  by  more  permanent  organi- 
zations. 

The    Second    National    Conference    on    Highways    and 
Urban  Development 

Under  these  circumstances,  the  most  remarkable 
achievement  in  planning  ever  seen  in  this  country 
was  developed.  Along  with  the  development  of  the 
machinery  to  administer  the  process  came  striking 
advances  in  technology  and  in  data  processing  equip- 
ment that  produced  a  degree  of  sophistication  in 
planning  techniques  that  perhaps  outran  the  ability 
to  administer  it.  By  1965  all  but  a  handful  of  the 
then  233  urbanized  areas  had  qualified  to  meet  the 
terms  of  the  Act.  It  was  against  this  backdrop  that 
the  Second  National  Conference  on  Highways  and 
Urban  Development  was  held  in  December  1965  in 
Williamsburg,  Virginia. 

The  Williamsburg  Conference  was  the  direct  result 
of  the  concern  within  the  AMA-AASHO  Committee 
that  plans,  then  in  the  formulation  stage,  be  converted 
into  programs  and  the  recognition  that  the  issue  of 
evaluating  social  and  community  values  and  relating 
transportation  plans  and  programs  to  them  had  not 
been  met.  At  its  meeting  in  November  1964,  the  Com- 
mittee agreed  to  hold  a  conference  to  review  the 
state-of-the-art  and  recommend  courses  of  action  for 
the  future  and  to  invite  the  National  Association  of 
County  Officials  to  join  the  other  two  groups  as  an 
official  sponsor.  The  Federal  Highway  Administrator 
expressed  strong  support  for  the  idea  and  instructed 
the  Director  of  Planning  of  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  to  find  the  necessary  funds.  This  he  did,  half 
within  his  own  budget  and  half  from  the  Automotive 
Safety  Foundation,  which  once  again  not  only  pro- 
vided financial  support  but  also  the  near  full-time 
assignment  of  the  Assistant  to  the  President  to  aid  in 
organizing  the  conference  and  producing  the  report. 
The  objectives  of  the  Conference  as  spelled  out  by  the 
sponsors  were  as  follows: 

To  identify  community  values,  goals,  and  objectives; 
and  to  explore  how  development  of  transportation  sys- 
tems can  serve  to  enhance  values  and  aid  in  reaching 
goals  and  objectives. 

To  evaluate  and  recommend  alternative  arrangements 
for  the  organization,  administration,  and  financing  of  the 
cooperative  continuing  transportation  planning  function 
within  multi-jurisdictional  areas. 

To  recommend  methods  and  procedures  for  converting 
cooperatively  developed  plans  for  interrelated  systems  of 
transportation  in  urban  areas  into  improvement  programs 
of  state,  county,  and  municipal  governments." 

The  Conference  was  particularly  significant  in  the 
degree  to  which  the  official  agencies  assumed  respon- 
sibility for  its  conduct.  The  Steering  Committee  com- 
prised the  executive  directors  of  the  three  Associa- 
tions— ^A.  E.  Johnson  for  AASHO,  Patrick  Healy  for 
AMA  (now  National  League  of  Cities)  and  Bernard 
Hillenbrand  for  NACO.  The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
provided  the  Chairman  of  the  Steering  Committee 
(and  of  the  Conference  itself)  in  the  person  of  the 
Director  of  Planning  of  BPR  and  the  Committee  sec- 
retary. ASF  provided  the  Conference  secretary. 
Each  executive  director  presided  over  one  of  the  three 
full-day  working  sessions. 

Of  the  74  participants,  nearly  half  were  there  as 
official  designees  of  the  sponsoring  association.  The 
othei's  constituted  a  good  cross  section  of  other  profes- 


312 


sionals  from  the  fields  of  planning,  architecture,  land- 
scape architecture,  research,  law  and  the  transportation 
industries.  Concerned  Federal  agencies  were  repre- 
sented by  high-level  staff  members.  The  directors  of 
the  planning  studies  thought  to  be  the  most  successful 
were  in\ated  and  contributed  heavily.  Among  the 
highwa}'  officials  were  six  who  served  at  one  time  or 
another  as  presidents  of  AASHO  and  three  others 
who  were  heads  of  their  departments.  Similar  high- 
level  participation  came  from  the  other  sponsors. 
The  Federal  Highway  Administration  and  the  Urban 
Renewal  Administrator  filled  places  on  the  program. 

At  Williamsburg  there  were  still  some  parochial 
views  expressed,  and  fairly  sharp  differences  came  out 
between  participants  as  to  the  intent  and  effect  of 
policies  or  practices  of  one  or  another  of  the  agencies 
represented.  But  in  general  the  atmosphere  from  the 
beginning  was  one  of  seeking  means  to  cooperate  in 
developing  urban  transportation  facilities  to  benefit 
the  whole  community,  users  and  nonusers  alike. 

A  full  day's  discussion  was  devoted  to  the  progress 
of  urban  transportation  planning,  emphasizing  its 
technical  gains  and  its  financing  problems.  Another 
day  was  devoted  to  the  broad  problem  of  establishing 
community  goals  and  objectives  and  determining  social 
values,  with  successful  examples  in  a  few  instances 
described.  And  another  day  was  devoted  to  admin- 
istration, not  only  of  planning  and  development  of 
plans,  but  of  implementation,  both  of  the  transporta- 
tion programs  and  of  land  use  controls. 

From  this  review  of  the  state-of-the-art,  it  could 
be  faii'ly  concluded  that  tremendous  gains  in  planning 
techniques  had  been  accomplished  and  that  the  im- 
portance of  close  coordination  between  land  use  and 
transportation  had  been  universally  accepted.  Ex- 
amples of  successful  processes  embracing  both  trans- 
portation and  land  use  planning  over  the  widest  range 
of  population  and  area  boundaries  showed  that  the 
needed  technical  processes  and  administrative  machin- 
ery could  be  organized.  In  these  areas  it  was  clearly 
evident  that  they  generally  followed  along  the  lines 
foreseen  as  needed  at  Sagamore.  But  more  than  that, 
the  gains  in  the  need  for  and  ability  to  cooperate 
among  States  and  their  local  subdivisions  had  become 
equally  apparent. 

The  one  area  in  which  little  progress  had  been 
made,  it  would  seem,  was  in  land  use  controls.  A^Tiile 
universally  recognized  that  no  transportation  system 
geared  to  a  land  use  plan  could  effectively  serv-e  land 
uses  unless  they  developed  in  adherence  to  the  plan, 
the  assurance  of  implementation  of  a  land  use  plan 
seemed  no  nearer  that  at  Sagamore.  In  this  area  the 
following  measures  were  proposed  to  the  Conference: 

We  must  define  the  governmental  level  at  which  land- 
use  issues  are  to  be  decided. 

We  must  devise  positive,  rather  than  negative,  controls 
by  which  definitive  allocations,  or  even  prohibitions,  of 
land  use  can  be  made. 

We  need  powers  by  which  public  agencies  can  buy  and 
hold  land  for  future  use  in  accordance  with  short  and 
long-range  development  plans  legally  established  and  in 
the  public  interest.** 

The  Conference  concluded  that: 

Local  governments  in  urban  regions  should  develop 
workable  administrative  mechanisms,  such  as  associations 
of  local  governments,  through  which   (a)   the  continuing. 


coordinated  planning  process  can  be  carried  out  in  co- 
operation with  Federal  and  State  agencies  on  a  regional 
basis;  and  (b)  regional  plans  can  be  effectively  imple- 
mented." 

In  the  deliberations  and  conclusions  of  the  Con- 
ference no  doubt  was  left  that  transportation  plans 
must  take  into  account  social  and  community  values, 
recognizing  that  as  of  that  time  there  was  no  accepted 
basis  for  integrating  them  into  the  economic  analyses 
customarily  made  of  various  alternatives.  Again,  re- 
search was  indicated  to  be  needed.  But  one  important 
point  emerged  without  question — transportation  itself 
is  a  community  value. 

And  in  the  conclusions,  it  was  fully  accepted  that 
means  to  bring  the  decisionmakers  into  the  planning 
process  and  to  keep  the  public  informed  as  the  plan- 
ning and  programing  progressed  must  be  achieved. 
Words  of  the  recommendation  in  this  area  were  these : 

Urban  planning  agencies  should  work  actively  to  achieve 

(a)  public    understanding    of    the    planning    efforts,    and 

(b)  participation  of  decision-making  agencies  at  appro- 
priate points  in  the  planning  process.'" 

While  it  was  accepted  that  citizens  should  be  kept 
advised  of  the  planning  as  it  progressed,  the  con- 
ferees evidently  saw  no  reason  to  bring  the  citizens 
into  the  decisionmaking  process,  accepting  that  it  was 
to  make  decisions  that  the  local  officials  were  elected. 

The  Williamsburg  Report,  like  its  predecessors,  was 
an  excellent  statement  of  sound  accomplishment  and 
mutual  understanding  and  was  likewise  given  wide 
distribution.  But  it  carried  a  stronger  official  en- 
dorsement than  any  that  went  before.  It  was  an  offi- 
cially sponsored  Conference,  and  that  alone  gave  it 
more  than  usual  stature.  Beyond  that  the  sponsoring 
associations  made  a  point  of  urging  their  members 
to  be  guided  by  it.  The  executive  director  of  AASHO 
noted  in  his  letter  transmitting  copies  of  the  report 
to  the  chief  administrative  officers  of  the  member  de- 
partments that  "We  hope  that  you  will  take  advantage 
of  reviewing  this  Report  to  indoctrinate  your  Depart- 
ment on  the  importance  of  our  urban  responsibilities 
and  the  magnitude  of  our  urban  challenges  .  .  ."  The 
Federal  Highway  Administrator  in  transmitting 
copies  of  the  report  to  the  Bureau's  field  organization 
stated  that: 

The  Williamsburg  Resolves,  buttressed  by  the  accom- 
panying text  of  the  report,  display  an  impressive  area  of 
agreement  among  the  representatives  of  the  several  levels 
of  government  and  the  professionals  of  the  different  dis- 
ciplines .  .  .  By  this  memorandum  I  am  placing  the 
Bureau  unequivocally  in  support  of  the  principles  enun- 
ciated in  this  report,  and  I  shall  expect  all  our  offices  to 
be  guided  by  them. 

Problems  of  Implementing  the  Conference 
Recommendations 

It  has  been  said  that  the  Williamsburg  Conference 
marked  the  high-water  mark  of  urban  transportation 
planning.  Without  judging  the  merits  of  this  view, 
it  did  mark  the  high  point  in  efforts  of  the  profes- 
sionals and  associations  of  officials  to  join  together  in 
a  common  approach  to  the  problems  they  had  by  then 
fully  agreed  were  mutual.  It  highlighted  a  "decade 
of  cooperation."  Following  that  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  decline  in  real  cooperation,  and  competitive 
forces   both    within    and    without   the   transportation 


313 


The  marriage  of  the  freeway  location  and  landscape  to  the 
Mission  Bay  Park  in  California  serves  multiple 
functions,  including  a  spectular  view  for  the 
developing  residential  area. 


area  increasingly  became  evident.  Concern  over  the 
environment  rose  sharply,  much  of  it  quite  proper,  and 
the  general  wave  of  dissent  that  swept  the  country 
was  felt  in  the  urban  transportation  area  no  less  than 
in  many  others.  Citizens  groups  discovered  their 
ability  to  stop  officially  approved  programs,  even  if 
unable  themselves  to  implement  or  even  to  suggest 
alternatives.  Individual  and  neighborhood  desires 
took  precedence  over  programs  for  the  wider  benefit 
of  larger  areas.  Self-interest  groups  took  advantage 
of  the  general  unrest  or  uneasiness. 

Yet,  with  all  this,  most  of  the  concern  being  felt 
and  the  demands  being  heard  in  the  decade  after 
Williamsburg  were  for  the  very  things  that  profes- 
sionals and  officials  had  been  seeking  for  many  years. 


314 


Relating  highways  to  the  environment  was  accepted 
as  an  important  factor  in  highway  location  in  Toll 
Roads  and  Free  Roads  in  1939.  It  was  accepted,  in  a 
variety  of  wordings,  in  each  of  the  conferences  and 
various  official  documents  since  that  time. 

The  necessity  for  relating  transportation  to  land 
use  was  likewise  acknowledged  at  every  turn.  IVliat 
is  now  the  Interstate  System  was  laid  out  on  that  basis 
in  the  early  1940's. 

That  State  and  local  officials  must  cooperate  in  plan- 
ning and  programing  urban  systems  was  noted  reg- 
ularly, with  particular  emphasis  at  Sagamore  and 
Williamsburg,  by  the  National  Committee  on  Urban 
Transportation  and  the  AIMA-AASHO  Committee, 
and  of  course,  it  was  made  a  requirement  by  the  1962 
Act. 


t 


r 


The  need  for  coordinating  programs  for  the  different 
modes  of  transportation  was  spelled  out  in  Toll  Roads 
and  Free  Roads  and  in  Interregional  Hightaays,  was 
recommended  at  every  conference,  and  likewise  was 
made  a  requirement  in  planning  in  the  1962  Act. 

Much  of  the  initiative  in  all  this  was  taken  by 
highway  officials,  but  they  received  willing  coopera- 
tion from  the  associations  of  city  and  county  officials 
and  the  support  of  professional  and  public  agencies 
outside  the  official  circles.  Notably,  the  Automotive 
Safety  Foundation,  supported  by  the  so-called  high- 
way industry,  provided  financial  support  for  the  three 
major  conferences  as  well  as  for  many  research  and 
promotional  activities  in  the  broad  areas  of  improving 
urban  transportation  and  enlisted  public  support  for 
sound  programs. 

The  need  for  keeping  the  public  informed  was  recog- 
nized at  Sagamore,  and  at  Williamsburg  the  conferees 
urged  greater  citizen  participation  in  developing  plans 
and  programs. 

Yet,  10  years  after  Williamsburg,  transportation 
problems  in  many  urban  areas  are  no  nearer  solution 
then  in  1965.  In  fact,  unrestrained  development  in  a 
large  number  of  urban  areas,  without  corresponding 
improvements  in  the  total  transportation  systems,  have 
made  their  solutions  even  more  remote.  In  retro- 
spect a  n\unber  of  reasons  can  be  seen  why  the  urban 
transportation  planning  effort  leveled  oflf  or  even 
slipped  backward,  only  having  to  be  revised  later  and 
broadened  by  direction  at  the  national  level  by  both 
the  legislative  and  executive  branches.  The  effect  of 
any  one  of  the  several  reasons  can  hardly  be  segre- 
gated because  of  their  interrelationship  both  in  nature 
and  over  time.  Each  contributed  to  keeping  planning 
and  the  use  of  planning  data  in  either  policy  or  pro- 
graming pretty  much  off  balance,  even  though,  in 
tracing  the  impact  of  any  one  reason  separately,  might 
not  seem  to  indicate  that  it  alone  should  have  been 
unduly  influential. 

Funding  had  to  be  a  major  factor  in  the  difficulty 
of  continuing  the  effectiveness  of  planning  in  the  ur- 
ban areas.  The  data  collection  required  for  the  initial 
phases  of  the  urban  transportation  process  (the  "3C" 
process),  called  for  in  all  urbanized  areas  by  the 
Federal- Aid  Highway  Act  of  1962,  was  costly,  ex- 
hausting any  li/^  percent  funds  not  required  for  other 
planning  functions,  and  in  many  States,  requiring 
considerable  "over  matching"  by  the  States.  A^Hiile 
the  costs  of  the  continuing  phases  were  far  less  on  an 
annual  basis,  they  were  substantial.  The  development 
of  simulation  models  and  the  computer  program  pack- 
ages to  implement  them  required  only  keeping  basic 
data  current  by  sampling  methods  and  not  complete  re- 
surveys,  but  even  that  was  not  inexpensive.  Funding 
of  the  urban  studies  was  also  hurt  by  the  decrease  in 
"701"  planning  assistance  funds  from  the  Department 
of  Housing  and  Ui'ban  Development.  Under  earlier 
policies  of  the  Housing  and  Home  Finance  Agency, 
"701"  funds  available  for  general  urban  planning  were 
directed  heavily  to  aid  the  cities  to  carry  on  their 
shares  of  the  cooperative  process.  With  the  establish- 
ment of  HUD,  the  policies  changed,  and  emphasis  on 
long-range  physical  planning  shifted  to  short-range 
socially  oriented  planning,  thus,  placing  virtually  the 
entire  burden   of   Federal   participation  not  only   in 


transportation  planning,  but  in  general  land  use  plan- 
ning as  well,  on  the  Federal  Highway  Administration. 

Other  demands  on  planning  funds  were  also  in- 
creasing, however,  particularly  to  finance  the  state- 
wide surveys  of  highway  needs  begun  by  the  joint 
action  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  the  States 
and  placed  on  a  continuing  basis  by  Congress.  Other 
new  programs  imposed  more  and  more  responsibility 
on  the  process  as  the  Congress  underlined  the  essen- 
tiality of  planning  data  to  serve  as  a  basis  of  State 
and  urban  programs.  In  1968  the  TOPICS  program 
required  that  projects  must  be  based  on  the  "3C" 
process,  as  did  the  fringe  parking  program  also  au- 
thorized by  the  1968  Act.  The  process  must  provide 
the  basis  for  the  selection  of  the  Federal -Aid  Urban 
System  authorized  by  the  1970  Act,  and  aid  to  bus 
public  transportation  could  be  provided  only  if  the 
routes  and  special  urban  high  density  traffic  program, 
authorized  in  1973,  were  on  routes  approved  by  the 
"3C"  process.  While  not  specifically  related  to  the 
"3C"  process,  amendment  of  the  basic  provisions  of 
the  1934  Hayden-Cartwright  Act  expanded  the  area 
eligible  for  use  of  the  fi^  percent  funds  by  adding  a 
phrase  to  permit  their  use  for  planning  of  local  public 
transportation  systems,  which  under  the  earlier  lan- 
guage also  included  planning  for  their  financing. 

Wliile  such  expressions  of  confidence  in  the  planning 
process  developed  by  voluntary  cooperative  effort  two 
decades  earlier  were  heartening,  the  imposition  of 
these  and  other  added  functions  made  the  effective 
conduct  not  only  of  the  added  responsibilities  but  of 
the  more  basic  requirements  of  statewide  planning  in- 
creasingly difficult  simply  because  of  inadequacy  of 
funding.  It  was  not  until  1973,  however,  that  Con- 
gress increased  the  11/4  percent  limitation  on  Federal 
participation  in  planning  by  authorizing  an  additional 
14  percent  to  aid  transportation  planning  in  metro- 
politan areas.  Apportioned  on  the  basis  of  urbanized 
area  population  and  required  to  be  matched  by  the 
States,  the  funds  must  be  "passed  through"  by  the 
States  ".  .  .  to  the  metropolitan  planning  organiza- 
tions designated  by  the  State  as  responsible  for  car- 
rying [on  the  "3C"  process]."  By  this  authorization, 
additional  funds  were  made  available  for  metropolitan 
transportation  planning,  but  still  under  the  general 
responsibility  of  the  States,  not  turned  over  carte 
blanche  to  the  metropolitan  areas.  Attempts  by  those 
most  concerned  with  planning  over  the  previous  years 
to  increase  the  V-/2  percent  funds,  never  advanced  to 
Congress  by  the  Bureau,  were  finally  successful  only 
after  their  inadequacy  became  painfully  apparent. 

Coupled  with  inadequacies  of  funds  was  the  lack  of 
real  concern  for  planning,  especially  in  the  urban 
areas,  by  some  States,  and  similar  indifference  on  the 
part  of  many  cities.  Changes  in  administration  in 
local  governments  brovight  into  office  new  officials  who 
were  not  even  aware  of  the  cooperative  process  in 
which  their  jurisdictions  were  involved  by  formal 
agreement.  Many  State  highway  departments  were 
not  adequately  staffed  with  professionals  from  disci- 
plines other  than  engineering  to  conduct  the  urban 
planning  process.  Over  one-third  of  the  States  re- 
sorted to  consultants  to  complete  the  initial  phases  of 
the  planning  process  in  order  to  meet  the  July  1,  1965, 
deadline  set  by  Congress  in  the  1962  Act.     Having 


315 


thus  met  the  requirement  to  permit  programing  of 
projects  in  the  urbanized  areas,  their  interest  flagged, 
and  without  staff  to  keep  data  and  analysis  current, 
the  product  of  the  planning  became  less  and  less  ade- 
quate as  a  basis  for  programing. 

Not  to  overemphasize  the  negative,  a  majority  of 
the  States,  especially  those  with  the  largest  cities, 
maintained  and  even  strengthened  their  interest,  and 
in  cooperation  with  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  uni- 
versities, and  other  agencies,  advanced  the  technology 
of  planning  to  a  highly  sophisticated  level,  so  much 
so  that  the  process  may  well  have  outnm  the  ability 
to  utilize  it  fully  in  administration.  But  despite  the 
advances  in  some  States,  a  sufficient  number  allowed 
the  process  to  become  dormant  or  lag  so  badly  as  to 
bring  into  question  whether  the  requirement  that  the 
process  be  continuing  cooperative,  and  comprehensive, 
one  or  another  or  all  three,  were  being  met.  Ulti- 
mately the  Federal  Highway  Administration  found 
it  necessary  to  require  that  the  Division  Engineer  in 
each  State  certify  annually  that  the  planning  process 
in  each  urbanzied  area  satisfactorily  met  the  require- 
ment of  the  1962  Act  as  a  basis  for  programing  proj- 
ects in  those  areas. 

Some  of  the  problems  with  respect  to  the  planning 
process  were  the  result  of  its  success.  It  became  widely 
accepted  throughout  all  the  States,  as  its  merits  were 
proved  under  actual  test.  It  became  accepted  in  other 
countries  as  well,  as  their  planners  observed  its  opera- 
tion in  this  country,  or  as  American  consultants  made 
their  experiences  available  to  them.  Some  countries 
literally  adopted  the  entire  process  bodily.  But  in  the 
enthusiasm  of  those  who  developed  and  were  applying 
the  process  so  successfully,  it  perhaps  became  oversold. 
It  had  its  limitations.  The  process  as  it  developed 
could  ascertain  the  relationship  between  transportation 
and  land  use  and  forecast  the  number  of  trips  in  an 
area,  their  origins  and  destinations,  the  mode  of  travel 
that  would  be  used.  It  could  "assign"  trips  to  specific 
routes  and  estimate  traffic  volumes  with  accuracy.  But 
it  was  developed  on  a  metropolitan  or  "coarse-grained" 
scale.  The  sampling  techniques  and  the  simulation 
models  were  fully  adequate  to  estimate  future  traffic 
volumes  on  freeways  and  major  arterial  streets,  for 
example,  or  on  a  heavily  traveled  transit  line,  but  they 
were  not  sufficiently  "fine-grained"  to  permit  showing 
turning  movements  at  a  particular  intersection  or 
volumes  on  particular  ramps  of  an  interchange.  It 
was  perfectly  proper  and  hiq-hly  desirable  for  the 
Congress,  in  authorizing  the  TOPICS  program,*  for 
example,  to  require  that  projects  be  based  on  the  plan- 
ning process.  But  what  the  Congress  perhaps  did  not 
appreciate,  and  what  many  States  certainly  did  not, 
was  that  the  process  as  then  in  operation  was  not  the 
"be-all"  and  "end-all"  in  planning,  and  could  not 
provide  data  needed  to  plan  minor  street  improvements 
or  traffic  signal  timing  as  TOPICS  required.  Some 
State  highway  officials  found  it  hard  to  accept  that 
the  process,  so  expensively  organized  and  conducted, 
could  not  supply  the  simple  facts  needed  for  TOPICS. 
All  that  was  needed,  of  course,  was  to  expand  the 
"3C"   process  to  treat  local  situations,  using  tested, 


*  Section  135  of  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1968  made 
the  Traffic  Operations  Program  for  Improvement  of  Capacity 
and  Safety  (TOPICS)  a  continuing  program. 


more  conventional  methods,  and  this  was  done.  But 
the  requirement  to  do  so  resulted  in  some  disenchant- 
ment, temporarily  at  least,  in  some  areas. 

The  Future  of  Urban  Transportation  Planning 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  others,  fully  aware 
of  the  limitations  of  the  process,  once  the  basic  job  of 
getting  planning  on  an  acceptable  basis  in  all  ur- 
banized areas  was  substantially  accomplished,  began 
exploring  methods  of  adapting  the  simulations  pro- 
cedure to  broader  use.  Looking  toward  the  finer- 
grained  traffic  data  needs,  a  "micro-assignment"  pro- 
cedure was  developed  to  meet  the  needs  of  localized 
traffic  analyses,  and  in  the  other  direction,  intensive 
effort  by  Bureau  staff  led  to  the  development  of  a 
multiregional  approach  to  urban  transportation  prob- 
lems at  policy,  rather  than  planning  and  programing, 
levels. 

This  latter  approach  called  TRANS,  an  acronym 
for  Transportation  Resources  Allocation  Study,  made 
it  possible  to  examine  the  effect  on  transportation  needs 
of  alternate  land  development  policies  and  the  dollar 
costs  and  benefits,  direct  and  indirect,  of  various  trans- 
portation alternatives  to  the  extent  pertinent  factors 
could  be  expressed  in  monetary  terms.  In  addition,  it 
provided  means  for  including  "noncostable"  items 
such  as  the  impact  of  the  alternatives  on  social  and 
environmental  areas  to  the  extent  their  effects  can  be 
measured,  but  only  in  nonmonetary  terms.  The  model 
is  applicable  to  all  urban  areas  aggregated  on  a  na- 
tional scale,  or  on  a  statewide  scale,  or  down  to  the 
larger  metropolitan  areas.  Its  purpose,  as  described 
by  two  of  the  Bureau  staff  most  deeply  involved  in 
its  development,  was: 

The  determination  of  long-range  government  priorities, 
policies,  and  programs  is  a  complex  process  which  blends 
hard  politics  with  occasional  naive  idealism,  trades  off 
narrow  interests  against  the  common  good  ...  It  re- 
mains the  responsibility  of  transportation  planners  .  .  . 
to  maintain  a  firm  philosophical  and  functional  commit- 
ment to  provide  policy  formulators  and  decision-makers 
with  a  continuous  flow  of  information  and  an  objective 
capability  for  digesting  and  evaluating  this  information. 
The  TRANS-urban  approach  must  be  viewed  in  this  con- 
text. It  is  not  an  automatic  policy  making  tool.  It  is 
intended  solely  as  a  mechanism  that  can  provide  rational 
information  that  was  perhaps  not  previously  available." 

This  concise  statement  applies  not  only  to  the  me- 
chanical process  that  was  developed.  It  defines  the 
role  of  the  planner  as  one  in  which  he  must  supply 
usable  objective  data  to  the  political  leader,  the  deci- 
sionmaker, and  it  calls  on  the  decisionmaker  to  use  it. 

The  planning  process  has  indeed  become  a  highly 
sophisticated  process,  developed  by  dedicated  profes- 
sionals drawn  from  a  variety  of  disciplines  Avhose 
product  was  made  possible  only  by  computer  tech- 
nology. Applicable  to  all  modes  and  to  general  plan- 
ning as  well,  its  development  Avas  financed  virtually 
entirely  by  road-user  funds.  It  is  unequaled  in  any 
other  planning  area.  Yet  it  can  be  effective  only  to 
the  extent  policymakers  understand  its  products  and 
accept  the  objective  data  it  presents  as  a  basis  for 
their  decisions. 

Beyond  the  question  of  the  mechanics  or  general 
applicability  of  the  planning  process  in  engineering 
analyses,  the  difficulty  in  gaining  public  acceptance  of 
plans  and   programs  developed   from   planning  facts 


316 


seems  to  cast  doubts  on  the  process  itself.  Planning 
and  development  of  a  freeway  system  must  be  at 
metropolitan  scale,  and  the  metropolitan  system  must 
be  accepted  as  an  inteo;ral  element  of  a  statewide  high- 
way network.  A  rapid  transit  line  and  even  major 
arterial  route  development  are  facilities  of  regional 
importance  and  nuist  be  planned  and  developed  at 
that  scale.  Yet  their  impact,  both  desirable  and  un- 
desirable, is  felt  at  a  very  local  scale.  While  residents 
of  a  neighborhood  or  even  a  larger  community  may 
strongly  favor  a  freeway  system,  they  object  to  its 
location  in  their  own  neighborhood  or  community, 
and  even  rail  rapid  transit  proposals  share  this  same 
problem.  Differences  between  local  and  regional  goals 
can  hardly  be  unexpected,  but  the  highway  program 
brought  them  into  sharp  focus.  The  highway  pro- 
gram also  gave  those  with  ecology  concerns,  often 
at  all  costs,  an  opportunity  to  focus  their  efforts.  The 
only  answer  seemed  to  be  to  bring  the  citizens  more 
directly  into  the  planning  process. 

The  Congress  first  recognized  the  need  to  give  citi- 
zens the  opportunity  to  comment  on  proposed  highway 
projects  in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956, 
but  for  diametrically  the  opposite  reason  for  what  is 
now  fundamental  to  project  acceptance.  At  that  time 
citizens  and  travel-oriented  businesses  in  small  towns 
feared  the  loss  of  business  if  the  Interstate  System, 
with  its  required  control  of  access  and  widely  spaced 
interchanges,  were  to  bypass  their  communities.  Re- 
sponding to  these  groups,  the  1956  Act,  under  section 
116,  declared  that  as  a  matter  of  policy: 

Any  State  highway  department  which  submits  plans 
for  a  Federal-aid  highway  project  involving  the  bypassing 
of,  or  going  through,  any  city,  town,  or  village,  either 
incorporated  or  unincorporated,  shall  certify  to  the  Com- 
missioner of  Public  Roads  that  it  has  had  public  hear- 
ings, or  has  afforded  the  opportunity  for  such  hearings, 
and  has  considered  the  economic  effects  of  such  a  loca- 
tion. Provided,  that  if  such  hearings  have  been  held,  a 
copy  of  the  transcript  of  said  hearings  shall  be  submitted 
to  the  Commissioner  of  Public  Roads,  together  with  the 
certification. 

From  this  start  grew  the  public  hearing  process, 
with  all  its  inadequacies,  dissatisfactions  and  problems. 
As  it  developed,  it  may  have  caused  more  problems 
than  it  solved,  and  it  is  still  a  troubled  area.  Early, 
most  highway  departments  looked  on  the  public  hear- 
ing as  an  unfortunate  added  step  in  project  approval 
and  went  into  the  hearing  intent  on  defending  their 
decisions  against  criticism.  Later,  as  the  requirements 
were  extended  ultimately  to  cover  nearly  all  Federal- 
aid  projects.  States  increasingly  attempted  to  make 
the  hearing  a  constructive  step,  often  in  difficult  cases 
employing  consultants  to  develop  various  alternatives 
for  consideration  at  the  hearing,  although  only  re- 
cently recognizing  that  one  alternative  should  be  to 
do  nothing.  The  assumption  that  a  project  was  to  be 
built  and  that  citizen  suggestions  might  help  decide 
which  alternative  was  most  suitable  met  with  little 
favor  among  groups  Avhich  wanted  only  one  thing — 
to  be  left  alone.  Criticism  developed  over  the  tendency 
to  make  only  engineering  and  economic  analyses  (after 
all,  the  law  only  required  consideration  of  economic 
effects)  and  ignored  social  and  environmental  factors. 

As  time  went  on,  the  requirement  for  two  public 
hearings,  a  location  hearing  and  a  design  hearing, 
was  introduced,  and  in  the  Federal- Aid  Highway  Act 


of  1968,  the  Congress,  responding  to  mounting  dis- 
satisfaction with  the  highway  program  in  many  urban 
areas,  amended  the  language  of  the  1956  Act  by  strik- 
ing out  the  words  "economic  effects  of  such  a  location" 
and  substituting  the  words  "economic  and  social  effects 
of  such  a  location,  its  impact  on  the  environment,  and 
its  consistency  with  the  goals  and  objectives  of  such 
urban  planning  as  has  been  promulgated  by  the  com- 
munity." This  change  clearly  brought  the  hearing 
process  directly  into  the  planning  area,  where  pre- 
viously it  had  been  regarded  generally  as  an  engineer- 
ing function.  It  imposed  a  further  load  on  the  "3C" 
process,  but  it  moved  the  process  to  closer  liaison  with 
engineering. 

This  change  still  did  not  suffice  as  a  means  of  recon- 
ciling divergent  views  as  to  the  highway  program,  and 
in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1970,  the  Congress 
further  required  that  the  certification  by  the  State 
regarding  the  public  hearing  must  be  accompanied 
by  a  report  of  the  consideration  given  to  the  economic, 
social,  and  environmental  effects  of  any  of  the  alterna- 
tives that  were  brought  up  at  the  hearing.  It  must 
be  assumed  that  representations  had  been  made  to  the 
Congress  that  the  States  paid  insufficient  attention  to 
suggestions  made  at  the  hearings. 

During  the  consideration  of  this  amendment,  the 
Committee  on  Public  Works  explored  with  the  Federal 
Highway  Administration  the  desirability  of  requiring 
a  third  public  hearing,  preceding  the  location  and  de- 
sign hearing  probably  to  be  called  the  planning  hear- 
ing, at  which  more  basic  questions  would  be  discussed 
and  hopefully  an  agreement  reached  that  a  highway 
improvement  in  the  particular  corridor  or  area  indeed 
was  necessary.  Concern  over  what  such  a  hearing 
process  would  involve  led  to  the  counter  suggestion 
that  FHWA  would  devise  a  strategy  by  which  there 
could  be  meaningful  input  by  citizens  into  the  plan- 
ning process.  To  this  the  Committee  agreed  and  the 
requirement  for  the  third  hearing  was  not  pursued. 

Thereupon  it  became  incumbent  on  FHWA  to  de- 
velop guidelines  to  bring  this  about.  Examination  of 
hearing  transcripts  and  of  other  means  some  States 
had  used  to  reach  agreement  with  local  groups  and 
communities  showed  many  examples  (ranging  from 
modification  of  Interstate  project  design  to  not  having 
a  village  street),  of  changes  stemming  from  the  hear- 
ing process.  Conferences,  organized  by  the  Highway 
Research  Board  and  other  agencies,  reviewed  examples 
of  effective  citizen  participation  and  of  the  problems 
of  achieving  it.  Primarily,  it  had  to  be  concluded, 
citizen  participation  was  most  effective  when  it  was 
handled  on  a  person-to-person  basis,  a  highly  subjec- 
tive approach.  The  problem  FHWA  faced  was  trying 
to  institutionalize  such  a  subjective  procedure. 

The  result  was  that  the  first  step  involved  little 
more  than  advising  the  State  that  the  citizens  must 
be  brought  into  the  planning  process,  and  gave  them 
examples  of  some  successful  devices  to  do  that. 

This  first  step  was  followed  by  a  more  formal  re- 
quirement in  1973  responding  to  section  136  of  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1970  under  which  each 
State  was  called  upon  to  develop  an  "Action  Plan" 
to  ensure  that  proposed  highway  projects  are  based 
upon  a  balancing  of  the  adverse  economic,  social,  and 
environmental  effects  and  the  cost  of  eliminating  oi 


317 


1-95  runs  beneath  this  reflecting  pool  two  blocks  west  of  the  Capitol  in  Washington,  D.C. 
Air-right  Federal  buildings  at  each  end  of  the  tunnel  enclose  the  ventilation  equipment. 
The  tunnel  concept  permitted  the  new  Mall  plan  to  retain  this  pool  and  the  proposed 
Ceremonial  Drive  along  its  western  edge. 


minimizing  such  effects  against  the  need  for  fast,  safe, 
and  efficient  transportation.  The  guidelines  and  the 
State  Action  Plans  are  discussed  in  detail  in  Chapter  5. 

Obviously  this  section  of  the  1970  Act  put  public 
hearings  deeply  into  the  planning  process.  As  the 
Action  Plans  were  being  received  in  the  Federal  High- 
way Administration  during  1974,  the  manner  in  which 
the  States  responded  to  the  congressional  intent  would 
become  apparent. 

It  has  been  noted  repeatedly  in  this  chapter  that 
most  urban  transportation  planning,  and  a  consider- 
able amount  of  general  urban  planning,  had  been  fi- 
nanced with  highway  funds.  It  was  also  noted  that 
prior  to  the  establishment  of  the  Department  of  Hous- 
ing and  Urban  Development  the  "701"  funds  that  had 
been  heavily  directed  to  aiding  the  cities  in  their 
cooperation  with  the  States,  primarily  for  developing 
the  land  use  plan,  were  redirected  more  toward  short- 
range  social  goals.  When  aid  to  public  transportation 
was  initiated  by  Congress,  administration  of  it  was 
placed  in  the  Urban  Transportation  Administra- 
tion then  under  HUD.  No  UTA  funds  were  avail- 
able for  the  sort  of  planning  carried  out  under  the 
"3C"  process  that  might  be  called  transportation  sys- 
tem planning,  although  funds  could  be  used  for  project 
planning,  the  type  of  work  called  project  design  in 
highway  terms  and  Avhich  can  be  financed  from  con- 
struction funds.  Projects  could  not  be  approved,  how- 
ever, unless  they  were  found  to  be  consistent  with  an 
acceptable  city  or  metropolitan  plan  such  as  had  been 
largely  financed  under  the  "701"  funds.  This  finding, 
or  certification  of  acceptability,  was  made  within  HUD 
but  not  within  the  UTA.  Subsequently,  when  the 
Department  of  Transportation  was  establislied  in  1967 
and  UMTA  was  brought  in  July  1,  1968,  project 
approval  became  the  responsibility  of  DOT,  yet  certi- 
fication of  acceptability  imder  the  approved  city  or 


metropolitan  plan  still  remained  in  HUD  and  any 
lingering  hope  of  "701"  fund  assistance  in  system 
planning  disappeared.  Responsibility  for  administer- 
ing a  rapidly  and  substantially  expanding  public 
transportation  improvement  program  fell  upon  an 
Administration  badly  understaffed,  with  no  field  or- 
ganization and  no  funds  for  system  planning. 

To  the  Federal  Highway  Administration,  it  was 
apparent  that  the  same  basic  data,  the  same  land  use 
transportation  relationships,  the  same  modal-split 
models  applicable  to  highway  planning  were  either 
directly  applicable  or  easily  adaptable  to  transit  plan- 
ning. It  offered  the  facilities  of  the  established  "3C" 
processes  in  every  urbanized  area  to  aid  transit  system 
planning  and  its  field  offices  and  its  division  planning 
engineers  to  act  as  a  field  arm  of  UMTA.  These 
efforts  met  with  only  mild  success,  for  over  the  years 
transit  interests  had  regarded  "their  mode"  as  competi- 
tive with  highways,  and  starved  for  Federal  aid  in 
comparison  with  the  affluence  of  the  highway  mode 
with  what  they  saw  as  heavy  Federal  "subsidies," 
particularly  the  90-10  Interstate  program.  Conver- 
sion of  thinking  of  modes  as  competitive  rather  than 
as  complementary  and  of  administration  as  antag- 
onistic rather  than  cooperative  was  not  easy,  but  grad- 
ually was  accomplished  with  strong  ui'ging  on  the  part 
of  both  FHWA  and  UMTA  Administrators,  Turner 
and  Villarreal.  Instructions  and  memorandums  signed 
by  both  Administrators  were  issued,  joint  research 
projects  set  up,  joint  committees  organized,  and  ac- 
tual exchanges  of  personnel  instituted.  During  this 
process,  UMTA's  basic  legislation  was  modified  to 
permit  use  of  funds  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  11/9 
percent  planning  funds,  and  the  administrative  budget 
increased  to  allow  at  least  the  beginnings  of  a  field 
organization.  A  full  i)artnorshi]i  in  attacking  urban 
transportation  problems  had  evolved,  and  at  least  in 


318 


one  area  the  purpose  of  assemblin<i:  Federal  transpor- 
tation responsibilities  under  one  roof  was  bein^  real- 
ized. A  somewhat  similar  situation  existed  in  the 
Federal  Aviation  Administration. 

With  the  'growing'  cooperation  evident  at  the  Wash- 
in<i:ton  level,  the  Department  of  Transportation  beo:an 
extending  the  policy  to  the  field.  In  1970  a  memo- 
randum from  the  Federal  Highway  Administrator  to 
the  Secretary'  of  Transportation  reconnnended  a  pro- 
gram to  be  tried  in  three  regions,  which  by  then  had 
been  made  coextensive  for  all  Administrations,  in 
developing:  the  planning  program.  Under  this  ex- 
periment, approval  of  the  planning  program  in  any 
of  the  three  areas,  FHWA,  UMTA,  and  FAA,  would 
be  approved  by  the  regional  modal  administrator  only 
when  all  three  were  correlated.  Regional  representa- 
tives of  each  Administration  would  meet  to  consider 
the  programs  ad\'anced  for  approval  by  the  State  or 
local  jurisdictions,  and  if  necessary  discuss  them 
further  with  their  counterparts,  to  assure  that  the 
individual  programs  were  complementary  and  not 
overlapping.  Hopefully  a  single  planning  agency, 
such  as  the  one  developed  cooperatively  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  the  "3C"  process,  would  carry  on  most 
if  not  all  the  transportation  planning  up  to  about 
project  design  stage  (to  use  highway  terms),  with  the 
Federal  share  of  the  cost  apportioned  appropriately 
among  the  three  Administrations. 

The  trial  program  was  to  extend  over  a  period  of  a 
year,  but  within  months  after  its  initiation  the  Secre- 
tary ordered  it  to  be  extended  to  all  regions  and  made 
a  permanent  procedure.  Thus  at  least  in  transporta- 
tion planning,  coordination  was  achieved  on  paper, 
and  increasingly  in  practice.  By  1973  the  procedure 
had  become  loiown  as  the  Unified  Work  Program  and 
all  planning  under  the  agreement  must  be  performed 
by  a  single  planning  agency.  The  policy  established 
by  Congress  in  1962  applicable  to  the  highway  pro- 
gram had  now,  by  decision  of  the  executive  branch, 
been  made  applicable  to  all  modes. 

In  40  years  planning,  not  even  called  that  in  the  be- 
ginning because  of  prejudice  against  the  word,  has  ad- 
vanced from  highway  improvement  planning  to  broad, 
sophisticated  transportation  planning,  advancing  in  its 
theory  and  techniques  even  more  than  the  technology 
of  any  of  the  modes  it  plans.  Unified  at  State  and 
local  level  by  requirements  of  the  Congress  and  Fed- 
eral executive  departments  and  expanded  in  scope  by 
acts  of  Congress  as  new  demands  appeared,  it  is  a 
powerful  tool  in  metropolitan  planning,  not  only  in 
transportation,  but  in  general  planning  as  well.  Con- 
gress has  forced  the  disparate  transportation  elements 
in  metropolitan  planning  to  come  together  at  local 
level.  It  has  provided  for  coordination  of  modal 
administrations  within  the  executive  branch. 

But  much  remains  to  be  done  at  the  metropolitan 
level  in  planning  transportation  and  land  uses  as  in- 
terrelated elements  if  the  overall  plan  is  to  be  an 
accomplished  fact.  Local  and  metropolitan  trans- 
portation policies  can  be  based  on  sound  planning, 
even  though  currently  there  is  little  assurance  that 
adequate  land  use  controls  or  transportation  programs 
will  necessarily  ensure  that  transportation  and  land 
use,  however  carefully  planned,  will  achieve  or  retain 
balance.     States  increasingly  are  coordinating  trans- 


portation planning  and  programing  through  depart- 
ments of  transportation,  but  only  a  few  are  relating 
them  to  approved  statewide  land  use  or  development 
plans  or  even  policies.  At  the  Federal  level  there  is 
no  national  development  plan  or  policy  to  which  a 
transportation  plan  or  policy  can  be  related.  Indeed, 
much  remains  to  be  done. 


REFERENCES 

*  History  and  Development  of  Road  Building  in  the  United 
States,  address  by  T.  H.  MacDonald  before  the  Annual  Con- 
vention of  the  Aniercian  Society  of  Civil  Engineers,  pp.  44-45. 

-Id.,  pp.  47,  48. 

'  H.  Doc.  272,  76th  Cong.,  1st  Sess. 

*  H.  Doc.  379,  78th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  Message  from  the  Presi- 
dent to  the  Congress,  p.  III. 

^  Id.,  pp.  62,  64. 

'  Id.,  p.  66. 

'  Id.,  pp.  4,  5. 

« Id.,  p.  3. 

» Id.,  p.  87. 

"  Id.,  p.  iv. 

"  What  is  This  Thing  Called  Planning?,  address  by  H.  S. 
Fairbanic  before  the  Sixth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Southeastern 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Miami,  Dec.  8,  1947, 
pp.  6,  7. 

"  National  Committee  on  Urban  Transportation,  Better 
Transportation  for  Your  City  (Public  Administration  Serv- 
ice, 1958)  p.  XI. 

"  Id. 

"  H.  Doc.  249,  81st  Cong.,  1st  Sess. 

"  H.  Doc.  139,  84th  Cong.,  1st  Sess. 

"  H.  Doc.  120,  84th  Cong.,  1st  Sess. 

"  H.  Doc.  106,  85th  Cong.,  1st  Sess. ;  H.  Doc.  344,  85th  Cong., 
2d  Sess. ;  H.  Doc.  91,  86th  Cong.,  1st  Sess. ;  H.  Doc.  355,  86th 
Cong.,  2d  Sess. ;  H.  Doc.  54,  87th  Cong.,  1st  Sess. ;  H.  Doc.  72, 
87th  Cong.,  1st  Sess. ;  H.  Doc.  124,  89th  Cong.,  2d  Sess. 

"House  Comm.  on  Public  Works,  1968  National  Highway 
Needs  Report,  90th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.   (Comm.  Print  90-22). 

"  Transit  and  Federal  Highways,  address  by  E.  H.  Holmes 
before  the  Engineers  Club  of  St.  Louis,  Apr.  23,  1964,  presented 
on  behalf  of  Federal  Highway  Administrator  Rex  M.  Whitton. 

^°The  Sagamore  Conference  on  Highways  and  Urban  De- 
velopment Report,  (Syracuse  University),  Oct.  5-9,  1958, 
Forward. 

''/d.,  p.  9. 

"  Id.,  p.  14. 

^'Id.,  p.  14. 

"*  Id.,  p.  14. 

='/d.,  p.  15. 

"  Id.,  p.  15. 

"  The  Hershey  Conference  on  Freeways  in  the  Urban 
Setting  Report,  (Automotive  Safety  Foundation),  Hershey, 
Pa.,  June  1962,  Foreward. 

^  Id.,  Background. 

^^  Id.,  Findings. 

'"  Id.,  Recommendations. 

"  Id.,  Recommendations. 

'2  FHWA  Federal-Aid  Highway  Program  Manual,  Vol.  4, 
Ch.  4,  Sec.  2. 

^'  Highways  and  Urban  Development,  Report  on  the  Second 
National  Conference,  Williamsburg,  Va.,  Dec.  12-16,  1965,  p. 
ii. 

^Id.,  p.  33. 

"Jd.,  p.  v. 

™/(Z.,  p.  V. 

"An  Approach  to  Multi-Regional  Urban  Transportation 
Policy  Planning,  a  paper  pre.sented  before  the  Highway  Re- 
search Board  by  H.  Kassoflf  and  D.  S.  Gendell,  Jan.  1971. 


319 


Re/eorch 


Research  was  one  of  the  principal  missions  of  the 
first  national  highway  program  in  the  United  States 
and  is,  in  fact,  the  oldest  continuous  Federal  highway 
activity.  The  scope  of  federally  conducted  or  assisted 
research  encompasses  all  of  the  Federal  highway 
programs  and  every  facet  of  highway  transportation — 
as  a  national  resource  and  as  a  principal  force  in  the 
social  and  economic  well-being  of  the  people  and 
Government. 

Early  History 

The  history  of  highway  research  in  the  Federal 
Government  began  with  the  establishment  of  the 
Office  of  Road  Inquiry  (ORI)  in  the  Department  of 
Agriculture  in  1893.  Prior  to  that  date,  there  had  been 
numerous  investigations  and  experiments,  but  they 
were  primarily  scattered  and  isolated  events.  With 
the  creation  of  the  ORI,  whose  primary  mission  was 
to  investigate  the  best  methods  of  roadmaking  and  to 
assist  in  disseminating  this  information,  a  formal, 
organized  research  program  began.  In  1894,  the  ORI 
issued  9  bulletins  on  such  subjects  as  State  laws,  road- 
building  materials,  and  railroad  rates  for  hauling 
those  materials. 

Demonstration  trains,  originally  loiown  as  "Good 
Roads  Trains,"  traveled  throughout  many  parts  of  the 
Nation  in  the  1890's.  These  trains  were  fitted  with 
construction  and  roadbuilding  machinery  and  equip- 
ment as  well  as  section  models  of  macadam  and  other 
types  of  road  construction. 

States,  local  authorities,  railroad  companies  and 
the  manufacturers  of  earth-handling  and  roadbuild- 
ing   machinery    also    cooperated    in    building    short 


sections  of  quality  roads  to  demonstrate  good  road- 
building  practices.  The  emphasis  was  on  drainage, 
surface  courses,  and  maintenance.  Local  materials 
and  manpower  were  used  under  the  general  super- 
vision of  Federal  engineers.  Sometimes  on  "Good 
Roads  Day,"  as  many  as  500  local  farmers  would  take 
a  walking  tour  of  a  demonstration  section  being  con- 
structed. In  1910,  the  annual  report  of  the  Office  of 
Public  Roads  reported  that  55  object  lesson  and  ex- 
perimental roads  had  been  completed  during  the 
fiscal  year.^ 

Although  information  on  specific  research  activities 
in  the  early  1900's  is  rather  fragmentary,  the  most 
substantial  continuing  effort  was  testing  large  num- 
bers of  samples  of  highway  materials,  including  ag- 
gregate, cement,  soil,  asphalt,  and  tar.  A  Federal 
laboratory  was  established  in  1900  for  mechanical  and 
chemical  investigation  of  these  materials.  The  results 
of  the  tests  were  analyzed  to  obtain  a  general  over- 
view of  the  characteristics  of  available  materials  and 
their  suitability  for  roadbuilding  purposes.  Samples 
were  sent  in  from  all  areas  of  the  country  and  were 
tested  free  of  charge  until  1924,  when  it  was  an- 
nounced that  materials  would  no  longer  be  tested  for 
the  general  public.  In  the  early  years,  the  laboratory 
developed  important  tests  to  help  improve  bituminous 
construction. 

In  addition,  statistical  and  economic  evaluations 
were  made  in  1910  of  the  efl'ect  of  road  improvements 
on  communities.  Some  woi'k  was  also  undertaken  on 
coatings  and  coverings  for  iron  and  steel  corrosion. 
In  1911  there  were  some  object  lesson  projects  on 
culverts,  and  a  bulletin  was  published  on  highway 
bridges. 


320 


From  the  beginning,  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  included  a 
group  of  men  to  develop  new  techniques  through  experiment 
and  research.  Historically,  this  activity  has  involved  a  strong 
element  of  "let's  try  it  and  find  out"  as  illustrated  in  this  early 
bitum^inous    macadam   pavement    experiment.     Today's    broad 


program  of  research  and  development  dealing  with  problems 
of  safety,  traffic  management,  environmental  protection,  mate- 
rials, structures,  and  maintenance  uses  modern,  scientific  tech- 
niques in  searching  for  solutions. 


Rather  than  attempting  to  outline  here  a  large 
number  of  technical  advances,  several  broad  historical 
milestones  can  be  summarized.  (1)  The  research 
mission  of  the  Federal  agency  was  clearly  established, 
and,  later.  Federal  funds  were  specifically  earmarked 
for  research.  (2)  A  major  research  journal.  Public 
Roads^  was  founded.  (3)  The  cooperative  and  joint- 
participation  concept  with  the  States  and  industry 
was  established.  (4)  The  initial  concentration  on 
material  and  surfaces  was  rapidly  expanded  into  areas 
such  as  structures,  economic  consequences,  and  the 
impact  of  traffic  and  trucks. 


Federal   Aid  for  Research 

Federal   AdministraHve   Resources 

The  first  sustained  fiscal  support  for  liighway  re- 
search was  authorized  by  section  21  of  the  Federal 
Highway  Act  of  1921.  The  foundation  for  the  Fed- 
eral-aid State  highway  planning  and  research  pro- 
gram was  laid  Avith  the  enactment  of  the  Hayden- 
Cartwright  Act  of  1934. 

Section  11  of  the  Ilayden-Cartwright  Act  specified 
"AVith  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture, 
not  to  exceed  li/^  per  centum  of  the  amoimt  appor- 


tioned for  any  year  to  any  State  .  .  .  may  be  used  for 
surveys,  plans,  and  engineering  investigations.  .  .  ." 
Under  this  authorization,  some  States,  with  the  dele- 
gated approval  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  ini- 
tiated research  activities,  mostly  in  the  area  of  physical 
materials  of  the  highway. 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944  contained 
for  the  first  time  the  term  "research"  in  addition  to 
planning.  Thus,  the  States  at  their  option  and  with 
the  approval  of  Public  Roads  could  use  a  portion  of 
the  114  percent  planning  funds  for  research.  Funds 
not  used  for  planning  or  research  could  revert  to  the 
construction  program.  With  the  enactment  of  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1962,  the  II/2  percent 
funds  were  restricted  as  of  fiscal  year  1964  to  research 
and  planning  purposes  only.  If  they  were  not  used 
during  their  availability  period,  these  funds  would 
lapse. 

To  further  encourage  the  States  to  increase  their 
research  and  planning  efforts,  the  1962  FTighway  Act 
authorized,  beginning  with  fiscal  year  1964,  the  use 
of  an  additional  one-half  of  1  percent  of  sums  appor- 
tioned for  each  fiscal  year  for  planning  and  research, 
but  this  was  optional.  The  initiative  to  conduct  such 
efforts  rests  with  the  State  highway  departments. 


321 


Prevost  Hubbard 


There  were  many  professional  men  who  made  major  contributions  to 
the  development  of  America's  roads.  One  such  man  was  a  scientist 
named  Prevost  Hubbard.  Between  1905  and  1919  he  developed  for  the 
Office  of  Public  Roads  methods  for  testing  and  specifying  bituminous 
i:)avement  materials  which  eventually  became  standards  of  the  highway 
construction  industry  and  the  foundation  of  modern  materials  tech- 
nology. 

Hubbard,  born  in  1881,  was  educated  at  George  Washington  Uni- 
versity in  Washington,  D.C.  He  joined  OPR  in  1905  as  the  agency's 
first  laboratory  chemist  to  help  sort  out  and  develop  standards  for  the 
wide  variety  of  petroleum  based  products  then  being  experimented  with 
as  surfacing  agents  for  highways. 

He  became  active  in  the  American  Society  for  Testing  Materials  and 
spearheaded,  with  Logan  Waller  Page,  Committee  H  (now  Committee 
D-4  on  Road  and  Paving  Materials).  He  served  as  secretary  of  the 
Committee  from  1909  to  1946. 

In  1919  Hubbard  joined  the  Asphalt  Institute,  first  known  as  the 
Asphalt  Association,  to  direct  a  research  and  development  program 
sponsored  by  the  petroleum  industry.  The  Institute's  laboratory  had 
its  beginning  in  the  basement  of  Hubbard's  home  in  "V^Hiite  Plains, 
New  York.  One  of  the  first  accomjilishments  under  his  leadership  was 
the  development  of  Medium  Curing  Cutback  Asphalt,  a  liquid  form  of 
asphalt,  later  used  extensively  in  the  construction  of  low-cost,  low- 
volume,  all-weather  pavements. 

During  the  early  1920's  an  intensive  effort  was  made  to  reduce  the 
number  of  specifications  in  effect  in  the  United  States.  The  asphalt 
industry,  under  the  direction  of  Hubbard,  in  cooperation  with  the  States 
and  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  was  successful  in  reducing  the  grades  of 
asphalt  cement  in  use  from  88  to  9  and  asphalt  joint  sealers  from  14  to 
4.  Similarly,  Hubbard's  cooperative  efforts  during  the  1930's  led  to  the 
successful  reduction  of  the  number  of  grades  of  liquid  asphalts  used  by 
33  States  from  125  to  18. 

The  latter  study  included  an  extensive  testing  program  of  most  liquid 
asphalts  produced  in  the  United  States.  J.  T.  Pauls  of  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  commented  on  the  study  in  a  progress  report  in  1932 : 

Representatives  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  Mr.  Hubbard  of  the 
Asphalt  [Institute]  stressed  the  fact  that  they  believed  in  the  adequacy  of  the 
proposed  cooperative  tests  for  the  testing  of  liquid  asphaltic  products  and 
felt  that  many  tests  now  being  used  by  the  States  Avere  unnecessary  and 
unsatisfactory. 

Hubbard  went  on  to  develop  methods  for  testing  the  design  of  paving 
mixtures.  With  the  assistance  of  F.  C.  Field  of  the  Asphalt  Institute, 
Hubbard  invented  the  Hubbard-Field  Stability  Test,  which  became  the 
first  widely  accepted  test  to  measure  the  strength  of  asphalt  paving 
mixtures. 

He  died  in  1971  at  the  age  of  90.  A  year  later  Committee  D-4  on 
Road  and  Paving  Materials  established  the  "Prevost  Hubbard  Award" 
in  recognition  of  his  outstanding  service  to  the  Committee  and  to  the 
field  of  bituminous  road  and  paving  materials. 


322 


This  is  a  1915  traction  dynamometer  monntcd  on  a  wagon, 
used  to  7neasure  the  force  required  to  pull  the  vehicle  over  the 
road  against  the  friction  of  the  tcheels  in  contact  with  the  road. 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendments  Act  of 
1963  expanded  the  law  to  include  development  under 
the  research  and  planning  section.  The  Act  specified 
that  the  I14  percent  funds  would  be  available,  among 
other  purposes,  ".  .  .  for  research  and  development, 
necessary  in  connection  with  the  planning,  design, 
construction,  and  maintenance  of  highways  and  high- 
way systems.  .  .  ."  The  intent  of  Congress  was  that 
development  would  be  an  integral  part  of  the  overall 
research  and  development  program  and  that  this  pro- 
vision would  stinuUate  the  States  to  play  a  more 
active  role  in  the  development  phase.^ 

Public   Roads  Magazine 

The  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916  authorized  a 
5-year  road  program  which  had  barely  begim  when 
the  United  States  entered  the  European  war.  Look- 
ing forward  to  the  resuuiption  of  the  road  progi-am 
after  the  war,  Director  Logan  W.  Page  of  the  Office 
of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engineering  (OPRRE) 
foresaw  tlie  need  for  a  journal  devoted  to  the  publi- 
cation ".  .  .  of  the  results  of  researches,  experiments 
and  studies  of  those  connected  with  this  Office,  and 
of  highway  officials  of  the  various  States  .  .  .";  and 
also  ".  .  .  for  the  dissemination  of  such  information 
as  the  officials  of  the  various  States  may  desire  to 
spread  for  the  benefit  of  their  contemporaries."  ^ 

The  first  issue  of  the  new  publication,  named  PuhUc 
Roads,  appeared  ]May  1918.  It  provided  the  State 
highway  officials  with  a  welcome  forum  for  the  dis- 
cussion of  current  problems.  The  first  issue  brought 
the  industrj-  up-to-date  by  summarizing  motor  vehicle 
licensing  laws  and  fees  for  registration  and  operators' 
licenses.  This  wartime  issue  also  ui'ged  highway 
builders  to  conserve  scarce  fuel  by  proper  attention 
to  the  firing  of  boilers  and  the  careful  use  of  steam 
in  road  machines  and  in  quarrying.  An  entire  issue 
(June  1918)  was  devoted  to  the  catastrophic  road 
breakups  caused  by  heavy  trucking  during  the  1918 
spring  thaw.  The  May  1919  issue  dealt  with  the 
social  and  economic  benefits  of  using  convict  labor  on 
the  public  roads.  "When  the  Government  distributed 
the  huge  surpluses  of  military  equipment  to  the  States, 
Public  Roads  ran  articles  on  how  to  take  care  of  the 
equipment  and  convert  it  to  civilian  highway  use. 


PuhUc  Roads  published  the  resolutions  adopted  by 
the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
(AASHO)  at  its  annual  meetings  of  December  1918, 
1919,  and  1920,  and  also  the  papers  read  at  those 
conventions.  In  eft'ect,  it  was  the  official  journal  of 
AASHO  until  that  organization  launched  its  own 
publication,  American  Ilighicays,  in  1922. 

Within  a  year  of  its  first  issue.  Public  Roads  was 
an  important  voice  of  the  young  highway  industry, 
with  a  long  waiting  list  of  would-be  subscribers.  In 
fiscal  year  1920,  the  authorized  monthly  circulation 
was  raised  to  4,500  copies,  but  hundreds  of  requests 
for  the  magazine  had  to  be  refused.  Budgetary  cuts 
reduced  the  circulation  to  4,000  copies  per  month  for 
fiscal  year  1921,  and,  without  explanation,  publication 
was  suspended  altogether  after  the  December  1921 
issue.  The  suspension  drew  an  immediate  protest 
from  the  American  Road  Builders'  Association, 
AASHO,  and  other  organizations  interested  in  roads 
and  also  ".  .  .  many  expressions  of  regret  not  only 
from  its  engineer  subscribers,  but  also  from  the  non- 
technical administrative  heads  of  coimty  highway 
activities  to  whom  it  had  been  helpful.  Not  the  least 
gratifying  of  such  expressions  were  those  which  came 
entirely  without  solicitation  from  the  editors  of  othei' 
technical  engineering  journals."  * 

Public  Roads  resumed  publication  in  March  1924, 
with  the  return  of  better  times.  However,  the  maga- 
zine was  no  longer  a  forum  for  the  administrative 
and  technical  problems  of  the  States,  this  function 
having  been  assumed  by  American  Highways  after 
Public  Roads  ceased  publication.  Instead,  the  new 
Public  Roads  was  exclusively  a  house  research  jour- 
nal, and  all  of  its  contributors  were  engineers,  scien- 
tists, and  economists  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 
As  the  Bureau's  research  activities  expanded.  Public 
Roads  published  papers  dealing  with  every  aspect  of 
highway  research — finance  and  taxation,  the  economics 
of  transport  systems,  the  properties  of  soil  and  road 
materials,  the  management  of  construction  operations 
by  contractors,  the  characteristics  of  highway  traffic, 
the  strength  of  road  slabs,  and  many  others. 

Public  Roads  was  the  original  publisher  of  many 
landmark  papers  in  highway  research.  Most  notable 
of  these  was  "Highway  Capacity:  Practical  Applica- 
tions of  Research"  by  O.  K.  Xormann  and  W.  P. 
Walker  {Public  Roads,  October,  December  1949). 
Another  paper,  "Interrelationship  of  Load,  Road  and 
Subgrade"  by  C.  Hogentogler  and  C.  Terzaghi  {Pub- 
lic Roads,  May  1929)  laid  the  foundations  of  sub- 
grade  soil  classification  and  marked  a  turning  point 
in  studies  of  subgrade  soils. 

The  highway  researchers  of  the  tw^enties,  thirties, 
and  forties  were  breaking  new"  ground.  Often  pro- 
gress in  a  particular  field  of  research  depended  on  the 
invention  of  new  instruments  to  measure  what  had 
never  been  measured  before.  A  continuous  stream  of 
such  instruments  issued  from  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads'  insti"ument  laboratory  for  nearly  40  years — 
the  Goldbeck  Pressure  Cell  for  measuring  pressui'es 
under  pavements;  the  electric-eye  and  road-tube  traf- 
fic counters;  the  Benkelman  Beam  for  measuring 
minute  deflections  in  pavements  under  load ;  and  many 
others.  Information  about  most  of  these  devices  first 
reached  the  scientific  world  through  the  pages  of 
Public  Roads. 


323 


Publication,  has  continued  without  interruption 
from  March  1924  down  to  the  present,  although  the 
frequency  of  issues  has  varied  widely.  Througli  the 
years,  Public  Roads  again  expanded  to  include  articles 
on  highway  research  and  development  from  sources 
outside  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  Throughout 
its  long  history.  Public  Roach  has  maintained  a  high 
standard  of  scientific  accuracy  and  literary  clarity 
and,  taken  as  a  whole,  is  a  remarkable  chronology  of 
the  development  of  highway  engineering  and  eco- 
nomics in  the  motor  age. 

Federal-State-Industry  Cooperation 

The  historic  association  between  Federal  highway 
researchers  and  their  counterparts  in  the  States  is 
considered  unique  in  Federal  Government  programs, 
past  and  present.  Over  the  years,  all  of  the  States 
have  conducted  research  in  cooperation  with  Public 
Roads  and  contributed  in  countless  ways  to  the  pro- 
gram described  here.  One  other  important  accom- 
plishment in  this  longstanding  Federal-State  partner- 
ship has  been  the  establishment  of  strong,  viable 
research  staffs,  facilities,  and  programs  in  the  States. 

Another  successful  research  relationship  was  estab- 
lished between  Federal  and  State  highway  agencies 
and  interested  outside  groups,  including  other  Gov- 
ernment agencies,  the  academic  community  and  asso- 
ciations, national  organizations,  professional  societies, 
and  industry  groups.  These  various  bodies  have 
aided  in  identifying  needs  and  in  planning  research 
to  fill  those  needs.  They  have  assisted  in  the  conduct 
of  studies  with  time,  manpower,  funds,  and  consulta- 
tion and  have  taken  an  integral  part  in  the  develop- 
ment and  implementation  of  results. 

One  organization  which  has  played  a  major  role  in 
coordinating  modern  highway  research  and  dissemi- 
nating the  results  is  the  Transportation  Research 
Board  (TRB),  or,  as  it  was  known  for  half  a  century, 
the  Highway  Research  Board  (HRB).  It  was  or- 
ganized in  1920  as  an  agency  of  the  National  Research 
Council  in  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences.  Its 
purpose  was  to  "  'assist  in  outlining  a  comprehensive 
national  program  of  highway  research  and  coordinat- 
ing activities  thereunder;  organize  committees  for 
specific  problems;  deal  with  ways  and  means;  and  act 
in  a  general  advisory  capacity.'  "  ^  In  recognition  of 
the  increasing  emphasis  on  the  "systems"  or  balanced 

The  Maryland  State  Roads  Commission  testing  laboratory  in 
1929. 


approach  to  transportation  problems,  the  TRB  in 
recent  years  has  modified  its  scope  to  include  the 
development  of  other  modes  of  transportation  as  they 
interact  with  highways.  A  more  detailed  discussion 
of  the  TRB  and  its  relationship  to  the  Federal  High- 
way Administration  research  efforts  can  be  found  in 
Chapter  1  of  Part  II. 

In  the  last  two  decades,  considerable  cooperative 
research  has  also  been  undertaken  on  an  international 
scale.  A  notable  example  is  the  continued  involve- 
ment of  Public  Roads  in  a  number  of  research  com- 
mittees of  the  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation 
and  Development  (OECD).  Their  efforts  have  been 
particularly  directed  toward  research  for  safer  high- 
way design  and  improved  traffic  operations.  Since 
1964  Public  Roads  has  also  worked  with  the  Inter- 
national Road  Federation  in  the  collection  and  dis- 
semination of  information  through  a  worldwide 
annual  inventory  of  research  and  development  activi- 
ties. 

Construction  Materials  and  Structures 

In  the  early  period  of  highway  construction  in  this 
country,  an  understanding  of  the  physical  behavior 
of  the  major  materials  was  developed  primarily  by 
trial  and  error,  which  led  to  the  development  of  cri- 
teria and  tests  based,  to  a  great  extent,  on  empirical 
relationships.  Much  of  the  early  research  work  con- 
sisted of  testing  large  numbers  of  samples  of  highway 
materials  to  determine  the  essential  characteristics  of 
available  materials  and  their  suitability  for  roadbuild- 
ing  purposes.  Developments  with  different  materials 
varied  somewhat  in  time,  but  in  general  during  the 
1920's  and  early  1930's,  the  technology  with  respect 
to  soils,  asphalts  and  other  bituminous  materials,  ce- 
ment and  concrete,  and  pavements,  bridges,  and  other 
structures  was  developed. 

Soils 

In  the  very  early  stages  of  the  roadbuilding  in- 
dustry, little  of  a  scientific  nature  was  known  about 
soils  as  road  materials  other  than  that  clay  soils  were 
sticky  and  sadly  lacking  in  vehicle  support  when  wet ; 
and  that  very  sandy  soils,  while  having  fair  perform- 
ance when  wet,  were  highly  unsatisfactory  when  dry. 
Thus,  the  first  effective  modification  of  soils  for  un- 
paved  roads  consisted  of  adding  sand  to  clayed  soils 
and  clay  to  excessively  sandy  soils  in  a  more  or  less 

Taking  soil  samples  for  field  subgrade  soil  studies. 


324 


"ciit-and-try"  system.  Plowever,  tlie  variable  results 
obtained  by  casual  blendino-  soon  made  it  apparent 
that  more  than  ej'eball  en<>:ineerin<>-  was  needed  in 
dealing  with  soils  and  de\clopino-  their  potential  as 
road  material. 

Most  of  the  experiments  up  imtil  1920  were  con- 
cerned with  dust  prevention  and  road  surface  preser- 
vation. Then,  in  1920,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
began  investigations  "to  obtain  accurate  scientific  in- 
formation regarding  the  characteristics  of  soils  which 
affect  their  bearing  value."" ''  At  about  the  same  time, 
several  State  highway  departments  established  soil- 
testing  units  and  each  attacked  the  problem  in  its  own 
way.  However,  through  exchange  of  infoi'mation  at 
conferences  and  through  American  Society  for  Test- 
ing and  Materials  (ASTM),  AASHO,  and  HRB,  a 
soil  classification  system  and  standard  soils  tests  were 
developed. 

Soil   Constants 

One  significant  milestone  was  the  development, 
during  the  latter  part  of  the  1920"s,  of  tests  to  measure 
certain  key  characteristics  of  the  various  soil  types 
and  their  blends.  These  were  the  so-called  soil  con- 
stants which  included  the  liquid  limit,  plastic  limit, 
and  plasticity  index,  the  latter  being  calculated  from 
the  other  two."  These  constants,  which  identify  the 
moisture  retention  and  flow  characteristics  of  a  par- 
ticular soil,  have  become  indispensable  criteria  for 
evaluating  and  predicting  the  performance  of  a  given 
soil  as  a  pavement  foundation  and  for  use  as  a  control 
tool  to  facilitate  the  blending  of  inherently  unsatis- 
factory soils  to  produce  acceptable  foundations. 

Research  in  the  late  1920's  also  disclosed  that  other 
soil  properties,  in  addition  to  plasticity,  affect  the 
performance  of  soils  in  road  foundations.  It  became 
apparent  that  the  wide  range  of  soil  types  should  be 
classified  on  the  basis  of  measurable  characteristics, 
such  as  fineness  and  chemical  composition,  to  provide 
highway  engineers  a  working  soil  language.  Based 
on  data  obtained  by  testing  thousands  of  soil  samples 
and  observation  of  behavior  of  soils  under  field  con- 
ditions,  the   Public   Roads'   soil   classification   system 


This  nuclear  moisturc-doiHity  gage  icas  developed  in  the  late 
1950's  to  instantly  test  subgrade  compaction  icithovt  the  need 
to  take  samples  and  complete  a  laboratory  a)ialysis. 


was  developed  and  first  published  in  1929.  The  best 
soil  for  use  in  road  foundations  and  earth  structures 
was  classified  A-1.  The  series  c(mtinued  through 
seven  more  main  groups,  the  poorest  being  A-8.  This 
system,  with  appropriate  revisions,  later  became  the 
ASTM  and  AASHO  standards. 

Continuing  soils  research  included  studies  of  re- 
sistance to  frost  heaving  in  cold  climates  (frost 
susceptibility)  and  consolidation  or  settlement  char- 
acteristics of  soils.  It  was  determined  that  frost 
heave  was  greatest  in  silty  soils  and  that  the  best 
remedy  was  to  remove  and  replace  the  silt  with  coarser 
grained  materials,  such  as  gravel,  to  a  depth  at  which 
frost  action  was  not  detrimental.  Under  the  guidance 
of  Dr.  Charles  Terzaghi  of  the  Massachusetts  Insti- 
tute of  Technology,  serving  as  consultant  to  Public 
Roads,  apparatus  for  measuring  the  consolidation 
characteristics  of  soils  was  also  developed  in  the  late 
1920's,  and  the  test  data  were  used  to  determine  the 
i-ate  and  amount  of  settlement  of  highly  compressible 
soils. 

Occasional  highway  surface  failures  where  the 
quality  of  the  foundation  soil  was  considered  to  be 
good  indicated  insufficient  compaction  during  con- 
struction. To  provide  adequate  compaction  control, 
a  test  method  for  determining  the  moisture-density 
relations  of  soils  for  earth  dams  was  adapted  to  high- 
way earthwork  in  the  mid-1930's.  Thereafter,  com- 
paction specifications  for  highway  embankments, 
subgrades  and  soil-aggregate  base  courses  required 
that  the  material  have  a  proper  amount  of  moisture 
when  compacted  so  that  a  target  density  could  be 
reached. 

Soil   Stabilization 

Significant  progress  was  made  in  soil  stabilization 
during  the  1930's.  Research  showed  that  soils  for  use 
in  pavement  subgrades  could  be  improved  by  the 
addition  of  portland  cement,  lime  or  bitumen,  and 
that  calcium  and  sodium  chlorides  were  effective  dust 
palliatives.  During  World  War  II,  the  Soils  Labora- 
tory collaborated  with  the  Engineer  Board,  Fort 
Belvoir,  Virginia,  in  the  evaluation  of  chemicals  for 

This  is  a  circa  1935  electrical  resistivity  test  along  the  George 
Washington  Memorial  Parkway  in  Virginia.  An  electric  cur- 
rent is  passed  through  steel  rods  to  measure  ground  resistance. 
This  geophysical  method  is  used  to  locate  subsurface  rock 
formations. 


326 


soil  stabilization.  Beginning  in  1954,  and  continuing 
until  about  1970,  the  Bureau  in  cooperation  with  the 
chemical  industiy  evaluated  about  50  chemicals  for 
soil  stabilization.  A  few  were  found  to  be  marginally 
useful,  but  none  were  economically  competitive  with 
Portland  cement  or  lime  for  subgrades. 

Remote  Sensing 

Throughout  modern  highway  history,  there  has 
been  a  continuing  search  for  a  rapid,  effective  way  to 
explore  conditions  on  or  beneath  the  ground  without 
actual  excavation  or  ground  sui-veys.  Beginning 
about  1932,  Public  Roads  promoted  the  development 
and  use  of  remote  sensing  methods  for  obtaining  in- 
formation  on  soil  and  ground  conditions  in  place. 
The  "cumulative-curve"  method  of  presenting  electri- 
cal resistivity  data  was  developed  and  adapted  to 
determine  depth  to  bedrock,  delineate  sand-gravel 
deposits  and  thickness  of  portland  cement  concrete 
pavement.  Also,  aerial  photographic  interpretation 
principles  were  adapted  to  engineering-soil  and  ma- 
terials mapping.  Cooperative  work  between  BPR 
field  offices  and  other  agencies  (U.S.  Geological  Sur- 
vey, National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration 
(NASA),  the  University  of  Michigan  and  Purdue 
University)  in  1960-1967  demonstrated  that  color 
aerial  photography  was  a  good  way  to  evaluate  soil 
and  terrain.  Widespread  use  of  these  methods  has 
followed.  The  development  and  evaluation  of  ground 
and  aerial  remote  sensing  methods  for  obtaining  in- 
formation on  terrain  and  environmental  features  con- 
tinued into  the  1970's. 

Bituminous   Materials 

Over  the  years.  Public  Roads  has  played  a  pre- 
dominant role  in  the  development  of  asphalt  tech- 
nology and  test  methods  for  bituminous  materials. 
In  1903  it  cooperated  with  the  American  Society  for 
Testing  Materials  in  organizing  a  committee  on  road 
and  paving  materials  to  develop  essential  standard 
test  methods  and  material  specifications. 

The  BPR  tried  various  tests  on  bituminous  ma- 
terials to  determine  their  physical  and  chemical 
properties  and  their  suitability  for  use  in  road  con- 
struction. Conclusions  on  which  properties  were 
significant  in  relation  to  performance  and  on  the  best 
methods  for  testing  materials  were  disseminated  in  a 
series  of  Department  of  Agriculture  bulletins,  begin- 
ning in  1911,  which  included  the  methods  in  use  by 
the  Office  of  Public  Roads  at  that  time,  and  provided 
a  progression  of  guidelines  for  procedures  in  the  use 
of  bituminous  materials.  Many  of  the  early  ASTM 
and  AASHO  standards  for  matei-ial  and  test  method 
specifications,  which  are  used  in  highway  construction, 
were  derived  from  this  series.  The  latest  edition,  now 
called  Standard  Specifications  and  Methods  of  Tests 
for  Highway  Materials,  was  published  by  AASHO 
in  1974. 

Beginning  in  the  1920's  and  continuing  through  the 
mid-1960's,  most  of  the  reseai'ch  effort  in  the  bitumi- 
nous area  was  concerned  with  studies  of  properties 
of  asphalts  and  tars  produced  in  the  United  States, 


and  the  relation  of  such  properties  to  the  performance 
of  pavements.  Often  such  studies  resulted  in  the 
adoption  of  new  specification  requirements. 

One  of  the  most  significant  developments  was  the 
simplification  of  specifications  for  liquid  asphalts  and 
asphalt  cements.  A  survey  of  penetration  grade  as- 
phalts in  1923  showed  that  88  different  specifications 
for  these  materials  were  being  used  in  the  United 
States.  A  joint  conference  of  representatives  of  Pub- 
lic Roads  and  users  and  producers  of  asphalt  recom- 
mended that  only  nine  grades  were  sufficient  to  provide 
the  necessary  materials.  Those  nine  grades  were 
adopted  by  national  groups  and  most  of  the  States. 
Subsequently,  the  number  of  grades  has  been  reduced 
to  five. 

In  1930  a  similar  survey  showed  that  there  were 
119  different  tests,  including  all  variations,  being  used 
in  specifications  for  acceptable  grades  of  liquid  as- 
phaltic  materials  in  the  United  States.®  After  a  co- 
operative study  of  the  materials  being  produced  and 
a  series  of  conferences  throughout  the  United  States 
sponsored  by  Public  Roads,  the  Asphalt  Institute,  and 
the  petroleum  industry,  13  grades  were  adopted  by 
most  States  and  national  groups.  In  most  cases,  the 
reduced  number  of  grades  for  both  penetration  grade 
and  liquid  asphalts  were  adequate  to  fill  the  needs  for 
pavement  construction  and  resulted  in  considerable 
economic  benefit  to  the  user  and  producer  of  the 
materials. 

Development  of  the  Thin-Film  Oven  Test 

The  control  of  the  hardening  of  asphalt  in  hot- 
plant  mixing  and  in  mixtures  in  service  has  been  of 
major  concern  to  the  engineer  and  chemist  since  as- 
phalt was  first  used.  In  1940  the  Public  Roads  Ad- 
ministration developed  a  laboratory  test  that  would 
predict  the  amount  of  hardening  of  asphalt  in  hot- 
plant  mix  construction.  This  became  known  as  the 
"Thin-Film  Oven  Test"  and  has  been  adopted  as  a 
standard  specification  test  by  ASTM,  AASHO,  and 
essentially  all  State  highway  departments.  This  test 
was  also  adopted  by  several  foreign  countries  to 
measure  and  control  asphalt  hardening. 

Development  of  the  Immersion-Compression  Test 

The  effect  of  moisture  on  asphalt  paving  mixtures, 
macadams  and  surface  treatments  has  been  one  of  the 
primary  causes  of  pavement  distress  or  early  failure. 
Tests  were  available  to  measure  the  effect  of  moisture 
on  different  aggregates  coated  with  asphalt,  but  a 
test  was  needed  to  measure  the  effect  of  water  on 
complete  compacted  mixtures  representative  of  those 
used  in  construction.  To  meet  this  need,  the  immer- 
sion-compression test  was  developed,  based  on  a  lab- 
oratory study  made  by  the  Bureau  in  1942.  The  test 
produced  valuable  information  on  the  susceptibility 
of  asphalt  mixtures  to  loss  in  strength  by  water  ac- 
tion.'' The  immersion-compression  test  has  been 
adopted  as  a  standard  by  ASTM,  AASHO,  and 
many  State  highway  departments  and  has  been  a 
valuable  tool  for  investigating  the  cause  of  distressed 
pavements. 


326 


Cement  and   Concrete   Materials 

The  name  "portland  cement''  comes  from  an  "arti- 
ficial" cement  patented  by  Joseph  Aspdin  in  England 
in  1824.  Aspdin  kept  his  process  a  secret,  although 
many  others  tried  to  duplicate  this  product.  In  1845, 
I.  C.  Johnson  developed  a  product  based  on  high 
temperature  calcination  that  was  essentially  "portland 
cement"  as  ^\e  know  it  today.  Portland  cement  was 
first  manufactured  in  the  United  States  in  1871.^° 

Concrete  technology  was  in  its  early  development 
at  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century.  Today's  re- 
fined knowledge  of  concrete  design  and  utilization  is 
the  product  of  a  number  of  organizations,  such  as 
Lewis  Institute,  American  Concrete  Institute,  Ameri- 
can Society  for  Testing  and  Materials,  Portland 
Cement  Association,  State  highway  departments,  and 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  In  particular,  BPR 
played  an  important  role  in  developing  knowledge  of 
the  relationship  of  concrete's  various  components  to 
concrete  strengths  and  other  characteristics  and  in 
developing  better  tests  and  specifications  for  the 
product.  In  addition,  BPR  performed  studies  which 
established  the  quantitative  relation  between  some 
aggregates  and  the  alkali  content  of  cements  and 
determined  the  value  of  fly  ash  in  concrete  to  control 
the  damaging  alkali  aggi'egate  reactions  as  well  as 
serve  as  a  replacement  for  part  of  the  cement.  Other 
research  assessed  the  sulfate  resistance  of  various  con- 
cretes and  the  relation  of  such  resistance  to  cement 
composition.  Air  entraining  agents  to  prevent  freeze- 
thaw  damage  were  also  evaluated. 

As  the  science  of  manufacturing  portland  cement 
developed  and  more  knowledge  of  the  effect  of  special 
compositions  was  gained,  specialty  cements  such  as 
"high-early-strength  portland  cement"  or  "sulfate  re- 
sistant" cements  began  to  appear  on  the  market.  This 
led  to  the  adoption  by  ASTM  and  AASHO  ai'ound 
1940  of  five  types  of  standard  cements. 


Bituminous  mixtures  being  prepared  in  the  Public  Roads 
Administratio7i  research  lab  for  immersion-compression  tests  to 
ascertain  durability  o/  materials  for  highway  construction  in 
1948. 

The  development  of  standard  cement  tests  was  an 
important  part  of  Public  Roads'  research  in  the  late 
1920's  and  early  1930's.  Difficulties  arose  when  dis- 
crepancies were  found  in  the  results  of  tests  run  by 
different  testing  laboratories  around  the  country 
whose  function  was  to  verify  that  highway  construc- 
tion materials  met  their  required  specifications  and 
also  to  test  samples  of  completed  highways.  This 
problem   led   to   the   establishment,   in    1929,   of   the 

Research  engineer  scans  slice  of  concrete  with  microscope  to 
determine  size  and  distribution  of  air  voids,  important  in  the 
durability  of  concrete,  especially  under  the  action  of  freezing 
temperatures. 


327 


Cement  Reference  Laboratory  (CRL)  at  the  National 
Bureau  of  Standards.  It  was  an  ASTM  sponsored 
activity  actively  supported  by  Public  Roads  from  its 
inception.  The  CRL's  duty  was  to  determine  whether 
the  laboratories'  equipment  was  in  order  and  to  ob- 
serve whether  the  proper  techniques  were  being  used 
in  making  the  tests.* 

Aggregates  for  Construction 

The  simplification,  standardization,  and  uniform 
application  of  aggregate  gradations  has  been  a  major 
effort  since  1936.  This  work  led  to  the  early  adoption 
of  a  simplified  practice  of  specifying  sizes  of  coarse 
aggregate  for  concrete.  In  1962  Public  Roads  en- 
couraged the  States  and  other  agencies  to  adopt 
simplified  procedures  for  aggregates  used  in  bitumi- 
nous construction.  The  recommendations  included 
the  development  and  adoption  of  standard  aggregate 
sizes,  standard  sieves,  and  a  standard  method  of  re- 
porting gradations.  Public  Roads  also  developed  a 
new  gradation  chart  that  showed  desired  combina- 
tions of  aggregate  sizes  in  graphical  form.  Since 
fewer  blends  were  required,  all  customers  could  be 
supplied  from  only  a  few  stockpiles  and  producer 
costs  are  minimized.  This  chart  is  now  in  wide  use 
for  evaluating  aggregates  in  bituminous  paving  mix- 
tures. 

In  1928  studies  were  made  of  concrete  containing 
rounded  gravel  coarse  aggregate  versus  the  angular 
material  produced  by  crushing  ledge  stone  or  large- 
size  waterworn  gravel.  This  research  determined  that 
crushed  stone  is  generally  preferred  for  paving  work 
because  of  the  superior  strength  of  the  resulting 
concrete. 


*  In    1960    the    CRL    was    expanded    into    the    Cement    and 
Concrete  Reference  Laboratory  (CCRL). 


Concrete  slabs  are  subjected  to  daily  applications  of  deicing 
agents,  such  as  calcium  chloride,  to  determine  the  durability 
of  the  concrete  or  the  effectiveness  of  various  protective  treat- 
ments. 


Research  on  concrete  freezing  and  thawing  was  also 
being  conducted  at  this  time.  Public  Roads  research 
led  to  the  development  of  new  concrete  specifications 
requiring  denser  and  more  durable  types  of  coarse 
aggregate.  Other  research  in  this  area  included  the 
development  of  air-entrainment  techniques  and  the 
establishment  of  a  list  of  acceptable  air-entrainment 
admixtures.  Air  entrainment  is  a  process  that  puts 
air  bubbles  in  the  cement  to  relieve  the  stresses  caused 
by  freezing  water.  Later,  Public  Roads  assisted  in 
the  development  of  ASTM  and  AASHO  specifications 
and  guidelines  for  air-entraining  agents. 

Coating   Materials 

Beginning  in  the  1920's,  Public  Roads  became  con- 
cerned with  the  need  for  improved  field  performance 
of  such  common  highway  coating  materials  as  paints 
and  galvanizing  for  metals  for  guardrails,  more  dur- 
able materials  for  culverts,  and  more  lasting  and 
visible  paint  for  lane  markings  and  directional  high- 
way signs.  A  special  chemical  unit  was  established 
to  conduct  research  in  this  area. 

A  significant  result  of  this  effort  was  the  develop- 
ment in  the  late  1940's  of  a  modified  anticorrosion 
paint  primer  for  the  bridge  steel  being  shipped  to  the 
Philippines  for  rebuilding  its  war-damaged  highway 
network.  The  standard  red  lead-linseed  oil  primer 
then  in  use  was  found  to  be  badly  scratched  and  sig- 
nificantly stripped  from  the  steel  after  its  ari'ival  in 
the  Philippines.  To  compound  the  problem,  the  ex- 
posed steel  also  corroded  rapidly  when  stored  under 
the  humid  Philippine  conditions.  Studies  showed 
that  a  pigment  combination  of  red  lead  and  iron 
oxide,  as  well  as  a  combined  base  of  linseed  oil  and 
alkyd  resin,  would  provide  adequate  corrosion  pro- 
tection and  would  be  tough  enough  so  that  shipment 
damage  and  deterioration  in  storage  was  minimal.^^ 
The  specification  developed  has  since  become  an 
AASHO  standard  used  by  a  number  of  State  high- 
way departments. 

Another  development  in  coating  materials  was  an 
abrasion-resistant  paint  system  for  highway  struc- 
tures. Exceptionally  high  wind  velocities  combined 
with  wind-borne  ice  and  soil  particles  in  the  Alaskan 
Copper  River  Delta  produced  almost  immediate  and 
extensive  abrasive  damage  to  the  standard  bridge 
paint  system  in  use.  Laboratory  and  field  research 
by  Public  Roads  and  the  Alaska  Department  of  High- 
ways were  completed  in  1965  and  demonstrated  that 
rubber-based  coating  systems  offered  superior  abrasive 
resistance  to  these  destructive  forces.^^ 

Because  traffic  paints  do  not  last  long  in  heavy 
traffic,  there  has  been  a  continuing  interest  in  devel- 
oping better  and  more  economical  lane  marking  ma- 
terial. This  has  led  to  three  distinctly  new  and  rather 
revolutionary  types  of  lane  markers.  In  general,  the 
new  materials  have  been  developed  by  industry  with 
evaluations  performed  by  State  higlnvay  departments 
and  technical  assistance  and  funding  help  from 
Public  Roads. 

The  new  materials  are : 

•  Prefabricated  plastic  striping  which  is  supplied 
either  as  short  rectangular  segments  or  in  rolls 
like  paper  towels  and  applied  to  the  road  surface 
with  permanent  cement. 


328 


•  Thermoplastic  striping  applied  hot  by  either 
extrusion  or  spraying-  and  capable  of  self-adhe- 
sion to  the  road  surface.  The  stripe  has  good 
visibility  and  excellent  life  characteristics. 

•  Plastic  dots  reflectorized  to  have  high  visibility 
in  rainy  weather  and  protected  by  steel  or  other 
housings  or  base  plates,  the  unit  being  firmly 
cemented  to  the  pavement  surface.  These  devices 
are  being  designed  to  have  a  very  low  profile, 
and  the  cement  now  available  holds  them  so 
firmly  to  the  pavement  surface  that  they  ai'e  not 
readil}'  toni  loose  by  street  sweepers  or  even  by 
snowplows. 

Each  of  these  lane-marking  developments  is  some- 
what more  expensive  in  the  initial  installation  than 
conventional  painted  striping,  but  the  initial  extra 
cost  is  often  offset  several  times  over  by  the  greatly 
extended  life,  which  has  proved  to  be  as  much  as  ten 
times  that  of  painted  stripes. 

New  Analytical  Techniques 

During  the  late  1940's  and  early  1950's  Public 
Roads  pioneered  in  the  application  of  sophisticated 
instruments  to  help  solve  materials  problems.  Infra- 
red spectroscopy  was  developed  to  identify  the  nature 
and  understand  the  behavior  of  chemical  admixtures 
for  concrete,  mineral  composition  of  aggregates,  and 
other  highway  materials.  An  infrared  spectropho- 
tometer was  acquired  in  the  late  1950's  and  was  suc- 
cessfully applied  to  analyzing,  classifying,  and 
regulating  the  use  of  certain  admixtures  for  concrete, 
such  as  water  reducers,  hardening  retarders,  and  air- 
entraining  chemicals.  These  materials  were  of  such 
complex  chemical  nature  that  they  had  defied  earlier 
less  sophisticated  methods. 

Pavement  Research 

In  1908,  Director  Page  reported  on  13  experimental 
road  sections  on  main  roads  connecting  New  York 
and  Boston.  These  experiments  resulted  in  the  suc- 
cessful upgrading  and  restoration  of  deteriorated 
travel  surfaces  with  various  water-gas  and  coal  tar 
products  used  primarily  as  dust  palliatives.  Addi- 
tional reports  by  Page  during  the  period  1909  through 
1918    covered   numerous   experiments   involving   dust 


Infrared  spectrophotometric  analysis  can  identify  substances 
present  in  such  materials  as  paints,  concrete  admixtures,  coat- 
ings, rubber,  etc.,  by  determining  the  frequency  at  which  radia- 
tion is  absorbed  by  the  substance. 


prevention  and  road  preservation.  These  early  treat- 
ments did  much  to  make  automobile  travel  faster  and 
more  pleasant  and  were  relatively  inexpensive  for  a 
single  apt^lication.  However,  since  they  required 
frequent  renewal,  the  total  cost  was  appreciable,  and 
they  finally  had  to  be  abandoned. 

In  the  early  1930's,  a  gradual  transition  took  place 
from  dust  control  treatments  to  surface  treatments, 
using  tars  and  asphalts  and  better  mineral  cover. 
Also,  during  this  period  and  continuing  into  the 
1950's,  many  miles  of  penetration  and  waterbround 
macadam  pavements  were  built.  These  roads  served 
growing  highway  needs  very  successfully,  and  con- 
siderable mileage  has  survived  to  the  present  time. 
Concurrent  with  the  development  of  more  substantial 
surface  treatments,  primarily  in  the  east  and  the 
south,  many  central  and  western  States  experimented 
with  and  developed  effective  procedures  for  the  type 
of  pavement  known  as  bituminous  road  mix. 

In  this  period.  Public  Roads  research  was  very  ac- 
tive in  coordinating  field  studies  of  roads  in  service 
with  laboratory  research  on  materials.  In  the  1930's, 
for  example,  studies  in  Colorado  and  Wyoming  dem- 
onstrated the  need  for  sealing  or  "surface  treating" 
road-mixed  surfacings.  As  a  result,  bituminous  seal 
coating  became  a  fairly  regular  procedure.  Another 
example  was  a  study  of  bituminous  concrete  roads  in 
Ohio  which  demonstrated  the  general  serviceability 
of  this  paving. 

Concrete   Pavement  Research 

Many  articles  were  published  documenting  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads'  research  on  portland  cement 
concrete  pavements.  Among  the  earliest  was  a  study 
in  1919  on  the  behavior  of  concrete  slabs.  The  meas- 
ured curling  and  warping  movements  of  the  slab  were 
evaluated,  in  addition  to  the  effect  of  wheel  loading, 
and  a  thickness  design  formula  based  on  the  corner 
break  was  developed.  This  was  followed  in  1923  by 
Dr.  H.  M.  Westergaard's  theoretical  analysis  of  slabs 
on  an  elastic  medium.  There  followed  a  period  of 
detailed  studies  by  Bureau  of  Public  Roads'  research- 
ers lasting  until  1936  to  verify  and  expand  his  results 
into  a  comprehensive  design  procedure,  published  as 
The  Structural  Design  for  Concrete  Pavements,  which 
has  remained  the  basic  guide  for  a  decade  or  more. 

Experimental  roads  continued  to  be  built  to  test 
new  concepts  in  concrete  pavement.  In  1921,  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  built  the  first  experimental 
continuously  reinforced  concrete  pavement  near  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  where  many  of  the  basic  principles  re- 
lated to  that  type  of  i^avement  were  developed."  In 
1937  the  Bureau,  in  cooperation  with  the  Indiana 
State  Highway  Depai'tment  at  Stilesville,  began  an 
extended  field  test  of  continuously  reinforced  concrete 
pavement,  which  now  comprises  a  significant  portion 
of  the  Interstate  System  mileage.  The  BPR  also 
worked  with  industry  in  1957  to  produce  the  first 
U.S.  prestressed  concrete  highway  pavement,  and, 
subsequently,  built  a  3,200-foot  experimental  section 
of  pavement  at  Dulles  International  Airport  in  1971.^* 
This  concept  too  is  gaining  widespread  acceptance. 


329 


The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  roughometer  measures  the  rough- 
ness of  the  pavement  in  units  of  vertical  spring  motion  per 
unit  of  distance  the  wheel  travels. 


Research  was  also  performed  on  reinforcing  ma- 
terials for  concrete  pavement.  Bond  studies  in  1926 
or  steel  reinforcing  bars  of  various  shapes  and  types 
of  deformation  included  pullout  tests  to  evaluate  the 
contribution  of  the  different  types  of  bar  deformation 
to  the  load-carrying  capability  of  concrete  slabs.  The 
superior  performance  of  several  specific  types  of  bars 
was  established.  In  addition,  results  in  1958  of  an 
extensive  laboratory  study  of  the  performance  of  load 
transfer  dowels  in  concrete  pavement  joints  had  an 
immediate  efi'ect  in  pavement  design.  Recommended 
dowel   bar   lengths   and   diameters   for   effective   load 


transfer  were  widely  adopted  and  are  still  in  use 
today. 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  was  an  early  leader 
in  efforts  to  provide  a  means  of  obtaining  quantitative 
measures  of  pavement  roughness.  The  result  was  a 
compact  single-wheel  trailer  that  measured  and  re- 
corded the  roughness  of  the  wheel  path  in  units  of 
vertical  spring  motion  per  unit  of  distance  traveled. 
With  this  device,  commonly  known  as  the  BPR 
roughometer,  it  became  possible  to  easily  rate  the 
roughness  of  both  new  and  old  pavements.  The  term 
"present  serviceability  index"  as  a  function  of  rough- 
ness was  used  to  express  the  results  in  numerical 
terms.  This  index  was  used  to  specify  the  degree  of 
roughness  for  design  standards  and  in  rating  con- 
struction. 

Among  other  items  of  special  equipment  designed 
by  Public  Roads  engineers  was  a  device  to  measure 
the  vertical  displacement  of  pavement,  both  elastic 
and  permanent,  caused  by  static  and  moving  wheel 
loads  of  various  intensities  and  at  different  distances 
from  the  point  of  load  application.  With  these  dis- 
placement data,  it  was  possible  to  make  design  anal- 
yses for  better  subgrades  and  pavements.  This 
ingenious  device,  named  the  Benkelman  Beam  for  its 
inventor,  received  nationwide  attention  and  was  dupli- 
cated by  many  State  highway  departments. 

In  addition  to  tests  on  roads  in  their  normal  condi- 
tion, studies  were  made  in  the  1920's  to  determine  the 
impact  forces  of  wheel  loads  generated  by  an  "arti- 
ficial" bump.  One  study  was  on  a  ramp  30  inches 
long  with  a  drop-off  varying  from  I14  to  3  inches. 
These  tests  demonstrated  the  superiority  of  pneumatic 
tires  versus  solid  rubber  tires.  Partly  as  a  result, 
solid  rubber  tires  were  rapidly  phased  out  in  the  late 
1920's. 

Service   Lives 

Highways  do  wear  out.  Because  they  wear  out, 
highway  programs  must  include  continuous  resurfac- 
ing and  reconstruction  operations  to  maintain  high- 
ways in  a  usable  and  safe  condition.  Accordingly,  a 
knowledge  of  service  lives  of  highway  pavements  is 
essential. 


Taking    deflection   measurements   with   the   Benkelman   Beam 
to  determine  pavement  displacement  when  a  load  is  applied. 


Testing  impact  of  vehicle  wheels  on  pavement. 


330 


This  machine  was  used  in  1922  to  test  the  impact  of  solid 
rubber  tires  on  test  pavement  sections.  By  raisinff  the  tvheel 
and  suddenly  dropping  it  at  impact  forces  comparable  to  truck 
traffic  on  the  roads,  comparative  pavement  design  strengths 
could  be  determined. 


Research  in  the  field  began  in  1935  when  road  life 
studies  were  incorporated  as  part  of  the  statewide 
planning  surveys.  At  one  time  or  another  nearly  all 
States  cooperated  in  this  research  by  providing  the 
basic  data  which  were  analyzed  by  Public  Roads 
staff.  Although  the  purpose  of  the  surveys  was  to 
determine  average  service  life  of  road  surfaces,  the 
data  also  provided  the  means  for  obtaining  construc- 
tion costs,  salvage  values  of  retired  roadway  elements, 
and  service  lives  of  structures,  gradings,  and  rights- 
of-way. 

Based  on  an  analysis  of  the  records  of  surfaces  and 
roadway  elements  previously  constructed  and  de- 
preciated, it  is  now  possible  to  estimate  the  amount 
and  cost  of  replacement  of  these  elements.  For  ex- 
ample, the  results  of  a  study  completed  in  1971  indi- 
cated that  of  the  total  miles  of  roads  remaining  in 
service  in  1968,  60  percent  will  be  retired  in  10  years 
and  87  percent  in  20  years."  Such  information  is 
essential  to  determine  construction  and  reconstruction 
programs  and  corresponding  revenue  needs  of  a  future 
period. 

Bridge   Research 

Early  highway  bridge  research  was  conducted  in 
response  to  the  need  to  shape  the  AASHO  standard 
specifications  for  highway  bridges,  which  were  grad- 
ually developed  between  the  formation  of  the  AASHO 
Bridge  Committee  in  1921  and  the  first  printing  of 
the  standards  in  1931.  Subjects  of  early  bridge  re- 
search studies  included  the  expanded  use  of  welding 
and  high-strength  bolting  for  connections  in  steel 
structures,  the  widespread  acceptance  of  continuous 
composite  bridge  design  and  new  techniques  of  con- 
struction, such  as  orthotropic  deck  design  and  cable- 
stayed  girder  bridges.  Other  important  developments 
were  specifications  covering  the  fatigue  life  of  steel 
and  the  widespread  adoption  of  new  high-strength 
structural  steels  for  bridges. 

A  unique  aspect  of  early  structural  research  activ- 
ity resulted  from  the  catastrophic  failure  of  the 
Tacoma  Narrows  Suspension  Bridge  in  the  State  of 
Washington  on  November  7,  1940,  due  to  flutter  in- 
duced by  high  winds.  Under  the  auspices  of  the 
Advisory  Board  on  the  Investigation  of  Suspension 


Bridges,  formed  in  September  1942,  a  wind  tunnel 
large  enough  to  accommodate  a  scale  model  of  the 
entire  NarroAvs  Bridge  was  designed  and  built  at  the 
University  of  Washington.  This  tunnel  was  used  to 
make  exhaustive  studies  of  the  causes  and  possible 
remedies  for  such  a  failure.  After  extensive  redesign 
utilizing  the  findings  of  that  study,  the  Narrows 
Bridge  was  rebuilt  and  has  since  served  well  without 
excessive  vibration  or  other  evidence  of  distress.  One 
feature  of  the  redesign  was  a  slotted  or  grid  type  of 
deck  which  largely  relieved  the  vertical  component  of 
wind  streams  impinging  on  the  bridge. 

The  extensive  investigations  which  followed  the 
collapse  of  the  Narrows  Bridge  led  to  the  construc- 
tion in  1950  at  the  Fairbank  Highway  Research 
Station  of  the  George  S.  Vincent  Memorial  Wind 
Tunnel,  where  model  studies  on  the  effects  of  winds 
on  highway  structures  were  conducted.  Models  of 
many  of  the  major  suspension  bridges  throughout  the 
United  States  and  abroad  have  been  investigated  for 
aerodynamic  stability  in  this  wind  tunnel. 

One  of  the  subjects  of  those  studies  was  the  Golden 
Gate  Bridge.  Excessive  wind-induced  vertical  oscil- 
lations at  a  maximum  amplitude  of  13  feet  had  oc- 
curred while  the  Narrows  Bridge  investigation  was 
still  underway,  causing  great  official  and  public  con- 
cern. Consequently,  section-model  studies  of  the 
bridge  were  performed  in  the  Vincent  wind  tunnel. 
Some  structural  stiffening  of  the  suspended  portions 
of  the  bridge,  as  well  as  the  introduction  of  slots  in 
the  deck  to  reduce  the  vertical  component  of  the  wind 
force,  proved  effective,  as  in  the  case  of  the  redesigned 
Narrows  Bridge,  in  remedying  the  excessive  oscilla- 
tion. 

A  great  deal  of  research  was  also  initiated  on  all 
of  the  common  bridge  construction  steels  in  order  to 
learn  more  about  their  sensitivity  to  brittle  fracture. 
Once  this  research  began  to  produce  results,  tentative 
toughness  specifications  for  bridge  steels,  using  the 
Charpy  V-Notch  impact  specimen  as  a  control,  called 
for  tougher  steel  with  increased  steel  strength  and 
thickness.  These  requirements  were  adopted  by  the 
AASHTO  Bridge  and  Materials  Committees  for  in- 
clusion in  the  1974  interim  specifications. 

Aerodynamic  studies  of  suspension  bridges  are  conducted  in  the 
George  S.  Vincent  wind  tunnel.  A  precise  model  of  a  portion 
of  the  bridge  deck  is  mounted  on  springs  that  match  the  stiff- 
ness of  the  actual  cable  system  with  instrumentation  to  measure 
the  oscillations  produced  by  the  wind  stream. 


331 


■. 


One  of  the  circular  test  tracks  built  in  Arlington,  Va.,  for 
measuring  the  impact  forces  of  various  wheel  loads  on  pave- 
ments. 


New  Structural   Concepts 

In  the  early  1950's,  the  use  of  prestressed  concrete 
structural  members  in  this  country  was  hastened  by 
the  many  research  studies  dedicated  to  the  solution 
of  problems  arising  in  connection  with  the  adoption 
of  this  new  structural  concept.  As  a  result,  the  use 
of  prestressed  concrete  bridges  advanced  rapidly  in 
the  United  States,  achieving  predominance  as  a  con- 
struction material  in  many  sections  of  the  country. 
Similarly,  an  intensive  program  of  structural  research 
led  to  the  widespread  acceptance  of  the  use  of  high- 
strength  bolting  of  steel  structural  connections,  an 
improvement  over  the  previous  exclusive  dependence 
on  riveting. 


Public  Roads  studied  a  number  of  full-scale  bridge 
loadings  in  cooperation  with  the  various  State  high- 
way departments  beginning  with  the  Yadkin  River 
Bridge  Test  in  1928.  And  in  1950,  Public  Roads 
instrumentation  and  assistance  were  made  available 
to  any  State  highway  department  requesting  assist- 
ance. As  a  result  of  these  studies  and  the  road  tests, 
which  included  bridges,  a  significant  contribution  was 
made  over  the  years  to  the  improved  fatigue  design 
of  steel  structures.  Out  of  these  studies  came  a  better 
understanding  of  such  theoretical  concepts  as  the 
effects  of  structural  fatigue  on  load  distribution  be- 
tween members  and  the  effect  of  incorporating  new 
materials,  such  as  high-strength  reinforcing  steel  or 


A  profilometer  is  used  to  measure  wear  and  displacement  of 
pavement  caused  by  traffic  on  the  Arlington,  Va.,  test  track. 


332 


lightweight  concrete,  on  the  performance  of  concrete 
highway  bridges. 

With  the  beginning  of  the  Interstate  System  came 
the  need  for  fitting  bridges  to  mucli  more  restrictive 
and  sophisticated  geometries  to  provide  for  the  needs 
of  high-speed  traffic  in  congested  areas  while  main- 
taining stnictural  esthetics  and  economy.  Straiglit 
span  members  were  no  longer  always  adequate  for  the 
needs,  and  the  understandings  of  the  structural  design 
of  curved  members  was  limited.  Research  undertaken, 
both  in  the  form  of  multi-State  pooled-fund  labora- 
tory and  analytical  studies  and  the  extensive  use  of 
cooperative  Federal-State  field  studies,  helped  fill  this 
urgent  and  critical  need  for  improved  curved  girder 
design  teclinology.  As  a  result  of  this  research, 
bridges  today  are  designed  and  built  with  cui'ved 
alinement  and  warped  decks  in  a  manner  unheard  of 
two  decades  ago. 

Road  Tests 

Following  World  War  I,  a  prime  objective  of  the 
State  and  Federal  highway  program  was  to  recon- 
struct the  surfaces  and  pavements  of  main  highways 
which  had  received  widespread  damage  from  the 
greatly  increased  traffic  of  heavy  trucks  with  solid 
rubber-tired  wheels.  The  light  surfaces,  designed  for 
horsedrawn  or  other  light  vehicles,  failed  under  the 
impact  of  the  heavier  vehicles.  Road  test  data  were 
needed  to  determine  the  supporting  capability  of  the 
various  subgrade  soils,  the  stresses  induced  in  rigid 
and  flexible  pavements  by  the  impact  of  motor  ve- 
hicles, the  eft'ects  of  expansion  and  contraction  of 
road  surfaces  caused  by  variations  in  temperature,  the 
wear  of  traffic  upon  pavement  surfaces,  the  distribu- 
tion of  loads  upon  bridges,  and  many  other  factors. 
To  solve  some  of  these  problems,  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  and  the  States  initiated  a  series  of  road  tests. 

The  Bates  test  road  and  test  vehicles. 


The  Arlington  Road  Test.  The  first  road  test  was 
initiated  in  1918  at  BPR's  Plxperimental  Farm  in 
Arlington,  Virginia,  to  measure  qualitatively  the  im- 
pact forces  of  various  wheel  loads.  The  tests,  con- 
ducted with  Army  trucks  equipped  with  solid  rubber 
tires,  were  on  concrete,  brick  and  bituminous  slabs  on 
circular  tracks.  The  early  tests  indicated  the  major 
effect  of  wheel  impact  forces  and  led  to  further  studies 
with  more  refined  measuring  instruments  and  the  in- 
clusion of  pneumatic  tires. 

The  Bates  Road  Test.  For  the  Bates  Road  Test, 
the  Illinois  Division  of  Highways  constructed  (58  test 
sections,  inchiding  six  types  of  pavement  on  2  miles 
of  road  and,  with  the  assistance  of  B1*R  engineers, 
conducted  tests  on  them  from  1920  to  1928.  Trucks 
were  operated  with  conti'olled  wheel  loads  that  were 
progressively  increased  from  2,500  to  18,000  pounds. 
The  test  data  gave  the  pavement  type  and  thickness 
required  for  a  specified  loading  and  showed  the  need 
for  control  of  wheel  loads.  A  direct  result  of  this 
study  was  the  use  of  a  thickened  edge  concrete  pave- 
ment. 

The  Pittsburg  Road  Test.  Between  1921  and  1922, 
another  road  test  was  conducted  in  Pittsburg,  Cali- 
fornia, to  determine  the  efficiency  of  both  reinforced 
and  plain  concrete  pavements  of  variable  thickness 
and  designs  on  certain  types  of  subgrade  soil.  The 
test  was  conducted  by  the  Columbia  Steel  Company 
on  an  elliptical  track  560  feet  in  length  containing  13 
concrete  pavement  test  sections.  Much  new  informa- 
tion was  learned,  particularly  concerning  the  effective- 
ness of  longitudinal  joints  in  preventing  longitudinal 
cracking. 

The  combined  findings  from  these  three  contempo- 
rary road  test  studies  led  to  major  advances  in  pave- 
ment design  practices.  The  relations  were  determined 
between  concentrated  wheel  loads  and  the  thickness 
of  several  common  types  of  pavement,  which  were 
directly  usable  on  new  highway  plans.  From  the 
range  of  wheel  loads  studied,  highway  officials  were 
able  for  the  first  time  to  reach  agreement  on  the  use 
of  a  9,000-pound  maximum  value  as  the  economic 
standard  for  highway  pavement  designs.  More  di- 
rectly evident  to  the  public  was  the  abrupt  phasing 
out  of  solid-rubber  tires  on  trucks  because  of  their 
high  impact  destruction  on  all  types  of  pavements. 
Within  a  few  years  after  1926  the  use  of  pneumatic 
tires  became  universal.  Also,  these  studies  made  evi- 
dent the  need  for  amplified  research  on  soil  support 
values  to  attain  better  pavements. 

The  HyUa  Valley  Road  Test.  From  1944  to  1954 
a  series  of  studies  on  flexible  pavements  was  con- 
ducted on  the  Hybla  Valley  test  track  in  Alexandria, 
Virginia,  by  BPR  in  cooperation  with  the  Asphalt 
Institute  and  HRB.  A  2,000-foot  oval  track  for  full 
size  vehicles  was  built  with  selected  soil  foundation 
and  paved  with  asphaltic  concrete.  Using  newly  de- 
veloped measuring  equipment,  data  were  obtained  on 
the  vertical  displacements  of  the  pavements  from  both 
static  and  moving  wheel  loads  of  varying  intensities. 

A  significant  finding  from  these  tests  was  that  there 
is  considerable  elastic  movement  within  a  nonrigid 
pavement  structure  under  load.  A  great  deal  was 
also  learned  about  instrumentation  and  field  measure- 
ment procedures  which  greatly  aided  later  test  road 
studies. 


333 


Road  Test  One — Md.  In  1949  the  Interregional 
Council  on  Highway  Transportation  originated  a  test 
road  study  on  a  1.1 -mile  section  of  highway  south  of 
La  Plata,  Maryland.  The  study  and  report  was  a 
cooperative  effort  of  11  eastern  States,  the  District  of 
Columbia,  Public  Roads,  truck  manufacturers,  the 
I^etroleum  industry,  the  Department  of  Defense  and 
HEB.  The  objective  was  to  obtain  data,  for  use  both 
in  vehicle  weight  regulations  and  in  pavement  design, 
on  the  relative  effect  of  four  different  axle  loads  on 
the  existing  concrete  pavement  (four  lanes),  then  in 
excellent  condition. 

Test  trucks  with  8,000-  and  22,400-pound  single 
axle  loads  were  operated  on  adjacent  lanes  and  trucks 
with  32,000-  and  44,800-pound  tandem  axle  loads  op- 
erated on  the  other  pair  of  lanes.  Nearly  240,000 
single  axle  truck  passes  were  made  and  about  half  as 
many  of  the  tandem  axle. 

The  data  on  the  progressive  pavement  deterioration, 
evidenced  by  cracking,  internal  structure  failure,  and 
joint  depression,  showed  that  damage  was  proportion- 
ate to  axle  loads.  Significant  data  also  were  reported 
concerning  soil  support  features  and  stresses  at  various 
points  in  the  pavement  slab. 

WASHO  Road  Test.  In  1951  the  Western  Asso- 
ciation of  State  Highway  Officials  (WASHO)  set  up 
a  test  road  to  obtain  data  for  use  in  establishing  load 
limits  and  in  designing  flexible  pavements.  Cooper- 
ating in  this  test  were  11  western  States,  truck  and 
truck  trailer  manufacturers  and  three  petroleum  com- 
panies. The  Highway  Research  Board  supervised  the 
construction  and  testing  to  determine  the  effects  of 
four-axle  loads  on  selected  designs  of  flexible  pave- 
ment. The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  assisted  with 
funds,  personnel,  instrumentation,  photography,  sup- 
plies and  equipment.  This  test  was  run  from  1952  to 
1954  at  a  site  near  Malad,  Idaho. 

Two  four-lane  test  loops,  each  with  1,900-foot 
tangents,  were  constructed  with  five  pavement  struc- 
tural sections  ranging  in  depth  from  6  to  22  inches 
on  each  tangent.  On  one  loop  the  pavements  were 
subjected  to  18,000-  and  22,000-pound  single  axle 
loads    and    on    the    other    32,000-    and    40,000-pound 


tandem  axle  loads.  The  lighter  loads  were  operated 
on  the  inner  lanes.  About  240,000  truck  passes  were 
recorded  on  each  of  the  loops. 

The  test  data  yielded  significant  relations  of  stresses 
within  and  failures  of  the  several  flexible  pavement 
design  sections  as  the  truck  loadings  progressed.  Some 
of  the  general  findings  were : 

•  The  4-inch  asphaltic  concrete  top  course  was 
markedly  superior  to  the  2-inch. 

•  The  heavier  axle  loads  resulted  in  considerably 
more  distress. 

•  A  paved  shoulder  contributed  to  the  pavement 
support. 

•  Greatest  distress  occurred  in  the  spring  and  least 
in  the  fall. 

•  Distress  from  the  tandem  axle  was  equivalent  to 
that  of  a  single  axle  of  about  two-thirds  of  the 
tandem  weight. 

The  A  AS  HO  Road  Test.  After  the  WASHO  Road 
Test,  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials  (AASHO)  in  agreement  with  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  decided  to  conduct  a  comprehensive 
national  test  to  obtain  data  on  all  significant  variables. 
In  1955,  AASHO  sponsored  and  requested  the  High- 
way Research  Board  to  direct  this  test.  The  purpose 
was  to  study  the  performance  of  pavement  and  bridge 
structures  of  known  characteristics  under  moving 
loads  of  known  magnitude  and  frequency.  Portland 
cement  concrete  and  asphaltic  pavements,  as  well  as 
certain  types  of  bridges,  were  included  in  the  specially 
constructed  test  facility. 

This  $27  million  project,  located  near  Ottawa, 
Illinois,  was  financed  by  the  highway  departments  of 
the  48  States,  Hawaii,  the  District  of  Columbia,  and 
Puerto  Rico.  Financial  support  was  also  provided  by 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  the  Automobile  Manu- 
facturers Association,  the  petroleum  industry,  and  the 
American  Institute  of  Steel  Construction.  The  De- 
partment of  Defense  furnished  the  heavy  vehicles  and 
drivers  for  their  test  run  operations.  In  addition, 
there  were  many  services  and  contributions  by  the 
automotive,  petroleum,  tire,  cement,  and  steel  indus- 
tries. 


Traffic  on  loops  during  the  AASHO  road  test. 


334 


The  test  road  consisted  of  about  7  miles  of  two-lane 
pavements,  half  of  concrete  and  half  bituminous.  The 
roadways  included  16  short-span  bridges.  There  were 
836  separate  test  sections  located  in  six  loops  which 
varied  in  length  from  2,000  to  6,600  feet.  The  test 
sections  had  selected  factorial  combinations  of  surface, 
base,  and  subbase  thicknesses.  Axle  loads  differed  on 
each  loop  and  varied  from  2,000-pound  single  to 
48,000-pound  tandem;  truck  trailer  units  were  in- 
cluded. Full-scale  tests  started  in  November  1958  and 
terminated  in  November  1960.  A  total  of  1,114,000 
axle  loads  had  been  applied  to  the  pavements  and 
bridges  surviving  at  the  last  date. 

The  project  produced  a  reservoir  of  facts  long- 
needed  for  the  development  of  a  more  I'efined  and 
scientific  design  of  pavements  and  short  bridges.* 

The  test  data  well  established  the  desired  relations 
of  pavement  stnictural  designs  (component  thick- 
nesses) and  loadings  (magnitude  and  frequency  of 
axle  loads).  These  findings  were  developed  in  the 
form  of  equations  and  graphs  that  showed  the  effects 
of  particular  variables  on  pavement  performance. 
These  soon  were  incorporated  by  AASHO  and  others 
into  pavement  design  guides  and  manuals.  The  con- 
cept and  use  of  a  "serviceability  index"  to  define  pave- 
ment performance  was  a  major  item.  And  the  data 
on  equivalencies  of  single-  and  tandem-axle  loads  for 
the  same  pavement  performance  was  a  high-use 
product.  Also  important  were :  a  method  to  predict 
pavement  performance  from  measurements  of  deflec- 
tions and  strains;  and  data  on  the  reduction  of  surface 
skid  resistance. 


The  test  bridge  findings  largely  verified  desigii  pre- 
dictions of  deflection  and  strain.  The  dynaniic  studies 
resulted  in  the  formulation  of  new  theoretical  con- 
cepts for  analytical  e^'aluation  of  stresses  and  deflec- 


*  The  extensive  technical  data  and  findings  are  recorded  in 
seven  Highway  Research  Board  Special  Reports  Series  61, 
and  Special  Report  73. 


tions  from  moving  vehicles. 


Construction   and   Maintenance 

Production   Costs 

The  construction  of  highways  in  the  early  stages  of 
our  country's  development  involved  mostly  hand  labor 
and  draft  horse  or  mule  power.  Formal  organization 
and  production  efficiency  were  items  unheard  of,  and 
the  pace  of  construction  depended,  for  the  most  part, 
on  the  forcefulness  and  ingenuity  of  the  foreman. 
Later,  as  mechanized  methods  started  to  supplement 
the  man  and  nude  power  method,  the  need  for  sys- 
tematic organization  increased.  Elarly  Public  Roads 
activities  in  this  area  concentrated  mostly  on  object 
lessons  gained  in  test  road  construction. 

In  the  early  1920's,  the  Production  Cost  Study 
Program  was  initiated  by  the  Bui'eau  to  assist  the 
highway  industry  in  analyzing  its  various  operations 
regarding  time  utilization  and  operational  efficiency 
of  equipment  used  in  construction.  This  program, 
led  by  T.  Warren  Allen,  served  two  purposes:  (1)  To 
assist  the  contractor  by  direct  time-motion  studies  on 
their  operations,  expressed  in  terms  of  production 
rates  and  costs,  pointing  out  observed  inefficiencies 
and  measures  as  to  how  he  might  improve  on  his 
operations;  and  (2)  to  ti'ain  junior  engineers  in  Pub- 
lic Roads  by  direct  exposure  to  the  practicalities  of 
construction  equipment  operations  and  the  overall 
process  of  building  a  highway.  This  program  con- 
tinued until  1936. 


There  were  16  short-span  bridges  on  the  AASHO  road  test  to 
determine  deflection  and  strain  on  bridges  from  heavy  loads. 


335 


Because  of  personnel  shortage  during  the  war 
emergency,  the  program  was  dormant  for  10  years 
and  was  reinstituted  in  1946.  By  then  the  highway 
construction  and  maintenance  industi-y,  with  its  far 
flung  operations  reaching  into  every  comer  of  the 
country,  was  using  thousands  of  major  equipment 
units  and  millions  of  dollars  worth  of  material  each 
year.  Economical  and  efficient  use  of  this  equipment, 
manpower  and  materials  was  of  concern  to  every  seg- 
ment of  the  industry  in  order  to  stretch  the  highway 
dollar  to  meet  the  need  for  more  and  better  roads  and 
yet  assure  the  competitive  contractor  a  reasonable 
profit. 

During  the  next  20  years,  production  time  and 
motion  studies  were  made  on  over  400  projects.  Over 
40  information  reports  were  issued  prior  to  1960  by 
Public  Roads  and  the  Highway  Research  Board  on 
performance,  time  utilization,  and  costs  pertaining  to 
equipment  employed  on  highway  construction  and 
maintenance  work.  In  addition  to  routine  production 
studies  on  maintenance  and  consti'uction  operations, 
the  program  was  directed  also  into  other  areas  to 
gather  information  on  a  particular  facet  of  construc- 
tion. In  1952,  a  year-long  comprehensive  study  was 
made  with  the  objective  of  developing  comparative 
data  regarding  net  cost  to  the  public  of  construction 
work  performed  by  contract  and  by  State  forces  in 
North  Carolina. 

These  cost  studies  were  later  expanded  to  obtain 
data  on  economics  of  detours  versus  carrying  traffic 
through  construction  and  on  economics  of  specifying 
a  single  cold  feed  bin  versus  multiple  bins  for  hot -mix 
production.  Other  cost  studies  were  made  on  various 
types  of  bridge  construction  and  grading  and  paving 
work  to  develop  comparative  man-  and  equipment - 
hour  unit  cost  data.  Teams  also  studied  such  areas 
as:  (1)  Determining  relationship  between  mixing 
time  and  productivity  for  dual  drum  pavers  and  for 
central  mix  plants,  (2)  mechanics  of  aggregate  dry- 
ing in  hot-mix  plants,  (3)  optimum  rolling  pattern 
on  hot-mix  construction,  (4)  benefits  of  blending  ma- 
terial prior  to  loading  the  concrete  mixer,  (5)  eval- 
uating a  newly  developed  nuclear  gage  for  determining 
density  of  bituminous  pavements,  (6)  evaluating  time 
lapse  movies  technique  for  studying  construction,  and 
(7)   demonstrating  the  need  for  surge  bins.     Also,  a 


Michigan  was  the  site  jor  a  imnter  driving  test  to  determine 
safe  speeds  and  handling  of  heavy  vehicles  on  ice  and  snow, 
including  negotiating  turns  and  curves. 


series  of  short-term  and  long-term  pilot  maintenance 
equipment  and  operations  studies  were  conducted  to 
pinpoint  areas  needing  better  organization  and  train- 
ing. 

This  program  was  again  terminated  in  1966.  The 
Federal  Highway  Administration  resumed  this  pro- 
gram in  1971  on  a  more  limited  scale.  The  benefits 
that  accrued  from  the  early  pre-World  War  II  and 
the  later  post-World  War  II  programs  were  widely 
reflected  in  many  positive  improvements  in  productiv- 
ity. It  can  be  said  that  they  were  a  major  factor, 
directly  and  indirectly,  in  the  constant  evolution  lead- 
ing to  automation  of  construction,  control,  and  oper- 
ation. 

Maintenance   Management 

Even  though  research  on  highway  materials  and 
construction  processes  had  an  influence  on  highway 
maintenance  and,  in  part,  directly  applied  in  main- 
tenance operations,  the  separate  study  of  management 
of  maintenance  operations  differs  substantially  from 
the  other  areas  of  highway  research.  These  investi- 
gations involved  a  considerable  number  of  States,  and 
their  results  have  affected  all  States. 

Highway  maintenance  has  experienced  many 
changes  through  the  years,  most  of  which  were  based 
on  intuition  and  practical  considerations  rather  than 
factual  knowledge  and  scientific  management  prin- 
ciples. There  were  some  limited-scope  highway  main- 
tenance management  studies  through  the  1940's,  but 
these  did  not  constitute  a  significant  serious  research 
program. 

A  1950  joint  study  with  the  Connecticut  State 
Highway  Department  developed  facts  concerning  the 
performance  of  labor  and  equipment  and  appraised 
management  problems.  Subsequently,  about  20  other 
small  studies  were  conducted  by  the  States  during  the 
1950's.  The  results  were  not  singularly  significant, 
but  indicated  a  common  need  for  better  management. 
In  1959,  a  major  study  by  the  State  of  Iowa,  in  coop- 
eration with  Public  Roads,  developed  a  comprehensive 
system  for  producing  facts  and  analyzing  management 
aspects.  This  report  received  considerable  publicity 
and  the  study's  system  was  adopted  in  various  ways 
by  many  highway  maintenance  organizations. 

During  the  1960's,  emerging  conditions  that  re- 
quired a  refined  maintenance  management  role  in- 
cluded the  new  Interstate  System,  the  need  for  higher 
levels  of  maintenance,  a  rapid  change  in  technology, 
and  labor  and  budget  problems.  As  a  result,  main- 
tenance management  became  much  more  prominent 
in  both  research  and  practice. 

Research  to  improve  maintenance  management  was 
gi-eatly  expanded  to  meet  these  challenges.  Between 
1960  and  1970,  about  half  of  the  State  highway  or- 
ganizations conducted  maintenance  management 
studies.  There  was  considerable  cross-fertilization 
between  these  studies,  and  they  covered  a  very  wide 
range  of  elements,  from  equipment  development  and 
roadside  practice  to  statewide  planning  and  economic 
investigations.  In  these  studies,  a  number  of  major 
management  consultants  wei-e  involved  as  well  as 
State  universities.  The  results  led  to  major  improve- 
ments in  maintenance  operations  throughout  the 
United  States,  and  more  refined  studies  are  in  progress. 


336 


Traffic  and  Safety 

Capacity  and   Design 

In  response  to  Chief  IMacDonald's  concern,  research 
was  directed  in  the  1920's  into  three  major  areas: 
(1)  Road  construction  and  maintenance,  (2)  the  eco- 
nomics of  road  operation,  and  (3)  the  economic  value 
of  highways  to  a  community.  Although  elements  of 
highway  capacity  and  design  were  mentioned,  it  was 
W.  K.  Hatt,  Director  of  the  Highway  Research  Com- 
mittee of  the  National  Reseai'ch  Council,  who  in  1921 
raised  the  following  questions:  "What  is  the  capacity 
of  a  road  of  a  given  width  for  any  particular  type  of 
vehicle  as  expressed  in  vehicles  per  hour,  ton-miles 
per  year,  etc.?  "What  is  the  appropriate  unit  for  ex- 
pressing traffic  for  various  purposes?"  ^^ 

Research   on   Highway  Geometries 

In  March  1925,  Public  Roads  first  reported  a  num- 
ber of  significant  facts  concerning  the  lateral  distri- 
bution of  traffic.  These  factors  included  the  eifect  of 
road  width,  curves,  shoulder  conditions,  grades,  sur- 
face crown,  and  other  physical  features.  Observers 
recorded  the  positions  of  tires  in  relation  to  lines 
painted  across  the  pavement  at  1-foot  intervals.  The 
results  indicated  that  18  feet  was  the  minimum  pave- 
ment width  which  would  permit  passenger  cars  and 
trucks  to  pass  in  safety  and  with  a  reasonable  amount 
of  clearance.  Speeds  were  not  considered  in  this 
study. 

Four  years  later,  in  1929,  when  equipment  for 
measuring  speeds  became  more  reliable,  it  was  found 
that  the  safe  passing  of  "rapidly"  moving  automo- 
biles and  trucks  required  a  surface  width  of  at  least 
20  feet  for  two-lane  rural  highways. 

Since  1929,  researchers  have  progressively  provided 
the  basic  information  required  to  set  design  standards 
and  operational  controls  for  main  roads  and  freeways. 
In  December  1944:,  one  of  the  recommendations  of  a 
BPR  study  of  the  effect  of  roadway  width  on  traffic 
operations  was  that  lane  widths  should  be  12  feet  for 
safety  and  comfort  of  traffic  operations.  The  AASHO 
soon  adopted  this  width  as  a  standard  for  primary 
highways  in  the  United  States.  Within  a  short  time 
this  standard  was  also  adopted  in  many  foreign  coun- 
tries. Vehicle  widths  remain  about  the  same  today, 
and  this  lane  width  remains  the  basic  standard. 

Horizontal  and  Vertical   Curves 

xVn  early  design  polic}-  statement  that  is  still  cur- 
rent says  that  "In  the  design  of  highway  curves  it  is 
necessai-y  to  establish  the  proper  relation  between 
design  speed  and  curvature  and  also  their  joint  rela- 
tions with  superelevation.  AVhile  these  relations  stem 
from  laws  of  mechanics,  the  actual  values  for  use  in 
design  depend  upon  practical  limits  and  factors  de- 
termined more  or  less  empirically  over  the  range  of 
variables  involved."  ^'  A  series  of  studies  have  been 
made  to  relate  the  speed  of  operation  on  higliways  to 
the  horizontal  and  vertical  alinement.  One  of  the 
earliest  studies  on  the  effect  of  speeds  on  geometric 


design  was  conducted  in  1929.  Even  though  the  legal 
speed  limits  in  the  1920's  were  35  to  45  miles  per  hour, 
A.  Bruce,  in  his  ai'ticle  "The  Effect  of  Increased 
Speed  of  Vehicles  on  the  Desigii  of  Highways,"  con- 
cluded that  there  was  need  for  easier  curves,  greater 
superelevation  of  curves,  more  extensive  vertical 
curves,  and  greater  sight  distance  on  both  horizontal 
and  vertical  curves. 

In  1953  a  comprehensive  study  of  driver  behavior 
on  vertical  and  horizontal  curves  was  completed  by 
Public  Roads  in  cooperation  with  the  New  York  De- 
partment of  Public  Works  that  showed  that  the  per- 
centage of  drivers  exceeding  a  safe  speed  for  the 
curve  radius  increased  greatly  on  the  sharper  curves. 
The  combination  of  curves  over  5  degrees  (radius 
less  than  1,200  feet)  and  grades  in  excess  of  5  percent 
also  were  found  to  result  in  an  especially  high  acci- 
dent rate  on  conventional  rural  highways. 

A  comprehensive  study  of  "Driver  Performance  on 
Horizontal  Curves"  was  conducted  during  1951-1954 
in  cooperation  with  five  States  at  35  horizontal  curves. 
The  separate  studies  were  on  two-lane,  two-directional 
roads.  Among  the  more  important  conclusions  were 
the  following: 

•  Drivers  did  not  change  their  speeds  after  enter- 
ing a  horizontal  curve. 

•  The    existing    superelevation    had    no    effect    on 
speeds. 

•  Operating  speeds   and  the  radius  of  curve  are 
linearly  related. 

•  The  curve  radius  had  a  greater  effect  on  speeds 
than  sight  distance.^^ 

In  1969  data  in  NCHRP*  Report  68  on  the  appli- 
cation of  vehicle  operating  characteristics  to  geometric 
design  substantially  verified  these  results. 

Highway  Capacity 

Highway  capacity  has  been  the  subject  of  careful 
and  painstaking  study  for  nearly  six  decades.  A 
rational  and  practical  method  for  the  determination 
of  highway  capacity  was  essential  for  the  sound  eco- 
nomic and  functional  design  of  new  highways  and 
for  the  many  existing  roads  and  streets  which  must 
continue  in  use  for  extended  periods  of  time.  Basic- 
ally, highway  capacity  concerns  the  effectiveness  of 
various  highways  to  serve  traffic  and  involves  the 
many  elements  of  highway  design,  speeds,  vehicle  and 
driver  performance,  and  traffic  control.  In  recent 
years,  due  to  the  development  of  refined  traffic  study 
methods,  instrumentation  and  equipment,  substantial 
amounts  of  reliable  field  data  have  been  used  to  de- 
velop new  insights  into  problems  of  and  solutions  to 
traffic  operations. 

In  1934  the  BPR  set  up  and  took  a  dominant  part 
in  a  coordinated  series  of  studies  to  obtain  the  basic 
data  on  highway  capacity.  This  widespread  effort 
included    studies    on :    methods    of    counting    traffic ; 


*  National  Cooperative  Highway  Research  Program. 


337 


Olav  Koch  Nermann 


In  a  career  foreshortened  by  his  untimely  death  at  age  57,  Olav  Koch 
Nermann's  contributions  to  safe  and  efficient  highway  travel  could  be 
matched  by  few  others  in  a  full  lifetime  of  effort.  Endowed  with  a 
rare  combination  of  brilliance  of  mind,  skill  of  hand,  and  enormous 
physical  strength  and  endurance,  O.  K.  Normann  set  a  pace  that  few 
could  follow.  He  was  a  leader  in  many  fields  but  became  best  known 
as  the  'father'  of  the  world's  knowledge  in  the  area  of  highway 
capacity. 

Normann  was  born  in  Kansas  City,  Missouri,  on  October  1,  1906,  and 
earned  his  Bachelor's  degree  in  Civil  Engineering  at  the  University  of 
Minnesota  in  1928.  Immediately  entering  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
as  a  junior  engineer  in  its  training  programme,  Normann  began  the 
career  that  kept  him  in  the  Bureau  until  his  death. 

His  inquisitive  mind  led  him  early  into  the  field  of  research,  and  in 
1935  he  moved  into  the  field  of  geometric  design  and  highway  capacity. 

The  approach  he  followed  would  probably  now  be  called  operations 
research  or  system  analysis  in  today's  more  sophisticated  language. 
Then  it  was  recognized  simply  as  the  only  logical  way  to  approach  the 
problem.  It  accepted  the  movement  of  traffic  as  a  dynamic  system  in- 
volving the  vehicle,  the  driver,  and  the  road.  Organizing  studies  in 
each  of  these  segments,  Normann  himself  synthesized  the  separate  results 
into  principles  derived  from  actual  experiment  on  the  road  and  in  the 
traffic  stream  to  reflect  the  countless  possible  combinations  of  the  in- 
dividual and  collective  actions  of  drivers  and  differing  vehicle  per- 
formance and  roadway  design  elements. 

This  approach  might  not  have  been  so  successful  had  it  not  been 
backed  by  Normann's  own  broad  talents.  As  an  analyst,  he  had  an 
uncanny  ability  to  detect  trends  and  relations  within  masses  of  data 
that  customary  statistical  methods  did  not  seem  to  reveal.  While  taking 
full  advantage  of  modern  data  processing  and  analysis  techniques,  he 
did  not  forsake  simple  graphical  and  other  methods  that  on  more  than 
one  occasion  proved  out  after  the  more  complex  methods  failed. 

It  was  this  depth  of  investigation  that  showed  clearly,  as  research 
progressed,  what  specific  facts  were  lacking  or  where  data  in  different 
form  would  have  helped.  Here  another  of  Normann's  talents,  me- 
chanical skill,  came  to  the  fore,  for  seldom,  it  seems,  was  there  available 
the  apparatus  or  equipment  needed  to  measure  particular  facets  of 
driver  behaviour  or  vehicle  performance.  Not  only  could  Normann 
specify  what  was  needed — he  could  design  and  construct  it,  sometimes 
with  the  design  only  in  his  mind,  not  on  paper. 

The  impact  of  Normann's  early  research  and  writing  led  to  his  selec- 
tion as  Chairman  of  the  Highway  Capacity  Committee  of  the  Highway 
Research  Board  when  it  was  first  organized  in  1944.  His  selection  as 
chairman  was  unique,  for  at  that  time,  as  a  general  policy  of  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads,  its  employees  could  serve  as  members  or  as  secretaries 
of  Board  committees,  but  never  as  chairmen.  Normann's  accomplish- 
ments were  so  predominant  in  the  field,  however,  that  there  could  be  no 
sensible  alternative  to  disregarding  the  policy  in  his  case. 

Years  of  work  by  the  committee  members,  aided  by  heavy  contribu- 
tions of  data  obtained  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  many  state 
highway  departments  and  city  traffic  engineering  organizations,  led  to 
the  publication  of  the  Highway  Capacity  Manual  in  1950.  Much  of  the 
willing  support  of  this  committee  can  be  attributed  not  only  to  the 
desire  of  various  agencies  to  cooperate  in  the  Boaixl's  activities,  but  also 
to  the  personal  regard  individuals  in  these  organizations  felt  for 
Normann,  the  man,  not  just  the  chairman.  Published  with  some  early 
reservations  as  to  the  breadth  of  interest  it  would  attract,  more  than 
26,000  English  language  copies  have  been  sold,  and  the  manual  has  been 
translated  into  nine  other  languages. 


338 


Disbanded  upon  publication  of  the  manual,  the  committee  was  sub- 
sequently reorganized  by  the  Highway  Research  Board  in  1953,  again 
with  O.  K.  Normann  as  its  chairman.  Again,  there  could  have  been 
no  other  sensible  choice.  The  committee  was  charged  with  extending 
and  updating  the  original  manual,  and  at  an  appropriate  time,  pre- 
senting a  revised  version  for  publication.  The  new  manual  was  nearing 
completion  Avhen  death  took  the  chairman.     It  will  be  his  monument. 

Although  perhaps  most  widely  known  for  his  work  in  highway  ca- 
pacity, Normann's  research  led  him  into  all  facets  of  geometric  design 
of  highways,  and  many  of  today's  standards  of  curvature,  sight  distance, 
gradients,  lane  widths,  and  intersection  design  are  traceable  directly  to 
his  eflforts.  Again,  it  was  his  understanding  of  the  highway  as  but  one 
element  of  a  system  that  enabled  him  to  design  his  experiments  so  as  to 
produce  results  of  immediate  applicability.  Important  as  he  regarded 
the  adequate  i-eporting  of  research  results,  he  felt  their  gi-eatest  value 
lay  in  prompt  application. 

As  his  technical  field  broadened,  he  was  called  upon,  as  is  often  the 
case,  to  shoulder  increasing  administrative  duties.  He  advanced  steadily 
through  positions  of  heavier  responsibility,  until  at  the  time  of  his 
death,  he  was  serving  as  Deputy  Director  for  Research  of  the  Office  of 
Research  and  Development  in  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  Despite  the 
burden  of  administrative  duties,  his  interest  in  technical  matters  in  no 
way  slackened  and  he  seemed  to  regard  the  administrative  functions  as 
merely  added,  not  different,  responsibilities.  In  effect,  he  did  two  jobs, 
each  in  his  characteristically  thorough  and  exacting  way — something  he 
could  do  because  of  his  energy  and  physical  endurance,  but  which 
evoked  mixed  feelings  of  admiration  and  despair  among  those  whom  he 
hopefully  expected  to  keep  pace. 

He  was  always  a  part  of  his  community  and  accepted  civic  respon- 
sibilities with  the  same  energy  and  enthusiasm  that  marked  his  profes- 
sional life.  He  was  active  in  and  served  as  president  of  his  Civic 
Association,  and  as  chairman  of  Better  Government  Committee  of  his 
county's  federation  of  civic  associations. 

In  all  aspects  of  life,  not  merely  in  his  professional  area,  Normann 
was  a  confirmed  skeptic.  In  his  view,  there  must  be  some  better  way 
to  do  it,  whatever  it  might  be,  than  the  way  it  was  traditionally  being 
done.  Little  with  which  he  was  connected  failed  to  show  some  evidence 
of  innovation  before  its  completion — a  healthy  attribute  in  research, 
but  not  always  so  desirable  in  other  fields,  such  as,  for  example,  home 
building.  Many  are  the  anecdotes  which  will  live  long  in  retelling 
among  his  vast  circle  of  friends  that  stemmed  from  Normann's  innova- 
tions, and  from  his  amazing  resourcefulness  in  turning  apparent  setbacks 
and  failures  into  advances  and  success. 

Through  his  highway  work  he  became  widely  known  around  the 
world.  Many  engineers  from  other  countries,  in  travelling  through  the 
United  States,  benefited  by  technical  discussion  and  enjoyed  his  warm 
hospitality.  Along  with  his  activity  in  the  United  States  he  had  the 
unique  opportunity  to  direct  the  changeover  from  left-hand  to  right- 
hand  driving  in  Panama  during  World  War  II.  He  conducted  a  train- 
ing course  in  highway  capacity  in  Madrid  in  1961  and  was  one  of  a 
small  group  of  United  States  highway  engineers  who  were  given  an 
extensive  tour  through  Russia  in  that  same  year. 

In  his  professional  field,  he  was  active  in  the  Institute  of  Traffic 
Engineers,  and  served  as  a  member  of  its  Board  of  Direction  from  1959 
to  1961,  as  well  as  President  of  the  Washington  Section,  ITE,  in  1956 
to  1957. 

Among  the  many  testimonials  and  honours  he  received  were  the  De- 
partment of  Commerce  Silver  Medal  for  Meritorious  Service  in  1960, 
and  the  Theodore  M.  Matson  Memorial  Award  in  recognition  of  the 
advancement  of  the  science  of  traffic  engineering  in  1957.  A  unique 
feature  of  the  latter  award  is  that  he  was  the  first  recipient. 

339 


Normann  was  deeply  appreciative  of  these  awards,  and  sincerely  felt 
undeserving.  But  a  little-known  gesture  only  a  few  months  before  his 
death  meant  more  to  him  than  any  other.  As  chairman  of  the  Highway 
Capacity  Committee  as  it  was  reconstituted  in  1953,  his  role  had  not 
been  easy.  The  committee  included  in  its  membership  men  of  brilliance, 
but  whose  brilliance  was  in  some  cases  matched  by  their  strong  wills.  As 
the  work  on  the  new  manual  was  nearing  completion,  some  issues  be- 
came increasingly  difficult  to  resolve,  some  philosophies  were  at  wide 
variance  with  others,  and  schisms  within  the  committee  threatened. 
Eventually  agreement  was  reached,  but  few  knew  of  Normann's  concern 
over  what  he  construed  as  disharmony  for  which  he  felt  somehow  re- 
sponsible, and  perhaps  even  a  lack  of  confidence  of  the  committee  in 
its  chairman.  His  doubts  and  fears  were  relieved,  however,  during  the 
1964  meeting  of  the  Highway  Research  Board  when  his  committee  mem- 
bers, in  a  carefully  staged  luncheon,  presented  him  with  a  very  fine 
watch  bearing  the  engraving  'to  Mr.  Capacity'.  Such  tributes  are  not 
uncommon  upon  completion  of  assignments  or  retirement  from  office, 
but  how  often  does  a  committee  make  such  a  heartfelt  expression  of 
appreciation  to  a  chairman  who  is  continuing  in  office? 

No  one  is  indispensable,  but  O.  K.  Normann  came  close  to  being  f 

irreplaceable. 

Reprinted  with  permission  from  Australian  Road  Research^  Vol.  ^, 
No.  /,  Septemter  196^. 


340 


lateral  placement  of  vehicles;  distances  for  passing; 
speeds  of  vehicles;  spacing  of  vehicles  in  the  traffic 
stream;  and  hill-climbinp:  abilities  of  larger  vehicles. 
Improved  jneasuring  instniinonts  and  methods  for 
analyzing  the  large  volume  of  data  were  also  devel- 
oped. 

The  Bureau  innnediately  applied  these  early  results 
in  design  and  construction  programs.  One  direct 
application  was  the  analysis  of  data  on  transverse 
positions  of  vehicles  on  bridges  to  assist  in  the  estab- 
lishment of  standards  for  bridge  widths.  The  basic 
relations  found  between  vehicle  speeds  and  spacings 
with  varying  volumes  of  connnercial  traffic  and  under 
various  alinement  conditions  have  been  used  and  haA'e 
aided  in  estimating  the  likelihood  of  congestion  in 
tunnels  and  on  bridges. 

These  early  studies  in  principles  of  highway  ca- 
pacity were  developed  and  later  expanded  by  O.  K. 
Normann,  the  "Mr.  Capacity"  of  highway  research. 
He  established  that  the  practical  or  working  capacity 
of  a  highway  is  a  relative  value,  being  the  number  of 
vehicles  that  a  highway  can  carry  without  restricting 
the  speed  or  movement  of  vehicles  to  an  extent  that 
drivers  find  intolerable.  He  also  determined  that  the 
minimum  spacing  the  average  driver  allows  between 
his  vehicle  and  a  vehicle  ahead  varies  for  different 
highway  conditions,  as  well  as  the  different  speeds, 
and  that  the  theoretical  or  possible  capacities  vary 
accordingly. 

A  major  milestone  was  the  determination  of  pos- 
sible capacities,  which  are  still  used  by  design,  traffic, 
and  operating  engineers  today.  On  analyses  of  the 
data  assembled  by  1941,  Xormann  concluded  that 
"The  possible  capacities  are  about  2,000  vehicles  per 
hour  for  both  lanes  of  a  2-lane  highway,  4,000  vehicles 
per  hour  for  two  lanes  of  a  4-lane  highway,  and  up 
to  3,600  vehicles  per  hour  for  the  best  3-lane  high- 
ways." "  The  first  edition  of  the  Highivay  Capacity 
Manual,  published  in  1950,  and  the  latest  edition,  pub- 
lished in  1965,  provide  the  identical  capacity  values 
for  two-  and  four-lane  highways.  The  value  for 
three-lane,  two-way  highways  has  been  increased  only 
slightly  to  4,000  vehicles  per  hour  in  the  latest  edition. 

Both  manuals  have  been  widely  used,  the  first  hav- 
ing been  translated  into  nine  languages.  These  suc- 
cessively refined  evaluations  proved  to  be  major  tools 
for  engineers  developing  the  details  of  current  high- 
way programs.  With  them,  designers  were  able  to 
determine  the  number  of  traffic  lanes  and  other  geo- 
metric features  that  should  be  provided  to  accommo- 
date the  predicted  volumes  and  types  of  vehicles  in 
operation  at  practical  speeds  on  a  given  highway. 

Continuing  research  in  the  1940's  regarding  char- 
acteristics of  individual  drivers  showed  that  "persons 
traveling  long  distances  drive  faster  and  generally 
have  newer  cars  than  local  travelers;  young  persons 
drive  somewhat  faster  than  older  persons;  men  drive 
somewhat  faster  than  women;  and  the  newer  vehicles 
are  driven  faster  than  older  vehicles."  ^°  Two  im- 
portant conclusions  were  developed  from  this  series 
of  studies:  (1)  Highways  built  to  accommodate  a 
high  percentage  of  drivers  traveling  on  long  trips 
should,  therefore,  be  designed  for  higher  speeds  than 
highways  on  which  trips  are  predominantly  short, 
and  (2)  there  is  no  justification  for  a  design  of  high- 


ways to  accommodate  speeds  in  excess  of  70  miles  per 
hour  under  any  condition.  For  about  two  decades 
70  miles  per  hour  has  been  the  advocated  upper  de- 
sign speed  for  the  Interstate  System  and  other  main 
highways. 

Truck   Performance 

Data  obtained  and  procedures  developed  in  the 
analysis  of  passing  practices  in  the  late  1930's  have 
resulted  in  guidelines  for  proper  design  of  two-lane, 
two-way  highways,  including  the  principles  of  stop- 
ping and  passing  sight  distances.  Also,  the  more 
fundamental  data  then  developed  from  the  hill- 
climbing  or  gradeability  studies  are  still  in  use  today 
in  solving  problems  of  highway  design  and  traffic 
regulation.  A  basic  conclusion  of  the  gradeability 
study  was  that  for  motor  trucks  even  to  approach 
reasonable  speeds  on  grades,  grades  must  be  reduced 
to  3  percent  or  less.  Where  such  grades  are  not  prac- 
tical, these  data  led  to  the  concept  of  an  additional 
uphill  or  climbing  lane  on  highways  carrying  sub- 
stantial numbers  of  heavy  trucks. 

The  desirability  of  design  with  grades  as  flat  as 
practical  was  recognized  in  the  1954  AASHO  design 
policy  guides.  The  1956  Interstate  standards  named 
maximum  design  grades  of  3,  4,  and  5  percent  (except 
in  rugged  terrain)  for  design  speeds  of  70,  60,  and  50 
m.p.h.,  respectively. 

In  1948,  a  major  study  was  conducted  on  the  fuel 
consumption  of  trucks  in  relation  to  their  weight  and 
power.  Cooperating  in  the  study  were  vehicle  manu- 
facturing and  operating  groups,  the  Department  of 
the  Army,  the  Pennsylvania  Department  of  High- 
ways, the  Pennsylvania  Turnpike  Commission,  and 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  Important  findings  de- 
veloped then,  and  still  in  use  today,  for  commercial 
vehicles  were:  (1)  On  any  highway  section,  gasoline 
consumption  and  travel  time  vary  in  a  definite  man- 
ner with  the  rate  of  rise  and  fall  on  the  highway; 
(2)  gasoline  consumption  was  definitely  related  to  the 
gross  weight  and  the  travel  time  to  the  weight-power 
ratio  of  the  vehicle;  and  (3)  the  results  were  ap- 
plicable to  paved  highways  and  gasoline-powered  ve- 
hicles in  any  part  of  the  country.^^ 

This  automatic  traffic  recorder  was  installed  on  US  24O  in 
Maryland  in  1938.  It  used  photoelectric  cells  to  project  two 
beams  across  the  road,  and  when  a  vehicle  broke  the  two 
beams  simultaneously,  a  cumulative  count  was  recorded  on  a 
tape. 


■n 


341 


Stopping   Distance 

Braking  performance  of  motor  vehicles  is  another 
important  area  which  the  Public  Roads  researchers 
have  been  studying  for  over  three  decades.  The 
braking  ability  of  all  types  of  motor  vehicles  is  an 
essential  factor  in  the  safe  and  efficient  movement  of 
traffic  on  our  highways.  The  sight  distance  needed 
for  stopping  is  one  of  the  important  geometric  design 
elements. 

In  1941,  the  Public  Roads  Administration  started 
a  broad  program  of  brake  performance  studies  of 
motor  vehicles  in  everyday  traffic.  The  Advisory 
Committee  on  Motor  Vehicle  Brake  Research  was 
formed  to  direct  and  guide  the  program.  This  was 
the  beginning  of  a  series  of  studies  conducted  at  7-  to 
10-year  intervals,  the  latest  of  which  was  completed 
in  1974.  The  objectives  of  these  studies  were  to : 
(1)   Establish  a  better  understanding  of  the  features 


of  vehicle  braking  performance;  (2)  determine  what 
levels  of  brake  performance  can  reasonably  be  met  by 
vehicles  in  service;  (3)  determine  the  essential  ele- 
ments of  reasonable  brake  regulations;  and  (4) 
determine  practical  means  of  enforcing  brake  regu- 
lations. 

Military  Highway  Transport 

Most  highway  research  was  initiated  to  provide 
basic  information  for  the  development  of  street  and 
highway  design  and  traffic  operations  for  civilian 
traffic.  Much  of  this  information  has  been  applicable 
also  to  military  traffic  movements,  but  military  con- 
voys required  special  study.  In  the  spring  of  1940, 
a  study  to  determine  the  effect  of  certain  highway 
conditions  on  the  operation  of  military  convoys  was 
conducted  by  BPR  at  the  request  of  the  Department 
of  the  Army. 


Ruote  82  in  Connecticut  winds  its  way  down  hill,  but  note, 
that  there  are  two  lanes  for  up-hill  traffic,  alloioing  slower 
traffic  such  as  trucks,  to  use  the  outer  lane  and  faster  traffic 
to  pass  on  the  inner  lane. 


This  study  dealt  with  the  effect  of  alinement,  grade, 
and  pavement  type  and  condition  on  convoy  opera- 
tions. It  involved  an  analysis  of  the  individual  speeds 
of  all  convoy  vehicles  and  the  longitudinal  spacings 
between  theni.  It  was  found  that  grades  were  the 
only  highway  feature  that  materially  affected  the 
speed  of  the  military  convoys.  Highway  grades  of 
no  more  than  6  percent,  and  preferably  5  percent, 
would  allow  practically  all  military  vehicles  to  main- 
tain speeds  of  25  miles  per  hour  as  long  as  the  road 
surfaces  were  dry  and  solid.  These  data  help  produce 
better  controls  for  military  convoy  operations. 

Traffic   Control   Devices 

Units  along  a  highway  that  regulate  or  advise  the 
vehicle  operators  are  broadly  known  as  traffic  control 
devices.  Presently  they  consist  of  traffic  signals,  signs, 
pavement  markings  and  other  markers  or  delineations 
along  the  roadway.  The  earliest  fonus  were  mile- 
stones and  notched  trees.  With  the  advent  of  the 
automobile,  signing  and  markings  became  prevalent 
in  the  early  1900's  on  principal  highways  in  and 
around  the  larger  cities.  Most  of  these  early  devices 
were  developed  by  innovative  people  based  primarily 
on  their  imagination  and  ingenuity. 

The  U.S.  literature  until  the  mid  1920's  is  prac- 
tically void  of  records  of  research  on  devices  used  to 
control  traffic.  Instead,  a  unit  was  conceived,  in- 
stalled, observed  and  conclusions  drawn  for  future 
guidance.  Naming,  numbering,  and  marking  of  roads 
began  with  motorist  clubs,  chambers  of  commerce, 
women's  clubs  and,  to  some  extent,  the  States.  Being 
individually  initiated,  the  overall  result  was  a  colorful 
chaos.  To  bring  order  out  of  this  chaos  and  thus 
help  to  speed  the  traveler  upon  his  way,  the  American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  agreed  in  1925 
that  the  main  roads  of  the  country  should  be  marked 
with  standardized  information  and  direction  sisTis. 
A  1927  manual,  developed  by  a  joint  board  of  Federal 
and  State  highway  officials,  published  sign  details  and 
the  numbering  system  of  U.S.  highways.  This  in- 
corporated the  numbering  system  adopted  in  1925  for 


In  the  late  1920's,  a  uniform  route  numbering  system  for  U.S. 
highways  was  adopted,  and  these  routes  were  identified  with  a 
distinctive  shield  design. 


the    Federal-aid    highway    system,    which    is   still    in 
effect. 

The  various  control  devices  now  used  for  traffic 
management  were  mostly  developed  through  private 
industrial  research.  However,  as  early  as  1934  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  had  begun  a  series  of  inter- 
section studies  to  determine  the  delay  caused  by  dif- 
ferent control  metliods.  A  report  in  that  year  showed 
that  for  an  intersection  having  a  total  volume  of  2,000 
vehicles  per  hour,  operation  without  any  mechanical 
control  incurred  the  least  delay  to  traffic.  "Of  all  the 
control  methods  [studied],  officer  control  permitted 
the  fastest  movement  of  traffic,  closely  followed  by 
the  shortest  fixed-time  control,  and  traffic-actuated 
control."  ^^  This  study  not  only  set  the  pattern  for 
much  future  research  in  this  area,  but  also  established 
methods  and  procedures  for  the  conduct  of  studies  of 
the  effect  of  traffic  control  devices  on  the  safety  and 
efficiency  of  traffic  operations. 

The  first  national  rural  manual  on  traffic  control 
signs  was  issued  by  AASHO  in  1927,  and  the  Manual 
on  Street  Traffic  /Sig7is,  Signals  and  Markings  (urban) 
was  issued  in  1930  by  the  National  Conference  on 
Street  and  Highway  Safety.  These  first  efforts  at 
national  standards  gave  details  on  sign  shape,  color, 
legend  and  mountings.  While  colors  were  prescribed, 
data  were  lacking  as  to  their  suitability.  To  fill  this 
need,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  undertook  a  study, 
completed  in  September  1933,  on  the  visibility  and 
legibility  of  several  alternative  color  combinations  of 
signs  visible  by  day  and  by  night,  with  and  without 
reflector  buttons.  This  study  showed  that  the  black 
on  yellow  combination  was  more  effective  than  either 
black  on  white  or  white  on  black.  It  also  determined 
for  the  first  time  the  effectiveness  of  reflecting  buttons 
in  various  sizes  and  spacings.^^ 

The  first  combined  rural-urban  Manual  on  Uniform 
Traffic  Control  Devices  for  Streets  and  Highways 
was  issued  in  1935.  With  each  new  edition  of  the 
Manual,  revisions  were  made  based  on  research  con- 
ducted by  Public  Roads,  State  highway  departments, 
universities,  cities,  industries,  and  others.  For  ex- 
ample, in  the  1955  Manual  the  stop  sign  was  changed 
from  black  on  yellow  to  white  on  red,  a  standard 
in  use  today.  This  came  about  as  a  result  of  research 
tests  which  demonstrated  that  motorists  observe  the 
red  sign  more  effectively  than  the  yellow.^* 

The  Interstate  manual  adopted  by  AASHO  and 
approved  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  1958  for 
signing  and  pavement  marking  of  the  Interstate 
System  was  the  result  of  recommendations  based  on 
their  joint  engineering  and  psychological  research. 
The  use  of  lowercase  lettering  became  widespread 
after  research  indicated  that  these  letters  are  more 
easily  read  by  the  average  driver.  There  was  di- 
versity of  opinion  on  the  color  and  reflectorization  of 
directional  signs.  A  research  project  Avas  imdertaken 
by  Public  Roads  in  1957,  which  gave  substantial  sup- 
port for  the  final  selection  of  green  as  the  approved 
color  for  directional  sign  background  on  the  Inter- 
state System.^^ 


343 


The  general  advantages  of  pavement  markings 
were  recognized  after  their  first  use  in  1911,  and  they 
were  included  in  the  early  manuals  to  some  extent. 
However,  it  was  not  until  1947  that  the  effectiveness 
of  centerlines,  particularly  on  two-lane,  two-way 
roads,  was  confirmed  through  research.  The  result 
of  studies  at  12  locations  in  seven  States  showed  that 
centerline  markings  provided  a  general  improvement 
in  the  transverse  positioning  of  vehicles,  that  vehicles 
were  driven  closer  to  their  proper  position  on  the 
I'oadway,  and  that  they  encroached  on  the  left  lane 
much  less  frequently  where  there  was  a  centerline.^® 

Edge  lines  were  added  as  a  standard  device  in  the 
current  Manual  on  Uniform  Trafic  Control  Devices 
for  Streets  and  Highioays  (1971)  and  are  in  universal 
use.  Their  effectiveness  was  determined  through  a 
comprehensive  study  of  driver  behavior  as  related  to 
pavement  edge  markings,  conducted  by  BPE,  in  1957 
in  Louisiana  and  the  western  States.  This  study 
showed  that  edge  lines  were  very  effective  aids  in 
confining  traffic  in  the  normal  travel  lane  and  in  re- 
ducing partial  shoulder  use. 

Freeway  Control   Systems 

By  the  late  1950's  a  substantial  number  of  freeways 
had  been  developed  in  most  of  our  larger  cities.  As  a 
result  of  increasing  traffic  on  them,  peak-hour  conges- 
tion became  a  major  problem.  Research  studies 
showed  congestion  during  the  morning  and  evening 
peak  travel  periods  could  be  greatly  reduced  by  the 
use  of  traffic  surveillance  and  addition  of  further 
controls.  The  application  of  the  latest  developments 
in  electronic  and  other  technological  equipment  served 
to  increase  operational  efficiency  and  safety. 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  in  cooperation  with  a 
number  of  State  highway  departments,  spearheaded 
the  research  and  development  in  this  area  and  has 
promoted  the  practical  results  of  its  studies.  The 
first  project  was  initiated  in  1960  on  John  C.  Lodge 
Freeway  in  Detroit.    The  second  one  was  initiated  in 


Demonstration  moving  merge  control  systems  have  been  used 
since  about  1969  on  freeway  entrance  ramps  to  help  ramp 
drivers  enter  a  freeway  in  situations  where  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  determine  adequate  gaps  in  the  freeway  traffic.  This 
is  an  artist's  concept  of  the  moving  greenband  system,  just  one 
type  under  consideration. 


MERGING 
CONTROL 

GREENBAND 
CONCEPT 


1961  on  the  Eisenhower  Expressway  in  Chicago  and 
the  third  in  1964  on  the  Gulf  Freeway  in  Houston, 
Texas.  After  1965,  a  large  number  of  States  started 
installing  freeway  surveillance  and  control  systems, 
the  most  extensive  of  which  was  the  42-mile  loop 
pilot  project  in  Los  Angeles. 

In  the  late  1960's,  Public  Roads  continued  to  ex- 
pand and  refine  the  technology  of  freeway  operations 
by  undertaking  a  major  travel  corridor  control  in- 
vestigation in  Dallas.  This  research  was  a  major 
effort  to  explore  the  total  corridor  concept,  including 
the  freeway,  service  road,  arterial  street,  and  sur- 
rounding system.  Public  transportation,  bus  opera- 
tions, roadside  communications  and  park-and-ride 
were  modern-day  additions  to  the  effort.  Public 
Roads  sponsored  many  other  freeway  operations 
studies,  among  them  the  improved  control  of  diamond 
interchanges. 

The  concepts  of  integrated  surveillance  and  control 
are  equally  important  to  urban  nonfreeway  systems. 
Traffic  signals,  intersections,  and  individual  aspects 
have  been  mentioned.  In  the  late  1960's,  Public  Roads 
stimulated  and  assisted  in  "systems"  approaches  to 
control  traffic  for  the  whole  of  a  certain  urban  area. 
One  significant  output  has  been  the  computerized 
concept  of  arterial  traffic  control.  Another  major 
project  was  an  urban  traffic  control  research  labora- 
tory operating  on  certain  streets  in  Washington,  D.C., 
which  was  still  active  in  1975.  This  study  has  had 
many  influences  in  the  broad  area  of  "software"  for 
urban  systems,  ranging  from  preprogramed  to  in- 
stantaneous timing.  Another  major  component  was 
an  integrated  bus  priority  system.  As  meaningful 
results  from  these  studies  have  become  available, 
nearly  all  of  the  States  have  applied  the  new  tech- 
nology to  other  locations. 

Lighting 

During  the  late  1930's  when  driver  behavior,  high- 
way capacity,  and  traffic  control  were  under  intensive 
study,  considerable  research  was  devoted  to  the  effect 
of  highway  lighting  on  traffic  operations  and  safety. 
For  several  years  prior  to  this  time,  illuminating 
engineers  had  studied  means  of  reducing  nighttime 
accidents,  which  were  proportionally  higher  then 
those  in  the  daytime.  There  were  only  a  few  hundred 
miles  of  rural  highways  that  Avere  lighted,  many  of 
which  were  temporary  installations  to  demonstrate 
and  experiment  with  the  safety  aspects  of  lighting. 

In  1939,  the  Public  Roads  Administration  and  the 
Ohio  Department  of  Highways  concentrated  their  re- 
search efforts  on  the  effect  of  lighting  on  the  lateral 
position,  passing  practices,  headways,  and  speeds  of 
vehicles  on  rural  highways.  The  results  showed  that 
the  behavior  of  drivers  operating  at  night  without 
overhead  light  differed  measurably  from  that  in  day- 
time, but  that  under  artificial  light  they  conformed 
very  nearly  to  their  behavior  in  the  daytime.  This 
indicated  the  advantage  of  highway  lighting  for  cer- 
tain speed- volume-geometric  highway  conditions.-' 


344 


By  the  late  1950's,  an  increasing  number  of  miles 
of  freeways  were  being  put  into  operation.  Because 
very  little  was  known  about  freeway  lighting  with 
respect  to  driver  behavior  and  safety,  the  Bureau  and 
the  Connecticut  State  Highway  Department  under- 
took in  1959  a  comprehensive  field  study  on  the  effect 
of  illumination  and  delineation.  Xine  different  con- 
ditions of  illumination  and  delineation  were  studied. 
No  significant  difference  with  respect  to  vehicle  speeds, 
lateral  position,  and  clearances  between  vehicles  un- 
der the  nine  study  conditions  were  noted.  In  general, 
it  appeai-ed  that  some  benefit  resulted  from  full-level 
illumination  in  the  deceleration  area  and  that  even 
greater  benefit  occurred  when  illumination  was  com- 
bined with  roadside  delineation.  Since  then  HRB 
has  reported  a  number  of  similar  studies  which  gen- 
erally corroborate  the  original  findings.  As  a  result 
of  these  research  conclusions,  recent  lighting  installa- 
tions have  been  largely  located  at  interchanges  and 
other  points  of  conflict  or  decision. 

The  photoloff  sustem  is  a  sequential  set  of  photographs,  usually 
taken  at  oue-hundreth  mile  increments  and  recorded  on  a  con- 
tinuous film  strip,  of  the  highivay  and  its  immediate  environ- 
ment. Each  photograph  normally  provides  the  viewer  with 
the  date  it  was  made,  the  route,  milepoint,  and  direction  of 
travel,  but  it  can  include  other  data  as  well.  Photologging 
teas  developed  more  or  less  on  the  "let's  try  it  and  find  out" 
m,ethod  by  research  and  operations  engineers.  Today  it  is  an 
operational  tool  i)i  some  1,0  States.  The  varied  uses  to  which 
photologs  may  be  applied  include  evaluating  the  adequacy  of 
traffic  control  devices,  providing  information  for  project  de- 
sign, identifying  and  evaluating  high  accident  locations,  acquir- 
ing planning  inventory  data  and  supplying  data  for  research 
studies. 


Highway  Safety 

The  basic  principle  of  highway  safety,  as  sum- 
marized by  Thomas  H.  MacDonald  in  1949  in  Public 
Roads  magazine,  is  that  maximum  safety  is  pi'ovided 
by  designing,  building  and  operating  the  highway 
and  vehicle  to  fit  the  driver's  known  capabilities  and 
limitations.  This  concept  recognizes  the  tremendous 
variation  in  age,  ability,  experience,  skill  and  physical 
and  mental  condition  of  tens  of  millions  of  drivers. 
It  prescribes  that  the  highway  and  the  vehicle  should 
accommodate  the  maximum  amount  of  this  variation 
and  assist  the  maximmn  number  of  drivers  in  their 
task.  It  has  been  the  foundation  for  nearly  all  useful 
and  productive  research  in  highway  safety. 

Since  the  1930's,  many  studies  have  provided  the 
bases  for  safer  design  criteria  for  highways  and  ve- 
hicles. The  highway  safety  research  has  included  on- 
highway  experiments  and  observational  studies  of 
passing  practices,  lane  position,  braking  and  accelera- 
tion capability,  grade-climbing  ability,  and  other 
aspects  of  driver  behavior  and  vehicle  performance. 

Control   of  Access 

Research  studies  over  the  past  several  decades  have 
shown  that  the  most  effective  way  to  facilitate  the 
driver's  task  is  to  provide  him  with  a  highway  having 
full  control  of  access.  Such  a  highway,  best  exempli- 
fied   by    the    Interstate   Highway    System,    prohibits 


345 


access  from  abutting  property,  thus  eliminating  many 
of  the  roadside  conflicts  which  confront  the  driver. 
Crossroads  are  grade  separated,  eliminating  angle 
collisions  occurring  at  intersections.  Wide  medians 
eliminate  head-on  collisions,  and  carefully  planned 
interchanges  with  long  speed  change  lanes  minimize 
rear  end  and  turning  collisions.  Research  undertaken 
in  the  early  1950's  demonstrated  that  full  control  of 
access  reduces  accidents,  injuries  and  fatalities  by  50 
percent  or  more.^* 

Control  of  access  also  has  safety  benefits  on  two- 
lane  highways.  A  study  on  a  two-lane  rural  highway 
with  average  daily  traffic  of  about  8,000  vehicles 
showed  that,  if  the  number  of  at-grade  intersections 
and  roadside  business  driveways  per  mile  were  in- 
creased a  hundredfold,  the  expected  accident  rate 
would  increase  approximately  14  times.^^ 

Roadside  Safety 

One  of  the  major  accident  types  is  the  single  vehicle 
run-off-the-road  accident.  Often  the  vehicle  strikes 
an  object  such  as  a  tree,  rock,  sign,  or  guardrail,  re- 
sulting in  injury  or  death  to  the  vehicle's  occupants. 
Although  studies  designed  to  relieve  this  problem  be- 
gan in  the  1920's,  the  most  significant  advances  have 
occurred  in  the  recent  past. 

In  December  1966  a  short-range  Public  Roads  re- 
search program  was  established  for  quick-payoff  con- 
cepts and  devices  to  substantially  reduce  the  severity 
of  single  vehicle  collisions  with  fixed  roadside  struc- 
tural obstacles.  The  primary  objective  of  this  pro- 
gram was  the  development  of  devices  that  would 
protect  vehicle  occupants  against  severe  injury  during 


impact  with  rigid  gore  structures,  bridge  piers,  sign 
bridge  supports,  and  open  areas  between  twin  bridges. 
The  studies  emphasized  the  use  of  existing  technology 
in  such  fields  as  impact  absorption  barriers,  new  and 
improved  types  of  redirectional  barriers,  vehicle  en- 
trapment devices,  cable  supported  structures,  and 
improved  computer  simulation  techniques.  The  im- 
pact acceptance  criterion  was  tentatively  set  at  a 
maximum  deceleration  limit  corresponding  to  a  10- 
foot  stopping  distance  from  60  miles  per  hour  for 
passenger  vehicles,  a  survivable  situation  for  shoulder 
and  lap-belted  vehicle  occupants. 

Several  types  of  impact  attenuators,  or  crash 
cushions,  were  successfully  developed  and  tested. 
These  include  the  steel  drum  barrier  (an  assemblage 
of  empty  55-gallon  drums),  a  water  cushion  (an  array 
of  waterfilled  vinyl  cells),  and  clusters  of  sand-filled 
plastic  drums.  More  than  3,000  such  devices  have 
been  installed  on  the  highways  to  date,  with  evidence 
that  they  are  extremely  effective  in  reducing  severity 
of  single  vehicle  collisions. 

The  overall  concept  and  application  of  breakaway 
sign  supports  were  also  developed  primarily  during 
the  past  10  years.  Research  efforts  began  with  the 
inception  of  multi-State,  pooled-fund  studies  of  the 
breakaway  sign  and  luminaire  support  concept.  The 
research  included  full-scale  field  experiments  and 
crash  testing  of  vehicles  into  prototype  breakaway 
sign  supports.  In  addition,  much  work  was  also  de- 
veloped or  verified  through  the  use  of  computer  simu- 
lation and  theoretical  studies.  Private  industry  also 
joined  in  this  effort  and  produced  a  number  of  break- 
away concepts. 


Motorists  on  ISJf  in  Connecticut  are  protected  from  a  possible 
fatal  injury  at  this  median  strip  bridge  pier  by  a  guardrail, 
the  approach  end  of  which  is  buried  in  the  ground  as  the  result 
of  research  into  the  causes  and  severity  of  accidents. 


346 


I 


Reducing   Skid  Accidents 

Skid  accidents,  which  result  from  slippery  pave- 
ments, especially  when  wet,  are  of  such  severity  that 
they  have  received  considerable  attention  in  reseai'ch 
and  safety  proprams  for  more  than  four  decades. 
Major  skid  factors  include :  water-on-pavement  con- 
ditions, tires  and  their  treads,  pavement  surface 
characteristics,  a<>"<jreffates  and  mixes  used,  pavement 
age  and  surface  wear,  speeds  and  vehicle  operations, 
and  highway  geometries.  There  have  been  many 
contributing  research  studies  on  individual  factors 
and  their  various  combinations,  but  the  complex  inter- 
actions involved  have  inhibited  easy  and  low-cost 
solutions. 

In  the  late  1920's  Iowa  State  College  began  measur- 
ing road  skid  resistance  with  a  towed  trailer.  Exten- 
sion of  these  studies  were  reported  in  1934;  this  proved 
to  be  a  milestone  report  on  the  theory  of  skidding  and 
means  for  measuring.  Within  the  next  few  years 
many  States,  imiversities,  industries  and  other  groups 
were  engaged  in  related  research.  Both  field  meas- 
urements and  laboratory  studies  on  aggregates,  mixes, 
their  polishing  features,  and  means  for  measurement 
were  under  study.  The  Hybla  Valley  and  other  test 
roads  included  these  features.  In  the  1950's  hydro- 
planing was  identified  as  one  of  the  skid  conditions 
of  much  concern  on  airports  as  well  as  roads.  Also 
the  first  steps  toward  grooving  of  concrete  pavements 
were  being  made  to  reduce  slipperiness. 

Skid  prevention  attained  nationwide  attention  and 
emphasis  at  an  important  international  conference  in 
Charlottesville,  Virginia,  in  1958.  This  conference 
dealt  with  many  new  research  and  development 
studies  to  attain  better  skid  resistance  and  served  to 
redirect  the  research  that  has  continued  since  then. 
Because  of  the  magnitude  and  severity  of  the  prob- 


lems in  recent  years,  FHWA  has  instituted  a  large 
scale  research  project  imder  its  federally  coordinated 
program.  It  deals  with  friction  requirements,  pave- 
ment materials  and  surfaces,  accident  and  cost  effec- 
tiveness studies,  and  a  national  program  to  standardize 
the  skid  measurement  process. 

Early  results  from  the  research  have  provided : 
(1)  Three  regional  test  centers  and  the  calibration  of 
dozens  of  State  skid  trailers;  (2)  a  standard  two- 
wheel  test  ti'ailer  and  testing  procedure;  (3)  guide- 
lines to  design  appropriate  variable  message  signs 
under  adverse  weather  conditions;  and  (4)  improved 
laboratory  methods  to  select  skid-resistant  materials. 

The  Accident  Prone  Driver 

Accident  research  studies  have  often  been  deficient 
because  of  limited  data  and  tlie  difficulties  in  obtain- 
ing the  data.  Despite  these  limitations,  key  accident 
studies  have  provided  nnich  useful  information  that 
has  dispelled  certain  myths  and  provided  support  for 
research  and  practical  day-to-day  programs. 

One  such  myth  prevalent  during  the  1940's  and 
1950's  that  has  been  exploded  is  that  of  the  so-called 
"accident  prone  driver."  A  study  in  1962-63,  showed 
that  ".  .  .  in  any  one  year  0.5  percent  of  the  drivers 
have  two  or  more  reported  accidents  and  that  they 
account  for  13.9  percent  of  all  accidents."  •"'  The 
accident  prone  concept  suggested  that  these  drivers 
be  removed  from  the  road,  thereby  reducing  accidents 
by  13.9  percent.  Such  a  conclusion,  however,  was 
erroneous.  Nearly  all  of  those  who  were  "accident 
repeaters"  in  any  one  year  became  so  by  chance  alone; 
the  research  revealed  that  87  percent  of  the  so-called 
accident  repeaters  would  not  have  even  one  reportable 
accident  the  second  year. 


This  trailer  measures  pavement  skid  resistance.  A  prescribed 
film  of  icater  is  spread  on  the  pavement  junlc  prior  to  brake 
application.  Instrvments  on  the  trailer  measure  wheel  motion 
and  traction  during  the  entire  braking  cycle. 


347 


Speed   and  Accidents 

For  many  years,  hio;hway  professionals  have  known 
that  highway  safety  could  best  be  achieved  by  mini- 
mizing traffic  turbulence  and  speed  variance.  Coop- 
erative research  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and 
several  State  highway  departments  in  the  late  1950's 
and  1960's  verified  these  views.  Both  two-  and  four- 
lane  main  rural  highway's  without  control  of  access, 
as  well  as  urban  and  rural  freeways,  exhibited  the 
lowest  accident  involvement  rate  for  vehicles  operat- 
ing near  the  average  speed  for  all  traffic.  For  vehicles 
traveling  at  both  lower  and  higher  speeds,  the  in- 
volvement rate  increased  sharply.  For  example,  at 
speeds  15  miles  per  hour  below  the  average  speed  on 
Interstate  highways,  the  accident  involvement  rate 
was  five  times  as  great  as  for  vehicles  operating  at 
the  average  speed.  When  an  accident  occurred,  the 
severity  increased  with  speed,  particularly  at  travel 
speeds  above  60  miles  per  hour.  The  chance  of  being 
killed  in  an  accident  was  found  to  be  about  four  times 
as  great  at  travel  speeds  of  73  miles  per  hour  or  higher 
than  at  60  miles  per  hour.^^  These  findings  have 
been  particularly  useful  in  stimulating  official  and 
public  awareness  of  the  effects  of  speed. 

Driver  and   Vehicle   Characteristics 

In  addition  to  speed,  studies  showed  that  other 
characteristics  for  groups  of  drivers  and  vehicles 
were  directly  related  to  accidents  on  two-  and  four- 
lane  main  rural  highways  without  control  of  access. 
Included  Avere  age,  sex,  and  residence  of  driver;  type, 
age,  and  horsepower  of  vehicle;  and  the  seat  location 
of  individuals  within  passenger  cars. 

It  was  found  that  local  drivers  tend  to  have  higher 
accident  involvement  rates  than  out-of-county  driv- 
ers, particularly  at  night,  and  that  drivers  of  pas- 
senger cars  with  low  horsepower  have  higher 
involvement  rates  than  drivers  of  cars  with  higher 
horsepower,  regardless  of  several  other  variables 
studied,  including  travel  speed.^^ 


Highway  Safety  Study 

In  the  late  1950's  in  response  to  a  congressional 
requirement,  a  comprehensive  study  of  highway 
safety  was  undertaken  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 
The  report  included  a  discussion  of  the  traffic  accident 
problem  and  its  setting,  review  of  the  highway  trans- 
portation system,  evaluation  of  current  highway 
safety  activities,  and  a  brief  description  of  an  ade- 
quate highway  safety  program.  Results  of  this  study 
were  used  to  expand  the  Federal  role  in  highway 
safety,  including  creation  of  a  special  National  High- 
way Safety  Bureau  in  the  Federal  Highway  Admin- 
istration, and  eventually  creation  of  the  National 
Highway  Traffic  Safety  Administration.  Also,  a 
nationwide  computerized  system  was  developed  for 
identifying  drivers  with  suspended  or  revoked  licenses 
attempting  to  obtain  drivers'  licenses  in  other  States. 

Other  Safety   Research 

Other  important  studies  have  delineated  the  cost  of 
traffic  accidents  in  considerable  detail,  permitting  de- 
velopment of  useful  benefit-cost  analyses  of  various 
safety  problems.  Studies  related  to  sizes  and  weights 
of  trucks  in  connection  with  the  speed  study  men- 
tioned earlier  have  been  useful  in  justifying  a  com- 
bined reduction  in  speed  to  65  miles  per  hour  to  save 
fuel  and  lives  coupled  with  a  10  percent  increase  in 
allowable  axle  and  gross  weight  limits  on  the  Inter- 
state System  to  further  save  fuel  and  reduce  freight 
haulage  costs. 

Since  1970  research  studies  have  provided  methods 
for  designing  improved  guardrails,  median  barriers 
and  bridge  rails,  criteria  for  safer  roadsides,  improved 
highway  lighting,  improved  traffic  signal  configura- 
tions, warrants  for  enhancing  safety  at  rail-highway 
grade  crossings,  use  of  earth  heat  to  melt  snow,  crack 
detectors  for  bridges,  and  driver  aids  in  fog.  Also, 
there  has  been  increased  attention  to  pedestrian  and 
bicycle  safety,  including  the  development  of  bicycle 
safe  grate  inlets  for  city  streets,  wide  dissemination 
of  a  bikeway  state-of-the-art  and  evaluation  of  sev- 
eral pedestrian  countermeasures. 


The  in-motion  vehicle  iveighing  and  measuring  system,  obtains 
a  description  of  the  traffic  traversing  the  area — number  of 
vehicles,  speed  and  classification  (car  or  truck).  Then  the 
weight  and  dimension  subsystems  add  a  complete  description 


of  the  truck  portion  of  the  traffic,  including  height,  loidth, 
length,  axle  spacing  and  tceights,  vehicle  type,  loading,  etc. 
Installations  such  as  this  are  being  used  in  Texas  and  as  demon- 
strations in  several  other  States. 


IN-MOTION  VEHICLE  WEIGHING  AND  MEASURING  SYSTEM 


Signal  conditioning 
equipment  for  weight 
'and  dimension  signals. 


kTraffic  control  signs. 
Legal  vehicles  bypass 
the  mechanical  scale, 
illegal  vehicles  are 
directed  to  the  weighing 
station. 


Weighing  station  with  mechanical 
scale.   The  scale  house  contains 
a  closed-circuit  television 
monitor,  vehicle  speed  and 
classification  console,  and  other 
electronic  equipment. 


348 


Human   Factors   Engineering 

During  World  War  II.  behavioral  scientists  pooled 
their  talents  to  help  military  systems  engineers  de- 
velop vehicle  operating  systems  to  be  used  by  military 
trainees  with  little  or  no  engineering  or  scientific 
training.  Fitting  machines  and  environments  to 
man's  capabilities  and  limitations  resulted  in  the 
emergence  of  new  disciplines  known  as  engineering 
psychology  or  human  engineering.  Tlie  relationship 
between  highway  design  and  operational  techniques 
became  a  major  concern  of  tlie  BPR's  research 
program. 

In  the  1950's  a  few  engineering  psychologists  began 
to  translate  the  findings  of  classical  experimental 
psychology  to  tasks  that  confronted  motorists  oper- 
ating their  automobiles  between  towns  and  cities. 
They  also  attempted  to  determine  the  basic  skills  re- 
quired of  drivers.  The  early  models  of  driver  be- 
havior are  now  recognized  to  be  overly  simplistic,  but 
they  alerted  traffic  engineers  and  other  road  authori- 
ties to  the  fact  that  most  people  using  highways 
differ  from  highway  designers  and  traffic  engineers 
in  their  perception  of  the  driving  situation. 

The  lOSO's  were  characterized  by  three  major  ap- 
proaches for  incorporating  driver  characteristics  into 
highway  designs  and  traffic  operations  techniques. 
The  first  was  an  attempt  to  scale  the  difficulty  of 
specific  types  of  driving  situations  by  measuring 
driver  stress.  The  second  w^as  performance  oriented 
research  characterized  by  measurement  of  the  driving 
patterns  of  large  numbers  of  drivers  on  a  variety  of 
road  environments  and  was  an  extension  of  studies 
undertaken  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  the 
1930's  and  1940's.  The  third  was  epidemiological  re- 
search, aimed  at  establishing  patterns  of  responses  of 
drivers  which  would  permit  officials  to  improve  their 
selection  techniques  or  develop  remedial  training  pro- 
grams. Incorporation  of  driving  behavior  into  high- 
way design  and  operational  techniques  was  a  major 
concern  of  the  BPR's  research  program. 

Behavior  research  in  the  1960's  began  to  mature. 
A  programmatic  approach  to  determining  driver 
capabilities  and  limitations  was  begun  in  the  late 
1950"s  when  a  team  of  behavior  scientists  began  to 
conduct  sophisticated  analyses  of  the  perceptual  en- 
vironment faced  by  motorists  traversing  high-speed 
roadways  on  potential  collision  courses  with  other 
vehicles  and  obstacles.  Fundamental  work  on  road 
tracking,  speed  sensing,  car  following,  overtaking  and 
passing,  object  avoidance,  sign  reading,  and  path  find- 
ing were  performed  jointly  in  BPR,  several  universi- 
ties and  bj'  private  contractors.  Most  notable  among 
the  collective  agencies  was  the  portion  of  a  program 
of  automated  or  semiautomatic  vehicular  control  con- 
ducted by  Ohio  State  University's  Industrial  Engi- 
neering Department. 

In  the  mid-1960's,  fundamental  work  aimed  at 
delineating  driving  skills  abated  in  favor  of  develop- 
ment of  driving  aids  systems  to  assist  motorists.  Sev- 
eral such  systems  were  identified  to  overcome  high 
accident  situations  and  ])asic  limitations  of  motorists; 
developmental  research  study  of  them  continues. 
Some  of  the  traffic  control  and  information  systems 
were : 

•  A  passing  aid  system  to  assist  drivers  in  over- 
taking and  passing  on  two-  and  three-lane  high- 
ways. 


•  A  merge  control  system  to  assist  drivers  in  mak- 
ing complex  decisions  at  freeway  entrance  ramps. 

•  An  experimental  route  guidance  system  for  as- 
sisting motorists  in  finding  their  way  to  unfa- 
miliar destinations. 

The  knowledge  developed  through  these  programs 
and  efforts  of  behavioral  scientists  have  been  inte- 
grated into  modern  highway  design  and  traffic  engi- 
neering. 

Environmental   Factors 

Hydraulics  and   Hydrology 

Hydraulics  and  hydrology,  simply  stated,  are  sci- 
ences developed  to  control  the  deleterious  effects  of 
water.  There  is  adequate  evidence  that  ancient  cul- 
tures constructed  amazingly  elaborate  conduits,  aque- 
ducts and  other  drainage  structures  to  control  the 
flow  of  water.  In  the  early  development  of  rail  trans- 
portation, bridges  and  culverts  were  certainly  an 
integral  part  of  the  design.  With  the  advent  of  the 
automobile  and  accelerated  highway  construction  pro- 
grams, drainage  and  water  problems  became  more 
critical.  Bridge  damage,  washouts,  and  flooded  road- 
ways became  intolerable,  and  paved  surfaces  required 
good  drainage  to  reduce  hazardous  conditions  for  the 
movement  of  traffic  and  to  prevent  pavement  failures. 

Progress  in  the  control  of  water  flow  and  drainage 
was  slow,  and  in  the  early  days,  designs  were  based 
on  judgment  without  uniform  policy  guidelines  or 
well-developed  engineering  technology.  It  was  com- 
mon to  size  highway  drainage  structures  by  using  a 
formula  developed  by  Professor  Talbot  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Illinois  for  the  design  of  railroad  struc- 
tures being  built  in  the  western  States  in  the  1890's. 
That  formula  was  the  first  attempt  to  provide  a  ra- 
tional approach  to  drainage  design;  it  was  crude  but 
an  improvement  over  previous  methods.  However, 
it  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  1961,  despite  the  fact 
that  by  then  more  sophisticated  techniques  had  been 
developed,  a  survey  by  the  American  Society  of  Civil 
Engineers  concerning  drainage  practice  showed  12 
States  still  using  Talbot's  formula. 

In  the  early  1920's,  David  Yarnell  pioneered  in 
experimental  hydraulic  research  with  his  study  on  the 
flow  of  water  through  culverts  based  on  extensive 
full-scale  tests  conducted  at  the  University  of  Iowa. 
Unfortunately  the  report  covered  only  culverts  flow- 
ing full.  Most  culverts  do  not  flow  full,  and  the 
factors  affecting  them  are  significantly  different. 
Yarnell  went  on  with  experiments  on  flow  resistance 
caused  by  pile  trestles  and  flowover  embankments. 
His  work  on  rainfall  intensity-frequency  relations 
was  published  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture 
in  the  mid-1930's  and  for  many  years  was  widely 
used  across  the  country  in  determining  the  rainfall 
rate  to  apply  in  the  use  of  the  rational  method  of 
estimating  runoff. 

Highway  engineers  had  also  been  concerned  about 
erosion  of  highway  ditches  and  slopes,  but  it  took  the 
demonstration  projects  of  the  Soil  Conservation 
Service  in  the  late  1930's  to  show  how  flattening  of 
slopes  and  rapid  establishment  of  sod  could  control 
erosion.  About  the  same  time  the  Soil  Conservation 
Service  also  began  setting  up  experimental  watershed 
stations  in  several  locations  to  study  rainfall-runoff 
relationships  as  affected  by  land  use  practices. 


349 


Durinof  World  War  II,  the  Public  Roads  Adminis- 
tration became  res^Donsible  for  constructing  satellite 
airfields  and  found  that  data  on  rainfall  and  runoff 
were  inadequate.  Using  rainfall  simulators  provided 
and  operated  by  the  Soil  Conservation  Service,  a 
series  of  experiments  on  overland  flow  was  conducted 
on  paved  and  grass  surfaces.  The  data  analyzed  and 
reported  by  Public  Roads  in  1944  enabled  engineers 
to  estimate  for  the  first  time  flows  over  overland 
routes.  This  paper  has  become  a  standard  reference 
on  the  subject. 

After  World  War  II  greater  interest  developed  in 
the  application  of  hydraulic  engineering  principles 
to  highway  design.  One  of  the  first  applications  of 
the  overland  flow  equations  was  in  the  design  of  a 
storm  drain  system  in  Chicago.  From  this,  Tholin 
and  Kiefer  developed  the  "Chicago  Hydrograph 
Method"  which  involved  routing  runoff  through  the 
drainage  system. 

The  Public  Roads  Administration  developed  a 
highwa}^  engineering  drainage  manual.  The  manual 
provided  step-by-step  instructions,  together  with 
numerous  nomographs  and  charts  based  on  research 
data,  to  facilitate  the  solution  of  hydraulic  equations 
for  design  of  ci;lverts,  open  channels,  and  storm 
drains.  The  manual  was  widely  used  in  draft  form 
by  the  States  in  their  highway  programs  and  on  most 
of  the  toll  roads  because  it  provided  imiform  and 
improved  drainage  design  techniques.  It  was  never 
formally  published  and  has  since  been  superseded  by 
the  series  of  Hydraulic  Engineering  Circulars  pub- 
lished by  BPR  beginning  in  1960.  The  original 
manual  and  the  Circulars  have  been  used  as  text  for 
training  courses  and  design  practices  throughout  the 
United  States  and  abroad. 

Following  a  series  of  disastrous  floods,  the  Iowa 
State  Highway  Commission  began  a  research  project 
in  1948  at  the  University  of  Iowa  to  investigate  scour 


around  bridge  piers.  Scour  is  the  severe  erosion  of 
firm  supporting  soils  around  bridge  piers  and  is  the 
principal  factor  in  the  failure  of  bridges.  The  results 
of  that  investigation  enabled  bridge  designers  to  esti- 
mate the  probable  depth  of  scour  during  floods  and 
provide  adequate  supports. 

A  formal  hydraulics  research  program  Avas  insti- 
tuted by  Public  Roads  in  1949  in  recognition  of  the 
need  for  systematic  study  of  hydraulics  and  hydrology 
as  an  integral  part  of  highway  engineering.  The 
agency  conducted  in-house  research  principally  in  the 
field  of  hydrology  (analyses  of  runoff  data)  ;  super- 
vised contract  research  at  a  number  of  university  and 
Government  laboratories;  and  monitored  research 
undertaken  in  several  States. 

In  the  1950's  major  research  was  continued  on 
bridge  scour  at  the  University  of  Iowa ;  culvert  design 
was  studied  at  the  National  Bureau  of  Standards; 
backwater  caused  by  bridges  was  studied  at  Colorado 
State  University;  head,  or  energy,  losses  in  storm 
drain  junctions  were  studied  at  the  University  of 
Missouri ;  resistance  losses  in  concrete  pipe  were 
studied  at  the  University  of  Minnesota;  and  urban 
stormwater  runoff  was  studied  at  the  Johns  Hopkins 
University.  All  of  the  research  was  undertaken  as  a 
result  of  expressed  needs  evolving  from  field  experi- 
ence. All  reports  provided  design  data  and  methods 
readily  used  by  highway  designers. 

Another  field  of  research  begun  in  the  1950's  in  a 
few  States  was  the  Cooperative  Highway  Program 
of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey  for  measurement  and 
analysis  of  runoff  from  small  watersheds,  preferably 
for  at  least  10  years  in  each  State.  The  objective  was 
to  estimate  the  magnitude  and  frequency  of  peak 
flows  from  watersheds  generally  under  25  square  miles 
in  area.  The  program  has  grown  to  include  at  pres- 
ent about  30  States  with  an  annual  total  expenditure 
of  about  $1  million. 


To  protect  this  cut  slope  from  erosion  during  highway  con- 
struction, the  first  section  of  the  cut  already  has  new  grass 
growing.  The  second  section  has  been  seeded  and  mulched, 
while  earthwork  is  still  in  progress  on  the  third  section. 


350 


In  succeeding  years  hydraulic  research  for  the 
Federal  Highway  Administration  has  been  conducted 
on  hydraulic  roughness  of  corrugated  metal  pipes  by 
the  U.S.  A^'aterways  Experiment  Station,  on  use  of 
riprap*  to  minimize  scour  at  culvert  outlets,  on  un- 
steady flow  in  a  pipe  at  Colorado  State  University, 
and  on  design  of  riprap  lining  for  open  channels  at 
the  University  of  ]Miiu\esota.  not  to  mention  numerous 
smaller  studies  undertakoii  elsewliere,  usually  in  co- 
operation with  a  State  highway  department. 

Roadside   Development 

One  of  tlie  earliest  publications  to  itlcntify  the  ele- 
ments of  and  the  need  for  improved  road  environ- 
ments was  by  Louis  C.  Haupt  in  1891 /■''  His  theme 
was  that  good  roadside  development  is  a  move  toward 
better  roads.  Little  further  attention  was  given  to 
this  subject  imtil  the  early  1930"s  when  AASHO  and 
HEB  organized  tlieir  first  roadside  conunittees;  at 
that  time  only  10  States  were  represented.  Even 
then,  where  roadside  improvement  was  performed,  it 
was  done  years  after  the  higliway  was  constructed. 

Finally,  however,  the  research  and  development 
work  of  the  conunittees,  with  support  from  the  Bu- 
reau of  Public  Roads,  receixed  progressively  greater 
attention,  and  for  some  20  years  adequate  roadside 
treatment  has  been  a  recognized  part  of  design  and 
construction.  Roadside  development  research  has 
covered  such  areas  as  erosion,  esthetics,  rest  areas, 
resource  conservation,  planting  and  vegetation  man- 
agement. 

The  large  number  of  studies  and  I'eports  in  this 
area  of  research  was  oriented  mostl}^  to  local  problems 
and  conditions.  A  1972  study  showed  that  roadside 
development  efforts  still  seem  to  be  very  much  a  local 
matter.  Efforts  to  broaden  this  activity-  on  a  national 
scale  have  thus  far  met  Avith  little  success. 

Vegetation   Management 

A  major  part  of  roadside  development  is  vegetation 
management.  For  50  years,  most  of  the  work  was 
directed  toward  the  prevention  of  erosion.  A^^^ile 
erosion  control  is  still  a  primary  goal,  for  more  than 
a  decade  the  Federal  Highway  Administration  and 
most  States  have  recognized  other  values  in  vegeta- 
tion. Research  was  directed  to  the  selection  of  proper 
vegetation  to  encourage  the  establishment  of  certain 
species  of  wildlife.  In  addition,  the  esthetic  value  of 
vegetation  is  recognized  for  its  potential  in  maintain- 
ing balance  between  the  highway  and  the  natural 
environment. 

During  the  1920's  and  1930's,  maintenance  of  road- 
side vegetation  was  usually  done  by  hand.  Although 
research  had  greatly  improved  mowing  equipment  and 
techniques  by  1960,  breakthroughs  in  the  use  of  herbi- 
cides greatly  altered  roadside  maintenance  techniques. 
As  this  work  progressed,  however,  concern  over  the 
long-term  effect  of  herbicides  created  new  interest  in 
development  of  dwarf  ground  covers. 


*  Riprap  is  a  layer,  facing  or  protective  mound  of  stones, 
concrete,  or  other  material,  randomly  placed  to  prevent  ero- 
sion, scour  or  sloughing  of  a  structure  or  embankment. 


Today,  with  rising  maintenance  costs  and  public 
concern  for  our  environment,  the  need  is  recognized 
for  a  highly  refined  roadside  development  prograui. 
Research  and  implementation  efforts  by  FIIWA, 
State  agencies  and  others  are  focused  on  reduced 
mowing,  refinement  of  herbicide  technology,  and  the 
development  and  selection  of  vegetation  that  will  re- 
duce nuiintcnance  costs  and  enhance  the  overall  en- 
\'ironment. 

Recent  Environmental    Research 

In  the  past  10  years,  two  areas  of  interest  have  been 
receiving  considerable  attention:  (1)  Firm  criteria 
for  esthetic  enhancement  of  the  view  from  the  high- 
way are  evolving  from  key  studies  and  are  having  a 
major  impact  on  new  highway  design  and  upgrading 
of  existing  roads,  and  (2)  the  need  to  protect  the 
wildlife  environment  has  opened  a  broad  vista  of 
studies  addressing  the  compatibility  of  small  and 
large  game,  birds  and  fish  with  the  highway  environ- 
ment. 

Work  on  erosion  control,  roadside  vegetation,  man- 
agement transportation  economics,  and  hydrology 
were  the  forerunners  of  today's  environmental  re- 
search. This  was  highlighted  by  the  establishment 
of  a  formal  research  program  in  environmental  de- 
sign and  control.  In  response  to  the  National  En- 
vironmental Policy  Act  of  1969,  the  research  is 
directed  to  understanding  the  interaction  between 
highways  and  the  environment  and  developing  tech- 
nology to  protect  the  environment. 

Since  1970  this  research  has  dealt  with  a  wide  range 
of  environmental  elements  including  air,  noise  and 
water  quality ;  social  and  economic  effects ;  roadside 
rest  areas;  sewage  treatment;  vegetation  management; 
esthetics;  water  runoff;  de-icing  chemicals;  spills  of 
hazardous  materials;  erosion  control;  and  wildlife. 

In  summary,  roadside  development  has  progressed 
during  the  past  50  years  from  a  somewhat  haphazard 
approach  to  a  highly  sophisticated  and  comprehensive 
science. 


Nationally  Coordinated   Programs 

In  the  early  1960's  several  significant  events  led  to 
dramatic  changes  in  the  concept  and  activity  of  high- 
way research.  Enlarged  research  and  development 
legislative  authority  was  enacted  in  1962  and  made 
effective  beginning  with  fiscal  year  1964.  There  were 
growing  problems  for  highway  transportation  along 
with  population  growth,  urban  concentration,  and 
changing  national  priorities  and- goals. 

One  major  legislative  change  was  the  requirement 
that  114  percent  highway  planning  and  reseai'ch 
(HPR)  funds  must  be  used  for  planning  and  research 
purposes.  No  longer  was  there  an  option  of  using 
this  money  for  construction.  This  requirement  en- 
sured the  strength  and  vitality  of  federally  aided 
planning  and  research  programs  in  the  States.  An- 
other event  was  the  organizational  separation  of  plan- 
ning and  research  in  the  Bureau  of  Ptiblic  Roads  late 
in  1961.  Research  and  development  finally  became  a 
formal  separate  program  in  the  Bureau. 


351 


At  the  same  time,  there  was  hig-h  interest  and  strong 
urging  from  scientists  and  technologists  in  the  De- 
partment of  Commerce  and  elsewhere  to  push  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  beyond  its  historic  materials 
and  physical  research  and  undertake  so-called  "soft'' 
research  in  operations,  human  factors,  systems  anal- 
ysis, safety,  society-  and  the  environment.  Eesearch 
programing  and  management  could  no  longer  be  a 
loose  collection  of  a  nvunber  of  separate,  isolated, 
totally  unrelated  studies.  The  problems  were  too 
complex  and  the  resources  too  small.  Comprehensive, 
integrated  and  balanced  research  was  the  only  answer. 

Starting  in  1963,  a  multidisciplined  task  force  re- 
viewed a  wide  range  of  problems  and  opportunities 
for  solution  in  the  human,  physical,  environmental 
and  public  policy  fields.  This  culminated  in  the  cre- 
ation of  "A  National  Program  of  Research  and  De- 
velopment for  Highway  Transportation,"  which 
officially  began  in  1965. 

If  the  National  Program  could  be  summed  up  in 
three  words,  they  would  be  coordination,  concentra- 
tion and  flexibility.  The  Federal  Highway  Adminis- 
trator called  it  a  program  to  coordinate  and 
concentrate  our  efforts  on  the  most  urgent  problems 
with  flexibility,  responsiveness  and  recognition  of 
local  and  regional  problems.^^  The  program  consisted 
of  detailed  work  plans  and  problem  statements  for 
each;  it  served  as  a  stimulus  and  guide  for  R&D  ef- 
forts to  develop  and  apply  solutions  rapidly. 

The  National  Program  was  directed  to  three  issues 
of  highest  concern — highway  safety,  urban  transpor- 
tation, and  reduction  in  the  costs  of  construction  and 
maintenance.  These  issues  were  important  because  of 
the  considerable  human  losses  and  $10  billion  annual 
costs  of  accidents;  the  increasing  problems  of  conges- 
tion, pollution  and  adverse  socioeconomic  impacts; 
and  the  critical  need  to  optimize  technological  pro- 
cesses and  cost. 

In  1970  when  the  National  Program  was  5  years 
old,  FHWA  initiated  a  new,  nationally  designed  and 
coordinated  program  for  highway  research  and  de- 
velopment called  the  Federally  Coordinated  Program 
of  Research  and  Development  in  Highway  Transpor- 
tation (FCP).  The  FCP  was  specially  designed  to 
meet  the  needs  of  the  customer — highway  program 
managers  and  operating  personnel  in  State  and  local 
agencies  as  well  as  the  general  public.  It  was  also 
designed  to  be  particularly  responsive  to  urgent  new 
problems  in  the  environment,  energy  and  resource 
conservation,  utilization  of  waste,  the  integration  of 
multitransportation  goals,  and  increasing  the  efficiency 
of  the  present  system. 

Research   Into   Practice 

For  a  number  of  years,  there  had  been  a  strong 
movement  throughout  the  highway  community  to  ex- 
pand and  strengthen  the  {practical  utilization  of  re- 
search. The  problems  of  highway  transportation  were 
becoming  too  large,  and  it  seemed  that  too  little  was 
being  accomplished  in  putting  the  information  gained 
from  research  to  work. 

Both  AASHO  and  FHWA  acted  in  the  late  1960's 
to  formalize  implementation.  It  was  suggested  that 
each  State  name  a  high-level  implementation  coordi- 
nator and  each  FHWA  region  organize  an  implemen- 


tation committee.  Both  of  these  suggestions  were 
carried  out,  but  a  national  program  still  did  not  de- 
velop. It  seems  that  plans,  procedures  and  resources 
were  lacking.  There  still  was  no  formal  national 
focus.  Skilled  promotion  was  needed  to  gain  mana- 
gerial support,  to  overcome  inertia  and  reluctance  to 
change,  and  to  secure  the  essential  ingredients  of 
public  acceptance. 

In  response  to  this  need,  FHWA  in  1970  created  a 
separate  Office  of  Development.  Thus  a  formal,  sub- 
stantial program  was  begun  and  within  a  couple  of 
years,  the  resources,  plans,  procedures  and  programs 
were  prepared.  Development/implementation  has  be- 
come a  full  and  substantial  i^artner  in  the  business  of 
"research  to  practice." 

REFERENCES 

*  Bureau  of  Pl^blic  Roads  Annual  Report,  1910,  p.  769. 

^  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  Amendments  of  1963,  S.R.  552, 
88th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  p.  6. 

'  L.  Page,  Salutatory,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  No.  1,  May  1918, 
p.  3. 

^  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1922,  p.  36. 

^  Ideas  and  Actions  :  A  History  of  the  Highway  Research 
Board,  1920-1970  (Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C., 
1970)  p.  29. 

"  Subgrade  Investigations  Begun  by  Bureau  of  Ptiblic  Roads, 
Public  Roads,  Vol.  2,  No.  24,  Apr.  1920,  p.  29. 

'A.  WiNTERMEYER,  Adaptation  of  Atterberg  Plasticity  Tests 
for  Subgrade  Soils,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  7,  No.  5,  Jul.  1926, 
pp.  119-122. 

"  B.  Kelly  &  P.  Hubbard,  Rationalization  and  Simplification 
of  Test  Requirements  for  Liquid  Asphaltic  Materials,  Public 
Roads,  Vol.  13,  No.  6,  Aug.  1932,  p.  89. 

'J.  Pauls  &  H.  Rex,  A  Test  for  Determining  the  Effect  of 
Water  on  Bituminous  Mixtures,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  24,  No.  5, 
Jul.-Aug.-Sept.  1945,  pp.  115-129. 

"R.  Bogue,  Chemistry  of  Portland  Cement  (Reinhold 
Publishing  Corp.,  New  York,  1947)  pp.  10-14. 

"W.  Halstead,  The  Behavior  of  Red  Lead-Iron  Oxide 
Primers  When  Exposed  Directly  to  Weathering,  Public 
Roads,  Vol.  29,  No.  9,  Aug.  1957,  p.  213. 

"B.  Chaiken,  Abrasion  Resistance  of  Bridge  Paints  for 
Use  in  Alaska — Field  and  Laboratory  Tests  Evaluated,  Public 
Roads,  Vol.  33,  No.  10,  Oct.  1965,  p.  201. 

"  J.  Pauls,  Reinforcing  and  the  Subgrade  as  Factors  in  the 
Design  of  Concrete  Pavements,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  5,  No.  8, 
Oct.  1924,  pp.  1-9. 

"  Prestressed  Concrete  Pavement  Demoyistration  at  Dulles 
International  Airport,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  37,  No.  1,  Jun.  1972, 
pp.  16-21. 

"I.  CoRvi  &  J.  Houghton,  Service  Lives  of  Highivay  Pave- 
ments— A  Reappraisal,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  36,  No.  9,  Aug. 
1971,  p.  192. 

"W.  Hatt,  The  Field  of  Highway  Research,  Public  Roads, 
Vol.  4,  No.  5,  Sept.  1921,  p.  17. 

"  Policy  On  Geometric  Design  of  Rural  Highways  (Amer- 
ican Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C., 
1965)  p.  152. 

''A.  Taragin,  Driver  Performance  on  Horizontal  Curves, 
Public  Roads,  Vol.  28,  No.  2,  Jun.  1954,  pp.  27,  28. 

"O.  K.  Normann,  Highivay  Capacity,  Proceedings,  21st 
Annual  Meeting,  Vol.  21  (Highway  Research  Board,  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  1941)  p.  379. 

-"Public  Roads  Administration,  Highway  Practice  In 
THE  United  States  of  America  (Federal  Works  Agency, 
Wasliington,  D.C.,  1949)  p.  65. 

-^C.  Saal,  Time  and  Gasoline  Consumption  In  Motor 
Truck  Operation,  Research  Report  9-A  (Highway  Research 
Board,  Washington,  D.C.,  1950)  p.  16. 


362 


''E.  Holmes,  The  Effect  of  Control  Methods  on  Traffic 
Flow,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  14,  No.  12,  Feb.  1934,  p.  240. 

"  F.  Mirxs,  The  Compdratire  Visibility  of  Standard  Lumi- 
nous and  XoiiliiviinoKS  Highway  Siyns,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  14, 
No.  7,  Sept.  1933,  p.  111. 

"^  G.  Sessions,  Traffic  Devices  :  Histouicat.  Aspects 
Thereof  (Institute  of  Traffic  Engineers,  Washington,  D.C., 
1971)   p.  121. 

"Id.,  p.  123. 

^A.  Taragix,  The  Effect  of  Driver  Beharior  of  Center 
Lines  on  Two-Lane  Roads,  Proceedings,  27tli  Annual  Meeting, 
Vol.  27  (Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C.,  1947) 
p.  273. 

"W.  "Walker,  Effects  of  Hif/hiray  Liyhting  on  Driver  Be- 
havior, Public  Roads,  Vol.  21,  No.  10,  Deo.  1940,  p.  187. 

^C.  Prisk,  Hoiv  Access  Control  Affects  Accident  Experience, 
Public  Roads,  Vol.  29,  No.  11,  Dec.  1957,  p.  266. 


■'.T.  CiRiLLo,  R.  Beatty,  S.  Dietz,  S.  Kai'fman  &  J.  Yates, 
Interst.xte  System  Accident  Research  Study  I  (Federal 
Highway  Administration,  Washington,  D.C.,  1970)   p.  I-l. 

™  D.  Solomon,  Highway  Safety  Myths,  North  Carolina 
Symposium  On  Htghway  Safety,  Vol.  2  (the  University  of 
North  Carolina  Higlnvay  Safety  Research  Center,  Chapel 
Hill,  1972)   p.  41. 

"  D.  Solomon,  Accidents  On  Main  Rural  Highways  (Fed- 
eral Highway  Administration,  Washington,  D.C.,  Reprinted 
1974)  p.  12. 

''The  Federal  Role  in  Highway  Safety,  H.  Doc.  93,  86th 
Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  pp.  71-83. 

"Roadside  Development — Evaluation  of  Reseaucii,  NCHRP 
Report  No.  137  (Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C., 
1972)   p.  45. 

^' R.  WnnroN,  I'reface  to  A  National  Proculvm  of  Research 
.\ND  Develop.ment  For  Highway  Transportation  (Bureau 
of  Public  Road.s,  Washington,  D.C.,  1965)   p.  11. 


353 


Right-of-UJQy 

and 

Environment 


Historically,  right-of-way  acquisition  for  a  new 
highway  or  improving  an  existing  highway  meant 
selecting  the  location  or  alinement  based  upon  cost- 
benefit  factors  of  the  highway  and  then  acquiring  the 
most  economical  and  effective  alternative  without 
much  consideration  given  to  the  socio-economic  impact 
on  those  along  the  proposed  route  or  the  community 
as  a  whole.  Occasionally  land  was  reserved  for  public 
thoroughfares,  but  usually  the  landowner  discovered 
that  if  the  State  or  county  wished  to  take  his  land  for 
a  highway,  he  had  little  recourse  but  to  give  in,  some- 
times receiving  fair  market  value  for  the  property. 
Since  route  selection  and  land  acquisition  for  the 
highway  was  entirely  the  responsibility  of  the  State 
and  local  authorities,  the  Federal  Government  took 
no  part  in  this  phase  of  the  Federal-aid  highway 
program. 

It  was  not  until  World  War  II  that  it  became  ex- 
pedient for  the  Federal  Government  to  become  in- 
volved in  the  acquisition  of  rights-of-way  to  provide 
highways  for  the  national  defense.  But  the  anguish 
and  hardships  to  the  landowners  in  the  path  of  the 
highway  continued  unabated. 

About  1950  when  more  highways  were  being  built 
on  entirely  new  locations,  it  became  apparent  that 
sociological  and  economic  impacts  on  connnunities 
must  become  a  principal  factor  in  the  location  selec- 
tion process. 

"WHion  the  1956  Federal -Aid  Highway  Act  was 
signed  into  law,  the  push  for  completion  of  the  Inter- 
state System,  mostly  on  new  locations,  brought  the 


entire  country's  attention  to  social,  economic  and  en- 
vironmental factors  related  to  highways.  In  the  1960's 
the  public  became  quite  vocal  about  its  concerns,  and 
Congress,  too,  became  aware  that  highway  constinic- 
tion  could  have  adverse  as  well  as  advantageous  im- 
pact upon  all  individuals.  Congress  acted  with 
legislation  to  alleviate  personal  hardships  and  environ- 
mental detriment  caused  by  highway  and  other 
Federal-aid  programs. 


Right-of-Way 

As  with  other  aspects  of  the  highway  program,  the 
authority  for  right-of-way  acquisition  is  assigned  with 
due  regard  for  the  distribution  of  powers  between  the 
Federal  and  State  governments.  Thus,  the  major  re- 
sponsibilities for  initiation  and  execution  have  been 
left  to  the  States  and  their  political  subdivisions. 

Although  organized  quite  similarly  in  many  re- 
spects, systems  of  highway  administration  in  the 
various  States  vary  considerably.  The  resultant  di- 
versity of  systems  renders  difficult  any  attempt  to 
outline  their  individual  characteristics  as  applied  to 
right-of-way  acquisition.  Therefore,  only  the  aspects 
of  right-of-way  administration  connnon  to  most  juris- 
dictions will  be  considered  in  this  chapter.  Special 
emphasis  is  given  to  the  evolution  and  dissemination 
of  right-of-way  policies  and  procedures  which  are 
developed  and  administered  by  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment, especially  in  the  area  of  Federal-aid  highways. 


354 


The  dcrdopmoit  of  the  Interstate  System  helped  focus  national  attention  on  the  social,  economic  and  environmental  factors 
of  building  hir/hicai/s.    1-80  icinds  gracefully  through  the  Delaware  Valley  Gap, 
ichich  is  part  of  the  National  Park  System  in  Netv  Jersey. 


The   Legal   Establishment  of  Right-of-Way 

The  establishment  of  highways  is  primarily  under 
the  control  of  the  State  legislature,  subject  to  consti- 
tutional limitations  and  restrictions.  Except  as  so 
restricted,  the  legislative  power  is  practically  unlim- 
ited. The  legislature  ma}'  establish  highways,  but 
State  highwa}'  departments,  cities,  counties  or  other 
political  subdivisions  of  the  State  are  usually  empow- 
ered to  locate,  design,  purchase  right-of-way  for,  con- 
struct, and  maintain  highways  and  to  carry  out  related 
highway  functions. 

Right-of-way  for  a  designated  highway  may  be  ac- 
quired in  one  of  three  ways,  or  a  combination  of  them : 
by  donation,  by  purchase  at  the  fair  market  value  of 
the  property  taken  plus  damages  to  any  remainders 
not  taken,  or  by  exercise  of  the  power  of  eminent 
domain.  Eminent  domain,  the  lawful  expropi'iation 
of  pi'operty,  is  an  inherent  and  necessary  attribute  of 
sovereignty,  existing  independently  of  constitutional 
provisions  although  subject  to  regulation.  In  order 
to  justify  the  taking  of  land  for  a  highway,  there 
must  exist  a  public  necessity  for  the  proposed  road, 
and  it  must  be  of  public  utility  or  convenience.  The 
road  need  not,  however,  be  an  absolute  necessity;  it  is 
legally  sufficient  if  it  is  required  for  public  convenience 
or  advantage. 

The  determination  of  the  necessity  for  the  proposed 
road  is  considered  a  legislative,  rather  than  a  judicial 
question,  and  the  determination  is  usually  made  by 
administrative  officials.     Such  action,  however,  is  lim- 


ited by  certain  common  principles,  among  which  is 
that  property  cannot  be  taken  without  due  process  of 
law  through  condemnation  proceedings  and  that  prop- 
erty cannot  be  taken  without  the  payment  of  just 
compensation  based  on  fair  market  value. 

Early  Background 

Within  the  United  States,  right-of-way  for  over- 
land transportation  started  with  the  forest  trails 
along  the  earth's  natural  contours.  The  trails  first 
were  followed  on  foot,  then  they  became  paths  over 
which  beasts  of  burden  and  ox  carts  could  also  move. 
At  this  stage,  no  concern  was  given  to  the  acquisition 
of  right-of-way,  for  the  only  consideration  was  the 
fastest  route  in  getting  from  one  place  to  another. 

In  most  instances,  the  right  of  the  public  to  main- 
tain and  use  these  roads  was  not  established  formally, 
it  was  simply  assumed.  However,  as  the  population 
and  the  corresponding  private  ownership  of  property 
increased,  and  as  overland  transportation  became  in- 
creasingly important  for  commerce,  communications, 
and  conquest,  right-of-way  had  to  be  established  on  a 
more  fonnal  basis  to  ensure  the  continued  use  of  these 
and  future  overland  routes. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  1700's  and  early  1800's, 
many  privately  chartered  turnpike  companies  were 
authorized  to  acquire  rights-of-way  for  the  turnpikes. 
Little  difficulty  was  experienced  in  acquiring  the 
needed  rights-of-way.  These  companies  eventually 
suffered  financial  difficulties  from  the  competition  by 


355 


I'Vvnv 


Shirley  Highway  (1-95)  in  Virginia  has  reversible  bus  and  carpool  lanes  in  the  median  to 
improve  traffic  movement  during  Washington,  D.C.,  rush  hours. 


canals  and  railroads,  and  after  a  short  time,  most 
were  abandoned  or  turned  over  to  local  public  agen- 
cies who  acquired  the  highway  right-of-way  in  the 
process.  By  the  middle  of  the  19th  century,  most 
highways  were  being  constructed  by  local  and  special 
agencies  of  the  States  through  which  they  passed, 
with,  in  some  instances,  slight  assistance  from  the 
Federal  Government.*  But  the  formal  acquisition 
of  deeded  right-of-way  evolved  as  a  gradual  process. 
In  the  early  stages  of  State  highway  building,  high- 
ways were  built  primarily  to  give  access  to  farms, 
homes,  and  businesses.  They  were  truly  "land  service 
roads,"  and  rights-of-way  usually  were  donated  by 
property  owners  or  by  others  eager  to  get  road  im- 
provements in  their  commimities.  In  many  instances, 
the  landowner  helped  build  the  road  through  direct 
labor  or  assessments.    There  was  no  question  as  to  the 


*  In  ]802  Congress  passed  the  first  semblance  of  Federal- 
aid  legislation  in  an  act  for  the  admission  of  the  State  of 
Ohio,  whicli  included  a  provision  for  5  percent  of  the  net 
l)roceeds  of  tlie  sales  of  public  lands  in  the  State  to  be  devoted 
to  the  construction  of  public  roads.  This  type  of  provision 
was  later  extended  to  other  States.  In  the  next  90  years, 
Congress  enacted  literally  hundreds  of  laws  appropriating 
funds  for  roads  for  military  and  other  purposes,  including 
roads  providing  communication  with  new  settlements.  The 
aggregate  amount  appropriated  l)y  Congress  up  to  1893  for  the 
construction  of  roads  and  bridges  is  reported  to  have  been  in 
excess  of  .$17  million.' 


landowner's  right  of  access  to  the  road  since  denying 
him  access  would  have  defeated  the  purpose  of  the 
road. 

Many  States  adopted  the  policy  of  requiring  the 
local  political  subdivisions  to  furnish  right-of-way  for 
State  highways  as  a  contributing  share  in  the  cost  of 
the  facility.  This  practice,  however,  was  gradually 
abandoned  except  for  local  roads  when  the  cost  of 
acquiring  rights-of-way  became  too  heavy  a  burden 
on  local  agencies  or  political  subdivisions.  It  then 
became  the  general  practice  for  the  State  highway 
department  to  acquire  the  major  portion  of  State 
rights-of-way,  especially  for  the  arterial  highways. 

The  land  ordinance  of  1785  provided  for  the  rec- 
tangular system  of  surveying  land.  Under  the  sj'stem, 
30  of  the  present  States**  were  subdivided  into  town- 
ships 6  miles  square,  each  containing  36  sections  1-mile 
squai'e.^  These  land  lines,  in  many  instances,  became 
the  boundaries  between  farms  and,  thus,  were  the 
lines  of  least  resistance  for  local  roads.  Normally, 
each  property  owner  donated  33  feet  on  his  side  of  the 
section  line,  resulting  in  a  right-of-way  of  one  chain 
or  66  feet  wide. 


**  Alabama,  Arizona,  Arkansas,  California,  Colorado,  Florida, 
Idaho,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Louisiana,  Michigan, 
Minnesota,  Mississippi,  Missouri,  IMontana,  Nebraska,  Nevada, 
New  IMexico,  North  Dakota,  Oklahoma,  Ohio,  Oregon,  South 
Dakota,  Utah,  Washington,  Wisconsin,  Wyoming,  and  Alaska.' 


356 


In  the  Great  Plains  and  Far  "West,  many  connties 
took  advanta<ie  of  the  Act  of  July  26,  1866  (18  Stat 
253)  in  which  Con<xress  orantcd  a  fi'ee  rifjht-of-way 
for  public  roads  over  unreserved  public  lands  by  de- 
clarint>;  all  section  lines  in  the  county  to  be  public 
roads  and.  thus,  reservina'  the  liaht-of-way  before  the 
lands  became  private  i)roperty.  The  Le<>islature  of 
Dakota  Territory  passed  an  act  (43  USCA  266)  mak- 
in<i-  all  section  lines  public  roads  66  feet  wide  to  the 
extent  it  Avas  physically  possible  to  build  roads  on 
these  lines. 

The  first  continuin<>-  involvement  of  the  Federal 
Government  in  the  Nation's  hi<)-hway  construction 
pro<rram  came  with  the  ori<>inal  Federal  Aid  Road 
Act  of  1916.  This  Act  contained  a  definition  of  the 
terni  "construction"  in  broad  <>'eneral  terms  which  did 
not  specifically  authorize  or  exclude  Federal  partici- 
pation in  ri<>ht-of-way  costs.  However,  the  Federal 
iri<>hway  Act  of  1921  expressly  excluded  Federal  par- 
ticipation in  such  costs  by  redefinino-  the  term  "con- 
struction'' to  except  "costs  of  rights-of-way."  The 
effect  of  this  definition  was  to  bar  rioht-of-way  costs 
frorii  Federal  participation  for  a  number  of  years. 
The  1921  Act  did,  however,  provide  that  rights-of-way 
initrht  be  granted  to  the  States  across  public  lands  or 
reservations  of  the  United  States  for  any  highway  or 
forest  road  or  as  a  source  of  materials  for  the  con- 
struction or  maintenance  of  any  such  facility. 

In  1938,  Chief  MacDonald  expressed,  in  general 
terms,  BPR's  thinking  on  right-of-Avay  and  clearly 
forecast  the  transportation  needs  of  the  future.  In  a 
speech  before  the  24th  Annual  AASHO  meeting,  he 
stated : 

"The  new  special  motor  roads  in  the  Netherlands  in- 
clude in  the  design  two  separated  roadways  for  motor 
traffic,  a  bicycle  paved  path  on  one  side,  a  wide  pedestrian 
path  also  paved  on  the  other,  and  at  some  distance  re- 
moved, local  roads  adequately  surfaced  for  land  sei-rice 
and  animal  traffic.  Here  is  a  conception  of  a  highway 
service  that,  complete  in  its  component  parts,  may  he 
used  safely  liy  all  normal  types  of  traffic,  which  quality 
should  be  reflected  in  many  miles  of  highways  in  this 
country  in  the  future.  It  may  he  urged  that  some  of 
these  types  of  traffic  do  not  exist  now  in  numl)ers  to 
justify  special  provision  for  them,  a  valid  olijection  as  to 
the  immediate  need ;  l)ut  it  is  not  the  important  point. 
The  essential  feature  is  the  provision  now  for  the  land 
necessary  for  the  development  of  each  traffic  facility 
when  it  is  necessary.  As  our  country  matures  and  be- 
comes more  congested  in  population,  we  sliall  have  the 
need  for  a  combination  of  these  or  comparable  highway 
facilities."  * 

In  anticipation  of  its  involvement  in  right-of-Avay 
acquisition,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  in  that  same 
^•ear,  initiated  a  program  of  research  involving  high- 
way right-of-way  acquisition  and  development. 

During  the  latter  half  of  the  1930-40  decade,  a 
number  of  bills  were  introduced  in  Congress  propos- 
ing the  authorization  of  Federal  participation  in 
right-of-way  costs.  Some  of  these  bills  even  proposed 
to  permit  Federal  acquisition  of  necessary  lands  for 
right-of-way  purposes.  None,  however,  received  fav- 
oralde  consideration.  During  the  period  prior  to 
World  "War  II,  acquiring  land  necessary  for  a  high- 
way was  often  thought  of  as  a  chore  which  would 
ultimately  have  to  be  taken  care  of  but  which  could 
be  postponed  until  after  all  other  steps  in  the  plan- 
ning and  programing  of  the  work  had  been  taken. 
A  deviation  from  the  established  policy  of  no  Federal 


participatioit  in  right-of-way  costs  did  come  in  tlie 
Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  of  1940  which  permitted 
Federal  participation  in  the  cost  "of  necessary  new 
or  additional  rights-of-way"  in  the  Territory  of 
Hawaii  uiuler  certain  specified  conditions  related  to 
the  national  defense.  The  Public  Roads  Administra- 
tion was  authorized  to  pay  all  or  any  part  of  the  costs 
of  specified  projects,  including  the  cost  of  right-of- 
way. 

It  Avas  common  practice  to  proceed  with  other  pre- 
liminaries, including  the  preparation  of  plans,  speci- 
fications, and  estimates  of  const I'uction  items,  before 
beginning  the  preparation  of  plats,  descriptions,  title 
evidence  and  appraisals  of  the  individual  parcels  of 
land  required  for  right-of-way.  Only  after  all  other 
preparatory  work  was  completed  did  the  agency  begin 
to  acquire  the  right-of-way,  often  under  pressure  to 
meet  construction  schedules  fixed  without  giving  ade- 
quate consideration  to  the  time  necessarily  involved 
in  all  land  transactions.  The  result  was  often  the 
last  minute  acquisition  of  rights-of-way  without  the 
necessary  basic  data  having  been  assembled.  Because 
of  the  delays  that  followed,  there  were  complaints 
that  construction  w^as  constantly  being  held  up  be- 
cause of  the  antiquated  and  cumbersome  procedures 
pursued  in  securing  the  land. 

This  complacent  prewar  attitude  and  approach  to 
the  right-of-way  problem  existed  at  all  levels  of  gov- 
ernment. It  was  manifest  both  in  the  judicial  and 
legislative  branches  as  well  as  in  the  administrative 
units  having  jurisdiction  over  highway  construction 
and  maintenance  activities.  Federal  funds  could  not 
participate  in  right-of-way  costs,  and  the  PRA  took 
a  legally  required  "hands  off"  position.  Ilowever,  as 
time  passed,  it  became  apparent  that  the  Federal 
Government  could  not  continue  to  tolerate  the  lack 
of  proper  acquisition  procedures  which  existed  in 
many  jurisdictions  as  they  related  to  the  Federal-aid 
highway  program. 

Active  Federal  Assistance  in  Right-of-Way  Acquisition 

Congress  made  its  first  major  departure  from  the 
policy  of  not  participating  in  right-of-way  costs  with 
the  Defense  Highway  Act  of  1941.  It  authorized  100 
percent  Federal  reimbursement  for  right-of-way  costs 
on  defense  access  roads  and  the  payment  of  three- 
fourths  of  such  costs  on  strategic  network  projects. 
It  also  authorized  the  Federal  Government,  itself,  to 
acquire  any  new  or  additional  lands  that  might  be 
required  for  such  purposes.  Under  this  authority, 
many  parcels  of  land  were  acquired  by  the  PRA 
throughout  a  number  of  States.  PRA  also  issued 
General  Administrative  Memorandum  149  in  1942  as 
a  guide  for  States  acquiring  rights-of-way  that  would 
be  subject  to  Federal  reimbursement  imder  this  Act. 

Twenty-seven  years  after  the  passage  of  the  Federal 
Aid  Road  Act  in  1916,  Congress  gave  recognition  to 
right-of-way  as  a  necessary  requisite  to  peacetime 
highway  construction  with  passage  of  Public  Law  146 
by  the  "78th  Congress  on  July  13,  1943.  This  Act 
redefined  the  term  "construction"  to  include  the  cost 
of  rights-of-way,  thus  permitting  Federal  participa- 
tion in  its  funding.  The  following  year  the  Federal 
Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944  again  included  the  cost  of 
rights-of-way  in  the  definition  of  the  cost  of  construc- 
tion.     However,   tlie    Federal   share   of   right-of-Avay 


357 


costs  was  restricted  to  one-third  of  such  costs  plus 
certain  increases  in  the  public  land  States.  For 
projects  eliminating:  hazards  at  railway-hio-hway  g-rade 
crossings,  50  percent  of  the  right-of-way  and  property 
damage  costs  were  reimbursable  from  Federal  funds. 
Because  of  the  difference  in  the  Federal  participating 
ratios  between  right-of-way  costs  and  other  construc- 
tion costs  established  by  the  1944  Act,  it  was  necessary 
to  differentiate  between  what  was  a  right-of-way  and 
what  was  a  construction  item.  Since  construction 
costs  were  established  by  competitive  bidding,  it  was 
often  simpler  to  document  eligible  construction  costs 
than  right-of-way  costs  for  Federal  participation. 
Because  of  this  and  since  the  States  received  a  fixed 
apportionment  of  money,  which  if  not  used  for  right- 
of-way  participation  would  be  available  for  construc- 
tion, most  of  the  States  did  not  take  advantage  of 
their  ability  to  claim  Federal  reimbursement  for 
right-of-way  costs.  They  elected  to  use  their  Federal 
allotments  for  construction  costs  which  were  more 
easily  substantiated. 

PRA  was  very  careful  in  analyzing  the  costs  to  be 
sure  that  proper  reimbursement  from  Federal  funds 
was  made.  This  caused  confusion  and  difficulty  until 
the  distinction  in  matching  ratios  was  removed.  How- 
ever, it  was  not  until  the  passage  of  the  Federal  Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1950  that  the  Federal  share  of  right- 
of-way  costs  was  increased  to  50  percent — the  same 
ratio  then  permitted  for  construction  costs  and  thereby 
eliminated  the  necessity  for  strict  delineation  of  costs 
between  right-of-way  and  construction. 

The  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  of  1954  increased 
the  Federal  participation  ratio  in  all  costs  to  60  per- 
cent on  projects  located  on  the  Interstate  System  and 
the  1956  Act  raised  this  ratio  to  90  percent.  The 
participating  ratio  for  right-of-way  costs  on  regular 
Federal-aid  projects  and  on  railroad  grade  crossing 
protection  projects  remained  at  50  percent.  However, 
the  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  of  1970  increased  the 
ratio  on  regular  Federal-aid  projects  to  70  percent 
beginning  in  fiscal  year  1974.  In  summary,  the  pres- 
ent Federal  participating  ratios  in  right-of-way  costs 
are : 

Railroad  Grade  Crossing  Projects       50  percent 
Regular  Federal- Aid  Projects  70  percent 

Interstate  System  Projects  90  percent 

Staffing  Changes  With  Increased  Federal  Involvement 

Staffing  requirements  of  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments and  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  were  related 
to  passage  of  highway  legislation. 

In  the  years  when  right-of-way  was  obtained  with- 
out Federal  participation,  it  was  often  acquired  by 
local  authorities.  At  the  State  highway  department 
level,  this  activity  had  been  handled  as  merely  a  part 
of  the  overall  duties  of  the  engineering  staffs  in  the 
highway  departments.  Thus,  few  adequate  State 
right-of-way  organizations  were  in  existence. 

In  the  headquarters  office  of  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads,  first  right-of-way  matters  were  handled  in  the 
Solicitoi'^s  Office  by  a  single  attorney.  After  passage 
of  the  1943  and  1944  Acts  when  Federal  funds  became 
available  for  right-of-way  cost  reimbursement,  an  ap- 
praiser and  anotlier  attorney  were  added  to  tlie  staff 
in  the  Bureau.     The  right-of-way  staff  was  then  ele- 


vated to  branch  status.  A  new  directive  governing 
Federal  participation  in  right-of-way  costs  was  issued 
in  1953  which  required  that  right-of-way  costs  be 
fully  documented  if  Federal  funds  were  desired.  The 
small  branch  in  BPR  was  sufficient,  since  only  a  few 
States  were  willing  to  go  to  the  extra  work  necessary 
to  secvire  Federal  participation  in  their  right-of-way 
costs.  As  mentioned  above,  if  a  State  were  able  to 
use  all  of  its  Federal-aid  apportionment  for  highway 
construction  work,  there  was  no  loss  if  Federal  funds 
were  not  claimed  for  right-of-way.  So  thei'e  Avas  no 
necessity  for  the  States  to  build  iip  their  own  right- 
of-way  organizations. 

With  the  passage  of  the  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1956,  the  full  impact  of  Federal  participation  in 
right-of-way  costs  was  felt  by  the  States.  Interstate 
funds  were  apportioned  on  the  basis  of  the  cost  to 
complete  the  System  in  each  State.  Therefore,  each 
State  had  to  claim  right-of-way  costs  in  order  to  ob- 
tain all  the  Federal  funds  available  for  its  Interstate 
program.  With  Federal  funds  assured  for  right-of- 
way  costs  on  the  Interstate  System  and  as  highway 
programs  moved  into  urban  areas  where  right-of-way 
problems  were  complex,  it  was  inevitable  that  the 
right-of-way  organizations  and  procedures  of  both  the 
States  and  BPR  had  to  be  strengthened. 

By  May  1957,  the  right-of-way  staff  in  the  BPR 
headquarters  was  expanded  and  raised  to  division 
level.  In  1962,  a  separate  Office  of  Right-of-Way  and 
Location  was  formed.  BPR  developed  and  issued 
expanded  policy  and  procedure  memorandums  gov- 
erning the  Federal-aid  right-of-way  program  and 
established  right-of-way  staffs  in  each  State  and  in 
all  regional  offices  to  provide  close  and  continuing 
contact  between  the  States  and  BPR.  In  1963  BPR 
established  its  own  right-of-way  training  program  to 
assure  a  continuing  supply  of  properly  educated  and 
trained  personnel  for  right-of-way  work.  Thus,  pro- 
cedures and  staff  were  created  to  assure  prompt  solu- 
tion of  problems,  and  controls  and  records  were 
instituted  to  assure  the  eligibility  for  Federal  aid  of 
costs  incurred  by  the  States  in  the  acquisition  of 
rights-of-way. 

As  for  the  States,  in  1956  two  States  did  not  have 
right-of-way  staffs  at  all,  and  in  many  others  right- 
of-way  activities  came  under  some  other  division.  At 
the  urging  of  BPR  and  with  much  assistance  from 
AASHO,  all  States  have  made  a  steady  improvement 
over  the  years  in  their  right-of-way  organizations  by 
better  coordination  between  design  and  right-of-way 
and  by  the  establishment  of  advance  acquisition  divi- 
sions, training  units,  i:)roperty  management  sections, 
appraisal  and  review  appraisal  groups,  relocation 
units,  environmental  specialty  sections,  etc.  The  State 
highway  departnients  are  now  effectively  using  right- 
of-way  personnel  from  the  inception  of  a  project  to 
its  conclusion.  Such  practices  have  brought  about 
savings  of  millions  of  dollars. 

Federal   Reimbursement  Requirements 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921  provided  that 
the  State  highway  departments  be  suitably  equipped 
and  organized  to  discharge  their  duties.  With  the 
passage  of  the  1956  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act,  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  in  order  to  fully  ascertain 


358 


the  capabilities  of  the  State  highwa)'  departments  in 
right-of-way  acquisition  matters,  required  that  eacli 
State  highway  department  submit  a  formal  statement 
covering  its  right-of-way  organization,  policies,  and 
procedures.  The  statement  was  required  to  be  up- 
dated and  revised  as  changes  occurred. 

By  accepting  the  State's  procedures.  Public  Roads 
assumed  the  responsibility  to  assure  that  each  State 
would  conduct  its  operations  in  accordance  with  its 
formal  statement  and  that  the  State's  pers(mnel  were 
competent  and  reliable.  FIHVA  continues  to  review 
State  property  accpiisitions  to  assure  conformance 
with  Federal  rules  and  regulations  governing  reim- 
bursements for  expenditures  made  by  the  State. 

With  minor  exceptions,  such  as  negotiations  for 
lands  from  national  parks  and  forests  and  other  Fed- 
eral areas,  FIHVA  does  not  acquire  lands  or  interest 
in  lands  for  the  construction  of  Federal-aid  highways 
except  in  connection  with  the  Interstate  System,  and 
then  only  when  it  has  been  determined  that  the  State 
is  either  unable  to  acquire  the  necessary  lands  or 
interests  in  lands  or  is  unable  to  acquire  them  Avith 
sufficient  promptness.  For  example,  from  1956  until 
about  1962,  Iowa,  Idaho  and  several  other  States  did 
not  have  the  legal  authority  to  acquire  property  for 
right-of-way  until  a  court  hearing  had  been  held  to 


determine  final  payment.  Until  final  payment  had 
been  made  to  the  property  owner,  construction  could 
not  proceed.  This  pro\'ision  in  the  State  laws  delayed 
Interstate  construction  several  months  at  the  very 
least  and  sometimes  caused  a  delay  until  the  next 
construction  season.  In  cases  of  this  nature,  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  acquired  the  property  to 
permit  timely  construction  schedules. 

Appraisal   and   Appraisal   Review 

In  the  early  years  of  highway  construction,  right- 
of-way  was  acquired  by  donation  or  by  "horse  trad- 
ing" practices  with  little  thought  to  a  value  appraisal 
of  the  lands  to  be  acquired.  Later,  appraisals  were 
used,  but  there  were  often  a  simple  opinion  of  value 
without  written  support. 

Under  such  circumstances,  the  property  owner  was 
to  a  degree  dependent  on  the  whims  of  the  appraiser, 
whose  personal  opinions  could  too  easily  affect  the 
amount  of  his  estimate.  Since  these  value  opinions 
usually  were  prepared  by  local  men  familiar  with 
land  values  in  the  general  area,  they  usually  were 
surprisingly  accurate.  However,  such  imsupported 
opinions  of  value  could  not  be  accepted  for  Federal 
pai'ticipation  and  more  sophisticated  procedures  were 
required. 


Close  coordination  between  design  and  right-of-way  blends  this  section  of  1-90  on  the  Mississippi  River  in  Minnesota — 
\oith   its  buildings,  terraces,  plantings  and  parking  areas — cotnpatiblg  ivith  its  surroundings. 


359 


The  States  or  their  political  subdivisions  had,  of 
course,  for  many  years  been  acquirinji  rio:ht-of-way 
for  hig-h-vvay  projects  without  Federal  participation. 
Although  procedures,  and  particularly  documentation, 
in  many  States  were  inadequate,  considerable  knowl- 
edge had  been  acquired  about  how  to  take  private 
property  for  public  use,  and  how  to  appraise  "just 
compensation"  for  it.  In  addition,  the  courts  were 
conversant  with  eminent  domain  procedures  because 
such  processes  had  been  used  in  cases  of  railroad  and 
utility  right-of-way  condemnations  which  established 
precedents  and  opinions.  Thus,  it  was  prior  to  Fed- 
eral participation  that  the  "market  value"  concept 
came  into  iise  as  a  means  of  determining  "just  com- 
pensation." Likewise,  the  "before  and  after"  approach 
in  appraising  damages  came  into  use  and  the  term  "a 
willing  buyer  and  a  willing  seller"  was  discussed  in 
many  court  opinions. 

The  acquisition  of  right-of-way  has  been,  and  con- 
tinues to  be,  a  process  of  evoliztion  brought  about  by 
the  experiences  of  men  and  the  wisdom  of  trial  judges 
in  acquiring  private  property  for  public  use.  When 
the  Federal  Government  became  involved  in  reimburs- 
ing the  States  for  right-of-way  costs,  the  BPE 
adopted,  as  the  foundation  of  its  right-of-way  pro- 
gram, standards  established  by  courts  in  eminent  do- 
main cases  and  procedures  evolved  in  acquisition 
programs  of  other  agencies.  One  of  the  first  proce- 
dures, still  in  use  today,  involved  sound  prenegotia- 
tion  appraisal  requirements  where  the  fair  market 
value  of  land  to  be  acquired  was  established  and  the 
damages  to  the  remaining  property  were  determined 
prior  to  negotiations  or  institution  of  condemnation 
proceedings.  These  appraisals  had  to  conform  to  es- 
tablished appraisal  principles  and  techniques;  be 
independent  judgments  as  to  the  value  of  the  prop- 
erty; and  be  prepared  without  collaboration  between 
the  various  appraisers. 

To  assure  that  the  States'  appraisals  are  properly 
prepared  and  documented,  FHWA  requires  that  a 
responsible  reviewing  appraiser  in  the  State  right-of- 
way  division  review  each  appraisal.  Basically,  it  is 
the  duty  of  the  reviewing  apx:)raiser  to  assemble,'  re- 
view, analyze,  and  correlate  all  appraisal  data  into  a 
final  estimate  of  value  and  damages  that  will  fairly 
compensate  a  landowner  for  his  real  property  being- 
acquired.  The  reviewing  appraiser's  estimate  of  value 
is  offered  in  writing  to  the  property  owner  on  the 
first  negotiating  visit  where  price  is  discussed. 

Prior  to  the  establishment  of  prenegotiation  ap- 
praisals, it  was  noted  that  in  one  State  the  acquisition 
cost  was  always  in  the  exact  amount  of  the  appraisal. 
Upon  investigation,  it  was  found  that  the  State  was 
working  out  an  agreement  with  the  property  owner 
and  then  sending  an  ai^praiser  out  to  make  an  ap- 
praisal supporting  the  settlement.  An  educational 
pi'ogram  prevented  a  continuation  of  this  i^rocedure 
and  resulted  in  the  property  owners  receiving  the  full 
appi'aised  fair  market  value  of  their  property. 

The  property  owner  has  no  role  in  the  selection  of 
the  appraisers  for  the  acquiring  agency.  He  is  free, 
however,  to  secure  his  own  appraisals  to  guide  him  in 
making  his  decision  in  subsequent  negotiations.  The 
property  owner  is  not  always  aware  that  sentiment  or 


long  family  tenure  is  of  no  use  in  determining  the 
value  of  his  property.  He  will  not  receive  more  for 
his  property  just  because  it  has  been  in  the  family  for 
generations.  Comparing  the  price  offered  w^ith  the 
price  someone  else  received  also  is  hazardous  since  no 
two  situations  are  exactly  the  same. 

At  the  outset,  the  appraisers  of  land  needed  for 
highways  were  often  without  training  and  experience. 
The  situation  is  entirely  different  today.  The  acquir- 
ing agencies  employ  appraisers  who  have  been  well 
trained  in  their  field  through  college  courses  and 
training  courses  conducted  by  appraisal  organizations 
or  the  acquiring  agencies  themselves. 

Negotiations 

During  the  formative  years  (1941-1956)  of  right- 
of-way  acquisition  procedures,  negotiations  for  rights- 
of-way  often  w'ere  conducted  by  the  person  who 
appraised  the  property.  Usually,  this  person  would 
make  a  fair  appraisal  of  the  property  being  pur- 
chased. He  would  then  call  on  the  property  owner 
and  after  some  discussion  niake  a  verbal  offer  of  some 
amount  less  than  his  appraisal.  In  these  years  many 
property  owners  were  not  loiowledgeable  about  real 
estate  transactions.  If  the  OAvner  accepted  the  offer, 
the  acquiring  agency  "saved"  the  difference  between 
the  appraisal  and  the  offer,  but  the  owner  was  actually 
deprived  of  money  that  really  belonged  to  him.  If 
the  owner  objected  to  the  low  offer,  the  appraiser/ 
negotiator  would  "horse  trade"  up  to,  or  perhaps  ex- 
ceed, the  amount  of  his  appraisal.  Under  this  system, 
the  knowledgeable  person  may  have  received  more  than 
that  to  which  he  was  entitled. 

To  help  correct  this  inequity,  BPR  late  in  1956 
required  that  appraisal  and  negotiation  functions  be 
separated.  The  appraiser  would  appraise  the  fair 
market  value,  the  reviewing  appraiser  would  review 
all  appraisals  and  approve  the  amount  to  be  offered 
the  property  owner,  a  trained  and  qualified  negotiator 
would  visit  the  property  owner,  explain  the  highway 
improvement  and  the  need  for  the  property,  and  pre- 
sent in  writing  the  amount  approved  by  the  reviewing 
appraiser  as  the  full  fair  market  value  of  the  prop- 
erty to  be  purchased.  The  negotiator  would  not  have 
authority  to  increase  the  amount  of  the  written  offer. 

Under  certain  prescribed  conditions,  the  chief  ad- 
ministrative officer,  or  other  officials  of  the  highway 
department  having  final  authority  over  right-of-way 
matters,  may  make  an  administrative  determination 
whether  a  settlement  should  be  attempted  at  an 
amount  above  that  previously  offered  the  property 
owner.  When  a  settlement  is  made  on  the  basis  of  an 
administrative  determination  and  such  a  settlement 
varies  from  the  State  review  appraiser's  determina- 
tion of  value,  the  file  must  contain  a  statement  setting 
forth  the  reason  for  the  settlement. 

In  a  few  instances,  a  property  owner  refusing  to 
settle  by  negotiation  has  taken  a  case  into  court  and 
received  a  verdict  less  than  the  amount  offered  by  the 
acquiring  agency.  He  then  wanted  to  go  back  to  the 
amount  offered.  However,  the  acquiring  agency  was 
bound  by  the  court  decision  and  could  not  pay  more 
than  the  court  award. 


360 


Acquiring  agencies  make  an  effort  to  be  extremely 
fair  with  the  property  owner  and,  if  there  is^  a  doubt, 
to  resolve  it  in  his  favor.  The  acquiring  agency 
normally  will  not  go  beyond  the  reasonable  fair 
market  value.  Occasional!}^  there  are  cases  where 
there  is  an  honest  difference  of  opinion  as  to  value, 
and  in  these  instances,  it  is  desirable  to  let  a  court 
decide  the  question. 

It  is  recognized  that  sometimes  there  are  hardships 
resulting  from  taking  property  for  which  no  just 
compensation  can  be  made.  As  a  case  in  point,  an 
elderly  couple  had  owned  their  home  for  many  years. 
The  wife  had  been  blind  for  a  number  of  those  years, 
but  because  she  knew  the  community,  she  could  visit 
her  friends,  the  stores,  and  other  facilities  within  a 
several-block  radius  unaccompanied.  The  family 
agreed  that  the  offer  made  for  this  home  was,  in  fact, 
generous,  but  moving  the  blind  woman  to  a  new 
neighborhood  was  of  genuine  concern.  Though  the 
couple  had  to  move,  here  was  a  hardship  for  whicli 
just  compensation  could  not  be  legally  paid. 

In  many  cases,  however,  the  situation  of  a  family 
that  has  to  be  relocated  ends  up  for  the  better  because 
of  strict  regulations  requiring  health  and  safety 
features.  In  a  southern  State,  a  man,  his  wife  and  11 
children,  ranging  in  age  from  6  months  to  16  years, 
lived  in  a  three-room  structure  that  the  husband  had 
built.  There  were  no  plumbing  facilities,  and  a  fire- 
place provided  the  only  heat.  The  husband  was  dis- 
abled and  unemployed.  The  family  subsisted  largely 
on  a  $1,980  yearly  allowance  for  aid  to  dependent 
children. 

The  highway  agency  successfidly  relocated  the  fam- 
ily to  another  house  superior  to  their  former  dwelling. 
The  relocation  officer  was  also  instrumental  in  obtain- 
ing such  necessities  for  the  family  as  a  stove,  refrig- 
erator, beds,  bedding,  furniture,  and  even  clothing. 
In  this  case,  the  relocation  officer  provided  much  more 
than  the  strictly  legal  role  required  in  the  relocation 
process,  which  is  discussed  later  in  this  chapter. 

As  a  result  of  the  requirement  for  sound,  supported 
appraisals,  appraisal  review  and  independent  negotia- 
tions, professionalism  in  the  land  acquisition  organi- 
zations at  all  levels  of  government  has  been  assured. 
As  will  be  seen  later  in  this  chapter,  the  i^resent  Uni- 
form Relocation  Assistance  and  Real  Property  Acqui- 
sition Policies  Act  of  1970  follows,  to  a  great  extent, 
the  procedures  advocated  and  developed  by  the  BPR 
throughout  the  years.  BPR's  early  directives  required 
the  States  to  adopt  acquisition  practices  which  met 
the  same  basic  goals  that  the  Act  later  embodied. 

Disposition   of   Improvements 

How  best  to  dispose  of  buildings  and  appurtenances 
purchased  with  land  needed  for  highway  rights-of- 
way  is  another  important  question  involved  in  the 
right-of-way  operations.  Originally  the  disposition 
of  improvements  on  the  acquired  right-of-way  often 
was  handled  in  an  informal  manner  with  no  uniform- 
ity of  treatment.  A  conunon  form  of  disposition  was 
to  include  the  buildings  in  the  prime  construction 
contract  as  a  clearing  item  and  let  the  contractor 
dispose  of  them  as  he  wislied.  This  was  permitted 
under  a  BPR  right-of-way  directive  issued  in  1956. 
At  times,  however,  the  contractor  would  sell  the  im- 


provements to  the  formei'  owner  or  others  for  a  con- 
sideral)le  amount  and  at  the  same  time  receive  payment 
from  the  State  for  removing  them  from  the  right-of- 
way. 

Since  the  contractor  had  no  authority  to  operate 
outside  the  right-of-way,  a  building  that  was  only 
partially  within  the  I'ight-of-way  was  often  partially 
demolished  leaving  the  remainder  standing  on  the 
private  property.  This  resulted  in  situations  that 
were  costly  to  the  private  property  owner  to  correct. 

To  correct  these  situations,  under  current  proce- 
dures, the  owner  of  improvements  and  ai)purtenances 
on  lands  being  acquired  for  right-of-way  is  allowed 
the  option  of  retaining  them  at  a  retention  value  pre- 
determined by  the  State  through  a  c()mj)arative 
process  with  improvements  sold  at  public  sale.  If  the 
owner  does  not  wish  to  retain  the  improvements,  the 
acquiring  agency  will  take  title  and  sell  them  under 
competitive  conditions.  The  objective  is  to  dispose  of 
the  improvements  by  the  method  that  will  reflect  the 
greatest  amoimt  of  credit  to  the  project  consistent 
with  equitable  treatment  for  the  former  owner.  Only 
under  unusual  circumstances  should  they  be  included 
in  the  construction  contract  as  a  clearing  item.  Where 
leadtime  is  sufficient,  acquired  properties  are  leased 
for  private  use  on  a  short-term  basis  until  tlie  land  is 
needed  for  construction  of  the  highway. 

Property  in   Public   Ownership 

Property  in  public  ownership  needed  for  highway 
purposes  is  treated  differently.  Originally  BPR  did 
not  permit  Federal  participation  in  the  cost  of  land 
already  in  public  ownership.  However,  participation 
was  permitted  in  the  removal,  readjustment,  repair, 
or  restoration  of  facilities  made  necessary  as  a  result 
of  the  construction  of  the  highway  project.  A  later 
policy  permitted  Federal  participation  on  the  basis  of 
the  appraisal  of  the  property  taken  and  the  resulting 
damages  incurred.  However,  it  proved  to  be  difficult 
to  determine  the  fair  market  value  of  public  property, 
such  as  a  school,  firehouse,  library,  etc.,  that  is  not 
commonly  bought  and  sold  in  the  open  market.  In 
many  instances,  the  local  government  was  subject  to 
additional  burdensome  costs  of  replacing  the  public 
facilities,  since  the  old  buildings  could  and  would 
have  served  their  purposes  for  many  years. 

Presently,  when  the  State  highway  department 
makes  a  request  and  can  legally  incur  costs  for  the 
functional  replacement  of  real  property  and  improve- 
ments in  public  ownership,  Federal  funds  may  par- 
ticipate in  the  costs  if  the  functional  replacement  is 
determined  to  be  in  the  overall  public  interest.  The 
costs  are  those  necessary  to  replace  the  land  and  im- 
provements being  acquired  with  a  similar  needed  fa- 
cility having  the  same  use.  Usually,  the  present 
buildings  are  old  and  out-of-date  and  the  materials 
with  which  they  are  constructed  are  often  not  avail- 
able. The  new  buildings  may  be  constructed  with 
modex'n  materials  and  are  required  to  be  constructed 
in  accordance  with  present  day  local  laws,  building 
codes,  and  reasonable  prevailing  standards  in  the  area 
for  similar  facilities.  If  the  owning  agency  has  suit- 
able land  on  which  the  new  facility  can  be  constructed, 
payment  may  be  made  for  the  land  taken  for  highway 
purposes.  If  the  owning  agency  does  not  have  the 
land,  a  replacement  site  may  be  purchased. 


361 


In  order  to  widen  Route  2  along  the  Ohio  River,  the  West  Virginia  Department  of  Highioays  specified  prcsplitting  and 
benching  of  Round  Hill.    This  project  involved  excavation  of  more  than  5  million  cubic  yards  of  earth. 


Advance  Acquisition   and   Revolving    Fund 

As  the  highway  program  continued  to  expand,  one 
major  problem  was  insufficiency  of  leadtime  for  the 
acquisition  of  rights-of-way.  As  soon  as  construction 
plans  were  completed,  right-of-way  personnel  were 
under  constant  pressure  to  acquire  the  right-of-way 
so  that  the  construction  work  could  be  advertised  for 
bids. 

In  order  to  encourage  early  acquisition  of  right-of- 
way,  BPR  issued  a  directive  in  July  1956  providing 
that  a  State  could  be  authorized  to  acquire  right-of- 
way  with  its  own  funds  and  that  later,  when  sufficient 
Federal  funds  were  available,  reimbursement  for  the 
Fedei'al  share  of  costs  could  be  made  back  to  the  date 
of  authorization  to  proceed.  Previously,  it  had  been 
customary  for  Federal  funds  to  be  available  at  the 
time  right-of-way  acquisition  was  authorized. 

The  full  requirements  for  land  cannot  be  deter- 
mined until  the  exact  location  of  the  highway  is 
known  and  tlie  final  design  is  nearly  completed.  In 
January  19.58,  BPR  issued  a  directive  providing  that 


right-of-way  acquisition  could  begin  when  the  State 
had  indicated  on  maps  or  drawings  the  proposed 
general  location  of  the  highway  together  with  the 
approximate  limits  of  the  right-of-way  and  they  Avere 
acceptable  to  BPR.  Federal  funds  could  participate 
in  the  right-of-way  costs  incurred  at  this  early  stage, 
but  before  final  reimbursement  was  made  for  the 
right-of-way,  the  accounts  had  to  be  adjusted  so  that 
Federal  funds  were  finally  used  only  for  the  land  area 
that  was  incorporated  within  the  final  right-of-way 
widths. 

Further  right-of-way  developments  have  made  nec- 
essary the  discontinuance  of  the  above  two  procedures. 
The  first  was  in  effect  for  about  20  years,  and  the 
second  for  about  10  years.  For  the  periods  of  time 
the  procedures  were  in  effect,  they  helped  acquire 
rights-of-way  expeditiously. 

When  right-of-way  was  acquired  in  advance,  the 
BPR  and  the  State  executed  a  project  agreement 
specifying  that  construction  on  the  right-of-way 
would  be  accomplished  within  a  reasonable  period  of 


362 


time  after  acquisition.  The  Federal-Aid  Highway 
Act  of  1956  provided  for  actual  construction  of  a 
road  on  the  right-of-way  within  5  years.  In  1959,  the 
time  period  was  extended  to  7  years,  in  1973  to  10 
years,  and  in  1976  Conoress  provided  that  the  period 
could  be  extended  beyond  10  years  to  whatever  addi- 
tional period  was  reasonable. 

In  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1968,  Congress 
established  a  right-of-way  revolving  fund  for  loans 
to  State  highway  departments  to  purchase  right-of- 
Avay  for  future  highway  construction  on  any  of  the 
Federal-aid  systems.  STo  interest  is  to  be  charged. 
The  money  can  be  used  to  pay  both  the  State  and 
Federal  shares  of  right-of-way  acquisition,  property 
management  costs,  and  for  moving  or  relocation  ex- 
penses of  persons,  businesses  and  farms.  Actual  con- 
struction on  the  right-of-way  shall  be  connnenced  not 
less  than  2  years  (and  as  amended  by  later  legislation) 
nor  more  than  10  years  following  the  end  of  the  fiscal 
year  in  which  the  cash  advance  is  made  unless  a 
shorter  or  longer  period  is  provided  by  FHWA. 

Some  advantages  resulting  from  using  the  revolv- 
ing fund  are: 

•  Additional  leadtime  for  relocation  of  persons  and 
businesses. 

•  Reduction  of  cost  by  purchasing  land  ahead  of 
rising  prices. 

•  Forestalling  proposed  private  development  on 
land  within  the  proposed  right-of-way. 

•  Acquisition  of  "hardship"  parcels  where  the 
owner  would  suffer  if  purchase  of  his  property 
were  delayed. 

Acquisition  in  advance  was  restricted  b}'  Congress 
in  the  National  Environmental  Policy  Act  of  1969. 
Procedures  developed  under  the  Act  provide  for  con- 
sideration of  environmental  aspects  and  approval  of 
the  highway  location  before  right-of-way  purchases 
can  be  started,  except  in  bona  fide  hardship  cases. 
Prior  to  this  Act,  parcels  could  be  purchased  if  they 
were  in  the  probable  limits  of  the  proposed  highway. 

The  size  of  the  fund  serves  also  as  a  restriction  on 
its  use.  Congress  autliorized  a  total  of  only  $300 
million.  However,  administratively,  about  $50  mil- 
lion a  year  were  pi'ovided  to  FHWA.  One  of  the 
reasons  for  these  financial  limitations  is  that  the  fund 
is  to  revolve.  First  a  State  borrows  the  money  from 
the  fund  for  right-of-way  acquisition  on  a  specific 
project.  Sometime  during  the  2-year  to  10-year  period 
the  right-of-way  is  acquired,  construction  plans  are 
completed,  and  the  construction  project  is  ready  to  be 
advertised  for  bids.  At  this  point  in  time,  the  State 
must  pay  back  100  percent  of  its  loan  without  interest. 
For  the  right-of-way  purchased,  the  State  must  pro- 
vide its  matching  share  from  its  own  revenues  while 
the  Federal  sliare  will  ])e  paid  from  the  current  fiscal 
year  highway  funds  for  tlie  project.  The  money  paid 
back  to  the  revolving  fund  can  then  be  loaned  out 
again  to  another  State  (or  to  the  same  State)  for 
another  project  and  tlie  whole  piocess  is  repeated. 

Uniform    Real    Property  Acquisition    Policy 

With  the  entry  in  1962  of  BPR  and  the  State  high- 
way departments  into  the  field  of  relocation  assistance 
and  payments,  the  problems  incident  to  a  multiplicity 


of  laws  and  procedures  applicable  to  right-of-way 
acquisition  were  increased.  It  was  possible  for  a 
number  of  Federal  and  State  agencies  to  be  operating 
in  the  same  community  at  the  same  time,  each  under 
its  own  individual  laws  and  directives.  Such  a  situa- 
tion resulted  in  considerable  differences  in  acquisition 
procedures  and  in  relocation  assistance  and  payments 
provided.  This  lack  of  imiformity,  in  many  cases, 
I'esulted  in  inequities  to  individuals. 

As  a  case  in  point,  there  were  two  garment  manu- 
facturers across  the  street  from  each  other.  Their 
businesses,  buildings  and  equipment  were  comparable. 
Under  the  then-existing  Federal  highway  legislation, 
the  business  whose  property  was  being  acquired  for 
highway  purposes  could  be  reimbursed  the  maximum 
of  $3,000  for  moving  expenses.  The  other  owner 
whose  biisiness  was  being  taken  for  an  urban  renewal 
project  could  receive  up  to  $25,000  for  moving.  The 
owner  whose  property  was  being  acquired  for  high- 
way purposes  was  understandably  upset  at  the  differ- 
ence in  treatment. 

To  assure  consistent  treatment  to  owners  by  the 
many  Federal  programs  and  to  promote  public  con- 
fidence in  Federal  land  acquisition  practices,  Congress 
enacted  the  Uniform  Relocation  Assistance  and  Real 
Property  Acquisition  Policies  Act  of  1970.  This  Act 
was  applicable  to  all  Federal  agencies  and  established 
a  uniform  policy  on  land  acquisition  practices  for 
their  guidance. 

FHWA,  to  implement  this  Act,  issued  policy  direc- 
tives which  are  being  followed  by  the  individual  State 
highway  departments  and  makes  periodic  reviews  to 
assure  that  the  intent  of  the  Act  is  being  carried  out. 


Relocation 

Relocation  Assistance  and   Payments 

As  more  and  more  property  became  essential  for 
the  construction  of  the  Interstate  System  and  other 
highways,  it  became  apparent  that  the  "fair  market 
value"  concept  as  a  basis  for  payment  to  the  property 
owner  did  not  completely  reimburse  him  for  his  costs 
and  required  some  persons  to  siiffer  disproportionate 
injuries.  The  cost  of  moving  personal  property,  lo- 
cating substitute  housing,  making  adjustments  to  new 
quarters,  utility  deposits  and  fees,  damages  to  prop- 
erty moved,  higher  rental  payments,  etc.,  were  not  a 
part  of  fair  market  value  and  often  worked  an  ex- 
treme hardship  on  those  whose  property  was  being 
acquired  or  who  were  forced  to  move  from  rental 
premises.  In  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1962, 
Congress  required  that  the  State  higlaway  departments 
provide  relocation  advisory  assistance  to  individuals 
and  families  displaced  by  acquisition  or  clearance  of 
right-of-way  for  any  Federal-aid  highway.  That  Act 
also  permitted  BPR  to  reimburse,  as  part  of  the  cost 
of  construction,  such  relocation  payments  as  the  State 
highway  departments  might  make  to  persons  for  their 
moving  expenses  from  the  property.  While  the  relo- 
cation advisory  assistance  services  were  mandatory, 
the  relocation  payments  were  not.  The  payment  fea- 
ture was  entirely  dependent  upon  State  law,  but  few 
States  actually  provided  monetary  reimbursement  to 
people  forced  to  move. 


363 


As  the  need  for  a  national  payment  program  for 
relocation  became  increasingly  urgent,  Congress  in- 
cluded in  the  1968  Act  the  first  mandatory  payment 
program  for  people  who  must  relocate  because  of 
Federal-aid  highway  construction.  The  legislation 
established  provisions  to  assist  individuals,  families, 
businesses  and  nonprofit  organizations  in  avoiding  the 
human  and  economic  shock  that  can  resvdt  from  in- 
voluntary displacement.  The  purpose  of  the  new  law 
was  twofold:  (1)  To  aid  the  national  goal  of  provid- 
ing every  citizen  with  decent,  safe  and  sanitary  hous- 
ing, and  (2)  to  reduce  the  inequities  of  a  strict 
application  of  the  fair  market  value  concept  to  Fed- 
eral-aid highway  right-of-Avay  acquisitions. 

Principal  provisions  of  the  law  were  that: 

•  Each  individual  or  family  displaced  must  receive 
a  scheduled  moving  expense  and  dislocation  al- 
lowance or  actual  moving  expenses. 

•  Businesses,  farms  and  nonprofit  organizations 
must  receive  their  actual  moving  expenses  or  a 
lump  sum  payment  based  on  an  established  for- 
mula in  lieu  of  actual  moving  expenses.  Payment 
was  also  permitted  when  they  discontinued  their 
operations  because  of  displacement. 

•  Owner  occupants  could  receive  a  payment  above 
fair  market  value  for  their  homes  to  assure  their 
ability  to  obtain  decent,  safe  and  sanitary  replace- 
ment housing  at  least  comparable  to  the  homes 
taken  with  designated  upper  limits.  Decent,  safe 
and  sanitary  housing  standards  were  established 
by  FHWA. 

•  Tenants  could  receive  a  payment  to  enable  them 
to  rent  comparable  rental  housing  or  purchase  re- 
placement housing  within  a  specified  upper  limit. 

•  Each  State  highway  department  was  required  to 
provide  relocation  advisory  service  to  those  being 
displaced. 

Last  Resort  Housing 

While  the  relocation  advisory  assistance  and  pay- 
ments required  by  the  1968  Highway  Act  were  a 
needed  addition  to  the  fair  market  value  payments, 
they  did  not  take  care  of  the  situations  where  decent, 
safe  and  sanitary  replacement  housing  simply  was  not 
available.  In  some  communities,  decent,  safe  and 
sanitary  housing  is  nearly  impossible  to  find  within 
the  economic  means  of  those  being  displaced.  There- 
fore, the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1970  author- 

During   right-of-way   acquisition,   sometimes   moving   a   house 
intact  is  a  part  of  the  relocation  agreement. 


ized,  as  part  of  the  cost  of  highway  construction,  the 
inclusion  of  the  construction  of  existing  housing  to 
serve  as  replacement  housing.  Through  this  "last  re- 
sort housing,"  the  highway  agency  could  release  a 
tied-up  project  by  rehabilitating  or  constructing 
homes  or  apartments  for  the  displaced  pex'sons.  Thus, 
no  person  woidd  be  required  to  move  from  his  dwell- 
ing unless  replacement  housing  was  available. 

The  1970  Highway  Act  also  provided  that  the  dis- 
placed dwelling  owner  could  be  compensated  for  any 
increased  interest  costs  that  such  owner  was  required 
to  pay  for  financing  the  acquisition  of  his  new 
dwelling. 

The  precedents  established  in  the  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1968  and  the  additional  emphasis 
supplied  by  the  FHAVA  and  the  highway  industry 
during  the  hearings  on  the  1970  Highway  Act  greatly 
influenced  the  Congress  to  enact  the  Uniform  Reloca- 
tion Assistance  and  Real  Property  Acquisition  Poli- 
cies Act  of  1970.  The  1970  Uniform  Act,  which 
nullified  the  relocation  requirements  of  previous  high- 
way acts  as  well  as  those  of  other  Federal  legislation, 
authorized  last  resort  housing  when : 

•  An  adequate  supply  of  comparable  decent,  safe 
and  sanitary  replacement  housing  is  not  available 
for  those  persons  to  be  displaced  (either  from 
public  housing  agencies  or  private  enterprise). 

•  Comparable  decent,  safe  and  sanitary  replacement 
housing  cannot  be  purchased  for  the  maximum 
payment  of  $15,000  in  addition  to  the  purchase 
price  of  the  displaced  person's  present  dwelling. 

•  Comparable  decent,  safe  and  sanitary  housing 
cannot  be  rented  over  a  4-year  period  for  the 
maximum  payment  of  $4,000  in  addition  to  the 
rent  presently  being  paid. 

Current  Status   of  Relocation   Procedures 

In  addition  to  making  decent,  safe  and  sanitary 
housing  available  to  all  those  displaced,  the  relocation 
program  has,  in  general,  not  only  been  instrumental 
in  assisting  those  persons  required  to  move  to  improve 
the  quality  of  their  housing  and  standard  of  living, 
but  has  also  been  instrumental  in  assisting  many  ten- 
ants to  become  homeowners. 

The  replacement  housing  payments  and  additional 
benefits,  plus  the  authority  to  provide  replacement 
housing  as  a  last  resort,  facilitates  the  move,  mini- 
mizes the  hardship,  and  assists  in  the  improvement 
of  the  quality  of  life  for  most  persons  involuntarily 
displaced. 

The  magnitude  of  the  relocation  program  is  re- 
vealed by  the  reports  received  from  the  States.  In 
fiscal  year  1975,  the  Federal-aid  highway  program 
relocated  21,162  persons  from  8,605  dwelling  units. 
The  average  moving  cost  payment  was  $410  per  claim. 
In  addition,  2,186  businesses  were  displaced  at  an 
average  moving  most  of  $4,544;  116  farms  at  an  aver- 
age moving  cost  of  $1,075;  and  103  nonpi'ofit  organi- 
zations at  an  average  moving  cost  of  $916. 

Of  the  total  number  of  people  displaced  in  fiscal 
year  1975,  44  percent  were  owners  and  56  percent 
were  tenants.  Of  the  21,162  people  displaced,  24 
percent  were  minorities.  About  70  percent  of  the 
residential  units  acquired  represented  housing  over 
$6,000  in  value  or  renting  for  over  $60  per  month. 


364 


The  motorist's  vieivpomt  ivas  one  of  the  design  factors  in  the  planning  and  construction  of  Junipero  Serra  Freeioay  in 
San  Bruno,  California.    A  long  range  landscaping  program  was  carefully  planned  for  the 
entire  route.     Trees  within  the  right-of-way  were  either  preserved  or  transplanted. 


Replacement  housing  payments  to  OAvners  averaged, 
nationally,  $4,755  and  to  tenants  $1,137.  The  moving 
cost  payments  and  replacement  housing  payments 
were  supplementary  to  the  payments  made  for  the 
pro^Derty  taken  under  the  "fair  market  value"  concept 
and  represent  the  expanding  concept  of  preventing, 
to  the  extent  possible,  hardships  upon  the  individuals 
who  are  relocated  because  of  the  construction  of  a 
highway. 

Location 

A  phase  of  highway  construction  which  is  closely 
related  to  right-of-way  is  highway  location.  During 
the  early  years  of  highway  development,  the  emphasis 
was  almost  exclusively  on  the  engineering  features  of 
such  location.  Unless  the  highway  was  solely  a  land 
service  facility,  the  highway  agency  attempted  to  find 
the  most  direct  lines  between  the  points  that  they 
wanted  to  serve  and  to  develop  the  most  economical 
way,  in  engineering  terms,  of  building  adequate  roads 
along  these  direct  lines.  They  sought  easy  grades,  the 
shortest  possible  river  crossings,  and  generally  adopted 
the  lowest  priced  adequate  solution  that  could  be 
found.  This  resulted  in  many  hardships  to  the  prop- 
erty owners  for,  too  often,  little  consideration  was 
given  to  their  needs  and  the  needs  of  the  community 
as  a  whole.  A  trial  attorney  once  remarked  that  it 
appeared   to  him   that  the  engineers'   procedure  was 


first  to  find  a  farmer's  Avater  supply  and  then  make 
that  the  centerline  of  the  highway.  While  this  judg- 
ment is  harsh,  it  is  clear  all  too  often  that  a  little 
consideration  of  right-of-way  costs  and  damages  at 
the  location  stage  could  have  materially  lowered  the 
cost  of  right-of-way  and  of  the  total  highway  project. 

It  has  been  understood  that  right-of-way  personnel 
should  not  determine  the  location  of  a  highway.  That 
has  always  been  an  engineering  detei'mination.  How- 
ever, the  engineer  should  have  input  from  the  right- 
of-way  man  as  to  property  costs  and  damages  to 
assist  him  in  making  his  engineering  determination. 
As  an  example  of  this,  a  highway  preliminary  loca- 
tion ran  through  the  middle  of  an  airstrip.  The 
right-of-way  man  estimated  damages  at  nearly 
$400,000.  A  restudy  was  made,  and  a  slight  realine- 
ment  resulted  in  taking  only  a  portion  off  one  end  of 
the  airstrip.  The  damages  were  reduced  to  well  under 
$100,000.  In  addition,  construction  costs  on  the  new 
location  were  several  thousand  dollars  less  than  they 
would  have  been  on  the  original  location. 

Another  situation  involved  a  very  minor  acquisition 
from  an  iceplant  which  would  have  resulted  in  a 
major  claim  for  damages  because  of  having  to  relocate 
and  rearrange  the  freezing  apparatus.  A  restudy 
resulted  in  a  sliglit  relocation  that  avoided  taking  any 
portion  of  the  iceplant. 


366 


Beginning  about  1950  and  rapidly  developing  in 
importance  since  that  time,  sociological  and  economic 
impacts  on  communities  have  become  the  pi'incipal 
and  often  overriding  factors  in  the  location  select ioi\ 
process.  This  has  been  particularly  true  in  the  more 
densely  settled  areas  of  the  country.  People  who  in 
the  past  wanted  a  highway  in  order  to  have  a  way  to 
get  places  suddenly  did  not  want  that  same  highway 
reconstructed  near  their  residences  to  attract  and  bet- 
ter serve  large  noisy  volumes  of  traffic  in  which  they 
had  no  particular  interest.  Over  the  last  few  years, 
esthetic  values  have  become  more  and  more  important, 
and  this  emphasis,  of  course,  has  culminated  in  the 
current  determination  to  preserve  and  enhance  the 
environment. 

The  highway  location  problems  now  are  to  find 
those  places  to  build  the  roads  that  will  provide  an 
adequate  highway  facility  for  the  particular  traffic  to 
be  served  and,  at  the  same  time,  cause  a  minimal  dis- 
ruption of  families,  a  minimum  disturbance  of  the 
landscape,  and  the  least  adverse  effect  on  such  things 
as  established  school  districts,  church  parishes,  park 
areas  and  historical  sites.  The  FHWA's  role  in  loca- 
tion is  largely  to  make  certain  that  State  highway 
departments  have  placed  in  proper  relationship  the 
various  engineering,  social,  and  environmental  ele- 
ments of  highway  location. 

The  Environment 

Pollution   in   the   Horse  and   Buggy  Era 

"King  Mud"  was  the  environmental  problem  that 
most  concerned  the  early  traveler.  Farmer  and  vil- 
lager, horseman  and  wagoner,  to  all  of  them,  the  mud 
of  the  roadway  was  an  unwelcome  but  frequent  com- 
panion. Large  towns  might  be  isolated  for  days  after 
a  heavy  rain.  Horses  floundering  up  to  their  bellies 
in  thick  mud  were  a  common  sight,  and  the  farmer, 
unable  to  get  his  produce  to  markets  that  were  empty, 
was  confronted  with  spoilage  and  loss  of  income.  The 
better  roads  were  found  primarily  in  the  major  cities, 
where  carriages  and  wagons  of  many  different  kinds 
were  in  daily  use.  As  the  number  of  conveyances  in- 
creased, so  did  the  number  of  horses  that  pulled  them, 
and  as  the  horses  multiplied,  they  began  to  be  de- 
nounced as  polluters  of  the  environment  in  harsh 
terms  similar  to  those  applied  to  automobiles  today. 

Nineteenth  century  urban  life  generally  moved  at 
the  pace  of  horsedrawn  transportation.  Evidence  of 
the  horse  could  not  be  missed.  It  was  seen  in  the 
piles  of  manure  littering  the  streets,  attracting  swarms 
of  flies  and  creating  a  stench,  and  in  the  numerous 
livery  stables  that  let  loose  an  odor  that  could  only 
mean  "horse."  ^  The  city  streets  were  usually  the 
repository  for  overworked,  mistreated  horses  that 
died  making  their  rounds.  Atlantic  Monthly,  in  an 
1866  article  described  Broadway  as  clogged  with 
"  'dead  horses  and  vehicular  entanglements.' "  The 
carcasses  added  another  dimension  to  the  smells  and 
the  swarms  of  flies.  In  1880,  Xew  York  City  removed 
some  15,000  dead  horses  from  its  streets,  and  Chicago 
carted  away  nearly  10,000  horses  as  late  as  1912.'' 

Because  of  this  problem,  tlie  cities  constantly  feared 
epidemics  of  cholera,  smallpox,  yellow  fever,  or 
typhoid.  Medical  authorities  blamed  the  spread  of 
these  diseases  on  filth  in  the  atmosphere  and  believed 


that  the  horse  was  the  chief  offender.  In  1752,  Boston 
authorities  voted  funds  to  clean  the  streets  to  avoid 
smallpox  infection,  and  in  1795  during  the  yellow 
fever  season,  they  asked  neighboring  farmers  to  col- 
lect manure  from  the  streets,  free  of  charge.^  Even 
in  1908,  Appleton's  Magazine,  in  an  article  "The 
Horse  v.  Health,"  blamed  most  of  the  sanitary  and 
economic  problems  of  cities  on  the  horse.  The  article 
calculated  that  the  horse  problem  cost  NeAv  York  City 
some  $100  million  each  year.^ 

However,  disease  was  not  the  only  hazard  caused  by 
the  horse.  Even  in  the  I700's,  noise  pollution  was 
already  becoming  a  problem  in  the  cities.  The  clop- 
ping  and  clanking  of  horses'  iron  shoes  and  the  iron- 
tired  wheels  of  carts  and  wagons  made  ear-shattering 
sounds  on  cobblestone  pavements.  Boston,  in  1747, 
banned  traffic  from  a  major  street  so  that  noise  would 
not  disturb  the  sessions  of  the  General  Court.  Later 
Benjamin  Franklin  noted  the  "  'thundering  of  coaches, 
chariots,  chaises,  waggons,  drays,  and  the  whole  frater- 
nity of  noise' "  that  offended  the  ears  of  Philadel- 
phians.  A  New  York  ordinance  in  1785  banned  teams 
and  wagons  with  iron-shod  wheels  from  the  streets, 
and  as  late  as  the  1890's,  an  article  in  Scientific 
American  referred  to  the  sounds  of  traffic  on  busy  New 
York  streets  as  making  conversation  difficult.'' 

The  solution  to  these  problems,  critics  agreed,  was 
the  horseless  carriage.  As  the  motor  car  and  the 
truck  began  to  replace  the  horse,  benefits  were  clearly 
seen.  Streets  were  cleaner,  pollution  from  manure 
was  diminished,  the  number  of  flies  dropped,  goods 
were  transported  more  cheaply  and  more  efficiently, 
and  traffic  moved  faster.  By  the  early  part  of  this 
century,  the  advantages  of  the  motor  vehicle  over  the 
horse  were  accepted  in  nearly  every  quarter. 

The   Conquest  of  Mud   and   Dust 

While  the  motor  vehicle  gradually  diminished  the 
problem  of  sanitation,  it  was  beginning  to  show  some 
of  its  own  disadvantages.  Mud  in  the  rainy  periods 
and  dust  in  dry  continued  to  plague  the  traveler 
through  the  close  of  the  19th  century  and  well  into 
the  20th,  and  the  automobile  seemed  to  only  exasperate 
this  problem. 

Dust,  although  a  minor  factor,  still  bothered  anyone 
riding,  driving  or  walking  on  or  near  a  highway. 
"  'The  dust  raised  by  an  automobile,  when  running  at 
a  rate  of  less  than  twenty  miles  an  hour,  is  not  any 
worse  than  that  raised  by  many  wagons,  but  when 
this  limit  is  exceeded,  the  automobile  becomes  the 
dust  nuisance.' "  ^^ 

Many  methods  were  used  to  try  to  control  the  mud 
and  dust  problem.  Sprinkling  roads  with  crude  oil 
or  absorbent  salts,  while  effective,  was  considered  too 
expensive,  and  water  was  recommended  to  provide 
"  'a  better,  smoother  and  more  dustless  surface  than 
we  now  enjoy.'  "  ^^ 

Martin  Dodge,  Director  of  the  Office  of  Public 
Road  Inquiries,  reported  on  an  experimental  road 
project  in  the  District  of  Columbia  in  1900.  This 
project,  the  Queens  Chapel  Road  in  the  District  of 
Columbia,  was  selected  for  a  controlled  oiling  appli- 
cation for  dust  control.  The  annual  report  stated: 
"This  road  was  treated  several  weeks  ago  and  so  far 
as  we  are  now  able  to  judge  the  new  system  is  a  suc- 


366 


cess  as  a  dust  settler.  ...  It  is  claimed  by  some  that 
the  application  of  crude  oil  will  make  a  surface  im- 
pervious to  water  and  consequently  free  from  frost 
and  mud.  If  this  be  the  case,  oil  will  supersede  <>ravel 
and  stone  in  the  improvement  of  country  roads."  ^- 

"With  the  various  types  of  surfaces  becoming  avail- 
able at  the  turn  of  the  century,  there  was  much  dis- 
cussion as  to  the  merit  of  each.  Some  of  the  criteria 
usually  taken  into  consideration  were  smoothness  of 
ride,  durability,  ease  of  repair,  cost,  etc.  However, 
thoufrh  very  mucli  in  a  minority,  there  were  those 
who  ar<i;ued  for  and  developed  experiments  on  the 
health  factors  of  various  surfaces. 

The   Beginnings   of  Roadside   Beautification 

Other  early  concerns  with  environmental  otl'octs  of 
hi<rhways  were  basically  limited  to  beautification,  and 
that  apparently  was  not  a  hi<>"h  priority  issue  with 
roadbuilders.  "The  efiort  to  promote  the  beautifying 
of  the  liighways  by  plantinu'  of  shade  ti-ees  has  not 
received  the  I'ccognition  and  attention  that  it  deserves," 
noted  a  speaker  at  tlie  turn  of  the  century.  "A  well- 
shaded  road  makes  the  work  of  the  heavily  laden 
team  easier,  and  greatly  enliances  the  delight  of  the 
man  who  is  traveling  for  pleasure,"  he  remarked, 
appealing  to  the  wealthy  to  supply  the  funds  to  carry 
out  "embellishment"  of  roadways." 

In  1900  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  issued  Farmers' 
Bulletin  Xo.  338  in  which  roadside  development  along 
macadam  roads  was  discussed  as  follows : 

Xo  matter  how  smooth  and  well  constructed  the  trav- 
eled road  may  I)e,  if  the  roadsides  are  not  cared  for,  the 
highway  as  a  whole  will  not  give  a  good  impression.  All 
rubbish  sliould  he  removed ;  the  excavations  should  be 
filled  and  emlianknients  smoothed  and  planted  with  grass 
wherever  it  will  grow.  Unsightly  brush  should  be  cut 
and  grubbed  out.  Sometimes,  however,  the  brush  and 
small  trees,  if  suitably  trimmed,  add  to  the  attractiveness 
of  the  roadside. 

All  trees  that  are  ornamental  or  which  have  value  as 
shade  trees  should  be  preseiwed  and  protected,  unless 
they  grow  so  close  together  as  to  make  a  dense  shade. . . . 
Care  in  the  selection  of  the  kinds  of  trees  best  suited  to 
the  locality  is  important." 

By  1915  highway  development  had  progressed  to  a 
degree  that  more  environmental  factors  Avere  being 
considered.     Some  of  these  factors  were  enumerated 


Graj/  birch  trees  loere  planted  along  this  Massachusetts 
highway  in  1928  to  improve  its  appearance 
and  to  shade  the  highway. 


Highway  Utter  removal  was  of  concern  in  Delaware 
as  early  as  1927. 

in  OPK  Farmers'  Bulletin  Xo.  505.  In  an  article 
entitled  Be/wfifs  of  Improved  Roa(h,  the  following 
items  of  social  advantages  were  listed:  (1)  Improve- 
ment of  schools,  (2)  improvement  of  rural  delivery 
service,  (3)  improvement  of  social  conditions. 

The  esthetic  value  of  roads  well  built  and  clean  is  some- 
times reluctantly  conceded  or  even  denied  by  individuals. 
It  is  noticeaV)le,  however,  that  along  improved  roads  there 
is  a  visible  tendency  for  farmers  to  improve  the  appear- 
ance of  their  homes  and  their  outbuildings.  .  .  .  The 
improved  road  not  only  has  an  esthetic  value  in  itself, 
but  it  is  potent  in  awakening  the  dwellers  along  its  borders 
to  a  sense  of  esthetic  values  in  farm  buildings  and  home 
surroundings. 

Social  activities  in  rural  communities  need  all  the  en- 
couragement and  stimulus  that  can  reasonably  be  given. 
All  social  activities  take  time  and  energy,  and  the  country- 
road  condition  therefore  is  a  prime  consideration  to  enable 
farmers  and  their  families  to  afford  time  for  social  inter- 
course." 

Over  the  ensuing  two  decades,  engineers  periodic- 
ally pointed  to  the  esthetic  advantages  of  tree  plant- 
ing. In  1920  a  State  highway  connnissioner  called 
for  the  adoption  in  his  State  of  the  slogan  "scenic 
betterment,"  while  at  the  same  time  warning  against 
the  destruction  of  roadside  beauty  by  billboards.^*^ 
In  1929,  after  describing  in  detail  his  State's  program, 
another  official  insisted  that  "the  business  of  roadside 
beautification"  be  made  permanent.  "It  can  never  be 
finished"  he  concluded."  In  an  article  in  1930,  titled 
"Uncle  Sam  Considers  Roadsides,"  Chief  MacDonald 
stated : 

Planting  shade  trees  along  highways  is  a  necessary 
complement  to  surfacing  of  roadways,  the  Bureau  believes. 
A  number  of  States  had  started,  with  their  own  resources, 
improvement  of  roadsides  l)efore  passage  of  the  amend- 
ment of  the  Federal  Highway  Act,  autliorizing  Federal 
participation  in  planting  shade  trees  along  higliways  in 
the  Federal-aid  system.  Recognizing  that  the  first  duty 
of  the  State  Highway  Departments  is  to  surface  highways, 
the  Bureau  does  not  wish  to  force  States  to  resort  to 
Federal  aid  in  tree-planting  nor  to  lead  States  to  begin 
tree-planting  until  they  are  ready  for  it.  But  it  will  use 
its  influence  to  bring  al)0ut  adoption  of  suitable  provisions 
in  all  States  to  enable  this  work  to  be  done. 

Correlated  with  roadside  beautification  is  the  problem 
of  ridding  the  main  traveled  liighways  of  the  blatant 
commercial  advertising  signs.  While  the  Bureau  has  no 
authority  to  correct  what  often  proves  a  menace  to  safe 
driving,  it  has  done  what  it  could  toward  eliminating  the 
billboards  by  developing  popular  sentiment  against  them. 
It  is  on  the  main  traveled  highways  of  the  country  that 
the  billl)oards  az-e  concentrated." 


367 


Recognizing  the  lure  of  pleasiue  driving,  some 
States  could  see  roadways  as  integral  pai-ts  of  the 
parks  they  were  beginning  to  build.  One  of  the 
earliest  efforts  in  this  direction  was  New  York  City's 
Central  Park,  opened  in  1862,  with  an  excellent  sys- 
tem of  roadways  for  horsedrawn  vehicles.^"  One  of 
the  earliest  parks  with  boulevards  to  be  completed  as 
a  total  system  was  constructed  in  Kansas  City,  Mis- 
souri, with  the  original  designs  dating  back  to  1893.-" 

New  York's  Bronx  River  Parkway  was  the  first 
parlcAvay  in  the  "Westchester  County  system,  a  system 
that  in  1925  pioneered  the  limited  access  scenic  road.-^ 

In  1928  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  made  its  entry 
into  construction  of  national  parkways.  With  a  man- 
date to  complete  a  highway  from  Washington,  D.C., 
to  Mount  Vernon  in  Virginia,  the  Bureau,  using 
knowledge  gained  in  observing  the  development  of 
the  Westchester  County  parkway  system,  attacked  the 
problem  of  coordinating  design,  location,  landscaping 
and  construction  into  a  finished  parkway  that  would 
befit  an  approach  to  the  home  of  our  First  President. 
This,  the  Mount  Vernon  Memorial  Parkway,  was  the 
first  major  project  to  which  the  Bureau  assigned  a 
full-time  landscape  architect.  From  the  construction 
of  this  project,  a  new  awareness  of  the  relationship  of 
landscaping  to  construction,  design,  and  maintenance 
was  established  at  the  Federal  level. 

In  1932  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials  joined  Avith  the  Highway  Research  Board  in 
the  appointment  of  a  Joint  Committee  on  Roadside 
Development.      During   the   next   8   years,   the   Joint 


Committee  prepared  and  published  a  number  of  re- 
ports. By  1940  it  was  felt  that  the  field  had  enlarged 
to  the  point  of  justifying  some  degree  of  specialization. 
Accordingly,  the  Joint  Committee  was  replaced  by  a 
committee  appointed  by  HRB  to  continue  research 
activities  and  a  committee  appointed  by  AASHO  to 
concentrate  on  administrative  issues. 

As  a  means  of  exchanging  ideas  on  all  aspects  of 
roadside  development,  the  Ohio  Department  of  High- 
ways and  the  Department  of  Landscape  Architecture 
of  Ohio  State  University  began  sponsoring  in  1941  an 
annual  Short  Course  on  Roadside  Development  which 
has  developed  over  the  years  into  a  national  conference. 
The  proceedings  of  the  conference  are  published  each 
year  to  disseminate  the  latest  information. 

With  increasing  interest  in  the  subject.  Congress 
proceeded  to  include  in  the  Federal- Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1938  approval  for  the  use  of  construction  funds  to 
cover  tcosts  of  roadside  and  landscape  development. 
This  measure  established  a  new  standard  for  Federal 
assistance  in  meeting  costs  beyond  those  incurx'ed  for 
purely  engineering  needs.  As  a  result,  many  roadside 
development  activities  Avere  carired  out.  Nevertheless, 
the  provisions  were  permissive  only,  and  since  the 
funds  came  from  amounts  otherAvise  earmarked  for 
construction,  there  Avas  a  reluctance  by  a  number  of 
States  to  allocate  moneys  to  roadside  development  at 
the  expense  of  badly  needed  neAV  highways.  It  was 
not  until  the  HigliAvay  Beautification  Act  of  1965 
provided  separate  funding  for  roadside  dcA-elopment 
that  States  really  took  advantage  of  this  permissiA^e 
legislation. 


A  junkyard  along  the  Baltimore-Washington  Expressivay  in  Anne  Arundel  County  is  effectively  screened 
with  wood  slats  and  with  vines  planted  along  the  fence. 


368 


Scenic   Enhancement   Programs 

Roadside  development  proo^rams  were  normally  lim- 
ited to  areas  within  right-of-way  lines  to  improve 
appearance  and  safety,  to  provide  amenities  for  the 
travelinp-  public,  to  facilitate  maintenance,  and  to  con- 
trol runoff  and  erosion.  Development  of  private  land 
on  the  other  side  of  these  lines  mip-ht  greatly  affect 
the  capacity  or  the  safety  of  tlie  higlnvay  or  the  view 
seen  by  the  motorist,  but  normally  this  development 
could  only  be  controlled  through  such  measures  as 
zoning,  and  this  Avas  considered,  by  State  higliway 
officials,  to  be  the  province  of  local  governments. 

Gradually,  however,  it  was  realized  that  highway 
agencies  had  a  legitimate  interest  in  what  took  place 
on  the  other  side  of  right-of-way  lines.  A  paper  pre- 
sented at  tlie  1940  AASITO  convention,  for  example, 
advocated  empowering  State  highway  departments  to 
apply  roadside  zoning  along  major  arteries.^-  Nothing 
came  of  that  recommendation,  but  Congress  did,  in 
the  19-40  Highway  Act,  authorize  the  use  of  up  to  3 
percent  of  apportioned  Federal  funds,  without  State 
matching,  for  the  purchase  of  land  beyond  normal 
right-of-way  lines  to  preserve  natural  beauty.  As  with 
roadside  development,  funds  used  for  such  purchases 
came  from  amounts  otherwise  available  for  construc- 
tion, and  only  limited  use  was  made  of  this  authoriza- 
tion. Again,  separate  funding  for  this  program  was 
also  provided  later  by  the  Highway  Beautification  Act 
of  1965. 

Parkways   and   Scenic   Roads 

During  the  1920's  and  1930's,  a  few  new  roads  were 
built  with  major  attention  to  enhancing  the  pleasure 
of  driving.  These  included  parkways  constructed  by 
State  and  county  agencies,  national  parkways,  and  a 
number  of  scenic  roads  in  national  forests.  World 
War  II  brought  a  stop  to  these  programs.  After  the 
war,  woxiv  resumed  on  scenic  roads  in  national  forests, 
and  several  State-sponsored  scenic  road  programs  were 
initiated,  notably  in  California  and  Wisconsin.  A  few 
new  parlvAvays  were  built,  but  aside  from  these,  the 
parkway  program  never  really  developed  again.  Park- 
ways became  increasingly  exi^ensive  and  the  prohibi- 
tion of  truck  traffic — one  of  the  characteristics  of 
parkways — was  a  factor  in  its  loss  of  popularity. 
'\Vhile  parkways  were  not  barred  from  inclusion  in 
the  Federal-aid  program,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
had  reservations  about  making  Federal-aid  funds  avail- 
able for  highways  from  Avhich  trucks  were  banned. 

Bureau  personnel  did,  however,  participate  in  a  com- 
prehensive reoprt  proposing  an  extensive  program  of 
parkways  and  scenic  roads  which  was  prepared  for 
the  President's  Council  on  Recreation  and  Natural 
Beauty  bj'  the  Department  of  Commerce  and  released 
in  1966."' 

Highway  Beautification   Act 

One  of  the  high  points  in  this  country's  efforts  to 
impi'ove  the  appearance  of  highways  has  been  the 
Highway  Beautification  Act  of  1965.  Basically  it 
authorized  a  threefold  program : 

•  Outdoor  Advertising  Control.  Certain  types  of 
signs  adjacent  to  primary  and  Interstate  highways 
were  to  be  removed,  and  States  were  required  to 
adopt  legislation,  if  necessarv.  controlling  new 
signs.     Compensation   was  to  be  mandatory  and 


Federal  aid  was  to  be  available  for  75  percent  of 
the  costs.  States  failing  to  comply  were  to  be 
subject  to  a  10  percent  loss  of  Federal  highway 
aid.  There  were  certain  important  limitations  in 
the  Act:  on-premise  signs  were  excluded;  control 
extended  only  660-feet  from  the  higliway  right-of- 
way  ;  signs  in  commercial  or  industrial  areas  could 
be  controlled  but  not  eliminated ;  and  Federal-aid 
secondary  highways  were  not  covered.* 

•  Jxinkyard  Control.  Certain  existing  junkyards 
along  Interstate  or  primary  highways  were  to  be 
removed  or  screened,  and  States  were  to  adopt 
legislation,  if  necessary,  controlling  new  junk- 
yards. Federal  assistance  was  to  be  available  for 
75  percent  of  the  cost  of  the  program.  States 
failing  to  comply  were  to  be  subject  to  a  10  percent 
loss  of  Federal  highway  aid.  Again,  there  wei*e 
important  limitations:  control  extended  only  1,000 
feet  from  the  highway  right-of-way  and  Federal- 
aid  secondary  highways  were  not  covered. 

•  Scenic  Enkancement.  Alternative  financing  from 
general  funds  without  State  matching  funds  was 
established  for  the  scenic  enhancement  and  road- 
side development  prograuis  previously  authorized. 
In  addition,  scenic  easements  were  authorized  and 
funds  could  be  used  not  only  for  new  projects, 
but  also  for  existing  highways  on  the  Federal-aid 
system. 

Progress  imder  the  Highway  Beautification  Act  was 
at  first  quite  slow,  due  perhaps  to  lack  of  moneys. 
Within  the  last  5  years,  however,  appropriations  have 
increased  and  considerable  progress  has  been  made. 
All  States,  for  example,  have  now  adopted  the  re- 
quired control  legislation  for  outdoor  advertising  and 
junkyards. 

An   Expanding   Environmental   Perspective 

Although  highway  administrators  had  long  con- 
sidered the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  road  lo- 
cations and  design  features,  recognition  of  the  various 
adverse  impacts  of  the  highway  have  only  fairly 
recently  been  expanded  and  quantified.  There  are  a 
number  of  reasons  for  this  lack  of  earlier  awareness. 
Most  important,  perhaps,  was  the  fact  that  prior  to 
the  mid-1950's  few  entirely  new  major  highways  were 
built.  Efforts  were  focused  upon  the  improvement  of 
existing  routes.  Surfaces  were  paved  or  repaved,  lanes 
were  widened  or  added,  and  curves  or  grades  were 
smoothed.  Occasionally  short  stretches  of  road  were 
realined  or  additional  rights-of-way  were  needed  for 
other  improvements,  but  generally  the  original  aline- 
ment  was  preserved  and  little,  if  any,  additional  land 
was  acquired. 

Properties  which,  in  the  1950's,  were  located  next  to 
major  highways  with  heavy  traffic  flows  were  not 
placed  in  this  situation  suddenly  or  unexpectedly. 
The  highways  had  evolved  from  impaved  country 
roads  in  stages  over  a  period  of  years.  During  any 
one  stage,  traffic  increased  steadily,  but  gradually, 
year-by-year.  The  final  impact  may  have  been  sub- 
stantial, but  since  it  was  imposed  bit-by-bit,  there 
was  time  for  adjustment  and  usually  little,  if  any, 
protest.  In  addition,  many  adjacent  properties  became 
suitable  for  roadside  commercial  uses  and  land  values 


*  The  660-foot  limitation   was  removed  by  the  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Amendment  of  1974. 


369 


increased  accordingly.  In  such  instances,  owners  re- 
garded the  improvement  of  the  highway  and  the 
growth  of  traffic  as  an  asset  rather  than  a  nuisance. 

Much  of  the  Federal-aid  program  took  place  in 
rural  or  undeveloped  areas — urban  projects  were  not 
eligible  prior  to  the  mid-1930's,  and  it  was  not  until 
the  1944  Highway  Act  that  a  continuing  program  for 
Federal  assistance  to  urban  projects  was  established. 
Many  of  the  adverse  impacts  of  highways  upon  the 
environment  were,  of  course,  minimal  in  rural  or  im- 
developed  areas.  Generally  speaking,  neither  noise 
nor  air  pollution  were  significant  problems  either  in 
the  early  years.  The  ecology'  of  the  areas  traversed 
may  have  been  affected,  but  it  has  only  been  in  recent 
years,  with  the  general  recognition  of  the  interde- 
pendent nature  of  the  biosphere,  that  there  has  been 
serious  recognition  of  this  possibility. 

A  matter  of  priorities  also  shaped  the  perspective 
of  these  years.  In  1920,  there  were  8  million  passenger 
cars,  but  by  1930  the  number  had  expanded  to  23  mil- 
lion and  in  1940,  to  27  million  cars.  This  rapid  ex- 
pansion loosened  the  restraints  of  fixed  transit  systems, 
and  suburbia,  with  access  provided  by  the  automobile, 
became  a  way  of  life  for  millions.  Little  attention 
was  being  paid  to  the  possible  adverse  effects  of  cars 
and  trucks  on  the  environment,  for  the  emphasis  was 
on  building  or  improving  the  roads  and  building  them 
faster  to  meet  the  burgeoning  demand. 

The  socio-economic  and  political  dislocations  of  the 
thirties  and  forties  also  diverted  attention  from  the 
environmental  effects  of  highways.  The  Depression 
of  the  1930's  resulted  in  the  encouragement  of  highway 
construction  as  a  means  of  relieving  unemployment, 
with  little  thought  given  to  possible  side  effects.  Sim- 
ilarly, during  World  War  II,  highway  construction 
was  devoted  to  projects  needed  to  support  the  war 
effort,  no  matter  what  their  environmental  conse- 
quences. 


The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  did,  however,  take  a 
step  in  the  instigation  of  an  environmental  concern  in 
the  early  1950's.  W.  J.  Keller,  BPR  Division  En- 
gineer in  New  Mexico,  felt  a  program  had  to  be  de- 
veloped to  preserve  a  record  of  our  past  that  was  being 
lost  through  highway  construction.  He  envisioned  a 
program  for  identifying  archeological  and  paleonto- 
logical  sites  prior  to  road  construction.  Keller  vis- 
ualized a  three-way  partnership — the  BPR,  the  State 
highway  department  and  the  Museum  of  New  Mexico. 
Because  of  the  working  relationship  developed,  the 
INIuseum  recovered  many  items  during  7  years  of  opera- 
tion at  89  sites.  More  important  to  the  Nation,  Con- 
gress granted  specific  authority  in  the  1956  Federal-aid 
highway  legislation  with  respect  to  archeological  and 
paleontological  salvage. 

An  economic  issue  affecting  urban  merchants  was 
the  first  general  intimation  that  highway  projects 
could  yield  environmental  problems  as  well  as  benefits. 
In  improving  existing  highways,  the  major  flow  of 
through  traffic  was  channeled  along  the  main  shopping 
streets  of  towns  and  cities.  The  merchants  viewed 
the  cars  passing  their  stores  as  carrying  potential  cus- 
tomers and  were  pleased  when  the  numbers  of  cars 
increased.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  motorist  and 
the  highway  engineer,  however,  shopping  districts  were 
frequently  bottlenecks  causing  congestion  and  delays. 
Due  to  existing  development,  street  widening  to  relieve 
the  congestion  was  usually  out  of  the  question,  and, 
thus,  the  obvious  solution  became  a  new  highway  by- 
passing built-up  areas. 

Proposed  bypasses  were  often  bitterly  resisted  by 
central-city  merchants  fearing  substantial  losses  in 
business  by  the  diversion  of  traffic  from  downtown 
streets.  Highway  builders  argued  that  most  through 
traffic  had  no  interest  in  shopping  and  that  its  presence 
on  business  district  streets  simply  interfered  with  local 
traffic  which  did  desire  to  shop.     The  resulting  con- 


U.S.  Route  48  toinds  through  western  Maryland,  not  far  from  the  trail  followed  by  General  Braddock 
in  the  French  and  Indian  War.    Freeflowing  alinement,  wide  medians  and  independently 
sited  roadways  Mend  ivell  with  the  picturesque  and  historic  countryside. 


370 


troversies  led,  in  many  cases  to  economic  sui-veys  and 
studies  designed  to  ascertain  what  the  facts  actually 
were.  Typically  these  studies  showed  mixed  results; 
some  businesses  suffered  from  the  diversion  of  through 
traffic,  some  benefitted,  and  some  were  little  affected. 

This  issue,  which  first  surfaced  in  the  yeai-s  just 
prior  to  World  AVar  II,  reached  a  peak  during  tlie 
1950's,  and  then  gradually  disappeared.  Traffic  vol- 
umes became  so  large  that  it  was  very  apparent  that 
they  could  no  longer  be  carried  on  existing  urban 
arteries. 

A  number  of  other  developments,  starting  in  the 
mid-1950's,  served  to  focus  attention  on  the  effects 
that  highways  miglit  have  on  adjacent  areas.  Prom- 
inent among  these  was  the  increasing  reliance  upon 
freeways  for  the  safe  and  effiicent  handling  of  major 
traffic  flows.  In  developed  areas,  controlled  access  and 
other  characteristics  of  freeways  were  extremely  diffi- 
cult to  achieve  by  upgrading  existing  highways.  New 
freeways,  therefore,  were  nearly  always  constructed 
along  new  alinements,  and  thus,  their  impacts  upon 
adjacent  areas  were  imposed  suddenly  and  without 
time  for  adjustment. 

Many  of  the  new  freeways  in  the  Interstate  and 
other  programs  were  located  in  or  near  the  large  ur- 
ban areas  Avliere  traffic  demand  was  the  heaviest.  These 
were  also  the  areas  where  the  possibilities  for  dis- 
placement from  homes  and  businesses  were  the  greatest 
and  where  such  adverse  effects  as  noise  and  air  pollu- 
tion were  most  keenly  felt. 

An  awareness  of  the  hazards  caused  by  vehicular 
emissions  and  poor  air  quality,  in  general,  also  basically 
developed  only  in  the  last  10  to  15  years.  The  density 
of  smog  over  a  number  of  large  urban  areas  warning 
of  future  dangers  dramatically  brought  a  heightened 
environmental  consciousness  to  the  people  at  large  and 
increased  the  demands  for  corrective  action. 


Responses  to   Environmental  Awareness 

Increased  awarene&s  of  the  environmental  effects 
of  highways  has  led  to  a  variety  of  responses  by  Con- 
gress, by  the  FHWA,  and  in  some  instances  by  other 
agenices  or  organizations.  Some  of  the  congi*essional 
actions  have  been  additions  or  amendments  to  basic 
highway  legislation,  but  others,  such  as  the  National 
Environmental  Policy  Act  of  1969  (NEPA),  apply 
to  a  wide  range  of  Federal  programs,  including  high- 
ways. 

Public   Hearings 

Lai'gely  as  a  result  of  the  bypass  controversy,  Con- 
gress, in  the  1950  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act,  required 
State  highway  departments  to  hold  piiblic  hearings 
for  all  projects  bypassing  cities  or  towns.  In  1956 
this  requirement  was  enlarged  by  requiring  public 
hearings  (or  the  opportunity  for  hearings  afforded) 
for  routes  going  tlirough  cities  or  towns  as  well  as 
those  bypassing  cities  or  towns.  Two  years  later,  in 
the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1958,  the  public  hear- 
ing requirement  was  applied  to  Interstate  projects. 
In  effect,  public  hearings  are  now  necessai-y  for  all 
major  projects  and  for  projects  of  any  size  which 
have  generated  public  interest  or  controversy. 

In  1969  the  FHWA  released  new  detailed  provisions 
requiring  that  two  hearings  (or  the  opportunity  for 
them)  be  held  for  each  important  project,  one  at  the 
location  stage  and  the  other  at  the  design  stage.  Later, 
in  1974,  however,  this  two-hearing  requirement  was 
modified.  New  regulations  permit  a  State  to  omit  one 
of  the  hearings  providing  its  Action  Plan*  spells  out 
acceptable  alternative  procedures  for  accomplishing 
the  same  objectives. 


*  Action  Plans  are  discussed  later  in  this  chapter. 


Erosion  control  dnring  consfructio?!  is  aided  by  these  silt  fence  installations  along  the 
Natchez  Trace  Parkway.     Other  methods  used  are  temporary  riprap  at  culvert  inlets, 
plastic  sheetiiH/  to  carry  cross  drainage,  and  brush  barriers 
in  conjunction  with  filter  fabric  on  embankments. 


371 


Consideration    of  Social,   Economic,   and    Environmental 
Factors 

In  addition  to  holdinjj;  public  hearings,  CongTess,  in 
1950  and  1956,  required  that  consideration  be  given 
to  the  economic  effects  of  routes  bypassing  or  going 
through  urban  areas.  In  the  1968  liighway  legislation, 
it  specified  that  social  and  environmental  effects  of 
such  projects  be  considered  and  be  consistent  with  "the 
goals  and  objectives  of  such  urban  planning  as  have 
been  promulgated  by  the  community." 

Meanwhile,  BPR  recognized  pressures  for  increased 
evaluation  of  alternative  alinements  during  the  route 
location  process  and  for  more  attention  to  social,  eco- 
nomic, and  environmental  factors.  Accordingly,  in 
1961  the  Bureau  issued  a  directive  emphasizing  the 
need  for  full  consideration  of  all  reasonable  alterna- 
tive alinements  and  listing  approximately  20  social, 
economic,  and  environmental  factors  to  be  studied  and 
evaluated,  if  applicable,  in  the  process  of  investigating 
alternatives. 


Interdisciplinary    Studies    and    Joint    Development    Per- 
spective 

As  the  importance  of  environmental  considerations 
became  increasingly  apparent  during  the  1960's,  BPR 
was    receptive    to    innovative    approaches   to    achieve 
greater  compatibility  between  highways  and  adjacent 
land  uses.     These  efforts  have  taken  several  forms: 
•  Special  studies  of  critical  segments  of  highways, 
usually  on  the  Interstate  System,  have  been  under- 
taken by  interdisciplinary  groups,  sometimes  re- 
ferred to  as  design  concept  teams.     Such  studies 
focused  not  only  on  the  design  of  the  highway, 
but   also   on  the   planning  or  replanning  of  the 
adjacent  areas.*    This  type  of  study  is  still  being 
made,  but  the  trend  has  been  towards  the  utiliza- 
tion of  in-house  professional  skills  or  established 
planning  agencies  rather  than  the  creation  of  a 
one-time  team  of  outside  experts. 


*  An  excell<>nt  discussion  on  tliis  subject  is  presented  in 
Urban  Highway  Design  Teams,  publislied  by  tlie  Higliway 
Users  Federation  for  Safety  and  Mobility. 


A  doiontoion  mini-mall  joint  development  project  in  Tvnn  Falls,  Idaho. 


•  Joint  development  of  highway  rights-of-way  has 
been  encouraged  so  as  to  acconiinodate  otlier  uses 
^Yhich,  by  their  nature  or  design,  coukl  be  ren- 
dered compatible  with  the  liighway.  Such  uses 
might  be  located  over  or  under  the  higliway  or, 
right-of-way  lines  permitting,  beside  the  highway. 
Joint  development  projects  frecjuently  provide  for 
parking  facilities,  parks,  and  recreation  areas; 
other  uses  have  included  buildings,  both  public 
and  private,  and  mass  transportation  facilities, 
such  as  rail  rapid  transit  lines. 

•  Trails  within  highway  rights-of-way  form  a  spe- 
cial category  of  joint  development.  "Within  the 
last  few  3'eai-s,  there  has  been  greatly  increased 
interest  in  bicycling  as  a  healthy  form  of  recrea- 
tion, an  economical  transportation  mode,  and  a 
significant  means  of  conserving  energy.  In  1971, 
the  FHWA  issued  a  notice  urging  States  to  give 
favorable  consideration  to  the  inclusion  of  bicycle 
or    hiking    trails    within    highway    rights-of-way 


The  location  of  1-66  in  Virginia  teas  altered  to  save  historic 
Beverly's  Mill  near  Middleburg. 


under  appropriate  conditions.  Two  yeai-s  later 
this  notice  was  expanded  and  indicated  that  Fed- 
eral highway  funds  could  be  used  in  the  cost  of 
trails  included  in  highwa}^  projects. 
During  1973  Congi-ess  carried  this  program  one 
step  further  by  authorizing  in  the  highway  legis- 
lation the  use  of  Federal  funds,  otherwise  avail- 
able to  States  for  highway  purposes,  for  the 
provision  of  separate  bikeways  or  walkways  up 
to  a  total  of  $40  million  per  year. 

•  In  1965,  the  Federal  Highway  Administrator 
brought  together  a  group  of  eight  distinguished 
professionals — representing  engineers,  architects, 
landscape  architects,  and  planners — and  requested 
that  they  prepare  a  set  of  guidelines  for  the  plan- 
ning and  design  of  urban  expressways.  The 
product  of  their  work  was  The  Freeway  in  the 
City,  issued  in  May  1968.  The  report  contained 
many  unusual  and  innovative  proposals  and  rep- 
resented the  most  advanced  thinking  of  its  time 
on  the  problem  of  fitting  a  freeway  into  an  urban 
setting. 

Protection    for    Parks,    Recreation    Areas,    Wildlife    and 
Waterfowl   Refuges,  and   Historic  Sites 

Lands  in  parks,  recreation  areas,  wildlife  and  water- 
fowl refuges,  and  historic  sites  have  particular  en- 
vironmental significance.  Preservation  has  emerged 
as  a  conscious  consideration  in  public  works  programs 
and  in  the  public's  mind  only  in  the  last  two  decades. 
Preservation  had  always  been  a  latent  concern  in  good 
engineering  practice. 

One  of  the  first  movements  for  historic  preservation 
came  about  in  the  19tli  century  when  Miss  Ann  Pamela 
Cunningham  and  her  Mount  Vernon  Ladies  Associa- 
tion decided  to  preserve  General  George  Washington's 
home,  Mount  Vernon.  This  was  and  still  is  today  a 
purely  private  effort. 

The  current  phase  of  preservation  that  is  discerned 
today  is  the  environmental  approach.  Historic  preser- 
vation was  conceived  as  a  facet  of  the  physical  en- 
vironment to  be  reflected  in  its  total  view.  Historic 
districts  and  restrictive  zoning  came  about.  Incor- 
porating sympathetic  modern  transportation  facilities 
in  these  areas  has  presented  the  highway  engineer 
with  many  challenges. 

As  historic  preservation  has  developed,  legislative 
mandates  have  helped  define  its  direction  and  goals 
and  often  presented  interesting  parallels  with  the 
highway  program.  In  1906,  the  Antiquities  Act  was 
passed  which  gave  the  Secretary  of  the  Department 
of  the  Interior  responsibility  for  prehistoric  and  his- 
toric sites  on  Federal  lands.  In  1916,  the  year  of  the 
first  highway  act,  the  National  Park  Service  Act  was 
passed  which  included  preservation  of  historic  parks. 
In  1935,  the  Historic  Sites  Act  announced  a  national 
policy  to  preserve  for  public  use  historic  resources. 
This  Act  was  the  culmination  of  tlie  associative  value 
and  inherent  architectural  merit  phases  of  tlie  preser- 
vation movement  and  exists  today  in  the  National 
Historic  Landmark  Program. 


373 


As  the  environmental  phase  of  preservation  was 
developing,  a  legislative  intei'lude  occurred.  Xot  until 
1966  was  the  envii-onmental  phase  recognized  in  the 
National  Historic  Preservation  Act  which  called  for 
a  national  inventory  of  historic  resources  (including 
historic  districts)  whose  value  could  be  national,  State 
or  local  in  significance.  Also,  these  sites  were  ex- 
tended a  protective  umbrella  that  required  special 
planning  consideration  for  historic  resources  affected 
by  Federal  public  works  projects.  This  same  year 
the  Department  of  Transportation  Act  was  passed  in- 
cluding paragraph  4(f)  which  reflected  national  con- 
cern for  historic  sites  and  mandated  that  lands  from 
historic  sites,  public  parks,  recreation  areas,  etc.,  were 
to  be  protected.  This  provision  has  been  incorporated 
into  section  138  of  title  23,  U.S.C.  Highways,  as 
follows : 

.  .  .  the  Secretary  shall  not  approve  any  program  or 
project  which  requires  the  use  of  any  publicly  owned  land 
from  a  public  parlc,  recreation  area,  or  wildlife  and  water- 
fowl refuge  of  national,  State,  or  local  significance  .  .  . 
or  any  land  from  an  historic  site  of  national,  State,  or 
local  significance  .  .  .  unless  (1)  there  is  no  feasible  and 
prudent  alternative  to  the  use  of  such  land,  and  (2)  such 
program  includes  all  possible  planning  to  minimize 
harm.  .  .  .* 

Since  1966  there  have  been  several  more  policy  re- 
finements. In  1969,  the  National  Environmental  Pol- 
icy Act  set  forth  a  national  policy  in  this  area  which 
includes  liistoric  resources.  In  1971  Presidential  Execu- 
tive Order  No.  11593  put  the  Executive  Department 
deei^ly  into  the  environmental  phase  of  the  historic 
preservation  movement.  Most  recently  has  been  the 
1974  Archeological  and  Historic  Preservation  Act 
which  has  liberalized  funding  requirements  for  Fed- 
eral agencies  to  spend  moneys  on  preservation  ac- 
tivities. 


*  This  language  is  quite  similar  to  that  used  in  section  4(f) 
of  the  1966  Department  of  Transportation  Act,  and  this  re- 
quirement has  since  been  identified  as  section  4(f).  Sponsors 
of  projects  coming  within  the  bounds  of  section  4(f)  are  re- 
quired to  demonstrate  compliance  with  its  requirements  to  the 
satisfaction  of  DOT. 


Other    Federal    Environmental    Requirements    and    the 
Highways 

There  are  now  numerous  Federal  environmental 
laws  and  regulations  relating  to  a  wide  range  of  Fed- 
eral or  Federal-aid  programs,  of  which  the  Federal- 
aid  highway  program  is  only  one.  To  the  extent  that 
highway  projects  are  affected,  they  must  and  do  com- 
ply.    The  inore  significant  of  these  measures  are: 

•  A-95  Notif cation  Procedure.  Named  after  Cir- 
cular A-95  issued  by  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget 
(now  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget)  orig- 
inally in  1969,  this  procedure  requires  applicants 
for  Federal  assistance  for  many  types  of  projects 
to  provide  advance  notice  and  plans  to  State  or 
metropolitan  area  clearinghouses.  The  clearing- 
houses inform  interested  State  and  local  agencies 
which,  in  turn,  have  the  opportunity  to  comment. 
Submitted  comments  must  accompany  the  applica- 
tion for  Federal  assistance. 

•  Historic  Preservation  Act  (1966).  Any  project 
impinging  upon  a  historic  site  placed  on  the  Na- 
tional Register  must  be  referred  to  the  Advisory 
Council  on  Historic  Preservation  for  its  review 
and  comment.  (This  requirement  relating  to  his- 
toric sites  is  in  addition  to  the  requirements  im- 
posed by  section  4(f).) 

•  National  Environmental  Policy  Act  of  1969.  This 
law,  as  its  name  indicates,  is  first  and  foremost  a 
statement  of  policy  designed  to  ".  .  .  encourage 
productive  and  enjoyable  harmony  between  man 
and  his  environment;  to  promote  efforts  which 
will  prevent  or  eliminate  damage  to  the  environ- 
ment and  biosphere  and  stimidate  the  health  and 
welfare  of  man;  to  enrich  the  understanding  of 
the  ecological  systems  and  natural  resources  im- 
portant to  the  Nation;  and  to  establish  a  Council 
on  Environmental  Quality." 


Winthrop,  Washington  preserved  its  early  Western  Mstnnj  l)i/  completely  rebuilding  its  business  district 
ivith  period  facades  at  the  time  State  Route  20  ivas  completed  in  1072. 


374 


The  National  Environmental  Policy  Act  (XEPA) 
undertakes  two  substantive  actions.  First,  it  estab- 
lishes the  Council  on  Environmental  Quality  (CEQ). 
This  three-man  group  is  responsible  for  monitorino- 
progress,  or  lack  thereof,  in  the  environmental  field,  for 
advising  the  President,  and  for  making  recommenda- 
tions on  future  actions  or  programs  Avhich  it  believes 
should  be  adopted.  Secondly,  XEPA  requires  for  each 
legislative  proposal  or  otlier  Federal  action  "sig- 
nificantly affecting  the  quality  of  tlie  Iniman  environ- 
ment" a  detailed  statement  covering: 

"(1)   the  enviroiinu'iital   impact  of  the  proposed  action, 
"(ii)   any    adverse   environmental   effects   wliicli   cannot 
be  avoided  should  the  proposal  be  implemented, 
"(iil)   alternatives  to  the  proposed  action, 
"(Iv)    the  relationship  between  local  sliort-term  uses  of 
man's  environment  and  tlie  maintenance  and  enliancement 
of  lonsr-term  productivity,  and 

"(v)  any  irreversible  and  irretrieval)le  commitments  of 
resources  which  would  I)e  involved  in  tlie  proposed  action 
should  it  be  implemented." 

These  statements,  Ivuown  as  environmental  impact 
statements  (EIS's),  must  be  prepared  for  all  Federal- 
aid  projects,  including  highways,  meeting  the  test  of 
"significantly  affecting  the  quality  of  the  human  en- 
vironment." Their  preparation  is  a  two-stage  opera- 
tion: draft  EIS's  are  circulated  to  all  concerned 
agencies  and  the  public  for  review  and  comment ;  final 
EIS's  tlien  incorporate  comments  and  indicate  their 
disposition.  Since  passage  of  NEPA,  approximately 
half  of  all  EIS's  prepared  stem  from  highway  projects. 

All  three  of  these  requirements  are  similar  in  ap- 
proach in  that  none  of  tliem  authorizes  the  direct  alter- 
ation or  stopping  of  a  project.  All  rely  upon  the  wide 
dissemination  of  information  and  the  opportunity  for 
comments  by  others  to  influence  the  decisionmaking 
process  and  to  prevent  or  mitigate  environmental  dam- 
age. Eacli  has  the  incidental,  but  important,  effect  of 
helping  to  identify  pertinent  social,  economic,  and 
environmental  considerations. 


.'1  fish  ladder  alongside  ISJ,  in  Connecticut  aids  the  migration 
of  fish  while  cnhancinf/  the  natural  environment. 


Process   Guidelines   and   Action    Plans  Approach   to   En- 
vironmental  Protection 

In  1970  Congress  decided  that  previous  efforts  by 
it  and  by  the  FHWA  to  assure  adequate  consideration 
of  the  environmental  aspects  of  highways  should  be 
reinforced.  Therefore,  the  1970  Federal-Aid  Highwaj'^ 
Act  added  three  related  measures  dealing  with  en- 
vironmental considerations  in  general,  noise  standards, 
and  air  quality. 

In  dealing  with  general  environmental  considera- 
tions, the  Department  of  Transportation  Avas  called 
upon  to  prepare  and  issue  guidelines  to  assure  (a)  t]\at 
possible  social,  economic,  and  environmental  effects 
of  proposed  highway  projects  are  fully  considered  and 
(b)  that  final  decisions  on  highway  projects  are  made 
in  the  best  overall  public  interest,  taking  into  accotmt 
the  need  for  fast,  safe,  and  efficient  transportation 
and  the  costs  of  eliminating  or  minimizing  adverse 
effects. 

The  resulting  guidelines,  known  as  the  "Process 
Guidelines,"  are  aimed  at  influencing  the  methods  by 
which  highway  projects  are  developed  rather  than  by 
attempting  detailed  supervision  or  control  of  plans 
or  projects. 

The  Process  Guidelines,  officially  issued  in  Septem- 
ber 1972,  require  each  State  highway  agency  to  prepare 
an  Action  Plan  spelling  out  the  organizational  arrange- 
ment, the  assignment  of  responsibilities,  and  the  pro- 
cedures to  be  followed  in  developing  projects  in 
conformity  with  congressional  intent.  The  Guidelines 
outline  issues  which  must  be  addressed,  of  which  the 
following  are  particularly  important : 

•  Identif cation  of  social.,  economic  and  environ- 
mental effects^  including,  especially,  the  incidence 
of  such  effects  upon  specific  groups  and  interests. 

•  Consideration  of  alternative  courses  of  action., 
including,  to  the  extent  appropriate,  alternative 
locations,  alternative  types  of  scales  of  highway 
improvements,  other  transportation  modes,  and 
the  option  of  no  new  construction  (often  referred 
to  as  the  "no  build"  alternative). 

•  Systematic  interdisciplinary  approach.,  including 
the  need  for  consideration  and  evaluation  of  the 
social,  economic,  and  environmental  effects  of 
highway  projects  by  a  wide  range  of  professional 
skills. 

•  Involvement  of  other  agencies  and  the  public, 
including  the  widespread  dissemination  of  infor- 
mation and  the  active  solicitation  of  comments 
and  views  during  all  stages  of  project  development. 

"\\'liile  coverage  of  the  topics  included  in  the  Guide- 
lines is  required,  the  manner  in  which  these  subjects 
are  addressed  is  left  to  the  States,  and  thus,  each 
State  has  considerable  freedom  in.  adjusting  its  Action 
Plan  to  its  own  needs  and  conditions. 

As  of  May  23,  1975,  52  of  a  possible  53  State  Action 
Plans  were  completed  and  approved,*  and  while  it  is 
too  early  to  make  definite  judgment  on  their  long- 
range  effectiveness,  an  FHWA  report  to  Congress  in 
1974  concluded,  "It  is  impossible  to  read  the  Action 
Plans  so  far  approved  without  being  struck  by  their 
thoroughness  and  sincerity.    These  Action  Plans  dis- 


*  The  total  number  of  53  Action  Plans  includes  50  States, 
Puerto  Rico,  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  the  FHWA  Offices 
of  Federal  Highway  Projects. 


375 


plaj'  a  willingness  to  experiment  with  the  new  tech- 
niques and  approaches,  a  strong  intent  to  solicit 
comments  and  to  disseminate  widely  all  relevant  in- 
formation, and  a  determination  to  conduct  an  open 
administration  of  the  highway  program.  Not  all  of 
the  Action  Plans  reviewed  are  equally  strong  in  all 
of  their  responses  to  the  Process  Guidelines,  but  the 
general  level  of  discussion  is  remarkably  high."  ^* 

Noise  Standards 

The  second  of  the  1970  environmental  actions  by 
Congress  was  a  requirement  calling  for  the  preparation 
and  promulgation  of  "standards  for  highway  noise 
levels  compatible  with  different  land  uses"  to  be  ap- 
plied to  future  Federal-aid  projects.  In  responses  to 
this  mandate,  FHWA  published  noise  standards  in 
1972. 

The  standards  established  design  noise  levels  for 
various  land  uses  and  activities.  These  values  are 
compared  with  predicted  future  noise  levels  expected 
from  new  highway  projects  to  determine  noise  impacts 
and  the  possible  need  for  noise  abatement  measures. 
Consideration  of  shifts  in  route  alinement  or  grade, 
the  provision  of  buffer  zones,  the  installation  of  noise 
barriers,  or  (in  limited  cases)  the  noise  insulation  of 
public-use  institutional  buildings  are  evaluated  on  all 


such  projects  to  the  extent  that  opportunities  to  abate 
noise  reasonably  exist. 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1973  authorized 
Federal-aid  funds  for  noise  abatement  measures  on 
existing  Federal-aid  highways. 

Two  important  aspects  of  the  highway  noise  prob- 
lem lie  outside  the  authority  of  the  FHWA.  The 
first  is  the  noise  emanating  from  the  vehicle  itself. 
Effective  control  here  is  dependent  upon  additional 
legislation  affecting  the  manufacture,  maintenance, 
and  operation  of  motor  vehicles.  The  second  concerns 
the  imposition  of  controls  over  the  development  of 
lands  adjacent  to  highways  to  reflect  actual  or  antici- 
pated noise  levels.  FHWA's  noise  regulations  in- 
struct highAvay  officials  to  advise  local  governments  of 
expected  noise  levels  for  new  projects.  In  addition, 
the  FHWA  has  issued  an  advisory  manual  on  the 
subject.^^ 

Air  Quality  Guidelines 

The  third  1970  environmental  action  directed  by 
Congress  was  the  preparation  and  promulgation  of 
guidelines  to  assure  that  future  highways  are  con- 
sistent with  state  implementation  plans  to  meet  the 
National  Ambient  Air  Quality  Standards  established 
as  a  result  of  the  1970  Clean  Air  Act. 


A  landscaped  sound  barrier  cuts  traffic  noise  in  residential  areas  adjacent  to  1-35  between 
Minnehaha  Parkway  and  Diamond  Lake  in  South  Minneapolis,  Minn. 


376 


Air  Quality  Guidelines  prepared  on  the  premise 
that  transportation  planning  and  air  quality  planning 
are  interdependent  and  that  neither  should  proceed 
without  full  considei'ation  of  the  other  were  issued  in 
final  form  by  the  FHWA  in  197-t.  The  Guidelines 
instruct  highway  officials  responsible  for  urban  trans- 
portation planning  in  areas  subject  to  the  3C  process* 
to  confer  with  the  appropriate  air  pollution  control 
agencies;  annually  solicit  comments  on  the  consistency 
of  transportation  plans  with  approved  State  Imple- 
mentation Plans  for  attainment  and  maintenance  of 
air  quality;  and  determine  consistenc}-  of  transporta- 
tion plans  with  State  Implementation  Plans.  Other 
provisions  in  the  Guidelines  are  intended  to  ensure 
adequate  coverage  of  air  (juality  considerations  in 
EIS's. 

Achieving  applicable  air  quality  standards  in  some 
urban  areas  will  imdoubtedly  be  very  difficidt.  For 
the  more  troublesome  air  quality  problem  areas,  the 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  has  re- 
quired transportation  control  plans  designed  to  reduce 
the  volume  of  pollutants  by  such  methods  as  improv- 
ing the  flow  of  traffic,  impi'ovements  in  mass  transpor- 
tation, bans  on  parking,  and  encouraging  carpooling. 


Section  134  of  title  23,  U.S.C. 


Of  the  various  responses  to  the  many  environmental 
problems,  only  a  few  set  forth  specific  rules  for  appli- 
cation to  individual  projects.  Section  4(f)  of  the  De- 
partment of  Transpoi'tation  Act  is  one  such  instance. 
Given  the  availability  of  a  "feasible  and  prudent 
alternative,"  land  from  public  parks  or  certain  I'elated 
uses  cannot  be  used  for  a  Federal-aid  highway  project. 

The  Noise  Standai'ds  issued  by  the  FHWA  are  also 
based  upon  a  project  approach.  When  predicted  noise 
levels  for  a  project  exceed  specified  design  noise  levels 
for  various  land  uses  and  activities,  then  noise  control 
measures  are  to  be  undertaken.  If  strict  adherence 
to  the  Standards  are  demonstratively  unreasonable, 
there  are  provisions  for  flexibility  or  exceptions. 

Like  noise,  air  quality  is  subject  to  quantitative 
analysis,  and  it  might,  therefore,  be  assumed  that  it 
would  be  equally  susceptible  to  a  project  approach. 
Because  so  little  is  known  about  the  subject  of  air 
quality  conditions  and  the  elements  involved  are  so 
varied,  project  rules  have  not  been  established  with 
the  same  degree  of  specificity  as  the  Noise  Standards. 
The  Air  Qtuxilty  Guidelines  are,  therefore,  aimed  at 
processes  and  procedures  to  assure  consistency  between 
highway  plans  and  State  air  quality  plans. 


An  aerial  ricic  of  the  serpentine  sound  barrier. 


377 


-,&-4t- 


The  other  environmental  responses,  while  varied  in 
their  approaches  and  methods,  are  alike  in  certain  re- 
spects. They  do  not,  for  one  thing,  attempt  to  impose 
regulations  or  standards  aimed  at  individual  projects, 
presumably  reflecting  a  concensus  that  any  such  effort 
"would  be  cumbersome  or  otherwise  impracticable. 
They  are  oriented,  rather,  to  procedures,  organization, 
and  personnel  in  the  expectation  that  the  right  pro- 
cesses will  lead  to  the  right  decisions  on  individual 
projects. 

Virtually  all  of  these  process-oriented  responses  are 
based  upon  one  or  more  of  a  small  group  of  funda- 
mental principles : 

•  The  need  for  identification  and  evaluation  of  all 
significant  factors. 

•  The  importance  of  wide  participation  in  the  high- 
way development  process  by  other  agencies,  offi- 
cials, and  disciplines  and  by  the  general  public. 

•  The  value  of  careful  consideration  of  all  feasible 
alternatives,  including,  where  appropriate,  other 
modes  and  the  option  of  not  proceeding  with  the 
project  in  question. 

•  The  need  for  widespread  dissemination  of  infor- 
mation to  other  agenices  and  to  the  public. 

The  application  of  these  principles  will  not  directly 
solve  environmental  problems.  But  taken  together, 
they  establish  a  process  which  goes  a  long  way  to 
assuring  maximum  compatibility  between  highways 
and  the  environment. 

Conclusion 

In  the  development  of  the  highway  system  of  this 
Xation,  the  original  motivating  factor  in  the  road- 
building  was  to  be  able  to  move  quickly  from  one 
point  to  another.  All  too  often  in  the  early  years, 
the  detrimental  sociological  and  environmental  impacts 
that  occurred  as  a  result  of  highway  construction 
were  ignored  or  treated  only  when  it  became  obvious 
or  hazardous,  as  in  the  case  of  the  health  problems 
raised  by  horses. 

The  development  of  an  awareness  of  the  sociological 
and  environmental  aspects  of  roadbuilding  was  a  grad- 
ual, evolutionary  process.  The  separation  of  State 
and  Federal  functions  allowed  the  development  of  this 
awareness  and  of  the  tools  to  correct  the  situation. 
But  the  Federal-State  partnership  evolved  such  pro- 
grams as  appraisal,  appraisal  review,  negotiation,  re- 
location assistance  and  payment,  replacement  housing, 
highway  beautification,  environmental  protection,  joint 
use  of  highway  rights-of-way,  and  many  more. 

Tliere  are  yet  many  problems  which  affect  man's 
total  environment  that  have  to  be  solved.  However, 
mechanisms  have  been  created  in  the  interrelated,  yet 
independent,  nature  of  the  Federal-State  partnership 
and  in  the  establishment  of  independent  offices  of 
right-of-way  and  enA'ironment  to  assure  that  these 
concerns  receive  their  full  consideration  in  the  building 
of  a  liighway.     The  existence  of  these  mechanisms  do 


not  guarantee  the  successful  solution  to  all  the  prob- 
lems affecting  man's  total  environment.  However,  their 
existence  does  provide  a  well-founded  hope  and  does 
go  a  long  way  in  assuring  that  the  creation  of  the 
highway  system  and  the  well-being  of  our  total  en- 
vironment will  exist  compatibly. 

REFERENCES 

'  S.  Booth,  The  History  of  Federal-Aid  Legislation  for  High- 
icays,  AASHO — The  First  Fifty  Years,  1914-1964  (American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Wasliington,  D.C.,  1965) 
p.  151. 

'W.  Rayner,  Elementary  StrR\'EYiNG,  Vol.  I,  2d  ed.  (Van 
Nostrand  Company,  Inc.,  New  York,  1946)   p.  278. 

'Id. 

*  Contrasting  United  States  and  European  Practices  In 
Road  Development,  address  by  T.  H.  MacDonald  before  the 
24th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials,  Dallas,  Tex.,  Dec.  5,  1938,  Papers,  1937-39, 
pp.  12,  13. 

°  J.  A.  Tarr,  Urban  Pollution — Many  Long  Years  Ago,  Amer- 
ican Heritage,  Vol.  XXII,  No.  6,  Oct.  1971,  p.  66. 

"  Id.,  p.  68. 

'  Id.,  p.  67. 

'  Id.,  p.  69. 

°  Id.,  p.  67. 

"  What  'New  York  State  is  Doing,  Good  Roads  Magazine, 
N.S.  Vol.  IX,  No.  2,  Feb.  1908,  p.  59. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1900,  p.  287. 

"M.  Dickinson,  The  Beautifying  and  Endowment  of  High- 
ways, Good  Roads  Magazine,  Vol.  IV,  No.  8,  Aug.  1903,  p.  324. 

"A.  Fletcher,  Macadam  Roads,  Farmers'  Bulletin,  338  (U.S. 
Dept.  of  Agriculture,  Washington,  D.C.  1909)   p.  21. 

"  Office  of  Public  Roads,  Benefits  of  Improved  Roads, 
Farmers'  Bulletin  505  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Agriculture,  Washington, 
D.C.  1915)  p.  20. 

"  J.  Hazlewood,  Making  Highways  Ornamental  and  Useful, 
Public  Roads,  Vol.  2,  Nos.  21-22,  .Jan.-Feb.  1920,  pp.  14-16. 

"  J.  Taylor,  Roadside  Plan  and  Progress  in  Massachusetts, 
Public  Roads,  Vol.  10,  No.  6,  Aug.  1929,  p.  109. 

"T.  H.  MacDonald,  Uncle  Sam  Considers  Roadsides,  Amer- 
ican Civic  Annual,  Vol.  II  (American  Civic  Association,  Inc., 
Washington,  D.C.  1930)   pp.  164,  165. 

"D.  C.  Smith,  Urban  Parks  and  Roads  (Highway  Users 
Federation  for  Safety  and  Mobility,  Washington,  D.C.  1971) 
pp.  7,  8. 

"Id.,  p.  21. 

"  W.  Bugge  &  W.  Snow,  The  Complete  Highway,  The  High- 
way and  the  Landscape  (Rutgers  Univeristy  Press,  New 
Brunswick,  N.J.  1959)  p.  10. 

"  H.  Coons,  Control  of  Roadside  Exploitation,  Con\tention 
Group  Meetings,  Papers  and  Discussions  (American  Asso- 
ciation of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C,  1940) 
p.  40. 

"U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce,  A  Proposed  Program  for  Scenic 
Roads  and  Parkways  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C,  1966)  pp.  2-4. 

'*  Federal  Highway  Administration,  Progress  Report  on 
Implementation  of  Process  Guidelines  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Trans- 
portation, Washington,  D.C,  1974)  p.  15. 

"  Federal  Highway  Administration,  The  Audible  Land- 
scape :  A  Manual  for  Highway  Noise  and  Land  Use  (U.S. 
Dept.  of  Transportation,  Washington,  D.C,  1974). 


The  right-of-way  of  1-40  west  of  Needles,   Calif.,  included  a 
.stand  of  rare  choUn  cactus  described  by  one  biologist  as  a 
"motherlode."    The  stand  was  placed  under  the  protection 
of  the  California  Natural  Lands  and  Water  Reserve 
System  as  an  outdoor  ecological  laboratory. 


379 


1 


De/iQn 


U.S.  Ji22  in  rural  Fcnnaylvania.    The  curvilinear  alinement  and  roadside  treatment 
have  resulted  in  a  design  incorporating  utility,  beauty,  and  economy  of  maintenance. 

380 


Highway  design  is  the  art  of  anticipating  the 
roadway  requirements  of  motor  veliicle  traffic  and  of 
satisfying  these  requirements  in  the  preparation  of 
construction  plans.  It  involves  the  selection  of  dimen- 
sional values  for  geometric  features  such  as  widths, 
radii  of  curvature,  rates  of  cross  section  slopes  and 
longitudinal  gradients;  the  determination  of  the  re- 
quirements for  the  roadway  structure  (pavement  and 
base  courses)  and  for  the  bridges,  drainage  and  other 
structures;  the  preservation  and  restoration  of  ground 
cover  and  plant  growtlis;  the  safety  and  efficiency  of 
traffic  operations,  including  all  forms  of  traffic  control 
devices;  and  the  melding  of  the  highway's  alinement 
and  gradient  with  tlie  landscape  in  a  manner  least 
disturbing  to  the  natural  environment.  Engineering 
analyses  during  the  highway  design  must  attain  an 
acceptable  balance  between  the  broad  controls  of  eco- 
nomic limitations,  land  space  usage  and  environmental 
and  social  considerations. 

The  roads  existing  during  the  early  years  of  the 
automobile  were  not  designed  for  motor  vehicle  usage; 
they  were  simply  wagon  roads.  For  many  years  after 
the  automobile  came  into  wide  use,  these  same  roads 
were  adapted  to  automobile  travel  with  little  or  no 
change  in  location,  alinement  or  geometries.  Even 
after  the  automobile  became  commonplace,  a  number 
of  years,  or  even  decades,  were  to  elapse  before  high- 
ways were  constructed  to  meet  the  unique  require- 
ments of  motor  vehicle  traffic. 

The  transitional  period  from  horsedrawn  to  motor 
vehicle  traffic  occurred  at  a  time  when  railroad  trans- 
portation was  approaching  maturity.  Trains  shared 
with  the  automobile  one  distinguishing  characteristic 
when  compared  with  horsedrawn  vehicles — both  trav- 
eled at  a  faster  speed.  It  was  natural,  then,  that  when 
travel  speed  became  recognizable  as  a  factor  in  high- 
way design,  the  leaders  in  this  art  turned  to  the  prac- 
ticing railroad  designers  for  guidance  in  determining 
alinement  design  details  to  satisfy  the  requirements 
of  the  higher  speeds  of  motor  vehicles. 

"\MTile  building  upon  these  bases  of  knowledge, 
highway  designers  were  often  in  a  dilemma  as  to 
which  features  of  wagon  roads  should  be  retained, 
modified,  or  rejected,  which  characteristics  of  railroad 
practice  should  be  incorporated,  and  what  new  con- 
cepts were  needed  to  satisfy  the  peculiar  qualities  of 
automobile  traffic.  Resolution  of  these  matters  was 
often  the  subject  of  heated  debate  with  the  answers 
frequently  being  dictated  by  economics. 

From  the  standpoint  of  highway  design,  the  auto- 
mobile era  logically  falls  into  four  fairly  distinct 
periods:  (1)  1900-1920:  the  preemptory  period  during 
which  the  motor  vehicle  usurped  the  wagon  road  in 
its  contemporary  state  of  improvement;  (2)  1920- 
1930 :  the  uplifting  period  during  Avhich  existing  roads 
were  adapted  to  motor  vehicular  use,  largely  by  shap- 
ing the  cross  section,  draining  and  surfacing;  (3) 
1930-1940:  the  period  of  stabilization  in  the  design  of 
conventional  highway  during  which  the  dynamics 
of  motor  vehicle  traffic  were  recognized  as  a  major 
force  to  be  dealt  with;  and  (4)  1940-1976:  the  era  of 
the  freeway. 

It  is  significant  that  tliroughout  the  brief  period  of 
development  of  the  modern  highway  system  there  has 
been  a  lag  of  a  decade  or  more  between  the  time  of 


recognition  of  a  new  design  principle,  or  a  standardi- 
zation of  a  dimensional  value,  or  the  advocacy  of  a 
concept,  and  the  time  that  results  of  these  advances 
in  design  begin  to  show  in  completed  highwaj^s.  For 
example,  a  discovery  or  determination  in  1910  that 
highway  curves  should  be  superelevated  to  offset 
centrifugal  force  found  little  application  until  after 
1920  when  the  extensive  program  of  surfacing  high- 
ways came  into  full  swing. 

The  categorization  of  the  four  design  periods  re- 
flects the  period  of  application  of  design  principles, 
rather  than  the  period  of  their  discovery.  Each  of 
these  periods  is  discussed  in  terms  of  the  design  char- 
acteristics in  vogue  at  the  time  and  of  the  factors  that 
influenced  these  characteristics. 


Twilight  of  the  Wagon   Road:   1900-1920 

The  automobile  came  on  the  scene  at  a  time  when 
roadbuilding  was  imdergoing  a  renaissance  after  50 
years  of  neglect.  The  better  rural  roads  of  the  mid- 
19th  century  were  waterbound  macadaui,  12  to  15  feet 
wide — ^a  width  that  was  adecjuate  for  two  loaded 
wagons  to  pass  each  other  with  the  horses  at  a  walk. 
To.  shed  water  quickly,  these  roads  were  crowned  on 
both  the  straight  sections  and  the  curves,  and  the 
crown,  6  to  8  inches  higher  in  the  center,  was  steep 
enough  to  make  driving  at  the  sides  uncomfortable. 
Consequently  all  traffic  ran  in  the  middle,  taking  to 
the  righthand  side  of  the  road  only  to  pass  other 
vehicles. 


In  1913,  even  mountain  roads  such  as  this  earth  road  in  Wise 
County,  Va.,  had  relatively  flat  grades  to  accommodate  horse- 
drawn vehicles. 


381 


Wagon  roads  outside  of  cities  were  usually  unsur- 
faced  except  for  the  more  heavily  traveled  trunk 
routes.  Highways  carrying  heavy  tonnages  of  freight 
were  surfaced  with  broken  stone,  gravel,  or  water- 
bound  macadam.  The  National  Road,  for  example, 
which  was  constructed  westward  from  Cumberland, 
Maryland,  in  the  early  years  of  the  19th  century,  had 
a  20-foot  surface  consisting  of  a  12-inch  bottom  course 
and  a  6-inch  top  course  of  broken  stone.  This  was 
far  superior  to  the  typical  highway  of  that  period. 

In  addition  to  macadam,  broken  stone,  and  gravel, 
other  road  surface  materials  used  with  varying  suc- 
cess were  brick,  asphalt,  wooden  planks,  sand-clay  and 
granite  blocks. 

The  basic  principles  for  constructing  all  forms  of 
surfaces  as  they  are  known  today  had  been  discovered 
and  put  into  limited  practice  before  1910.  Except  for 
streets  in  the  larger  metropolitan  areas  and  major 
routes  of  commerce,  most  road  surfaces  were  in  a 
rather  primitive  state  of  improvement  at  that  time 
and  were  to  remain  so  for  several  years  to  come. 

These  roads  were  built  for  horsedrawn  steel-tired 
traffic  traveling  at  a  top  speed  of  8  miles  per  hour. 
In  recognition  of  the  limited  capability  of  animal- 
drawn  conveyances  to  ascend  grades,  gradients  seldom 
exceeded  5  percent,  and  this  resulted  in  rather  crooked 
locations  carefully  selected  to  avoid  steep  grades, 
closely  fitted  to  the  terrain,  with  small  cuts  and  fills 
to  save  grading  costs.  Side  slopes  in  both  cuts  and 
fills  were  as  steep  as  the  natural  materials  would 
allow,  usually  li/^  feet  horizontal  to  1  foot  vertical. 

In  the  era  of  animal  power,  105  feet  was  a  generous 
radius  for  horizontal  curves.  This  would  enable  a 
four-horse  team  and  wagon  having  a  total  length  of 
50  feet  to  round  a  curve  without  leaving  a  12-foot 
travelled  way.  For  two-horse  rigs  with  wider  roads, 
the  radius  could  be  even  shorter.  Vertical  curves 
were  seldom  used;  the  vertical  angle  between  two  6 
percent  grades  was  only  about  6  degrees,  and  this  was 
hardly  enough  of  a  peak  or  valley  to  cause  discomfort 
to  anyone  in  a  vehicle  traveling  at  4  or  5  miles  per 
hour. 

The  wagon  roads  were  inconspicuous  and,  from 
economic  necessity,  "rested  lightly  on  the  land." 
However,  it  is  doubtful  that  their  builders  considered 
this  fact  as  an  esthetic  advantage  for  their  work  or, 
for  that  matter,  that  they  gave  much  thought  to  the 
appearance  of  the  road  itself.  In  a  few  eastern  States, 
notably  Massachusetts  and  Maryland,  trees  were 
planted  along  the  roads,  but  these  had  a  practical 
purpose  in  addition  to  creating  visual  beauty.  Their 
shade  reduced  the  dusting  and  disintegration  which 
followed  when  waterbound  macadam  surfaces  dried 
too  rapidly. 

Early  Location  Methods 

The  railroads  pioneered  good  location  methods  in 
the  early  20th  century.  Under  the  spur  of  competi- 
tion among  themselves  and  being  relatively  unhamp- 
ered by  manmade  obstacles,  the  railroads  began  to 
seek  locations  with  flatter  gradients  than  previously 
accepted  in  the  interest  of  greater  loads  and  less  fuel 
consumption.  For  such  exacting  requirements,  the 
old  method  of  location  by  which  the  locator  went  into 
the  field,  selected  the  route  by  direct  observation,  and 


set  the  stakes  as  he  went  along  was  no  longer  adequate 
in  any  but  the  most  level  country.  The  locator  could 
be  aware  of  only  what  was  in  the  range  of  his  vision ; 
a  better  location  might  lie  over  the  next  hill,  but  he 
could  not  see  it.  A  method  had  to  be  devised  that 
would  permit  the  locator  to  examine  a  wider  and 
longer  sweep  of  country,  and  to  meet  this  need,  a  new 
method  of  location  evolved.  This  is  called  the  "topo- 
graphic method"  to  distinguish  it  from  the  old  "direct 
method." 

Instead  of  staking  the  centerline  directly  on  the 
ground,  the  locator  surveyed  a  preliminary  line,  or 
"baseline,"  as  a  base  for  a  strip  topographic  map. 
After  completing  4  or  5  miles  of  topography,  the 
locator  spread  his  maps  on  a  long  table,  and  he  looked 
down  upon  them  as  if  he  were  an  observer  in  a  bal- 
loon. Instead  of  seeing  only  a  hill  in  front  of  him  he 
saw  the  country  in  a  miniature  far  ahead.  His  vision 
was  not  obstructed  by  trees,  and  he  was  not  annoyed 
by  insects  or  the  weather.  He  easily  perceived  the 
vital  features,  or  "controls,"  which  determined  the 
best  location  for  the  centerline  that  would  conform 
with  the  railroad's  geometric  standards. 

By  scaling  the  horizontal  distances  between  points 
where  his  projected  centerline  intersected  the  contours 
of  the  map,  the  locator  obtained  a  profile  which  he 
could  analyze  for  gradients  and  earthwork  balance. 
If  this  profile  was  unsatisfactory,  he  could  draw  an- 
other paper  projection,  scale  a  new  profile,  and  make 
a  new  analysis.  Only  when  he  was  satisfied  that  he 
had  the  best  location  did  he  transfer  the  paper  pro- 
jection to  the  ground  as  his  final  staked  location  for 
the  centerline  of  the  railroad. 

It  was  to  be  many  years  before  the  art  of  highway 
location  and  design  was  to  attain  such  a  high  degree 
of  sophistication.  Until  about  1930,  the  railroad 
method  of  alinement  and  profile  was  generally  con- 
sidered the  ultimate  in  design  for  highways  as  well. 

The  Impact  of  the  Automobile  on  the  Early  Roads 

Prior  to  and  during  the  first  decade  of  the  20th 
century,  the  automobile  had  a  negligible  effect  on  the 
design  and  construction  of  highways.  It  was  looked 
upon  as  an  interloper  which  had  to  adapt  itself  to 
existing  streets  and  highways.  If  adjustment  was 
necessary,  it  was  encumbent  upon  the  vehicle  manu- 
facturer and  the  operator  to  make  such  adjustment. 
It  was  considered  no  more  inconvenient  for  a  motorist 
on  a  rural  highway  to  slow  to  6  or  8  miles  per  hour 
for  a  right-angled  curve  than  for  him  to  do  so  at  an 
urban  street  intersection.  If  climatic  conditions  were 
unfavorable  for  motoring,  the  traveler  merely  substi- 
tuted the  horse  for  the  auto.  In  northern  latitudes, 
roads  were  so  frequently  impassable  for  automobiles 
during  the  winter  months  that  cars  were  customarily 
placed  on  jacks  in  the  late  autumn  and  remained 
there  until  after  the  spring  thaws  in  order  to  preserve 
the  tires. 

Despite  enactment  of  the  1916  Federal  Aid  Road 
Act,  the  harsh  impact  of  the  automobile  on  the  high- 
way system  was  felt  very  strongly  in  the  second  dec- 
ade of  the  century,  and  this  was  particularly  true  of 
the  roadway  surface.  The  automobile  Avas  extremely 
damaging  to  macadam  and  gravel  roads,  which  essen- 
tially were  held  together  by  the  interlocking  of  stone 


382 


*    6'    - 

24' 

6' 

t 

12" 

nM^> 

ik 

VOx^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 

2'    y^ 

^ 

\y* 

EARTH  ROAD 

*>  7y5 

$>" 

SOURCE: 

FIRST  ANNUAL  REPORT  OF  IOWA  STATE  HIGHWAY 

COMMISSION    1913-1914 

10' 


y—    •    g'-«»>^  - ■■'^■,■1 


GRAVEL  SURFACE 
SOURCE:    SECOND  BIENNIAL  REPORT  ARKANSAS  STATE  HIGHWAY 
COMMISSION    1916 


OIL  MACADAM  SURFACE 
SOURCE:    FIRST  BIENNIAL  REPORT  CALIFORNIA  HIGHWAY 
COMMISSION    1918,  p.  49 


TYPICAL  SECTIONS  1900-1920 


When  roads  became  impassable, 
some  motorists  fell  back  on 
the  services  of  more 
traditional  transportation. 


383 


fragments  and  the  cementing  power  of  stone  dust  and 
clay.  The  tread  patterns  of  pneumatic  tires  tended 
to  suck  the  finer  particles  to  the  surface  where  they 
were  caught  in  the  turbulent  air  currents  created  by 
the  car's  rapid  movement.  The  result  was  a  huge 
cloud  of  dust,  stifling  to  the  motorist  and  abhorrent 
to  the  property  owner,  but  even  worse  was  the  devas- 
tating effect  on  the  road  surface.  Waterbound  ma- 
cadam was  soon  reduced  to  a  residual  layer  of  loose 
coarse  material  filled  with  potholes.  On  roads  of 
native  clay,  the  surface  became  a  dust  layer  2  inches 
or  more  in  depth  during  the  dry  season  and  as  fine  as 
powdered  talc.  A  sudden  shower  would  turn  such  a 
layer  of  dust  into  a  thin  blanket  of  mud  as  slippery 
as  wet  ice;  a  prolonged  rain  would  convert  it  to  a 
bottomless  quagmire. 

Another  unexpected  effect  was  greatly  increased 
wear  on  the  inside  of  curves  and  the  loosening  and 
shifting  of  surfacing  materials  from  the  inner  to  the 
outer  side  of  the  roadway  on  curves.  Rather  than 
slowing  to  a  speed  commensurate  with  the  radius  of 
the  curve,  drivers  instinctively  hugged  the  inside  of 
the  curve,  even  to  the  extent  of  encroaching  upon  the 
ditch  slope,  in  order  to  lengthen  the  effective  radius 
and  to  take  advantage  of  the  "banking"  afforded  by 
the  ditch  slope. 

In  the  case  of  curves  to  the  left,  this  meant  crossing 
into  the  opposing  lane,  since  the  normal,  high  crown 
was  customarily  carried  around  curves.  As  a  conse- 
quence of  resistance  to  lateral  acceleration,  loose  sur- 
facing materials  were  thrown  to  the  outer  side  of  the 
curves,  resulting  in  a  curve  of  longer  radius  that  be- 
came somewhat  superelevated  by  traffic,  rather  than 
by  design  and  construction. 

The  impact  of  the  automobile  on  the  early  roads 
was  not  all  on  the  negative  side.  In  the  case  of  gradi- 
ent, for  example,  automobiles  and  trucks  were  capable 
of  ascending  any  grade  suitable  for  horsedrawn  traffic. 
If  the  surface  provided  sufficient  traction,  grades  up 
to  6  or  8  percent  posed  no  serious  problem  for  skilled 
operators  who  had  mastered  the  art  of  down-shifting 
to  a  lower  gear.  One  feature  of  vehicular  design  that 
was  the  cause  of  considerable  consternation  to  many 
drivers  ascending  hills  was  the  location  of  the  gas 
tank  with  respect  to  the  carburetor.  Many  vehicles, 
including  the  most  popular  make  of  the  era,  relied 
upon  gravity  flow  of  fuel  from  a  tank  beneath  the 
driver's  seat  to  the  engine's  carburetor  located  only 
2  or  3  inches  lower  than  the  bottom  of  the  tank.  It 
was  not  uncommon  to  stall  on  a  grade  for  lack  of  gas, 
even  with  a  tank  partly  filled.  There  is  no  evidence 
that  these  experiences  altered  the  design  of  highways, 
however. 

By  the  year  1920,  many  State  higliAvay  departments 
were  recognizing  the  inadequacies  of  the  design  fea- 
tures of  wagon  roads,  but  aside  from  a  very  limited 
mileage  of  added  pavement  during  the  period  1900- 
1920,  advances  in  design  were  very  limited.  It  is 
questionable  whether  rural  roads  in  many  of  the  States 
up  to  this  time  were  actually  designed.  Rather,  they 
came  into  being  through  the  gradual  improvement  of 
trails,  and  their  shape  and  dimensions  depended  more 
on  the  skill  and  judgment  of  a  maintenance  man 
riding  a  split  log  drag  than  upon  a  professional  de- 
sign engineer  guided  by  a  set  of  design  standards. 


By  the  early  1900's  the  National  Road,  a  superior  highway  for 
its  time,  needed  improvement.  This  is  a  section  of  the  road 
near  Hancock,  Md.,  before  construction. 

In  a  report  prepared  by  the  highway  commissioner 
of  one  of  the  States  in  1915,  county  officials  were 
advised : 

Many  of  the  counties  .  .  .  have  the  remains  of  roads . . . 
built  during  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  .  .  . 
The  old  roads  of  this  age  still  stand  as  monuments  to  the 
ability  and  farsightedness  of  our  forefathers  .  .  .  The 
roads  of  that  day  were  arteries  of  commerce.  Later  they 
gave  way  to  the  railroads  and  roadbuilding  became  a 
forgotten  and  lost  science.  Any  man  who  could  nap  rock 
was  a  roadbuilder. 

With  the  coming  of  the  automobile  and  the  motor  truck 
the  road  is  again  the  artery  of  commerce.  Interest  has 
been  revived.  We  are  beginning  to  appreciate  the  State 
highways  and  turnpikes  built  nearly  one  hundred  yeai-s 
ago.  We  find  them  hard  to  improve  on,  even  with  present 
day  methods.  We  can  build  a  better  surface,  but  we 
can't  build  a  better  subgrade.  .  .  . 

...  a  road  once  built  is  rarely  changed,  provided  it  is 
built  according  to  certain  laws  which  are  as  old  as  the 
hills  themselves.  So  insist  that  your  road  be  properly 
drained,  well  located,  taking  advantage  of  every  topo- 
graphic condition.  No  grade  should  exceed  a  rise  of  5' 
in  100',  and  lastly  that  you  keep  and  take  sufficient  right 
of  way  to  allow  for  ditches  and  any  increase  in  width 
your  road  may  require  in  the  years  to  come  .  .  .  The 
right  of  way,  roadbed  and  drainage  openings  ai-e  perma- 
nent. Tlie  surface,  regardless  of  what  it  is,  will  sooner 
or  later  have  to  be  replaced.' 

At  about  the  same  time,  a  neighboring  State  re- 
ported that  90  percent  of  the  roads  within  its  boun- 
daries were  earth  roads  and  added,  prophetically,  that 
they  were  likely  to  remain  earth  roads  for  a  great 
many  years.^  In  1933,  18  years  later,  less  than  14 
percent  of  the  total  road  mileage  in  that  State  was 
reported  as  surfaced.^  Despite  the  fact  that  over 
13,000  miles  had  been  paved  in  the  interim,  there  had 
been  little  gain  percentagewise  because  of  expansion 
in  the  highway  network. 


384 


■■KBk 

The  same  section  of  7-oad  after  construction. 

Nationwide,  the  mileage  of  high  type  pavements  on 
i"ural  highways  in  1920  was  negligible  in  relation  to 
the  total  miles  of  highway,  although  substantial  gains 
had  been  made  in  gravel  surfacing  up  to  that  time. 
Regretabl}-,  however,  much  of  the  rural  pavement  in 
place  at  the  beginning  of  World  War  I  was  destroyed 
by  heavy  trucking  in  pursuance  of  the  war  effort. 

Dawn  of  the   Motor  Highway:    1920-1930 

The  period  1920-1930  may  be  characterized  as  a 
period  of  trial  and  error  in  adapting  an  assortment 
of  roads  laid  out  for  use  by  horses  and  wagons  to  the 
use  of  automobiles  and  trucks,  ^^^lile  the  highway 
system  continued  to  expand  during  this  period,  par- 
ticularly in  the  agricultural  belt  of  the  Plains  States, 
the  nature  of  the  added  highways  was  generally  the 
same  as  the  earlier  wagon  roads  with  perhaps  the 
addition  of  an  all-weather  surface,  frequently  gravel 
or  sand-clay.  Except  for  roads  in  the  New  England 
and  North  Atlantic  States  and  in  portions  of  the 
Pacific  States,  few  rui'al  roads  in  1920  were  surfaced 
with  anything  better  than  sand-clay  or  gravel.  If  one 
were  careful  in  selecting  his  route,  he  could  travel 
from  New  York  City  to  Washington,  D.C.,  on  paved 
highways.  From  Washington  to  Richmond,  however, 
the  best  route  was  one-third  longer  than  the  most 
direct  one  and  included  99  miles  of  gravel  surface 
rather  than  a  paved  surface.  From  Chicago  to 
^Milwaukee,  according  to  a  prominent  guidebook  of 
the  day,  the  entii-e  92  miles  was  paved  with  concrete 
or  macadam  "except  for  one  very  rough  mile."'  Going 
south  from  Chicago,  the  route  to  Lafayette,  Indiana, 
consisted  of  98  miles  of  gravel,  26  miles  of  macadam, 
and  16  miles  of  dirt.  The  entire  102-mile  route  from 
Atlanta  to  Macon,  Georgia,  consisted  of  sand-clay 
roads.^     With  these  segments  of  interstate  highways 


in  the  conditions  described,  it  requires  little  imagina- 
tion to  visualize  the  condition  of  the  lesser  important 
routes.  Clearl}^  the  most  pressing  need  was  for  all- 
weather  surfacing,  and  this  was  the  course  that  the 
roadbuilding  program  followed. 

Geometric   Design   Features 

While  most  highway  authorities  were  conscious  of 
a  need  to  modify  the  highway  cross  section  and  aline- 
ment  to  meet  the  requirements  of  motorized  traffic, 
there  was  little  precedent  upon  which  to  base  judg- 
ments of  immediate  design  requirements,  or  worse,  for 
predicting  those  of  the  future.  Highway  engineers 
had  much  in  common  with  one  self-made  automotive 
engineer  of  this  period  who  has  been  quoted  to  the 
effect  that,  "If  its  in  a  book  its  out  of  date."  ^  * 

Elements  recognized  as  warranting  special  consid- 
eration because  of  higher  vehicular  speed  included 
sight  distance,  curvature,  and  superelevation.  Vari- 
ables taken  into  account  because  of  the  volume  and 
character  of  traffic  were  pavement  width  and  struc- 
tural needs.  The  manner  of  satisfying  these  require- 
ments varied  not  only  between  States,  but  within 
States.  Minnesota,  for  example,  found  that,  "Abrui^t 
narrow  curves  have  contributed  their  share  to  fatal 
accidents  .  .  .  which  it  is  expected  will  be  relieved 
by . . .  [a]  requirement  for  a  clear  sight  distance  of 
200  feet  on  all  State  roads  with  widening  and  banking 
on  curves."  '^  In  1921  it  was  the  practice  in  Illinois, 
as  another  example,  to  eliminate  right-angled  turns 
"whenever  possible,"  and  where  such  turns  were  nec- 
essary, a  minimum  radius  of  500  feet  was  used.  More- 
over, "All  curves  which  have  a  radius  of  less  than 
6,000  feet  are  super-elevated  .  .  ."  ^  The  speed  upon 
which  the  superelevation  was  based  was  the  legal 
speed  limit  which,  in  1921,  was  25  m.p.h.  This  was 
increased  to  35  m.p.h.  in  1928,  with  a  maximum  super- 
elevation of  1  inch  per  foot  for  curves  with  radii  of 
less  than  1,000  feet.^  The  State  of  California,  among 
others,  had  earlier  considered  the  matter  of  super- 
elevation and,  in  1917,  had  reached  a  compromise 
decision  to  apply  superelevation  to  concrete  pavements 
on  mountain  roads  only.  The  rate  of  superelevation 
to  be  applied  varied  from  a  maximum  of  %  inch  per 
foot  for  curves  having  a  radius  of  75  feet  or  less  to 
i/g  inch  per  foot  for  radii  within  the  range  of  225  to 
300  feet.^  A  few  States  used  spiral  transitions,  but 
the  practice  was  not  widespread.  Obviously,  most 
decisions  in  the  matter  of  roadway  geometry  were 
arbitrarily  made  and  had  little  scientific  support. 

Perhaps  the  element  that  varied  most  widely  was 
the  width  of  surfacing.  In  Kentucky,  for  example, 
during  the  years  just  before  and  after  1920,  contracts 
were  awarded  for  pavements  ranging  from  9  to  20 
feet  in  width,  with  14  feet  predominating.^"  Most 
bridges  had  either  12-  or  16-foot  roadways.  In  Illi- 
nois during  the  same  period,  concrete  and  brick  pave- 
ments were  10,  15,  and  18  feet  wide."  It  was  common 
practice  at  about  this  time  to  construct  pavements 
with  sufficient  width  to  accommodate  only  a  single 
lane  of  traffic.  There  was  some  disagreement  as  to 
whether  the  best  position  for  such  a  pavement  was  in 
the  center  of  the  roadbed  or  at  the  riffht-hand  side 


*  The  engineer  was  Childe  Harold  Wills,  at  the  time  an 
employee  of  the  Ford  Motor  Company  and  later  producer  of 
the  Wills  St.  Claire  Automobile. 


385 


going  to  the  market  center.  One  critic  claimed  that 
the  center  was  the  most  desirable  position  because  it 
was  better  looking,  was  more  easily  drained,  and  was 
safer  to  traffic." 

The  dilemma  as  to  the  most  suitable  position  for 
single-lane  pavements  was  soon  resolved — the  rate  of 
traffic  growth  was  so  rapid  that  single-lane  pavements 
were  short  lived  and  such  construction  was  uneco- 
nomical. Consequently,  this  type  construction  was 
discontinued.  The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921 
doubtless  spurred  this  action.  This  legislation  re- 
quired, for  the  first  time,  that  the  wearing  surfaces 
on  Federal-aid  highways  be  at  least  18  feet  wide. 

With  the  discontinuance  of  single-lane  construction, 
pi'actically  all  subsequent  paving  between  1920  and 
1930  was  of  two-lane  width,  ranging  from  14  to  20 
feet.  Pavements  wider  than  two  lanes  were  rarely 
needed.  The  experience  in  Maryland  may  be  typical. 
In  1920  the  concrete  roads  were  constructed  15  feet 
wide,  6  inches  in  depth  at  the  edges  and  8  inches  in 
depth  at  the  center,  resulting  in  a  crown  of  2  inches. 
This  same  type  construction  was  used  in  1921.     In 


1922  the  Commission  thought  it  desirable  to  reduce 
the  crown  and  adopted  a  section  6i^  inches  in  depth 
at  the  edges  and  7i^  inches  in  the  center.  This  con- 
struction method  was  used  in  1922  and  1923.  At  that 
time,  however,  concrete  was  finished  by  hand,  and 
some  difficulty  was  experienced  in  getting  a  smooth 
road  with  only  a  1-inch  crown.  In  1924  the  Commis- 
sion went  back  to  building  a  2-inch  crown,  still  using 
a  15-foot  width,  6  inches  in  depth  at  the  edges  and 
8  inches  at  the  center.  This  type  construction  con- 
tinued to  the  end  of  1927.  In  1928  the  thickened  edge 
was  adopted,  and  the  standard  width  of  roadway  was 
increased  to  16  feet  with  a  depth  of  9  inches  at  the 
edges  and  6.3  inches  at  the  center  and  was  the  method 
still  used  in  1930." 

In  contrast,  Illinois  during  this  period  was  building 
concrete  pavements  18  feet  wide  (in  some  cases  20 
feet)  on  a  roadway  30  feet  wide.  In  1926  Illinois 
constructed  its  first  four-lane  highway.^*  Lanes  10 
feet  or  more  in  width  were  rare  anywhere  in  the 
country. 


4' 


8'  OR  IT 


^•^ 


18' 


8' OR  IT 


p^— L 


PORTLAND  CEMENT  CONCRETE  PAVEMENT 
SOURCE:    ANNUAL  REPORT  ILLINOIS  DIVISION  OF  HIGHWAYS    1927 


18' 


2"  WEARING  SURFACE 


3' 


4"  BASE  COURSE 


ASPHALT  MACADAM 

SOURCE:    PART  II  -  REPORT  OF  CALIFORNIA  HIGHWAY  COMMISSION  TO 

ACCOMPANY  FIRST  BIENNIAL  REPORT.  NOV.  1,  1922 


TYPICAL  SECTIONS  1920-1930 


386 


Horsedrawn  equipment  making  a  cut  and  raising  levee  across 
Souwashy  Creek  Bottom^  near  Meridian,  Aliss. 


Except  where  the  terrain  was  flat,  the  rolling  profile 
and  widening  alinement  of  the  wagon  road  era  con- 
tinued. Although  location  and  design  engineers  rec- 
ognized the  desirability  of  gentle  curvature  and 
uniform  grades,  much  of  the  design  was  dictated  by 
economics  and  the  limitations  of  grading  equipment. 
Grading  was  performed  largely  with  animal-drawn 
equipment ;  hence  heavy  cuts  and  fills  and  direct  aline- 
ment were  avoided  in  favor  of  sidehill  locations. 
Power  shovels  were  in  common  use  for  rock  excava- 
tion and  sidehill  casting,  but  the  narrow  cuts  and  fills 
of  the  period  were  too  confining  for  efficient  use  of 
motorized  hauling  units,  which  were  also  poorly 
adapted  to  operating  on  newly  placed  embankments. 
For  the  year  1920,  Minnesota  reported  that  equipment 
actually  engaged  in  highway  construction  included 
2,693  scrapers  (wheel,  slip,  or  Fresno),  .36  steam 
shovels  and  6,212  horses  and  mules,  together  with  466 
motor  trucks  recently  acquired  as  war  surplus  ma- 
terials.^'^ In  Illinois  in  1924,  a  recordbreakirig  year 
for  construction  in  tliat  State,  11,700  men  and  3,000 
teams  were  emploj'ed,  a  "team"  consisting  of  two  or 
more  animals.  The  day  of  mechanization  was  still  in 
the  future. 


Roadbuilders  then,  as  always,  were  realists.  They 
were  in  a  race  with  time  to  pave  as  many  miles  as 
possible  with  available  funds.  Office  seekers  made 
extravagant  promises  for  getting  the  voters  out  of  the 
mud.  The  report  of  one  highway  department  in  1924 
boasts  that  of  the  4,671  miles  of  hard  surfaced  roads 
then  existent  in  the  State,  75  percent  were  completed 
during  the  4-year  tenure  of  the  encumbent  governor.^*' 
One  result  of  this  frenzied  effort  to  add  miles  of  pave- 
ment was  that  many  design  features,  later  found  to 
be  hazardous,  were  incorporated  into  the  highway 
system  before  a  background  of  experience  could  be 
developed. 

Every  section  of  newly  paved  highway  seemed  to 
have  its  "deadman's  curve."  Vehicular  brakes  were 
generally  poor,  as  was  lighting  equipment.  Many 
trucks  using  the  highways  in  the  late  twenties  were 
still  equipped  with  acetylene  or  kerosene  lamps,  and 
their  speeds  were  limited  by  mechanical  engine  gov- 
ernors to  15  to  18  m.p.h.  A  good  number  of  horse- 
drawn  vehicles  continued  to  use  the  public  highways. 
Passenger  car  speeds  increased  rapidly  in  keeping 
with  highway  and  automotive  improvements.  In 
1920  most  States  had  a  25  m.p.h.  speed  limit  for  rural 
highways.     By  1930  the  speed  limit  most  frequently 


387 


100 


X 
feUJ 

r 


CO 

D 

UJ 

a. 


X 

< 


90 


80 


70 


60 


50 


>>: 

^)C-'t 

CL•^^ 

^ 

/^ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

^.J- 

''/ 

r\ 

/ 

\ 

y 

/ 
/ 

Y 

1 

"-X 

V 

> 

y 

\\ 

M 

^^ 

f 

vA 

< 

/ 

^"^ 

r^^ 

/ 

-  LEGEND  - 

/ 

tm 

—  X HIGH  PRICE  GROUP 

-  O  —    MEDIUM  PRICE  GROUP 

M/ii  noior:    /-«c»/-»i  lO                    1 

L^^vv  r  nioi-  vjMv^i^i 

1925 


1928 


1931  1934 

YEAR  MODEL 


1937 


1940 


AVERAGE  TOP  SPEEDS  OF  AMERICAN  STOCK  CARS  IN  HIGH,  MEDIUM 
AND  LOW  PRICE  RANGES  BY  YEAR  MODELS. 

SOURCE:  "HIGHWAY  PRACTICE  IIM  THE  USA".  BUREAU  OF  PUBLIC  ROADS,  1948,  p.  65 


encountered  was  35,  with  a  few  States  having  limits 
of  40  or  45  m.p.h.  No  highway,  regardless  of  how 
designed,  could  be  properly  fitted  to  the  needs  of  such 
a  conglomeration  of  vehicles  and  regulations.  Not 
surprisingly,  deaths  and  injuries  soared. 

There  were  also  signs  of  pessimism  in  some  quarters 
as  to  the  ability  to  cope  with  the  unbridled  growth  in 
motor  vehicle  usage  through  highway  construction 
alone.  Taking  note  of  the  heavy  weekend  demands 
being  placed  on  improved  highways,  one  State  high- 
way commission  noted  in  1926  : 

It  seems  quite  clear  to  the  commission  tliat  tlie  regula- 
tion of  traffic  is  the  first  step  toward  adequate  use  of  the 
highways.  Indeed,  the  number  of  vehicles  placed  upon 
the  highways  each  year  is  propoi'tionately  greater  than 
the  miles  of  highway  which  are  added.  The  conditions 
of  traveling,  in.stead  of  becoming  better,  are  becoming 
worse,  due  to  congestion  on  these  roads,  and  the  entii'e 
solution  does  not  seem  to  lie  in  the  building  of  more 
roads,  but  rather  in  the  regulation  of  traffic  that  goes 
over  them." 

This  philosophy  was  to  find  expression  many  times 
over  in  the  years  ahead.  Traffic,  however,  continued 
to  increase  in  volume. 


Partly  as  a  result  of  the  wide  disparity  in  design 
practices  between  the  States,  a  new  form  of  leadership 
in  the  art  of  highway  desigTi  began  to  assert  itself 
toward  the  end  of  this  period.  This  Avas  the  Commit- 
tee on  Standards  of  the  American  Association  of 
State  Highway  Officials  (AASHO),  which  had  been 
formed  in  1914.  Initially,  AASHO's  Committee  on 
Standards  confined  itself  to  disseminating  informa- 
tion on  design  to  its  members,  but  in  1928  it  proposed 
that  the  Association  adopt  "standards  of  practice"  to 
guide  the  member  States  in  technical  matters  in  whicli 
some  uniformity  from  State  to  State  was  urgentlj^ 
needed.  The  resulting  first  standards,  1928,  pre- 
scribed : 

•  That  whenever  practicable,  shoulders  shall  have 
a  standard  width  of  not  less  than  8  feet. 

•  That  on  pavements,   10  feet  shall  be  considered 
as  the  standard  Avidth  for  each  traffic  lane. 

•  That  the  crown  of  a  two-lane  concrete  pavement 
shall  be  1  inch. 

•  That  no  part  of  a  concrete  pavement  shall  have 
a  thickness  of  less  than  6  inches.^® 


388 


The  AASHO  Committee  on  Standards  and  its  off- 
spring, the  Committee  on  Planning  and  Design  Poli- 
cies, were  destined  to  have  a  profound  effect  in 
stabilizing  highway  design  by  recognizing  and  advo- 
cating the  best  and  most  economical  practices  of  the 
various  higliway  departments  and  in  promoting  the 
I'esults  of  research  efforts  that  were  soon  to  be  under- 
taken. 

Advent  of  Aerial  Surveying 

Another  development  of  the  decade,  1920-1930,  was 
the  initial  use  of  aerial  surveys  in  highway  location. 
Mention  has  been  made  of  the  "topographic  method" 
pioneered  by  the  railroads  for  selecting  the  most  suit- 
able alinement  from  among  a  number  of  alternatives. 
Initially  the  topographic  method  did  not  meet  with 
much  favor  among  highway  builders  for  several 
reasons:  (1)  Alinement  and  profile  Avere  not  as  critical 
for  highways  as  for  railroads;  (2)  the  method  was 
slower  and  more  costly  than  the  conventional  or  direct 
method;  and  (3)  most  highway  projects  consisted  of 
improving  an  existing  or  established  route,  which 
might  be  either  a  trail,  a  well  traveled  artery,  or  some- 
thing in  between.  The  penalty  for  using  the  direct 
method  was  the  production  of  an  inferior,  unsafe 
highway. 


A-V^ien  aerial  photography  became  available  on  a 
commercial  scale,  it  offered  a  means  of  overcoming 
the  greatest  objection  to  the  to^^ographic  method  of 
location,  namely,  heavy  expense  in  time  and  manpower 
in  making  field  surveys  and  preparing  maps.  The 
highway  profession  Avas  quick  to  recognize  the  poten- 
tial of  aerial  survey  methods.  An  example  of  its  use 
described  briefly  in  the  1927  Aircraft  Yearbook: 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  of  the  Department  of 
Agriculture  has  used  the  airplane  in  making  of  mosaics 
to  show  the  route  of  a  proposed  road  and  to  ascertain 
over  what  territory  the  proposed  road  will  travel.  The 
Army  Air  Coips  has  provided  the  equipment  and  person- 
nel, and  the  Bureau  has  provided  the  films  and  paid  the 
cost  of  operation. 

During  the  past  year  aerial  survey  has  been  made  of  a 
proposed  new  highway  from  Washington  to  Mt.  Vernon, 
Va.  The  survey  showed  the  old  road  as  well  as  the  terri- 
tory over  which  the  new  road  would  have  to  he  laid. 
Surveys  have  been  made  in  Connecticut  along  the  coast 
line,  and  again  between  Boston  and  New  York  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Boston  Post  Road,  in  an  endeavor  to  find 
a  new  automobile  route  to  take  cai'e  of  the  crowded 
travel  on  the  old  Boston  Post  Road." 

The  article  concluded  that  the  saving  in  time  and 
money  on  these  and  other  projects  was  very  satisfac- 
tory, and  future  use  of  this  means  of  mapping  and 
surveying  was  contemplated.  This  was  a  very  con- 
servative prediction. 


A  typical  main  liighway  of  the  early  1920's. 

The  major  defects  are  the  16-foot  co7icrete 

pavement  width,  narrow  and  poorly 

maintained  shoulders,  and  the 

encroachment  of  utility 

poles. 


389 


Stabilization   in   Design  Practices:   1930-1940 

The  period  1930-1940  was  one  of  discovery,  as  well 
as  of  stabilization.  On  the  debit  side,  administrators 
were  dismayed  to  discover  that  many  highways  paved 
during  the  previous  decade,  in  the  expectation  they 
would  last  a  lifetime,  were  already  obsolete.  There 
were  several  reasons  for  this — the  alinement  was  not 
suited  to  current  speeds,  sight  distances  were  too 
short,  pavements  and  shoulders  were  too  narrow,  and 
traffic  volume  had  simply  outgrown  the  capacities  of 
many  two-lane  roads.  Moreover,  the  seemingly  un- 
limited capacity  of  multilane  roads  near  cities  was 
being  rapidly  depleted  as  a  result  of  uncontrolled 
access.  Pavements  were  deteriorating  because  of  the 
frequency  of  heavy  axle  loads.  Trucks  were  seriously 
interfering  with  the  free  movement  of  passenger  cars 
where  there  were  long  steep  grades. 

On  the  plus  side,  the  most  outstanding  discovery, 
or  more  properly,  achievement,  was  the  recognition 
that  most  problems  could  be  resolved  through  a  co- 
ordinated research  effort  coupled  with  an  organized 
program  to  exchange  knowledge  and  information 
gained  in  the  various  States. 

A  coordinated  research  program  was  given  a  strong 
boost  by  the  U.S.  Congress  in  1934  through  passage 
of  the  Hayden-Cartwright  Act.  This  Act  authorized 
the  use  of  up  to  li/^  percent  of  Federal-aid  highway 
funds  for  planning  and  research. 

Secondly,  distilling  the  results  of  experience  and 
research  and  promoting  the  best  in  design  practices 
commensurate  Avith  economic  benefits  found  expres- 
sion through  the  AASHO  Committee  on  Planning 
and  Design  Policies. 

Design   Policies 

In  February  1937  a  proposal  was  approved  by 
AASHO  to  establish  a  special  committee  consisting 
of  three  key  officials  from  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
(BPR)  and  12  outstanding  design  engineers  from  the 
States.  This  committee  was  named  the  Committee 
on  Administrative  Design  Policies.  It  was  subse- 
quently renamed  the  Committee  on  Planning  and  De- 
sign Policies,  and  membership  was  increased  to  include 
20  members  from  the  States  with  BPR  furnishing  a 
single  member,  a  nonvoting  secretary.  A  unique  fea- 
ture of  the  committee  working  process  was  the  provi- 
sion of  a  small  force  of  experts  assigned  by  BPR  to 
devote  full  time,  if  necessary,  to  the  work  of  the 
Committee. 

The  Committee's  mode  of  operation  was  to  outline 
a  general  program  of  work,  after  which  the  BPR 
task  force  gathered  and  evaluated  all  the  known  in- 
formation on  each  subject.  If  there  were  gaps  in  the 
existing  knowledge,  the  BPR  engineers  identified 
them  for  further  study.  Eventually  the  staff  prepared 
a  tentative  discussion,  with  indicated  design  controls, 
guide  values  and  other  conclusions  for  that  subject. 
This  was  then  criticized,  evaluated,  and  supplemented 
by  the  Committee  members  and  reworked  until  a 
policy  acceptable  to  them  was  produced.  The  result- 
ing policy  was  submitted  through  the  Committee  on 
Standards  to  the  AASHO  Executive  Committee  for 
ballot  by  the  several  States;  with  a  two-thirds  favor- 
able vote,  it  became  an  approved  policy,  and  also,  in 
effect,  the  national  design  policy  of  the  United  States 
on  that  particular  subject. 


The  Committee  soon  developed  design  policy  bro- 
chures on  seven  projects:  (1)  Highway  classifications; 
(2)  sight  distance;  (3)  marking  and  signing  no- 
passing  zones;  (4)  highway  types;  (5)  intersections 
at  grade;  (6)  rotary  intersections;  and  (7)  grade 
separations.  These  booklets  have  considerable  his- 
torical significance  since,  together,  they  are  the  funda- 
mental structure  upon  which  all  subsequent  geometric 
design  policy  for  highways  has  been  based. 

A  Policy  on  Highway  Olassif  cation,  1938 — offered 
a  method  of  classifying  highways  to  indicate  the 
service  expected  of  them.  Three  factors  were  consid- 
ered in  the  classification:  (1)  Traffic  volume,  (2) 
character  of  traffic,  and  (3)  design  speed. 

"Traffic  volume"  represented  the  number  of  vehicles 
per  hour  and  Avas  defined  as  the  average  of  the  prob- 
able maximum  hourly  traffic  of  several  peak  days. 
Prior  to  this  time,  it  had  been  common  practice  to 
consider  traffic  on  a  daily  basis  if,  in  fact,  it  was  con- 
sidered at  all  in  geometric  design.  In  later  years, 
research  was  to  permit  a  degree  of  refinement,  and 
the  30th  highest  hourly  volume  of  the  design  year 
became  the  criterion  of  traffic  volume  classification  for 
design  purposes. 

"Character  of  traffic"  was  used  to  denote  the  relative 
number,  or  percentage,  of  trucks  and  buses  in  the 
traffic  stream  in  order  that  alloAvance  could  be  made 
for  them  in  design  and  operation  of  highways.  Three 
categories  were  utilized :  "P"  for  traffic  composed  en- 
tirely of  passenger  cars  or  types  of  trucks  which  did 
not  impede  smooth  traffic  operation ;  "T"  for  traffic  in 
which  the  percentage  of  trucks  likely  to  use  the  high- 
way was  such  that  movements  of  passenger  cars  would 
be  interfered  with  and,  consequently,  should  be  given 
detailed  considerations;  and  "M"  for  mixed  traffic 
where  the  percentage  of  trucks  was  between  that  for 
"T"  and  "P."  While  the  classification  was  necessarily 
vague,  it  did  serve  a  useful  purpose  in  recognizing 
that  truck  traffic  was  an  essential  factor  that  must  be 
dealt  with.  This  classification  stood  for  many  years 
and  was  discontinued  only  after  a  means  was  devised 
in  1950  for  converting  truck  volumes  into  equivalent 
passenger  car  volumes. 

The  "assumed  design  speed"  was  used  for  correlat- 
ing the  design  features  of  a  length  of  higliAvay  that 
affect,  or  are  affected  by,  the  speed  of  operation.  For 
this  purpose,  assumed  design  speed  was  chosen  as 
being  representative  of  the  maximum  approximately 
uniform  speed  that  probably  would  be  adopted  by  the 
faster  group  of  drivers,  exclusive  of  the  i^eckless  few, 
that  would  use  the  highway.  Speed  classifications  of 
30,  40,  50,  60  and  70  miles  per  hour  were  agreed  upon, 
and  guidance  was  offered  as  to  conditions  under  which 
each  might  be  appropriate. 

Adoption  of  speed  as  a  design  criterion  was  in  rec- 
ognition of  the  fallacy  of  the  previously  held  belief 
that  drivers  could  be  relied  upon  to  detect  sharp 
curvature  and  short  sight  distances  sufficiently  Avell  to 
adjust  their  speed  to  conditions.  The  false  assumption 
that  drivers  would  reduce  their  speed  to  as  Ioav  as 
15  or  20  miles  per  hour  at  curves  was  a  major  cause 
for  high  accident  rates  and  the  early  obsolescense  of 
many  highways  paved  prior  to  1930.  The  design 
speed  concept  was  truly  a  landmark  innovation  in 
highway  engineering.-" 


390 


Center  77iarki)igs  on  curves  aided  motorists  on  this  highway  in  1921,  but  short 
sight  distances  made  passing  dangerous. 


A  Policy  on  Sight  Distance  for  Highways,  1940 — 
provided  a  scientific  approach  to  ansAvering  the  con- 
troversial question  as  to  the  length  of  sight  distance 
that  should  be  provided  to  assure  safety  at  curves  and 
ci-ests  and  also  for  overtaking  and  passing  sloAver 
A'ehicles  on  two-  and  three-lane  highways. 

In  the  absence  of  research  results,  which  were  to 
become  available  a  few  years  later,  certain  assump- 
tions were  necessary  in  deriving  the  values.  It  is  a 
credit  to  the  Committee  that  the  assumptions  were 
remarkabh'  accurate.  In  one  of  the  first  applications 
of  the  design  speed  concept,  the  derived  minimum 
sight  distance  values  for  stopping  ranged  from  200 
feet  for  an  assumed  design  speed  of  30  m.p.h.  to  600 
feet  for  a  design  speed  of  70  m.p.h.  It  was  fui'ther 
postulated  that  this  distance  should  be  measured  on  a 
line  from  the  driver's  eye  4.5  feet  above  the  surface 
to  a  hypothetical  object  4  inches  above  the  pavement." 
There  was  considerable  conjecture  as  to  the  height  of 
the  object.  Logic  would  dictate  that  visibility  of  the 
road  surface  itself  would  provide  the  ultimate  in 
safety,  but  provision  of  the  required  sight  distance 
to  the  road  surface  would  necessitate  extremely  long 
vertical  curves  at  hill  crests  and  would,  therefore,  be 
very  costly.  A  standing  or  slow  moving  vehicle  would 
be  the  type  of  obstacle  most  likely  to  be  encountered 
on  a  highway  and  a  height  of  2  feet,  representative 
of  the  height  of  tail  lights  for  a  typical  vehicle,  was 
favored  by  some  Committee  members.  Obstacles  a 
foot  or  so  in  height,  even  though  encountered  only 
infrequently  on  highways,  could  result  in  serious  ac- 
cidents if  struck  by  cars  and,  consequently,  such  mini- 
mum heights  were  rejected  on  the  grounds  of  being 


unsafe.  The  4-inch  dimension  finally  agreed  upon 
represented  a  compromise  between  economics  of  con- 
struction and  severity  of  hazard.  (Both  dimensions, 
height  of  eye  and  height  of  object,  were  reevaluated 
in  1961  and,  because  of  reduced  height  of  vehicle, 
were  changed  to  3.75  feet  for  height  of  eye  and  6 
inches  as  a  compromise  value  for  height  of  object.) 

Passing  sight  distances  were  derived  by  dividing 
the  passing  maneuvers  into  several  component  parts 
and  developing  time-space  relationships  for  each. 
Desirable  distances,  as  well  as  absolute  minimums, 
were  developed.  For  two-lane  roads,  the  "desirable" 
values  ranged  from  600  feet  for  a  design  speed  of 
30  m.p.h.  to  3,200  feet  for  a  speed  of  70  m.p.h.  The 
sight  line  was  from  the  driver's  eye,  assumed  to  be 
4.5  feet  above  the  road  surface,  to  the  top  of  an  on- 
coming car,  also  assumed  to  be  4.5  feet  in  height." 
Both  dimensions  were  changed  to  3.75  feet  in  1961  in 
recognition  of  changes  in  vehicle  design. 

The  three-lane  highway,  like  the  single-lane  high- 
way of  20  years  earlier,  enjoyed  a  comparatively 
short  period  of  popularity,  and  sight  distances  for 
such  highways,  as  well  as  for  two-lane  highways, 
were  discussed  in  this  policy.  Very  few  three-lane 
projects  were  constructed  before  1930  or  after  1940. 
It  was  soon  learned  that,  while  they  did  provide 
greater  capacity  than  two-lane  roads,  the  added  incre- 
ment was  not  great.  With  the  rapid  increase  in  traffic, 
they  wei'e  soon  taxed  to  capacity.  Moreover,  they 
did  not  lend  themselves  to  conversion  to  multilane 
divided  highways.  Of  greatest  concern,  however,  was 
their  poor  accident  experience.     One  reason  for  this 


391 


Kentucky's  Daniel  Boone 
Parktvay  exhibits  modern  de- 
sign features  such  as  sweep- 
ing curves  with  adequate  sight 
distances  and  gentle  grades. 


was  that  sight  distances  were  frequently  too  short  for 
passing.  The  AASHO  policy  sought  to  overcome  this 
deficiency  in  future  construction  by  furnishing  de- 
rived values  for  needed  passing  sight  distances  on 
three-lane  roads.  "Desirable  minimum"  values  ranged 
from  900  feet  for  50  m.p.h.  to  1,700  feet  for  70  m.p.h. 
Another  reason  for  the  poor  accident  experience  on 
three-lane  roads  was  the  lack  of  uniformity  and  the 
haphazard  manner  in  which  they  were  marked  to 
regulate  overtaking  and  passing  during  the  early 
years  of  their  use.  A  recognized  need  for  impi'ove- 
ment  in  this  department  led  to  development  of  the 
next  of  the  several  policies. 


A  Policy  on  G^'itena  for  Marhing  and  Signing  No- 
Passing  Zones  on  Tioo-  and  Three-Lane  Roads,  1940 — 
advocated  a  uniform  system  of  marking  two-  and 
three-lane  roads  to  restrict  passing  where  sight  dis- 
tances were  less  than  certain  values  as  listed  for  vari- 
ous design  speeds.  The  types  of  stripes  and  signs  for 
marking  no-passing  zones  were  the  province  of  an- 
other AASHO  committee,  but  the  recommendations 
of  that  committee  were  included  in  the  policy.  Since 
this  feature  was  more  closely  related  to  operation  than 
design,  this  subject  received  no  further  attention  by 
the  Committee  on  Planning  and  Design  Policies  but, 
instead,  was  handled  thereafter  by  the  National  Joint 
Committee  on  Uniform  Traffic  Control  Devices. 


392 


A  Policy  on  Highway  Types  (Geometric),  1940 — 
outlined  the  distinctions  between  the  t-\vo-,  three-,  and 
four-lane  highway  types  and  divided  highways.  It 
dealt  primarily  with  pavement  Avidths  and  factors  of 
driver  liehavior  and  higliway  design  that  aft'ect  width. 
The  policv  related  the  traffic  volume,  the  cliaracter  of 
traffic  ("P,"  "M"  or  "T"),  and  design  speed  to  the 
minimum  width  of  parement  that  should  be  provided. 
For  two-lane  roads,  the  niininuun  width  of  surfacing 
varied  from  16  feet  for  the  lowest  classification  up- 
ward to  2-1  feet.  (Single-lane  roads  wore  acceptable 
for  volumes  below  five  vehicles  per  hour.)  Turning 
paths  were  developed  for  tliree  design  vehicles — a 
passenger  car,  a  truck,  and  a  tractor-semitrailer. 

The  Committee  lamented  the  absence  of  better  high- 
way capacity  information  that  would  permit  delinea- 
tion between  the  traffic  warrants  for  two-,  three-,  and 
four-lane  pavements.  Because  of  the  intervention  of 
"World  War  II  and  for  other  reasons,  such  infonna- 
tion  woiild  not  become  available  for  another  10  years, 
although  the  basic  research  was  already  well  ad- 
vanced. 

The  policy  discussed  median  design  for  divided 
highways  at  considerable  length,  as  well  as  curbs, 
sidewalks,  gaiardrails  and  shoulders.  Shoulders  8  to 
10  feet  wide,  clear  of  all  obsti'uctions,  were  recom- 
mended.^^ 


A  Policy  on  Intersections  at  Grade^  1940 — treated 
the  subject  in  groat  detail,  utilizing  turning  paths  for 
a  design  passenger  car  and  a  design  truck.  Design 
requirements  were  developed  for  various  types  of  in- 
tersections fi-om  a  simple  crossing  to  the  more  elab- 
orate types  of  channolizod  intersections  Avith  relatively 
high-speed  turning  roadways  and  speed  change  lanes. 
Innovations  included  three-centered  compound  curves 
for  the  pavement  edge  at  turns,  minimum  I'adii  for 
separate  turning  I'oadways  as  related  to  design  speed. 
pavement  widths  for  such  roadAvays,  and  sight  dis- 
tance requirements  at  intersections  not  controlled  by 
signals.  Vehicle  dimensions  have  changed  since  this 
policy  Avas  prepared,  but  in  all  other  respects  the  con- 
cepts haA'-e  stood  the  test  of  time  Avith  little  need  for 
modification. 

A  Policy  on  Rotary  Intersections  Avas  not  completed 
until  1941.  During  the  period  1930-1940,  rotary  in- 
tersections Avere  thought  to  be  a  considerable  improve- 
ment over  conventional  intersections,  so  much  so  that 
they  Avere  often  constructed  as  substitutes  for  grade- 
separated  interchanges.  Events  A\'ere  to  prove  that, 
like  the  three-lane  road,  their  effective  life  was  usually 
rather  short  because  of  their  limited  capacity  and  the 
rapid  rate  of  traffic  groAvth. 

The  policy  provided  guidance  in  selecting  various 
design  dimensions  such  as  radius  of  the  central  island, 
roadway  widths,  and  lengths  of  weaving  sections  as 
related  to  design  speed. 


4:1 

FILLS  TO  3' 

3:1 

FILLS  3' TO  7' 

2:1 

FILLS  OVER  7' 

.<<^ 

,g^>>j>i?55^ 

PORTLAND  CEMENT  CONCRETE  PAVEMENT 
SOURCE:    TENTH  BIENNIAL  REPORT  OF  STATE  HIGHWAY  COMMISSION 
OF  MISSOURI    1936 


36'  TO  44' 

8'  TO  10' 

20'  TO  24' 

^    8'  TO  10' 

-,<-!'3r;?'^ 

Z^ 

^^:^;i9^ 

U^M 

^^^^5^^^ 

^ 

a  ^Z^^MlJ^  A'i^.-.bO:c^>icvoari:.oNi? 

TYPICAL  2-LANE  HIGHWAY  (GEOMETRIC) 
SOURCE:  A  POLICY  ON  HIGHWAY  TYPES  (GEOMETRIC),  AASHO    1940 

TYPICAL  SECTIONS  1930-1940 


393 


A  Policy  on  Grade  Separations  for  Intersecting 
Highicays  was  the  logical  sequel  to  the  two  policies 
on  intersections.  It  was  the  final  one  of  the  seven 
geometric  design  policies,  and  it  was  completed  in 
19-M. 

The  title  of  this  policy  is  somewhat  misleading 
because  it  treated  not  only  the  separating  structure, 
but  actually  covered  in  great  detail  the  design  of 
grade  separated  traffic  interchanges.  Design  data 
were  grouped  in  three  categories:  (1)  Structures  and 
approaches.  (2)  ramp  arrangements,  and  (3)  ramp 
design. 

One  important  design  element  not  treated  in  detail 
by  these  several  design  policies  was  the  relation  be- 
tween curvature,  superelevation,  and  design  speed. 

Curves 

By  1930  most  States  were  superelevating  all  curves 
except  those  of  very  long  radius:  however,  there  was 
little  uniformity  as  to  superelevation  rates,  just  as 
there  was  little  consistency  in  minimum  radii  for 
curves.  Empirical  controls  were  generally  applied, 
with  maximum  cross  slopes  of  about  10  percent. 

A  BPR  study  in  1920  focused  attention  on  the 
necessity  of  a  tire-pavement  friction  factor  for  super- 
elevation design  and  also  noted  that  a  spiral  curve  or 
transition  length  was  needed  at  each  end  of  a  curve 
section  for  the  change  from  normal  pavement  crown 
to  a  superelevated  section.^* 

One  of  several  conclusions  resulting  from  a  long 
series  of  studies  on  tire-pavement  slridding  relation- 
ships conducted  by  the  Iowa  State  University  was 
that  the  maximum  permissible  speed  as  used  in  de- 
signing curves  should  not  exceed  that  for  which  a 
useful  side-friction  coefficient  of  0.30  was  required  to 
counteract  centrifugal  force.  This  conclusion  was 
reached  in  1934.^^ 

In  1935.  the  BPR  collected  data  from  drivers  across 
the  country  operating  their  own  vehicles  on  curves  of 
known  radius  and  superelevation  by  asking  them  to 
report  the  speed  at  which  they  began  to  feel  a  side 
pitch  outward.  Analysis  of  these  data  resulted  in  a 
new  design  premise  that  safe  operation  on  curves 
would  be  attained  when  the  superelevation  was  suf- 
ficient to  coiinteract  centrifugal  force  for  three- 
quarters  of  the  expected  speed,  relying  on  side  friction 
to  supply  the  remaining  horizontal  resistance  up  to  a 
maximum  side  friction  factor  of  -f  0.16  at  60  m.p.h.^* 
The  speed  concerned  was  advocated  to  be  the  "as- 
sumed design  speed."  which  was  to  be  used  as  a  basis 
for  coordination  of  all  alinement  and  geometric  de- 
sign values.  The  side  friction  factor  to  be  used  in 
calculating  the  minimum  radius  or  the  maximimi  rate 
superelevation  did  not  enjoy  the  same  degree  of  final- 
ity as  the  speed  criteria,  although  the  values  used 
were  apparently  on  the  safe  side.  Research  is  con- 
tinuing at  the  present  time  in  an  endeavor  to  discover 
pavement  materials  and  construction  methods  to  im- 
prove the  skid  resistant  qualities  of  pavements. 

In  1937  the  BPR  completed  a  highway  curve  design 
manual  (later  published  as  Transition  Curves  for 
nighrcays.  1940)  embodying  the  above  proposals. 
The  manual  presented  data  for  10  m.p.h.  increments 
in  design  speed  for  all  curve  design  features — curve 
radii,  superelevation,  curve  widening  and  transition 
(spiral)    curves.     These  concepts  and  design  details 


were  greatly  needed  and  soon  gained  wide  use,  thus 
stabilizing,  to  a  large  extent,  curve  design  practices 
throughout  the  countiy  and  nullifying  for  the  time 
being  any  necessity  for  the  AASHO  Committee  to 
concentrate  its  efforts  on  this  subject. 

Gradients 

Common  logic  has  always  dictated  that,  from  the 
traveler's  point  of  view,  the  most  desirable  route  be- 
tween two  points  is  the  one  that  is  straightest  and  has 
the  least  rise  and  fall.  In  the  days  of  wagon  road- 
building,  circuity  and  indirection  of  alinement  often 
had  to  be  substituted  for  directness  in  order  to  obtain  a 
suitable  profile.  The  wagon  roads  were  later  con- 
verted to  motor  highways,  frequently  with  little 
change  in  alinement  and  grade  despite  the  fact  that 
automobiles  and  trucks  could  negotiate  grades  steeper 
than  the  4  to  6  percent  commonly  used  for  horse- 
drawn  A^ehicles.  This  was  clone  in  the  interest  of 
economy,  although  the  roadbuilders  would  have  pre- 
ferred a  better  alinement. 

As  the  highway  network  expanded  and  more  roads 
were  built  on  new  locations,  particularly  during  the 
late  1920*s  and  the  1930's,  advantages  were  taken  of 
the  better  gradeability  of  motor  vehicles,  and  grades 
as  steep  as  9  percent  Avere  used  sometimes  to  provide 
a  straight  alinement.  Design  with  long  tangents  be- 
came commonplace  and  road  distances  were  shortened 
by  hundreds  of  miles  in  the  aggregate.  A  BPR  sum- 
mary of  practice  in  1929  stated  : 

On  main-line  highways  it  is  customary  to  adopt  a 
maximum  grade  of  5  percent  in  gently  rolling  country 
and  7  percent  in  rough  country,  but  it  is  no  longer  con- 
sidered good  practice  to  resort  to  sharp  curvature  in 
order  to  avoid  grades  steeper  than  7  percent.  If  local 
conditions  permit  either  a  7  percent  grade  with  a  sharp 
curve  or  a  short  9  percent  grade  with  a  wider  curve,  the 
latter  design  is  thought  to  be  the  better  practice  because 
it  is  safer  for  modern  motor  trafBc.^' 

In  the  rolling  terrain  commonly  encountered  in  the 
midwest  and  far  west  where  roads  were  developed  on 
section  line  locations,  this  type  of  design  resulted  in 
many  hundreds  of  miles  of  "roller  coaster"  highway 
profiles.  Design  of  profiles  with  frequent  grades  over 
5  percent  tended  to  minimize  earthwork  quantities, 
with  only  shallow  cuts  and  fills.  As  traffic  volumes, 
speeds,  and  truck  loadings  increased,  the  deficiencies 
of  short  sight  distances  and  high-downgrade  speeds 
proved  that  this  type  of  profile  was  somewhat  haz- 
ardous. 

The  alternative  was  a  profile  design  of  a  railroad 
grade  type,  that  is,  long,  easy  grades  with  long  flat 
vertical  curves  in  conjunction  with  long  horizontal 
tangents  connected  by  gentle  curves.  Prior  to  1930. 
any  extensive  mileage  of  such  highway  construction 
would  have  been  out  of  the  question  because  of  the 
large  earthwork  quantities  and  attendant  high  costs. 

The  rapid  mechanization  of  earthmoving  equipment 
that  began  in  the  early  1930-s  revolutionized  construc- 
tion methods  and  made  feasible  the  construction  of 
highways  of  a  type  that  had  heretofore  existed  only 
in  the  fanciful  minds  of  design  engineers.  Tractor- 
drawn  self-loading  scrapers  with  capacities  of  12 
cubic  yards  came  upon  the  scene  for  the  first  time. 
Pneumatic  tires  had  been  improved  to  such  an  extent 
that  they  could  be  used  on  heavy  trucks,  thus  afford- 
ing   sufficient    flotation    to    operate    on    newl}-    placed 


394 


Connecticut's  route  11  preserves  the  natural  rack  formations  and  vegetation 
by  varying  the  loidth  of  the  median. 


embankments  and  made  long  hauls  a  routine  opera- 
tion. The  roadbed  of  the  then-modern  highway,  even 
though  it  was  only  two  lanes  in  width,  afforded  suf- 
ficient room  for  turning  and  maneuvering.  AVhen 
compared  with  unit  construction  costs  for  the  earlier 
years,  earthwork  became  the  best  bargain  in  the  entire 
roadbuilding  operation. 

The  trends  toward  steeper  gradients  was  arrested, 
if  not  reversed,  by  these  developments.  However,  it 
was  not  until  1950  or  later  that  a  consensus  was  ar- 
rived at  and  anything  approaching  standardization 
of  maximum  grades  was  developed  by  AASHO. 

Design   Effects   on  the   Environment 

Highway  construction  inevitably  left  scars  upon  the 
landscape.  These  were  not  particularly  objectionable 
until  the  era  of  heavy  cuts  and  fills  and  relatively 
wide  roadbeds  that  accompanied  the  design  concepts 
of  the  1930's.  Most  State  highway  departments  had 
programs  for  roadside  development  prior  to  that  time, 
some  as  early  as  1912.  These  programs  consisted 
largely  of  planting  trees  and  shrubs.  These  were 
reasonably  successful  prior  to  1930  but  were  not  ade- 
quate for  the  true  automobile  road.  As  one  writer 
described  the  situation  in  1936  : 

The  quite  common  belief  that  the  adoption  and  execu- 
tion of  a  mere  beautification  program  for  our  highways 
satisfies  even  the  most  obvious  requirements  and  poten- 
tialities of  roadside  development  is  both  incorrect  and 
disheartening.  We  must  sadly  admit  that  much  of  our 
present  so-called  roadside  improvement  is  little  more  than 
a  landscape  hair-cut  or  perhaps  a  horticultural  manicure. 


What  is  now  most  needed  is  to  set  up  a  better  type  of 
organization  with  engineering  and  landscape  departments 
properly  coordinated  and  working  in  harmony.^' 

This  advice  was  heeded,  at  least  in  part,  but  the 
demands  for  more  miles  of  paved  highways  and  for 
widening  and  straightening  existing  ones  continued 
to  take  the  lion's  share  of  the  highway  dollar.  Much 
credit  is  due  the  Xational  Park  Service  for  their  in- 
sistence upon  the  incorporation  of  esthetic  quality  in 
the  design  of  national  parkways.  An  outstanding 
example  of  the  good  results  that  could  be  produced 
by  the  joint  efforts  of  landscape  architects  and  high- 
way design  engineers  may  be  found  in  the  Mount 
Vernon  Memorial  Highway  which  was  designed  and 
constructed  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  for  the 
Park  Service  during  the  period  1929-1932. 

Credit  is  also  due  to  the  membership  of  two  com- 
mittees within  the  highway  fraternity — the  Commit- 
tee on  Roadside  Development  of  the  American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  and  a  similarly 
named  group  in  the  Highway  Research  Board.  Ini- 
tially in  1932,  these  two  groups  were  established  as  a 
joint  committee  but  were  separated  in  1939  under 
their  parent  organizations.  The  term  "complete  high- 
way" was  coined  by  these  committees  to  describe  suc- 
cinctly the  importance  of  blending  into  a  highway  the 
fundamental  elements  of  design,  construction,  and 
maintenance.  The  complete  highway  had  to  incor- 
porate utility,  safety,  beauty,  and  economy  to  satisfy 
this  very  sound  concept. 


395 


Highway  beautification  was  also  given  a  boost  by 
the  National  Recovery  Act  of  1933,  which  included 
among  its  objectives  the  landscaping,  with  Public 
Works  funds,  of  a  moderate  mileage  of  main  road- 
sides. The  rules  and  regulations  governing  the  use 
of  these  funds  required  that  at  least  one-half  of  1 
percent  of  each  State's  apportionment  should  be  de- 
voted to  this  type  of  improvement.  Thus,  a  total  of 
approximately  $2  million  was  set  aside  for  pioneering- 
work  which  had  for  its  ideal  the  conversion  of  im- 
sightly  roadsides  into  attractive  areas  bordering  road- 
ways made  safe  for  those  traveling  upon  them. 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1940  was  a  fur- 
ther landmark  in  legislation  in  support  of  better 
looking  and  safer  roadsides.  Section  11  of  this  act 
authorized  the  use  of  Federal  funds  for  ".  .  .  such 
roadside  and  landscape  development,  including  such 
sanitary  and  other  facilities  as  may  be  deemed  reason- 
ably necessary  to  provide  for  the  suitable  accommoda- 
tion of  the  public  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  likewise  .  .  .  the  purchase 
of  .  .  .  adjacent  strips  of  land  of  limited  width  and 
primary  importance  for  the  preservation  of  the 
natural  beauty  through  which  highways  are  con- 
structed .  .  ."  The  Highway  Beautification  Act  of 
1965  further  liberalized  the  use  of  Federal  funds  for 
roadside  improvements,  such  as  control  of  outdoor 
advertising  and  the  control  of  roadside  junkyards. 

Practical  Applications 

Returning  for  a  moment  to  the  Mount  Vernon 
Memorial  Highway,  one  reason  for  its  attractive  ap- 
pearance was  its  gentle  sinuous  alinement;  there  were 
no  long  tangents  and  no  abrupt,  short  radius  curves. 
Yet,  the  highway  formed  a  reasonably  direct  route 
between  termini.  It  was  the  antithesis  of  the  type  of 
alinement  that  was  evolving  for  conventional  two-lane 
highways  which,  by  their  very  nature,  necessitated 
that  vehicles  encroach  upon  the  opposing  lane  of 
traffic  in  order  to  overtake  and  pass  slower  vehicles. 
Straight  alinement  with  good  sight  distances  was  thus 
a  requisite  of  a  good,  safe  two-lane  road. 

By  way  of  contrast,  the  Mount  Vernon  highway 
was  a  four-lane  highway  on  which  faster  cars  could 
overtake  and  pass  slower  ones  without  having  to  en- 
croach on  the  lane  for  oncoming  traffic.  Thus,  pass- 
ing sight  distance  was  not  important.  The  curves  on 
the  Mount  Vernon  highway  were  of  longer  radius 
than  those  generally  used  on  two-lane  roads,  and  there 
was  no  necessity  for  the  motorist  to  vary  his  speed  in 
traversing  the  entire  length  of  the  route.  One  curve 
has  been  said  to  be  over  2  miles  long.  All  curves  were 
provided  with  spiral  transitions. 

This  departure  from  conventional  curve  design  was 
achieved  through  the  use  of  a  flexible  spline  of  the 
type  used  in  ship  design,  and  this  was  one  of  the  early 
applications  of  the  method.  A  prei'equisite  of  this 
method  of  location  and  design  is  a  topographic  map 
of  fairly  large  scale  and  of  sufficient  width  to  include 
all  alternative  locations  for  the  selected  routes.  As 
has  been  mentioned,  aerial  pliotographs  Avere  very 
helpful  in  this  regard,  and  this  project  was  one  of  the 
first  to  use  tliis  technique.  The  methods  for  deter- 
mining elevations  from  the  two-dimensional  photo- 
graphs were  crude  and  lacked  precision,  and  there 
were  other  problems  to  be  overcome,  but  the  benefits 


of  seeing  the  vegetation,  the  drainage  courses,  the 
configurations  of  the  ground,  and  the  land  uses  as 
they  appeared  in  nature  were  tremendous. 

Rapid  strides  were  to  be  made  in  photographic 
techniques  and  in  the  development  of  equipment  for 
interpreting  and  photogrammetrically  plotting  topog- 
raphy by  use  of  contours  on  topographic  maps  en- 
tirely adequate  for  precise  highway  location  and 
design.  Improvements  were  to  continue.  Looking 
ahead,  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956  author- 
ized "the  use  of  photogrammetric  methods  in  map- 
ping, and  the  utilization  of  commercial  enterprise  for 
such  services."  By  1960,  the  accuracy  and  practicality 
of  aerial  survey  methods  were  so  well  recognized  that 
contractors  were  willing  to  accept  payment  for  earth- 
work computed  on  the  basis  of  cross  sections  measured 
photogrammetrically  using  aerial  photographs  taken 
before  and  after  the  construction  work  was  performed. 


An  arterial  highway  of  the  lO^O's  with  uncontrolled 

access.    An  early  form  of  channelization  helped 

trafflc  movements,  but  the  danger  from  cars 

backing  out  onto  the  highway  still 

remained. 

At  the  same  time  that  new  techniques  were  being 
discovered  or  improved,  new  concepts  and  principles 
were  being  recognized.  One  of  these,  soon  to  be  ex- 
ploited, was  the  principle  of  control  of  access.  It 
would  be  difficult  to  say  when  the  first  public  highway 
was  planned  with  the  express  intent  of  excluding 
abutting  property  owners  from  access  to  the  road  for 
the  purpose  of  protecting  and  preserving  the  opera- 
tional character  of  the  highway.  One  of  the  earliest 
examples  of  a  controlled  access  highway  is  the  Bronx 
River  Parkway  in  New  York.  It  was  designed  about 
1914  and  completed  approximately  10  years  later.  It 
has  been  said  that  this  project  was  conceived  as  an 
attempt  to  protect  the  historical  old  Bronx  River,  but 
as  studies  developed,  it  was  found  that  protection  was 
feasible  only  if  the  land  on  both  sides  were  purchased 
in  fee.  Once  the  land  was  purchased,  it  appeared 
desirable  to  use  it  for  park  purposes  and  then  for  a 
parkway  to  relieve  the  congestion  on  the  heavily 
traveled  north-south  streets  in  the  area.  Regardless 
of  whether  this  controlled  access  parkway  came  into 
being  by  accident  or  whether  by  intent,  it  stood  for 
half  a  century  as  a  lasting  proof  of  the  value  of  con- 
trolled access.  Whereas  other  roads  of  much  higher 
standard  built  decades  later  have  since  become  obso- 
lete because  of  roadside  interference,  the  original 
Bronx  River  Parkway  retained  all  of  its  beauty  and 


396 


utility  until  the  pressures  of  continued  traffic  growtli 
necessitated  reconstruction  during-  the  IQeO's.  Much 
of  this  beauty  was  retained  in  the  reconstruction 
process. 

The  example  set  by  the  Bronx  River  Parkway  and 
other  early  controlled  access  highwa3^s  went  largely 
unnoticed  for  many  years,  mainly  because  one  of  the 
primary  functions  of  highways  at  that  time  was  to 
serve  the  abutting  property,  not  to  isolate  the  road 
user. 

During  the  period  1030-1940,  highway  designers 
became  aware  of  the  adverse  effect  that  unregulated 
access  could  have  upon  highway  traffic  service.  Strip 
commercial  development  in  the  vicinity  of  towns  and 
cities  was  particularly  troublesome.  Vehicles  turning 
into  and  out  of  roadside  businesses  created  congestion 
and  caused  accidents.  A  few  far-sighted  individuals 
recognized  the  principle  of  control  of  access  that  had 
been  pretty  much  dormant  throughout  the  1920's. 
Interest  was  not  limited  to  the  United  States.  In 
1933,  the  first  spade  of  earth  was  turned  on  a  new 
system  of  highwaj^s  for  the  German  Reich.  These 
autobahnen,  with  full  control  of  access  and  designed 
for  speeds  up  to  120  miles  per  hour,  were  destined  to 
exert  considerable  influence  on  American  design 
criteria. 

The  roadbuilders  in  the  United  States  demon- 
strated, however,  that  they  were  not  dependent  on  the 
German  engineers  for  leadership  in  designing  and 
constructing  freeways.  Between  1934  and  1940  the 
Merritt  Parkway  was  constructed,  extending  the  park- 
way and  controlled  access  features  of  the  Westchester 
County,  New  York,  parkway  system  across  Connecti- 
cut. During  its  first  full  year  of  operation,  it  handled 
an  average  of  20,000  cars  per  day. 

The  Merritt  Parkway  near  Darien,  Conn. 


The  need  for  a  traffic  artery  capable  of  handling 
similar  traffic  volumes  between  Los  Angeles  and  Pasa- 
dena led  to  the  start  of  the  six-lane  Arroyo  Seca  Free- 
way in  1938.  It  had  two  35-foot  I'oadways  with  a 
6-foot  curbed  median. 

The  Pennsylvania  Turnpike,  comi^leted  in  1940 
from  Ii'win  to  Carlisle  as  a  toll  facility,  was  the  first 
rural  freeway  of  notable  length  in  this  counti*y.  It 
was  a  four-lane  divided  highway,  except  for  several 
tunnels  through  mountains  where  the  width  was  nar- 
I'owed  to  two  lanes.  Noteworthy  features  in  the  de- 
sign standards  were  gentle  alinement  and  relatively 
fiat  gradients  suitable  for  high-speed  travel  despite 
the  rugged  terrain  traversed  by  portions  of  the  route. 
Also,  consistent  with  anticipated  high-speed  travel 
was  a  design  requirement  for  speed  change  lanes  1,200 
feet  long  at  points  of  access. 

These  and  the  several  other  freeways  in  use  by  1940 
met  with  immediate  acceptance  by  the  motoring  pub- 
lic.   The  freeway  era  was  born. 

The  Era  of  the  Freeway:   1940-1976 
Design   Standards 

Concentrated  thought  and  effort  toward  a  nation- 
wide system  of  controlled  access  highways,  both  urban 
and  rural,  began  to  gather  momentum  about  1940. 
However,  it  Avould  be  totally  erroneous  to  leave  the 
impression  that  no  further  advances  were  made  in  the 
design  of  conventional  highways  after  that  date.  It 
is  generally  true  that  the  advances  were  in  the  nature 
of  refinements  of  the  basic  concepts  and  principles 
enunciated  in  AASHO's  seven  published  design  poli- 
cies. These  refinements  generally  took  the  form  of 
more  generous  dimensions  in  such  elements  as  pave- 


397 


1".  1'/4"0R  1V4" 


20'.  22'  OR  24' 


-CIRCULAR  ARC- 


>-rRnvui\jFn  .<;iiRRRAnF -I  9  '^' 


-CROWNED  SUBGRADE 


PORTLAND  CEMENT  CONCRETE  PAVEMENT,  NORMAL  TRAFFIC 

SOURCE:  ANNUAL  REPORT  ILLINOIS  DIVISION  OF  HIGHWAYS  1942 


^RESHAPED  SUBGRADE  3/16'  PER  FT. 
(42')  WIDTH  OF  CEMENT  TREATED  DESIGN  SOIL 


(56')  WIDTH  OF  LIME  TREATED  DESIGN  SOIL 


TYPICAL  SECTION  MAIN  FACILITY 
RT.  OR  LT.  LANE  IN  DIRECTION  OF  TRAFFIC 

®      4"  HOT  BITUMINOUS  PAVEMENT 

(D      3"  &  VARIABLE  HOT  BITUMINOUS  PAVEMENT 

(3)      DOUBLE  BITUMINOUS  SURFACE  TREATMENT 

®     8%"  PLANT  MIX  BITUMINOUS  BASE  COURSE 

®     414"  TO  BE  PLACED  IN  1  @  2V,"  COURSE  AND  1  0  2"  COURSE 

d)     4"  COURSE  MAY  BE  PLACED  IN  ONE  OR  MORE  COURSES  AS 

NECESSARY  TO  MEET  THE  REQUIREMENTS  OF  CONTRACT 

(D      CEMENT  TREATED  OR  LIME  TREATED  DESIGN  SOIL 

©      BITUMINOUS  PRIME  COAT  (CURING  SEAL) 

@      VARIABLE  DEPTH  GRANULAR  MATERIAL 

(8)       ifi-f     INDICATES  EROSION  CONTROL  TREATMENT 


FLEXIBLE  PAVEMENT-lnterstate  Highway  1975 

SOURCE;  INTERSTATE  COST  STUDY,  MISSISSIPPI 


RESHAPED  SUBGRADE  I 
(41')  WIDTH  OF  CEMENT  TREATED  DESIGN  SOIL 


(56)  WIDTH  OF  LIME  TREATED  DESIGN  SOIL 


TYPICAL  SECTION  MAIN  FACILITY 
RT.  OR  LT.  LANE  IN  DIRECTION  OF  TRAFFIC 

®  8"  CONTINUOUSLY  REINFORCED  CONCRETE  PAVEMENT 

@  DOUBLE  BITUMINOUS  SURFACE  TREATMENT 

(D  7"  &  VARIABLE  DEPTH  PLANT  MIX  BITUMINOUS  BASE 

®  4"  PLANT  MIX  BITUMINOUS  BASE  (TO  BE  PLACED  IN  ONE  OR  MORE  COURSES  AS 

NECESSARY  TO  MEET  THE  REQUIREMENTS  OF  CONTRACT) 

(D  VARIABLE  DEPTH  GRANULAR  MATERIAL 

(S)  CEMENT  TREATED  OR  LIME  TREATED  DESIGN  SOIL 

(J)  BITUMINOUS  PRIME  COAT  (CURING  SEAL) 

(D  -^  v-v-vr  INDICATES  EROSION  CONTROL  TREATMENT 


RIGID  PAVEMENT-lnterstate  Highway  1975 

SOURCE:  INTERSTATE  COST  STUDY.  MISSISSIPPI 


TYPICAL  SECTIONS  1940-1975 


398 


ment  and  shoulder  widths,  wider  bridges,  and  flatter 
slopes  with  better  rounding  at  intersections  of  slope 
planes.  The  need  for  a  more  open  type  of  design  was 
occasioned,  in  part,  by  the  continued  increase  in  travel 
speeds,  but  in  most  cases,  these  liberal  practices  were 
as  much  a  result  of  a  greater  flow  of  money  into  the 
highway  coffers  as  to  any  sudden  awareness  of  need 
for  more  generous  dimensions.  It  would  be  difficult 
to  say  which  is  cause  and  which  is  effect — increases 
in  speed  or  improvements  in  design  standards — but 
historically  they  have  gone  hand  in  hand. 

AASHO  prepared  concise,  abbreviated  design 
standards  for  the  several  classes  of  highways,  starting 
with  those  for  primary  highwaj's  in  1941.  Design 
and  construction  standards  for  secondary  and  feeder 
roads  and  for  the  Interstate  System  were  published  in 
1945.  These  have  since  been  expanded  and  upgraded, 
as  necessary,  for  the  three  general  categories  of  roads. 
The  classification  terminology  has  been  changed  some- 
what with  the  passage  of  time.* 

These  standards  have  since  been  approved  by  the 
Federal  Highway  Administrator  for  application  on 
Federal-aid  highways  and  are  the  specific  controls  for 
the  design  of  such  higliways.  Many  States  have  also 
adopted  them  in  tlieir  exact  form  for  application  on 
highways  that  are  off  the  Federal-aid  systems.  Other 
States  have  promulgated  standards  of  their  own  for 
application  on  their  various  classes  of  State  highways. 
'\^niei'e  found  to  be  in  reasonable  conformity  with 
AASHO  standards,  these  have  been  approved  by  the 
Federal  Highway  Administrator  for  use  on  the  Fed- 
eral-aid systems. 

Getting  AASHO  standards  approved  has  not  al- 
waj's  been  accomplished  without  dissension  and  de- 
bate. "\^lien  a  pavement  width  of  24  feet  was  proposed 
for  heavily  traveled  two-lane  roads  in  1941,  for  ex- 
ample, some  officials,  accustomed  to  building  lanes 
only  9  or  10  feet  wide  and  having  been  stung  by  the 
bad  accident  experience  on  three-lane  roads,  were 
fearful  that  drivers  would  mistake  the  24-foot  road- 
way for  a  three-lane  road.  Other  States  were  deeply 
concerned  by  the  added  costs  for  higher  standards. 

Rural   Design    Policies 

Highway  design  policies  are  general  procedures  and 
controls  which  are  less  specific  than  design  standards, 
often  with  a  range  of  acceptable  values,  and  which 
are  officially  adopted  or  accepted  for  application  in 
the  design  of  higliways.  In  1950,  the  seven  separately 
published  design  policies  were  reprinted  and  bound 
as  a  single  volume  under  the  title.  Policies  on  Geo- 
metric Highway  Design.  Parenthetically,  tlie  final 
one  of  the  policies,  published  in  1944.  dealt  with  inter- 
changes and  grade  separations  and  should  properly 
be  identified  with  freeway  development  to  a  greater 
extent  than  with  conventional  highways.  The  policies 
were  updated  and  republished  in  1954  as  A  Policy  on 
Geometric  Design  of  Rural  Tlighvays,  the  "Blue 
Book."  This  publication  broadened  considerably  the 
earlier  work,  largely  as  a  result  of  research  efforts  in 


*  Current  versions  prepared  by  the  Committee  on  Planning 
and  Design  Policies  are  Geometric  Design  ,Sta7i(lards  for  the 
Xational  f^ijstem  of  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways — 1967; 
Geometric  Design  standards  for  Hightcays  Other  Than  Free- 
loays — 1969;  and  Geometric  Design  Guide  for  Local  Roads 
and  Streets — 1970. 


the  field  of  traffic  oi^eration.  The  Highway  Capacity 
Manual,  published  by  the  Highway  Research  Board 
in  1950,  supplied  material  on  the  relation  between 
highway  capacity  and  roadway  characteristics.  This 
information  was  incorporated  in  the  1954  rural  design 
policy  and  has  been  invaluable  in  aiding  the  designer 
to  better  fit  the  highway  to  traffic  requirements. 

The  results  of  studies  of  truck  speeds  on  grades  as 
related  to  motive  power  and  load  carried  also  became 
available  after  1940  and  were  used  in  selecting  values 
for  control  gradients  for  the  design  of  the  several 
classes  of  higliAvays  in  different  types  of  terrain.  One 
solution  to  the  problem  created  by  slow  moving  trucks 
on  grades  was  the  i^rovision  of  an  added  lane  in  the 
uphill  direction  for  use  by  trucks.  These  have  become 
known  as  "climbing  lanes."  Criteria  for  climbing 
lanes  were  included  in  the  1954  policy. 

The  1954  design  policy  also  enlarged  upon  the  de- 
sign speed  concept  and  included  tables  showing  the 
relation  between  design  speed,  degree  of  curvature, 
rate  of  superelevation,  and  needed  length  of  spiral 
transition.  The  subjects  of  freeway  design  and  inter- 
change geometries  were  discussed  to  the  extent  that 
the  state-of-the-art  permitted. 

In  1965  the  rural  design  policy  was  again  brought 
up  to  date  and  republished  under  the  same  title. 

A  Need  to  Expand  the  Highway  Network 

As  efforts  to  improve  and  expand  the  highway  net- 
work continued,  it  became  increasingly  apparent  to 
higliAvay  administrators  and  lawmakers  alike  that 
portions  of  the  predominantly  two-lane  rural  system 
of  highways  were  becoming  severely  strained  by  the 
ever  increasing  traffic  burden.  Urban  arterials  were 
becoming  choked  by  intensified  commercial  develop- 
ment coupled  with  rapid  traffic  growth.  Inadequacies 
in  the  form  of  low  travel  speeds,  low  capacities,  and 
high  accident  rates  were  clearly  evident  to  those  at 
even  the  highest  level  of  government.  At  the  same 
time,  there  was  an  awareness  that  transportation 
within  cities  was  a  national  matter  rather  than  a  local 
problem.  As  a  means  of  defining  the  scope  of  the 
problem  and  of  developing  remedial  measures,  Presi- 
dent Roosevelt,  on  April  14,  1941,  appointed  the 
National  Interregional  Highway  Committee  to  ".  .  . 
investigate  the  need  for  a  limited  system  of  national 
liighways  to  improve  the  facilities  now  available  for 
interregional  transportation,  and  to  advise  ...  as  to 
the  desirable  character  of  such  improvement.  .  .  ."  ^^ 

The  product  of  the  Committee's  efforts  was  the 
celebrated  report  Interregional  Highv)ays,  submitted 
to  the  President  on  January  5,  1944.  The  ultimate 
accomplishment  was  the  incorporation  in  the  Federal- 
Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944  of  a  provision  for  desig- 
nating a  national  system  of  highways  and  a  further 
provision  for  the  expenditure  of  Federal-aid  highway 
funds  in  urban  areas. 

Highlights  of  some  of  the  recommendations  of  the 
report  as  to  locating  and  designing  tlie  system  were: 

•  The  system  would  be  both  urban  and  rural  in 
extent. 

•  Roadways  and  structures  would  be  designed  to 
serve  vehicles  of  the  types  and  numbers  to  be 
expected  20  years  from  the  date  of  construction. 

•  Intersections  with  crossroads  and  railroads  would 
be  separated  in  grade. 


399 


Traffic  jam  at  intersection  of  U.S.  routes  3  and  20  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  the  early  1940's. 


Rural  hridycs  became  dangerous  bottlenecks  token  they  ivere  narroicer  than  the 
approach  highway,  often  making  two-way  traffic  hazardous  or  impossible. 


400 


•  Kural  sections  would  be  designed  for  safe  travel 
at  a  speed  of  75  m.p.li.  in  flat  topography;  urban 
sections  for  50  m.p.h. 

•  Traffic  lanes  would  be  12  feet  wide. 

•  Shoulders  would  be  10  feet  wide  except  in  nioini- 
tainous  topography. 

•  Embankments  10  feet  or  less  in  height  would 
have  side  slopes  no  steeper  than  1  foot  vertically 
to  4  feet  horizontally. 

•  The  roadway  width  on  bridges  would  be  at  least 
6  feet  greater  than  the  width  of  the  pavement  of 
the  approacli  roadway ;  on  sliort  bridges  the  road- 
way widtli  would  be  as  great  as  the  width  of 
approach  roadway,  including  shoidders. 

There  were  many  other  details  for  the  design  and 
construction  of  the  system,  including  such  items  as 
signs  and  markings,  lighting  and  landscaping.  A  dis- 
cussion of  the  principles  of  landscape  design  occupied 
three  and  one-lialf  pages  of  the  report.  It  was  a  com- 
plete text  within  itself. 

The  design  criteria  contained  in  the  report  wei'e 
reconunendations  only.  The  19-14  legislation  author- 
izing the  designation  of  the  National  System  of  Inter- 
state Highway's  made  no  reference  to  the  standards 
to  be  used  in  the  design  and  construction  of  that 
System.    This  was  to  come  later. 

Enabling  legislation  for  financing  and  constructing 
the  System  was  enacted  in  1956.  This  legislation 
contained  the  unique  provision  that  the  standards  for 
the  System  would  be  those  approved  by  the  Secretary 
of  Commerce  ".  .  .  in  cooperation  with  the  State  high- 
way depai'tments."  Thus,  the  continuance  of  the 
voluntary  cooperative  efforts  of  the  States  and  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  formulating  standards  for 
the  other  highway  systems  for  the  past  20  years  was 
firmly  assured  and  made  applicable  to  tlie  Interstate 
System. 

AASHO  responded  to  the  requirement  of  the  law 
by  adopting  standards  for  the  System  within  3  weeks 
after  passage  of  the  Act.  Many  of  the  recommenda- 
tions of  the  1944  Inferregiondl  lUghirays  found  ex- 
pression in  these  standards,  whicli  Avere  approved  by 
the  Secretary  of  Commerce  in  accordance  with  the 
law. 

Urban   Design   Policies 

The  Committee  on  Planning  and  Design  Policies 
was  well  aware,  as  it  always  had  been,  that  bare-bone 
standards  are  not  enough  to  assure  the  design  of  a 
safe,  utilitarian  higlnvay  that  is  estlietically  pleasing 
and  economical  to  construct  and  maintain.  They  rec- 
ognized a  need  for  a  more  casual  and  philosophical 
discussion  of  the  principles  of  freeway  location  and 
design.  Tlie  Committee  was  also  confronted  with  the 
challenge  of  developing  guidelines  for  the  utilization 
of  Fedei'al-aid  funds  in  tlie  construction  or  improve- 
ment of  city  streets  and  highways. 

The  Committee  chose  to  combine  tliese  objectives 
and  to  develop  a  policy  on  urban  arterial  highwaj's, 
which  would,  of  course,  include  freeways  as  well  as 
conventional  arterial  surface  streets.  This  effort 
culminated  in  tlie  publication,  in  1957,  of  A  Policy  on 


Arterial  Highways  in  Urhan  Areas,  the  "Red  Book." 
"When  work  began  on  this  policy,  there  were  few  free- 
ways in  existence,  and  experience  in  their  design  and 
operation  was  limited.  Nevertheless,  the  vision  and 
foresight  of  the  Committee  members  was  sufficient  to 
result  in  a  thorough  and  comprehensive  text  on  this 
subject,  as  well  as  on  the  more  conventional  types  of 
streets  and  urban  highways.  The  discussion  of  inter- 
change types  and  configurations  was  particularly  ex- 
haustive. 

Experience  in  the  application  of  the  1957  urban 
design  policy  was  generally  favorable,  but  after  a 
period  of  years,  operational  deficiencies  began  to  de- 
velop in  many  urban  freeways  built  in  accordance 
with  the  1957  doctrine.  In  large  measure,  these  de- 
ficiencies were  attributable  to  traffic  loads  far  in  excess 
of  those  that  were  anticipated  at  tlie  design  stages. 
Nevertheless,  many  of  the  operational  problems  would 
have  been  alleviated  had  some  of  the  dimensional 
\'alues  and  configurations  been  more  generous.  Ac- 
cordingly, the  policy  was  updated  and  republished  in 
1973  as  A  Policy  on  Design  of  Arterial  Ilighioays 
and  Urhan  Streets.  In  the  process  of  revision,  new 
sections  were  added  on  urban  transportation  planning 
and  on  arterial  route  location. 

Design  standards  and  guidelines  have  undergone 
only  minor  modification  and  upgrading  since  adoption 
of  the  first  editions  of  the  two  geometric  design  poli- 
cies, rural  in  1954  and  urban  in  1957.  Such  changes 
as  have  been  made  are  attributable  to  two  px'incipal 
factors:  (1)  Travel  speeds  have  continued  to  climb, 
necessitating  adjustments  for  all  design  features,  and 
(2)  vehicular  silhouettes  have  been  lowered,  requiring 
flatter  highway  profiles  to  provide  the  necessary  sight 
distances  for  avoidance  of  accidents. 

Clearances  to  roadside  obstacles  and  the  moderately 
flat  side  slopes  that  were  entirely  adequate  for  the 
travel  speeds  prevalent  before  the  mid-1950's  were 
found  deficient  when  measured  against  the  speeds  and 
other  operational  practices  of  the  seventies,  as  is  ap- 
parent from  an  examination  of  speed  trends  on  main 
rural  highways.  Consequently,  more  liberal  dimen- 
sions have  been  incorporated  in  the  standards  and 
above  minimum  design  is  the  rule  rather  than  the 
exception. 

It  may  be  truthfully  said  that  throughout  the  his- 
tory of  highway  design  development,  the  highway 
user,  in  the  collective  sense,  has  dictated  the  character 
of  the  highway  by  his  manner  of  operation  on  it  and 
by  the  extent  of  his  willingness  to  pay,  through  road 
user  imposts,  for  roads  that  would  sustain  that  type 
of  operation.  It  remained  for  the  design  engineer, 
working  in  concert  with  the  research  engineer,  the 
landscape  architect,  and  the  economist,  to  determine 
the  type  of  operation  demanded  by  the  vehicle  opera- 
tor (now  and  in  the  future),  the  design  characteristics 
of  a  highway  system  that  would  safely  support  that 
type  of  operation  witliout  being  unnecessarily  extrava- 
gant, and  the  probable  revenues  that  would  be  avail- 
able. It  would  not  be  a  gross  exaggeration  to  say  that 
every  highway  project  has  represented  a  compromise 
l)etween  the  ideal  in  design  characteristics  on  the  one 
hand  and  economic  reality  on  the  other.  This  is  likely 
to  remain  the  case  in  tlie  future. 


401 


Design  For  Safety 

While  not  always  indicated  separately,  safety  in 
highway  vehicle  operations  has  been  an  important 
objective  of  highway  design  since  the  beginning  of 
the  highway  development  programs.  The  identifica- 
tion by  the  1920's  of  the  need  for  clear  stopping  dis- 
tances, for  widths  to  pass  without  major  pullover,  and 
for  usable  curve  radii  led  to  early  efforts  to  determine 
and  incorporate  such  appropriate  features  in  the  next 
highway  improvements.  "With  reasonable  rapidity, 
the  design  engineers  accepted  the  identified  highway 
safety  needs,  developed  newer  design  controls  reflect- 
ing them  and  put  them  to  use.  In  retrospect  over  the 
last  50  years,  it  should  be  said  that  designers  never 
were  able  to  catch  up  with  nor  were  the  construction 
programs  able  to  provide  the  highways  needed  for 
the  rapidly  changing  vehicles,  volumes,  speeds,  travel 
habits  and  driver  attitudes.  The  history  of  highway 
design  control  development  shows  a  progressive  series 
of  adjustments  that  reflect  the  concerns  for  highway 
safety  evolving  from  the  latest  experiences  and  acci- 
dent data.    The  same  process  continues  today. 

There  is  space  here  only  to  indicate  a  few  examples 
of  design  controls  and  practices  that  were  pointed 
toward  better  safety.  In  1938-1944  initial  design 
policies  of  AASHO  had  many  such  items.  The  1941 
primary  standards  preamble  urged  that  in  using  the 


design  values,  "unquestioned  adequacy  rather  than 
strict  economy  should  be  the  criterion."  ^°  The  over- 
all concept  of  design  for  expected  volumes,  for  the 
character  of  traffic  and  for  an  assumed  design  speed 
was  a  major  effort  for  highway  safety.  The  enumer- 
ated values  and  controls  for  lane  width,  shoulders, 
use  of  a  dividing  median,  pavement  crown,  curve 
radius  and  superelevation,  minimum  sight  distance, 
safety  passing  sections,  guardrails  where  roadway 
slopes  were  steep,  appropriate  intersection  details  and 
layouts,  and  for  grade  separations  with  interchange 
ramps  all  embody  features  patterned  for  safe  vehicle 
operations.  The  1954  rural  design  policy  book  refined 
these  and  provided  additional  details;  advocacy  of 
controlled  access  design  was  a  major  addition.  The 
1965  revision  expanded  treatment  of  these  details, 
primarily  in  the  realm  of  the  higher  volume  and 
higher  speed  operations  which  were  then  being  ex- 
perienced. Both  of  these  editions  keyed  into  the  sepa- 
rately developing  standards  for  the  several  types  of 
traffic  control  devices  which  have  a  high  safety  orien- 
tation. Both  the  1957  and  the  1973  urban  highway 
policy  books  reflected  design  features  needed  for  the 
higher  volumes  and  greater  land  space  restrictions  in 
urban  areas.  They  particularly  stressed  the  design 
details  of  grade  separations,  interchange  patterns, 
frontage  roads,  and  practical  geometries  relative  to 
expressways  and  freeways. 


1       65 
60 

tr 

r)  55 
O 

^» 

LU 

°-    45 

CO 

LU 

d    40 

35 

30 

A 

\/EF 

?AG 

E  S 

PEI 

ED 

-^r- 

c: 

— 

r^ 

^ 

=- 

»  ^ 

_  _ 

.- 

-^ 

-  — 

^ 

^^> 



^^ 

_ 

^-^ 

,-- 

** 

\ 

^^ 

^^ 

•^ 

^ 

^- 

— 

-- 

— 

'- 



^■' 

4 

^- 

7 

V- 

— 

,— — 



V"" 

— 

—  - 

-  B 

Pi 

JSES 
\SSE 

NGE 
CS 

R  CA 

iRS  - 

^-^ 

- 



-T 

'\  WAR  TIME 

LOW 

1          1 

1942    43     44     45     46     47     48     49     50     51     52     53     54     55     56     57     58     59     60     61      62     63     64     65     66     67     68      69     70     71      72     73 
inn 

90 

'       80 

1      ^° 

H    60 

LU 
O50 

LU 
Q-    40 

f       30 

20 
10 

F 

=  EF 

CE 

SJT/i 

iGE 

OF 

VE 

HIC 

LEJ 

5  E) 

<CE 

EDI 

NG 

50 

MIL 

.ES 

PE 

^  H 

DU 

=! 

^ 

^ 

^^^ 

7— 

.  > 

^ 
f 

^ 

^ 

-^ 

^ 

s» 

-rr. 

.-• 

,«i»  ** 

— —. 

— 

_  y 

/"^ 

,^ 

-^ 

^ 

-' 

1 
1 

jx"" 

* 

^ 

^ 

^'* 

- 

.^^ 

1 
1 

/ 

.^ 

'^ 

r 

/ 

X 

• 

/ 

/ 

/ 

. 

^^ 

I  ^ 

AR  T 

IME 

/ 

," 

— — ■ 



>  ^  ^ 

**  ** 

*** 

%■ 

/ 

^ 

x^ 

'-' 

•••** 

x_y 

/ 

/' 

f 

0 

I 

1942    43     44     45     46     47     48     49     50     51     52     53      54     55     56     57     58    59     60     61      62     63     64     65     66     67     68     69     70      71     72      73 

SPEED  TRENDS  ON  MAIN  RURAL  HIGHWAYS  BY  VEHICLE  TYPE 

SOURCE:    "HIGHWAY  STATISTICS",  FEDERAL  HIGHWAY  ADMINISTRATION,  1973,  p.  81 

402 


The  Snow  Road  Bridge  over  1-^96  near  Lansing,  Mich.,  is  an  example  of  modern 
safety  design.    Slanted  back  slopes  and  the  absence  of  side  piers  on 
either  end  make  safe  vehicle  recovery  possible. 


The  1956  Interstate  standards  made  a  further 
breakthrough  in  stating  positive  requirements  for  de- 
sign with  full  access  control  throughout  that  System 
and  for  use  of  higher  realm  geometric  design  values 
as  needed  for  operations  at  speeds  of  60  m.p.h.  and 
above. 

During  1959  and  again  in  1966,  a  special  AASHO 
Safety  Committee  conducted  a  natiouAvide  survey  of 
highways  which  resulted  in  published  reports  enum- 
erating design  details  to  provide  greater  safety.  The 
second  of  these,  Highioay  De-sign  and  Operational 
Practices  Related  to  HigKvmy  Safety.,  1967,  soon 
known  as  the  "Yellow  Book,"  included  recommenda- 
tions on  the  current  highway  design  and  practices  to 
attain  a  higher  degree  of  safety  in  both  State  and 
local  agency  actions.  Responding,  Federal  policy 
directives  called  for  utilization  of  the  report  recom- 
mendations on  all  project  plans  designed  for  a  speed 
of  .50  m.p.h.  or  mox'e  and  a  corrective  program  to 
apply  the  findings  on  existing  highways.  The  report 
was  updated  and  reissued  in  1974  with  the  same  title. 


One  of  the  newly  advocated  features  from  these 
studies  was  the  "clear  roadside"  concept,  which  by 
1966  had  been  started  in  a  few  States.  During  the 
early  1960's,  it  became  evident  through  accident  anal- 
yses that  about  one-third  of  all  accidents  were  single 
vehicle,  run-off-the-pavement  types,  a  high  proportion 
of  which  proved  to  be  of  high  severity  on  collisions 
with  an  object  on  the  roadside,  such  as  a  rock,  large 
tree,  or  steep  cut  slope.  Some  of  these  objects  were 
highway  elements  such  as  culvert  headwalls,  rigid 
sign  posts,  lighting  standards,  bridge  piers,  etc.  Bet- 
ter design  and  correction  programs  for  safety  were 
needed  to  provide  traversible  roadsides  of  a  width 
well  beyond  the  shoulder  that  was  free  of  all  formid- 
able objects  and  reasonably  flat  and  rounded  so  that 
off-roadway  drivers  would  have  a  chance  to  i-ecover 
control  of  their  vehicles.  Actions  taken  included 
lengthening  culverts  and  overcrossings,  moving  sign 
supports  or  using  the  breakaway  type,  eliminating 
protruding  drainage  inlets,  flattening  and  rounding 
roadway  slopes,  and  providing  tested-types  of  crash 
cushions  at  bridge  abutments  and  between  diverging 


403 


highways  and  guardrails  in  front  of  essential  roadside 
objects  and  as  central  barriers  in  narrow  medians. 
Main  highways  of  new  design  now  are  being  devel- 
oped in  this  manner  and  corrections  made  to  the  ex- 
tent practical  on  existing  highways.  The  cost 
effectiveness  of  some  of  these  features  remains  moot 
on  low  and  intermediate  volume  highways  and  further 
studies  are  continuing  for  their  more  widespread 
application. 

Traffic   Control   Devices 

Traffic  control  devices  are  the  several  elements  pro- 
vided on  highways  to  advise,  guide,  warn,  regulate  or 
otherwise  inform  the  vehicle  drivers.  The  basic  types 
of  devices  are  signs,  pavement  markings,  roadside 
delineators  and  traffic  signals.  The  1971  Manual  on 
Uniform:  Traffic  Control  Devices  was  approved  by  the 
Federal  Highway  Administrator  as  the  national  stand- 
ard for  all  highways  open  to  public  travel.  This 
Manual  presents  essential  standards  for  design,  loca- 
tion, installation  and  operation  of  all  forms  of  traffic 
control  devices  and  is  the  culmination  of  over  50  years 
of  progressive  development  of  the  devices  and  national 
standards  for  their  detailed  and  uniform  use. 

The  history  of  these  developments  can  be  briefly 
reviewed  in  two  stages.  First  are  the  series  of  indi- 
vidual and  scattered  instances  to  conceive  and  use 
some  form  of  device.  Second  are  the  organized  efforts 
to  develop  and  attain  acceptance  of  standards  for 
national  uniformity. 

Early  Traffic   Controls 

In  1745  stone  markers  were  placed  between  Trenton 
and  Perth  Amboy  on  the  principal  highway  between 
New  York  and  Philadelphia.  They  were  installed  at 
2-mile  intervals  and  at  intersections  with  other  public 
roads.  A  public  subscription  was  made  to  pay  for 
them.  In  1763  the  Boston  Post  Road  similarly  was 
marked  with  mileposts. 

The  Pennsylvania  State  authorizing  act  in  1792  for 
the  Philadelphia  to  Lancaster  turnpike  included  re- 
quirements for  mileposts  and  directional  signs. 


By  1902  some  cautious  automobile  touring  had  be- 
gun, and  the  adventurers  were  losing  their  way.  Often 
there  were  no  signs  at  all,  or  where  there  had  been 
signs,  many  had  toppled  over  and  been  broken  or 
faded  beyond  readability.  As  early  as  1905,  extensive 
signpost  work  was  performed  by  the  Buffalo  Automo- 
bile Club  in  New  York  State.  In  the  next  few  years, 
auto  clubs  aci'oss  the  country  undertook  the  task  of  a 
basic  directional  signing  on  the  principal  highways 
within  their  areas.  Despite  their  local  efforts,  there 
were  no  national  or  long  route  installations. 

In  1913  the  Lincoln  Memorial  Highway  Association 
was  organized  and  funds  collected  toward  promotion 
and  construction  of  a  central  east-west  highway  across 
the  country.  While  the  construction  phase  largely 
became  promotional  assistance  to  the  State  highway 
agencies,  the  Association  shortly  put  into  effect  an 
entire  route  marking  along  existing  roads.  Painted 
red,  white  and  blue  band  markings  and  symbols  were 
placed  on  utility  poles,  clearly  designating  the  chosen 
route.  This  example  generated  widespread  activity 
by  many  motorist  and  local  clubs  to  similarly,  but 
distinctively,  mark  a  selected  and  named  route  and 
foster  its  improvement.  By  the  1920's,  there  were 
some  250  name  routes,  each  with  characteristic  color 
bands  marked  on  roadside  poles.  In  some  cases,  sev- 
eral such  routes  overlapped,  resulting  in  totem  poles 
of  multicolors.  These  color  bands  and  symbols  were 
gradually  replaced  by  route  numbers  as  the  States 
installed  signs  designating  them. 

The  widespread  use  of  stone  mileposts  did  not  begin 
until  the  early  1920's  when  mileposts  appeared  on  the 
roads  of  a  few  States  in  the  form  of  concrete  marker 
posts.  Gradually  the  mileposts  began  to  be  replaced 
by  signs  indicating  mileages  to  places  ahead  to  aid 
travelers.  The  rapid  expansion  and  drastic  changes 
in  our  Nation's  highway  system  beginning  about  1910 
were  reflected  in  significant  modifications  in  highway 
markings.  The  realinement  and  abandonment  of 
roads,  together  with  construction  of  ncAv  highways, 
made  many  of  the  old  mileage  signs  virtually  useless, 
and  they  were  gradually  replaced  by  signs  displaying 
point-to-point    distances    and    route    numbers    based 


The  Automobile  Club  of 

Maryland  posting  directional 

and  mileage  signs. 


404 


An  early  railroad  crossiiig  warning. 

upon  uniform  statewide  highAvay  numbering  systems. 
In  addition,  travelers  weve  greatly  aided  by  the  wide- 
spread production  and  distribution  of  tourist  maps 
that  made  use  of  readily  identifiable  landmarks,  as 
well  as  route  markers  and  signs.  This  increased  avail- 
ability of  other  devices  for  the  guidance  of  travelers 
resulted  in  a  marked  decline  in  the  use  of  mileposts, 
except  in  a  few  States  and  on  turnpikes. 

Immediately  after  "World  "War  I,  as  the  States  en- 
gaged in  a  greatly  speeded-up  road  development 
program,  it  became  apparent  that  a  simplified  and 
adequate  marking  system  was  a  necessity.  In  1918, 
Wisconsin  decided  that  proper  names  could  not  be 
applied  to  an  extensive  network  of  highways  and  so 
developed  the  route  marker  and  the  numbering  method 
of  designating  its  higliAvays  and  for  directing  travel 
over  them.  The  shape  selected  for  its  route  marker 
signs  was  a  triangle  with  the  apex  down,  using  black 
and  Avhite  colors.  The  triangle  showed  "State  trunk 
highway,"  the  route  number  and  the  State  name. 
Also  W^isconsin  placed  directional  and  distance  signs 
for  the  trunk  system  and  for  lesser  roads." 

In  1921  Minnesota  established  its  trunk  highway 
system  and  promptly  installed  full-scale  marking  and 
signing.  Minnesota  adopted  a  star  shaped  design, 
with  lemon  yellow  and  black  colors  for  all  official 
route  signs  on  the  system  and  suggested  white  and 
black  for  signs  placed  by  other  jurisdictions.^^ 


In  1911  the  road  commissioner  in  "Wayne  County, 
Michigan,  ordered  that  a  white  line  be  painted  down 
the  center  of  every  bridge  and  curve  under  his  author- 
ity. Later,  he  carried  the  idea  to  its  logical  conclusion 
and  painted  the  centerline  along  all  the  highways. 
The  obvious  benefits  of  the  centerline  strip  were 
eventually  realized,  and  the  striping  spread  to  all 
highway  agencies.^^ 

In  1915,  a  Detroit  police  official  designed  the  first 
stop  sign.  When  the  first  installation  proved  effective, 
the  city  promptly  allocated  funds  to  make  six  major 
streets  through  thoroughfares,  by  placing  stop  signs 
on  intersecting  streets.^* 

Traffic  sigiials  were  developing  in  this  same  decade, 
first  with  the  hand  operated  semaphores,  then  a  mo- 
torized version  that  was  patented  in  1910.  The  first 
use  of  electric  traffic  signals  was  during  the  period 
1912  to  1914  with  Cleveland,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  St. 
Paul  all  claiming  their  use  to  be  the  first.^^  In  1920, 
the  first  three-colored  traffic  signal  light  to  control 
street  and  highway  traffic  was  installed  in  Deti^oit.^*' 
The  first  four-way  three-color  signal  was  installed  in 
Detroit  in  1920." 

The  first  traffic  control  tower,  located  within  an 
intersection,  w^as  set  up  in  1917,  at  a  main  Detroit 
crossroad. ^^  Similar  towers  also  were  used  about  the 
same  time  in  Xew  York  City. 


405 


These    route    and    mileage    markers    aided    travelers    passing 
through  Jackson,  Mich. 


Uniformity  Through   Standards 

Late  in  1922,  three  State  highway  department 
officials  from  Minnesota,  AVisconsin,  and  Indiana 
joined  in  a  trip  through  several  States  to  try  to  work 
out  some  basis  for  uniformity  in  the  signing  and 
marking  of  their  highways.  The  trio's  findings  were 
reported  at  the  1923  meeting  of  the  Mississippi  Valley 
Association  of  State  Highway  Departments.  That 
body  agreed  on  them  as  a  uniform  signing  and  mark- 
ing plan  for  the  member  States  and  passed  its  recom- 
mendations on  to  AASHO.  Two  years  later  the 
system  of  signs  and  markers  became  the  basis  for  the 
first  national  standards.^^ 

The  Mississippi  Valley  Association  established  dis- 
tinctive shapes  for  the  several  classes  of  signs,  namely, 
a  circular  railroad  crossing  sign,  an  octagonal  stop 
sign,  a  diamond-shaped  slow  sign,  and  a  distinct  route 
marker  to  be  individually  designed  by  each  State. 
All  of  these  signs  were  to  have  a  white  background 
with  black  lettering  and  border.  With  the  exception 
of  the  route  markers  and  the  rectangular  information 
sign,  all  were  to  be  two  feet  square  or  2  feet  across. 
Within  a  year  Wisconsin,  Minnesota,  Indiana,  and 
Michigan  were  installing  signs  on  their  State  systems 
largely  in  harmony  with  the  Association  plan,  and 
other  States  in  the  Association  were  making  plans  to 
do  so  promptly.  A  Minnesota  Highway  Department 
Manual  of  Markers  and  Signs  was  completed  in  April 
1923. 

The  report  of  the  National  Conference  on  Street 
and  Highway  Safety  in  1924  by  its  Committee  on 
Construction  and  Engineering  stated  that: 

Proper  signs  and  signals  are  essential  to  the  safe  move- 
ment  of   traffic   on    any   street   or  highway.   .    .    .      Signs 
should   be   uniform   for   a   given   purpose   throughout   the 
United  States.  ...     It  can  be  assumed  that  the  Federal- 
aid  signs   .   .   .   will  be  uniform   in  every  state  and  will 
point   the   way   to   state  and   county  highway  authorities 
to  follow  the  same  standards.   .   .  .     All  signs  should  be 
simple,   with   the   least   amount   of  wording  necessary   to 
make  them  readily  understood,  depending  mainly  on  dis- 
tinctive shapes,  symbols  and  colors."" 
The  Conference  report  recommended  that  color  in- 
dications,  which   would  not  be  used   for  any  other 
purpose,   should  be  red   for  "stop";   green   for  "pro- 
ceed"; yellow  for  "caution"  at  curves;  some  special 
cautionary  color  indications  should  be  used  at  cross- 
roads; white  letters  or  symbols  should  be  used  on  the 
red  or  green  background,  and  black  on  the  yellow. 
Distance    and    direction    signs    should    be   black    and 
white. 

Other  recommendations  were : 

Railroad  crossings  remaining  at  grade  should  be  safe- 
guarded in  every  reasonable  way.  Standard  warning 
signs  and  pavement  markings  should  be  used  to  mark  the 
approaches  to  all  public  railroad  crossings. 

Rural  highways  should  be  marked  with  a  white  center 
line  on  curves,  at  and  near  hill  crests,  at  irregular  inter- 
sections, and  at  any  other  points  where  safety  requires 
that  motorists  keep  strictly  to  the  right.  No  parking 
even  off  the  traveled  roadway  should  be  permitted  oppo- 
site these  white  lines.  White  center  lines  should  not  be 
used  on  straight  level  sections  of  highway  or  street  except 
at  highway,  street  or  railroad  crossings.  Black  center 
lines  on  straight  sections  of  highways  are  desirable. 

Pedestrian  lanes  sliould  be  marked  on  the  pavement  at 
bu.sy  intersections. 

Objects  near  the  roadway,  such  as  curbs,  poles,  fences 
and  rocli  surfaces,  should  be  painted  wliite.  Ol)structions, 
such  as  columns  and  curbs,  at  the  centers  of  underpass, 
should  be  striped  diagonally  black  and  white." 


406 


"■■'■■  ■  ■  ■    —  — "^ 

to''  -V 


■» 


V- 


By  1922,  fourteen  towers  of  this  type  had  been  installed  at  main  intersections 
in  Detroit,  Mich. 


DANGER 
GO     SLO 


CURVE. 


DANGER 


JF 


GO   SLO 


DANGER 
GOjSLO 

CROSS  Broads 


GO.     SLO 


B  b  EG 

SCHOOL 


STANDARD   DANGER   SI6NS-I9I9 


407 


At  the  annual  meeting  of  AASHO  in  1924,  its 
Subcommittee  on  Traffic  Control  and  Safety  presented 
recommendations  for  standard  signs  and  markings 
based  largely  on  the  work  of  the  Mississippi  Valley 
Association,  but  incorporating  at  least  one  new  fea- 
ture, a  color  code  to  distinguish  the  several  types  of 
signs.  Acting  on  an  AASHO  resolution,  the  Secre- 
tary of  Agriculture  appointed  a  Joint  Board  on  Inter- 
state Highways  in  March  1925  with  21  members  from 
State  highway  departments  and  3  from  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads.  In  October,  the  Board  made  its 
report  covering  the  proposed  interstate  highway  net- 
work, the  route  numbering  system,  and  a  comprehen- 
sive set  of  sign  designs.  The  system  devised  for 
numbering  the  interstate  network  of  highways  (now 
called  the  U.S.  Numbered  Highways)  used  even  num- 
bers for  east  and  west  roads  and  odd  numbers  for 
north  and  south  roads.  Long  distance  routes  which 
might  be  connected  entirely,  or  nearly  so,  across  the 
country  were  given  multiple  numbers  of  10.  The 
principal  north  and  south  routes  were  given  numbers 
such  as  1,  5,  11,  15.  Other  numbered  routes  could  be 
used  for  shorter  lines  between  the  main  designated 
routes. 

The  Joint  Board  sign  standards  followed  closely  the 
1924  Conference  recommendations  with  the  addition 
of  the  now  familiar  "U.S.  shield"  marker  for  the  new 
network.  A  yellow  background  was  adopted  for  all 
caution  and  danger  message  signs,  including  the  stop 
sign.  There  were  no  recommendations  on  luminous 
or  reflectorized  signs. 

The  Joint  Board  report  was  submitted  to  the  Sec- 
retary of  Agriculture  and  approved  by  him  November 
8,  1925.  It  was  accepted  at  the  annual  AASHO  meet- 
ing a  few  days  later  and  subsequently  adopted  by 
letter  ballot  of  the  State  highway  departments. 

During  the  following  year,  AASHO  developed  de- 
tailed sign  standards  and  published  the  first  edition 
(1927)  of  the  Manual  and  Specif  cations  for  the 
Manufacture^  Display,  and  Erection  of  U.S.  Standard 
Road  Markers  and  Signs.  This  Manual  set  forth  the 
design  and  use  of  each  type  of  sign  and  illustrated 
most  of  the  api^roved  signs.  It  listed  a  series  of  work- 
ing drawings  of  standard  signs  and  alphabets  that 
had  been  prepared  for  distribution  by  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads.  Also,  it  contained  detailed  specifica- 
tions for  materials  and  manufacturing  of  various 
types  of  wood  and  metal  signs.  This  1927  Manual 
was  the  first  national  rural  manual  on  traffic  control 
signs  and  markings.  A  1929  second  edition  authorized 
the  use  of  a  luminous  element  mounted  below  a  stand- 
ard sign  on  the  same  post  or  on  a  separate  mounting 
in  advance  of  the  standard  sign  framed  with  a  back- 
ground of  the  same  shape  and  color  as  the  standard 
sign  that  it  supplemented.  A  1931  revised  edition 
added  a  number  of  new  signs,  including  a  new  design 
for  junction  markers. 

Two  years  after  the  1927  AASHO  Manual,  other 
officials  gathered  for  urban  sign  standardization.  The 
National  Conference  on  Street  and  Highway  Safety, 
recognizing  the  need  for  greater  uniformity  in  street 


The  standardised  U.S.  route  shield. 

traffic  sig-ns,  signals,  and  markings,  accepted  an  offer 
of  the  American  Engineering  Council  to  make  a  na- 
tional survey  of  existing  conditions  and  to  prepare  a 
recommended  practice.  The  resulting  report  accepted 
most  of  the  AASHO  Sign  Manual  standards,  but 
with  some  exceptions  and  qualifications.  The  recom- 
mended "stop"  sign  was  to  have  a  yellow  background, 
but  the  letters  were  to  be  red.  Eighteen  inches  was 
to  be  the  standard  outside  dimension  instead  of  24 
inches  because  the  generally  slower  speeds  in  cities 
did  not  require  lai'ge  signs  for  visibility  and  the 
smaller  signs  would  occupy  less  space.  Parking  regu- 
lation signs  and  other  signs  applicable  to  city  use 
were  added.  These  parking  signs  were  to  be  12  by  18 
inches  with  a  white  background.  Red  letters  were  to 
be  used  on  "no  parking"  signs,  and  green  letters  where 
limited  time  parking  was  permitted.  Pedestrian  re- 
strictions were  to  be  shown  in  blue  letters  on  a  white 
background,  and  other  restrictions  in  black  on  white. 

The  urban  recommendations  also  included  subjects 
not  dealt  with  by  AASHO,  such  as  traffic  signals, 
pavement  markings  and  safety  zones.  The  signal 
recommendations  included  terms,  systems,  control 
types,  colors,  specifications,  beacons,  and  "wigwag" 
and  flashing  light  train  signals.  The  marking  recom- 
mendations included  pavement  lines,  railroads,  iden- 
tification, curve  lines,  words,  pavement  inserts,  paint, 
buttons,  and  markings  on  vertical  elements  such  as 
obstructions  and  railroad  gates. 

The  Council's  report  was  submitted  and  approved 
by  the  Third  National  Conference  on  Street  and 
Highway  Safety  in  1930.  Then  there  were  in  exist- 
ence two  national  manuals,  one  for  rural  use  and  one 
for  municipal  use,  with  some  significant  differences 
between  them.  It  was  apparent  to  all  that  a  single 
manual  covering  all  traffic  control  devices  would  be 
desirable. 


408 


Soon  a  Joint  Committee  on  Uniform  TraiRc  Control 
Devices  was  established,  represented  by  AASHO  for 
the  rural  manual  and  the  National  Conference  for  the 
urban  manual.  At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Committee, 
it  was  agreed  that  certain  details  should  be  thoroughly 
investigated  before  completing  the  joint  sign  manual. 
A  project  to  investigate  visibilitj'  and  legibility  of 
several  alternative  color  combinations  by  day  and 
night,  with  and  without  reflector  buttons,  was  ar- 
ranged with  the  Bureau  of  Standards  by  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads.  The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  also 
made  delay  studies  at  traffic  control  signals.  With 
these  and  other  data,  Committee  compromise  adjust- 
ments were  worked  out  and  a  combined  manual  was 
developed.  The  new  manual  was  approved  by  the 
Secretary  of  Agriculture  as  the  standard  code  for 
application  on  Federal-aid  highways;  it  was  published 
in  1935  as  the  Manual  on  Uniform  7'inffic  Control 
Devices  for  Streets  and  Highways  (MUTCD). 

The  new  jNIanual  dealt  comprehensively  with  the 
whole  field  of  traffic  control  de\-ices.  Signs  were  di- 
vided into  three  classifications — regulatory,  warning, 
and  guide.  The  stop  sign  retained  the  yellow  back- 
ground and  red  letters  were  accepted  as  an  alternative 
to  the  black  letters.  The  railroad  crossing  sign  was  a 
crossbuck  to  closely  resemble  the  standard  railroad 
advance  warning  sign.  The  Manual  included  new 
self-evident  symbols  to  indicate  crossroads,  Y  and  T 
intersections  and  side  roads.  The  section  on  traffic 
signals  supplied  long  needed  guidance  on  the  number, 
meaning,  and  arrangement  of  signal  lenses.  Green 
was  specified  for  go,  yellow  for  caution,  and  red  for 
stop.  The  ^Manual  provided  that  each  signal  should 
have  three  lenses  since  the  function  of  the  yellow 
light  could  not  be  attained  witli  a  signal  having  only 
two  lenses. 

In  1938  the  Joint  Committee  reexamined  the  Man- 
ual and  recommended  numerous  updating  revisions, 
and  a  supplement  was  issued  in  February  1939. 

As  one  of  the  aftermaths  of  the  Pearl  Harbor  at- 
tack on  December  7,  1941,  problems  of  wartime  traffic 
loomed,  especially  the  altogether  new  possibility  of 
having  to  move  traffic  under  blackout  conditions.  The 
Joint  Committee  was  revived,  this  time  including  the 
Institute  of  Traffic  Engineers  as  a  member.  The 
"War  Emergency  Edition"  of  the  Manual,  published 
at  the  end  of  1942,  was  a  condensed  version  of  the 
previous  edition,  modified  only  to  deal  with  blackouts 
and  make  certain  wartime  concessions,  such  as  per- 
missive use  of  white  pavement  markings  instead  of 
yellow  because  of  material  shortages. 

In  1944  the  Joint  Committee  agreed  that  the  Man- 
ual must  be  entirely  rewritten  to  include  the  needs  of 
changed  conditions.  In  1948,  after  a  wide  review,  the 
final  draft  was  approved  by  the  Joint  Committee's 
three  sponsoring  organizations  and  by  the  American 
Standards  Association.  That  year,  also,  the  National 
Committee  on  Uniform  Traffic  Laws  and  Ordinances 
was  made  a  member  of  the  Joint  Committee  replacing 
the  National  Conference  on  Streets  and  Highway 
Safety. 


Some  of  the  more  significant  changes  in  the  1948 
Manual  were :  a  diamond-shaped  sign  was  prescribed 
for  all  warning  signs  (except  the  circle  for  the  rail- 
road crossing)  ;  a  new  intersection  route  turn  symbol 
sign  was  provided;  a  new  "advisory  speed"  sign  was 
included  for  use  with  any  warning  signs;  aiid  the 
growing  need  for  larger  signs  was  recognized  and 
some  of  the  minimum  sizes  were  increased. 

A  major  change  and  innovation  was  made  in  the 
next  Joint  Connnittee  JNIanual  revision  of  1955.  The 
stop  sign  was  changed  from  black  on  yellow  to  white 
on  red.  The  yield  sign  came  into  being  in  the  now 
familiar  equilateral  triangle  with  one  point  downwai'd 
and  used  black  lettering  on  yellow  as  were  other 
warning  signs. 

In  1955  the  MUTCD  did  not  include  material  for 
the  signing  and  marking  of  freeways.  The  National 
Joint  Committee  on  Uniform  Traffic  Control  Devices 
began  drafting  an  extensive  addition  to  the  existing 
manual  in  1956  to  cover  expressway  signs  as  called 
for  by  the  1956  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act.  Also  in 
1956,  the  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials  set  up  a  subcommittee  of  its  traffic  connnittee 
to  develop  an  Interstate  Manual  that  would  "incor- 
porate the  best  experience  from  all  the  higher  type 
toll  roads  and  freeways."  The  resulting  Manual  Avas 
adopted  by  AASHO  in  1958.  In  February  1958,  the 
Manual  for  Signing  and  Pavement  Marking  of  the 
National  System  of  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways 
was  approved  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  A 
second  edition  of  the  Interstate  Manual  was  published 
in  1961  and  a  slightly  revised  edition  in  1962. 

In  the  meantime,  to  provide  broader  representation, 
the  Joint  Committee,  in  1960,  had  enlarged  its  mem- 
bership to  include  the  National  Association  of  County 
Officials  (now  the  National  Association  of  Counties) 
and  the  American  Municipal  Association  (now  the 
National  League  of  Cities).  The  Joint  Committee 
published  a  new  MUTCD  in  1961,  drawing  heavily 
on  the  AASHO  Interstate  Manual  for  expressway  and 
freeway  signing.  The  new  Manual  had  many  refine- 
ments, changes  in  emphasis,  and  new  applications  of 
engineering  and  psychological  research  and  experience 
in  operations  of  the  substantial  mileage  of  high-speed 
limited  access  highways,  particularly  of  toll  roads. 
New  features  included  the  use  of  lowercase  letters  and 
green  background  on  freeway  directional  signs,  re- 
flectorization  or  illumination  for  the  background  of 
overhead  signs,  and  reflectorization  of  all  pavement 
markings  that  have  application  at  night.  The  1961 
MUTCD  also  included,  for  the  first  time,  an  extensive 
special  treatment  of  traffic  control  devices  for  highway 
construction  and  maintenance  operations  and  a  group 
of  special  signs  for  emei'gency  civil  defense  applica- 
tions. Standards  for  traffic  signals  were  modernized 
to  keep  up  with  technical  advances  in  that  field. 

The  1966  Highway  Safety  Act  provided  for  the 
first  time  that  specific  Federal  safety  funds  be  spent 
l)y  local  governments  as  a  step  toward  reducing  the 
number  of  accidents.  The  existing  devices  on  all 
highways  and  streets  were  to  be  continually  reviewed 
and  upgraded.    The  Federal-aid  requirement  for  uni- 


409 


ss^ 


BIKE  ROUTE 


<s> 

NO  LEFT 

TliOkJ 

KEEP 

Dl/^UT 

New  signs,  1971.    Many  of  the  signs  combine  international  symbols  and  word  equivalents. 


form  traffic  control  standards  was  extended  to  apply 
to  all  streets  and  highways.  The  Act  provided  funds 
for  the  improvements,  which  would  ultimately  place 
the  Nation  under  one  set  of  traffic  control  standards. 

Using  the  Joint  Committee  as  an  advisory  board,  a 
new  updated  revision  of  the  MUTCD  was  prepared 
by  the  FHWA  staff.  Issued  as  the  1971  Manual  on 
Uniform  Ti'^afflc  Control  Devices  for  Streets  and 
Highioays.,  it  is  now  the  national  standard  for  all 
highways  open  to  public  travel. 

The  1971  MUTCD  incorporates  significant  changes 
in  the  wider  use  of  symbols,  which  are  international 
in  character,  on  both  regulatory  and  warning  signs. 
A  separate  part  covers  traffic  controls  for  school  areas. 
A  pennant  shaped  "no  passing  zone"  sign  and  penta- 
gon shaped  school  signs  were  added.  For  construc- 
tion and  maintenance  work,  the  colors  for  the  warning- 
signs  were  changed  to  orange.  In  the  pavement  mark- 
ing area,  yellow  was  added  as  the  color  to  delineate 
the  separation  of  traffic  flowing  in  opposite  directions. 
Traffic  signal  updating  included  recommending  a 
12-inch  signal  face  instead  of  8-inch  for  arrows.  It 
emphasizes  that  engineering  study  always  is  an  im- 
portant part  of  the  application  of  detail  standards. 


Surfacing  and  Paving  the  Highways 

Development  of  Pavement  Design 

The  history  of  the  development  of  highway  pave- 
ments in  the  United  States  to  the  present  stage  is  a 
series  of  incidents  that  are  widespread  both  in  time 
and  place.  Once  roads  advanced  beyond  the  foot- 
paths and  horse  trails,  their  improvements  into  paved 
highways  were  successive  developmental  efforts  to 
match  the  available  manpower,  funds  and  natural  re- 
sources against  the  changing  needs  of  the  types  and 
extent  of  vehicular  traffic  for  each  area's  expanding 
commerce. 

The  first  "macadam"  surface  in  this  country  was 
constructed  in  1823  between  Hagerstown  and  Boons- 
boro,  Maryland.  Rocks  were  broken  by  hand  so  as 
not  to  exceed  6  ounces  in  weight  or  to  fail  to  pass  a 
2-inch  ring.  The  material  was  laid  in  three  separate 
strata,  the  finished  surface  being  15  inches  deep  at  the 
center  and  12  inches  at  each  edge.  The  surface  was 
20  feet  wide.*2 

In  the  forested  sections,  plank  roads  were  dominant 
for  a  period.  The  first  plank  road  in  the  United 
States  was  opened  to  traffic  in  18-16  in  Syracuse,  New 
York.     Advocates  of  plank  roads  made  extravagant 


410 


claims  as  to  their  superiority  over  macadam,  and 
lumber  being  available,  thousands  of  miles  were  built 
in  many  States  during  the  following  decade.  In  a 
few  years,  the  public  discerned  that  the  life  of  any 
road  is  limited  by  the  lasting  qualities  of  the  material 
of  which  it  is  built.  It  took  about  10  years  for  the 
wooden  planks  to  rot  away,  and  the  plank  road  era 
ended  rather  abruptly.*^ 

Dust  palliatives  were  applied  on  gravel  and  mac- 
adam road  surfaces  as  early  as  1898.  Tar  and  asphalt 
were  used  as  protective  surface  coatings  and  later  as 
binders. 

Bituminous  pavements  were  constriicted  in  "Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  and  Xew  York  City  as  early  as  about 
1870.''*  Bituminous  macadam  experiments  began  in 
Boston  in  1906,  and  a  1-mile  section  was  constructed 
there  in  1907.-''' 

Recovering  from  the  ravages  of  the  Civil  War,  the 
South  needed  a  road  surface  that  could  be  built  and 
maintained  at  a  small  cost  from  local  materials  in 
general  abundance.  Sand-clay  surfacing,  because  it 
was  lower  in  cost,  adequate  for  light  traffic,  less  dusty 
and  noisy,  and  more  resilient  than  macadam,  was  the 
logical  answer  to  the  road  problems  of  the  South 
Atlantic  and  Gulf  States  in  1885.  It  was  used  widely 
in  these  areas. 

The  first  brick  pavement  on  a  rural  road  was  placed 
near  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1893.  The  roadway  was  32 
feet  wide,  but  the  brick  pavement,  8  feet  wide,  was 
placed  near  one  side  of  the  roadway,  leaving  the  re- 
maining width  unsurfaced.'*® 

Mention  has  been  made  of  early  macadam,  brick, 
and  bituminous  surfaces  and  pavements  on  rural 
roads.  By  the  1890's  the  heavy-load  hauling  demands 
in  the  large  cities  had  led  to  construction  of  heavy 
street  pavement  sections  of  the  types  which  had  shown 
good  stability.  The  horsedrawn  drays  hauling  heavy 
loads  on  steel-rimmed  wheels  had  pulverized  all  but 
the  hardest  pavement  surfaces.  Consequently,  the 
main  streets  of  the  large  cities  were  built  very  heavily 
and  surfaced  with  granite  blocks  or  hard  paving 
bricks.  Concrete  bases  were  used  on  some.  The  minor 
business  streets  and  residential  streets  were  commonly 
of  macadam  or  gravel.  Asphalt  paving,  begun  in  the 
early  1870's.  was  immediately  popular  because  of  its 
smoothness,  silence,  lack  of  dust,  and  ease  of  cleaning. 
By  the  1890's,  many  of  the  city  streets  wei'e  asphalt 
surfaced  to  gain  these  advantages. 

Credit  for  first  surfacing  a  rural  public  road  with 
Portland  cement  concrete  is  conceded  to  Wayne 
County,  Michigan,  where  a  1-mile  section  was  built  in 
1909.  The  i^avement  was  laid  in  two  courses,  18  feet 
wide  and  having  a  total  depth  of  61/2  inches.  The 
first  course  was  made  of  1-21/2-5  mix  of  portland 
cement,  sand  and  limestone  4  inches  deep  and  the 
second  course  of  a  1-2-3  mix  of  portland  cement, 
sand  and  crushed  cobblestone  2i/^  inches  deep.  It  was 
laid  in  25-foot  sections.*' 

The  heavy  truck  traffic  during  World  War  I  in- 
flicted widespread  damage  upon  surfaces  built  during 
the  preceding  generations  to  carry  horsedrawn  ve- 
hicles. After  the  war,  there  was  a  public  clamor  for 
improved  roads,  at  once  and  everywhere.  Responsible 
engineers  agreed  that  they  lacked  the  essential  infor- 
mation required  for  the  design  and  construction  of  a 
nationwide  system   of  paved  laighways  as  envisioned 


by  the  framers  of  the  1916  Federal  Aid  Road  Act. 
This  led  to  the  fornuilation  and  cari-ying  out  of  the 
continuing  and  extensive  series  of  engineering  re- 
search studies  by  the  State  highway  departments, 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  related  industry.  The 
HighAvay  Research  Board,  created  in  1920,  served  to 
nationally  correlate  and  disseminate  the  ensuing  re- 
sults of  the  studies,  delving  into  the  proper  relation- 
ship between  highway  loads,  road  surfaces,  and 
subgrades.  The  system  of  soil  classification  and  anal- 
ysis was  developed,  together  with  data  on  the  many 
detailed  characteristics  of  aggregates,  materials  and 
mixes  under  the  varied  field  conditions  and  traffic 
loads.  Traffic  counting  and  weighing  facilities  were 
set  up,  and  the  procedures  for  predicting  traffic  vol- 
umes and  loadings  were  developed  and  put  into  use 
in  the  late  1930's. 

As  the  numbers,  sizes,  weights  and  speeds  of  ve- 
hicles increased,  highway  officials  struggled  to  provide 
pavements  with  adequate  structural  strength  to  meet 
the  demands  of  traffic.  Practices  of  highway  design, 
construction  and  maintenance  were  progressively  re- 
vised upward.  Some  of  these  revisions  were  the  result 
of  practical  experience  and  some  were  based  on  results 
of  engineering  research.  In  the  1920's,  many  highway 
engineers  recognized  that  the  supporting  ability  re- 
quired in  the  pavement  structure  of  roads  was  deter- 
mined principally  by  the  axle  loads  of  the  vehicles. 
There  was  also  general  recognition  of  the  need  for 
more  factual  information  on  all  of  the  pavement  and 
soil  elements. 

Design   Road   Tests 

Beginning  in  1920,  several  research  projects  using 
specially  constructed  test  tracks  produced  significant 
advances  in  the  science  of  pavement  desigTi  and  con- 
struction. In  1920,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  expe- 
dited its  field  tests  on  the  large  circular  track 
containing  different  pavement  sections  at  Arlington, 
Virginia.  Experimental  roads  were  constructed  in 
1921  by  the  Columbia  Steel  Company  cooperating 
with  the  California  Highway  Commission  at  Pitts- 
burg east  of  San  Francisco.  The  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  intensified  its  laboratory  tests  and  initiated  a 
countrywide  field  study  of  subgrade  soils.  Universi- 
ties became  beehives  of  research  activity.  One  major 
effort  to  obtain  such  information  was  the  Bates  Ex- 
perimental Road,  a  test  conducted  by  the  Illinois 
Division  of  Highways  in  1922  and  1923  near  Spring- 
field, Illinois,  on  a  2i/^-mile  roadway  divided  into  63 
test  sections  of  varied  materials  and  design.**  The 
test  vehicles  were  trucks  with  solid  rubber  tires  on 
which  wheel  loads  were  increased  from  2,500  to  13,000 
poimds  as  the  testing  progressed. 

Within  a  few  years,  there  were  four  principal  types 
of  findings:  (1)  Subgrade  soil  tests  were  developed 
which,  together  with  traffic  studies  and  otlier  informa- 
tion, became  valuable  aids  in  pavement  design.  (2) 
The  destructive  impact  of  the  solid  rubber  tire  was 
isolated  and  overcome  by  the  introduction  of  the 
softer  pneumatic  tii'e.  (3)  Agreement  was  reached 
on  the  9,000-pound  wheel  load  as  a  logical  basis  upon 
which  to  plan  a  long-term  paving  program.  (4)  The 
thickened  edge  design  of  rigid  pavements  w^as  adopted. 
These  findings  soon  ])rought  about  the  adoption  of 
laws  regulating  vehicle  weights. 


411 


The  Baltimore-Washington  Boulevard  was 

greatly  damaged  by  World  War  I 

truck  traffic 


By  1930,  the  same  stretch  of  road  had  been 
resurfaced  with  bituminous  concrete  and 
widened  by  the  construction  of  two 
10-foot  concrete  shoulders. 


« 

I 


"^>^^Mifld 


*^- 


412 


The  Baltimore-Washington  Blvd.  (U.S.  route  1)  in  1975. 

413 


Aware  of  the  need  for  uniformity  of  State  motor 
vehicle  weight  regulations,  the  Governors  Conference, 
in  1949,  requested  a  study  of  the  matter.  This  study 
resulted  in  a  rigid  pavement  test  road  being  estab- 
lished in  Maryland,  with  participation  by  11  State 
highway  departments,  the  District  of  Columbia,  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  auto  manufacturers  and  the 
petroleum  industry.  The  purpose  of  the  testing  pro- 
gram was  to  determine  the  relative  effects  of  various 
axle  loads  and  configurations  on  distress  of  rigid 
pavement.  The  findings  supplied  extensive  data  on 
the  factors  to  be  used  in  the  design  of  rigid  pave- 
ments.*^ Especially  significant  were  those  factors  re- 
garding support  material  characteristics. 

The  Western  Association  of  State  Highway  OiRcials 
constructed  a  test  road  in  Idaho  in  1951  to  aid  in 
establishing  load  limits  and  to  develop  rational  design 
methods  for  flexible  pavements.  A  number  of  spe- 
cially designed  and  constructed  bituminous  pavements 
Avere  carefully  observed  under  the  repeated  applica- 
tion of  a  number  of  selected  heavy  axle  loads.  The 
findings  provided  significant  information  on  the  ma- 
terials and  soil  parameters  for  designing  flexible  pave- 
ments, especially  in  the  western  States  where  soil 
conditions  are  similar.  Also  the  surfaced  shoulder 
was  found  to  contribute  to  the  pavement  structural 
stability.^o 

In  1955,  the  American  Association  of  State  High- 
way Officials  undertook  the  AASHO  Road  Test  at  a 
selected  site  near  Ottawa,  Illinois,  with  the  Highway 
Research  Board  accepting  the  responsibility  of  ad- 
ministering the  project.  Various  heavy  truck  loads 
were  operated  on  specially  constructed  pavement  sec- 
tions of  both  rigid  and  flexible  types  until  they 
reached  a  failure  stage.  A  vast  amount  of  data  was 
collected  and  analyzed,  providing  engineering  facts 
for  highway  design  and  construction  nationwide.  In 
addition,  the  test  findings  were  aimed  at  determining 
maximum  desirable  weights  of  vehicles  to  be  operated 
on  Federal-aid  highways,  including  the  Interstate 
System,  and  determining  an  equitable  distribution  of 
the  tax  burden  among  various  classes  of  persons  using 
Federal-aid  highways. 

The  findings  of  the  AASHO  Road  Test  were  sum- 
marized and  prepared  in  the  form  of  design  equations 
and  graphs  and  made  available  to  the  States  in  1962, 
but  it  was  not  until  1973  that  the  data  was  updated 
and  published  by  AASHO  as  Interim  Guide  for  the 
Design  of  Rigid  Pavement  Structures.  The  equations 
and  graphs  incorporated  the  research  data  for  design 
factors  such  as  traffic,  soil  support  and  material 
strengths.  The  guide  today  represents  the  major  cur- 
rent data  available  for  broad  application  in  designing 
pavements  and  is  used  by  the  Federal  Highway  Ad- 
ministration to  measure  the  adequacy  of  the  States' 
proposed  pavement  designs  for  use  on  Federal-aid 
highways. 

Present  day  pavements  consist  of  layers  of  bitumi- 
nous materials  or  portland  cement  concrete,  plain  or 
reinforced,  with  thicknesses  ranging  up  to  10  inches; 
in  some  instances,  unusually  high  truck  loadings  call 
for  even  greater  thicknesses.  Most  pavements  today 
include  a  subbase  which  is  a  stratum  of  material  4  to 
20  inches  thick  between  the  pavement  and  natural 
subgrade.  This  subbase  is  a  granular  material  some- 
times treated  for  stabilization  with  either  cement  or 


asphalt.  Design  criteria,  which  account  for  soil  sup- 
port values,  material  strength  characteristics  and 
traffic,  are  used  to  determine  the  thickness  of  the 
pavement  subbase. 

Highway  Development  Record 

The  records  of  the  development  of  roads  and  streets 
in  the  United  States  show  a  progressive  increase  in 
the  total  mileage  and  a  continued  conversion  from  the 
lower  to  higher  surfacing  and  pavement  types.  The 
actual  rate  of  development  and  change  reflects  not 
only  the  increase  in  funding  for  public  highways  to 
serve  the  rising  traffic  needs,  but  also  the  findings 
from  research  studies  on  surface  materials,  aggregates, 
reinforcements,  mixes,  construction  and  maintenance. 

In  1904  there  were  about  2.35  million  miles  of  pub- 
lic streets  and  highways.  From  1910  to  1920  the  total 
increased  rapidly  to  about  3.2  million  miles  in  all 
stages  of  improvement,  ranging  from  primitive  trails 
to  highly  improved  urban  thoroughfares.  In  1920, 
425,000  miles  had  some  form  of  surfacing.  Since 
1950  the  total  mileage  has  increased  consistently  to 
the  1973  total  of  3.8  million  miles.  The  urban  mileage 
has  been  expanding  somewhat  more  rapidly  than  the 
rural  mileage,  particularly  since  1950. 

About  90  percent  of  the  total  road  mileage  was  not 
surfaced  in  1904.  During  the  total  mileage  expansion 
in  the  teens,  the  nonsurfaced  mileage  actually  in- 
creased, but  the  construction  programs  resulted  in  a 
gradual  proportional  decrease  to  about  80  percent  in 
1925.  Since  then  the  nonsurfaced  mileaq^e  has  de- 
creased rapidly  to  about  20  percent  in  1973. 

Since  about  1920  the  total  surfaced  mileage  has 
been  increasing  steadily  to  the  1973  total  of  3.17 
million  miles.  The  gravel  surfacing  type  has  been 
dominant.  Since  about  1935  the  rate  of  surfacing 
urban  highways  has  been  somewhat  more  rapid  than 
that  for  the  rural  mileage. 

The  mileage  of  rural  gravel-type  surfaces  (soil, 
slag,  gravel  and  stone)  increased  regularly  to  about 
1960.  Since  1962  this  type  has  been  decreasing.  It 
should  be  noted  that  the  increase  in  gravel  mileage 
up  to  1960  was  over  and  above  the  mileage  that  was 
upgraded  to  higher  surface  types.  From  1935  to  1955 
the  rural  gravel  improved  mileage  was  from  3  to  4 
times  that  of  the  low  bituminous  mileage.  The  record 
on  urban  gravel  mileage  shows  little  change  from 
1941  to  1973,  with  a  continuing  total  of  70,000  to 
80,000  miles. 

The  low  bituminous*  rural  mileage  jumped  sub- 
stantially during  the  1930's  and  increased  steadily 
until  the  late  1960's,  when  it  leveled  off.  In  the  urban 
areas,  the  low  bituminous  mileage  continually  in- 
creased. 

The  high  bituminous**  rural  mileage  followed  the 
upward  trend  of  low  bituminous  type,  with  totals 
only  about  half  to  two-thirds  that  of  the  lower  type. 
The  decided  increase  about  1950  corresponds  with  the 
decrease  in  the  low  bituminous  type.  This  type  con- 
tinued the  upward  trend  the  last  few  years,  as  distinct 
from  the  low  bituminous  mileage. 


*  Having  a  combined  surface  and  base  thickness  less  than 
7  inches  and/or  low  load-bearing  capacity. 

**  Having  a  combined  surface  and  base  thiclvuess  7  inches 
or  more  and/or  a  high  load-bearing  capacity. 


414 


4000 


« 

o 
o 
o 


Q 

LU 

z 

CQ 

o 
o 

LU 

< 

LU 


o 


CO 
X 

LU 


3500 


3000 


2500 


2000 


1500 


1000 


500 


BUBAL 


.^.v3^^^°-•■ 


X 


0 

1900   05 


_L 


jL 


•■•"'''■■  1 1 


±. 


CONCRETE  -  RURAL 

J I I "i" i V 


10         15      1920      25         30        35      1940      45         50         55      1960      65        70      1975 

YEAR 
SOURCE:    "HIGHWAY  STATISTICS,"  ANNUAL  PUBLICATIONS  1945  -  1973. 


The  mileage  record  of  the  concrete  type  differs  con- 
siderably from  the  other  types.  For  the  rural  mileage 
during  the  1920\s  and  early  1930's,  the  total  exceeded 
that  of  both  bituminous  types.  The  existing  rural 
concrete  pavement  mileage  increased  until  1935,  lev- 
eled off  for  some  10  years,  and  since  has  decreased. 

The  mileage  decrease  for  rural  concrete  pavements 
reflects  the  conversion  of  sections  of  that  type  of  pave- 
ment to  the  high  bituminous  type  when  an  overlay 
was  placed  as  a  maintenance  step.  The  existing  urban 
concrete  mileage  for  the  last  16  years  shows  no  in- 
crease, the  mileage  being  only  half  or  less  those  of 
bituminous  pavements.  The  overlay  conversion  effect 
doubtless  applies  here  also. 


Proportionally,  there  has  been  substantially  higher 
type  development  of  road  and  street  mileage  in  the 
urban  area.  The  percentages  of  the  1973  mileages  for 
the  various  types  were : 


State  Highway 

Total 

Rural 

Urban 

Systems 

Total  Existing  Mileage 

(1,000's) 

3,807 

3,176 

631 

764 

Percentage  by  Type: 

Nonsurfaced 

20 

23 

4 

3 

Surfaced : 

Gravel 

34 

38 

11 

8 

Low  Bituminous 

24 

21 

40 

33 

High  Bituminous 

19 

16 

36 

48 

Concrete 

3 

2 

9 

8 

Total  Surfaced 

80 

77 

96 

97 

415 


1300 

1200 

1100    - 

1000  - 
900  - 
800  - 
700    - 

CO 

§    600    - 
I     500    - 

LU 
CD 

m    400    - 

O    300    - 

P 

CO 

x    200 

LU 

100 
0 


EXISTING  MILEAGE  OF  ROADS  AND  STREETS 
BY  SEPARATE  TYPES 


RURAL 


/ 
/ 


,^''r-:~- 


/ 


400 
300 
200 
100 


± 


URBAN 


—  ^ 


J_ 


± 


X 


J_ 


± 


J_ 


X 


_L 


CONCRETE 
1 I  I 


0 
1900     05     1910     15        20        25      1930     35        40       45      1950     55        60       65      1970     75 

SOURCE:  "HIGHWAY  STATISTICS",  ANNUAL  YEAR  PUBLICATIONS  1945  -  1973. 


416 


REFERENCES 

'  Second  Biennial  Report  of  the  Department  of  Public 
Roads  Made  to  the  Governor  and  General  Assembly  of 
Kentucky— Nov.  1,  1913  to  Nov.  1,  1915  (The  State  Journal 
Co.,  Frankfort,  Ky.,  1915)  pp.  35,  36. 

'  Fifth  Report  of  the  Illinois  State  Highway  Depart- 
ment For  the  Years  1913,  1914,  1915,  1916  (Illinois  State 
.lournal  Co.,  Springfield,  111.,  1917)  p.  135. 

'  Sixteenth  Annual  Report  of  the  Division  of  High- 
ways—Jan.  1,  1933  to  Dec.  31,  1933  (Illinois  Department  of 
Pul)lic  Works  and  Buildings,  Springfield,  111.,  1933)  p.  10. 

*  Official  Automobile  Blue  Book,  various  volumes  for  the 
year  1920  (Automobile  Blue  Book  Publishing  Co.,  New  York). 

'M.  Duerksen,  The  Story  of  Abner  Doble  and  His  Mag- 
nificent Steam  Cars,  Cars  &  Parts,  Jan.  1975,  p.  102. 

°  Report  of  the  State  Highway  Commission  of  Minnesota, 
1915-1916,  (Mar.  1,  1917)  p.  18. 

'  Fourth  Annual  Report  of  the  Division  of  Highways — 
Jul.  1,  1920  to  Dec.  31,  1921  (Illinois  Department  of  Public 
Works  and  Buildings,  Springfield,  111.,  1922)  p.  9. 

*  Eleventh  Annual  Report  of  the  Division  of  Highways — 
Jan.  1,  1928  to  Dec.  31,  1928  (Illinois  Department  of  Public 
Works  and  Buildings,  Springfield,  111.,  1929)  p.  25. 

"  First  Biennial  Report  of  the  California  Highway  Com- 
mission, 1917-1918  (State  Printing  Office,  Sacramento,  Calif., 
1919)  p.  51. 

'"  Biennial  Reports  of  the  State  Highway  Commission, 
Commonwealth  of  Kentucky,  various  years  from  1915  to 
1921  (The  State  Journal  Co.,  Frankfort,  Ky.). 

"  Annual  Reports  of  the  Division  of  Highways,  various 
years  from  1915  to  1921  (Illinois  Department  of  Public  Works 
and  Buildings,  Springfield,  111.). 

'=  Id. 

"  Report  of  the  State  Road  Commission  of  Maryland 
For  the  Years  1927,  1928,  1929  and  1930  (Baltimore,  Md., 
Oct.  1,  1930)  p.  85. 

"Annual  Reports  of  the  Division  of  Highways,  various 
years  from  1921  to  1930  (Illinois  Department  of  Public  Works 
and  Buildings,  Springfield,  111.). 

"  Report  of  the  Commissioner  of  Highways  of  Minnesota 
For  1920  (Mar.  1,  1921)  p.  4. 

"  SEMi;NTH  Annual  Report  of  the  Division  of  Highways — 
Jan.  1,  1924  to  Dec.  31,  1924  (Illinois  Department  of  Public 
Works  and  Buildings,  Springfield,  111.,  1925)  p.  1. 

"  Se\-enteenth,  Eighteenth  and  Nineteenth  Annual  Re- 
ports OF  the  State  Highway  Commission  For  the  Years 
1924,  1925  and  1926  to  the  General  Assembly  of  Maryland 
(Baltimore,  Md.,  Jan.  1927)  p.  12. 

^'Standards  Approved  b7j  the  American  Association  of  State 
Highway  Officials  During  the  Year  1928,  American  Highways, 
Vol.  7,  No.  4,  Oct.  1928,  p.  21. 

"Aircraft  Yearbook,  1927  (Aeronautical  Chaml)er  of  Com- 
merce of  America,  Inc.,  New  York,  1927)  pp.  96,  97. 

"A  Policy  On  Highway  Classification  (American  Asso- 
ciation of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C.,  1940) 
pp.  1,  2,  7,  8. 

"A  Policy  On  Sight  Distance  For  Highways  (American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Wa.shington,  D.C., 
1940)  pp.  4,  17. 


''  Id.,  p.  15. 

"A  Policy  On  Highway  Types  (Geometric)  (American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C., 
1940)  pp.  65-69. 

^'  A.  LuEDKE  &  J.  Harrison,  Superelevation  and  Easement 
as  Applied  to  Hightvay  Curves,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  3,  No.  31, 
Nov.  1920,  pp.  3-12. 

'"  R.  MoYER,  Further  Skidding  Tests  With  Particular  Refer- 
ence to  Curves,  Proceedings,  14th  Annual  Meeting,  Vol.  14 
(Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C.,  1934)  p.  129. 

'^  J.  Barnett,  Safe  Side  Friction  Factors  and  Superelevation 
Design,  Proceedings,  16th  Annual  Meeting,  Vol.  16  (Highway 
Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C.,  1936)  pp.  72,  73. 

■'  A.  Bruce,  The  Effect  of  Increased  Speed  of  Vehicles  on 
the  Design  of  Highways,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  10,  No.  1,  Mar. 
1929,  pp.  15,  16. 

^  H.  Kelsey,  The  Future  of  Roadside  Development  in 
Massachusetts,  (Address  delivered  at  the  annual  meeting  of 
the  Massachusetts  Forest  and  Park  Association  in  Boston, 
Mass.,  Feb.  6,  1936)  pp.  1,  2. 

^°  Interregional  Highways,  H.  Doc.  379,  78th  Cong.,  2d 
Sess.,  p.  III. 

'"A  Policy  On  Design  Standards  (American  Association 
of  State  Highway  Officials,  Washington,  D.C.,  1941)  p.  5. 

"Traffic  Devices:  Historical  Aspects  Thereof  (Institute 
of  Traffic  Engineers,  Washington,  D.C.,  1971)  p.  81. 

''Id.,  p.  82. 

"Id.,  p  .103. 

"  C.  Borth,  Mankind  On  the  Move  (Automotive  Safety 
Foundation,  Washington,  D.C.,  1969)  p.  204. 

'=  ITE,  supra,  note  31,  p.  24. 

'^Id.,  p.  35. 

''Id.,  p.  43. 

"/(Z.,  p.  35. 

''Id.,  pp.  82-84. 

'"Report  of  First  National  Conference  On  Street  and 
Highway  Safety,  Washington,  D.C.,  Dec.  15-16,  1924,  p.  21. 

''Id.,  p.  26. 

"A.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Public  Roads 
of  the  Past  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Of- 
ficials, Washington,  D.C.,  1953)  pp.  52,  53. 

"  Id.,  p.  70. 

"Fundamentals  of  Asphalt  Paving  (The  Ohio  Oil  Com- 
pany, 1949)  pp.  18,  19. 

"  A.  Rose,  supra,  note  42,  p.  105. 

'"Id.,  p.  97. 

"  Third  Annual  Report  of  the  Board  of  County  Road 
Commissioners  of  Wayne  County  to  the  Board  of  Super- 
visors OF  Wayne  County — From  Sept.  16,  1908  to  Sept.  30, 
1909,  p.  23. 

"*  C.  Older,  Official  Conclusions  From  the  Bates  Road,  Public 
Works,  Vol.  54,  No.  1,  Jan.  1923,  p.  13. 

"  Final  Report  On  Road  Test  One — Md.  :  Effect  of  Con- 
trolled Truck  Axle  Loadings  On  Concrete  Pavement,  Special 
Report  4  (Highway  Research  Board,  Washington,  D.C.,  1952) 
pp.  7-11. 

^The  WASHO  Road  Test — Part  2,  Test  Data,  Analyses, 
AND  Findings,  Special  Report  22  (Highway  Research  Board, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1955)  pp.  4,  5. 


417 


Bridge/ 


Pre- 1776  Bridges 

History  teaches  that  all  sciences  and  arts,  including 
bridge  design  and  construction,  benefit  from  the  in- 
novations, successes  and  failures  of  the  past.  This 
presupposes  a  tradition  of  learning  not  ahvays  avail- 
able to  the  American  colonists.  The  first  bridges  in 
this  country  were  often  built  by  untrained  persons 
inexperienced  with  the  difficulties  and  problems  of 
constructin.of  a  bridge  of  adequate  strength  and  reason- 
able durability.  Instead,  they  substituted  determina- 
tion, native  ingenuity,  and  more  determination. 

Economics  and  material  availability  generally  lim- 
ited the  colonial  bridges  to  timber  or  stone  construc- 
tion with  timber  being  predominant.  This  was  largely 
due  to  the  greater  time  and  labor  required  to  quarry 
and  transport  stone.  From  this  lowly  beginning,  the 
complex  design,  construction  and  material  sciences 
have  developed. 

The  existing  bridges  in  the  American  colonies  in 
1776  were  few  and  minor  in  size.  At  that  time,  all 
major  cities  and  most  towns  and  villages  were  located 
on  navigable  waterways,  since  the  waterways  offered 
the  most  practical  transportation  between  populated 
areas.  Barges,  boats,  canoes  and  fords  Avere  mainly 
used  wliere  roads  crossed  the  waterways.  As  the 
population  centers  developed,  some  timber  bridges 
were  built  over  adjacent  nari'ow  waterways  by  local 


authorities  to  facilitate  access  by  travelers  and  com- 
mercial goods. 

Generally,  the  bridges  had  log  beam  spans  and  were 
limited  to  the  length  of  timber  available  from  local 
trees.  Abutments  at  the  stream  banks  were  timber 
mud  sills,  wooden  cribs,  or  dry  stone  masonry  where 
stone  was  available.  Where  more  than  one  span  was 
required,  timber  pile  bents,  wooden  cribs  or  wooden 
mud  sills  were  used  for  piers  in  the  stream  bed.  The 
cribs  were  usually  braced  and  filled  with  rock  or  com- 
pacted earth.  The  life  of  these  bridges  was  usually 
short  due  to  the  rapid  deterioration  of  the  timber  and 
the  washing  out  of  the  foundation  structures.  Some 
floating  bridges  were  constructed,  usually  of  large  logs 
fastened  together. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  Concord  Bridge, 
at  which  the  homespun  Xew  England  "Horatius"' 
fired  "the  shot  heard  round  the  world,"  was  a  timber 
beam  and  pile  bent  structure  very  similar  to  the 
Sublician  Bridge  defended  by  his  Roman  prototype 
nearly  2,000  years  before. 

Since  the  waterways  were  the  main  and  pre-existing 
arteries  of  travel  and  connnerce,  any  bridges  built 
o\er  navigable  waterways  required  openings  and 
clearances  adequate  for  the  passage  of  the  waterway 
traffic,  whether  sailing  ships,  barges,  canoes  or  log 
I'afts.  Where  the  horizontal  and  vertical  clearances 
of  fixed   spans  were   not  adequate   for  such  passage, 


418 


Reproduction  of  historic  timber  beam  and  pile  bent  bridge  at  the  original  site  in  Concord,  Mass. 


movable  spans  were  used.  These  were  most  likely 
single  or  double  leaf  bascules  (hinged  sections)  oper- 
ated manually.  Floating  bridges  were  provided  with 
sections  that  co\dd  be  hinged  or  pulled  out  of  place  to 
permit  the  passage  of  waterway  traiRc.^ 

Some  short  span  stone  arches  were  built,  mainly  in 
the  colonies  north  of  the  Potomac  River. 

Timber  Bridges   1776-1916 

King-post  or  queen-post  trusses  (actually  simple 
braced  beams)  were  in  early  use  for  short  spans. 
However,  the  very  common  pier  washouts  experienced 
by  multispan  beam  bridges,  plus  the  increasing  knowl- 
edge of  the  society  in  general,  led  to  the  development 
of  timber  trussed  arches  that  could  span  wide  rivers. 
A  New  England  millwright  named  Timothy  Palmer 


built  a  series  of  patented  trussed  arches  very  like  one 
of  those  illustrated  in  Palladio's  Treatise  on  Archi- 
tecture (1570).  The  best  known  was  the  244-foot 
span  across  the  Piscataqua  River  near  Portsmouth, 
New  Hampshire,  built  in  1794.^  The  roadways  were 
supported  on  the  lower  chords  of  the  structure,  re- 
sulting in  steep  grades  ascending  to  the  center  from 
each  end  of  the  spans.  These  bridges  being  true 
arches,  provision  was  made  for  their  horizontal  thrust 
to  be  transferred  to  the  substructure. 

Besides  Timothy  Palmer,  two  other  men,  Louis 
Wernwag  and  Theodore  Burr,  stand  out  as  the  first 
professional  bridge  builders  in  the  United  States. 
These  men  shared  several  things  in  common — they 
were,  of  course,  contemporaries,  their  structures  were 
all  highly  indeterminate  combinations  of  trusses  and 
arches,  and  they  most  likely  did  not  have  the  theoreti- 


The  Upper  Ferry  Bridge  over  the  Schuylkill  River,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  was 
a  covered  timber  trussed  arch  created  by  Lewis  Wernwag  in  1805. 


419 


Camp  Nelson  covered  arch-truss  over  the  Kentucky  River 
during  razing  i7i  1933.    The  three  trussed  240-foot  span  bridge 
was   built  by  Wernwag  in  1838  and  closed  to  traffic  in  1926. 


cal  knowledge  to  anal3^ze  such  structures.  They  were 
virtually  carpenters  building  bridges  in  accordance 
with  their  own  experience  or  that  related  by  others, 
and  they  were  among  the  group  that  produced  the 
distinctly  American  bridge  characteristic,  the  covered 
bridge.  Their  picturesque  practice  was,  of  course,  a 
sound  and  practical  measure  that  extended  the  life 
of  the  wooden  structure  immeasurably. 

The  first  of  many  covered  bridges  in  America  was 
built  in  1800  by  Palmer  at  Middle  Ferry,  Philadel- 
phia, Pennsylvania.^  The  covering  protected  the 
bridge  members  from  decay  to  the  extent  that  a  prop- 
erly maintained  bridge  would  give  many  years  of 
service.  The  Waterford  Bridge  over  the  Hudson 
River,  a  covered  wood  truss  bridge  built  by  Theodore 
Burr  in  1803-4,  had  a  service  life  of  105  years  (it  was 
destroyed  by  fire  in  1909).* 

The  steep  roadway  grades  of  the  trussed  arches 
were  objectionable,  and  by  the  beginning  of  the  19th 
century,  a  combination  truss  and  arch  was  developed 
with  the  roadway  supported  by  the  lower  chords  and 
having  only  a  slight  longitudinal  camber.  The  height 
or  rise  of  the  timber  arch  was  about  equal  to  the 
depth  of  the  truss,  with  the  arch  fastened  to  the  truss 
web  members  at  all  intersections.  The  Susquehanna 
River  bridge  at  McCall's  Ferry,  Pennsylvania,  built 
in  1814-15  by  Theodore  Burr,  contained  a  truss-arch 
with  a  367-foot  span  said  to  be  the  longest  then  built 
in  America.^  Burr's  bridge  represented  a  small,  but 
significant,  change — the  arch  was  added  to  the  truss. 


Inside  view  of  typical  Indiana  covered  bridge, 
built  in  1900,  showing  arch-truss  details. 

420 


Covered  timber  truss  bridge  over  the  Connecticut  River 

between  Cornish,  N.H.,  and  Wi7idsor,  Vt.    Built  in  1866, 

this  460-foot  long,  tico-span  Town  truss  structure  is  said 

to  be  the  longest  timber  bridge  remaining  in  this  country. 

In  1820,  Ithiel  Town  patented  a  timber  lattice  truss, 
although  lattice  trusses  had  been  built  in  Vermont  as 
early  as  1813,^  and  in  1829  Colonel  Stephen  H.  Long 
developed  a  panel  truss  with  double  diagonals,  similar 
to  a  Howe  truss.''  These  trusses  could  stand  by  them- 
selves, and  arches  were  not  necessary.  Thus,  the  truss 
bridge  appeared  in  a  recognizable  modern  form. 

The  web  members,  diagonals  and  verticals  of  the 
earlier  trussed  arches  and  truss-arches  were  made  of 
timber.  Some  of  the  later  web  systems  used  iron  rods 
for  tension  verticals,  diagonals  and  counters  in  the 
web  system.  There  were  many  other  variations  of 
the  truss  besides  those  mentioned.  Due  to  intensive 
promotion,  the  various  types  were  identified  by  the 
name  of  the  developer.  '\^'lien  iron  and  steel  trusses 
were  developed,  the  timber  truss  designations  were 
given  to  the  corresponding  geometric  metal  trusses, 
i.e.,  Howe,  Pratt,  Fink,  etc.  Connections  of  members 
were  made  by  bearings  of  timber,  forgings,  iron  bolts 
and  spikes,  mortises  and  tenons,  and  hardwood  dowels. 

The  layout  and  relative  position  of  the  trusses  and 
arches,  the  proportioning  of  the  members,  the  methods 
of  support  of  the  floor  system,  and  type  and  magni- 
tude of  the  connections  were  determined  by  the  ex- 
perience and  preference  of  the  builder.  There  was  no 
published  method  of  stress  analysis  available  to  the 
builders  for  proportioning  members  and  connections 
until  Squire  Whipple's  publication  in  1847,  An  Essay 
on  Bridge  Building^  and  Herman  Haupt's  General 
Theory  of  Bridge  Construction  in  1851,*  although  it 
appears  that  Colonel  Long  may  have  used  mathe- 
matical theory  in  the  design  of  his  bridges.® 

While  the  timber  bridge  had  evolved  into  an  almost 
determinate,  fully  utilitarian  structure,  it  was  not  free 
of  problems.  Covering  the  truss  with  a  roof  and 
siding  had  retarded  deterioration,  but  there  were  still 
many  failures  of  covered  timber  trusses  due  to  lack  of 
maintenance,  fires,  floods,  overloads,  and  inadequate 
design.  Nonetheless,  the  covered  bridge  era  might 
have  lasted  until  the  coming  of  the  automobile  were 
it  not  for  a  combination  of  events  that  led  bridge 
designing  into  the  modern  era.  The  newly  developed 
truss  and  the  fledgling  analytic  methods  found  them- 
selves a  new  client,  the  railroad.  Trains  being  unable 
to  ford  even  small  streams  or  tolerate  the  sinuous 
alinement  and  steep  grades  used  by  pedestrians  and 
wagon  traffic,  a  great  many  bridges  were  needed,  and 
not  only  more  bridges,  but  stronger  and  more  durable 
ones.  This  accelerated  the  growth  of  design  tech- 
nology. 


i 


As  far  as  durability  was  concerned,  early  attempts 
at  increasing  the  life  of  timber  in  contact  with  earth 
and  water  achieved  little  success.  JNIethods  used  in- 
cluded dipping,  soaking  or  brushing  the  timber  with 
creosote  or  salts,  such  as  zinc  chloride  or  mercuric 
chloride.  These  methods  were  ineffective  due  to  the 
lack  of  penetration  and  leaching  out  of  water  soluble 
preservatives. 

"Wliile  the  railroads  were  especially  desirous  of  find- 
ing a  satisfactory  method  of  prolonging  the  life  of 
the  great  number  of  ties  and  timber  structures  on 
their  systems,  it  was  not  until  1865  that  the  first  pres- 
sure creosote  treatment  plant  was  constructed  at 
Somerset,  Massachusetts,  primarily  to  treat  timber 
track  ties."  Other  plants  were  constructed  soon 
thereafter  for  treatment  of  ties,  piles  and  timber. 

With  the  advent  of  timber  treatment  plants  to  sup- 
ply the  railroads,  treated  timber  piles  and  lumber 
became  available  for  use  on  higliway  structures,  but 
by  then  the  use  of  metal  in  trusses  was  becoming 
more  common. 

The  general  use  of  timber  trusses  for  highway 
bridges  continued  to  the  1880's,  but  gradually  de- 
creased until  bj^  1916,  there  were  practically  none. 
However,  such  construction  has  continued  in  isolated 
areas  where  timber  was  readily  available  and  in  scenic 
areas  as  tourist  attractions. 

Cast-iron,  Wrought-lron  and  Composite 
Wood  Bridges  and  Metal  Bridges 

The  use  of  iron  for  incidental  connecting  parts  was 
introduced  early  in  the  construction  of  timber  bridges 
since  it  facilitated  construction,  improved  the  rigidity 
of  the  structure  and  reduced  maintenance  problems. 
"Wernwag  used  iron  rods  for  the  light  web  diagonal 
of  his  Upper  Ferry  Bridge,  popularly  named  the 
"Colossus,"  in  1806." 

Soon  after  the  railroad  era  started  in  1827,  bridge 
engineers  realized  that  the  timber  truss-arch  bridges 
were  not  serving  satisfactorily  under  the  speed  and 
weight  of  railroad  traffic  and  sought  various  methods 
to  introduce  iron  members  into  the  truss  arch.  Such 
structures  were  called  combination  bridges. 

One  of  the  early  combination  bridges  was  a  through 
timber  truss-iron  arch  bridge,  a  133-foot  span,  carry- 
ing the  Pennsylvania  Central  Railroad  over  a  canal. 
The  bridge  was  so  constructed  that  the  timber  truss 
would  receive  the  load  from  the  ties,  transfer  it  to  the 
arch,  and  provide  lateral  support  for  the  arch  ribs 
which  were  the  main  load  carrying  members.  How- 
ever, should  the  arch  fail,  the  truss  was  adequate  for 
the  full  load.  The  engineer,  possibly  at  the  owner's 
request,  tested  the  completed  structure  by  passing  a 
23-ton  locomotive  over  it  several  times." 

In  1840,  "William  Howe  patented  the  "Howe"  truss. 
This  was  a  true  truss  with  timber  chords  and  com- 
pression diagonals  but  with  iron  bars  for  the  vertical 
hangers.  Iron  members  had  been  used  before,  but 
they  had  always  played  a  minor  role. 

His  patent  also  permitted  prefabrication  of  parts, 
permitting  manufacture  away  from  the  site.  The 
ability  to  tighten  up  the  hanger,  via  an  adjustable  nut 


should  it  become  loose,  was  an  added  benefit.  The 
parallel  chord  and  X  diagonal  pattern  soon  became 
a  familiar  part  of  the  countryside  since  the  Howe 
truss  was  the  most  common  of  all  timber  trusses. 
However,  this  truss  represented  high  tide  for  the  tim- 
ber truss  and  for  the  carpenter  bridge  builders,  of 
whom  Howe  was  the  last  well-known  one.  What  had 
already  happened  in  Europe  was  happening  in  Amer- 
ica. Stress  and  strength  were  about  to  join  stability 
as  the  criteria  in  bridge  building. 

The  stone  arch  had  been  the  main  bridge  type  for 
nearly  2,000  years.  A  masonry  arch,  if  stable  enough 
to  stand,  was  adequate  for  any  conceivable  load.  For 
this  reason,  stress  analysis  had  been  imnecessary. 
With  the  advent  of  timber  (and  metal)  beams  and 
trusses,  it  could  no  longer  be  assumed  that  the  bridge's 
existence  was  proof  of  its  strength.  The  possibility 
of  overload  and  failure  due  to  overload  now  existed, 
especially  with  the  heavier  loads  of  the  locomotive. 

The  timber  trusses  and  combination  timber-metal 
trusses  still  suffered  from  the  difficulty  in  joining 
timber — the  tensile  strength  of  the  joint  was  always 
less  than  the  strength  of  the  timber  member.  This 
made  these  trusses  especially  susceptible  to  falling 
apart  at  the  joints.  On  March  4,  1840,  a  Town  lattice 
truss  over  Catskill  Creek,  New  York,  came  apart 
dropping  a  train  of  boxcars  into  the  water,  resulting 
in  the  Nation's  first  railroad  bridge  fatality,"  The 
need  for  a  metal  bridge  had  arrived. 

Other  methods  were  used  in  replacing  wood  with 
iron  in  the  arches  of  truss-arch  railway  bridges.  Wliile 
limited  construction  of  short-span  combination  trusses 
with  timber  compression  and  wrought  iron  or  steel 
tension  members  continued  until  the  end  of  the  19th 
century,  it  steadily  decreased. 

The  engineer's  first  choice  for  a  bridge  metal  was 
cast  iron,  and  1836  saw  the  first  cast-iron  bridge  in 
this  country,  an  80-foot  arch  span,  built  over  Dunlap 
Creek  in  Brownsville,  Pennsylvania,  by  the  U.S. 
Corps  of  Engineers."  Shortly  afterward,  in  1840, 
the  first  iron  trusses  came  into  existence  when  two 
highway  bridges  were  built  over  the  Erie  Canal  by 
Earl  Trumbull  and  Squire  "^Vhipple.  Trumbull's 
truss  spanned  80  feet  and  had  a  wooden  floor  system. 
It  featured  a  parabolic  bottom  chord  of  wrought  iron 
bars.  Squire  Whipple's  72-foot  bridge  was  the  first 
example  of  the  famous  Whipple  bowstring  truss,  so 
called  because  of  its  curved  upper  and  horizontal 
bottom  chord.  The  tension  members  were  wrought 
iron  and  the  compression  members  were  cast  iron.^^ 
AVhile  most  of  Whipple's  bowstring  trusses  have  van- 
ished, there  are  still  some  examples  of  his  other  design, 
the  trapezoidal  truss,  in  service. 

In  1844,  4  years  after  the  first  two  iron  bridges, 
Thomas  and  Caleb  Pratt  patented  the  Pratt  truss. 
This  parallel  chord  truss  with  tension  diagonals  and 
compression  verticals  in  the  web  system  was  well 
suited  for  metal  trusses  and,  together  with  its  many 
modifications,  became  the  most  popular  type  of  truss 
for  short  and  intermediate  span  trusses  to  the  present 
day.  Among  its  better  known  variations  are  the 
Baltimore,  Parker,  Pegram,  Pennsylvania  and  Petit 
trusses." 


421 


First  cast-iron  bridge  in  the  United  States,  over  Dunlap  Creek  at  Brownsville,  Pa. 


WHIPPLE  ARCH-TRUSS  BRIDGE. 


WHIPPLE  TRAPEZOinAL  BRIDGE. 


The  second  cast-iron  arch  in  this  country,  completed 
in  1860,  was  the  Meigs  Bridge  over  Rock  Creek  in 
Washington,  D.C.*  Like  the  Dunlap  Creek  Bridge, 
it  was  also  built  by  the  Corps  of  Engineers.  Its  two 
cast-iron  pipe  arches  supported  the  deck  of  the  high- 
way bridge  and  carried  the  water  supply  of  the  city 
over  the  creek.  The  51 -inch  outside  diameter  pipes 
spanned  200  feet.  The  bridge  deck  and  supi^orts  were 
removed  in  1916  and  a  new  bridge  was  constructed 
over  and  independent  of  the  pipes  still  carrying 
water." 

Ironically,  the  chief  factor  in  the  decline  of  the 
cast-iron  bridge  was  its  success.  The  increased  use  of 
wrought  iron  and  cast  iron  for  bridges,  rails  and  other 
related  uses  caused  a  boom  in  the  iron  industry  and 
created  an  incentive  to  develop  new  processes  for  pro- 
ducing iron  and  steel. 


*  Not  to  l)e  confused  with  the  Meigs  Stone  Arch  over  Cabin 
John  Creek  in  Maryland  wliicli  was  also  built  under  the 
supervision  of  Capt.  IMontgoniery  C.  Meigs  when  he  was  with 
the  U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers. 


The  original  Meigs  Bridge  over  Rock  Creek  in  Washington, 
D.C.,  built  in  1860  by  the  U.S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Although  the  Bessemer  converter  and  open-hearth 
furnace  made  the  steel  bridge  inevitable,  several 
bridge  failures  also  increased  distrust  of  iron  bridges. 
The  most  notable  was  a  failure  of  an  iron  Howe  truss 
at  Ashtabula,  Ohio,  which  took  65  lives  in  1876,  the 
worst  rail  disaster  in  America  so  far.  Surprisingly, 
many  highway  bridges  also  failed,  despite  their  rela- 
tively light  live  loads.  This  was  due  to  the  pres- 
sures for  economy  put  upon  county  officials  who  lacked 
technical  expertise  and  fly-by-night  bridge  salesmen 
and  promoters,  who,  sometimes  involved  in  political 
and  business  corruption,  provided  cheap  and  inade- 
quately designed  structures. 

From  the  1850's,  companies  were  formed  primarily 
for  constructing  patented  truss  bridges,  either  under 
their  own  patents  or  as  licensees.  There  being  very 
few  bridge  engineers  with  a  working  knowledge  of 
stress  analysis  and  truss  design  in  the  early  years  of 
iron  superstructures,  these  "bridge  companies"  became 
firmly  established.  Bids  let  for  short-  and  medium- 
length  span  truss  bridges  allowed  the  bidder  to  fur- 


422 


The  Eads  Bridge  over  the  Mississippi  River  was  opened  to  traffic  in  1874-    Alloy  steel  was  used  for  the 
first  time  in  this  country  for  the  members  of  the  three  arches  of  this  double  deck  bridge. 


The    remaining   trusses    and 


nish  the  superstructure  to  his  own  plans,  "\\niile  many 
safe  and  satisfactory  bridges  were  obtained  by  this 
procedure,  tliere  were  also  many  unsatisfactory 
bridges.  In  some  cases,  the  companies  furnished  weak 
or  inadequate  bridges  to  compensate  for  underbidding 
or  to  make  excessive  profits. 

Due  perhaps  to  a  combination  of  poor  engineering, 
poor  material,  and  fraud,  the  numerous  failures  of 
iron  and  combination  bridges  brought  about  the  com- 
plete abandonment  of  cast  iron  and  led  to  the  accept- 
ance of  wrought  iron  and  steel,  the  flowering  of 
modern  truss  design,  and  the  rise  of  the  civil  engineer. 

The  first  American  all  steel  spans  built  M'ere  the 
five  main  spans  of  the  Missouri  River  Bridge  at 
Glasgow,  Missouri.  Bessemer  steel  was  used  for  the 
315-foot  long  trusses, 
trestle  work  were  made  of  wrought  iron 

However,  the  Glasgow  trusses  lagged  by  10  years 
the  first  extensive  use  of  structural  steel  in  a  bridge. 
It  was  in  1868  that  construction  commenced  on  the 
first  of  the  two  "great  bridges"  of  American  history,* 
the  Eads  Bridge  across  the  Mississippi  at  St.  Louis, 
Missouri. 

Until  IS;"),"),  the  "Father  of  "Waters"  had  never  been 
spanned.  Thirteen  j'ears  later,  James  Eads,  a  hero 
of  the  Civil  War,  began  building  three  alloy-steel 
arches  of  502-,  520-,  and  502-foot  spans,  respectively, 
across  the  river.  This  bridge  is  noteworthy  for  an- 
other reason :  The  first  iise  of  pneiimatic  caissons  in 
the  United  States  and,  sadlv,  the  first  death  from  the 
"bends"  or  "caisson  disease."  (In  all,  13  died.)  It  is 
interesting  that  Captain  Eads  had  never  built  a  bridge 
before.^®  Despite  the  magnificence  of  the  Eads  Bridge, 
which  is  still  in  use,  the  future  of  the  steel  bridge  was 
with  the  plate  girder  and  the  truss. 

After  Squire  AVhipple's  essays  on  bridge  building, 
the  increasing  knowledgability  of  the  engineer  led  to 
further  refinements  in  the  metal  truss  as  iron  yielded 
to  steel.  Among  the  changes  were  the  use  of  bridge 
rollers  and  the  perfecting  of  the  pinned  connection. 


The  improved  metallurgy  permitted  the  evolution  of 
machined  steel  pins  from  the  old  iron  trunnions  and 
the  use  of  the  now  famous  eyebar  tension  member. 
The  eyebar  became  the  trademark  of  the  American 
truss  bridge  in  the  latter  half  of  the  19th  century. 
In  this  area,  the  American  engineers  deviated  from 
European  practice,  which  was  turning  to  the  more 
rigid  riveted  gusset  plate  connections.  The  economy 
and  determinacy  of  the  pinned  truss  was  well  suited 
to  the  American  bridge  engineer's  interest  in  struc- 
tural analysis.  While  the  riveted  joint  was  finally 
accepted,  the  practice  of  using  decider  trusses  and 
longer  panels  was  retained  this  side  of  the  Atlantic. 

Interest  in  determinate  structures  led  to  the  use  of 
cantilever  bridges.  Eventually,  cantilevers  were  so 
widespread  that  Europeans  referred  to  them  as  the 
"American"  bridge. 

In  1876,  Charles  Smith  built  the  first  such  bridge 
over  the  Kentucky  River  for  the  Cincinnati  Southern 
Railway  with  three  375-foot  spans.  Other  long  span 
cantilever  bridges  were  the  Monongahela  River  Bridge 
at  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  built  in  1904  with  a 
maximum  span  length  of  812  feet,  and  the  Queens- 
borough  cantilever  designed  by  Gustav  Lindenthal  in 
1909  in  New  York  City.  Its  maximum  span  was 
1,182  feet.i» 

The  use  of  plate  girder  bridges  for  short  spans 
began  during  the  Civil  War.  While  these  spans  were 
limited  to  moderate  length  by  the  size  and  length  of 
the  wrought-iron  plates  and  shapes  then  being  rolled, 
longer    spans    were    built    as    the    available    size    of 


*  The  second  of  the  "great  bridges"  in  America — the  Brooli- 
lyn  Bridge — is  discussed  under  Suspension  Bridges. 


The  Washington  Street  Bridge  over  the 
Harlem  River  in  New  York,  City. 


423 


Details  of  a  200-foot  Finley  chain  link  suspension  bridge. 


wrought-iron  and  steel  plates  increased.  The  first 
American  railroad  girder  bridge  with  a  100-foot  span 
was  built  in  1887.  Just  7  years  later,  a  182-foot  span 
was  constructed,  a  major  span  even  by  today's  stand- 
ards. The  use  of  wrought-iron  and  steel  I-beams  for 
short  spans  was  initiated  by  the  rolling  of  deeper 
beams. 

Still,  early  plate  girder  highway  bridges  were  lim- 
ited to  short  spans  because  of  the  inconvenience  and 
cost  of  transporting  and  erecting  long  members  except 
when  the  bridge  site  was  near  railroad  transporta- 
tion.^" Thus,  long  spans  still  belonged  to  the  truss, 
the  suspension  span,  and  the  arch. 

The  first  American  plate  girder  arch  bridge  was 
the  Washington  Street  Bridge  over  the  Harlem  River 
in  New  York  City,  built  in  1886-88.  It  had  two  510- 
foot  arch  spans  with  plate  girders  13  feet  deep.^^ 

By  the  early  1870's,  the  size  of  I-beams  rolled  was 
large  enough  to  use  for  stringers  in  the  floor  systems 
of  short  paneled  truss  bridges.  This,  together  with 
the  development  of  plate  girders  for  floor  beams,  led 
to  the  general  discontinuance  of  the  use  of  wooden 
stringers  by  1875.  However,  wooden  stringers  were 
used  on  short-  and  medium-length  spans  until  1890 
and  later."  During  the  period  1874  to  1890,  the 
maximum  depth  of  American  rolled  I-beams  increased 
from  101/2  inches  to  20  inches. 

Suspension   Bridges 

This  most  fascinating  of  all  bridges  first  appeared 
in  America  in  1801  when  Judge  James  Finley  built 
a  70-foot  chain  link  suspension  bridge  over  Jacobs 
Creek  near  Greensburg,  Pennsylvania.  The  chains 
were  made  from  1  inch  square  wrought-iron  bars. 
The  links  varied  from  5  to  10  feet  in  length  so  as  to 
match  the  distance  between  floor  beams.  The  timber 
floor  system  was  stiff  enough  to  distribute  live  loads 
to  several  hangers  and  to  resist  deformation,  undula- 


Suspension  bridge  built  by  Charles  Ellet  in  1849 
over  the  Ohio  River  at  Wheeling,  W.  Va. 

tions  and  vibrations  from  the  live  load  and  wind 
loads.  The  bridge  failed  under  a  six-horse  team  in 
1825  but  was  repaired.  A  number  of  bridges  were 
built  under  the  direction  of  Judge  Finley  or  his 
licensees.  The  maximum  span  lengths  were  probably 
about  150  feet.  The  cable  supports  were  usually  tim- 
ber towers  on  stone  masonry  piers.  A  suspension 
bridge  at  Lehigh  Gap,  Pennsylvania,  apparently  the 
last  Finley  type  in  use,  was  replaced  by  a  modern 
structure  in  1933.^3 

One  of  the  largest  of  the  chain  link  structures  was 
the  Point  Bridge  over  the  Monongahela  River  at 
Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  Built  in  1875-77,  it  was  a 
stiffened  chain  suspension  span  800  feet  long.  The 
main  and  backstay  chains  were  of  wrought-iron  link 
bars  20  feet  6  inches  long.^* 

The  first  highway  bridge  in  America  with  wire 
suspension  cables  was  designed  by  Chai'les  Ellet  and 
completed  in  1842.  It  replaced  Wernwag's  wooden 
trussed-arch  Upper  Ferry  Bridge  over  the  Schuylkill 
River  at  Philadelphia.-''  As  would  be  the  case  for  all 
American    suspension    bridges    until    the    Brooklyn 


424 


Roebling  opened  this  suspension  bridge  over  the  Ohio  River  between  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  Covington,  Ky.,  in  1866. 


The  Brooklyn  Bridge  over  the  East  River  in  New  York  City. 

Bridge,  drawn  wrought-iron  wires  were  used  for  the 
cables. 

Subsequent  to  1840,  several  wrought-iron  wire 
bridges  were  built  in  America  by  Charles  Ellet,  John 
A.  Roebling,  Thomas  M.  Griffith,  Edward  W.  Serrell 
and  others.  However,  the  suspension  bridge  was  still 
in  its  infancy.  It  began  to  come  of  age  in  1849  when 
Ellet  spanned  the  Ohio  at  Wheeling,  Virginia,  with 
a  1,010-foot  suspension  span.  When  completed,  this 
was  the  longest  bridge  span  in  the  world.  While  it 
was  damaged  by  wind  in  1854,  the  bridge  was  repaired 
and  is  still  in  service.^® 

John  Roebling  had  built  nine  suspension  bridges 
by  1855,  one  of  which  was  the  821 -foot  span  combina- 
tion highway-railroad  bridge  over  the  Niagara  Falls 
rapids,  a  bridge  most  engineers  thought  doomed  to 
failure.  When  Mr.  Ellet's  temporary  suspension 
bridge  was  built  at  the  site  in  1848,  the  rope  for  pull- 
ing the  first  cable  across  the  river  was  pulled  across 
by  a  cord  flown  over  the  gorge  by  a  boy  with  his 
kite.2'  In  December  1866,  Roebling  opened  his 
recordbreaking  Ohio   River  suspension  span  at  Cin- 


cinnati. This  structure,  1,05Y  feet  between  towers,  is 
also  still  in  use.^^  During  the  flood  of  1937,  this  was 
the  only  highway  bridge  open  across  the  Ohio  be- 
tween the  Mississippi  River  and  Sciotoville,  Ohio. 

There  were  at  least  two  factors  that  Roebling  had 
considered  in  his  bridges:  the  quality  and  protection 
of  the  cable  and  the  bracing  of  the  structure  against 
aerodynamic  loadings.  Attention  to  these  problems, 
plus  the  other  design  aspects,  made  his  bridges 
successes. 

These  major  bridges,  although  unprecedented 
achievements,  were  only  the  prototype  for  his  crown- 
ing task,  the  second  "great  bridge"  of  America:  the 
Brooklyn  Bridge  over  the  East  River.  This  bridge, 
its  1,595-foot  main  span  50  percent  longer  than  the 
previous  record  span  at  Cincinnati,  linked  Brooklyn 
and  Manhattan  and  made  New  York's  expansion  pos- 
sible. It  was  also  the  first  bridge  to  use  galvanized 
steel  cable. 

Building  the  East  River  bridge  was  probably  the 
most  dramatic  verse  in  the  saga  of  bridges.  Its 
creator,  John  Roebling,  died  of  tetanus  as  a  result  of 
an  accident  during  the  early  stages  of  construction. 
His  son.  Colonel  Washington  Roebling,  who  had  sur- 
vived the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  was  crippled  by  the 
"bends"  and  had  to  direct  operations  through  his 
wife,  Emily.  But  in  1883,  14  years  after  construction 
started,  man  had  conquered  the  East  River  and 
signaled  the  beginning  of  the  great  age  of  bridge 
building.^^ 

Two  other  notable  suspension  bridges  were  built 
over  the  East  River  at  New  York  City  around  the 
turn  of  the  century.  The  Williamsburg  Bridge,  built 
in  1903,  has  a  1,600-foot  main  span.  The  main  span 
of  the  Manhattan  Bridge,  built  in  1909,  while  130  feet 
shorter,  yet  is  considered  by  many  as  the  most  grace- 
ful cable  arc  of  any  of  New  York's  bridges. 


425 


The  rising  tempo  of  bridge  building  may  be  noted 
from  the  fact  that  the  Williamsburg  Bridge,  although 
5  feet  longer  than  the  Brooklyn  Bridge,  was  just  a 
long  bridge.  The  long-span  title  had  gone  across  the 
seas  to  the  Firth  of  Forth's  1,700-foot  cantilever  span 
in  1890. 


Movable  Bridges 

Bridges  with  movable  spans  to  accommodate  water 
traffic  also  date  back  to  colonial  times.  The  early 
timber  bridges  were  opened  and  closed  by  the  only 
available  power — manpower.  As  a  rule,  they  were 
either  bascule  (draw)  spans  or  swing  spans  which 
rotated  to  open  the  channel  to  marine  traffic.  This, 
of  course,  meant  that  only  short  span  openings  could 
be  used.  Fortunately,  the  pace  of  life,  as  well  as  of 
river  traffic,  was  sufficiently  slow  so  that  lengthy 
bridge  opening  times  could  be  tolerated. 

Some  early  spans  were  a  wooden  drawbridge  be- 
tween Boston  and  Charlestown  over  the  Charles  River, 
built  in  1785-86,=^°  and  the  Haverhill  Bridge  over  the 
Merrimack  River  at  Haverhill,  Massachusetts,  built  in 
1794  with  a  wooden  bascule  drawspan.  The  30-foot 
drawspan  was  raised  by  means  of  levers  elevated  on 
a  post  on  each  side  of  the  draw.^^  The  Tiverton 
Bridge  over  a  tidal  inlet  near  Howland  Ferry,  be- 
tween Portsmouth  and  Tiverton,  Rhode  Island,  built 
in  1795,  contained  a  sliding  drawspan.^^ 

The  advent  of  the  railroads  and  steam-powered 
boats  made  the  span  weights  heavier  and  the  opening 
time  of  the  movable  spans  more  critical.  Fortunately, 
as  wrought  iron,  and  then  steel,  became  the  material 
for  the  bridge  members,  steam  became  the  motive 
power  for  opening  railroad  and  main  highway  mov- 
able bridges  over  busy  waterways.  For  minor  water- 
way crossings  and  during  power  failures,  movable 
spans  were  still  opened  manually. 

As  the  larger  rivers  and  tidal  estuaries  became 
more  frequently  bridged  and  river  craft  became  wider 
and  longer,  wider  channel  openings  were  required, 
necessitating  longer  spans  for  movable  bridges.  Of 
the  movable  bridges  constructed  during  the  last  half 
of  the  19th  century,  two  were  notable.     The  first  was 


a  railroad  bridge  located  between  Rock  Island,  Illinois, 
and  Davenport,  Iowa,  providing  a  swing  span  with 
two  120-foot  channel  openings.  Built  in  1854—56,  it 
was  the  second  bridge  to  cross  the  Mississippi  River.^^ 
The  other  was  the  Utica  Lift  Drawbridge,  a  60-foot 
X  18-foot  movable  deck,  suspended  by  rods  from  the 
lower  chord  panel  points  of  an  overhead  fixed  truss. 
The  vertical  lift  was  11.6  feet.  Opening  time,  using 
preset  weights,  took  10  seconds.  This  was  one  of 
several  unusual  vertical  lift  bridges  which  Squire 
Whipple  designed  and  built  over  the  Erie  Canal  in 
New  York  in  the  1870's.3* 

The  development  of  modern  movable  bridge  spans 
started  in  Chicago  when  the  channels  of  the  Chicago 
River  and  related  waterways  were  improved  at  the 
turn  of  the  century.  Many  of  the  existing  movable 
bridges  were  manually  powered  swing  spans,  with 
center  piers  obstructing  channels.  These  were  re- 
placed with  bascule  and  vertical  lift  spans.  This  era 
was  begun  by  two  famous  bridges.  The  Halsted  Street 
Lift  Bridge  over  the  Chicago  River  in  Chicago, 
Illinois,  1894,  lifted  a  130-foot  truss  span  with  a 
34-foot  roadway  and  two  7-foot  sidewalks  using 
steampower.  Maximum  vertical  clearance  was  155 
feet  above  low  water.  Two  light  longitudinal,  later- 
ally braced,  trusses  connected  the  tops  of  the  towers. 
The  design  of  this  bridge  introduced  another  famous 
name  in  bridge  engineering,  J.  A.  L.  Waddell.^^  The 
other  bridge,  the  Van  Buren  Street  Bridge  also  over 
the  Chicago  River,  was  opened  in  1895.  This  115- 
foot  span,  double  leaf  of  the  Scherzer  type,  was  the 
first  rolling  lift  bridge.^'' 

From  then  on  there  was  a  series  of  new  movable 
bridge  types:  the  simple  trunnion,  or  Chicago,*  and 
Strauss  bascules,  the  Rail  rolling  lift,**  and  various 
vertical  lifts.  The  swing  span,  despite  its  economy 
and  minimal  power  requirements,  fell  into  relative 
disuse  since  it  required  a  pier  in  the  middle  of  the 
stream  and  blocked  the  channel  more  during  opening 
and  closing  operations. 


*  So  named  because  it  was  developed  by  the  city  of  Chicago 
bridge  office. 

**  Rolling  lifts  were  really  bascules  turning  on  a  large 
roller  quadrant  instead  of  a  trunnion  or  axle. 


This  sketch  of  a  manpower-operated  bascule  on  the 
Pongo  River  Bridge  in  Virginia  probably  exaggerates 
the  difflcultics  of  such  operations.    From  the  Harpers 
New  Monthly  May  1858. 


Vertical  lift  bridge  over  the  Cape  Fear  River  at  Wilmington, 

N.C.    The  400-foot  lift  span  has  a  vertical  clearance 

above  mean  high  water  of  65  feet  in  the  closed 

position  and  125  feet  in  the  open  position. 


426 


Lahe  Washington  Pontoon  Bridge, 
Seattle,  Wash.,  is  a  concrete  pontoon 
bridge  completed  in  19^0.    The 
floating  portion  consists  of  25  units 
350  feet  long,  together  with  retracting 
sections  to  provide  a  200-foot 
opening  for  large  vessels.    Passage 
for  small  boats  is  provided  near  each 
shore  under  truss  spans.    The 
pontoons  are  fixed  laterally  by  long 
steel  cables  fastened  to  submerged 
concrete  anchors. 


The  Oeorge  P.  Coleman  Memorial  Bridge  over  the  Yorlc 
River  near  Yorlctown,  Va.    The  double  500-foot  swing 
spaiis  arc  the  largest  tandem  swing  spans  in  the  world. 


Cabin  John  Bridge  over  Cabin  John  Creek  in  Montgomery 

County,  Md.    The  aqueduct  for  the  Washington,  D.C., 

water  supply  is  in  the  spandrel  fill  under  the  roadway. 


The  great  size  of  today's  structures,  which  evolved 
from  the  short  span  crossings  of  the  Charles  River 
and  Merrimack  River,  is  due  to  the  growth  in  technical 
knowledge,  experience,  better  steels,  steam  and  electric 
power,  and  a  near  perfect  use  of  the  old-fashioned 
counterweight. 

Stone  Arches 

Stone  arches  have  not  been  a  major  element  in  high- 
way bridge  construction  in  this  country.  However, 
numerous  short-span  stone  arches  have  been  built  in 
areas  where  stone  and  skilled  masons  were  readily 
available.  These  bridges  are  frequently  seen  along- 
side present  highways  where  they  have  been  left  for 
their  historic  and  scenic  value  when  highway  aline- 
ment,  width,  or  grade  was  improved.  Long-  and 
short-span  stone  bridges  have  been  built  in  parks  and 
large  cities  to  be  compatible  with  their  surroundings. 

One  of  the  most  notable  stone  arches  was  built  dur- 
ing the  Civil  "War  as  a  combination  aqueduct  and 
road.  The  220-foot  filled  spandrel  ]Meigs  Arch,  which 
carries  Washington,  D.C.'s  water  supply  and  Mac- 
Arthur  Boulevard  over  Cabin  John  Creek  in  Cabin 
John,  Maryland,  was  the  longest  span  of  its  type  Avhen 
built.  It  is  still  in  service  despite  its  narrow  road- 
way.^" 


Where  stone  was  readily  available,  stone  arches  of 
nominal  spans  and  stone  arch  culverts  were  frequently 
used  in  railroad  construction  before  metal  superstruc- 
tures were  developed  and  accepted.  Some  of  the  note- 
worthy stone  railroad  bridges  still  in  existence  are: 

•  Carrollton  Viaduct  over  Gynn's  Falls  on  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  near  Baltimore, 
Maryland,  was  built  in  1829  of  granite  ashlar 
masonry.  The  center  span  is  80  feet  and  the  over- 
all length  is  297  feet.^* 

•  Thomas  Viaduct  over  Patapsco  Creek  on  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  near  Relay  Station, 
Maryland,  was  built  in  1835  of  granite  ashlar 
masonry  and  is  612  feet  long  and  has  eight  full- 
centered  arch  spans.^^ 

•  Starrucca  Viaduct  over  Starrucca  Creek  (a  tribu- 
tary of  the  Susquehanna  River)  on  the  New  York 
and  Erie  Railroad,  was  built  in  1847-48  with  stone 
masonry  made  of  stone  quarried  locally.  The 
viaduct  is  1,040  feet  long  with  a  maximum  height 
of  110  feet  above  the  creek.*° 

•  The  Morgan  Bulkeley  Bridge  was  constracted 
across  the  Connecticut  River  between  Hartford 
and  East  Plartford  with  funds  raised  by  subscrip- 
tion from  all  the  towns  aroimd  the  area  in  1905. 
This  beautiful  structure  of  pink  granite  has  11 
elliptic  arches,  tlie  largest  being  119  feet  long. 
In  1962,  it  was  widened  to  carry  Interstate  84. 


427 


The  Morgan  Bulkeley  Bridge  over  the  Connecticut  River  at  Hartford,  Conn. 


Reinforced  Concrete  Bridges 

Although  concrete  bridges  are  part  of  the  modern 
era,  the  early  use  of  concrete  was  limited.  Natural 
cement  entered  into  bridge  construction  as  mortar  for 
stone  masonry  and  for  unreinforced  concrete  footings 
and  substructures  as  early  as  1850.  Although  many 
cement  users  switched  to  the  more  uniform  and  su- 
perior Portland  cement  after  its  first  manufacture  in 
this  country  at  Allentown,  Pennsylvania,  in  1871, 
natural  cement  has  continued  to  be  used  to  a  lesser 
extent  even  to  this  day. 

The  Clefridge  pedestrian  underpass  was  built  of 
concrete  in  Prospect  Park,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  in 
1871.  This  structure,  said  to  be  the  earliest  concrete 
arch  constructed  in  America,  is  an  arch  that  follows 
the  design  of  stone  arches  and  has  a  radius,  of  10 
feet," 

The  first  reinforced  concrete  building  in  this  country 
was  built  by  W.  E.  Ward  in  New  York  State  in  1875, 
and  the  first  reinforced  concrete  bridge  in  this  country 
was  a  20-foot  span  built  in  Golden  Gate  Park,  San 
Francisco,  California,  in  1889.^^  ^^ 

Other  early  reinforced  concrete  bridges  were  the 
Eden  Park  Bridge,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  a  70-foot  arch 
span  built  in  1894-95 ;  the  five-span  arches  over  the 
Kansas  River  at  Topeka,  Kansas,  built  in  1896  with 
a  maximum  span  of  125  feet  and  a  total  length  of 
539  feet;  and  the  36-foot  span  stone-faced  reinforced 
concrete  arch  built  according  to  the  Melan  method 
near  Rock  Rapids,  Iowa,  in  1894.  This  latter  bridge 
was  moved  to  a  roadside  park  when  the  bridge  was 
replaced  in  1964."  *^ 

The  first  10  years  of  the  20th  century  saw  a  phe- 
nomenal gi'owth  in  the  use  of  concrete  structures  on 
both  the  highway  and  railroad  systems.  Many  long- 
span  concrete  arch  bridges  with  either  plain  or  rein- 
forced arches  were  built  in  populated  places,  probably 
because   of  the   architectural   improvement  over   the 


truss  and  trestle  bridges  of  the  time.  The  use  of  rein- 
forced concrete  for  deck  girders,  culverts,  slabs  for 
steel  truss  and  girder  spans,  and  bridge  abutments 
and  piers  soon  became  commonplace.  Of  special  im- 
portance was  the  use  of  reinforced  concrete  slabs,  still 
in  use  today,  for  bridge  decks  instead  of  timber,  steel, 
or  cast  iron. 

Construction  to   1916 

Through  the  years,  the  methods,  materials  and 
equipment  for  bridge  construction  had  developed  and 
improved  with  experience  and  invention.  Steam- 
powered  equipment  had  supplanted  men  and  horses 
for  heavy  lifting  and  excavation.  Deep  foundation 
excavation  in  open  cofferdams,  cellular  cofferdams, 
open  caissons  and  pneumatic  caissons  had  been  de- 
veloped and  successfully  used.  Steam  piston  and 
pulsometer  pumps  had  supplanted  the  chain  and  ship 
pumps  of  colonial  days  for  draining  foundation  ex- 
cavations. Improved  timber  sheet  piling,*  such  as 
the  Wakefield  type,  and  steel  sheet  piling  were  de- 
veloped which  resulted  in  relatively  watertight 
cofferdams. 

Many  steel  fabricating  shops  had  become  established 
with  power  equipment  for  handling  and  fabricating 
the  steel  bridge  members.  Power  shears,  pimches  and 
drills  were  employed.  Heavy  hydraulic  and  pneu- 
matic riveters  were  developed  for  driving  tight  rivets. 
Relatively  efficient  and  structually  satisfactory  stand- 
ards for  riveted  and  pinned  connections  and  other 
structural  details  had  been  developed  and  were  in  use, 
by  1916. 

Efficient  and  safe  methods  had  also  been  developed 
for  erection  of  steel  superstructures.  Steam-powered 
cranes,   derricks   and   gin   poles**   were  available   for 


*  Designed   to   interlock,   forming  a  wall  or  sheet  to  resist 
lateral  pressures. 
**  Hoisting  devices. 


428 


lifting  heavy  members.  Relatively  light  pneiimatic 
riveting  guns  were  developed  for  driving  field  rivets 
so  that  only  small  and  minor  structures  had  hand- 
riveted  or  bolted  connections. 

Most  important  of  all,  these  construction  improve- 
ments were  documented  in  the  literature,  and  en- 
gineers and  teclmicians  well  versed  in  their  application 
were  available  for  bridge  construction. 

About  1870  engineers  began  developing  shear  and 
moment  anal^-ses  to  determine  stresses  for  structural 
design.  Before  that,  structures  were  "proof  loaded" 
before  acceptance,  that  is,  highway  bridges  M-ere  sub- 
jected to  carts  loaded  with  pig  iron  or  stone,  while 
railroad  bridges  were  subjected  to  two  locomotives  in 
tandem.  Wliile  this  primarily  tested  the  quality  of 
woi'kmanship  and  protected  against  the  most  •  gross 
errors,  it  did  not  provide  for  overloads  or  fatigue 
failure.  These  proof-load  requirements  persisted  in 
the  specifications  until  the  turn  of  the  century. 

However,  engineers  were  aware  that  the  proof-load 
was  no  substitute  for  a  rational  design  and,  as  their 
knowledge  grew,  began  to  write  design  specifications. 
^^Hiipple  had  already  I'ecommended  a  design  load  of 
100  pounds  per  square  foot,  equivalent  to  the  whole 
roadway  area  covered  with  men.*"  In  1875,  as  a 
result  of  a  series  of  bridge  failures,  an  American 
Society  of  Civil  Engineers  committee  recommended 
live  loading  values  for  both  railway  and  highway 
bridges.  For  highwa}^  bridges,  loads  varjdng  from 
40  to  100  pounds  per  square  foot  were  given,  depend- 
ing on  span  and  type  of  usage.*^  "\^^lile  railroad  and 
"bridge  companies"  issued  their  own  specifications  for 
highway  bridges,  a  concerted  etfort  for  a  specification 
of  national  scope  had  to  await  the  Operating  Com- 
mittee on  Bridges  and  Structures  of  the  American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  in  the  1920's. 

In  1910,  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  established  a 
Division  of  Highway  Bridges  and  Culverts.  This 
new  division,  upon  request  from  a  State  or  local  au- 
thority, assisted  in  bridge  design  and  construction  and 
reviewed  and  advised  on  bridge  plans  and  specifica- 
tions prepared  by  States,  local  authorities  or  bridge 
companies.  It  also  prepared  and  published  bulletins 
on  highway  bridge  and  culvert  design  and  construc- 
tion, including  typical  plans  for  reinforced  concrete 
culverts,  abutments  and  piers  and  discussions  on  the 
use  and  design  of  steel  truss  and  plate  girder  bridges. 

In  1913,  the  Office  of  Public  Roads  issued  Circular 
Xo.  11,  Typical  Sj^ecif cations  for  the  F abrication  and 
Erection  of  Steel  Highway  Bridges.  This  circular 
specified  a  live  loading  of  interurban  electric  cars  or 
a  15-ton  road  roller  plus  a  uniform  live  load  on  the 
portion  of  the  bridge  deck  not  occupied  by  the  roller. 

The   Era  of  Great  Bridges 

It  was  said  earlier  that  the  opening  of  the  Eads 
and  Brooklyn  Bridges  was  the  beginning  of  the  great 
bridge  building  era.  As  noted,  it  continued  slowly 
with  the  Williamsburg  and  Manhattan  Bridges. 

The  Hell  Gate  Railroad  Bridge  in  Xew  York  City, 
built  in  1916,  and  designed  by  Gustav  Lindenthal, 
spanned  9771^  feet  between  support  pins  and  was  the 
longest  and  heaviest  arch  in  the  world.  "When  it  was 
built,  it  was  considered  an  engineering  marvel  because 
of  the  location  conditions  and  the  long  span.  It  was 
to  have  a   profound  effect  on  steel  arch  design. 


At  almost  the  same  time,  the  long-span  continuous 
truss  had  finally  come  to  America  in  the  form  of  two 
continuous  spans  of  775  feet  over  the  Ohio  River  at 
Scioto ville,  Ohio.  (Strictly  speaking,  a  continuous 
truss  had  been  used  in  the  approaches  to  an  earlier 
structure,  but  Sciotoville  was  the  first  use  of  it  for 
main  river  spans.)  Coincidentally,  the  longest  simple 
span  truss,  720  feet,  was  built  over  the  Mississippi 
at  Metropolis,  Illinois.  Both  of  these  were  railroad 
bridges. 

Not  long  after,  a  major  cantilever  truss  with  two 
cantilever  spans  of  1,100  feet,  designed  by  David  B. 
Steinman,  crossed  the  Carquinez  Straits  near  San 
Francisco,  California. 

The  long-span  records  continued  to  fall  through  the 
1920's  and  1930's.  Detroit's  Ambassador  Bridge,  1,850- 
foot  suspension  span  surpassed  the  Quebec  cantilever's 
1,800  feet.  In  1931,  Othmar  Amman's  arch  over  the 
Kill  van  Kull  between  Staten  Island,New  York,  and 
Bayonne,  New  Jersey,  set  a  new  arch  record  of  1,652 
feet. 

In  that  same  year  (1931),  the  George  Washington 
Bridge  was  opened.  This  bridge  across  the  Hudson 
River  in  New  York  City  reached  3,500  feet  between 
towers.  At  one  bound,  it  had  virtually  doubled  the 
Ambassador's  span.  Not  only  that,  but  it  was  one 
of  the  strongest  bridges  ever  built,  with  the  greatest 
capacity — eight  highway  traffic  lanes  on  the  upper 
deck  and  provision  for  future  rapid  transit  below 
(ultimately  six  highway  lanes  were  added  instead) 
when  the  stiffening  trusses  would  be  added.  While 
the  increase  in  technical  knowledge  was  one  factor, 
the  most  important  reason  behind  this  great  leap  in 
span  length  was,  as  Roebling  had  realized  years  be- 
fore, the  great  improvement  in  the  quality  of  the  steel 
wire. 

Since  then,  the  George  Washington  Bridge  has  been 
surpassed  several  times  in  span  but  not  yet  in  strength 
and  capacity.  The  three  longest  spans  are  the  4,200- 
foot  center  span  of  the  Golden  Gate  in  San  Francisco 
(1937),  the  4,260-foot  span  of  the  Verrazano-Narrows 
(1965)  in  New  York  City  and  also  an  Amman  design, 
and  the  3,800-foot  center  span  of  the  Mackinac  Straits 
Bridge  which  joins  Michigan's  upper  and  lower  pen- 
insulas. 


The  George  Washington  Bridge.    The  upper  roadway  has  eight 
t7'afflc  lanes;  a  lower  deck  loith  six  lanes  was  added  later. 


429 


San  Francisco's  Golden  Gate  Bridge. 


The  Mackinac  Bridge  over  the  Straits  of  Mackinac,  where  Lakes  Huron  and 
Michigan  meet.    Completed  in  1957,  this  bridge  is  nearly  five  miles  long. 


430 


During  the  1930's,  many  other  noted  long  suspen- 
sion bridges  were  built,  among  them  two  beautiful 
spans,  tlie  Bronx-Whitestone  in  Xew  York  City  and 
the  Oakland  Bay  Bridge,  and  that  fateful  structure, 
the  Tacoma  Narrows  Bridge  over  Puget  Sound  in 
Washington. 

The  Tacoma  Narrows  Bridge,  like  tlie  Whitestone, 
was  built  with  a  plate  girder  instead  of  a  stiffening 
truss.  In  addition,  although  2,800  feet  between  towers, 
the  cables  were  only  39  feet  apart.  Just  over  4 
months  after  being  opened,  it  failed,  literally  twist- 
ing itself  to  pieces.  The  shallow  stiffening  girder, 
combined  with  the  light  dead  load  of  the  relatively 
narrow  bridge,  was  unable  to  resist  the  aerodynamic 
forces  that  developed  because  of  the  steady  Avinds  of 
Puget  Sound.  This  failure  led  to  considerable  re- 
seai'ch  and  improvement  of  future  structures,  such  as 
the  Mackinac  and  Verrazano-Narrows  Bridges,  as 
well  as  stiffening  of  existing  bridges.  Since  the 
Whitestone  Bridge  showed  signs  of  serious  oscillation, 
a  half  truss  was  added  to  the  top  of  the  original 
girder.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  George  Washington, 
despite  the  absence  of  a  stiffening  truss,  showed  few 
symptoms  of  instability,  possibly  due  to  its  great 
weight  and  width,  as  well  as  to  the  less  constant  wind 
patterns  of  New  York  Harbor. 

Current  technology  seems  to  make  it  less  necessary 
to  build  record  spans.  However,  even  today,  a  new 
steel  arch  with  a  record  span  of  1,700  feet  is  under 
construction  at  the  New  River  Gorge  in  West  Virginia. 

These  "great  bridges"  were  all  toll  facilities  built 
by  bond  issues  rather  than  Federal-aid  financing. 
After  enactment  of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of 
1916,  the  Division  of  Highway  Bridges  and  Culverts, 
established  in  1910,  became  the  Bridge  Division  of 
Public  Roads.  The  immediate  task  of  this  Division 
was  to  set  standards  for  design  and  construction  of 


bridges  to  be  constructed  under  the  1916  Act.  Under 
the  Act,  roadway  and  bridge  planning  became  a  co- 
operative undertaking  with  the  States  initiating, 
planning,  designing  and  constructing  the  projects  and 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  (BPR)  advising,  approv- 
ing, committing  Federal-aid  matching  funds  for  satis- 
factory plans  and  specifications  and  paying  such  funds 
iipon  successful  final  inspection  of  the  completed 
projects. 

This  cooperation  was  facilitated  by  the  formation, 
in  1921,  of  the  Operating  Committee  on  Bridges  and 
Structures  of  AASHO,  known  popularly  as  the 
AASHO  Bridge  Committee,  which  was  composed  of 
the  bridge  engineer  of  each  State  highway  depart- 
ment and  a  designated  bridge  engineer  from  Public 
Roads. 


The  Tacoma  Narrows  Bridge,  showing 
oscillation  1  hour  before  its  collapse. 


Architect's  drawing  of  the  New  River  Gorge  Bridge  in  West  Virginia.  The  hinged  arch  has 
a  span  of  1,700  feet,  the  longest  of  its  kind  in  the  loorld.    Construction  began  in  1973. 


431 


The  AASHO  Bridge  Committee's  continuing  func- 
tion was  to  develop  policies  and  specifications  for 
design  and  construction  of  highway  bridges.  Public 
Roads  bridge  engineers  served  as  chairman  of  the 
AASHO  Bridge  Committee  from  1921  until  1953  and 
as  secretary  from  then  until  the  present  time. 

The  AASHO  Bridge  Committee  gradually  de- 
veloped the  bridge  specifications  and  issued  the  first 
printed  edition  of  the  AASHO  Standard  Specifica- 
tions for  HigMoay  Bridges  in  1931.  These  "Standard 
Specifications"  were  not  just  specifications,  but  served 
as  a  standard  or  guide  for  the  preparation  of  State 
specifications  and  for  reference  by  bridge  engineers. 
They  combined  design  criteria  and  policies  with  de- 
tailed specification  guidelines.  Primarily,  "Standard 
Specifications"  set  forth  minimum  requirements  M'hich 
were  consistent  with  the  current  practices.  The  same 
objectives  prevail  in  the  current  edition. 

A  notable  innovation  in  the  specifications  was  the 
use  of  a  truck  system  of  live  load  instead  of  road 
rollers.  The  loadings,  designated  as  H-20,  H-15,  and 
H-10,  specified  basic  two-axle  design  trucks  of  20,  15, 
and  10  tons,  respectively.  The  H-truck  loading  was 
a  basic  truck  in  each  lane  of  the  bridge,  preceded  and 
followed  by  a  train  of  trucks  each  weighing  3^  as 
much  as  the  basic  truck.  An  equivalent  "lane  load- 
ing," consisting  of  a  concentrated  load  plus  a  uni- 
formly distributed  load  for  each  lane  of  loaded 
structure,  was  provided. 

During  the  "great  bridge"  era  between  1900  and 
World  War  II,  there  was  a  phenomenal  increase  in 
the  number  and  size  of  lesser  bridges  as  well  as  a 
growth  in  technical  knowledge.  The  biggest  new 
development  was  reinforced  concrete.  The  short-span 
timber  bridges  were  being  displaced  by  concrete  slab 
or  concrete  I-beam  bridges.  The  reinforced  concrete 
box  culvert  also  became  common.  But  aside  from 
this,  most  of  the  growth  consisted  of  further  develop- 
ments and  refinements  of  existing  bridge  types. 
Riveted  joints  in  steel  trusses  replaced  the  earlier  pin 
connected  joints,  and  stiffer  and  more  substantial  truss 
members  developed.  Steel  rolled  beam  and  built-up 
"plate  girder"  structures  became  common.  The  small 
arch  brige  changed  from  stone  to  concrete  and  began 
to  grow  in  span  length.  Wider  bridge  roadways  were 
being  used. 

There  were  three  new,  or  at  least  different,  develop- 
ments that  were  significant  beginning  in  the  1920's. 
The  first  was  the  construction  of  a  "parkway  system" 
in  Westchester  County.  This  progressive  county  be- 
gan building  roads  with  some  control  of  access  and 
separation  of  cross  traffic.  This  kind  of  road  meant 
bridges  wherever  traffic  was  to  be  separated,  even 
where  there  was  no  river  to  be  crossed.  Usually,  these 
grade  separation  structures  were  not  very  large  but 
did  need  eye  appeal.  The  result  was  the  rebirth  of 
the  stone  arch  (or  stone-faced  at  least)  and  its  varia- 
tion, the  rigid  frame.  The  Westchester  Parkway  used 
many  stone-faced  reinforced  concrete  arches  and 
frames  for  the  Bronx  River,  Cross  County,  Saw  Mill, 
and  Taconic  Parkways.  Arthur  Hayden  was  the 
bridge  engineer  at  Westchester,  and  his  book  on  the 
Rigid  Frame  Bridge  has  become  a  classic.  The  park- 
way and  freeway  concept  spread  to  Connecticut  where 


the  Merritt  and  Wilbur  Cross  Parkways  were  built, 
again  with  emphasis  on  esthetics.  Every  bridge  on 
the  Merritt  Parkway  is  different.  This  road  is  still 
one  of  the  most  delightful  and  scenic  in  the  United 
States. 

The  second  development  was  the  almost  exponential 
increase  in  engineering  theory  and  application.  While 
there  were  many  whose  studies  made  these  new  frames 
and  arches  possible,  there  was  one  outstanding  con- 
tribution. In  1932  Professor  Hardy  Cross  of  the 
University  of  Illinois  presented  the  method  of 
moment  distribution  for  determining  the  moments 
and  shears  in  continuous  beams,  arches,  and  frames 
in  a  paper  to  the  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers. 
Prior  to  this  time,  the  design  of  continuous  frames 
was  a  tedious,  intricate  and  time  consuming  process 
which  discouraged  the  use  of  indeterminate  structures. 
Moment  distribution  came  at  a  very  favorable  time — 
at  the  beginning  of  the  widespread  use  of  highway 
grade  separation  structures  for  which  rigid  frames 
were  especially  appropriate. 

The  third  significant  factor  was  the  growth  of  Fed- 
eral interest  and  activity  in  the  highway  field.  Public 
Roads  was  still  a  relatively  small  agency,  but  it  helped 
the  States  through  the  transition  to  heavier  automo- 
bile loadings.  "Wliile  the  designated  Federal-aid  sys- 
tem at  the  start  of  the  Federal-aid  program  was  in 
most  States  essentially  a  system  of  county  roads 
located  and  designed  for  preautomobile  traffic,  the 
quality  of  bridges  increased  dramatically  during  the 
1920's  because  of  the  cooperation  of  the  States  and 
Public  Roads,  increased  experience,  and  improved 
criteria,  specifications  and  guides.  The  example  of  the 
improved  highways  and  bridges  created  a  demand  for 
similar  improvements  on  other  State  highways.  In 
general,  bridges  on  the  Federal-aid  system  in  this 
period  were  of  short  to  medium  spans  and  of  moderate 
cost.  The  Federal-aid  allocation  and  the  State  high- 
way funds  were  not  sufficient  to  finance  high  cost 
structures  and  at  the  same  time  to  construct  other 
highway  facilities  in  the  State.  Consequently,  high 
cost  bridges  and  tunnels  were  frequently  built  by 
bridge  or  tunnel  authorities  or  private  interests  as 
toll  facilities. 

During  these  years,  the  AASHO  Bridge  Committee 
continued  to  develop  the  bridge  design  specifications. 
Basic  two-  and  three-axle  truck  design  loads  were 
substituted  for  the  truck  train  loading  in  1941,  leav- 


On  U.S.  route  5  in  Vermont,  large  vehicles  were  forced 
to  straddle  the  'pavement  ceyiterline  in  crossing  this 
narrow  bridge  with  its  sharp-curved  approaches. 


432 


This  continuous  steel  truss  bridge  over  the  Allegheny  River  on  1-80  in  Pennsylvania  was  completed  in  1968.    The  68- 
foot  wide  concrete  deck  easily  accommodates  four  lanes  of  trafflc  and  a  concrete  median  barrier. 


ing  the  concentrated  truck  loading  for  short  span 
designs  and  the  conventionalized  lane  loading  for 
longer  span  designs. 

The  design  formulas  for  concrete  floor  slabs  were 
revised  in  the  1941  and  the  1961  editions  of  the 
AASHO  Bridge  Specifications  to  conform  to  the  re- 
sults of  slab  tests. 

New  revised  editions  of  the  specifications  continued 
to  be  developed  and  issued  at  4-  or  5-year  intervals 
up  to  the  present  day.  The  revisions  keep  the  specifi- 
cations up-to-date  on  new  design  concepts,  safety 
policies,  use  and  development  of  materials  and  con- 
struction practices.  The  AASHO  Bridge  Specifica- 
tions have  become  a  valuable  addition  to  the  bridge 
building  profession,  serving  as  guides  to  State  high- 
way departments,  cities,  counties  and  foreign  countries 
in  the  design  of  adequate  but  economical  structures 
of  all  types. 

A  new  design  concept  evolved  during  the  1930's — 
that  bridge  alinement  should  confonn  to  the  overall 
alinement  of  the  highway.  Previously,  bridges,  which 
cost  much  more  per  unit  of  length  than  roadways, 
were  generally  located  for  minimum  cost  reasons,  with 
little  regard  to  approach  road  curvature.  The  new 
concept  has  resulted  in  much  safer  approach  aline- 
ments. 


Developments  After  World  War  II 

The  Federal- Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944  authorized 
the  National  System  of  Interstate  Highways.  Initial 
standards  for  construction  of  the  Interstate  System 
were  developed  jointly  by  Public  Roads  and  AASHO 
in  1945.  The  high  standards  for  the  Interstate  System 
to  meet  present  and  future  traffic  needs  also  neces- 
sitated changes  in  the  character  of  highway  bridges. 
Standards  for  traffic  capacity,  load  capacity,  safety 
and  appearance  of  structures  were  given  careful  study 
in  order  to  provide  for  the  safe  and  free  movement 
of  vehicles  over  and  through  bridges. 

The  field  of  the  bridge  engineer  was  broadened  be- 
cause of  the  number  of  large  bridges  required  over 
waterways  and  because  of  the  greatly  increased  num- 
ber of  grade  separations. 

Bridge  railings  were  studied  and  led  to  the  use 
of  rail  curbs  and  streamlined  railings.  Full  width 
roadways  (surface  and  shoulders)  were  advocated  for 
safety  on  short  bridges,  and  deck  type  rather  than 
through  type  bridges  were  emphasized.  Particular 
attention  was  given  to  horizontal  clearance  at  under- 
passes, with  greater  clearances  to  sidewalls  and  center 
piers  than  had  been  customary. 

Design  with  continuous  spans  was  advocated.  In 
anticipation  of  the  increased  use  of  three-span  con- 
tinuous reinforced  concrete  structures  for  urban  and 
Interstate  bridges.  Public  Roads  prepared  a  report, 


433 


1-480  exit  ramp  in  Omaha,  Nebr.    This  was  one  of  the  first  major  interchanges  where  curved  composite  steel  box 

girders  were  used. 


Computing  Moments  for  Continuous  Concrete  Bridges^ 
including  design  procedures  and  moment  charts,  which 
was  published  in  the  January-February-March  1944 
issue  of  Public  Roads. 

While  the  use  of  AASHO  H20  loading  was  quite 
general,  the  new  and  heavier  H20-S16  loading  was 
adopted  for  bridges  on  routes  that  would  probably 
be  included  in  the  Interstate  Systein.  There  was  a 
general  trend  toward  the  use  of  heavier  loading  design 
of  bridges  on  all  highway  systems. 

With  the  toll  turnpike  era  starting  again  after  the 
war,  good  architectural  treatment  of  structures  was 
encouraged,  especially  where  improvement  could  be 
made  without  substantial  increase  in  cost.  Consulting 
engineers  and  architects  were  retained  for  design  of 
these  toll  road  structures  and  for  other  major  bridges 
on  the  Federal-aid  system. 

In  the  10  years  following  World  War  II,  the  march 
of  new  developments  in  the  bridge  field  resumed. 
One  of  the  most  widespread  was  the  use  of  composite 
steel  beam  bridges,  which  enabled  the  deck  slab  to 
work  with  the  steel  beams  as  a  main  load-carrying 
member. 

Another  development  was  the  use  of  welded  bridges. 
Welded  steel  bridges,  except  for  minor  details,  had 
not  been  permitted  on  the  Federal-aid  system  until 
after  World  War  II  because  of  the  lack  of  toughness 


(and  resultant  welding  inadequacy)  of  most  struc- 
tural steel  used  for  bridges.  At  first,  welding  on 
bridge  members  was  limited  to  welding  flange  cover 
plates  to  beams  and  web  to  flange  connections  on  plate 
girders.  At  BPR's  urging,  steel  producers  developed 
a  weldable  steel  for  bridges  which  had  sufficient 
chemical  controls  to  produce  a  tougher  steel.  The 
American  Society  of  Testing  and  Materials  (ASTM) 
adopted  the  Specification  for  Structural  Steel  for 
Welding  (A373)  in  1954.  ASTM  A373  steel  was  sup- 
planted in  1960  by  ASTM  A36  steel  which  had  the 
same  tougloness  with  a  higher  yield  point.  The  avail- 
ability of  these  steels  rapidly  expanded  the  scope  and 
volume  of  welded  structures  and  eliminated  the  riveted 
plate  girder  save  for  very  large  bridges  and  railroad 
structures.  More  versatile  designs  and  economy  of 
weight  were  obtained  with  welded  designs. 

At  about  the  same  time,  high  strength  bolts  were 
developed  for  use  in  place  of  rivets  in  the  connection 
of  structural  members.  These  bolts,  tightened  to 
their  proof  load,  clamp  the  plates  tightly  together 
and  transfer  the  stress  in  joints  by  friction  rather  than 
by  bearing  and  shear  on  the  bolt. 

However,  the  most  significant  development  of  this 
period  was  the  use  of  prestressed  concrete  in  which 
highly  stressed  steel  wires  introduced  compressive 
forces  into  the  concrete  to  offset  the  tensile  stresses 


434 


The  Red  Bridge  over  the  Seekonk  River  between  Providence,  and  East  Providence,  R.I.,  is  a  welded  plate  girder  bridge  of 

composite  construction. 


caused  by  normal  service  load.  In  the  early  1950's, 
reports  on  European  use  of  prestressed-concrete 
bridges  had  aroused  the  interest  of  engineers  and 
cement  producers  in  this  country.  The  first  American 
prestressed  bridge  was  the  Walnut  Lane  Bridge  in 
Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  built  in  1951.  Subse- 
quently, in  1955,  Public  Roads  published  the  Criteria 
for  Py'estressed'G oncrete  Bridges^  the  only  such  pub- 
lication in  the  United  States  at  the  time.  With  the 
help  of  this  j)amphlet  and  the  standard  plans  pub- 
lished by  the  cement  industry  and  Public  Roads,  the 
use  of  prestressed-concrete  for  bridges  rapidly  de- 
veloped and  greatly  expanded  the  span  range  of  con- 
crete structures. 

The  desire  for  separation  of  grades  led  to  extensive 
use  of  long  sections  of  viaduct  construction  in  ui'ban 
areas  on  the  Interstate  as  well  as  on  other  freeways. 
Divided  roadways,  liberal  bridge  roadway  widths  and 
increased  pier  and  abutment  clearances  under  over- 
passes became  normal  safety  practices. 


i         "^  1 

The  mainline  and  ramps  of  the  Mission  Valley  Bridge  in  Ban 
Diego,  Calif.,  are  prestressed  concrete  box  girders.  Architec- 
tural treatment  gives  the  piers  an  old  "Spanish  flavor." 


435 


The  National  System  of  Interstate 
and  Defense  Highways 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956  provided 
for  construction  of  the  41,000-mile  Interstate  System 
with  an  accompanying  source  of  funding.  This 
System,  which  was  to  be  a  modern,  safe,  limited  access, 
divided  highway,  set  highway  and  bridge  design 
engineers  to  work  developing  ideas  for  facilities  which 
would  be  adequate  for  estimated  future  needs.  The 
tremendous  number  of  structures  required  to  maintain 
access  control  encouraged  continuous  study  of  struc- 
ture types  and  construction  methods.  Coincident  with 
this  was  the  dawn  of  the  computer  age.  The  capa- 
bility of  these  electronic  macliines  to  perform  lengthy 
mathematical  operations  permitted  more  refined  anal- 


ysis of  increasingly  complex  structures  in  less  time. 
Just  as  moment  distribution  gave  impetus  to  con- 
tinuous frame  analysis,  the  computer  made  indeter- 
minate analysis  commonplace.  The  elimination  of 
the  computational  drudgery  brought  a  return  to  more 
basic  and  theoretical  solutions  and  away  from  the 
approximation  methods  of  the  second  quarter  of  the 
century.  The  computer  also  created  new  approaches, 
such  as  the  finite  element  method. 

The  numerous  large  and  complex  grade  separation 
structures  and  extensive  urban  viaducts  led  to  many 
bridge  developments  in  designing  for  improved  archi- 
tectural treatments  and  economy.  Deck  structures 
were  generally  used  with  girders  curved  to  follow  the 
alinement  of  the  roadway.     Box  girder  design  tech- 


Hiyli  strength  steels  vrrc  used  jar  Die  iccldcd  areli  truss  inembers  of  the  Sherman-Minton 
Bridge  over  the  Ohio  River  on  1-64  bctiveen  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  Neio  Albany,  Ind. 


436 


Completed  in  1973,  the  Sitka 

Harbor  Bridge  in  Sitka,  Alaska, 

is  the  first  cable-stayed  highway 

bridge  in  the  United  States. 

The  cable-stayed  welded  steel 

box  girder  design  ivas  selected 

to  make  the  structure  as  visually 

unobstructii'e  as  possible  from 

Sitka  and  Castle  Hill,  the  site 

of  Baranof  Castle,  from  which 

the  Russians  governed  Alaska 

prior  to  1867,  when  it  became 

a  U.S.  territory. 


The  Poplar  Street  Brirlgc  over  the  Mississippi  River  at  St.  Louis,  Mo. 


437 


This  pedestrian  b^-idge  over  U.S.  41  ii^  Menomonee  Falls,  Wis.,  was  the 
first  cable-stayed  girder  bridge  in  the  United  States. 


Built  in  1973,  the  pedestrian  overpass  of  the  47th  Street  Bypass  in  Boulder, 
Colo.,  is  a  cast-in-place  concrete  box  girder. 


438 


niques  were  developed  for  the  longer  spans.  Rein- 
forced concrete  box  girders  and  composite  structural 
steel  box  girders  were  constructed  to  conform  to  the 
sinuous  and  undulating  lines  of  the  ramps  and  via- 
ducts. Without  the  computer  many  of  these  struc- 
tures could  hardly  have  been  analyzed  and  designed 
realistically  or  economically. 

As  happens  so  often,  a  breakthrough  in  one  area 
seems  to  lead  to  one  in  another  area.  Prestressed 
concrete  has  already  been  mentioned.  New  struc- 
tural steels  were  also  developed  to  permit  larger,  more 
hea^^ly  stressed  bridges.  In  1959  and  1960,  a  new 
high-strength  low-alloy  structural  steel  for  riveted 
construction,  ASTM  A440,  and  a  companion  steel  for 
welded  construction,  ASTINI  A441,  were  produced  to 
supersede  the  then-standard  silicon  steel. 

In  1961,  a  temporary  specification  for  a  90,000- 
100,000  pounds  per  square  inch  yield  strength  steel 
for  long-span  bridges  Avas  approved  by  Public  Roads 
for  use  on  Federal-aid  projects.  After  3  years,  an 
ASTM  specification  for  this  steel,  High-YieJd- 
Strength^  Quenched  and  Tempered  Alloy  Steel  Plate^ 
Suitable  for  Weld/'ng,  ASTM  A514,  was  issued,  and 
the  temporary  specification  was  discontinued.  This 
same  procedure  was  followed  in  1966  with  the  high- 
strength  columbium  and  vanadium  steels.  ASTM 
issued  a  specification  for  the  steel,  A572,  without  notch 
toughness  (impact  testing  to  insure  steel  will  resist 
fatigue  cracking)  requirements.  BPR  accepted  the 
ASTM  specification  for  use  on  Federal-aid  projects 
with  welded  steel  only  if  a  special  provision  covering 
notch  toughness  was  includecl  in  the  project  specifica- 
tion. This  was  done,  but  the  use  of  the  special  pro- 
visions was  discontinued  in  1974  when  ASTM  in- 
cluded notch  toughness  tests  for  all  structural  steels. 

The  use  of  curved  bridges  produced  other  problems 
besides  design,  e.g.,  the  great  amount  of  scrap  metal 
resulting  from  cutting  the  flanges  to  the  curve.  This 
required  development  of  new  fabrication  methods 
whereby  members  were  fabricated  straight  and  then 
heated  and  bent  to  the  desired  curvatures,  thereby 
eliminating  the  waste. 

To  achieve  better  quality  control  in  welding  bridge 
members,  nondestructive  testing  by  radiography,  mag- 
netic particle  and  ultrasonic  testing  were  developed 
by  Public  Roads  bridge  engineers.  Ultrasonic  testing 
of  welded  groove  joints  was  found  to  be  a  faster,  more 
sensitive  and  cheaper  method  of  locating  weld  defects 
than  the  methods  previously  used. 

Among  the  many  long-span  bridges  built  on  the 
Interstate  System  to  cross  wide  waterways,  the  Poplar 
Street  Bridge  over  the  Mississippi  River  at  St.  Louis 
is  one  of  the  most  notable  structures.  A  truss  or  arch 
span  was  not  acceptable  since  it  was  considered  that  its 
bulk  would  detract  from  the  nearby  Gateway  Arch 
and  the  Eads  Bridge.  The  8-lane  bridge,  constructed 
in  the  mid-1960's  with  a  600-foot  center  span,  is  the 
Nation's  longest  box  girder  bridge  and  the  first  large 
structure  in  the  United  States  to  use  orthotropic 
design.  Orthotropic  design,  developed  in  Europe, 
consists  of  main  girders  and  a  stiffened  steel  plate 
deck  welded  together  so  as  to  act  jointly  in  support- 
ing the  structure.  The  stiffened  plate  deck  serves  a 
fourfold  purpose  as  bridge  deck,  stringers,  and  an 
upper  flange  for  l)oth  tlie  floor  l:)eams  and  the  main 
girders,  reducing  the  dead  load  of  the  structure. 


Pedestrian  crossings  of  freeways  became  necessary 
in  some  locations  to  avoid  undue  division  of  estab- 
lished neighborhoods.  Topography  and  personal 
safety  of  pedestrians  generally  dictate  the  design  of 
overpasses.  Protection  for  the  traffic  below  from 
objects  dropped  or  thrown  from  pedestrian  crossings 
led  to  the  use  of  enclosures  or  high  fences  of  closely 
meshed  wires  on  the  overpasses.  Many  unique  and 
attractive  structures  have  been  developed  for  these 
overpasses. 

Bridge  Research 

The  AASHO  Road  Test  near  Ottawa,  Illinois,  dis- 
cussed in  Chapters  4  and  6,  is  a  good  example  of 
Federal-State  cooperation  on  research.  Public  Roads 
bridge  engineers  designed  and  prepared  the  plans  for 
the  18  bridges  in  the  program.  The  bridges  were 
designed  with  high  working  loads  so  that  fatigue 
failures  could  be  expected.  There  wei-e  18  steel  and/or 
concrete  beam  spans  representing  contemporary 
practices. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  regular  test  traffic  in 
December  1960,  7  of  the  11  surviving  bridges  were 
subjected  to  accelerated  fatigue  tests,  and  two  were 
tested  to  failure  by  increased  vehicle  loads.  The  mass 
of  test-to-failure  data  on  the  behavior  of  the  bridges 
under  repeated  loading  has  proved  to  be  of  major 
assistance  in  subsequent  studies  for  developing  specifi- 
cations and  design  revisions. 

Seven  years  later,  full  size  welded  plate  girders 
were  fatigue  tested  at  Lehigh  University  under  the 
sponsorship  of  the  Welding  Research  Council. 
Analyses  of  the  results  of  these  tests  resulted  in  design 
and  specification  changes  for  welded  and  riveted  plate 
girders  and  confirmed  the  integrity  of  properly  de- 
signed and  constructed  welded  girders. 

Since  the  late  1920's,  research  and  development  has 
been  greatly  broadened  in  the  nonstructural  areas, 
such  as  hydraulics.  While  bridges  and  culverts  have 
been  used  for  centuries  to  cross  streams  and  rivers,  the 
structural  elements  of  these  crossings  have  attracted 
most  of  the  attention  of  engineers  with  less  attention 
given  to  the  bridge's  capacity  to  accommodate  floods, 
except  for  very  large  bridges  over  major  rivers.  Pro- 
gress in  highway  hydraulics  and  drainage  was  slow, 
and  in  the  early  days,  designs  were  frequently  based 
on  judgment  without  well  developed  engineering  tech- 
nology or  adequate  rainfall  data.  Drainage  struc- 
tures, including  bridges,  were  commonly  sized  by 
using  empirical  formulas  developed  in  the  19th 
century. 

Progressive  engineers  had  long  recognized  the  short- 
comings of  drainage  design  and  had  stressed  the 
importance  of  estimating  the  magnitude  and  frequency 
of  flood  flows  and  the  risk  of  damage.  The  lack  of 
hydrologic  data  and  the  dearth  of  information  on 
hydraulics  of  highway  structures  made  it  difficult  to 
develop  policy  and  design  procedures. 

Research  on  hydraulics  and  hydrology  started  in  the 
1920-1930  era,  mainly  encouraged  by  Public  Roads 
and  other  agencies  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture, 
and  after  Woi-ld  War  II,  extensive  development  in 
the  application  of  hydraulic  engineering  principles  to 
highway  design  began  in  Public  Roads.     During  the 


439 


The  infamous  Silver  Bridge  over  the  Ohio  River  at  Point  Pleasant,  W.  Va. 


1950's,  an  extensive  program  of  research  on  the 
hydraulics  of  culverts,  bridges,  and  storm  sewers  was 
undertaken,  largely  by  contract  with  various  univer- 
sities and  other  Federal  agencies. 

In  1959  a  Hydraulic  Branch  was  established  in  the 
Public  Roads  Bridge  Division.  The  functions  of  this 
Branch  were  to  initiate  and  participate  in  hydraulic 
research,  to  disseminate  the  practical  application  of 
hydraulic  design  to  bridge  engineers  and  to  review 
hydraulic  features  of  Federal-aid  structures.  Studies 
were  also  made  on  stream  pollution  from  highway  and 
bridge  construction  and  guidelines  were  issued  on  re- 
duction of  such  pollution. 

One  of  the  most  important  contributions  in  this 
area  was  BPR's  Hydraulic  Engineering  Circulars  and 
Hydraulic  Design  Series  Bulletins.  These  publica- 
tions, still  in  use,  provide  practical  methods  for  apply- 
ing research  results  to  designs  and  are  widely  used  by 
Federal,  State  and  consulting  engineers. 

Other  areas  of  bridge  related  research  and  develop- 
ment included  safety  measures,  with  particular 
emphasis  on : 

•  Elimination  or  neutralization  of  hazardous  fixed 
objects  along  the  roadside  including  bridge  piers, 
abutments,  parapets,  and  culvert  headwalls. 

•  Strengthening  of  bridge  guardrail  designs  and 
the  new  concept  of  a  strong  beam  (rail)  with  a 
weak  post  that  would  yield  partially  and  redirect 
the  errant  vehicle  safely  bade  to  the  road. 

•  Breakaway  sign  supports  and  lighting  poles  that 
break  when  hit  by  a  vehicle,  thereby  i-educing  the 
injury  to  vehicle  and  occupants  on  collision.  In 
collisions,  tlie  vehicle  usually  passes  under  the 
sign  or  pole  before  it  falls.  These  concepts  were 
developed  at  Texas  A&M  through  State  and  Fed- 
eral funding. 


•  Gore*  protection  devices  to  protect  out-of -control 
vehicles  at  the  diverging  point  of  ramp  exits  and 
branching  roadways.  These  rapidly  reduce  the 
speed  of  an  out-of-control  vehicle  by  the  absorp- 
tion of  energy  by  using  springs,  crushing  of 
drums,  displacement  of  water  or  sand  or  related 
methods. 

•  New  criteria  for  design  of  sign  supports,  includ- 
ing new  recommedations  for  certain  aluminum 
alloy  design  stresses,  accepted  and  published  by 
AASHO  in  1961. 


The  Scene  Today 

The  State  transportation  agencies,  the  Federal  High- 
way Administration,  the  highway  industry  and  re- 
search groups  have  achieved  a  finely  tuned,  cooperative 
highway  program.  It  is  difficult  to  say  that  any  one 
group  is  responsible  for  new  developments,  since  each 
concerned  group  has  played  a  part.  Tliis  is  the  way 
it  has  been  with  the  latest  developments  in  bridge  de- 
sign, ultimate  strength  design  (USD)  for  concrete 
and  load  factor  design  for  steel.  The  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  supported  these  developments  vigorously  and 
was  in  the  forefront  of  this  movement  when  it  pub- 
lished the  /Strength  and  Serviceahility  Criteria — Re- 
inforced Concrete  Bridge  Members — Ultimate  Design 
in  1966.  This  helped  bring  the  bridge  specifications 
up  to  the  American  Concrete  Institute  (ACI)  Build- 
ing Code  Requirements  for  Reinforced  Concrete  which 
had  adopted  USD  in  1963.  A  Tentative  Criteria  for 
Load,  Factor  Design  of  Steel  Highway  Bridges,  with 


*  The   elongated   triangular   area   where   one-way   roadways 
begin  to  separate. 


440 


commentary,  was  developed  and  circulated  by  the 
American  Iron  and  Steel  Institute  in  1968.  This  cri- 
teria for  steel  design  was  similar  to  the  strength  and 
serviceability  criteria  for  USD  in  that  the  designs  are 
based  on  yield  conditions  and  load  factors.  Basically, 
these  methods  represent  a  departure  from  designing 
a  structure  for  service  loads  with  an  overall  safety 
factor.  Under  USD  and  load  factor  design,  mag- 
nification of  individual  safety  factors  are  applied  to 
the  various  types  of  loads.  The  magnified  loads  are 
then  totaled  and  used  to  proportion  a  member  assumed 
to  be  in  a  state  of  incipent  yielding.  These  methods, 
with  additional  controls  for  overload,  excessive  crack- 
ing, deflection,  vibration,  and  permanent  set  and  for 
fatigue  of  material  at  working  loads,  have  been  incor- 
porated in  the  AASHTO  Bridge  Design  Specification 
criteria. 

Comparisons  of  costs  have  shown  an  initial  economy 
in  material  costs  for  both  steel  and  concrete  members 
proportioned  by  these  methods  over  those  proportioned 
by  working  stress  design,  especially  for  long  spans. 

The  events  chronicled  here,  aside  from  a  few  set- 
backs, have  been  a  series  of  successes.  One  failure 
should  be  recorded  to  alert  the  bridge  engineer  frater- 


nity that  these  is  more  to  be  learned  about  materials 
and  fatigue  structures.  On  the  evening  of  December 
15,  1967,  a  39-year  old  eyebar  suspension  bridge 
quivered  slightly  and  then  collapsed,  carrying  46  i)er- 
sons  to  their  deaths  in  the  icy  Ohio  River.  This 
catastrophic  failure  of  the  Silver  Bridge  at  Point 
Pleasant,  West  Virginia,  shocked  the  Nation. 

An  extensive  investigation,  including  mechanical  and 
chemical  tests  of  the  failed  structure,  showed  that  the 
failure  was  initiated  by  fracture  of  an  eyebar  in  the 
suspension  chain.  It  was  further  determined  that  a 
small  corrosion  pit  on  the  pin  hole  face  of  the  eyebar 
started  a  small  crack  and  that  the  crack  reached  crit- 
ical size  under  the  joint  action  of  stress-corrosion  and 
fatigue. 

The  disturbing  part  about  the  Silver  Bridge  failure 
was  the  contributing  causes  listed  as : 

•  In  1927  when  the  bridge  was  designed,  the  phe- 
nomena of  sti'ess  corrosion  and  fatigue  were  not 
known  to  occur  in  the  classes  of  bridge  material  used 
under  conditions  of  exposure  normally  encountered 
in  rural  areas. 

•  The  location  of  the  flaw  was  inaccessible  to  visual 
inspection. 


The  CdO  Bridge  over  the  Ohio  River  beticeen  Cincijinati,  Ohio,  and  Covington,  Ky.,  was  removed  by  explosives  after  inspec- 
tion revealed  it  was  unsafe  for  highioay  traffic.    The  replacement  bridge  was  opened  to  highway  traffic  in  19TJf. 


441 


•  The  flaw  could  not  have  been  detected  by  any  in- 
spection method  known  to  the  state-of-the-art  today 
without  disassembly  of  the  eyebar. 

These  revelations  led  to  a  program  of  immediate 
bridge  inspections  and  bridge  inventories  directed  by 
a  committtee  formed  at  the  direction  of  the  President. 
As  a  result  of  this  committee's  actions,  new  inspection 
equipment  is  being  developed  and  purchased  and  so- 
phisticated devices  are  being  employed  for  inspecting 
bridge  members  and  for  determining  scour  at  bridge 
piers.  Bridges  deemed  unsafe  are  being  closed  to 
traffic,  and  bridges  are  being  reappraised  as  to  load 
capacities. 

The  1968  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  mandated  na- 
tional bridae  inspection  standards  for  the  Federal-aid 
systems.  These  standards  establish  inspection  quali- 
fications and  require  biennial  inspections.  All  States 
are  required  to  maintain  written  inspection  reports 
and  a  current  inventory  of  all  bridges  on  the  Federal- 
aid  systems. 

The  1968  Act  also  required  that  an  inspector  train- 
ing program  for  employees  of  the  Federal  and  State 
governments  be  established  and  be  kept  current  with 
new  and  improved  techniques.  In  the  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1970,  a  bridge  replacement  program 
was  required  to  replace  substandard  bridges  over 
waterways  and  topographic  barriers.  This  program 
is  now  in  full  swing.  Many  of  the  most  deficient 
bridges  have  been  or  are  being  replaced.  There  are 
thousands  of  bridges  on  the  Federal-aid  system  that 
are  posted  as  having  limited  capability  of  carrying 
truck  traffic.  It  is  presently  estimated  that  replace- 
ment cost  would  be  approximately  $2.3  billion. 

The  60  years  since  the  first  Federal-aid  act  have  been 
a  challenge  to  the  bridge  engineer.  The  first  goal  was 
to  set  a  plan  of  cooperation  and  encouragement  be- 
tween Federal  and  State  organizations  in  developing 
bridge  standards,  then  to  devise  a  comprehensive  and 
workable  program  for  planning,  designing,  approving 
and  inspecting  Federal-aid  bridges  to  meet  the  current 
and  predictable  future  needs  of  traffic.  With  no  early 
background  for  predicting  traffic  growth  and  facing 
an  unprecedented  increase  in  vehicle  volumes,  speed 
and  weight,  increased  higher  standards  for  width, 
alinement  and  strength  of  bridges  were  required,  and 
many  existing  bridges  became  obsolete. 

Continuous  and  careful  attention  to  new  develop- 
ments was  necessary  to  maintain  current  criteria  and 
specifications  for  bridge  planning  and  design.  The 
first  60  years'  pursuits  and  accomplishments  leave  a 
background  of  experience  and  knowledge  for  con- 
tinued accomplishmment  of  future  comprehensive 
programs. 

Highway  Tunnels 

As  was  the  case  in  Europe,  tunneling  activity  in 
this  country  began  with  the  mining  industry,  followed 
by  canal  tunnel  construction,  then  the  railroads  and 
finally  highways.  Most  of  the  early  canal  and  rail- 
road tunnel  work  was  done  in  Pennsylvania,  but  Cali- 
fornia holds  several  important  "firsts"  for  highway 
tunnels. 


By  stretching  the  definition  of  a  highway  tunnel  to 
include  tunnels  constructed  for  horsedrawn  traffic  be- 
fore the  automobile  came  into  general  use,  probably 
the  oldest  highway  tunnel  in  the  United  States  is 
located  in  California.  Built  during  the  1870's,  the 
tunnel  pierces  a  high  rock  cliff  on  the  Pacific  Ocean 
about  6  miles  south  of  San  Francisco.  Complete  and 
accurate  records  concerning  this  tunnel  are  lacking, 
but  historians  speculate  that  the  bore  was  built  to 
permit  local  ranchers  easy  access  to  San  Francisco 
along  the  beaches.*^  *® 

The  first  tunnel  of  substantial  length  constructed  to 
accommodate  automobile  traffic  is  also  located  in  Cali- 
fornia. Completed  in  1901,  the  Third  Street  Tunnel 
passes  through  Bunker  Hill  in  downtown  Los  Angeles. 
Interestingly,  the  contractor  made  an  imsuccessful  at- 
tempt to  use  a  tunnel  boring  machine  on  the  project.^" 

The  pioneer  spirit  and  Yankee  ingenuity  of  Amer- 
ican tunnel  builders  was  perhaps  most  evident  in  the 
1920's.  During  this  era,  some  of  the  most  famous 
highway  tunnels  in  the  United  States  were  built. 
Early  in  the  1920's  a  comprehensive  research  program 
developed  the  fundamental  data  for  vehicular  tunnel 
ventilation.  The  research  was  conducted  in  connection 
with  the  design  of  the  Holland  Tunnel."  Passing 
under  the  Hudson  River  between  New  Jersey  and 
New  York,  the  Holland  Tunnel  was  the  first  major 
subaqueous  vehicular  tunnel  in  the  United  States.  It 
was  opened  to  traffic  in  1927.  Three  years  earlier  the 
Liberty  Tunnels  were  completed  in  Pittsburgh,  Penn- 
sylvania, and,  at  5,800  feet,  were  the  longest  highway 
tunnels  in  the  country  at  that  time.'^  About  the  same 
time,  the  Posey  Tube  under  the  estuary  between  Oak- 
land and  Alameda,  California,  was  nearing  comple- 
tion. "When  opened  to  traffic  in  1928,  the  Posey  Tube 
became  the  first  highway  tunnel  in  the  world  to  be 
built  by  the  "trench  method."  ^^  An  American  inno- 
vation, the  trench  method  consists  of  sinking  pre- 
fabricated tunnel  sections  into  a  prepared  trench  on 
the  riverbed.  A  total  of  13  highway  tunnels  have 
been  built  by  the  trench  method,  the  latest  being  the 
Wallace  Tunnel  on  Interstate  10  in  Mobile,  Alabama, 
opened  to  traffic  in  1973. 

The  decade  of  the  1930's  saw  most  of  the  tunnel 
construction  being  concentrated  in  the  western  States. 
Many  of  these  tunnels  were  located  on  the  new  access 
routes  into  the  national  parks.  Probably  the  most 
notable  accomplishment  during  the  1930's  was  the 
Yerba  Buena  Island  Tunnel  connecting  the  San  Fran- 
cisco-Oakland Bay  Bridges  in  California.  Completed 
in  1937,  it  remains  the  only  double-deck  highway 
tunnel  in  the  country. 

Immediately  following  World  War  II,  tunnel  con- 
struction activity  quickened,  and  in  1950  another 
record  was  established.  The  Brooklyn-Battery  Tunnel 
under  the  East  River  in  New  York  City  became  the 
longest  highway  tunnel  in  the  country — a  distinction 
it  still  holds  today. 

Since  the  early  1960's,  the  bulk  of  U.S.  highway 
tunnel  construction  has  been  within  the  Interstate 
System.  To  date  15  major  tunnels  have  been  com- 
pleted on  the  Interstate,  4  are  under  construction  and 
13  others  are  under  design.  These  facilities  are  de- 
signed to  safely  handle  high-speed  traffic,  a  far  cry 
from  that  narrow  passage  carved  through  a  cliff  on  a 
California  beach. 


442 


REFERENCES 

*  L.  Edwaeds,  a  Recoed  of  Histoky  and  Evolution  of  Early 
American  Bridges  (University  Press,  Orono,  Maine,  1959) 
pp.  47,  48. 

^Id.,  p.  197. 
'Id.,  p.  40. 

*  Id.,  pp.  49,  50. 
'Id.,  p.  50. 

'  Id.,  p.  56. 

'  Id.,  p.  61. 

» Id.,  pp.  80,  82. 

'Id.,  p.  63. 

"  G.  Hunt,  A  Century  of  Engineering  in  Wood  Preservation, 
Proceedings  of  Wood  Symposium,  September  3-13,  1952  (Tim- 
ber Engineering  Co.,   Washington,   D.C.,   1952)    p.   66. 

"J.  GiES,  Bridges  and  Men  (Doubleday,  Garden  City,  N.Y., 
1963)   p.  107. 

"H.  Haupt,  General  Theory  of  Bridge  Construction  (D. 
Appleton  and  Co.,  New  York,  1853)  pp.  243-247. 

"  J.  GiES,  supra,  note  11,  p.  112. 

"  L.  Edwards,  supra,  note  1,  p.  75. 

"Id.,  p.  71. 

"Id.,  p.  74. 

"Id.,  p.  76. 

"  J.  GiES,  sttpra,  note  11,  pp.  155-177. 

"A.  Reichmann,  The  History  of  Bi-idge  Development,  Jour- 
nal of  the  Western  Society  of  Engineers  Special  Edition — 
75  Years  of  Engineering  Achievements  In  the  Midwest, 
Dec.  1944,  pp.  60,  61. 

"  L.  Edwards,  supra,  note  1,  pp.  125, 126. 

"/d.,  p.  204. 

"Id.,  p.  122. 

'^Id.,  pp.  41-44. 

"/d.,  pp.  202,  203. 

''Id.,  pp.  162,  163. 

"/d.,  pp.  88-90. 

"/d.,  p.  167. 


="/d.,  p.  90. 
™  Id.,  pp.  199,  200. 
'"  Id.,  p.  190. 
"/d.,  p.  194. 
'■Id.,  p.  198. 
''  Id.,  p.  197. 

^O.  Ho\TEY,  Movable  Bridges,  Vol.  I  (John  Wiley  and  Sons, 
New  York,  1926)  pp.  146-149. 
^/d.,  pp.  151,  152. 

'"  L.  Edwards,  supra,  note  1,  pp.  203,  204. 
''Id.,  p.  191. 

'^Id.,  p.  198. 

■"  Id.,  p.  200. 

"-  F.  Turneaure  &  E.  Maurer,  Principles  of  Reinforced 
Concrete  Construction  (John  Wiley  and  Sons,  New  York, 
1911)  p.  2. 

"  L.  Edwards,  supra,  note  1,  p.  137. 

"/d. 

"  A.  Reichmann,  supra,  note  19,  p.  64. 

"  L.  Edwards,  supra,  note  1,  p.  140. 

"  Id.,  pp.  144,  145. 

*'E.  Drew,  First  Highway  Tunnel,  California  Highways 
and  Public  Works,  Vol.  35,  Nos.  5-6,  May-Jun.  1956,  pp.  12,  13. 

*"  F.  Stanger,  An  Interesting  Historical  Letter,  California 
Highways  and  Public  Works,  Vol.  35,  Nos.  9-10,  Sept.-Oct. 
1956,  p.  37. 

'°  J.  QuiNTON,  The  Third  Street  Concrete  and  Brick-Lined 
Tunnel,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  Engineering  News,  Vol.  XLVI,  No. 
3,  Jul.  18,  1901,  pp.  34-37. 

"  Studies  and  Methods  Adopted  for  Ventilating  the  Holland 
Vehicular  Tunnels,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  98,  No. 
23,  Jun.  9,  1927,  pp.  934-939. 

^'Pioneer  Highway  Tunnels  Modernized  for  Service,  Engi- 
neering News-Record,  Vol.  131,  No.  9,  Aug.  26,  1943,  p.  68. 

'^  T.  Mereiman  &  T.  WiGGiN,  American  Civil  Engineers' 
Handbook,  5th  Ed.  (John  Wiley  and  Sons,  New  York,  1949) 
p.  1647. 


443 


Con/tfuction 

and 

fTlQintenonce 


In  the  late  1800's,  with  the  growth  of  the  cities, 
the  demand  for  better  roads  increased.  The  need  to 
move  farm  produce  from  the  fields  to  the  city  in  a 
steady,  dependable  manner  grew  with  the  increasing- 
city  population.  Yet,  only  about  150,000  miles  of  the 
rural  roads  were  surfaced,  while  the  vast  majority  was 
of  rutted,  packed  earth  that  became  unusable  with 
inclement  weather.  In  describing  the  prevalent  con- 
dition of  the  roads  in  this  country.  General  Roy  Stone 
said,  "In  many  parts  of  the  United  States  the  roads 


are  torn  up  with  the  outcoming  frost  in  the  spring, 
soaked  with  autumn  rains,  frozen  into  ridges  in  win- 
ter, and  buried  in  the  dust  in  the  summer,  making 
four  regular  seasons  of  bad  roads,  besides  innumerable 
brief  'spells.'  "  ' 

Roadbuilding  and  maintenance,  in  the  latter  19th 
century,  was  still  primarily  accomplished  by  the 
statute  labor  system  using  horsedrawn  slij)  scrapers 
and  teams  and  wagons.  The  road  grader,  first  intro- 
duced in  1878,  consisted  of  a  steel  blade  hung  beneath 


Early  grading  operations  were  performed  with  pick,  shovel,  and  animal-drawn  equipment. 
This  wMledrawn  slip  scraper  hauled  very  little  earth  compared  to  more  modern  devices. 


444 


Oradlng    a     new    location    at 
a  washout  in  1914-    At  right 
a  man  uses  a  plow  to  form 
a  ditch,  others  drive  horse- 
drawn  wheel  scrapers. 


Steam  shovels  were  used  lor  excavation  work  in  the  early  1900's,   but  dump  wagons  were  still  horsedrawn. 
dump  wagons,  shown  here,  were  especially  useful  for  dumping  heavy,  sticky  material. 


Bottom 


a  wooden  wagfon.  But  changes  were  starting  to  take 
place.  The  Office  of  Road  Inquiry,  establislied  in 
1893,  sent  engineers  to  various  parts  of  the  country 
to  construct  object  lesson  roads  in  order  to  demon- 
strate that  year-round  good  roads  were  possible  and 
to  show  the  proper  roadbuilding  methods  to  achieve 
them.  In  machinery,  the  steam  shovel  and  steam 
roller  were  already  in  limited  use  but  the  new  steam 
tractor,  with  its  broad  iron  wheels,  foreshadowed  the 
retirement  of  the  horse  and  mule  from  the  road  con- 
struction scene. 

1900  to    1916 — The   Beginning   of 
Federal-Aid   Construction 

After  the  turn  of  the  century,  there  were  some  very' 
significant  happenings  which  had  quite  an  influence 
on  the  future  of  road  construction.  The  Office  of 
Public  Roads  (OPR)  engineers  continued  to  teach 
others  how  to  build  and  maintain  <rood  roads  under 


the  object  lesson  roads  program  while  also  studying 
and  investigating  new  methods  themselves.  The  small 
Federal  laboratory  in  the  OPR  developed  tests  for 
aggregates  and  other  materials  and  made  important 
contributions  toward  overcoming  defects  in  early  bi- 
tuminous construction.  Public  Roads  engineers  de- 
termined and  published  typical  specifications  for 
highway  construction,  the  first  of  which  was  in  1913 
concerning  the  fabrication  and  erection  of  steel  high- 
way bridges. 

With  the  coming  of  the  automobile,  the  macadam 
and  earth  roads  caused  quite  a  dust  nuisance  in  dry 
weather.  However,  it  was  also  about  this  time  that 
people  realized  that  oil  could  be  used  as  a  road  ma- 
terial. It  was  found  that  a  road  covered  with  oil 
would  be  free  from  dust  in  the  dry  season,  yet  hard 
and  firm  in  the  wet  season.  This  led  the  way  to  early 
experiments  with  tar  and  bituminous  material  to  im- 
prove road  surfaces.^ 


445 


In  1905,  coal  tar  and  crude  oil  were  experimentally 
applied  to  recompacted  macadam  streets  in  Jackson, 
Tennessee.  After  nearly  a  year  of  observation,  it 
showed  that  the  coal  tar  had  penetrated  from  1  to  2 
inches  and  maintained  a  hard  smooth  surface.  How- 
ever, the  light  crude  oil  used  showed  little  permanent 
results.  The  heavier  crudes  showed  nearly  the  same 
results  as  coal  tar.  Late  in  1906,  coal  tar  was  used  by 
Ehode  Island  on  a  short  section  of  the  New  York  to 
Boston  trunk  highway  in  Charlestown  in  much  the 
same  method  as  building  an  ordinary  macadam  road. 
After  the  subgrade  had  been  thoroughly  rolled,  the 
number  one  stone  (114-inch  to  214-inch  diameter)  was 
spread  to  a  depth  of  6  inches  and  rolled  to  4  inches. 
Heated  tar  was  then  sprinkled  on  the  first  course  with 
dippers.  The  number  two  stone  (li/^-inch  to  114-inch 
diameter)  was  next  mixed  by  hand  with  hot  tar  and 
spread  to  a  depth  of  3  inches  on  the  first  course  and 
rolled  to  2  inches.  A  thin  coat  of  fine  stone  (passing 
i/^-inch  ring)  was  then  spread  on  the  surface  and 
rolled  into  the  number  two  course  to  fill  up  the  voids 
and  provide  a  smooth  surface — 114,  gallons  of  the  tar 
per  square  yard  were  used  in  all.  As  this  method  pro- 
vided a  stable  hard  surface,  it  was  advocated  by  State 
engineers  for  use  on  first  class  highways.^ 

Use  of  Portland  cement  concrete  pavement  also  was 
beginning  to  grow,  as  the  steel  drum  tilting  mixer 
came  into  use.  The  first  rural  concrete  pavement, 
however,  was  not  constructed  until  1909  in  Wayne 
County,  Michigan. 

In  terms  of  new  equipment  and  techniques,  steel 
forms  were  being  produced  for  concrete  work  and  the 
gasoline  engine  came  to  construction  work  as  the 
power  unit  for  hoisting  and  excavation  equipment, 
spelling  doom  for  the  steam  engine.  The  diesel  engine 
was  also  being  developed  and  crawler  tracks  were 
being  tried  on  tractors  and  cranes.  A  wooden-boomed 
excavator  was  rigged  with  a  drag  bucket  in  1903, 
making  this  the  forerunner  of  the  drag-line.  By 
1907,  a  sheepsfoot  roller  was  in  use  on  embankment 
work  on  West  Coast  road  construction.  A  rock 
crusher  and  elevator  was  mounted  on  a  four-wheel 
truck  in  1910  to  become  the  first  portable  crushing 
and  screening  plant.* 


1 


First  graders  ever  used  on  highway  construction  work.  Fixed 
with  adjustable  blades  to  provide  the  desired  slope  and  section, 
graders  were  suited  for  fine  grading  and  shaping. 

Even  though  the  first  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  was 
not  passed  until  1916,  in  1912,  the  Congress  authorized 
funds  for  the  improvement  of  post  roads  with  the 
appropriation  of  $500,000,  to  be  expended  in  rebuild- 
ing and  upgrading  roads  used  in  the  rural  free  deliv- 
ery of  mails. 

The  first  of  these  road  projects  to  be  built  was  in 
Lauderdale  County,  Alabama,  where  approximately 
30  miles  of  road  was  graded  and  surfaced  with  gravel 
at  a  total  cost  of  nearly  $28,000.  One-third  of  the 
cost  was  paid  with  Federal  funds  and  the  remainder 


An  early  roller 
compacting  a  roadbed. 


446 


The  Offlce  of  Public  Roads 

and  the  American  Highioay 

Association  sponsored  this 

road  improvement  in 

Dunn,  N.G.,  in  1914,  the 

first  use  of  a  drag  in 

the  county. 


A  horsedrawn  sweeper  cleans  the  surface  of  a  macadam  road 
in  preparation  for  bitiimoi  application.  It  rid  the  surface  of 
du^t  and  loose  material  so  that  the  Mtumen  would  form  a 
positive  bond  between  the  cover  aggregate  and  the  macadam 
layer. 

"with  State  funds.  Under  this  post  road  program, 
each  of  the  48  States  was  to  be  allotted  $10,000  and 
the  remaining  $20,000  was  to  be  used  for  administra- 
tive expenses  and  contingencies.  It  was  estimated 
that  an  average  of  $600  per  mile  would  be  spent  on 
this  improvement  whereb}^  about  50  miles  would  be 
completed  by  each  State  with  their  total  joint  fund 
of  $30,000.=^ 

It  is  likely  that  these  roads  were  built  by  contract, 
rather  than  statute  labor  as  in  the  past,  thus,  recogniz- 
ing the  importance  of  the  new  road  technology.  How- 
ever, though  there  was  probably  a  change  in  the  labor 


system,  the  roads  must  surely  have  been  built  by  hand 
with  pick  and  shovel  and  by  horsedrawn  slips  and 
scrapers.  The  gravel  surfacing  material  was  no  doubt 
hauled  by  teams  and  wagons.  Though  many  new 
types  of  equipment  were  being  developed  or  modified 
and  improved,  construction  equipment  advertising  was 
in  its  infancy  and  so  there  was  often  a  lack  of  wide- 
spread knowledge  of  the  development.  In  other  cases, 
if  the  equipment  were  known,  often  the  contractors 
were  not  ready  to  accept  it  or  could  not  afford  it. 
Therefore,  during  this  time,  the  older  methods  of  road 
construction  often  prevailed  long  past  the  develop- 
ment of  new  machinery  and  techniques. 

In  this  era  of  post  road  building,  $1.8  million  of 
State  and  Federal-aid  funds  was  spent  in  the  con- 
struction of  425  miles  of  roads — certainly  not  a  veiy 
impressive  accomplishment  compared  to  present  road- 
building,  but  one  that  meant  a  great  deal  at  the  time. 
A  further  advantage  of  the  1912  Act  was  that  the 
betterment  of  these  post  roads  was  a  good  training 
ground  for  the  engineers  of  the  Office  of  Public  Roads, 
and  this  experience  was  to  prove  valuable  in  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916. 


Laying  block  pavement  in  Washington,  D.C.,  in  1917. 

447 


1916  to   1926:  The  Start  of  the  Federal-State 
Joint  Highway  Effort 

Evidence  of  the  success  of  the  small  previous 
Federal-aid  program  for  post  road  construction  surely 
contributed  to  the  passing  of  the  Federal  Aid  Road 
Act  of  1916  which  provided  for  the  improvement  of 
any  rural  road  over  which  the  mails  were  carried. 

One  of  the  central  features  of  this  Act,  in  terms  of 
the  future,  was  the  requirement  that  the  States  must 
have  a  highway  department  capable  of  designing, 
constructing,  and  maintaining  the  designated  roads 
in  order  to  share  in  the  appropriation.  Immediately 
this  brought  about  the  creation  of  highway  depart- 
ments in  those  States  not  meeting  this  requirement. 
Other  provisions  of  the  Act  gave  the  States  the 
authority,  subject  to  Federal  approval,  to  select  the 
roads  to  be  improved  and  the  nature  of  the  improve- 
ment, plus  the  responsibility  of  supervising  the  con- 
struction and  the  obligation  to  maintain  the  completed 
pi'ojects.'' 


A  Need  for  Maintenance 

With  Federal  funds  assured  for  highway  construc- 
tion, the  door  was  open  to  considerable  activity  in 
roadbuilding.  By  1918,  a  feeling  of  well  being  was 
the  mood  of  the  day.  In  the  1918  fiscal  year  alone, 
6,249  miles  of  Federal-aid  roads  had  been  or  were 
being  surfaced.^  New  surface  treatments  were  being 
utilized,  and  equipment  technology  was  advancing  to 
make  work  easier  and  more  productive.  However, 
the  development  of  heavy  trucks  and  their  usage  dur- 
ing World  War  I  brought  this  mood  quickly  to  an 
end.  Roads  that  were  suitable  for  travel  by  passenger 
cars  rapidly  deteriorated  as  they  were  subjected  to  the 
loads  imposed  by  5-  and  10-ton  trucks.  Prevost 
Hubbard,  the  chief  chemist  and  expert  on  bituminous 
pavements  for  BPR  described  the  situation  in  Public 
Roads  : 

Hundreds  of  miles  of  roads  failed  under  the  heavy 
motor-truck  traffic  within  a  comparatively  few  weeks  or 
months.  Roads  with  bituminous  surfaces,  bituminous 
macadam  roads,  and  bituminous  concrete  roads  all  failed 


A  steam  roller  provides 
motive  power  for  a  scarifier 
on  an  Indiana  road  in  1916. 
Scarifiers  were  used  to  loosen 
the  material  on  the  top  layer 
of  the  road.    The  surface 
was  then  graded  and 
compacted. 


^:^^^...:i^ 


In  1)tc  ('iirlji  1900'x,  sonic  coioitirs  and  cificn  hired  full-time 
caretakers  to  perform  the  maintenance  functions  preiHousltj 
done  by  statute  labor.  This  man  was  one  of  95  caretakers 
for  a  Pennsylvania  county  who  received  $50  per  month  to 
maintain  from  3  to  5  miles  of  road. 


alike,  together  with  other  types  used  in  State  and  county 
work.  These  failures  were  not  only  sudden  but  complete, 
and  almost  overnight  an  excellent  surface  might  become 
impassable.  ...  A  very  large  proportion  of  the  failures 
have  been  characterized  by  an  almost  simultaneous  de- 
struction of  the  entire  road  structure,  and  not  merely  the 
disintegration  of  the  wearing  course  or  pavement  proper.' 

The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  conducted  extensive 
research  on  this  subject  and  concluded  that  possible 
solutions  to  this  problem  required:  (1)  Stronger  road 
surfaces  and  better  drainage,  with  special  attention  to 
sub-drainage,  and  (2)  continual  adequate  mainte- 
nance. 

The  Bureau  recommended  during  this  same  period 
that  really  economic  and  efficient  maintenance  could 
be  secured  only  by:  (1)  Patrols  assigned  to  definite 
sections  for  which  they  would  be  responsible  for  all 
ordinary  routine  work,  and  (2)  well-equipped  and 
organized  gangs  or  crews  continuously  employed 
throughout  the  season  to  perform  all  work  which 
could  not  be  economically  performed  by  the  patrol 
alone.''  These  recommendations  became  the  basis  for 
tlie  structure  of  most  of  the  State  maintenance  organi- 
zf)tions. 


448 


A  homemade  tar  kettle  used 

to  heat  tar  as  a  surfacing 

for  dustless  macadam. 


The  1921  Federal  Highway  Act  reinforced  the  con- 
struction and  maintenance  provisions  of  the  1916  Act 
by  requiring  the  States  to  maintain  the  highway  con- 
structed under  the  program  and  specifying  actions  to 
be  taken  if  this  were  not  done.  Section  14  of  the  Act 
required  that  where  a  State  failed  to  maintain  any 
road  constructed  as  a  Federal-aid  highway  project, 
the  Secretaiy  of  Agriculture  Avas  to  serve  notice  to 
that  State.  If  the  State  did  not  repair  the  project 
within  90  days,  the  Secretary  was  to  make  the  repairs 
by  contract  or  Federal  force  account  work  and  charge 
the  cost  against  the  Federal  funds  allotted  to  the 
State.  No  additional  Federal-aid  highAvay  projects 
were  to  be  approved  for  that  State  until  the  mainte- 
nance conditions  Avere  made  satisfactory.  When  the 
Federal  Government  Avas  reimbursed  for  the  mainte- 
nance performed,  the  funds  Avere  paid  into  the  Federal 
highway  fund  for  I'eapportionment  among  all  the 
States  for  the  construction  of  roads.  The  Secretary 
could  then  approA'e  further  projects  for  that  State. 


Construction   Partners 

Unlike  earlier  roadbuilding  procedures,  such  as 
statute  labor  or  force  account,  by  1918,  nearly  all  of 
the  road  construction  work  was  done  by  contract.  The 
State  higliAvay  departments,  after  getting  the  ap- 
proval from  the  BPR  on  their  highway  programs, 
project  plans,  specifications,  and  estimates  of  cost 
(PS&E),  advertised  for  bids  on  the  proposed  work. 
After  studying  the  bids  received  and  selecting  a  con- 
tractor, a  construction  contract  was  awarded  by  the 
State  highway  department  Avith  the  concurrence  of 
the  BPR.  Copies  of  all  contract  documents,  as  well 
as  plans  and  specifications,  Avere  forwarded  to  the 
BPR  Washington  office  for  review  and  analysis.  This 
evaluation  was  to  insure  full  compliance  with  Federal 
laws  and  regulations  in  order  to  avoid  difficulties  in 
paying  the  Federal  share  of  the  cost  and  to  keep  up 
with  new  materials  and  methods  of  construction  de- 


Application  of  bitumen  on  a  macadam  road  in  1912.    The  man  in  the  center  foreground  is  sprinkling  aggregate  onto  the 
freshly  poured  surface.    Today  mechanized  spreaders  perform  the  same  task. 


449 


veloped  by  the  various  States.  The  information  was 
passed  on  to  the  other  States  for  their  mutual  benefit. 
All  of  the  construction  work  was  supervised  and  in- 
spected by  State  engineers.  Public  roads  field  engi- 
neers made  periodic  inspections  to  assure  compliance 
with  the  approved  PS&E.  All  changes  in  the  plans 
or  extra  work  that  became  necessary  during  the  life 
of  contracts  were  reviewed  by  BPR.  A  final  review 
and  inspection  of  all  engineering  features  of  the  com- 
pleted project  was  made  by  BPR  before  payment  of 
the  final  reimbursement  for  the  Federal  share  of  the 
work  done. 

In  the  early  twenties,  the  average  length  of  Federal- 
aid  projects  was  just  over  5  miles,  and  the  average 
cost  per  project  was  roughly  $85,000.     The  average 


This  road  was  surfaced  using  the  penetration  method.  Aggre- 
gate was  spread  on  the  roadbed  first  and  the  bitumen  poured 
on  top. 


cost  per  mile  was  about  $17,000.  Of  the  roads  com- 
pleted during  this  period,  about  25  percent  were 
paved,  and  the  rest  were  surfaced  with  gravel,  sand- 
clay,  or  other  select  material.  On  the  paved  roads, 
about  65  percent  was  spent  on  surfacing,  20  percent 
on  grading  and  nearly  15  percent  on  structures.  The 
Federal  share  of  these  projects  was  approximately  50 
percent. 

The  unit  prices  for  the  various  items  of  road  con- 
struction, such  as  excavation,  concrete  pavement  and 
structural  concrete,  were,  in  general,  more  expensive 
in  the  twenties  than  they  were  in  the  thirties.  Of 
course,  this  was  partly  due  to  the  Depression  of  the 
1930's,  but  it  was  also  due  to  the  development  of 
equipment  to  replace  more  expensive  hand  methods. 
This  enabled  roadbuilders  to  move  more  earth  and 
pour  more  concrete  for  the  same  amount  of  money  in 
the  thirties  than  they  could  in  the  twenties. 

The  cost  data  were  compiled  on  all  projects  and 
forwarded  to  the  BPR  Washington  office  for  analysis 
to  determine  the  trends  in  highway  construction  cost 
for  various  types  of  construction.  This  information 
has  proven  to  be  of  such  general  interest  through  the 
years  that  it  has  become  the  basis  of  a  quarterly  index, 
showing  the  relative  movement  of  highway  construc- 
tion costs  over  a  period  of  years.^° 

During  the  early  twenties,  important  advances  and 
experiments  were  made  in  all  phases  of  management 
techniques  and  standardization  development  in  the 
construction  and  maintenance  of  roadways.  This 
work  by  the  BPR  and  private  organizations  increased 
the  capability  to  produce  cheaper,  more  efficient, 
quality  roads. 


A  steam  roller  rolls  a  second  coat  of  bitumen  with  chips  on  a 
macadam  street  in  1922.  First  a  coat  of  bitumen  was  spread, 
then  a  layer  of  large  stones,  followed  by  another  coat  of  bi- 
tumen, and,  finally,  a  layer  of  smaller  stones  to  fill  in  the  voids. 


By  the  1920's,  crawler  tractors  icere  pulling  scrapers  and  other  equipment.    This  tractor 
could  pull  5  scrapers  at  once,  enabling  these  men  to  excavate  and  move 
material  more  efficiently. 


An  important  program  started  by  the  BPR  during 
this  period  was  the  "Production  Cost  Studies,"  a  man- 
agement tool  to  promote  efficient  road  construction 
operations.  These  studies  on  earth  moving  and  con- 
crete pavement  construction  produced  practical  appli- 
cations. From  the  results  of  these  studies,  savings  of 
from  25  to  35  percent  were  possible  in  earthwork  by 
selecting  the  right  number  of  appropriate  pieces  of 
equipment  best  suited  to  the  particular  job.  The 
process  applied  to  the  concrete  paving  operations 
showed  that  production  losses  Avere  mainly  the  result 
of  the  failure  to  provide  appropriate  hauling  equip- 
ment in  number  and  character  to  maintain  the  capac- 
ity of  the  concrete  mixer.  By  careful  elimination  of 
such  losses,  astonishing  increases  of  from  25  to  100 
percent  were  made  by  Public  Roads  engineers  in  the 
output  of  working  paving  organizations.  The  most 
gratifying  result,  however,  was  the  success  that  some 
contractors  attained  in  nearly  doubling  their  output 
by  employing  similar  methods,  and  thereby  permit- 
ting them  to  drastically  reduce  their  next  bids  on 
concrete  pavement  items.^^ 

Another  important  development  in  earthwork  was 
the  ability  to  compact  soil  embankments.  Early  ex- 
periments showed  that  the  amount  of  moisture  in  soil 
had  a  great  influence  on  the  degree  of  compaction 
that  could  be  attained.  This,  of  course,  led  to  the 
use  of  moisture  control  methods  of  compaction  and 
the  develoi^ment  of  the  "Proctor"  method  of  testing 
the  compaction  of  soil  embankments,  a  method  which 
later  became  standard  on  highway  embankments 
throughout  tlie  country. 

The  Public  Roads  engineers  were  actively  working 
with  various  State  highway  departments  and  vmi- 
versities  in  cooperative  investigations  to  develop  suit- 
able cheap  roadway  surfacing  materials.  At  the 
University  of  Georgia,  tests  were  underway  on  sand- 


clay.  In  Iowa  and  South  Dakota  tests  were  being  run 
on  methods  of  stabilization  of  soils  with  cement  and 
lime.  South  Carolina  was  experimenting  with  bi- 
tuminous applications  to  preserve  earth  roads.  In- 
vestigations continued  in  Iowa  on  the  tractive  resist- 
ance of  various  types  of  highway  surfaces.  In  Kansas, 
tests  were  being  conductetl  to  measure  tire  wear  on 
various  surfaces.  In  addition,  the  Bureau  also  was 
continuously  making  routine  examinations  of  highway 
materials  and  coordinating  the  work  of  a  large  num- 
ber of  State  and  commercial  laboratories  making  tests 
for  the  acceptance  of  materials  on  Federal-aid  pro- 
jects. The  result  of  this  work  was  a  general  improve- 
ment of  all  laboratories  with  the  corresponding  benefit 
to  both  Federal-aid  and  State  highway  construction 
projects.  ^^ 


A  tractor-pulled  grader  maintaining  a  gravel-surfaced  road  in 
Minnesota,  ^clf-propcllcd  motor  graders  tvcrc  introduced  in 
the  early  1920's  but  were  not  widely  used  until  much  later. 


451 


A  paving  train  near  Memphis,  Tenn.,  in  1929.    Steel  forms  were  set 
ahead  of  time  on  the  subgrade  to  hold  the  concrete  in  place. 


Excavation  work  o»i  the 

Blue  Ridge  Parkway  in 

1936.    In  the  background 

i))cn  drill  7(o/r.s  for  c.rplosircs 

used  to  break  up  rock, 

while  a  diesel-powered 

shovel  loads  earth  into 

dump  trucks. 


452 


The  Swing  to   Power  Equipment 

Equipment  for  highway  construction  was  under- 
going some  tremendous  changes  during  the  period 
1916-26.  The  steam  shovel  was  being  replaced  with 
gasoline  engine-powered  excavators.  The  lines  of 
horsedrawn  wagons  were  disappearing  as  dump  trucks 
were  taking  their  places.  Crawler  tractors  pulling 
rotary  scrapers  were  replacing  horse  or  muledrawn 
fresnos  and  drag  scrapers.  Monstrous  early  models 
of  the  self-propelled  scrapers  were  being  developed 
in  the  early  1920's."  A  manual  hoisting  bulldozer 
blade  was  put  on  a  crawler  tractor  in  1923,  and  by 
1925  hydraulic  controls  were  in  use  on  the  bulldozer 
blades. 

The  self-propelled  motor  grader  was  introduced  in 
the  early  1920's,  but  it  did  not  get  widespread  use 
until  much  later.  By  1922,  an  all-welded  tractor 
drawn  scraper  with  a  6-cubic  yard  capacity  was  in 
use  and  by  1924  electric  handsaws  were  put  to  use  in 
construction.  The  steam  crusher  was  being  replaced 
with  gasoline  engine  models  with  revolving  screens 
and  belt  conveyors,  and  in  1923  a  completely  portable 
crushing  and  screening  plant  was  placed  on  the 
market." 

Paving  equipment  was  also  coming  into  more  use. 
In  1919,  a  bituminous  distributor  was  introduced  to 
help  improve  the  quality  and  uniformity  of  penetra- 
tion asphalt  pavements;  1920  brought  batching  plants 
(volumetric)  for  concrete  aggregates,  eliminating  a 
large  amount  of  hand  shovel  and  wheelbarrow  work. 
In  1923,  a  traveling  concrete  mixer  was  introduced 


on  pavement  projects.  An  old  issue  of  EngineeHng 
Neios-Record  contains  a  detailed  description  of  the 
construction  of  a  concrete  pavement  in  1918 : 

The  rough  grading  was  done  entirely  by  machine; 
meaning  a  pull-type  grader  equipped  witli  a  scarifier. 
Fine  grading  was  done  by  hand.  A  concrete  mixer  rode 
l)etween  wooden  forms,  with  volumetric  proportioning  of 
the  mix.  The  concrete  was  strucl<  off  and  tamped  with 
an  iron-shod  wooden  templet,  finished  witli  a  wood  float 
and  a  coarse  wire  stal)le  broom.  The  concrete  gang  (23 
men)  averaged  500  feet  of  9-foot  wide,  8-inch  thick  pave- 
ment per  9-liour  day." 


1926  to   1944 — Building   More 
and   Better  Roads 

The  Federal-aid  system  of  building  roads  was  well 
established  by  this  time.  Construction  followed  the 
same  basic  procedure  with  the  State  highway  depart- 
ments selecting,  designing  and  constructing  their  own 
projects  by  contract,  all  with  the  approval  of  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  with  partial  funding 
from  Federal  appropriations. 

Pressure  from  the  general  public  was  increasing  to 
"get  the  farmer  out  of  the  mud" ;  and  the  consolidated 
school  system  required  the  improvement  of  many 
miles  of  roads  in  order  to  facilitate  the  busing  of 
more  children  to  the  wider  dispersed  schools.  To  get 
more  miles  improved  with  the  funds  available,  many 
of  the  highways  were  built  as  "stage"  construction  so 
that  the  road  could  be  brought  up  to  a  higher  type 
later  with  additional  improvement  as  traffic  volumes 
grew  and  the  weight  and  speed  of  vehicles  increased. 


The  1930's  ivitnessed  an  important  advance — the  introduction  of  the  diesel  engine  on 
tractors.    This  diesel-powered  tractor  teamed  with  a  5-cubic  yard  capacity 
scraper  moved  approximately  16,000  yards  of  earth  in  14  days. 


453 


Stage  construction  was  also  used  for  other  reasons. 
Some  road  projects  were  let  to  contract  for  the  grad- 
ing work  alone,  or  perhaps  the  drainage  work  and 
grading  work,  leaving  the  surfacing  work  to  be  done 
by  later  contracts.  This  permitted  the  newly  graded 
embankments  to  settle  for  a  couple  of  years  before 
placing  surfacing  materials.  It  was  advantageous  to 
let  nature  compact  these  embankments  over  a  period 
of  time  because  many  States  still  did  not  use  effective 
compaction  procedures  in  their  grading  work.  This 
also  permitted  the  natural  stabilizing  of  any  slips  and 
slides  that  might  occur  in  the  generally  steep  back 
slopes  which  were  employed  at  that  time  in  roadway 
excavation. 

Between  1926  and  1944,  BPR  and  the  American 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  (AASHO) 
worked  with  various  associations  in  the  highway  in- 
dustry toward  the  common  goal  of  building  more  and 
better  highways.  For  example,  the  Portland  Cement 
Association  (PCA)  contributed  financially  to  the  es- 
tablishment in  1929  of  the  Cement  Reference  Labora- 
tory by  the  National  Bureau  of  Standards  in  coopera- 
tion with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and 
Materials  (ASTM).  The  PCA  was  also  instrumental 
in  the  development  of  soil  cement  for  low-cost  surfac- 
ing.i"  AASHO  published  the  first  edition  of  their 
materials  books  in  1931,  and  then  in  1940  and  1942 
they  published  their  Standard  Specifications  for  Con- 
crete Pavement  and  Bituminous  Surface  Treatment, 
respectively.  In  the  1920's  and  early  1930's,  the 
Asphalt  Institute,  in  cooperation  with  the  BPR  and 
various  other  public  agencies,  standardized  asphalt 
cements  and  liquid  asphalt  products,  thus,  greatly  re- 
ducing the  number  of  grades  and  thereby  facilitating 
the  writing  of  asphalt  specifications.  Also,  the  As- 
phalt Institute  in  cooperation  with  the  American 
Farm  Bureau  Federation  was  instrumental  in  initiat- 
ing a  program  of  paving  farm-to-market  roads.  Like 
the    capillaries    of    one's    blood    system,    these    feeder 


Constructing  a  stabilized  soil  road.  A  scarifier  prepares  road 
for  the  mixing  of  soil  and  cement. 

roads  played  an  important  role  in  the  transportation 
system  of  today.^"  In  cooperation  with  public  high- 
way authorities,  all  of  the  industry  associations,  in 
one  way  or  another,  were  major  contributors  to  the 
tremendous  development  of  highway  construction 
during  this  period. 

Modernization   of  Roadbuilding 

Probably  the  two  most  important  advances  in  mod- 
ernizing construction  equipment  during  the  1920's 
and  1930's  were:  (1)  The  introduction  of  the  diesel 
engine  on  tractors  and  graders  in  1931,  and  (2)  the 
development  of  large  pneumatic  tires  which  were  used 
on  scrapers  as  early  as  1932,  and  on  dump  trucks  in 
1934,  making  it  easier  to  operate  on  soft  ground  off 
the  highway. 

In  the  19JfO's  self-powered  equipment  for  onsite  material  stabi- 
lization was  developed.  This  machine  mixed  soil  and  cement 
and  added  water  to  create  a  stabilized  base. 


454 


Earthivork  equipment  became  heavier  and  more  powerful  in 
the  late  JfO's  and  50's.  Here  a  loader  vnth  a  front-end  scoop 
handles  rock. 


Bulldozer  in  action. 


455 


In  other  developments  of  construction  equipment, 
the  front  apron  was  first  placed  on  scrapers  in  1933, 
making  a  12-cubic  yard  load  possible.  Hydraulic 
controls  were  placed  on  power  shovels  in  1937,  then 
in  1938  the  self-propelled  scrapers  made  it  possible  to 
move  earth  at  a  much  faster  pace.  The  compaction 
of  earth  was  also  keeping-  pace  as  the  ballastable  roll- 
ers were  introduced  in  1936.  Paving  equipment  was 
being  revolutionized  as  the  traveling  concrete  paver, 
introduced  in  1926,  made  use  of  the  skip  lever  to  acti- 
vate the  water  measurement  and  the  timing  of  the 
mix.  In  1932,  the  dual-drum  traveling  paver  helped 
to  increase  production  of  concrete  for  pavements. 
Internal  vibrators  for  portland  cement  concrete  were 
patented  in  the  United  States  in  1935  and  soon  used 
widely  to  assist  in  the  consolidation  of  concrete  in  the 
forms.  Bituminous  paving  equipment  was  being  de- 
veloped as  the  road  mix  machine  was  introduced  in 
1929,  and  the  bituminous  paver  placed  on  the  market 
in  1932.  This  equipment  provided  more  rapid  con- 
struction of  improved  asphalt  pavement  at  lower 
cost." 

Silver  Lining   of  the   Depression   Cloud 

As  can  be  seen,  many  of  these  developments  took 
place  during  the  Depression  years,  when  so  many  in- 
dustries were  virtually  shut  down  because  of  the  na- 
tional economic  situation.  The  highway  industry  was 
probably  one  of  the  industries  that  was  least  injured 
by  the  Depression.  By  using  highway  work  as  one  of 
the  "make  work"  projects  of  this  period,  the  National 
Recovery  Act  brought  employment  close  to  the  homes 
of  the  unemployed.  It  was  estimated  that  for  every 
person  directly  employed  on  road  work,  there  were 
two  others  employed  in  the  manufacture  and  trans- 
portation of  road  materials  and  equipment.^^ 

Thus,  while  being  used  as  one  of  the  "tools"  to  fight 
the  unemployment  of  the  Depression,  an  added  benefit 
was  that  the  highway  industry  grew  in  capacity  and 
was  ready  for  the  program  of  interregional  highways 
that  was  recommended  by  the  report  Toll  Roads  and 
Free  Roads  in  1939.  The  program  discussed  in  the 
report  became  the  basis  for  the  plan  of  the  National 
System  of  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways  as  we 
laiow  it  today. 


World   War   II   Disrupts  the   Highways 

The  Interstate  program  had  to  be  postponed,  how- 
ever, as  the  countiy  plunged  into  World  War  II.  The 
Nation's  roads  took  a  hard  beating  during  the  war 
years,  as  construction  and  maintenance  were  slowed 
considerably.  The  road  work  accomplished  was 
largely  composed  of  correction  of  critical  deficiencies 
on  main  highways  essential  to  war  transportation. 

All  noncritical  highway  work  was  deferred,  and  the 
use  of  critical  materials  was  reduced  to  a  minimum. 
New  construction  was  largely  confined  to  access  roads 
to  new  military  installations,  defense  plants,  ports  and 
the  like.  World  War  II  left  its  imprint  on  the  high- 
ways. Many  miles  of  the  oldest  highways,  already 
worn  and  obsolete  and  scheduled  for  replacement, 
were  kept  in  service.  This  situation,  already  bad,  was 
accentuated  by  the  wear  and  tear  of  continuous 
streams  of  war  traffic.  Thus,  the  mileage  of  roads  no 
longer  adequate  for  the  traffic  carried  and  difficult  to 
maintain  in  service,  grew  in  size  throughout  the  war. 

Due  to  the  loss  of  personnel  by  State  highway  de- 
partments to  the  military  forces  and  defense  plants 
and  the  unavailability  of  new  equipment,  spare  parts, 
tires  and  fuel,  it  was  necessary  for  most  States  to 
sharply  reduce  their  maintenance  activities.^"  The 
quality  of  maintenance  suffered.  Only  routine  surface 
maintenance,  resurfacing,  and  resealing  were  intensi- 
fied to  preserve  the  existing  surface,  whatever  type  it 
happened  to  be.  Operations  to  maintain  shoulders, 
clean  ditches  and  culverts  and  mow  the  weeds  were 
performed  only  as  time,  manpower,  and  equipment 
allowed.^^ 

1944  to   1964 — The  Push  For  More  Production 

As  the  war  in  Europe  neared  an  end.  Congress 
passed  the  Federal  Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944.  This 
was  a  far-reaching  piece  of  legislation.  It  authorized 
$500  million  for  each  of  the  first  3  postwar  years;  it 
authorized,  for  the  first  time,  the  use  of  Federal-aid 
highway  funds  in  urban  areas;  it  provided  authoriza- 
tion for  the  construction  of  a  Secondary  Road  Sys- 
tem; and  it  directed  the  designation  of  a  National 
System  of  Interstate  Highways.  The  funds  authorized 
in   this   legislation   made   possible   an   expanded   and 


A  self-propelled, 
self-loading  scraper. 


456 


■  jpfc--*'*^  •_ 


This  grader  was  designed  to  be  as  flexible  as  the  human  lorist. 
The  blade  shown  here  is  especially  useful  for  fine  grading  on 
slopes  and  ditches;  a  bucket  blade  is  used  for  excavation  work. 

essential  program  of  construction  and  reconstruction 
of  highways  which  had  borne  the  burden  of  heavy 
wartime  ti'affic  with  a  minimum  of  maintenance  or 
betterment  activity. 

This  period  of  1944-64  was  one  of  greatly  expanded 
highway  activity.  Public  Koads  worked  closely  with 
the  AASHO,  the  Highway  Kesearch  Board  (HEB), 
and  the  various  industry  associations,  especially  in  the 
areas  of  coordination  of  construction  practices,  re- 
search, and  the  development  of  standard  specifications. 

In  1948,  AASHO  published  its  Policy  on  Mainte- 
nance of  Roadioay  Surfaces  (revised  in  1961).  Then 
in  1949,  AASHO  came  out  with  its  Manual  of  High- 
way Construction  Practices  and  Methods.  These  two 
publications  were  a  great  help  in  distributing  infor- 
mation to  the  States  so  that  all  could  benefit  from  the 
successes  that  some  States  were  having  in  their  con- 
struction and  maintenance  procedures. 


An  elevating  grader  picks  up  material  and  conveys  it  to  a 
waiting  truck. 

In  1960,  AASHO  published  its  guide  on  project 
procedures,  and  in  1963,  it  published  the  first  Guide 
Specif  cations  for  Highxoay  C  onstruction.,  which  be- 
came the  national  standard  for  highway  construction 
specifications. 

During  this  period,  there  were  also  tremendous  ad- 
vances in  the  productivity  of  highway  construction. 
One  of  the  big  advances  was  the  development,  in  1945, 
of  self-powered  equipment  for  onsite  inaterial  stabili- 
zation, which  greatly  increased  the  productivity  and 
control  of  stabilized  bases  and  subbase  courses.  The 
rubber-tired  bulldozer,  first  placed  on  the  market  in 
1947,  and  the  vibrating  roller,  introduced  in  1948, 
proved  to  be  very  successful.  In  rock  excavation,  the 
new  carbide  insert  on  rock  bits  was  a  tremendous  help 
in  lengthening  the  life  of  these  bits.  The  application 
of  hydrostatic  drive  to  construction  equipment  was 
also  being  developed.  In  earthwork,  as  well  as  all 
phases  of  construction  as  a  whole,  the  equipment 
manufacturers  were  continuously  developing  heavier 
and  more  powerful  units  to  obtain  more  production 
at  less  unit  cost  for  a  better  quality  highway. ^^ 


Compaction  is  important  in  firrpnring  a  firm  hir/hicay  founda- 
tion. This  compactor  has  pneumatic-tired,  vibrating  rollers 
which  are  particularly  effective  in  compacting  granular  soils. 


467 


A  paving  train  in  Iowa  in  1949  utilized  dry  batches  dumped  in 
to  two  ticui-bdtch  trai^eliiig  mixers. 


For  this  paving  operation,  concerts  was  hauled  from  a  central  mix  plant 
and  poured  into  the  spreader  from  a  side  dump  (bin). 


458 


The  array  of  road  construction  equipment  that  was 
available  at  this  time  was  huge  and  diverse,  but  every 
unit  was  developed  in  an  orderly  fashion  to  fill  a 
definite  need. 

Significant  advances  in  paving  equipment  were 
started.  In  1955,  electronic  controls  were  put  into 
use  in  concrete  batch  plants,  simplifying  and  giving 
better  control  over  batching.  The  triple-drum  con- 
crete paver,  which  could  produce  125  batches  per  hour 
compared  to  87  batches  for  the  dual-drum,  was  intro- 
duced in  1959.  Central-plant  mixing  with  hauling  by 
agitator  trucks  was  used  on  large  concrete  paving- 
projects.  Transit  mixei's  were  widely  used  in  urban 
paving  and  bridge  work.  Slipform  pavers  became 
widely  accepted  on  highway  work.  Spreading  and 
finishing  equipment  were  developed  to  do  a  faster, 
better  job.  The  use  of  central-plant  mixing  and  slip- 
form  paving  methods  made  possible  some  astonishing 
achievements  in  concrete  pavement.  Some  road  con- 
tractors reached  the  production  rate  of  paving  more 


In  1958,  there  were  over  12,000  Federal-aid  highway 
projects  awarded  at  a  total  cost  of  about  $3.5  billion 
to  build  or  improve  nearly  34,000  miles  of  roads.  In 
1964,  approximately  7,000  Federal-aid  px'ojects  were 
awarded  at  a  total  value  of  about  $4  billion,  corre- 
sponding to  18,300  miles  of  roads.  The  average  size 
contract  in  1958  was  almost  $300,000  and  in  1964  was 
about  $560,000 — nearly  doubled — while  the  total  an- 
nual miles  dropped.  Obviously  the  trend  was  to 
shorter,  more  costly  projects.  In  general,  the  longer 
rural,  less  costly  Interstate  projects  were  built  first 
with  the  more  costly  and  shorter  urban  projects  fol- 
lowing. 

The  high  degree  of  mechanization  of  highway  con- 
struction activity  enabled  construction  labor  to  in- 
crease production  greatly  while  reducing  the  number 
of  man-hours  required  per  mile  of  highway  construc- 
tion. The  cost  of  highway  construction  over  the 
years,  in  fact,  has  risen  quite  slowly  as  compared  to 
the  cost  of  labor  and  materials. 


The  paving  train's 
screw  spreader. 


than  a  mile  per  day  of  24-foot  wide,  9-inch  thick 
Portland  cement  concrete  pavement  with  this  type 
modern  equipment.  This  led  to  the  "Mile-A-Day 
Club,"  sponsored  by  the  American  Concrete  Paving 
Association.  In  1973,  one  contractor  set  a  new  record 
by  paving  4.7  miles  of  8-incli  thick,  24-foot  wide  con- 
crete pavement  in  a  23-hour  period — ^14,853  cubic 
yards  of  concrete. 

In  the  early  sixties,  automatic  slope  and  grade  con- 
trols for  asphalt  paver  screeds  were  developed.  Roll- 
ing equipment  for  bituminous  pavements  showed 
little  apparent  change  over  the  years,  but  in  reality 
improvements  were  developed  for  these  machines  dur- 
ing this  period  which  made  them  faster,  more  produc- 
tive, and  easier  to  operate. 

Other  innovative  developments  included  a  helicop- 
ter designed  to  hoist  and  haul  a  6-ton  payload  for 
construction  work  in  inaccessible  areas,  and  a  vibra- 
tory sonic  pile  driver  that  could  drive  and  pull  piling 
at  a  small  fraction  of  the  time  needed  with  conven- 
tional equipment. 


1964  to   1974 — An   Increased  Emphasis 
on   Social   Goals 

By  1964  the  Interstate  program  was  in  full  swing. 
While  highway  mileage  accomplishment  for  the  Inter- 
state was  still  the  main  goal,  attention  was  focusing 
on  other  aspects  such  as  highway  safety,  highway 
beautification,  and  consideration  of  wildlife  and  rec- 
reation areas,  as  well  as  historic  sites.  Environment- 
alists and  ecologists  were  instrumental  in  keeping 
environmental  concerns,  potentially  affected  by  con- 
struction, at  a  high  level  of  consciousness  among 
higliAvay  builders.  New  construction  procedures  were 
developed  whereby  detailed  programs  were  imple- 
mented in  order  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  soil  ero- 
sion during  the  construction  process,  and  several 
States  wei'e  investigating  improved  methods  of  sedi- 
ment control  for  future  highway  construction  use. 

Studies  were  undertaken  to  investigate  new  equip- 
ment and  other  means  to  control  noise  and  air  pollu- 


459 


1 


U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  TRANSPORTATION 

FEDERAL  HIGHWAY  ADMINISTRATION 


HIGHWAY  CONSTRUCTION  COST  AND  LABOR  USAGETRENDS 


iioa  isa-ios 


LABOR  FACTORS 

MAM  HOURS  PER  MILUON  OQIURS 

CONSTRUCTION  COST  IBAStO  Oil 

CONSTANT  OOLLARSI 


400 

an 
m 

3B 

m 
m 
m 

M 

ra 

m 

400.000 
380.000 

360.000 
340.000 

LSGtKIO: 
1^  COMPOSITE  CONTRACT  BID  PRICE  INDEX  CONVERTEI 
FROM  AWARD  BASIS  TO  EXPENDITURE  BASIS 

^m  AVERAGE  HOURLV  WAGE  INDEX 

■la  LABOR  FACTORS  MANHOURS  USED  PER  MILLION 
DOLLARS  WORTH  OF  CONSTRUCTION,  ADJUSTED 
TO  1954  CONSTANT  DOLLARS 

■■  LABOR  COST  INDEX  BASED  ON  PRODUCT  OF 

AVERAGE  HOURLY  WAGES  AND  LABOR  FACTORS 

MB  MATERIAL  PRICE  INDEX  BASED  ON  WEIGHTED 

AVERAGE  OF  UNIT  PRICES  FOR  PORTLAND  CEMENT. 
ASPHALT.  AGGREGATES.  STEEL  AND  LUMBER 

> 

J 

/ 

r 

/ 

V 

/ 

320.000 
300.000 

280.000 
260JI00 
240.000 
220.000 

/ 

/ 

'^AVERAGE  HOURLY 
WAGES         1          1 

/ 

r 

/ 

r 

i 

^ 

^ 

>J 

CuiviKu;>iik 
CONTRACT  -x 
gin  PRirFC M 

^ 

y 

n 

200.000 
180,000 
160.000 
140.000 
120.000 

m 

Mi 

-^ 

^' 

\Bor 

1  FA( 

TOR 

! 

^ 

.^ 

^ 

^ 

y 

w 

^ 

^ 

A 

s 

^ 

^ 

Y" 

ATEI 

1         1 
lAL  PRICES 

1          1 

^ 

120 

^ 

^r 

^ 

u 

^ 

^ 

□ 

Hi 

5a 

^M« 

^ 

tf 

^ 

^ 

i^Khfl 

^~ 

^p 

^ 

•^ 

-^ 

1M 

^M 

'^ 

^*Bh 

^ 

100.000 

^ 

■S 

.^ 

- 

- 

- 

a 

^^  ■■ 

aaooo 

60.000 

^LABOFI  COST 

i         1          1 

■■ 

^ 

IS)  1961  1952  1953  19M  19G5  1956  1957  1958  1959  1960  1981  1962  1963  196«  1965  1966  1967  1968  1969  1970  1971  1972  1973  1974  197S  1976  1977  1978  1979  19 


PREPARED  BY 

OFFICE  OF  HIGHWAY  OPERATIONS 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  MAINTENANCE  DIVISION 

CONTRACT  ADMINISTRATION  BRANCH 


tion  during  the  construction  process.  The  dryer-drum 
process  for  hot-mix  asphalt  plants  and  better  mufflers 
for  heavy  equipment  were  developed  in  an  effort  to 
reduce  or  eliminate  these  types  of  pollution. 

There  was  an  increased  emphasis  on  highway 
safety.  New  safety  devices  were  built  into  new  high- 
ways, such  as  sign  posts  that  broke  upon  impact,  safer 
guardrails,  and  crash  cushions  which  absorbed  the 
shock  of  a  collision  with  fixed  structural  elements. 

Activities  on  construction  projects  were  also  chang- 
ing. Construction  contractors  in  some  States  were 
being  required  to  furnish  completely  equipped  lab- 
oratories and  do  their  own  surveying  and  layout  stak- 
ing, jobs  which  had  previously  been  done  by  State 
highway  departments.  More  States  Avere  using  aerial 
photography  and  new  data  processing  procedures  to 
speed  up  monthly  estimates. 

The  highway  construction  industry  developed  a 
greater  awareness  of  public  need  and  good  public 
relations.  Soil  erosion  prevention  and  other  environ- 
mental and  ecological  aspects  became  integral  parts 
of  construction  practices.  Ways  were  studied  to  help 
the   construction   labor   force   also.     Where   possible, 


activities  such  as  winter  concreting  techniques  were 
developed  to  help  extend  the  construction  season  and 
to  give  workers  more  yearly  income,  and  occupational 
safety  measures  were  adopted  to  improve  the  working 
conditions  for  the  construction  work  force. 


A  slip  form  paver  eliminates  the  need  for  setting  steel  forms, 
since  the  forms  move  along  with  the  paving  machine.  A  rela- 
tively stiff  concrete  is  used  so  that,  by  the  time  the  machine 
passes  on,  the  concrete  will  hold  its  shape. 


460 


Bridge  deck  construction  has 
become  increasingly  mech- 
anized.   This  finishing 
machine  permits  the  use  of 
stiffer  concrete  and  produces 
a  smooth  deck  surface. 


Grading  equipment  had  greatly  improved  by  the  60's  and  70's. 
This  motor  grader  is  not  only  self-propelled,  but  also  has 
enough  power  to  push  a  scraper. 


Conflict  for  Space  Brings  New  Maintenance  Era 

As  highway  facilities  became  more  and  more  con- 
gested and  more  people  with  their  respective  vehicles 
were  fighting  for  this  precious  space  on  the  streets 
and  highways,  the  public  began  to  resent  the  highway 
worker  with  his  equipment  taking  up  space  on  the 
public  right -of -wa}',  even  if  it  did  have  to  be  main- 
tained. The  cry  was :  "Can't  you  find  some  other  time 
to  do  that;  you  can't  block  the  road  at  this  time  of 
day."  So  a  new  emphasis  was  placed  on  road  main- 
tenance. ^Maintenance  organizations  were  subjected  to 
numerous  external  pressures  which  caused  sevei'e  in- 
ternal stresses.  Because  a  maintenance  management 
science  had  not  been  developed  as  fast  as  the  tech- 
nological improvements  or  sociological  needs,  the 
existing  management  was  not  able  to  cope  with  the 
problems  of  reporting  systems,  work  methods  and 
procedures,  perfoi'mance  in  terms  of  quality,  quantity 
and  productivity,  and  planning  and  scheduling  work. 
An  organized  formal  research  program  was  expanded 
considerably  during  this  period,  with  studies  covering 
a  wide  variety  of  subjects. 


In  Virginia  between  1963  and  1965,  a  Federal-aid 
study  was  designed  to  cover  nearly  every  aspect  of 
maintenance  management.  It  involved  the  collection 
of  data  concerning  performance  of  labor  and  equip- 
ment; development  and  testing  of  various  work 
methods;  establishment  of  quality,  quantity  and  per- 
formance standards;  development  and  testing  of  a 
new  reporting  system;  development  and  testing  of  a 
budgeting  system;  and  development  and  testing  of 
training  materials.  Other  simultaneous  studies  were 
in  progress  which  zeroed  in  on  various  aspects  of 
maintenance  management. 

The  basic  components  of  maintenance  management 
systems  derived  from  these  studies  have  been  accepted 
by  approximately  30  highway  maintenance  organiza- 
tions. Such  a  system  enables  a  highway  department 
to  prepare  a  performance  budget  showing  specific 
maintenance  activities  and  the  resources  in  personnel, 
materials  and  equipment  required  to  carry  them  out. 
On  this  basis,  the  highway  department  can  develop 
long-range  plans  for  maintenance  operations  and 
evaluate  performance  of  the  various  field  organiza- 
tional units.    This,  in  turn,  indicates  where  additional 


Scraper  being  pushed  by  two  tractors.    Push-loading  speeds  up 
the  process  of  loading  and  hauling  heavy  materials. 


w^^^*- 


i^<ja^ 


461 


»  v-4^v-:4,25^^r=;^ 


d 


Grading    operations    on    Interstate    9If    in    North 
After  a  toater  distribution  truclc  moistens  the  soil, 
sheeps  foot  and  ballastable  rollers  compact  it. 


Dakota. 


training  is  needed.  Furthermore,  such  a  system  pro- 
vides the  manager  with  the  information  needed  to 
insure  that  equipment  is  being  used  efficiently  and 
effectively,  and  to  aid  him  in  selecting  the  best  unit 
for  the  work  to  be  done. 

Since  1971  the  Federal  Highway  Administration, 
when  requested,  has  assisted  State  organizations 
interested  in  discussing  the  basic  components  of  a 
maintenance  management  program.  State  highway 
maintenance  organizations  that  have  implemented  a 
maintenance  management  system  are  presently  re- 
viewing management  practices  in  equipment  manage- 
ment and  caj)ital  outlay  programs  and  are  establishing 
district  and  area  boundaries  for  related  maintenance 
programs. 

Advances   in   Equipment  and   Techniques 

Construction  industry  associations  were  instru- 
mental, as  in  previous  periods,  in  the  development  of 
new  equipment  in  such  areas  as  tamping  and  vibrating 
rollers  to  speed  up  compaction  of  embankments  and 
base  courses.  The  use  of  nuclear  devices  for  testing 
compaction  on  soil  and  base  courses  became  more 
widespread  as  these  devices  made  this  type  of  testing 
much  faster.  Large  screw  augers  were  being  used 
more  frequently  for  structure  foundation  excavation. 
New  equipment  developed  for  subsurface  investigation 
made  it  possible  for  more  precise  bidding  on  excava- 
tion work,  because  the  contractor  could  depend  on 
more  accurate  subsurface  inforniation. 

The  laser  beam  has  become  a  very  useful  tool  for 
engineers  in  establishing  line  and  grade  for  pipe  lay- 
ing, eliminating  the  need  for  off-set  lines  and  batter 
boards.  New  methods  of  making  pipe  and  specialized 
equii^ment  for  cleaning  pipe  have  also  come  into  use 
during  this  period. 

New  methods  for  handling  concrete,  such  as  con- 
crete pumps  and  new  deck  finishing  equipment,  have 
made  bridge  work  more  productive  and  enabled  con- 
tractors   to    produce    safer,    smoother    riding    bridge 


roadways.  Stay-in-place  steel  forms  for  concrete 
bridge  decks  were  developed  and  thereby  eliminated 
the  need  for  the  removal  of  the  forms,  an  often  haz- 
ardous and  difficult  operation. 

Precast  concrete  units  such  as  culverts  and  barri- 
cades came  to  be  widely  used,  also. 

Spreading  and  finishing  equipment  for  pavements 
were  developed  into  quite  sophisticated  machines  that 
eliminated  much  of  the  hand  work.  New  types  of 
equipment  for  texturing  and  grooving  concrete  pave- 
ment surfaces  came  into  use  to  help  provide  more 
skid  resistance. 

Large  automatically  controlled,  central-mix  plants 
were  quite  extensively  used  in  concrete  pavement  work 
in  this  period  from  1964  to  1974.  Some  States  per- 
mitted asphalt  plants  to  operate  without  screens,  using 
variable  speed  belts  and  multiple  cold  feed  bins  for 
gradation  control.  Also,  some  asphalt  plants  were 
equipped  with  surge  storage,  which  allowed  them  to 
produce  asphaltic  concrete  continuously  without  hav- 
ing to  stop  the  plant  to  wait  for  haul  trucks.  The 
development  of  practical  electronic  systems  for  auto- 
matic grade  controls,  which  used  sensing  devices  to 
follow  a  string-line  or  guide- wire,  was  very  important. 

Significant  advances  in  equipment  in  nearly  every 
field  of  use  were  seen  during  this  period  in  an  effort 
by  the  industry,  as  a  whole,  to  obtain  faster,  more 
efficient  j)roduction  with  less  "down  time." 

Many  advances  have  been  made  in  developing  new 
materials  and  techniques  for  highway  construction. 
A  new  technique  of  presplitting  faces  of  road  back 
slopes  before  blasting  for  excavation  gave  a  much 
more  even  back  slope  in  rock  cuts.  Various  treat- 
ments, such  as  lime  and  water-proof  membranes,  were 
put  into  use  to  help  overcome  the  problems  of  swell- 
ing soils.  Even  though  they  had  been  in  use  for  many 
years,  synthetic  aggregates  were  seeing  niore  use  in 
highway  work  during  this  period.  New  types  of 
coatings  for  structural  steel  and  culvert  pipe,  as  well 
as  pipe  jointing  materials,  were  being  produced. 


462 


Additives  for  concrete  that  controlled  the  set  for 
better  workability  and  that  produced  more  durable 
structures  were  being-  further  developed.  Even  so, 
concrete  bridg'e  decks  were  be<>inning  to  show  signs 
of  early  deterioration,  caused  by  salt  used  as  a  de-icing 
agent  penetrating  tlie  concrete  and  destroying  the  re- 
inforcing steel.  This  brought  about  specialized  con- 
struction methods  for  the  protection  of  bridge  decks, 
such  as  the  use  of  epoxy  coated  or  gahanized  rein- 
forcing .steel  and  waterproof  ma.stics  or  membranes. 

During  the  years  from  1967-1974,  highway  builders 
were  finding  an  increasing  scarcity  of  key  highway 
con.struction  materials,  such  as  cement,  steel,  asphalt, 
and  paint,  which  accelerated  the  search  for  alternate 
materials.  Gasoline  and  diesel  oil  for  the  big  rigs 
also  became  scarce,  especially  during  the  oil  embargo 
late  in  1973  and  early  1974.  The  use  of  some  waste 
matei'ials  in  higliway  construction  helped  stretch 
existing  supplies  somewhat.  For  example,  some  States 
started  using  fly  ash  as  a  substitute  for  some  of  the 
cement  in  concrete  mixes.  Some  experimented  with 
rubber  from  old  automobile  tires  to  modify  asphalt 
in  hot  mixes. 

Now  the  United  States  has  become  a  Xation  bound 
together  by  an  extensive  ribbon  of  efficient  well- 
maintained,  quality  streets  and  highways.  Where 
once    the   horse   and    wagon   slowly    plowed    through 


muddy  roadways,  millions  of  cars  and  trucks  swiftly 
carry  people,  goods,  and  services  to  every  corner  of 
this  country,  impacting  the  social  and  economic  well- 
being  of  every  conummit}'.  The  ability  to  steadily 
obtain  more  pi-oduction  and  an  improved  quality  of 
construction  and  maintenance  of  this  Nation's  streets 
and  highways  while  still  preser\'ing  a  reasonably  level 
cost  is  due  to  the  combination  of  the  many  factors  of 
the  construction  and  maintenance  system  as  it  has 
developed.  Some  of  these  factors,  which  have  been 
discussed,  are  the  couii)etitive  bidding  mechanism, 
the  improved  managerial  methods,  a  dependable  pub- 
lic financing,  the  advancing  technology,  and  the  mo- 
tive force  of  the  State  and  Federal  Governments  in 
desiring  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  Nation  and  her 
people. 

However,  though  the  capability  and  motivation 
were  present,  the  success  of  this  efl'ort  re(iuired  the 
excellent  cooperative  spirit  that  existed  among  the 
Federal  Highway  Administration  and  its  predecessors, 
the  State  highway  departments,  and  the  industry  as- 
sociations. AVithout  this  partnership,  there  would  not 
be  the  sound  construction  industry  or  the  effective 
highway  network  that  we  have  today. 


Hanging  a  girder  during  construction  of  a 
three-level  interchange  in  Dallas,  Tex. 


463 


A  twin  box  culvert  under  construction. 


464 


REFERENCES 

'  A.  C.  Rose,  Historic  American  Highways — Public  Roads 
OF  THE  Past  ,  (American  Association  of  State  Highway  Of- 
ficials, Wasliington,  D.C.,  1953)  p.  100. 

-Id.,  p.  101. 

^M.,  pp.  i03-ior>. 

*  G.  Galli,  100  Years  of  Construction  Netvs — Events  That 
Shaped  the  Future,  Engineering  News-Record,  Vol.  192,  No. 
18,  Apr.  30,  1974,  p.  455. 

'A.  C.  Rose,  supra,  note  1,  i).  108. 

°  Public  Roads  Administration,  The  Public  Roads  Adaiin- 
isTRATioN  AND  ITS  WoRKs  (Federal  Works  Agency,  Washing- 
ton, D.C.,  Revised  Nov.  1946)  p.  3. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1918,  p.  5. 

'  P.  Hubbard,  Efficiency  of  Bituminous  Surfaces  and  Pave- 
ments Under  Motor  Truck  Traffic,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  No. 
10,  Feh.  1919,  p.  25. 

•a.  p.  Anderson,  Modern  Road  Bt'ilding  and  Maintenance 
(Hercules  Powder  Co.,  1921),  pp.  33,  103. 

"  PRA,  supra,  note  6,  pp.  25-27. 

"  BuKEAU  OF  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1926,  p.  32. 


'■Id.,  pp.  34-35. 

"  Civil  Engineering  Department  and  the  Transportation 
Engineering  Center  of  the  Ohio  State  University,  Pro- 
ceedings OF  THE  Sixteenth  Annual  Ohio  Highway  Engi- 
neering Conference  (Columbus,  Ohio,  Apr.  2-4,  1962),  pp. 
13-14. 

"  G.  Galli,  supra,  note  4,  p.  455. 

'^  Ohio  State  University,  supra,  note  13,  p.  27. 

"  50th  Anniversary  of  PC  A,  Civil  Engineering,  Vol.  36,  No. 
3,  Mar.  1966,  pp.  32-42. 

"The  Asphalt  Institute — Wh.\t  It  Is  and  What  It 
Does,  Information  Series  110,  (The  Asphalt  In.stitute,  College 
Park,  Md.,  Jun.  1973). 

"*  G.  Galli,  supra,  note  4,  pp.  455,  456. 

''Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1931,  pp.  1-7. 

™  Southeastern  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials, 
Proceedings  (Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  1943)  p.  75. 

-'Convention  (Jroi'p  Meetings — Papers  and  Discussions 
(St.  Louis,  Missouri,  Dec.  1942),  (American  A.ssociation  of 
State  Highway  Officials,  Wa.shington,  D.C.)   p.  76. 

"  G.  Galli,  supra,  note  4,  pp.  455-459. 


465 


Development 
of  the 
Inter/tote 
Program 


The  National  System  of  Interstate  and  Defense 
Highways,  more  commonly  known  as  the  Interstate 
Highway  System,  is  a  42,600-mile  network  of  free- 
ways, spanning  the  Nation  and  linking  together  and 
serving  more  than  90  percent  of  all  cities  of  over 
50,000  population  and  thousands  of  smaller  cities  and 
towns.  The  System  comprises  little  more  than  1  per- 
cent of  the  Nation's  road  and  street  mileage,  but  when 
completed,  it  is  expected  to  carry  about  25  percent  of 
all  traffic. 

While  the  Interstate  System  is  a  national  system 
connecting  all  States,  it  is  a  part  of  the  State  highway 
system  in  each  of  the  States  in  which  it  is  located. 
Federal  highway  funds,  derived  from  highway-user 
taxes,  are  used  together  with  appropriate  State  fund- 
ing for  the  construction  of  the  Interstate  System,  but 
tlie  "ownership"  is  with  the  States,  and  the  entire 
burden  of  maintenance,  administration,  and  regulation 
falls  upon  the  States  and  localities. 

The  Interstate  System,  now  nearing  completion,  is 
being  constructed  by  a  State-Federal  partnership. 
The  State  highway  departments  and  the  Department 
of  Defense  assisted  in  the  designation  of  the  System's 
routes.  The  States  select  and  design  the  projects  to 
be  built  each  year;  the  necessary  right-of-way  is  ac- 
quired by  the  States  under  State  law,  and  the  States 


award  and  manage  the  construction  contracts — all 
subject  to  the  review  and  approval  of  the  Federal 
Highway  Administration.  The  Federal  share  of  the 
total  system  cost,  now  estimated  at  $89  billion,  is  90 
percent,  and  States'  shares  are  10  percent. 

The  Birth  of  the  Interstate  System 
Initial   Consideration 

The  origin  of  the  Interstate  Highway  System  can 
be  related  specifically  to  a  formal  report  made  to 
Congress  in  1939.  Before  that,  a  few  scattered  park- 
ways and  urban  arterials  were  already  demonstrating 
the  virtues  of  controlled  access  highways  with  grade- 
separated  interchanges.  There  had  been  earlier 
dreams  of  a  transcontinental  network  of  superhigh- 
ways, although  these  were  usually  conceived  of  as 
bypassing  all  cities  and  serving  only  those  who  wanted 
to  make  long  trips. 

In  the  1930's  there  was  mounting  evidence  of  future 
traffic  congestion  on  the  country's  main  travel  arteries ; 
but  at  the  same  time  a  prolonged  period  of  economic 
depression  made  normal  public  financing  of  higliway 
improvement  a  difficult  matter.  There  was  a  sudden 
revival  of  interest,  after  almost  a  century,  in  toll  road 
financing,  and  toll  roads  were  built  in  several  of  the 
major  traffic  corridors. 


466 


The  Piscataqua  Rivet-  Bridge  on  Interstate  95  literally  joi7is  the  States  of  Maine  and  New  Hampshire.    It  fits  gracefully  into 
its  environment  and  provides  convenience,  safety,  and  savings  in  travel  time  for  the  motorist. 


The  Federal-aid  legislation  in  1934  had  authorized 
the  use  of  Federal-aid  hin-hway  funds  for  planning 
purposes,  and  continuing  statewide  highway  planning 
surveys  were  initiated  in  1935  under  the  guidance  and 
leadership  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  From 
these  studies  came  a  wealth  of  factual  information 
which,  for  the  first  time,  permitted  some  definition 
and  measurement  of  highway  ti-ansportation  and  its 
problems  and  made  possible  highway  planning  based 
on  knowledge  rather  than  guess^vork. 

A  Study  of  Toll  Roads  Versus  Free  Roads 

With  this  data  to  draw  on,  the  Congress  in  1938 
requested  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  to  study  the 
feasibility  of  a  toll  financed  system  of  three  east-west 
and  three  north-south  superhighways.  The  resulting 
comprehensive  study  made  by  Public  Roads  in  coop- 
eration with  the  State  highway  departments  was  re- 
ported to  Congress  in  1939  in  the  landmark  publica- 
tion Toll  Roads  and  Free  Roads. 

This  study  demonstrated  that  the  suggested  14,000- 
mile  toll  road  system  would  be  far  from  self-support- 
ing. Seeking  more  than  a  negative  recommendation, 
the  study  explored  and  documented  the  need  for  a 


system  of  interregional  superhighways,  with  connec- 
tions through  and  around  cities.  A  26,700-mile  non- 
toll  network  was  proposed,  with  the  recommendation 
that  the  Federal  Government  share  the  construction 
cost  at  more  than  the  traditional  50  percent  Federal- 
aid  rate. 

The  Interregional  Highways  Study 

To  pursue  this  concept.  President  Franklin  D. 
Roosevelt  appointed  a  National  Interregional  High- 
way Committee  in  1941.  Thomas  H.  MacDonald, 
Commissioner  of  Public  Roads,  became  the  Commit- 
tee's chairman ;  its  secretary  was  Herbert  S.  Fairbank, 
Deputy  Commissioner  for  Research  in  the  Public 
Roads  Administration. 

Through  them,  the  resources  and  assistance  of  the 
Public  Roads  Administration  and  the  States  were 
made  available  to  the  Interregional  Highway  Com- 
mittee. Then,  in  1943,  in  the  midst  of  World  War  II, 
Congress  requested  Public  Roads  to  make  a  study  of 
the  need  for  a  nationwide  expressway  sj'stem.  The 
Committee  and  Public  Roads  presented  their  report, 
Interregional  Highways,  to  Congress  in  1944. 


467 


The  study  considered  systems  of  several  sizes,  test- 
ing each  by  a  variety  of  criteria,  and  recommended 
as  optimum  a  rural  network  of  33,900  miles.  The 
need  for  an  additional  5,000  miles  of  auxiliary  urban 
routes  was  foreseen,  bringing  the  total  proposed  sys- 
tem to  about  39,000  miles,  of  which  one-fifth  would 
be  in  urban  areas. 

High  standards  of  geometric  design  with  full  con- 
trol of  access  were  recommended.  No  overall  cost 
estimate  for  the  system  was  made.  It  was  suggested 
that  postwar  expenditures  for  its  construction  should 
be  $750  million  a  year,  two-thirds  of  it  on  the  urban 
sections. 

Designation   of  the  System 

Acting  on  the  basis  of  the  1939  and  1944  reports, 
the  Congress  in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of 
1944  directed  the  designation  of  a  National  System 
of  Interstate  Highways  limited  to  40,000  miles  and 
".  .  .  so  located  as  to  connect  by  routes,  as  direct  as 
practicable,  the  principal  metropolitan  areas,  cities, 
and  industrial  centers,  to  serve  the  national  defense, 
and  to  connect  at  suitable  border  points  with  routes 
of  continental  importance  .  .  ." 

The  Act  provided  that  the  routes  of  the  National 
System  of  Interstate  Highways  be  selected  by  joint 


action  of  the  State  highway  department  of  each  State 
and  the  adjoining  States,  with  the  approval  of  the 
Public  Roads  Administration  and  were  to  be  incor- 
porated in  the  Federal-Aid  Primary  System  if  not 
already  included  in  it. 

In  response  to  a  request  from  PRA,  the  States  pro- 
posed routes  for  inclusion  in  the  System.  Criteria  for 
selection  included  service  to  cities  and  rural  popula- 
tion, to  manufacturing  and  agricultural  production, 
to  concentrations  of  motor-vehicle  ownership  and 
traffic,  and  to  national  defense.  Additional  criteria 
in  urban  areas  included  consideration  of  need  for 
through  and  circumferential  routes  and  their  relation 
to  land  use,  urban  planning,  and  civil  defense. 

Considerable  discussion  ensued  between  the  States 
and  the  Department  of  Defense.  On  August  2,  1947, 
selection  of  the  general  locations  of  the  main  routes 
of  the  Interstate  System  was  announced.  They  totaled 
37,700  miles,  including  2,900  in  urban  areas.  The 
remaining  mileage  within  the  40,000-mile  limit  was 
reserved  for  auxiliary  urban  routes. 

Again  on  the  recommendation  of  and  in  consulta- 
tion with  the  States  and  the  Department  of  Defense, 
the  general  locations  of  2,300  miles  of  urban  circum- 
ferential and  distributing  routes  were  designated  on 
September  15,  1955. 


This  well  designed  interchange  in  Morris  County,  N.J.,  maintains  much  of  the  original 
topography  while  smoothly  blending  the  heavy  trafflc  of  1-80  and  287  with  that  of 
U.S.  46.    It  provides  long  acceleration  and  deceleration  lanes 
and  wide  shoulders  for  safe  emergency  stops. 


468 


Early  System   Construction 

Progress  in  the  designation  of  the  routes  on  the 
System  had  been  slow.  So  was  progress  in  construc- 
tion. Congress  authorized  a  sizable  postwar  Federal - 
aid  highway  program,  but  for  the  fiscal  yeai\s  1946-53 
no  specific  amounts  were  earmarked  for  the  Interstate 
System. 

In  what  now  seems  a  token  gesture,  the  Federal- 
Aid  Highway  Act  of  1952  did  authorize  $25  million 
for  the  Interstate  System  for  each  of  the  fiscal  years 
1954:  and  1955,  to  be  matched  on  the  traditional  50-50 
Federal-State  cost  sharing  basis.  The  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1954  authorized  $175  million  for  the 
Interstate  for  each  of  the  fiscal  years  1956  and  1957, 
with  the  matching  ratio  changed  to  a  60-percent  Fed- 
eral share.  These  1954-57  funds  were  apportioned 
among  the  States  by  formulas  used  for  apportioning 
regular  Primary  System  funds,  taking  into  account 
the  area,  population,  and  postal  route  mileage  in  each 
State. 

Dxiring  the  first  postwar  decade,  of  course,  a  good 
deal  of  the  regular  Federal-aid  highway  funds  were 
used  on  the  Interstate  System — some  27  i^ercent  of  the 
Primary  and  45  percent  of  the  Urban  Federal-aid 
funds  authorized  for  fiscal  years  1946-56 — however, 
this  level  of  construction  funding  fell  far  short  of 
meeting  System  traffic  requirements  or  design  stand- 
ards. 

Highway  Needs  Studies 
National   Defense 

Although  some  work  progressed,  traffic  needs  on  the 
System  increased  at  a  faster  rate  than  construction. 
The  Congress,  in  1948,  requested  PRA  to  study  the 
status  of  the  System  and  to  comment  on  the  relation 
of  highways  to  the  national  defense.  The  ensuing 
study,  made  in  cooperation  with  the  State  highway 
departments,  was  reported  to  Congress  in  1949  in  the 
document  Highway  Needs  of  the  National  Defense. 
It  demonstrated  the  critical  deficiencies  of  the  Inter- 
state routes  and  estimated  the  cost  of  needed  improve- 
ments at  $11.3  billion;  47  percent  of  the  suggested 
improvements  lay  in  urban  areas. 

There  Avere  some  recognized  deficiencies  in  the  esti- 
mate. It  did  not  include  the  2,300  iniles  of  urban 
auxiliary  routes,  which  were  then  yet  to  be  designated. 
It  was  realized  that  designs  should  be  based  on  traffic 
needs  of  the  futui'e,  but  it  was  found  impracticable 
to  make  such  forecasts,  so  deficiencies  of  existing  high- 
ways were  measured  against  existing  traffic. 

There  were  other  flaws,  easily  seen  in  hindsight. 
It  was  then  considered  that  a  good  deal  of  the  System 
could  be  developed  by  reconstruction  of  or  widening 
existing  highways,  which  later  proved  impractical  on 
many  route  segments.  And  subsequent  substantial 
construction  i)rice  increases  were  unanticipated. 

Highway  Systems 

The  next  few  years  brought  a  welter  of  discussion 
and  studies  of  the  problem.  Protracted  hearings  of 
the  Subcommittee  on  Eoads  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives in  1953,  published  as  the  National  Highway 
Study.,  dwelt  at  length  on  the  Interstate  System  among 
other  subjects. 


In  a  message  sent  to  the  Governors  Conference  on 
July  12,  1954,  President  Eisenhower  called  for  "a 
grand  plan  for  a  properly  articulated  highway  sys- 
tem." ^  Later  in  1954,  a  committee  of  the  Governors 
Conference  reported  to  the  President  its  belief  that 
the  national  government  should  assume  primary  re- 
sponsibility, with  State  participation,  for  financing 
the  Interstate  System. 

In  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1954,  Congress 
requested  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  to  make  several 
extensive  studies,  in  each  of  which  the  State  highway 
departments  collaborated. 

One  study  was  reported  in  March  1955  in  the  docu- 
ment Needs  of  the  Highway  Systems.,  1955-81^..  Con- 
struction needs  of  the  37,700-mile  Interstate  System 
for  the  years  1955-64,  to  provide  for  traffic  predicted 
for  1974,  were  estimated  to  cost  $23.2  billion,  of  which 
46  percent  would  be  spent  in  urban  areas.  Again,  the 
estimate  did  not  cover  the  2,300  miles  of  urban  aux- 
iliary routes.  Thus,  the  estimate  included  essentially 
the  same  mileage  as  the  estimate  reported  in  1949,  and 
at  about  the  same  construction  unit  price  levels. 

Yet  the  new  cost  estimate  was  double  that  reported 
in  1949.  This  time  an  attempt  was  made  to  forecast 
future  traffic  needs;  higher  standards  were  used  for 
estimate  purposes,  including  access  control  through- 
out; and  there  was  greater  awareness  of  the  probable 
need  for  extensive  location  on  new  right-of-way. 

Still,  the  report  itself  acknowledged  that  there  was 
a  tendency  in  State  estimates  to  reflect  financial  limita- 
tions rather  than  anticipated  needs,  and  additionally 
a  tendency  to  understate  the  needs.  Further,  both 
this  and  the  earlier  estimates  were  made  in  a  com- 
paratively short  time,  with  limited  manpower.  A 
good  deal  of  the  estimating  was  done  by  map  study 
for  route  location  and  use  of  average  quantities  and 
costs  per  mile. 

Feasibility  of  Toll   Roads 

Another  study  requested  by  Congress  in  1954  was 
reported  in  April  1955  in  the  document  Progress  and 
Feasibility  of  Toll  Roads  and  Their  Relation  to  the 
Federal- Aid  Program.  At  that  time  the  toll  turnpike 
was  vigorously  advocated  by  various  promotional 
groups  as  the  ready  solution  to  highway  congestion 
and  financing.  This  study  indicated  that  6,700  miles 
of  routes  could  be  successfully  financed  by  tolls,  but 
predicted  (reliably)  that  assurance  of  public  funds 
for  early  completion  of  the  Interstate  System  would 
soon  end  widespread  interest  in  toll  roads. 

The  report  reaffirmed  the  desirability  of  the  prin- 
ciple established  in  the  Federal-Aid  Road  Act  of  1916 : 
Roads  l)uilt  with  Federal  aid  should  be  toll  free.  But 
the  report  did  recommend  inclusion  in  the  Interstate 
System  of  toll  roads  which  met  System  standards 
where  there  were  reasonably  satisfactory  free  roads 
in  the  corridor  permitting  traffic  to  bypass  the  toll 
road.  This  simply  recognized  that  toll  roads,  built 
without  Federal  aid,  existed  on  the  lines  of  the  Inter- 
state System  and  that  to  duplicate  them  would  be  an 
economic  Avaste. 

The   Clay   Committee   Report 

FolloAving  up  on  his  message  to  the  GoA^ernors  Con- 
ference in  1954,  President  EisenhoAver  appointed  an 
Advisory  Committee  on  a  National  HigliAvay  Program, 
Avith  General  Lucius  D.  Clay  as  its  chairman.     The 


469 


This  attractive  safety  rest  area  and  information  center  on  1-94  near  New  Buffalo,  Mich.,  is  the  result  of  a  combined 
effort  of  architects,  landscapers,  and  design  engineers  to  preserve  mature  trees  and  to  provide  grassy  picnic  areas.  The 
pond  was  purposely  created  from  a  J^-acre  borrow  pit. 


Committee's  report,  A  10-Year  National  Highioay 
Program.,  was  transmitted  to  Congress  in  February 
1955.  Using  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads-States 
estimate  of  $23  billion  and  adding  to  it  $4  billion  for 
the  urban  auxiliary  routes  not  included  in  that  esti- 
mate, the  Committee  arrived  at  an  overall  cost  for 
completion  of  the  Interstate  System,  in  the  10  years 
1956-65,  of  $27  billion.  The  Federal  share  was  figured 
at  $25  billion,  or  about  90  percent. 

To  manage  the  financing  of  the  program,  the  Com- 
mittee proposed  creation  of  a  Federal  corporation 
which  would  issue  $20  billion  of  long-term  bonds  to 
be  repaid  over  the  32-year  period  1956-87  from  the 
existing  2-cent  Federal  motor-fuel  tax.  While  the 
proposal  had  many  attractive  aspects,  features  that 
probably  weighed  most  heavily  against  it  were:  (1) 
it  placed  a  ceiling  for  32  years  on  the  regular  ABC 
Federal-aid  program  (as  a  necessaiy  part  of  the 
financing  plan)  ;  (2)  it  would  cost  $12  billion  in  bond 
interest;  and  (3)  it  removed  fiscal  control  of  the 
program,  in  effect,  from  the  hands  of  Congress. 

Program   Established 

Legislation   Fails   in    1955 

Equipped  with  these  reports.  Congress  began  con- 
sideration of  the  highway  problem  early  in  1955- — in 
both  the  House  and  the  Senate.    The  Senate  Subcom- 


mittee on  Roads  held  hearings  extending  from  Feb- 
ruary into  April.  In  the  House,  the  Committee  on 
Public  Works  held  hearings  from  April  into  July. 
In  addition  to  the  public  hearings,  both  committees 
spent  countless  hours  in  executive  session. 

Both  the  Senate  and  the  House  had  for  considera- 
tion an  Administration  bill,  modeled  rather  closely 
after  the  recommendations  of  the  President's  Advisory 
Committee.  The  Senate  also  had  before  it  a  bill  in- 
troduced by  Senator  Albert  Gore.  This  bill  proposed 
continuing  the  Federal-aid  program  generally  in  its 
traditional  form  but  with  substantial  increase  in 
authorization  levels.  Annual  authorizations  for  the 
regular  Federal-aid  highway  program  would  be  in- 
creased from  the  existing  level  of  $700  million  to 
$1.1  billion;  Interstate  authorizations  from  $176  mil- 
lion to  $500  million;  both  authorizations  would  cover 
each  of  the  5  fiscal  years  1956-1960 ;  the  Federal  share 
of  Interstate  costs  would  be  increased  from  the  level 
of  60  percent  to  a  two-thirds  share,  and  apportion- 
ment among  the  States  would  remain  as  prescribed 
in  the  1954  Act. 

Later,  Senator  Francis  Case  introduced  a  bill  pro- 
viding over  a  10-year  period  annual  authorizations 
of  $450  million  for  the  ABC  program  and  $900  mil- 
lion for  the  Interstate  System,  the  latter  to  be  on  a 
90-10  matching  ratio. 


470 


A  modified  version  of  the  Gore  bill  was  passed  by 
the  Senate  on  May  25,  1955,  providing  $7.75  billion 
for  the  Interstate  System  program,  spread  over  the 
5  fiscal  years  1957-61,  with  the  Federal  share  of  costs 
to  be  90  percent.  Numerous  other  significant  provi- 
sions were  included  in  the  bill  with  respect  to  the 
Interstate  program.  There  were  no  provisions  for 
the  revenue  required. 

In  the  House  of  Representatives  consideration  was 
given  to  the  Administration  bill,  the  Senate-passed 
bill,  and  a  bill  proi^osed  by  Representative  George  H. 
Fallon.  For  the  Interstate  System,  Fallon's  bill  of- 
fered $24  billion  over  the  12  years  1957-68,  a  90- 
percent  Federal  share  of  costs,  and  apportionment 
among  the  States  in  the  ratio  of  the  estimated  cost  of 
completing  the  System  in  each  State  to  the  total  cost 
of  completion  in  all  the  States.  The  bill  proposed 
increases  in  Federal  mot  or- fuel  and  rubber  taxes  to 
provide  needed  revenue. 

A  modified  Fallon  bill  came  before  the  House  in 
the  last  days  of  the  session  but  was  defeated.  The 
Administration  bill  also  was  defeated.  With  adjourn- 
ment of  the  1st  session  of  the  84th  Congress,  the  Gore 
bill,  passed  by  the  Senate,  remained  alive  but  dormant 
for  the  rest  of  1955. 

The  failure  of  Congress  to  enact  legislation  came 
as  a  shock  to  many.  There  had  been  almost  universal 
testimony  supporting  an  expanded  highway  program. 
One  major  difficulty,  perhaps,  was  the  diversity  of 
proposals,  each  Aagorously  supported  or  opposed. 
Questions  of  toll  financing,  credit  financing,  and 
current-revenue  financing  were  hotly  argued.  Almost 
every  highway  beneficiary  group  expressed  willing- 
ness to  pay  its  fair  share  of  the  cost — according  to  its 
own  method  of  calculation.  Some  groups  objected  to 
any  tax  increases.  There  was  one  further  possible 
reason  why  legislation  was  not  enacted  in  1955.  The 
public,  still  relatively  uninformed  on  the  issues,  had 
yet  to  raise  a  concerted  voice. 

1956^Year  of  Action 

Congi'ess  returned  to  the  problem  early  in  1956. 
User  groups  seemed  more  amenable  to  compromise; 
the  public  was  better  informed,  aroused,  and  strong 
for  action.  The  Federal  corporation  and  the  bond 
financing  plan  were  dead  issues,  and  the  Administra- 
tion endorsed  the  pay-as-you-go  principle. 

In  this  receptive  atmosphere  the  House  Roads  Sub- 
committee and  the  House  Ways  and  Means  Committee 
separately  undertook  to  develop  the  program  features 
and  the  finance  provisions  for  Federal-aid  highway 
legislation.  Many  provisions  of  the  1955  bills  were 
adopted.  A  joint  committee  bill  was  approved  by  the 
House  on  April  27,  1956. 

Shortly  thereafter  the  Senate  Public  Works  Com- 
mittee replaced  the  program  features  of  the  House 
bill  with  a  modified  version  of  the  1955  Gore  bill; 
and  the  Senate  Finance  Committee  modified  the 
House  bill's  finance  provisions.  The  revised  bill  was 
approved  bv  the  Senate,  with  some  amendments,  on 
May  29. 

Senate-House  conferees  developed  a  compromise 
bill  on  June  25  and  on  the  next  day  both  the  Senate 
and  the  House  approved  it  by  overwhelming  votes. 
On  June  29,  1956,  President  Eisenhower  signed  the 
bill  into  law. 


This  portion  o/  1-91  near  Fairlee,  Vt.,  is  located  on  indc^i'  m/r  at 
alinements  to  preserve  the  natural  terrain  characteristics  and 
the  beauty  o/  the  area. 


471 


\ 


The  Federal-Aid  Act  Highway  of   1956 

General   Provisions 

The  legislation,  so  painstakingly  developed,  is  com- 
monly called  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956, 
but  officially  this  is  the  name  of  Title  I  of  twin  acts; 
it  contains  the  program  features.  The  other  twin  is 
Title  II,  the  Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956,  which 
covers  the  financing  provisions. 

In  recognition  of  its  importance  to  the  national 
defense,  the  System's  name  was  expanded  to  National 
System  of  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways.  The 
length  limitation  for  the  System  was  increased  from 
40,000  to  41,000  miles.  (Later,  in  the  Federal-Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1968,  an  additional  1,500  miles  of 
Interstate  System  was  authorized — bringing  the  total 
system  length  to  42,500  miles.) 

The  Act  prescribed  that  standards  for  the  Inter- 
state System  should  be  adopted  by  the  Secretary  of 
Commei'ce  in  cooperation  with  the  State  highway  de- 
partments; that  they  should  be  adequate  to  accommo- 
date the  traffic  forecast  for  1975  (modified  in  later 
legislation)  and  that  they  be  applied  uniformly 
throughout  the  States.  To  preserve  the  operating 
efficiency  and  safety  of  this  System,  access  ramps  at 
interchanges  on  Interstate  highways  were  to  be  lim- 
ited to  those  provided  in  the  original  project  plans, 
except  as  changes  may  be  approved  by  the  Secretary. 

In  authorizing  Interstate  funds,  the  1956  Act  sig- 
nificantly departed  from  the  traditional  biennial 
authorization  pattern.  For  the  first  time,  an  ac- 
celerated program  to  complete  a  highway  system  was 
authorized.  The  Act  authorized  a  total  of  $25  billion 
over  the  period  1957-69  as  the  Federal  share  of  this 
construction  program. 

The  Act  also  established  a  new  method  of  appor- 
tioning Interstate  funds  among  the  States,  changing 
after  the  first  3  years  from  a  formula  based  on  mile- 
age, area,  and  population  to  an  apportionment  factor 
for  each  State  computed  from  the  ratio  of  the  cost  of 
completing  the  System  in  each  State  to  the  total  cost 
of  completing  the  System  in  all  States.  It  further 
provided  for  a  series  of  cost  estimates  to  establish 
these  values  on  a  current  basis  as  construction  of  the 
System  progressed  in  the  years  that  followed. 

The  Federal  share  of  Interstate  project  costs  was 
set  at  90  percent,  except  in  States  with  large  areas  of 
Federal  public  land  where  the  Federal  share  is  in- 
creased proportionally  up  to  a  limit  of  95  percent. 

Title  II — the  Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956 — es- 
tablished the  Highway  Trust  Fund  and  assigned  spe- 
cific motor-vehicle  user  taxes  to  this  fund  for  the 
payment  of  highway  construction  costs.  The  Act  also 
provided  that  the  highway  program  must  be  conducted 
on  a  "pay-as-you-go"  basis,  requiring  that  Trust  Fund 
revenues  be  adequate  to  meet  all  needs  without  draw- 
ing on  the  General  Fund  of  the  Treasury  which  had 
previously  supported  the  Federal-aid  highway  pro- 
gram. 

Interstate   Use   Restrictions 

The  1956  Act  barred  service  stations  and  other 
commercial  establishments  from  location  on  or  access 
within  the  Interstate  System  right-of-way  on  the 
grounds  that  highway  users  should  not  be  subjected 
to  monopoly  and  so  that  highway-oriented  business 
could  engage  in  free  competition.  It  is  probable,  also. 


that  many  State  highway  departments  were  imen- 
thusiastic  about  undertaking  the  franchise  system, 
with  its  attendant  problems,  which  is  common  on  toll 
roads.  Service  at  businesses  located  on  intersecting 
roads  is  not  difficult  for  Interstate  travelers  to  obtain, 
since  interchanges  occur  much  more  frequently  and 
there  is  less  inconvenience  in  leaving  and  re-entering 
than  on  toll  roads. 

In  a  positive  direction,  the  Act  permitted  use  of 
airspace  above  or  below  Interstate  highways  for  park- 
ing purposes  (a  provision  subsequently  broadened  to 
allow  any  public  or  private  use  that  will  not  impair 
the  highway). 


Gently  curving  1-70  in  the  Eagle  River  Valley  of  Colorado 
provides  the  motorist  with  new  vistas  of  the  countryside  with 
each  turn.  The  weathering-steel  guardrail  blends  with  its 
surroundings.  Flat  slopes,  designed  for  safety,  are  quickly 
regaining  vegetation  because  of  the  topsoil  salvaged  during 
early  stages  of  the  construction. 

Congressional  belief  that  Interstate  highways  built 
with  90  percent  Federal  funds  should  have  some  Fed- 
eral protection  against  very  heavy  loads  led  to  a  pro- 
vision in  the  Act  on  vehicle  weight  and  width 
limitations.  The  limits  were  essentially  those  of  the 
then-ciuTent  policy  of  the  American  Association  of 
State  Highway  Officials,  or  alternatively  those  legally 
permitted  in  a  State  on  July  1,  1956,  whichever  were 
greater.  The  law  did  not  actually  prescribe  Federal 
limitations  per  se,  but  accomplished  its  objective  by 
providing  that  no  Federal-aid  apportionment  would 
be  made  to  any  State  that  permitted  vehicles  on  the 
Interstate  System  of  greater  size  or  weight. 

Route   Location 

To  some  extent.  Congress  entered  into  problems  of 
route  location.  The  1956  Act  proposed  that  "Insofar 
as  possible  in  consonance  with  this  objective  [prompt 
completion  of  the  Interstate  System],  existing  high- 
ways located  on  an  interstate  route  shall  be  used  to 
the  extent  that  such  use  is  practicable,  suitable,  and 
feasible,  it  being  the  intent  that  local  needs,  to  the 
extent  practicable,  suitable,  and  feasible,  shall  be 
given  equal  consideration  with  the  needs  of  interstate 
commerce." 


472 


This  language  was  intended  as  permissive  modifi- 
cation of  the  original  legislative  prescription  in  the 
1944  Act  that  the  system  was  ".  .  .  to  connect  by 
routes,  as  direct  as  practicable,  the  principal  metro- 
politan areas,  cities,  and  industrial  centers  ..."  There 
may  also  have  been  concern  about  the  needs  of  the 
cities  as  contrasted  with  those  of  cross-country  travel, 
about  possible  dislocations  of  homes  and  businesses, 
and  about  the  costs  of  new  right-of-way. 

Broadening  a  provision  of  the  Federal-Aid  Higli- 
way  Act  of  1950,  the  1906  Act  required  that  the  State 
highway  departments,  in  planning  a  Federal-aid 
project  (Interstate  or  ABC)  involving  the  bypassing 
of  or  going  through  a  city  or  town,  must  hold,  or 
offer  to  hold,  a  public  hearing  and  nmst  consider  the 
economic  effects  of  such  a  location.  (This  provision 
was  subsequently  expanded  to  cover  rural  Interstate 
projects  as  well.) 

The  public  hearing  has  a  dual  purpose:  for  the 
State  to  present  and  explain  its  proposals  to  the  pub- 
lic and  for  the  public  to  present  its  views  to  the  State. 
Decision  by  popular  vote  was  not  intended.  Decision 
by  the  responsible  highway  official  is  properly  made 
by  weighing  the  economic  and  social  costs  and  benefits 
to  highway  users  and  to  the  locality,  the  region,  and 
the  Nation,  and  choosing  that  solution  which  produces 
the  greatest  overall  benefit — often  a  far  from  simple 
task. 

Right-of-Way  Acquisition 

Acquisition  of  right-of-way  had  been  recognized  as 
a  large,  costly,  and  complicated  aspect  of  the  Inter- 
state System  program.  To  ease  the  problem,  the  1956 
Act  authorized  use  of  apportioned  Federal-aid  funds 
for  advance  acquisition  of  right-of-way,  provided  that 
actual  construction  followed  within  a  specified  period 
(within  10  years  now). 

At  that  time,  not  all  States  could  legally  acquire 
control  of  access,  and  while  all  could  take  land  by 
eminent  domain,  some  could  not  begin  construction 
on  the  land  until  the  taking  process  had  gone  through 
the  courts.  The  1956  Act,  therefore,  provided  a  means 
whereby,  at  the  request  of  a  State,  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment could  acquire  land  (and  prompt  entry  to  it) 
or  access  control  for  an  Interstate  project  and  then 
convey  the  title  to  the  State.  Some  States  took  ad- 
vantage of  this  mechanism ;  however,  most  States  soon 
obtained  legislation  or  procedures  for  obtaining  access 
control  and  prompt  right-of-way  entry. 

Toll   Facilities 

The  early  consideration  of  toll  road  construction  for 
the  Interstate  S3'stem  has  already  been  mentioned. 
The  subject  received  a  great  deal  of  attention  again 
in  both  1955  and  1956.  The  decision  reached  in  the 
1956  Act  was  that  toll  roads,  bridges,  and  tunnels 
could  be  included  in  the  Interstate  System  if  they 
met  the  System  standards  and  if  their  inclusion  pro- 
moted development  of  an  integrated  system.  The  Act 
reiterated  that  Federal-aid  funds  could  not  be  used  on 
toll  roads,  nor  on  toll  bridges  and  tunnels  except  un- 
der the  special  circumstances  already  covered  by 
Federal-aid  legislation. 


The  Act  did  provide  that  Federal-aid  Interstate 
funds  could  be  used  on  an  approach  to  a  toll  road 
incorporated  in  the  System,  if  the  toll  road  is  to  be- 
come free  when  the  bonds  are  liquidated  and  if  there 
is  a  reasonably  satisfactory  alternate  free  route  avail- 
able by  which  the  toll  section  may  be  bypassed. 

As  a  result  of  these  provisions,  some  2,300  miles  of 
toll  facilities  (roads,  bridges,  and  tunnels)  have  since 
been  incorporated  in  the  Interstate  System. 

A  sharp  controversy  had  developed  over  the  ques- 
tion of  reimbursement  to  the  States  for  Interstate 
projects  already  built  with  less  than  90-percent  Fed- 
eral aid  or  with  none  at  all.  While  both  free  and  toll 
facilities  were  involved,  the  arguments  generally  cen- 
tered on  the  latter.  In  the  1956  Act,  the  whole  matter 
was  in  effect  deferred — the  law  declai-ed  the  intent  of 
Congress  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  States 
should  be  reimbursed  for  work  completed  between 
1947  and  1957,  and  if  so,  how,  when,  and  how  much; 
and  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  was  requested  to  re- 
port to  Congress  on  this  issue.  The  report  was  made 
in  January  1958,  but  Congress  took  no  action  to  pro- 
vide reimbursement  for  either  toll  or  free  road  con- 
struction. 

The  Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956 

The  language  of  Title  II  was  formidable,  for  in 
large  part  it  comprised  amendments  to  the  Internal 
Revenue  Code.  But  it  was  a  landmark  in  Federal 
highway  law  since  it  established,  for  the  first  time, 
a  linkage  between  Federal  excise  taxes  on  highway 
users  and  Federal  aid  for  highways.  It  sought  to 
achieve  three  major  objectives:  To  finance  the  long- 
range  Federal-aid  program,  including  the  funds  spe- 
cifically authorized  to  complete  the  Interstate  System 
and  an  anticipated,  but  not  legislated,  escalating  ABC 
program  during  the  same  period;  to  provide  revenue 
wholly  from  highway-user  tax  revenues;  and  to  con- 
fine the  program  to  a  pay-as-you-go  basis. 

The  Taxes 

The  Federal  excise  taxes  earmarked  to  pay  for  the 
Federal  share  of  the  highway  program  and  their 
rates  reflected  a  balance  between  the  need  to  pay  for 
highways  and  for  other  functions  of  Government  and 
the  cost  occasioned  or  the  benefit  gained  by  each 
class  of  highway  beneficiary  in  forms  that  were 
practical  of  collection.  The  result  of  this  endeavor 
by  Congress  appeared  at  the  time  to  be  a  productive 
and  generally  equitable  tax  schedule.  Considerable 
revision  was  made  in  later  legislation.  The  taxes  in- 
cluded an  increase  in  the  tax  on  motor-vehicle  fuel, 
an  increase  in  the  excise  tax  on  the  manufacturer's 
sale  price  on  commercial  vehicles  (new  trucks,  buses, 
and  trailers),  a  new  annual  use  tax  on  vehicles  in 
excess  of  26,000  pounds  gross  weight,  and  an  increase 
in  the  tax  on  highway  vehicle  tires. 

The   Highway  Trust   Fund 

Linkage  between  highway-user  tax  revenue  and 
Federal  aid  for  highways  was  formalized  in  the  1956 
Act  by  creation  of  the  Highway  Trust  Fund.  Into 
the  Fund  go  the  earmarked  taxes;  out  of  it  are  ap- 
propriated the  Federal-aid  funds  for  payment  to  the 
States. 


473 


THE  NATIONAL  SYSTEM  OF  INTERSTATE  AND  DEFENSE  HIGHWAYS 

STATUS  OF  IMPROVEMENT  AS  OF    SEPTEMBER  30,1976 


Preliminary 

Engineering  and 

Under 

Adequate 

Statut 
or  Not  Yet 
in  Progre>i 

Right-of-Way 
in  Progreft 

Ba«ic 
Con.truclion 

Toll 

Pretent 
Traffic 

679  Miles 

1,908  Miles 

2,044  Miles 

2,266  Milei 

1,984  Miles 

Total  Open  to  Traffic 
37,869  Miles 


It  was  recognized  that  expenditures  would  exceed 
income  in  the  early  years  of  the  Trust  Fund,  but  this 
deficit  would  be  overcome  by  excess  revenue  in  later 
years.  The  1956  Act,  therefore,  included  a  provision 
permitting  borrowing  or  "repayable  advances"  from 
the  U.S.  Treasury.  However,  this  provision  was  in 
effect  nullified  by  an  amendment  requiring  pay-as- 
you-go  operation.  The  amendment  (Byrd  Amend- 
ment) required  that  if  the  projected  expenditures 
which  would  result  from  a  pending  apportionment  of 
authorized  funds  were  forecast  to  exceed  projected 
Ti'ust  Fund  receipts,  then  the  apportionment  was  to 
be  appropriately  reduced  to  prevent  a  deficit. 

1956 — A  Landmark  Year 

In  the  1956  Act,  the  Congress  acknowledged  that 
it  was  dealing  with  forecasts  of  highway  needs  and 
of  tax  revenue  and  that  future  legislation  might  well 
be  needed  to  bring  about  proper  balancing  of  receipts 
and  expenditures  and  of  costs  and  benefits  to  bene- 
ficiaries of  highways.  Accordingly,  it  requested  the 
Secretary  of  Commerce  to  undertake  an  extensive  in- 
vestigation which  became  known  as  the  highway  cost 
allocation  study;  the  final  report  was  completed  in 
January  1961. 


The  twin  1956  Acts  were  indeed  a  major  landmark 
in  the  highway  history  of  the  United  States.  It  was 
perhaps  less  than  perfect  legislation,  arrived  at  after 
long  and  sometimes  hot  debate.  Much  of  it  evolved 
through  compromise,  aimed  at  practical  solutions. 

Nevertheless,  the  legislation  broke  with  traditions 
and  created  some  new  principles : 

•  It  authorized  completion  of  an  entire  national 
highway  network — the  Interstate  System — and 
provided  for  its  financing  (on  the  basis  of  costs 
recognized  at  that  time). 

•  It  required  the  establishment  of,  and  broadly  de- 
fined, location  and  design  criteria  for  the  System. 

•  It  departed  from  the  historic  50-50  Federal-State 
sharing  of  project  costs  and  the  fixed  formula 
method  of  apportionment. 

•  It  created  a  linkage  between  highway-user  tax 
revenue  and  highway  expenditure  and  established 
the  Highway  Trust  Fund. 

•  It  began  an  accelerated  highway  improvement 
program  which  was  to  bring  about  a  new  era  in 
highway  transportation  in  America. 


474 


The  Accelerated  Program 

The  Starting   Point 

To  the  public,  the  accelerated  program  for  building 
the  Interstate  System  as  announced  in  1956  was  ob- 
viously a  big  job,  but  not  necessarily  complex.  Per- 
haps this  thinking  derived  from  the  characteristic 
development  of  a  toll  road — a  one-route  project,  all 
starting  from  scratch,  all  on  new  location,  all  built  in 
a  short  period  of  time,  and  all  under  the  management 
of  a  single  agency,  with  all  the  money  available  at  the 
beginning  or  as  needed. 

But  the  Interstate  program  was  being  accomplished 
by  49  States  and  the  District  of  Columbia  (there  are 
no  Interstate  routes  in  Alaska),  in  cooperation  with 
the  Federal  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.    Cities,  counties, 


and  towns  had  a  direct  interest  in  how  routes  were  to 
be  (or  were  not)  located  to  serve  them;  and  while  toll 
roads  characteristically  approach  but  do  not  enter  the 
cities,  the  Interstate  System  would,  and  at  the  same 
time  would  serve  large  volumes  of  the  local  traflS.c  load. 
Not  all  Interstate  routes  were  starting  from  the 
same  status  of  development  in  1956.  Some  sections, 
indeed,  were  already  completed,  although  these  were 
mostly  toll  roads.  Some  others  were  in  varied  stages 
of  development — a  two-lane  highway  needing  expan- 
sion to  four  lanes;  an  expressway  lacking  full  control 
of  access  or  needing  additional  grade  separations  or 
lanes.  About  four-fifths  of  the  Interstate  mileage  was 
destined  to  be  built  on  new  location,  but  some  would 
follow  an  existing  highway,  perhaps  using  it  as  one 
of  its  separated  pairs  of  directional  roadways. 


The  alinement  of  1-280  in  densely  populated  northern  'Mew  Jersey  was 
carefully  selected  to  have  a  minimal  impact  on  the  established 
neighborhoods  and  existing  traffic  patterns. 


475 


Not  all  States  were  starting  from  the  same  status 
in  1956  either,  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  A  "shelf"  of 
acceptable  project  plans  was  available  in  some  States 
but  not  in  others.  Some  State  highway  departments 
were  able  to  staff  up  to  the  job  rapidly  while  others 
took  much  longer;  many  had  previously  acquired 
little  or  no  right-of-way  on  their  own ;  some  had  never 
before  designed  or  built  freeways  on  a  large  scale. 

Interstate  projects  are  complex  undertakings,  con- 
suming 3  or  4  years  from  beginning  of  route  location 
study  to  final  completion — and  often  much  longer  in 
urban  areas.  In  the  early  years  of  the  program,  a 
large  proportion  of  effort  and  expenditure  was  de- 
voted to  preliminary  engineering  and  right-of-way 
acquisition.  Construction  followed  at  some  later 
period. 

All  of  this  explains  why  the  Interstate  System 
program  did  not  instantly  jump  into  high  gear  on  the 
morning  of  June  30,  1956,  producing  great  stretches 
of  completed  pavement.  It  necessarily  would  be  a 
number  of  years  before  any  notable  mileage  was 
opened  to  traffic. 

Design  Standards 

The  1956  Act  called  for  adoption  of  uniform  design 
standards  for  the  Interstate  System  in  all  States. 
The  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
and  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  anticipating  the 
need,  began  developing  geometric  standards  (those 
governing  curvature,  gradient,  number  and  width  of 
lanes,  etc.)  in  May  1956  and  by  July  had  completed 
and  adopted  a  full  set  of  such  standards.  This  rapid 
accomplishment  was  possible  because  the  AASHO 
Committee  on  Planning  and  Design  Policies  had  been 
evolving  progressive  freeway  standards  for  years  and 
had  developed  a  set  of  Interstate  System  standards  as 
early  as  1945. 

The  major  items  in  the  adopted  standards  included: 
control  of  access  throughout  the  System;  design  ade- 
quacy for  projected  1975  traffic — later  changed  (in 
1963  Act)  to  a  20-year  minimum  design  period  from 
the  date  of  project  approval;  12-foot  travel  lane 
width;  10-foot  minimum  shoulder  width;  elimination 
of  railroad  grade  crossings;  elimination  of  highway 
at-grade  intersections;  design  speeds  of  50,  60,  and  70 
m.p.h  respectively  for  mountainous,  rolling,  or  flat 
terrain  conditions;  curvatures  and  gradients  consistent 
with  design  speeds;  separated  traffic  lanes  with  vari- 
able median  widths  on  a  right-of-way  adequate  in 
width  to  accommodate  these  standards;  and  minimum 
widths  for  highway  bridges. 

The  1956  design  standards  were  formulated  as  mini- 
mum rather  than  fixed  levels,  with  the  expectation 
that  minimum  levels  would  be  used  only  where  higher 
ones  would  result  in  excessive  cost.  They  have  served 
well,  and  have  required  but  little  modification  since 
their  adoption. 

Reasonable  uniformity  prescribed  through  minimum 
standards  seemed  fully  appropriate  for  the  Interstate 
System  insofar  as  geometries  were  concerned,  since 
these  are  the  features  the  driver  sees  and  is  directly 
affected  by.  In  contrast,  however,  structural  design 
features  which  govern  load-carrying  capacity  and 
durability  are  hidden  from  the  driver's  eye.  More- 
over, structural  design  of  a  roadway  is  necessarily 
largely   guided   by   localized   circumstances — physical 


conditions,  availability  of  materials,  and  local  experi- 
ence and  practice.  Consequently  "uniformity"  in 
structural  design  was  not  prescribed  in  detail  for  the 
Interstate  System — only  the  requirement  that  design 
be  soundly  and  justifiably  arrived  at  and  be  adequate 
to  support  anticipated  traffic  loads. 

While  these  geometric  standards  complied  with  the 
basic  requirements  of  the  law  at  the  time  of  adoption, 
they  were  soon  found  to  be  inadequate  to  meet  realistic 
needs  for  future  traffic  service.  The  statutory  design 
year  1975  was  changed  by  Congress  in  the  1963  High- 
way Amendment  Act  to  provide  a  design  requirement 
for  traffic  service  adequate  for  a  20-year  period  com- 
mencing on  the  date  of  plan  approval  for  the  initial 


A  bicycle  path  has  been  built  within  the  right-of-way  of  1-94 
in  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  that  extends  for  over  half  a  mile 
and  safely  connects  two  neighborhoods. 

construction  of  the  project.  The  Committee  Report 
stated  this  action  was  necessary  to  prevent  premature 
obsolescence  in  the  System  design.  And,  in  1966,  the 
Congress  amended  Title  23  to  provide  that  "Such 
standards  shall  in  all  cases  provide  for  at  least  four 
lanes  of  traffic." 

Designation   of  Additional   System   Mileage 

As  noted  earlier,  the  1944  Federal-Aid  Highway 
Act  provided  for  the  designation  of  an  Interstate 
System  not  to  exceed  40,000  miles,  and  in  August 
1947  a  System  totaling  37,700  miles  was  designated 
which  included  routes  through  and  skirting  major 
cities.  The  remaining  mileage  authorized  (2,300 
miles)  was  designated  in  September  1955  for  addi- 
tional routes  around  and  through  urban  areas. 

At  the  time  of  the  initial  System  designation,  there 
were  no  detailed  location  studies  and  no  engineering 
and  economic  analyses  available  for  consideration. 
The  locations  within  each  State,  therefore,  were  dia- 
grammetic  only,  and  the  estimated  mileage  of  desig- 
nated System  segments  was  derived  from  the  length 
of  the  existing  principal  highways  in  the  route  cor- 


476 


be  added  to  the  System  within  the  authorized  mileage 
ridors  selected  for  the  System.  As  more  precise  data 
became  available,  the  mileage  and  location  of  the 
designated  segments  were  adjusted  accordingly. 

Savings  in  the  total  System  length,  resulting  from 
more  detailed  studies  of  the  related  engineering,  eco- 
nomic and  sociological  factors  involved  in  the  high- 
way location,  permitted  added  System  segments  under 
the  original  statutory  length  limitation.  In  addition, 
Congress  in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956 
increased  the  authorized  length  of  the  Interstate 
System  by  1,000  miles.  Thus,  the  Secretary  of  Com- 
merce, on  October  18,  1957,  was  able  to  announce  an 
increase  of  2,102  miles  of  Interstate  routes  that  could 


Signing   and  Numbering 

From  the  very  nature  of  Interstate  System  traffic, 
signs  on  the  System  need  to  be  highly  visible,  prop- 
erly located,  clearly  understood,  and  completely  uni- 
form. After  study  of  existing  practices  on  expressways 
and  field  tests  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  the 
American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  in 
1958  adopted  a  manual  on  signing  and  pavement 
marking  for  the  Interstate  System.  The  manual  pre- 
scribed as  the  Interstate  route  number  marker  the 
now  familiar  red-white-and-blue  shield.  Guide  signs, 
primarily  for  carrying  destination  information,  are 
uniformly  white  on  green;  signs  concerning  services 


The  rest  and  information  area  on  1-90  near  Sheridan,   Wyo.,  provides  picnic  areas  for  the  family  and 
play   areas   for   children.     A   choice  of  a  moment  beside  the  delicate  ponds  or  a  lovely  view  of 

mountains  is  also  available  to  arrest  the  traveler's  eye. 


limit.  With  these  additions,  there  remained  a  reserve 
of  350  miles  which  was  held  to  cover  possible  increases 
in  the  length  of  individual  route  segments  as  more 
detailed  location  studies  progressed. 

Section  17  of  the  Hawaii  Omnibus  Act  of  1960 
(PL  86-624)  included  an  amendment  that  removed 
the  limitation  that  the  Interstate  System  be  designated 
entirely'  within  the  continental  United  States.  Under 
the  provisions  of  this  amendment,  three  routes  on  the 
island  of  Oahu  in  the  State  of  Hawaii  were  approved 
as  additions  to  the  System  in  August  1960,  utilizing 
some  of  the  "reserve"  mileage  noted  above.  And  in 
the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1968,  Congress 
authorized  an  additional  1,500  miles  on  the  Interstate 
System.  This  led  to  an  announcement  in  December 
1968  of  the  designation  of  route  segments  totaling 
1,473  miles  in  length. 

Subsequent  System  adjustments,  additions  and  dele- 
tions have  resulted  in  the  present  status  of  full  com- 
mitment of  the  total  42,500  miles  authorized  by 
Congress  for  the  Interstate  highways. 


and  rest  areas  are  white  on  blue.  The  manual  also 
specified  the  message  sizes  and,  in  general  terms,  the 
placement  of  signs  so  that  uniformity  will  prevail 
throughout  the  System. 

The  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Of- 
ficials also  developed  a  complete  numbering  system 
for  Interstate  routes.  Those  routes  with  odd  numbers 
run  north-south;  those  with  even  numbers  run  east- 
west.  Major  routes  have  one-  or  two-digit  numbers, 
and  the  long,  evenly  spaced  routes  have  numbers  end- 
ing in  5  or  0.  The  lowest  numbers  are  in  the  west 
and  south  to  avoid  conflict  locally  with  the  U.S.  Route 
numbers.  In  urban  areas  the  main  route  numbers  are 
carried  through  on  the  paths  of  the  major  traffic 
streams.  Connecting  circumferential  or  loop  routes 
at  urban  areas  have  three-digit  numbers,  using  the 
main  route  number  with  an  even-number  prefix. 
Radial  and  spur  routes  also  have  three-digit  numbers, 
with  an  odd-number  prefix. 


477 


Toll  Roads 

As  already  noted,  the  1956  Act  permitted  inclusion 
of  toll  roads  in  the  Interstate  System,  although  it 
continued  to  bar  the  use  of  Federal  aid  for  toll  road 
construction  or  for  further  improvement  of  such  in- 
cluded routes.  On  the  recommendation  of  the  States, 
it  was  announced  on  August  21,  1957,  that  2,102  miles 
of  then  existing  toll  roads  in  15  States  were  being 
officially  included  in  the  System.  The  only  sizable 
toll  section  imdertaken  on  the  designated  Interstate 
System  since  1956  is  a  53-mile  portion  of  1-95  in 
Maryland  and  Delaware.  This  segment  was  com- 
pleted in  1963  and  was  constructed  following  special 
congressional  legislation. 

Program  Funding 

initial  Authorization   Level 

Although  Congress  in  1944  directed  that  the  Inter- 
state System  be  designated,  it  made  no  provision  for 
special  Federal  funding  for  the  construction  of  the 
System  until  years  later.  The  1952  Act  included  a 
token  Interstate  authorization  of  $25  million  each  for 
fiscal  years  1954  and  1955  and  the  1954  Act  included 
$175  million  for  fiscal  years  1956  and  1957.  This 
"beginning"  of  special  Interstate  System  funding 
authorization  was  followed  by  the  creation  of  the 
Highway  Trust  Fund  in  1956. 

In  Section  108  of  the  1956  Act  the  Congress  de- 
clared it  to  be  essential  to  the  national  interest  to 
provide  for  the  early  completion  of  the  Interstate 
System  as  authorized  and  designated  in  accordance 
with  the  1944  Act.  Section  108  states  it  was  ".  .  .  the 
intent  of  the  Congress  that  the  Interstate  System  be 
completed  as  nearly  as  practicable  over  a  thirteen- 
year  period  and  that  the  entire  System  in  all  the 
States  be  brought  to  simultaneous  completion."  There 
was  authorized  to  be  appropriated  for  fiscal  years 
1957-69  a  total  of  $24.8  billion  of  Federal  funds,  to 
be  matched  by  the  States  on  a  90-10  Federal-State 
ratio,  for  the  purpose  of  expediting  the  construction, 
reconstruction  or  improvement  of  the  Interstate  Sys- 
tem. This  amount  combined  with  the  unexpended 
balance  of  previous  authorizations  brought  the  total 
of  available  Federal  Interstate  authorization  to  $25.14 
billion  as  of  June  1956. 

It  should  be  noted  that  up  to  this  time  there  had 
been  no  detailed  estimate  on  a  section-by-section  basis 
of  the  cost  of  building  the  Interstate  System.  The 
$25  billion  Federal  authorization  in  the  Act  was  based 
on  the  Clay  Committee  Report,  in  which  the  total 
System  cost  was  stated  at  $27  billion — with  a  Federal 
share  of  $25  billion  recommended. 

The  Congress,  in  the  1956  Act,  recognized  the 
changing  requirements  for  the  System  and  the  need 
for  up-to-date  periodic  estimates  of  the  cost  of  com- 
pleting the  System  and  required  a  series  of  such 
estimates  beginning  in  1958. 

1958  Cost  Estimate 

The  first  of  the  series  of  periodic  estimates  of  the 
cost  of  completing  the  Interstate  System  was  sub- 
mitted to  the  Congress  in  January  1958.  This  esti- 
mate was  prepared  by  the  individual  States  during 
calendar  year  1957.     To  provide  for  uniformity  of 


estimate  procedures  among  the  States,  an  instruction 
manual  was  adopted  which  extended  the  standards 
for  design  and  construction  of  the  System. 

The  unit  price  level  of  1956  construction  in  each 
State  was  selected  as  a  cost  base.  Units  of  construc- 
tion quantities  estimated  for  the  System  completion 
in  each  State  were  computed  against  this  unit  price 
base  for  the  total  cost  determination.  The  estimate 
total  exceeded  the  authorization  level  established  by 
Congress  2  years  earlier  in  the  1956  Act. 

In  submitting  this  first  estimate  to  Congress,  Secre- 
tary of  Commerce  Sinclair  Weeks  noted : 

Although  this  estimate  shows  an  increase  in  cost  over 
the  amounts  authorized  by  section  108  (d)  of  the  1956 
Act,  I  do  not  see  any  need  for  consideration  at  the  present 
time  of  new  legislative  measures  which  would  add  to  the 
income  of  the  highway  trust  fund.  This  is  the  first  esti- 
mate of  a  series  of  five  and  is  made  in  the  early  stage  of 
the  highway  program  launched  by  the  1956  Act.  As  con- 
struction of  the  Interstate  System  progresses  toward 
completion  and  as  the  amount  of  remaining  work  cor- 
respondingly decreases,  future  estimates  of  cost  will  be 
made  on  a  broader  basis  of  experience  and  these  esti- 
mates will  progressively  become  more  accurate  by  reflect- 
ing actual  trends  in  cost,  either  upward  or  downward, 
that  cannot  be  forecast  as  well  now.  Until  this  addi- 
tional experience  is  acquired,  consideration  of  any  ad- 
justments in  authorization  of  funds  or  revenues  would 
be  premature.^ 

The  1958  estimate  included  only  38,548  miles  of  the 
41,000-mile  System  authorized  by  Congress.  This 
differential  resulted  from  the  fact  that  the  1,000-mile 
addition  to  the  System,  authorized  by  Congress  in 
1956,  was  specifically  excluded  from  the  estimate  by 
provisions  of  the  1956  Act;  and  the  additional  1,102 
miles  available  for  allocation  October  18,  1957,  be- 
came available  after  the  cutoff  date  for  preparation 
of  the  estimate.  The  total  cost  for  the  38,548  miles 
was  estimated  to  be  $37.6  billion  of  which  $33.9  billion 
was  the  Federal  share,  and  $3.7  billion  the  States' 
matching  share. 

The  basic  information  in  the  1958  estimate  was 
supplemented  by  data  presented  in  hearings  con- 
ducted before  the  House  Ways  and  Means  Committee 
in  July  1959,  at  which  time  preliminary  cost  data  for 
the  remaining  2,452  miles  of  the  41,000-mile  System 
were  reported.  The  combination  of  these  submittals 
was  an  estimate  totaling  $41  billion  for  41,000  miles. 
Of  this  total  the  Federal  share  was  estimated  to  be 
$37  billion.  This  was  the  first  detailed  Interstate  cost 
estimate  submitted  to  the  Congress  which  encompassed 
the  entire  System  mileage  authorized  up  to  that  time. 
No  costs  were  included  for  State  highway  planning 
and  research,  or  for  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  adminis- 
tration and  research.  Since  both  of  these  activities 
are  charged  against  Federal  Interstate  funds,  the  costs 
should  have  been  included.  This  omission  was  cor- 
rected in  the  1961  estimate. 

Economic  Recession  and  the  1958  Federal-Aid  Highway 
Act 

In  1958  the  Nation  found  itself  in  the  grip  of  an 
extended  economic  recession,  and  acceleration  of  the 
Federal-aid  Highway  program  was  considered  as  one 
means  to  hasten  recovery.  The  Federal-Aid  Highway 
Act  of  1958  was  prepared  with  this  objective  in  view. 
Among  other  provisions,  it  increased  the  annual  Inter- 
state authorizations  of  the  1956  Act  from  $2.0  billion 


478 


The  plants  and  vegetation 
used  along  1-64  in  Greenhrier 
County,  W.  Va.,  were  selected 
to  blend  ivith  the  natural 
vegetation  on  the  rolling  hills 
of  the  Qreenbrier  River 
Valley. 


to  $2.2  billion  for  fiscal  year  1959,  and  from  $2.2 
billion  to  $2.5  billion  for  each  of  the  fiscal  years  1960 
and  1961.  These  increases  were  partially  in  recogni- 
tion by  the  Congress  that  the  Interstate  System  was 
going  to  cost  more  than  had  been  provided  for  in  the 
1956  Act ;  partially  because  Congress  desired  to  ac- 
celerate progress  toward  completion  of  the  System; 
and  partially  because  of  the  recession  in  the  economy. 
More  important  perhaps  than  the  increases  in  au- 
thorization levels — in  its  ultimate  impact  on  the  pro- 
gram financing — was  the  provision  of  the  1958  Act 
which  set  aside  the  pay-as-you-go  provision  of  the 
1956  Act  for  2  years  and  directed  apportionment  to 
the  States  of  the  full  amounts  authorized  for  fiscal 
years  1959  and  1960,  namely,  $2.2  billion  and  $2.5 
billion.  This  provision  in  the  1958  Act  for  expanded 
and  accelerated  expenditures  was  not  matched  by  a 
commensurate  provision  for  additional  Trust  Fund 
revenue. 

The  net  effect  was  to  advance  appreciably  the  time 
when  the  Federal-aid  program  would  enter  a  period 
during  which  annual  expenditures  would  exceed  Trust 
Fund  I'evenues.  And  when  the  pay-as-you-go  amend- 
ment again  became  effective  after  its  2-year  suspen- 
sion, it  was  obvious  that  Federal-aid  highway  program 
financing  was  in  need  of  adjustment. 

Temporary  Relief 

A  report  on  the  study  of  allocating  highway  costs 
and  benefits  and  a  new  estimate  of  the  cost  of  com- 
pleting the  Interstate  System,  both  called  for  by  the 
1956  Act,  were  expected  to  be  completed  early  in  1961. 
It  was  generally  assumed  that  a  long-range  solution 
to  Federal-aid  financing  problems  should  then  be 
undertaken  and  that,  in  tlie  meanwhile,  temporary 
relief  measures  would  be  sufficient. 

Consequently,  early  in  1959  President  Eisenhower 
proposed  a  temporary  increase  of  li^  cents  per  gallon 


in  the  Federal  motor-fuel  tax.  The  Congress,  in  the 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1959,  increased  the  tax 
from  3  to  4  cents  per  gallon  for  the  period  from 
October  1,  1959,  to  June  30,  1961. 

The  1959  Act  also  reduced  the  Interstate  authoriza- 
tion for  fiscal  year  1961  to  $2.0  billion.  When  the 
time  came  to  make  the  apportionment  in  October 
1959,  however,  the  pay-as-you-go  provision  made  it 
necessary  to  reduce  the  apportionment  to  $1.8  billion. 

In  addition,  because  of  the  necessity  for  correlating 
the  level  of  anticipated  Trust  Fund  revenues  and  ex- 
penditures, the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  in  1959  insti- 
tuted a  program  of  "reimbursement  planning"  under 
which  a  limit  was  set  quarterly  on  the  rate  at  which 
each  State  could  obligate  funds  to  contracts  in  order 
to  assure  that  Federal  payments  of  ultimate  reim- 
bursement to  the  States  for  work  accomplished  could 
be  made  within  the  limits  of  the  available  Trust  Fund 
balance. 

The    1961    Estimate 

In  1961  the  second  estimate  of  cost  of  the  Interstate 
System  was  submitted  to  the  Congress.  Again,  as  in 
the  1958  estimate,  the  total  cost  was  $41  billion  with 
a  Federal  share  of  $37  billion. 

The  unit  price  base  for  the  1961  estimate  was  the 
average  unit  price  level  in  each  individual  State  for 
calendar  year  1959.  There  had  been  a  lowering  of 
construction  unit  price  levels  between  the  1956  level 
used  in  the  1958  estimate  and  the  1959  level  used  for 
the  1961  estimate.  AVith  this  lowering  of  construc- 
tion prices,  the  construction  costs  reported  in  1961 
were  reduced.  This  was  offset  by  including  the  costs 
of  administration  and  research  and  planning,  which 
were  omitted  from  the  1958  report.  A  comparison  of 
the  1958  estimate  and  the  1961  estimate  is  shown  in 
Table  1. 


479 


Table  1 — Comparison  of  the  1958  and  the  1961  estimates  of  total  cost  for  the  41,000-mile  Interstate  System 

(Millions  of  dollars) 


2. 


Item 


1,     Interstate  System  routes  included  in  1958  estimates: 

1958  estimate  (38,  548  miles) 

1961  estimate  (38,522  miles) 


Remaining  system  mileage: 

1958  estimate  adjusted  to  include  1,452  miles,  excluding  1,000-mile  addition  _. 

1961  estimate  (1,528  miles),  excluding  950  miles  of  1,000-mile  addition: 

Routes  designated  in  1957  (952  miles) 

Hawaii  routes  designated  in  1960  (48  miles) 

Reserved  for  specific  routes,  detailed  location  not  yet  established  (220  miles) 
Held  for  final  measurement  C308  miles) 


Subtotal . 


Routes  included  in  1,  000-mile  addition: 

1958  estimate  adjusted  to  include  the  1,  000  miles. 
1961  estimate  (950  miles) 


Subtotal,  41,000-mile  system. 


4.  State  highway  planning  and  research 

5.  Public  Roads  administration  and  research. 

6.  Contingencies 


Grand  total  . 


1958 


Total 
cost 


$  37, 570 


1,613 


1,613 


1,111 


40,294 


706 


$  41,000 


Federal 
funds 


$  33,900 


1,452 


1,452 


1,000 


36,352 


648 


$  37,000 


1961 


Total 

cost 


$  36,848 


1,209 
216 
220 
308 


1,953 


449 


39,250 

574 
357 
809 


$  41,000 


Federal 
funds 


S  33,234 


1,087 
195 
198 
277 


1,757 


404 


35,  395 

511 
357 
737 


$  37,000 


The  1961  estimate  report  stated  that  the  estimates 
reflected  accurate  appraisals  of  the  cost  in  each  State 
based  on  1959  price  levels  but  "do  not  represent  a 
commitment  of  funds  to  the  location,  design,  or  cost 
of  individual  projects  to  be  undertaken  on  the  Inter- 
state System."  ^  The  estimates  were  considered  ade- 
quate for  establishing  apportionment  factors  for 
distributing  Federal  funds  among  the  States  for  the 
fiscal  years  1963,  1964,  1965,  and  1966— the  purpose 
for  which  Congress  intended  the  estimate — and  for 
the  enactment  of  necessary  legislation  modifying  the 
level  of  authorization  for  construction  of  the  Inter- 
state System  and  providing  the  revenue  needed  to  pay 
for  the  costs  involved. 

Highway  Cost  Allocation   Study 

The  highway  cost  allocation  study,  undertaken  pur- 
suant to  the  1956  Act,  was  reported  on  to  Congress 
in  January  1961.  Its  jjurpose  was  to  provide  Congress 
with  information  on  which  it  might  make  an  equitable 
distribution  of  the  Federal  tax  burden  for  the  support 
of  the  Federal-aid  highway  program  among  the 
various  classes  of  persons  using  Federal-aid  highways 
or  otherwise  deriving  benefits  from  them.  The  need 
for  additional  revenue  to  meet  the  cost  of  the  Inter- 
state System  program  had  already  become  evident 
from  the  1958  cost  estimate,  as  substantiated  by  the 
1961  cost  estimate. 


The  highway  cost  allocation  study  was  unquestion- 
ably the  most  comprehensive  and  exhaustive  study  of 
highway  economics  ever  undertaken.  The  study  find- 
ings relative  to  highway-user  benefits  of  passenger 
cars  and  trucks  of  different  weight  categories  strongly 
influenced  the  legislation  that  was  to  put  Interstate 
financing  back  on  a  sound  basis. 

The   1961    Federal-Aid   Highway  Act 

In  February  1961  President  Kennedy,  in  a  message 
to  Congress,  endorsed  continuation  of  the  pay-as-you- 
go  principle  and  support  of  the  Federal-aid  highway 
program  wholly  by  highway-user  taxes,  for  which  he 
recommended  certain  increases.  After  extensive 
study,  the  Congress  rejuvenated  the  Interstate  pro- 
gram by  passage  of  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1961. 

Under  the  1956  Act,  as  amended  in  1958  and  1959, 
some  $11.7  billion  of  Federal  Interstate  funds  had 
already  been  apportioned  to  the  States  for  fiscal  years 
1957-62.  The  1961  Act  revised  the  remaining  authori- 
zation schedule  to  provide  $2.4  billion  for  fiscal  year 
1963,  $2.6  billion  for  1964,  $2.7  billion  for  1965,  $2.8 
billion  for  1966,  $2.9  billion  for  1967,  $3.0  billion  each 
for  1968,  1969,  and  1970,  and  $2,885  billion  for  1971. 
Thus  the  total  of  Federal  funds  apportioned  or  au- 
thorized was  increased  to  $37  billion,  the  90-percent 
Federal  share  of  the  total  $41  billion  Interstate  pro- 
gram cost. 


480 


Nebraska's    "Chain    O'    Lakes"    along    ISO 
resulted  from  borrow  pits  used  during 
construction  of  this  part  of  the  highway. 
These  lakes  have  been  landscaped  with 
native  grasses  and  trees  and  offer  the 
highway  user  water-oriented  recreation 
and  provide  midlife  sanctuaries. 


To  provide  the  needed  financing,  the  1961  Act  re- 
vised the  existing  schedule  of  highway-user  excise 
taxes  dedicated  to  the  Highway  Trust  Fund.  The 
motor-fuel  tax  was  continued  at  4  cents  per  gallon 
until  October  1,  1972.  For  the  same  period,  the  tax 
per  pound  was  increased  on  highway  vehicle  tires 
from  8  to  10  cents,  on  inner  tubes  from  9  to  10  cents, 
and  on  retread  rubber  from  3  to  5  cents.  The  use  tax 
on  heavy  vehicles,  those  of  over  26,000  pounds  gross 
weight,  was  increased  from  $1.50  to  $3.00  per  1,000 
pounds  per  year.  All  of  the  10-percent  tax  on  the 
manufacturer's  sale  price  of  new  trucks,  buses,  and 
trailers  was  earmarked  to  the  Trust  Fund,  instead  of 
only  half  as  had  been  provided  by  the  1956  Act. 

By  this  1961  Act,  both  the  necessary  authorizations 
to  complete  the  Interstate  System  on  the  basis  of  the 
most  recent  estimate  available  and  the  revenues  to 
pay  for  the  job  were  provided. 

Construction  Progress 

Following  passage  of  the  1961  Act  and  the  regular 
funding  of  the  program  which  resulted,  construction 
of  the  System  moved  forward  steadily.  "Miles  open 
to  traffic"  grew  in  number  on  virtually  a  straight-line 


basis  year  by  year.  The  States  were  able  to  move  to 
construction  on  most  sections  of  the  System  without 
major  delay  and  total  progress  was  limited  only  by 
the  funding  available. 

There  were  problems  relating  to  the  location  of 
some  segments  of  the  System,  generally  involving  en- 
vironmental considerations,  but  these  were  relatively 
few  in  number  when  considered  against  the  total 
system  concept.    Progress  in  general  was  excellent. 

In  1967,  as  a  Federal  budget  requirement,  the  au- 
thorized Federal  funding  was  withheld  in  part.  Al- 
though the  States  had  available  balances  of 
unobligated  apportioned  funds,  they  were  not  per- 
mitted to  exceed  a  predetermined  level  of  Federal 
funding.  The  result  was  the  beginning  of  the  con- 
troversy over  "withholding"  of  funds  authorized  by 
the  Congress  and  otherwise  legally  available. 

With  obligation  ceilings  controlling  the  total  level 
of  highway  construction  after  1967,  there  was  a  slack- 
ening of  the  rate  at  which  new  sections  of  the  Inter- 
state System  were  opened  to  traffic.  However,  even 
with  these  controls,  there  were  in  service  at  the  end 
of  1974  over  36,000  miles  of  the  42,500-mile  System 
and  another  2,800  miles  were  under  basic  construction, 


481 


generally  on  new  location.  Only  about  400  miles,  or 
about  1  percent,  of  the  System  remained  in  a  no- 
progress  status  at  that  time. 

Increase  In  System  Cost 

With  the  changes  in  statutory  engineering  require- 
ments (20-year  traffic  projection  (1963),  minimimi 
design  of  four  lanes  (1966),  and  increased  System 
length  by  1,500  miles  (1968))  for  the  Interstate  Sys- 
tem, there  were  also  legislative  requirements  enacted 
by  the  Congress  in  recognition  of  the  public  need  in 
areas  of  economic,  sociologic,  and  environmental  con- 
siderations. Included  in  this  category  of  legislative 
requirements  were: 

•  Assistance  for  relocating  families  and  businesses — 
1962 

•  Transportation  planning  requirements  in  urban 
areas  for  joint  modes — 1962 

•  Scenic  enhancement  provisions,  spot  safety  im- 
provement program — 1965 

•  Joint  development  concept,  soil  erosion  control, 
preservation  of  parklands — 1966 

•  Fringe  parking  facilities,  increased  relocation 
assistance,  replacement  housing — 1968 

•  Exclusive  or  preferential  bus  lanes,  highway  traffic 
control  devices,  passenger  loading  areas  to  serve 
bus  and  other  mass  transit  passengers — 1970 

•  Urban  mass  transit  provisions  involving  the  with- 
drawal and  substitution  of  certain  Interstate  routes 
in  large  urban  areas — 1973 

The  provisions  of  the  1973  Act  have  not  yet  been 
fully  implemented,  and  the  ultimate  cost  effect  of  this 
legislation  is  not  known. 

Such  changes  have  a  marked  effect  on  the  cost  of 
constructing  a  highway  system.  This  had  been  ex- 
pected from  the  start.  The  earliest  reports  to  Con- 
gress on  the  need  for  an  interregional  highway  system 
stated  the  "impossibility"  of  venturing  an  approxi- 
mate estimate  of  the  cost  of  building  the  entire  inter- 
regional system  to  the  standards  recommended.  It 
was  stated  that  to  be  of  value,  such  an  estimate  would 
have  to  be  predicated  on  far  more  exact  determination 
of  all  variables  involved  than  had  been  possible  to 
undertake.  Further,  the  Congress  was  informed  that 
even  had  such  precise  determination  been  attempted, 
the  "usefulness  and  validity  of  an  estimate  of  the 
ultimate  cost  of  a  construction  program  that  must 
inevitably  extend  over  a  period  of  perhaps  20  years 
and  be  affected  by  unpredictable  changes  in  the  gen- 
eral economy,  in  the  habits  and  desires  of  people,  in 
the  character  of  vehicles,  and  in  other  circumstances, 
would  still  be  highly  questionable."  * 


With    safety  for   the   pedestrian  in  mind,   a  1,082-foot   long 
pedestrian  overpass  was  built  over  1-95  in  Shirlington,  Va., 
that  safely  connects  a  large  apartment  complex  on  the 
east  side  of  the  highway  mth  a  large 
shopping  center  on  the  west. 


482 


f^ — ^J<^*  )\r~< 


t  ^  i 


**ASHINGTON 


■        L<  >^  / 

«l"I.t«T _  )    / 


'   ; 


"Uf 


V/.  /- 


City  of  1 


r 


/*<£ 


Salt  Lake  City 


Tlie  Oregon  Trail 
as  of  1848. 


The  eastbound  lane  of  1-80,  east  of  Pendleton,  Oreg.,  is  built  on  the  site  of  the  Old  Oregon  Trail  and  takes  the  motorist 
into  tortuous,   but  spectacularly  scenic,  mountain  country.     In  this  area, 
the  east-  and  westbound  lanes  may  be  more  than  a  mile  apart. 


483 


The  report  continued,  "Construction  to  the  stand- 
ards recommended  will  certainly  be  expensive  beyond 
the  common  experience  in  building  most  of  the  ordi- 
nary existing  roads  and  streets,  but  the  merit  of  the 
expenditure  is  to  be  judged  not  by  such  a  comparison 
but  rather  by  the  value  of  the  advantages  to  be  gained 
in  traffic  facilitation,  in  reduced  costs  of  vehicle  op- 
erations, and  in  lowered  accident  rates."  ^ 

As  noted  earlier,  the  1958  and  1961  estimates,  each 
totaling  $41  billion  in  cost,  formed  the  basis  for  the 
1961  Act.  In  compliance  with  statutory  requirements, 
additional  cost  estimates  were  submitted  to  Congress 
in  1965,  1968,  1970,  1972,  and  1975.  Future  estimates 
are  to  be  submitted  in  January  1977. 

In  each  of  the  reports  to  Congress,  information  was 
submitted  regarding  the  difference  in  total  costs  re- 
ported. With  the  changes  in  the  statutory  require- 
ments as  to  the  total  system  concept  and  the  enactment 


of  new  environmental  and  sociological  requirementby 
it  was  expected  there  would  be  introduced  elements 
of  cost  not  considered  in  the  initial  estimates.  These 
increased  costs  were  not  "overruns"  or  "errors"  in 
previous  estimates,  but  were  rather,  a  reflection  of 
changing  construction  prices  and  changes  in  law 
enacted  by  Congress  in  recognition  of  changing  public 
need,  including  design  changes  for  mobility,  safety, 
and  environmental  requirements. 

Table  2  categorizes  the  major  influences  affecting 
total  costs  and  shows  the  cost  increase  in  each  cate- 
gory. Some  elements  of  the  1973  highway  legislation 
are  yet  to  be  implemented,  and  the  permissive  substi- 
tution of  System  segments  and  cost  in  urban  areas 
will  be  reflected  in  the  highway  and  mass  transit 
construction  programs  in  urban  areas.  These  changes 
will  affect  the  construction  cost  on  the  Interstate 
System. 


Table  2 — Interstate  System  cost  estimates,  increases  by  cost  categories 

(Millions  of  dollars) 


Description  of  cost  category 

Estimate  cost  increase  by  years 

Category 
No. 

1965 
over 
1961 

1968 
over 
1965 

1970 
over 
1968 

1972 
over 
1970 

1975 
over 
1972 

Total 

1 

Unit  price  increase 

$1,135 

$1,875 

$2,395 

$3,825 

$5,  870 

$15, 100 

2 

Engineering  cost  increase 

161 

385 

350 

125 

515 

1,536 

3 

Right-of-way  values — relocation  assistance, 
homes  and  businesses 

693 

890 

910 

250 

1,060 

3,803 

4 

Statutory  design  year  change — added  lanes, 
4-lane  minimum,  etc. 

739 

675 

320 

100 

515 

2, 349 

5 

Statutory  mileage  increase,  major  System 
adjustments,  etc. 

941 

930 

4,155 

-235 

30 

5,821 

6 

Added  interchanges  and  grade  separation 
structures 

289 

990 

240 

185 

160 

1,864 

7 

Increase  in  roadway  design,  bridge  width, 
tunnel  clearances 

445 

1,245 

3,265 

1,015 

2,355 

8,325 

8 

Additional  safety  elements  on  new  and  on 
completed  sections 

1,530 

335 

1,865 

9 

Increased  social,  economic  and  environmental 
requirements 

1,207 

555 

285 

515 

1,110 

3,672 

10 

Mass  transit — fringe  parking  provisions 
of  1970  Act 

125 

125 

11 

Construction  project  overruns 

257 

257 

Subtotal* 

5,610 

9,075 

12,255 

5,905 

11,872 

44,717 

Total  Estimate  1961  =  $41,000* 

$46, 800 

$56, 500 

$69, 870 

$76,300 

$89, 200 

*  The  arithmetic  disparity  between  the  addition  of  these  last  two  entries  is  the  element  of  cost  involved  in  categories  of  State 
highway  planning  and  research,  FHWA  administration  and  research,  and  in  contingency  items.  These  are  listed  in  the  reports  to 
Congress. 


484 


Completion  of  the  Interstate  System 

The  System  is  nearing  completion  in  rural  areas 
and  in  most  of  the  urban  areas.  The  benefits  derived 
in  the  new  freedom  of  movement  and  safety  of  travel 
have  been  enormous.  The  movement  of  people  and 
goods  on  this  System  results  in  a  user-benefit  ratio  of 
about  $2.90  for  every  dollar  invested  in  the  construc- 
tion of  the  System  over  its  service  life  period.  The 
differential  in  operating  safety  on  this  highway  sys- 
tem, over  other  highway  systems,  will  result  in  a 
saving  of  an  estimated  8,000  lives  per  year.  The 
System  contributes  dramatically  to  the  economic  de- 
velopment of  the  areas  it  serves  and,  because  of  the 
advanced  design  features  involved,  will  continue  to 
serve  this  development  long  after  other  highways 
would  have  become  functionally  obsolete. 

The  "finished"  System  may  yet  be  altered  in  urban 
areas  as  the  1973  Highway  Act  is  implemented  and 
as  Congress  gives  further  consideration  to  the  total 
transportation  needs  in  the  large  urban  areas.  How- 
ever, these  adjustments  can  and  will  be  made  without 
impairment  of  the  total  value  of  the  Interstate  System 
to  this  Xation's  economic  growth  and  social  well  being. 


The  $90  billion  level  which  is  approximately  the 
"cost  of  completion"  of  this  giant  public  works  project 
is  a  fair  price  for  the  end  product.  The  highway 
system  cannot  be  compared  in  service  or  in  cost  to  the 
limited  facility  under  consideration  when  the  basic 
highway  legislation  was  first  being  formulated.  The 
Nation  can  well  be  grateful  to  the  Congress  for  its 
wisdom  in  adjusting  highway  statutes  to  meet  public 
interest  requirements  as  the  System  developed.  The 
end  product  will  be  a  lasting  testimonial  to  the  Con- 
gress and  to  the  highway  oi'ganizations.  State  and 
Federal,  who  were  responsible  for  carrying  out  the 
program. 

REFERENCES 

'  BxjREAU  OF  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1954,  p.  3. 

^  A  Report  of  Factors  For  Use  In  Apportioning  Funds 
For  The  National  System  of  Interstate  and  Defense 
Highways,  H.  Doc.  300,  85th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  pp.  Ill,  IV. 

'  The  1961  Interstate  System  Cost  Estimate,  H.  Doc.  49, 
87th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  p.  13. 

*  Interregional  Highways,  H.  Doc.  379,  78th  Cong.,  2d  Sess., 
p.  114. 

'Id. 


485 


Con/tfuction 
in  the 
Federol 
Domoin 


Millions  of  Americans  visit  national  parks  and 
forests  and  other  Federal  recreational  areas  each  year. 
From  this  experience,  they  enrich  their  lives  and  gain 
new  appreciation  of  their  national  heritage  and  of  the 
natural  beauty  of  the  country.  It  is  difficult  today 
to  realize  that  just  a  few  decades  ago  the  trip  that  is 
casually  made  now  by  automobile  was  impossible  be- 
cause there  was  no  transportation  system  giving  citi- 
zens access  to  these  areas. 

The  thrust  of  western  migration  across  the  continent 
during  the  first  150  years  settled  the  land  and  still  left 
vast  areas  in  the  public  domain.  It  was  from  these 
public  land  areas  that  Congress  established  the  first 
national  parks  and  national  forests.  Yellowstone 
National  Park,  the  first  national  park,  was  created  by 
act  of  Congress  in  1872.^  Other  national  parks  were 
gradually  added  and  by  1900,  included  Yosemite, 
General  Grant,  Mt.  Rainier,  and  Sequoia.  A  rapid 
expansion  of  the  national  parks  system  followed  in 
succeeding  years. 

National  forests  have  developed  in  a  similar  fashion. 
The  first  forest  reserves  were  authorized  by  Congress 
in  1891,^  and  again,  they  were  taken  from  the  public 
domain  in  the  West.  The  forest  reserves  were  created 
to  perpetuate  the  country's  supply  of  timber  and  to 
ensure  a  more  regular  flow  of  water  from  streams  by 
preserving  the  forest  floor  to  prevent  too  rapid  run-off 
and  flooding.  In  1905,  Congress  transferred  the  forest 
reserves  from  the  Department  of  the  Interior  to  the 
Department  of  Agriculture,  and  in  1907,  Congress 
changed  the  name  "forest  reserve"  to  national  forest. 
Like  the  national  parks,  the  national  forests  expanded 
rapidly  and  today  constitute  a  major  resource  of  this 
Nation. 


The  development  of  both  the  national  parks  system 
and  the  national  forests  occurred  during  the  same 
period  as  the  development  of  the  Nation's  highway 
system.  Because  the  Federal  Highway  Administra- 
tion is  the  "roadbuilder"  for  the  Federal  Government, 
it  has  been  directly  engaged  in  the  location,  design, 
and  construction  of  public  roads  to  and  through  the 
national  parks  and  forests  and  other  Federal  domain 
areas  since  1905.  In  spite  of  extremely  limited  staff 
and  resources  in  the  early  days,  the  Office  of  Public 
Roads  constructed  a  macadam  road  on  the  grounds  of 
the  Weather  Bureau  Station  in  Mount  Weather, 
Virginia;  assisted  the  Forest  Service  in  securing  in- 
formation to  be  used  in  the  preparation  of  a  manual 
on  trailmaking  and  maintenance;  and  gave  advice  on 
the  construction  of  wagon  roads  and  trails  in  forest 
reserves  to  facilitate  lumbering.  One  engineer  was 
detailed  for  a  short  time  in  the  Yellowstone  Reserve 
during  1906  to  investigate  and  make  recommendations 
for  the  improvement  and  maintenance  of  forest  roads 
and  trails.^ 

In  1912  the  Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  con- 
tained a  provision  that  10  percent  of  all  moneys  re- 
ceived from  the  national  forests  during  each  fiscal 
year  be  available  at  the  end  of  the  year  for  use  by  the 
Secretary  of  Agriculture  for  the  construction  and 
maintenance  of  roads  and  trails  within  the  national 
forests  in  the  States  from  which  such  proceeds  were 
derived.  This  provision  was  made  a  continuing  ap- 
propriation by  the  Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  of 
1913.  These  laws  provided,  for  the  first  time,  a  sus- 
tained source  of  revenue  for  road  improvement  pur- 
poses in  the  public  domain. 


486 


Mount  Rainier  National  Park  in  the  State  of  Washington 
was  established  in  1899.    The  peak  is  covered  with 

snow  year  round. 


Because  of  increased  responsibilities  for  direct  road 
construction  activity,  a  Division  of  National  Park  and 
Forest  Roads  was  created  in  1914  in  the  Office  of 
Public  Roads  to  give  advice  and  to  supervise  major 
construction  projects  in  national  parks  and  foi-ests  in 
cooperation  with  the  Department  of  the  Interior  and 
the  Forest  Service.  At  that  time,  improved  roads 
were  practically  nonexistent  throughout  the  vast  areas 
of  the  West  where  the  principal  national  parks  and 
forests  were  located. 

Forest  Highways  and   Development  Roads 

By  the  end  of  fiscal  year  1916,  the  direct  Federal 
highway  construction  program  was  well  established. 
The  annual  report  for  that  year  states  that  approxi- 
mately 127  miles  of  reconnaissance  surveys  and  350 
miles  of  location  surveys  were  made.  Maintenance 
work  had  been  done  on  approximately  160  miles. 
Construction  work  was  in  progress  on  about  170  miles, 
of  which  approximately  70  miles  were  completed  dur- 
ing the  fiscal  year.  Of  great  significance  was  the 
construction  of  the  road  across  Rabbit  Ear  Pass  in 
the  Routt  National  Forest  in  Colorado — which  opened 
large  sections  of  country,  and  the  initiation  of 
construction  of  the  Trinity  River  Road  in  Trinity 
County,  California,  which  would  eventually  provide 
a  year-round  highway  connection  from  the  upper 
Sacramento  Valley  with  the  coast  of  Humboldt  Bay. 
Another  significant  survey  that  year  was  on  the  Mt. 
Hood  Road  in  Oregon.  This  road  was  essential  for 
the  comprehensive  development  of  the  Oregon  Na- 
tional Forest  and  in  providing  a  southern  outlet  for 
Columbia  River  highway  traffic* 

By  section  8  of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916, 
the  sum  of  $1  million  was  aj^propriated  for  each  of 
the  fiscal  years  1917  through  1926  for  a  total  of  $10 


million  to  be  available  until  expended  under  the  super- 
vision of  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture  for  the  survey, 
construction  and  maintenance  of  roads,  trails  and 
bridges  within  the  national  forests.  The  Act  provided 
that  the  work  would  be  carried  on  under  cooperative 
agreements  with  the  State,  territory  or  county  au- 
thorities on  a  basis  equitable  to  both  parties.  The 
subsequent  rules  and  regulations  provided  that  the 
cooperating  agency  would  contribute  at  least  50  per- 
cent of  the  cost  of  the  work  and  also  the  entire  cost  of 
maintenance.  There  was  thus  made  available  for  the 
construction  of  so-called  "section  8  national  forest 
roads"  slightly  more  than  $2  million  annually. 

The  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  necessitated  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  complete  Federal  highway  engineering 
organization  throughout  the  country,  and  in  1917,  10 
Districts  were  established  to  carry  out  the  responsi- 
bilities mandated  in  the  Act. 

.  .  .  The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  placed  with  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  the  responsibility  for  all  engi- 
neering and  construction  worli  on  the  national  forest 
roads  and  cooperative  forest  roads  to  be  built  under 
section  8  of  the  Act.  At  the  same  time  he  placed  with 
the  Forest  Service  the  responsibility  for  the  general  ad- 
ministrative work  necessary  in  selecting  the  roads  to  be 
constructed,  securing  cooperation  and  cooperative  funds, 
arranging  the  allotment  of  funds  and  financing  of  projects 
and,  in  general,  harmonizing  the  scheme  of  road  construc- 
tion with  the  requirements  of  the  national  forests." 

Independent  of  the  section  8  funds,  the  so-called 
"10  percent  fund"  was  still  available  to  the  Forest 
Service  annually  for  road  and  trail  construction  lo- 
cated entirely  within  the  national  forest  areas.  Part 
of  this  fund  was  allotted  by  the  Forest  Service  for 
expenditure  by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  on  survey 
and  road  construction  work  on  major  projects  which 
usually  were  also  financed  with  matching  funds.    The 


487 


The  Bitterroot-Bighole  Road  in  Beaverhead  National  Forest,  Mont., 
exemplifies  the  type  of  forest  highway  constructed  around  1916. 


Berthoud  Pass  crosses  the  Continental  Divide  about  60  miles  from  Denver 

and  was  on  a  line  of  the  main  east-west  highway  in  Colorado  in  1920. 

This  steam  shovel  was  surplus  equipment  after  WW  I 

and  allowed  considerable  savings  in  time  and  costs. 


488 


remainder  of  the  10  percent  fund  was  expended  di- 
rectly by  the  Forest  Service  on  the  construction  of 
trails  and  other  minor  road  construction  and  mainte- 
nance projects  needed  for  the  administration  of  the 
forests.  Within  BPR,  the  field  responsibility  for  the 
forest  road  work  was  such  that  each  district  forester 
would  deal  with  only  one  district  engineer. 

Breaking  the   Mountain   Barrier 

In  1918  the  national  forests  in  the  "West  comprised 
274,000  square  miles,  equivalent  to  the  area  of  the 
States  of  California,  Oregon,  and  one-fourth  of 
Washington.®  They  were,  in  general,  located  on  the 
slopes  of  the  Rocky,  Cascade,  and  Sierra  Nevada 
Mountains  between  Canada  and  Mexico.  They  com- 
prised rough  and  rugged  terrain  which  was  an  im- 
posing barrier  to  transcontinental  travel.  Of  greater 
State  and  local  interest  was  the  fact  that  the  intensive 
development  of  agricultural  and  other  resources  of 
the  valleys  required  the  improvement  of  roads  ad- 
jacent to  and  through  the  national  forests.  It  was 
imperative  that  mountain  barriers  within  the  national 
forests  be  conquered  if  the  Great  Plains  were  to  be 
connected  to  the  Pacific  by  trunk  highways  and  north 
and  south  travel  provided  in  the  intermountain  States. 
Dr.  L.  I.  Hewes,  then  General  Inspector  of  BPR, 
described  the  importance  of  forest  road  work  in  1920 
as  follows: 

.  .  .  Except  to  the  westerner  and  the  traveler,  the  idea 
of  altitude  may  not  carry  great  significance.  But  the 
effect  of  altitude  may  be  realized  when  it  is  stated  that 
from  the  Canadian  boundary  to  Helena,  Mont.,  there  has 
never  yet  been  built  a  road  crossing  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
Automobilists  who  visit  Glacier  National  Park  cannot 
drive  from  Glacier  to  Bolton,  30  miles  away,  until  the 
road  partly  within  the  Blackfeet  Forest  along  the  southern 
boundary  of  the  park  is  completed.  There  is  no  road  in 
the  State  of  Washington  that  can  be  traveled  the  entire 
year  across  the  Cascade  Mountains  between  the  Inland- 
Empire  and  Puget  Sound  and  western  Washington  popu- 
lations. The  same  is  true  in  Oregon.  The  only  all-the- 
year  passable  road  from  the  Columbia  basin  to  the  coast 
is  down  the  gorge  of  the  Columbia  River ;  and  at  the 
point  where  the  Cascade  Range  would  cross  the  river  a 
national  forest  road  has  just  been  constructed  on  the 
north  bank  from  Stevenson  to  White  Salmon.  There  are 
now  in  process  of  construction  in  the  11  Western  States 
more  than  20  projects,  all  of  which  run  over  mountain 
passes  at  elevations  of  from  3,000  to  10,000  feet.  These 
particular  roads  involve  some  of  the  most  difficult  pieces 
of  construction  in  the  entire  western  road  program,  and 
many  are  connecting  links  in  State  highways.  The 
McKenzie  Pass  Road  across  the  Cascade  Mountains  be- 
tween Eugene  and  Bend  in  Oregon  runs  for  3  miles  on  a 
mountain  top  over  a  fresh  lava  flow  in  which  not  a  single 
plant  grows. 

Second,  every  national  park  in  the  western  one-third 
of  the  continent  is  practically  surrounded  by  national 
forests,  and  motorists  can  not  reach  the  roads  already 
constructed  in  the  national  parks  unless  the  roads 
through  the  forests  leading  to  the  parks  are  first  con- 
structed. 

Glacier  National  Park  in  Montana  is  bordered  by  the 
Blackfeet  National  Forest ;  the  Yellowstone  is  completely 
surrounded  by  six  forests,  except  for  a  narrow  strip 
along  the  railroad  branch  from  Livingston.  Mount 
Rainier  is  completely  surrounded ;  Crater  Lake  can  be 
approached  only  through  the  National  forest,  although  a 
narrow  strip  of  patented  land  exists  on  the  southeast ; 
Yosemite  is  completely  surrounded,  except  for  the  road 
to  El  Porto :  and  Sequoia  lies  in  the  heart  of  the  Sequoia 
Forest.' 

In  addition  to  the  importance  of  forest  highways  to 
through  travel  and  to  community  development,  they 


were  essential  to  the  conservation  and  resource  de- 
velopment of  the  national  forests  themselves.  An- 
nually, there  was  a  tremendous  loss  of  timber  due  to 
fires  since  there  was  no  way  to  fight  forest  fires  in 
remote  areas  without  access  roads.  In  1920,  heavy 
timber  operations  in  the  national  forests  were  still 
some  years  away ;  however,  the  need  for  a  forest  high- 
way system  was  evident  if  both  timber  and  other 
forest  resources,  including  recreation,  were  to  be 
developed. 

Early  Administration 

The  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921  provided  a  num- 
ber of  elements  needed  for  the  administration  of  the 
cooperative  Federal-aid  highway  program.  Section 
23  of  this  Act  substantially  increased  the  funds  avail- 
able for  the  forest  highways  and  recognized  that  there 
were  two  distinct  classes  of  roads  needed  in  the  na- 
tional forests.  The  "forest  highways,"  which  were  in 
many  instances  extensions  within  the  forest  of  the 
State  and  local  road  system,  were  needed  for  com- 
munity use  and  resource  development;  in  addition, 
"forest  development  roads"  were  needed  for  the  pro- 
tection, administration  and  resource  development  of 
the  national  forests  themselves.  The  forest  develop- 
ment roads  have  been  a  direct  responsibility  of  the 
Forest  Service,  and  their  location,  design,  and  con- 
struction supervision  has  generally  been  by  Forest 
Service  engineers,  sometimes  with  assistance  from  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads. 

The  rules  and  regulations  for  administration  of 
forest  roads  and  trails,  approved  by  the  Secretary  of 
Agriculture  on  March  11,  1922,  provided  for  the  de- 
velopment of  a  forest  highway  system  through  the 
cooperative  effort  of  the  State  highway  departments, 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  the  Forest  Service. 
These  regulations  also  provided  for  the  development 
by  the  three  agencies  of  an  annual  work  program 
defining  those  projects  selected  for  improvement  with 
forest  highway  funds.  These  procedures  have  worked 
so  well  that  they  have  been  followed  for  over  50  years 
with  little  change. 

By  1921  the  importance  of  forest  highways  to  inter- 
state and  regional  travel,  as  well  as  to  the  full  devel- 
opment of  State  and  local  road  systems,  was  fully 
recognized.  At  that  time,  there  were  approximately 
14,000  miles  of  main  State  and  county  roads  within 
the  forests  still  to  be  constructed,  and  in  addition,  it 
was  estimated  there  were  approximately  13,000  miles 
of  forest  development  roads  or  service  roads  needed 
in  the  administration  of  the  forests.^ 

To  facilitate  the  construction  work  in  the  western 
States,  BPR  established  the  Western  Regional  Office 
at  San  Francisco,  California,  under  the  direction  of 
Dr.  L.  I.  Hewes,  Deputy  Chief  Engineer  in  Charge. 
The  six  western  districts  (with  headquarters  at  Port- 
land, San  Francisco,  Denver,  Missoula,  Ogden,  and 
Albuquerque)  were  placed  under  the  Western  Regional 
Headquarters.  These  locations  were  also  the  head- 
quarters of  the  corresponding  forest  districts. 

By  1929  there  were  14,166  miles  on  the  forest  high- 
way system  of  which  12,015  miles  were  in  the  11 
western  States,  South  Dakota  and  Alaska.  Some  im- 
provement had  been  made  on  4,091  miles  since  the  be- 
ginning of  the  program.^  Total  expenditure  through 
fiscal  year  1929  was  $77  million. 


489 


Laurence  I.  Hewes 


No  one  man  contributed  more  to  the  development  of  the  highways  of 
the  West  than  Dr.  Laurence  Ilsley  Hewes.  He  opened  the  Western 
Headquarters  Office  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Koads  in  1921  when  Wash- 
ington officials  felt  that  the  magnitude  of  the  national  forest  highways 
and  the  expected  increased  workload  resulting  from  the  1921  Federal 
Highway  Act  needed  more  direct  supervision  than  was  possible  by 
having  all  review  authority  placed  in  Washington.  In  the  course  of 
his  29-year  tenure,  he  stimulated  and  guided  highway  progress  over  an 
area  representing  one-third  of  the  Nation. 

Dr.  Hewes  was  born  in  New  Hampshire.  He  received  a  B.S.  degree 
from  Dartmouth  College  in  1898  and  a  Ph.D.  from  Yale  University  in 
1901.  He  then  taught  science  and  mathematics  at  Rhode  Island  State 
College,  Yale  University  and  Whitman  College,  Walla  Walla,  Wash- 
ington. In  1911  he  was  appointed  as  a  Senior  Highway  Engineer  with 
the  Federal  Office  of  Public  Roads  in  Washington,  D.C. 

In  1920,  as  General  Inspector,  he  conducted  a  study  of  the  operations 
of  the  California  Highway  Commission  and  of  its  accomplishments 
under  three  State  highway  bond  issues.  The  report  was  cited  as  being 
the  most  comprehensive  study  of  results  obtained  through  the  develop- 
ment of  a  State  highway  system  that  had  yet  been  undertaken.  In 
fact,  this  report  was  the  initial  highway  needs  study  of  the  type  later 
authorized  under  Section  11  of  the  1934  Hayden-Cartwright  Act,  which 
authorized  Federal-aid  funds  to  cover  the  cost  of  highway  planning 
surveys. 

Dr.  Hewes  was  selected  in  1921  to  administer  the  Federal-aid  high- 
ways and  the  direct  Federal  highway  construction  programs  in  the  11 
western  States  and  the  Territories  of  Alaska  and  Hawaii.  He  served 
continuously  as  chief  of  the  Western  Headquarters  for  almost  30  years. 

During  that  time.  Dr.  Hewes  guided  and  shaped  the  highway  trans- 
portation patterns  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  system.  He  assured  the 
connection  of  Federal-aid  road  systems  in  the  West  with  the  principal 
roads  of  Canada  and  Mexico  and  with  Federal-aid  routes  of  the  States 
to  the  east.  He  directed  the  construction  of  thousands  of  miles  of 
Federal  roads  and  trails  through  the  national  forests  and  parks.  He 
directed  the  coordinated  efforts  of  Public  Roads  and  the  western  States 
leading  to  the  designation  of  the  city-to-city  routes  of  the  National 
System  of  Interstate  and  Defense  Highways.  He  also  directed  the 
activities  leading  to  the  designation  of  the  Federal-Aid  Secondary 
Road  System  and  Federal-aid  route  extensions  through  the  urban  areas 
in  the  West  that  were  authorized  in  the  1944  Highway  Act. 

As  an  engineer,  controller,  expediter  and  manager.  Dr.  Hewes  had  an 
influence  on  every  phase  of  highway  construction.  "The  problem  of 
keeping  a  high  mountain  pass  free  from  winter  blockade  in  Colorado 
was  as  fascinating  problem  to  him  as  repairing  flood  damage  on  an 
Oregon  valley  road,  or  the  threat  of  shifting  sands  to  travel  in  the 
Imperial  Valley,"  according  to  a  testimonial  written  after  his  death. 

His  interest  in  keeping  the  Federal-State  partnership  active  and 
healthy  led  him  to  play  a  major  role  in  the  establishment  of  the  Western 
Association  of  State  Highway  Officials  (consisting  of  the  11  western 
States,  Alaska,  Hawaii,  Texas,  and  the  Forest  Service,  Park  Service, 
Land  Management  and  Public  Roads  agencies).  He  participated  in  all 
of  its  meetings  and  in  the  work  of  its  various  committees. 

In  addition.  Dr.  Hewes  contributed  many  technical  and  policy  papers 
dealing  with  highways.  He  authored  several  books  on  mathematics  and 
highway  engineering,  the  most  important  of  which  was  American  High- 
way Practice,  a  standard  engineering  reference  first  published  in  1942. 
In  collaboration  with  Professor  Clark  Oglesby  of  Stanford  University, 
he  published  several  revised  editions. 

In  1934  Dr.  Hewes  was  Chairman  of  the  American  Delegation  to  the 
Seventh  International  Roads  Congress  at  Munich,  Germany,  In  1946-47 
he  was  Consulting  Engineer  to  the  government  of  Saudi  Arabia. 


490 


Dr,  Hewes'  chief  hobby  was  his  job,  but  family  was  a  close  second. 
He  and  Mrs.  Hewes,  an  author  of  novels  for  children,  raised  a  family 
of  five.  He  was  also  an  enthusiastic  tennis  player  and  a  butterfly  col- 
lector. He  was  skilled  enough  in  lepidopterology  to  have  articles  on  the 
subject  published  in  National  Geographic  magazine. 

Dr.  Hewes  was  a  member  of  the  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers, 
the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  the  Cali- 
fornia Academy  of  Sciences,  the  Commonwealth  Club  of  San  Francisco, 
the  Cosmos  Club  of  Washington,  D.C.,  and  the  Sigma  Xi  honorary 
fraternity. 

Just  prior  to  his  death  on  March  2,  1950,  he  received  the  Gold  Medal 
Award  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce  for  exceptional  service. 
A  year  later,  the  Western  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
formally  approved  the  establishment  of  the  "Dr.  L.  I.  Hewes  Award," 
to  be  given  annually  to  a  highway  engineer  from  WASHO  in  recogni- 
tion of  an  outstanding  contribution  to  highway  development. 

"This  award,"  reads  the  resolution,  "will  perpetrate  the  name  and 
achievements  of  Laurence  Ilsley  Hewes  .  .  .  whose  superlative  contribu- 
tions in  every  phase  of  highway  engineering  gave  great  impetus  to 
Western  highway  development." 


491 


Tooth  Rock  Tunnel  on  the  Colmnhia  River,  Highway  Oreg., 

constructed  by  BPR  in  1936-37.    The  old  highway 

can  be  seen  above  the  tunnel  portal. 


492 


The  Growth   of  a   Valuable   Resource 

In  the  1930's,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads'  direct 
Federal  construction  program  in  the  Federal  domain 
greatly  expanded.  The  onset  of  the  Great  Depression 
prompted  Congress  to  enact  legislation  expanding 
public  works  construction,  including  funds  for  roads 
and  trails  in  the  national  forests  and  national  parks. 

For  example,  the  regular  forest  highway  fund 
authorizations  under  section  23  of  the  Federal  High- 
way Act  during  the  period  1921-1929  totaled  $58 
million,  whereas  in  the  period  1930-1939,  these  funds 
totaled  $93  million.  In  addition,  under  the  National 
Industrial  Recovery  Act  of  1933  and  several  emer- 
gency relief  and  construction  acts,  $43  million  in  ad- 
ditional funds  were  authorized  and  appropriated  for 
forest  highways  and  development  roads  and  trails. 
Of  the  total  funds,  $95  million  were  expended  on 
forest  highways  and  $40  million  were  expended  on 
forest  development  roads  and  trails  during  this  period. 

By  1940,  the  original  national  forest  lands  had  been 
increased  by  more  than  17  million  acres,  purchased 
under  the  Weeks  Act  passed  by  Congress  in  1911  and 
amended  in  1924,  which  authorized  the  purchase  of 
forest  lands  to  protect  the  navigability  of  streams, 
and  to  help  perpetuate  the  country's  water  supply. 
All  the  original  national  forests  were  taken  from  the 
public  domain  lands  in  the  West.  By  1940,  there  were 
2  national  forests  in  Alaska,  1  in  Puerto  Rico,  and 
158  in  36  States. 

"UHiile  in  1930  there  were  only  65  miles  of  forest 
highways  with  a  bituminous  surface,  by  1939  there 
were  about  1,670  miles  of  surfaced  roads  that  had 
some  form  of  bituminous  surfacing  or  paving." 

The  improvement  of  the  Nation's  highway  trans- 
portation system  was  making  the  national  forest  areas 
increasingly  accessible  and  contributed  to  their  be- 
coming a  great  national  resource.  In  addition  to  the 
production  of  saw  timber,  the  national  forests  pro- 
vided a  water  source  for  cities,  towns,  farm  irrigation, 
and    hydroelectric    power;    grazing    land    for    cattle. 


sheep  and  horses;  protection  for  wildlife;  mining  re- 
sources; and  reci'eation  areas.  In  1931,  there  were 
8  million  visits  by  people  who  used  the  national  forests 
for  camping  and  other  forms  of  recreation."  In  1939, 
14.5  million  people  visited  the  national  forests.^^ 

Postwar  Developments  on  the  Forest  Highways 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1944  authorized 
for  each  of  the  first  3  postwar  years,  $25  million  for 
forest  highways,  $4.3  million  for  highways  in  national 
parks,  and  $10  million  for  parkways.  By  concurrent 
resolution  of  Congress,  the  first  postwar  fiscal  year 
was  determined  to  be  the  1946  fiscal  year. 

During  the  war,  timber  was  cut  from  commercial 
stands  on  such  a  scale  that  the  supply  was  nearly 
exhausted.  In  developing  the  postwar  national  hous- 
ing program,  it  became  imperative  to  use  the  timber 
resources  of  the  national  forests.  This  resulted  in  an 
immediate  demand  for  timber  access  roads. 

At  the  same  time,  it  was  recognized  that  many 
forest  highways  on  the  Federal-aid  and  State  highway 
systems  constructed  in  the  earlier  years  needed  mod- 
ernization to  provide  an  adequate  level  of  service  for 
the  increasing  traffic  volume.  However,  the  scarcity 
of  materials  and  supplies  and  the  high  national  prior- 
ity assigned  to  building  houses  affected  the  resumption 
of  the  forest  highway  program. 

A  directive  from  the  Office  of  War  Mobilization, 
issued  on  August  5,  1946,  restricted  the  award  of 
contracts  for  construction  in  Federal  areas  to  im- 
provements needed  for  the  production  of  lumber  in 
order  to  conserve  the  use  of  materials  needed  for  the 
expanding  housing  program.  The  President  limited 
expenditures  for  forest  highways  during  fiscal  year 
1946  to  $12.5  million. 

Work  on  the  forest  highways  on  the  Federal-Aid 
Primary  Highway  System  had  ceased  in  1942,  and 
little  had  been  done  to  repair  surface  damage  during 
the  war  years.  Hauling  logs  and  timber  had  left  a 
deep  imprint  on  many  miles  of  main  forest  highways. 


Wind  Cave-Dcadtcood  and  Sylvan  Lake  Road 

in  S.  Dakota  with  a  new  railroad  bridge 

crossing  over  the  forest  highway. 


493 


Toward  the  end  of  the  forties,  there  was,  therefore, 
increasing  pressure  from  many  quarters  to  modernize 
these  highways  to  meet  the  growing  traffic  demand. 
The  Public  Roads  Administration,  in  cooperation 
with  the  State  highway  departments  and  the  Forest 
Service,  undertook  a  study  of  the  network  of  forest 
highways  in  the  western  States  and  Alaska  and  re- 
ported in  1948  that  an  expenditure  of  $40  million  for 
each  of  the  next  10  years  would  be  required  to  pro- 
vide a  well  balanced  and  adequate  system.^^ 

In  spite  of  many  problems,  in  1949,  232  miles  of 
forest  highways  were  completed  at  a  cost  of  $8  million 
and  projects  were  under  construction  at  the  close  of 
the  year  on  521  miles,  estimated  to  cost  $24  million." 
Many  important  forest  highway  projects  were  either 
under  construction  or  programed  for  improvement. 

The  direct  Federal  construction  program  was  grow- 
ing in  size  and  complexity  during  the  fifties.  Forest 
highways  were  authorized  $219  million  during  this 
period  which  was  more  than  twice  the  amount  au- 
thorized during  the  thirties.  The  amount  authorized 
for  forest  development  roads  and  trails  was  $222 
million  compared  with  $40  million  during  the  thirties. 

A  concerted  effort  was  made  during  the  1950's  to 
modernize  the  forest  highways  on  the  Federal-aid 
highway  system  that  were  no  longer  adequate.  A 
310-foot  steel  arch  bridge  was  constructed  across  the 
Snake  River  in  the  Teton  National  Forest  in  Wyom- 
ing, and  26  miles  of  forest  highway  was  built  through 
the  Snake  River  Canyon,  becoming  a  part  of  U.S. 
Route  89.  This  opened  a  new  route  that  saved  from 
50  to  135  miles  when  traveling  from  Utah  and  south- 
eastern Idaho  to  Jackson  Hole,  Grand  Teton  National 
Park  and  Yellowstone  National  Park  in  Wyoming. 
This  route  permits  a  gradual  climb  to  Jackson,  Wy- 
oming (elevation  6,235  feet)  instead  of  going  over  the 
summit  through  Teton  Pass  at  an  elevation  of  8,450 
feet  by  tortuous  mountain  road.  Because  of  the  dif- 
ference in  elevation,  the  new  route  also  made  a  great 
difference  in  travel  conditions  during  the  winter 
months. 

Highways   in   the  Territory  of  Alaska 

In  addition  to  the  normal  forest  highway  program, 
the  1950  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  contained  a  spe- 
cial forest  highway  provision  of  $3.5  million  each  for 
fiscal  years  1951  and  1952  for  the  construction  of  new 
highways  in  the  Tongass  National  Forest  in  Alaska. 
The  Bureau  had  been  building  forest  highways  in 
Alaska  since  1919  through  an  agreement  with  the 
Alaska  Road  Commission  in  the  Department  of  the 
Interior.  One  such  project  was  the  Turnagain  Arm 
Highway,  connecting  Anchorage  with  Seward  and  the 
Kenai  Peninsula  highway  system.  In  addition,  BPR, 
by  mutual  agreement  with  the  Alaska  Road  Commis- 
sion occasionally  performed  highway  engineering 
functions  throughout  Alaska.  By  1956,  some  400 
miles  of  forest  highways  at  a  cost  of  approximately 
$50  million  had  been  constructed  in  Alaska  by  BPR. 

The  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956  extended 
the  Federal-aid  highway  program  to  Alaska  for  the 
first  time,  and  it  transferred  all  the  functions  and 
responsibilities  for  the  Territory's  highway  program 
to  BPR.  Personnel  of  the  Alaska  Road  Commission 
were  transferred  to  the  existing  BPR  Alaska  at  this 
time,  and  the  direct  responsibility  for  the  location. 


surveys,  design,  contract  administration,  construction 
supervision,  and  highway  maintenance  of  the  5,356- 
mile  highway  system  placed  the  Bureau  in  the  posi- 
tion of  acting  as  a  State  highway  department.  In 
1959,  Alaska  became  a  State,  and  the  Alaska  Omnibus 
Act  made  the  State  responsible  for  the  Federal-aid 
highway  program  on  a  basis  comparable  to  that  of 
the  other  States. 

A   10-Year  Program 

In  1958,  Congress  directed  that  a  study  be  made  to 
determine  how  well  the  forest  highway  system  was 
meeting  the  highway  transportation  needs  of  the 
counties  and  communities  that  were  within  or  adjacent 
to  the  national  forests  and  that  a  10-year  program  to 
meet  these  needs  be  prepared  in  cooperation  with  the 
Forest  Service  and  the  States.  The  report  was  sub- 
mitted to  Congress  in  January  1960.  The  report 
noted  that: 

•  The  roads  of  primary  importance  to  the  States, 
counties,  and  communities  which  were  not  desig- 
nated as  forest  highways  totaled  28,884  miles. 
Approximately  48  percent  of  this  mileage  was  on 
the  Federal-aid  highway  systems  as  follows: 

Interstate  Highway  System  360 

Primary  System  2,332 

Secondary  System  11,272 

13,964 

As  a  comparison,  82  percent,  or  19,927  miles  out 
of  a  total  of  24,399  miles,  of  presently  designated 
forest  highways  was  on  a  Federal-aid  system. 

•  It  would  cost  approximately  $2.6  billion  to  com- 
plete construction  of  all  presently  designated 
forest  highways  to  adequate  standards. 

•  A  10-year  construction  and  maintenance  program 
for  roads  of  primary  importance  but  which  were 
not  designated  forest  highways  would  cost  a  total 
of  $803  million  for  construction  and  $237  million 
for  maintenance. 

•  A  similar  10-year  construction  and  maintenance 
program  for  presently  designated  forest  highways 
would  cost  a  total  of  $1.4  billion  for  construction 
and  $305  million  for  maintenance. 

The  report  estimated  that  the  10-year  construction 
programs,  totaling  about  $2.2  billion,  "could  be 
financed  by  continued  authorization  of  Federal  forest- 
highway  funds  at  the  presently  authorized  level  of 
$33  million  annually,  together  with  the  use  of  all 
other  funds  normally  expended  on  forest  highways, 
including  Federal-aid  funds,  State  and  local  matching 
money,  and  other  State  and  local  funds."  ^^ 

The  report  recommended  that,  since  Federal-aid 
funds  were  not  eligible  for  maintenance  of  highways 
and,  in  the  past,  authorized  funds  had  been  fully 
obligated  for  construction  of  forest  highways,  the 
approximately  $542  million  estimated  for  maintenance 
during  the  10-year  period  should  be  derived  from 
State  and  local  sources.  The  report  also  recommended 
that  the  apportionment  of  funds  be  continued  in  the 
historic  manner.^® 

As  of  January  1960,  national  forests,  or  purchase 
units  under  the  Weeks  Act,  were  located  in  41  States 
and  in  Puerto  Rico.     In  all  of  these  States,  there  was 


494 


iiiSmM 


-X7 


amm 


McKenzie  Highway  (Oreg.  Fn-22)  in  Willamette  National  Forest 
is  a  modern  design  and  has  numerous  safety  features. 


a  designated  forest  highway  system  except  in  North 
Dakota.  Xine  other  States*  had  no  national  forests 
or  purchase  units,  and,  consequently  no  forest  high- 
way system. 

Since  1960,  the  direct  Federal  highway  construction 
program  has  continued  at  about  the  same  program 
level.  Beginning  with  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 
of  1958,  forest  highway  funds  have  been  authorized 
for  each  of  the  succeeding  years  at  the  level  of  $33 
million.  Historically,  funds  for  the  forest  highway 
system  have  been  authorized  and  appropriated  from 
the  general  fund.  However,  the  Federal-Aid  High- 
way Act  of  1970  directed  that,  beginning  with  the 
fiscal  year  1972,  the  forest  highway  funds  would  come 
from  the  Highway  Trust  Fund.  This  Act  amended 
the  definition  of  the  term  "forest  highway"  to  require 
all  forest  highways  to  be  on  the  Federal-aid  system. 
This  change  eliminated  the  former  Class  III  forest 
highway  designation  which  included  those  highways 
designated  as  forest  highways  which  were  not  on  the 
Federal-aid  system. 


*  Connecticut,  Delaware,  Hawaii,  Kansas,  Maryland,  ]\Iassa- 
chusetts,  New  .Jersey,  New  York,  and  Rhode  Island. 


The  Hardships  of  Working  on  Forest  Roads 

The  history  of  the  BPR's  direct  Federal  construc- 
tion program  is  a  record  of  the  work  of  three  genera- 
tions of  highway  engineers,  many  of  whom  devoted 
their  entire  professional  careers  to  this  service.  By 
the  very  nature  of  the  work,  they  accepted  hardship 
and  personal  privation  for  the  love  and  challenge  of 
the  work.  Arthur  E.  Loder,  Assistant  Chief  Engineer 
of  BPR  in  1918  aptly  described  their  lot. 

Much  of  the  work  is  located  at  high  altitudes  where 
heavy  snow  remains  until  late  in  the  spring.  The  streams 
carrying  away  the  melting  snow  remain  at  flood  stage 
making  them  difficult  to  ford  until  the  last  of  June  and 
in  some  cases  even  later.  In  such  places  the  snow  may 
begin  to  fall  again  in  September  and  often  stops  field 
work  before  October.  Although  the  work  is  located  in 
every  climate  from  the  torrid  desert,  through  regions  of 
excessive  rainfall  and  high  timberline  altitudes  to  the 
frozen  forests  of  Alaska,  the  average  season  for  efficient 
work  is  short.  Under  these  conditions  work  must  be 
organized  and  rushed  as  fast  as  possible  while  conditions 
permit. 

Although  the  locating  engineer's  work,  with  its  inter- 
esting problems  and  the  call  of  mountain  and  forest,  is 
so  fascinating  that  he  is  rarely  content  thereafter  to  live 
in  the  plains,  his  existence  is  a  busy  one  and  his  hard- 
ships real.  He  soon  learns  to  regard  as  a  luxury  his  bed 
made  by  pounding  the  earth  with  an  ax  to  remove  the 


495 


I 


When  the  Clakamas  River  in  ML  Hood  National  Forest  reached  a  "200-ucar  frequexcij" 
When  ^^^^^  ^^^^^  .^  ^^^^^  ^^^^^^^^  ^^^.^^^  Highway  55  was  destroi/ed. 


496 


In  1967  repair  work  ivas  nnder'tcay  on  Orcg.  FH  55. 
The  men   ivorking  on  this  project  took  a 
quick  course  in  mountain  climbing,  which 
later  saved  the  life  of  at  least  one  man. 


The  slope  was  drilled  and  small  charges  of 

dynamite  were  set  to  blast  the  face  of  the 

slope  for  ivhat  is  called  presplitting  of 

cut  slopes.     The  drills  and  other 

equipment  had  to  be  high-lined  on 

cables  to  the  top  of  the  slope. 


Men  and  equipment  operating 
above  Highway  55,  both 
secured  by  ropes  and  cables. 
The  work  today  is  still 
as  challenging  as  ever. 


497 


stones  and  roughest  projections,  and  never  has  difficulty 
in  sleeping  without  shelter  unless  the  coyotes  howl  too 
much.  He  is  also  content  with  his  morning  bath  in  an 
icy  stream  and  never  complains  of  an  all  day  and  night 
hike  to  find  camp,  but  the  romance  of  the  work  gives  way 
to  the  most  serious  problem  of  existence  when,  on  a  long 
lonesome  reconnaissance  a  week's  travel  from  base,  he 
wakes  in  the  morning  to  find  that  a  neighborly  bear  has 
visited  camp,  destroying  his  light  grub  pack  and  making 
away  with  the  bacon  upon  which  he  had  relied  for  sub- 
sistence on  his  return  journey.  If  to  this  is  added  the 
sadness  of  finding  that  his  horses  have  slipped  their 
hobbles  and  disappeared  completely,  leaving  him  afoot, 
hungry,  and  four  days  from  grub,  his  misery  is  complete. 
When  a  survey  party  sets  forth  with  a  standard  camp, 
living  conditions  are  usually  good.  The  hardships  are 
more  often  encountered  on  the  long  reconnaissance  sur- 
veys when  an  attempt  is  made  to  travel  with  little  equip- 
ment, depending  upon  game  and  good  fortune  for 
subsistence.  Some  sections  can  be  traversed  more  easily 
by  waiting  for  snowfall  and  using  snowshoes  or  skis. 
In  Alaska  the  dog  train  is  useful.  It  is  not  an  uncommon 
experience  for  the  party  to  bunk  in  the  snow  without  tent. 
Occasionally  the  survey  must  be  carried  along  the  face 
of  precipitous  slopes  and  rocky  clilfs  where  a  misstep  or  a 
loosened  rock  would  be  disastrous.  In  such  cases  long 
ropes  from  above  suspend  the  men  or  protect  them  from 
accident.  In  1916  one  member  of  a  survey  party  on  this 
work  lost  his  life  from  a  fall  of  several  hundred  feet  on 
account  of  not  taking  such  precaution." 

In  1926,  the  BPR  Annual  Report  described  forest 
highway  construction :  "For  the  engineering  features 
involved  in  their  construction  and  the  difficulties  over- 
come these  roads  are  not  surpassed  in  the  world." 

Today  we  smoothly  cross  these  same  mountain  bar- 
riers on  Interstate  highways  which  are  a  tribute  to 
50  years  of  highway  engineering  progress  pioneered 
by  those  engineers  who  made  the  first  highway  loca- 
tions and  carried  through  the  design  and  construction 
of  the  first  improved  highways  across  the  mountain 
barriers,  tying  all  parts  of  our  country  together  with 
a  modern  highway  transportation  system. 

National  Park  Roads  and  Trails 

The  construction  of  roads  in  national  parks  was  an 
essential  element  of  park  development.  Prior  to  the 
establishment  of  the  National  Park  Service  in  the 
Department  of  the  Interior  in  1916,  improvements 
within  each  park  appear  to  have  been  the  responsi- 
bility of  the  park  superintendent,  and  road  improve- 
ments were  at  best  spasmodic  as  funds  were  made 
available,  but  some  progress  was  made.  Yellowstone 
National  Park  was  allotted  $15,000  in  1877,  the  first 
appropriation  for  roads  in  a  national  park.^^ 

The  U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  took  over  the 
roadbuilding  responsibility  in  Yellowstone  National 
Park  in  the  summer  of  1883  and  continued  to  be  re- 
sponsible for  road  construction  in  the  Park  until  1918. 
During  this  period,  the  basic  road  system  was  con- 
structed. General  Hiram  M.  Chittenden,  associated 
with  Yellowstone  National  Park  from  1891  to  1893 
and  from  1899  to  1906,  is  credited  with  having  a 
major  influence  on  the  development  of  the  Yellowstone 
Park  loop  road  system.  He  was  one  of  the  early 
advocates  of  building  high  quality  roads  in  the  Park, 
roads  that  would  sit  lightly  on  the  landscape,  taking 
advantage  of  the  terrain  by  curvilinear  alinement.^^ 

By  the  mid-1920's,  it  was  becoming  increasingly 
evident  that  the  activities  of  the  State  highway  de- 
partments, the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  the  Forest 


Service,  and  the  National  Park  Service  needed  to  be 
closely  correlated.  In  most  instances,  the  national 
parks  were  practically  surrounded  by  forests,  and  in 
almost  every  case,  the  approach  to  the  parks  was 
dependent  on  the  construction  of  a  main  road  through 
the  forests. 

In  1924  Congress  enacted  special  legislation  (43 
Stat.  90)  for  the  authorization  of  road  construction  in 
national  parks.  Following  this  legislation,  BPR  and 
the  National  Park  Service  worked  out  a  Memorandum 
of  Agreement  on  the  survey,  construction  and  im- 
provement of  roads  and  trails  in  the  national  parks 
and  national  monuments.  This  document  and  later 
ones  established  broad  principles  for  standardizing 
construction  of  these  highways  and  joining  them  with 
forest  roads  and  trails,  State  highways,  and  the 
Federal-aid  system  to  form  an  interconnected  system 
of  highways.^" 

A  statement  of  policy  on  roads  was  made  by  Di- 
rector Stephen  T.  Mather  in  the  National  Park 
Service's  annual  report  of  1924 : 

It  is  not  the  plan  to  have  the  parks  gridironed  with 
roads,  but  in  each  it  is  desired  to  make  a  good  sensible 
road  system  so  that  visitors  may  have  a  good  chance  to 
enjoy  them.  At  the  same  time  large  sections  of  each 
park  will  be  kept  in  a  natural  wilderness  state  without 
piercing  feeder  roads  and  will  be  accessible  only  by  trails 
by  the  horseback  rider  and  the  hiker.  All  this  has  been 
carefully  considered  in  laying  out  our  road  program. 
Particular  attention  also  will  be  given  to  laying  out  the 
roads  themselves  so  that  they  will  disturb  as  little  as 
possible  the  vegetation,  forests,  and  rocky  hillsides  through 
which  they  are  built.  .  .  ." 

See  America   First 

Under  the  new  park  road  Act,  work  was  initiated 
in  1925  on  the  construction  of  the  transmountain 
highway  in  Glacier  National  Park,  Montana.  This 
project  was  considered  one  of  the  most  important  of 
the  transcontinental  highways.  It  was  located  between 
Lake  MacDonald  and  St.  Mary  Lake  and  connected 
these  two  areas  of  Glacier  National  Park  via  Logan 
Pass. 

By  the  mid-1920's,  a  national  system  of  improved 
highways  was  beginning  to  take  form,  encouraging 
family  vacations  by  automobile  and  visits  to  the  na- 
tional parks  and  national  forests.  "See  America 
First"  was  the  slogan.  Auto  camping  was  becoming 
increasingly  popular.  The  first  automobiles  had  been 
admitted  to  Yellowstone  National  Park  in  1915,^2  and 
from  1918  to  1925  approximately  1.6  million  private 
autos  entered  the  national  parks.^^ 

Locating   National   Parks  in   the   East 

All  but  one  of  the  major  parks  were  west  of  the 
Mississippi  River,  while  two-thirds  of  the  population 
lived  east.  Director  Mather  wrote  in  1923,  "I  should 
like  to  see  additional  national  parks  established  east 
of  the  Mississippi,  but  just  how  this  can  be  accom- 
plished is  not  clear."  ^* 

While  western  parks  had  been  created  out  of  the 
public  domain,  the  only  extensive  land  in  public 
ownership  in  the  East  were  the  number  of  forest  re- 
serves acquired  under  the  provisions  of  the  Weeks 
Act,  which  authorized  the  purchase  of  land  for  the 
protection  of  forests  and  the  headwaters  of  streams. 
It  appeared  the  only  practical  way  national  park  areas 
could  be  acquired  would  be  by  donation  or  by  pur- 
chasing land  with  privately  donated  funds. 


498 


In  1925  Mr.  MacDonald  made  a  tnsit  to  the  construction 

site  of  the  Transmountain  Highway  in 

Glacier  National  Park,  Mont. 


The  Transmoutitain  Highway  (now  called 
Going-to-thc-Sun  Highway)  under 
construction  in  1927. 


^    ^  ^ 
^«?»:^ 


Going-to-the-Sun  Highway  in 

1962  in  Glacier  National 

Park,  Mont. 


499 


As  a  result  of  Director  Mather's  concerns,  Secretary 
of  the  Interior  Hubert  Work,  in  1924,  established  a 
Southern  Appalachian  National  Park  Commission  to 
make  an  investigation  of  the  southern  Appalachian 
Mountains  region  and  to  determine  whether  there 
were  suitable  areas  for  national  parks.  The  initial 
committee  appointed  by  the  Secretary  was  composed 
of  public-spirited  men  who  served  without  compensa- 
tion. The  only  funds  available  for  the  Commission's 
use  were  those  provided  by  private  individuals.  The 
Commission  devoted  much  personal  time  in  reconnais- 
sance of  the  area,  meeting  with  local  groups  and  in- 
vestigating the  feasibility  of  areas  to  be  recommended 
for  national  parks.  From  these  studies.  Congress 
drafted  the  necessary  legislation  in  1925  authorizing 
the  securing  of  lands  in  the  southern  Appalachian 
Mountains  for  perpetual  preservation  as  national 
parks. 

By  1926  enough  public  support  had  been  generated 
so  that  enabling  laws  in  both  the  State  legislatures 
and  in  Congress  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Great 
Smoky  Mountains  National  Park  in  North  Carolina 
and  Tennessee  and  the  Shenandoah  National  Park  in 
Virginia.  Later  the  Mammoth  Cave  National  Park 
was  established  in  Kentucky. 

In  the  Commission's  1924  report  to  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  the  following  comment  was  made  on  the 
Blue  Ridge  area  of  Virginia  that  became  the  Shen- 
andoah National  Park: 

The  greatest  single  feature,  however,  is  a  possible  sky- 
line drive  along  the  mountain  top,  following  a  continuous 
ridge  and  looking  down  westerly  on  the  Shenandoah 
Valley,  some  2,500  to  3,500  feet  below,  and  also  com- 
manding a  view  of  the  Piedmont  Plain  stretching  easterly 
to  the  Washington  Monument,  which  landmark  of  our 
National  Capital  may  be  seen  on  a  clear  day.  Few  scenic 
drives  in  the  world  could  surpass  it." 

It  was  this  vision  that  led  ultimately  to  the  construc- 
tion of  the  Skyline  Drive  in  the  proposed  Shenandoah 
National  Park. 

Pioneer  Road   Construction 

By  1930  the  work  initiated  in  1924  for  the  National 
Park  Service  on  the  improvement  of  park  roads  was  a 
significant  part  of  the  total  direct  Federal  construc- 
tion program.  A  system  of  national  park  roads  had 
been  selected  for  improvement,  involving  some  1,500 
miles  of  road.  The  cost  of  improvement  was  $50  mil- 
lion, and  $22.5  million  had  been  authorized  between 
1924  and  1930,  of  which  $20  million  had  been  actually 
appropriated.  Of  the  planned  system,  302  miles  were 
already  improved  at  a  cost  of  approximately  $9.2 
million,  and  construction  was  underway  on  241  miles 
on  which  the  cost  was  estimated  to  be  approximately 
$9.6  million.2« 

The  initial  project  in  1924  of  surveying  the  trans- 
mountain  highway  in  Glacier  National  Park  and  the 
work  on  the  Zion-Mount  Carmel  Road  illustrate  the 
difficulties  to  be  surmounted  in  pioneer  road  construc- 
tion. The  transmountain  highway  project  was  only 
accessible  by  saddle  horses,  and  in  the  very  early 
stages  of  work,  the  average  load  for  a  packhorse  was 
very  small.  The  project  was  on  the  west  side  of  the 
Continental  Divide  in  the  Rocky  Mountains  and  was 
15.7  miles  long.  It  started  at  an  elevation  of  3,537 
feet  and,  for  the  major  portion  of  its  length,  climbed 


along  the  "Garden  Wall"  to  Logan  Pass  at  an  eleva- 
tion of  6,648  feet.  In  the  upper  reaches,  the  location 
followed  virtually  a  vertical  cliff  for  long  distances. 

On  the  Zion-Mount  Carmel  Road  in  Zion  National 
Park,  Utah,  which  was  completed  in  1930,  a  tunnel 
was  necessary. 

In  the  4.6  mile  stretch  of  the  Zion  Park  Road  in  Upper 
Pine  Creek  Canyon,  there  is  more  than  a  mile  of  tunnel. 
The  tunnel  is  sufficiently  near  to  the  cliff  face  so  that  it 
has  been  possible  to  cut  openings  or  galleries  through  the 
face  from  which  views  of  the  canyon  may  be  obtained. . . . 

Before  actual  construction  work  began  much  had  to  be 
done  in  preparation.  A  feasible  route  had  to  be  found  by 
which  to  climb  from  the  floor  of  the  valley,  1,400  feet  in 
elevation  to  the  park  boundary  at  4,100  feet.  The  survey 
involved  weeks  of  arduous  labor,  climbing  rocky  slopes, 
cutting  through  dense  thickets,  hanging  from  hazardous 
points,  and  at  all  times  maintaining  an  accuracy  of  meas- 
urement which  would  allow  computations  to  be  made 
closely  enough  for  proper  control  and  close  estimate  of 
the  work  to  be  done. 

In  starting  the  tunnel  work,  it  was  necessary  to  begin 
at  several  points  along  the  line  and  excavate  the  galleries 
first  and  then  complete  the  tunnel  between  these  points. 
All  measurements  had  to  be  made  from  the  outside,  car- 
ried in  and  projected  through  the  tunnel.  Scaffolds  were 
built  on  the  outside  of  the  cliffs,  and  all  supplies  and 
materials  were  lifted  to  these  galleries." 

The   National   Park  System 

On  June  10,  1933,  President  Roosevelt  signed  an 
executive  order  establishing  the  national  park  system 
which  was  to  be  administered  by  the  National  Park 
Service.  The  components  of  the  system  were  identi- 
fied in  six  groupings:  (1)  The  National  Capital  Parks, 
comprising  the  lands  reserved  by  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment after  the  founding  of  the  District  of  Columbia 
in  1790  on  which  today  are  found  the  Capitol,  the 
White  House,  the  Lincoln  and  Jefferson  Memorials 
with  the  connecting  mall  and  park  area,  the  Rock 
Creek  Park  authorized  in  1890,  and  other  areas  and 
buildings  in  the  Nation's  Capital  of  great  historical 
significance;  (2)  21  national  memorials;  (3)  11  na- 
tional military  parks  and  9  national  battlefield  sites; 
(4)  national  cemeteries,  including  the  Gettysburg 
National  Cemetery  and  10  other  similar  cemeteries 
established  at  the  sites  of  historic  battlefields;  (5)  10 
national  monuments  on  military  reservations;  and  (6) 
21  national  monuments  on  national  forest  lands.  Al- 
together, there  were  137  areas  in  the  national  park 
system.^** 

Between  1933  and  1940,  six  new  national  parks  were 
established:  the  Everglades  National  Park,  Florida, 
1934;  the  Great  Smoky  Mountains  National  Park, 
North  Carolina  and  Tennessee,  1934;  the  Shenandoah 
National  Park,  Virginia,  1935;  Big  Bend  National 
Park,  Texas,  1935 ;  the  Olympic  National  Park,  Wash- 
ington, 1938;  and  King's  Canyon  National  Park, 
California,  1940.  BPR's  activity  on  park  road  con- 
struction was  thus  greatly  expanded. 

As  a  result  of  the  1933  executive  order.  Commis- 
sioner MacDonald,  in  January  1934,  established  the 
Eastern  Parks  and  Forests  District  in  Washington, 
D.C.,  to  provide  an  organization  to  undertake  the 
location,  design,  and  construction  of  park  and  forest 
and  such  other  highway  work  in  the  eastern  section 
of  the  United  States  as  might  be  entrusted  to  the 
Bureau.    The  result  of  this  action  was  to  bring  under 


500 


The  east  portal  of  the  tunnel  cm  the  Zion-Moxmt  Carmel  Highway  in  Utah. 

501 


Excavation  of  gallery  No.  1 
late  in  1927. 


View  of  Pine  Creek  Canyon 
from  gallery  No.  4- 


502 


View  of  the  completed  gallery  No.  4  with  reinforced  concrete 
lining  from  across  Pine  Creek  Canyon. 


the  new  district  direct  supervision  of  all  the  work 
contemplated  or  underway  in  the  East.  The  territory 
of  the  region  included  30  States  east  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains  and  the  District  of  Columbia.  The  work 
in  the  western  States  and  Alaska  remained  as  organ- 
ized in  1921  under  a  Western  Regional  Office. 

All  of  the  park  work  was  performed  under  the 
interagency  agreement  of  1926,  and  by  1939,  1,577 
miles  of  road  in  or  leading  to  43  national  parks  and 
monuments  had  been  improved  on  the  national  park 
system.^®  For  example,  much  of  the  original  Yellow- 
stone Park  loop  road  was  reconstructed  suitable  for 
automobile  traffic.  The  Red  Lodge-Cook  City  ap- 
proach road  to  Yellowstone  Xational  Park  and  the 
Cameron  Desert  View  approach  road  to  Grand  Can- 
yon National  Park  in  Arizona  were  both  completed. 
The  Crater  Lake  Xational  Park  loop  road  in  Oregon, 
portions  of  the  Fall  River  Highway  in  the  Rocky 
Mountain  Xational  Park,  and  the  Wawona  Tunnel 
project  in  Yosemite  Xational  Park  in  California  were 
also  completed.  This  timnel  was  approximately  4,200 
feet  in  length.  The  Big  Oak  Flat  Road  on  which  the 
Wawona  Tunnel  is  located  replaced  a  carriage  road 
built  in  1874  which  was  very  narrow  with  a  steep 
descent  into   Yosemite  Valley.     Building  a   road  to 


acceptable  standards  to  replace  the  old  road  called  for 
the  best  highway  engineering  skills.  The  new  road, 
10  miles  in  length,  included  three  tunnels,  three  major 
bridges,  and  2  miles  of  exceptionally  difficult  construc- 
tion. Work  was  also  in  progress  on  the  Tioga  Pass 
Road,  giving  access  to  Yosemite  National  Park  from 
points  east  of  the  Sierra  Nevada  Mountains. 

Skyline   Drive 

Late  in  1930,  work  was  begun  on  the  Skyline  Drive 
to  provide  employment  for  the  inhabitants  of  the 
drought-stricken  Shenandoah  Valley  and  to  open  a 
road  in  the  newly  authorized  Shenandoah  National 
Park  for  recreational  use. 

Today,  Skyline  Drive  extends  from  the  northern 
boundary  of  the  Shenandoah  National  Park  at  the 
outskirts  of  Front  Royal,  Virginia,  and  then  in  a 
southerly  direction  along  the  crest  of  the  Blue  Ridge 
Mountains  to  Jarman's  Gap  near  where  U.S.  Route 
250  crosses  the  summit  of  the  Blue  Ridge  Mountains 
at  Rockfish  Gap,  a  distance  of  approximately  97  miles. 
In  altitude,  the  Skyline  Drive  varies  from  approxi- 
mately 600  feet  at  Front  Royal  to  a  maximum  eleva- 
tion on  the  north  section  of  3,390  feet  on  the  side  of 
Hogback  Mountain. 


503 


Cole  Creek  Bridge  in  the  Great  Smoky  Mountai7is. 


A  creek  channel  change  was  necessary  on  this  section  of  the  highway  in  the 
Great  Smoky  Mountains.    Native  rock  was  used  for  the  wall. 


604 


A  section  of  Skyline  Drive  in  the  Shenandoah  National  Park 
about  9  miles  south  of  Front  Royal,  Va. 


Hand-laid  rock  embankment  at  Beacon  Hollow  Overlook  on  Skyline  Drive. 


W-'m 


m"     •?T»rs5.-< 


to^*      ■     .^^! 


505 


>.  :  '  —sis'         '^  ^    •     ■  «•      . 


Construction  in  1938  of  Crater  Lake  Rim  Road  switchback  along  Applegate  Peak 
(at  left)  in  Oregon.    Men  in  foreground  are  installing  a  culvert. 


Preliminary  surveys  were  started  in  January  1931 
with  only  5  months  to  make  surveys,  prepare  plans, 
and  award  contracts  for  approximately  40  miles  of 
highway.  The  initial  construction  work  was  let  under 
two  contracts,  a  20-mile  section  from  Thornton  Gap 
to  Big  Meadows  and  a  20-mile  section  from  the 
Rapidan  River  via  Big  Meadows  to  Swift  Run  Gap. 
Both  contracts  were  awarded  in  the  latter  part  of 
June  1931. 

The  Skyline  Drive  was  constructed  in  three  major 
sections.  Part  of  the  first  section  between  Thornton 
Gap  and  Swift  Run  Gap  was  surfaced  by  the  summer 
of  1934,  Because  of  the  public  clamor  to  use  the  park 
road,  it  was  decided  to  open  the  Drive  on  September 
15,  1934,  between  Thornton  Gap  and  Big  Meadows. 
But  it  soon  became  impossible  to  keep  tourists  off  the 
section  from  Big  Meadows  to  Swift  Run  Gap  and 
work  was  delayed.  The  surfacing  on  this  part  was 
completed  in  1935. 

The  northern  section  between  Thornton  Gap  and 
Front  Royal  was  placed  under  contract  in  1934,  and 
the  final  surfacing  was  completed  in  time  for  the 
dedication  of  the  Park  by  President  Roosevelt  in 
July  1936.  The  final  section  of  Skyline  Drive  between 
Swift  Run  Gap  and  Jarman  Gap  was  constructed 
between  1936  and  1939.3° 

It  has  been  estimated  that  the  grading  and  base 
course  operations,  covering  the  years  1931  through 
1938,  provided  approximately  2.1  million  man-hours 
of  employment  and  the  total  construction  cost  was 
approximately  $4  million. 


506 


Although  begun  hurriedly  during  the  Depression  to 
stimulate  employment,  the  blend  of  this  park  road 
into  the  mountain  landscape,  providing  the  most 
scenic  views  of  the  panorama  of  the  foothills  of  the 
Blue  Ridge  Mountains  and  the  plains  of  Virginia,  was 
no  accident.  It  was  the  joint  effort  of  the  National 
Park  Service  landscape  architects  and  the  Bureau's 
highway  engineers  in  carrying  out  the  policy  on  park 
roads  announced  in  1924. 

A  Master  Plan  for  the  National  Park  System 

Very  early  the  National  Park  Service  had  evolved 
a  general  development  plan  or  master  plan  as  a  guide 
for  the  development  of  each  park  area  in  the  national 
park  system.  The  road  system  plan  was  an  integral 
part  of  the  overall  master  park  plan  and  was  devel- 
oped through  collaboration  of  Bureau  engineers  work- 
ing closely  with  the  landscape  architects  and  engineers 
in  the  National  Park  Service.  It  was  customary  for 
the  road  system  plan  to  be  approved  both  by  the 
Director  of  the  National  Park  Service  and  the  Com- 
missioner of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  The  road 
system  plan  provided  a  means  for  identifying  road- 
way needs  and  improvements  and  allowed  for  phase 
construction  of  park  roads  and  trails. 

During  the  1940's,  much  work  was  accomplished  on 
the  development  of  the  road  system  plans  while  the 
construction  program  was  at  a  low  ebb.  However, 
even  though  there  was  a  scarcity  of  materials  because 
of  the  urgency  of  the  housing  program,  the  mileage 
on  the  national  park  system  increased  from  1,577  to 
1,979  miles.3i 


Spreading  crushed  stone  over  fresh  oil  on  Crater  Lake  Rim  Road. 


Keeping   Up  With  the  Vacationers 

After  the  establishment  in  1933  of  the  national  park 
system,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  was  called  on  to 
build  roads  in  many  of  the  areas  as  they  were  added 
to  the  national  park  system. 

The  development  of  the  Nation's  highway  transpor- 
tation system  had  also  brought  a  tremendous  increase 
in  recreational  travel  in  the  years  following  the  close 
of  World  War  II.  Visits  to  the  national  park  system 
mounted  from  a  low  of  6  million  in  1942  to  33  million 
in  1950  and  to  72  million  in  imo.'^ 

Providing  an  adequate  road  system  serving  each  of 
the  national  park  areas  was  an  essential  element  of 
the  development  of  each  area.  To  accommodate  the 
travelers,  much  work  was  necessary.  For  example, 
during  the  fifties,  the  Stevens  Canyon  Highway  in  the 
southeastern  part  of  Mount  Rainier  National  Park  in 
Washington  was  completed.  The  Moran- Yellowstone 
Park  approach  road,  between  the  Grand  Teton  Na- 
tional Park  and  Yellowstone  National  Park  in  Wyom- 
ing, was  also  completed.  In  the  eastern  United  States, 
the  work  included  park  road  construction  in  the 
Acadia  National  Park  in  Maine,  located  on  beautiful 
Mount  Desert  Island,  in  the  Great  Smolcy  Mountains 
National  Park,  and  in  the  new  Everglades  National 
Park. 

The  Mission  66  national  park  10-year  program  had 
as  a  target  date  the  completion  by  1966  of  the  mod- 
ernization of  the  national  park  system,  now  compris- 
ing 183  separate  units.  The  upgrading  of  existing 
park  roads  and  trails,  construction  of  new  park  roads 
and  construction  on  the  eight  national  parkways  ad- 
ministered by  the  National  Park  Service  was  a  major 


part  of  this  program.  Special  emphasis  was  placed 
on  modernizing  the  Yellowstone  National  Park  road 
system  in  anticipation  of  the  celebration  of  the  100th 
anniversary  of  Yellowstone  Park  in  1972. 

One  of  the  last  transmountain  highways  of  the 
West,  reminiscent  of  the  early  twenties  pioneer  effort, 
was  the  North  Cross  State  Highway  in  Washington, 
constructed  during  the  1960's.  After  construction  was 
substantially  completed,  the  North  Cascades  National 
Park  was  established.  The  highway  bisects  the  na- 
tional park  and  is  its  principal  access  road.  Important 
segments  of  the  highway  were  designed  and  con- 
structed as  forest  highway  projects. 

Throughout  the  national  park  system  the  unusual 
terrain  features  encountered,  the  necessity  to  preserve 
to  the  maximum  extent  the  natural  scene,  the  fulfill- 
ment of  park  objectives  in  constructing  roads  to  points 
of  special  scenic  interest,  and  to  meet  the  requirements 
of  other  park  objectives,  challenged  the  best  ingenuity 
of  the  highway  engineer  working  with  the  landscape 
architect. 

The  Development  of  Parkways 

A  parkway  differs  from  a  park  road  in  that  the 
park  road  is  within  or  leads  to  a  national  park  or 
monument  and  is  intended  primarily  to  provide  access 
to  the  national  park  without  disturbing  its  beauty. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  parkway  was  developed  as  a 
highway  primarily  for  through  traffic,  excluding  com- 
mercial vehicles,  with  full  or  partial  control  of  access, 
and  usually  located  either  within  a  park  or  a  parklike 
setting. 


507 


Jordan  Pond  in  the  Acadia  National  Park  in  Maine. 


Early  parkways  showed  the  potential  of  the  park- 
way. The  first  parkway  in  the  Nation  was  the  Bronx 
River  Parkway  completely  opened  to  traffic  in  1924. 
By  1934,  114  miles  of  parkways  existed  in  the  New 
York  City  area.  These  parkways,  developed  by 
private  authorities  to  move  commuter  traffic,  generated 
great  interest  among  highway  engineers  because  of 
the  imaginative  design  concept.  When  properly  de- 
signed, the  parkway  could  serve  a  twofold  purpose — 
it  would  provide  a  park  and  an  arterial  highway  at 
the  same  time,  and  in  a  manner  that  would  impact 
favorably  upon  the  surrounding  environment. 

The  design  concept  was  to  develop  the  parkway 
from  the  interior  outward  in  such  a  way  as  to  provide 
freedom  in  the  determination  of  the  highway  location 
to  take  maximum  advantage  of  the  landscape  for 
scenic  vistas  and  to  preserve  the  parkway  environ- 
ment by  suitable  planting  and  screening.  The  neces- 
sity for  preserving  the  arterial  highway  aspect  was 
also  recognized,  and  access  to  the  parkway  was  pro- 
vided only  at  long  intervals.  Special  attention  was 
given  to  the  development  of  interesting  alinement  by 
long,  easy  curves  fitted  to  the  natural  contour  of  the 
land,  with  special  emphasis  given  to  the  landscaping 
scheme  so  that  the  completed  road  became  a  part  of 
the  natural  countryside.^^ 

The  concept  of  national  parkways  under  the  author- 
ity of  the  National  Park  Service  came  about  in  1928 
when  an  act  of  Congress  authorized  a  highway  be- 
tween Mount  Vernon  and  Arlington  Memorial  Bridge 
to  commemorate  the  birth  of  George  Washington. 
National  parkways  encompass  ribbons  of  land  of 
scenic  interest  belonging  to  the  U.S.  Government  and 
are  authorized  by  an  act  of  Congress.  They  are  not 
designed  for  high-speed  point-to-point  travel,  but  they 
do  constitute  a  through  traffic  highway. 


The  Mount  Vernon   Memorial   Parkway 

In  December  1924,  the  68th  Congress,  by  joint  reso- 
lution, established  the  United  States  Commission  for 
the  Celebration  of  the  200th  Anniversary  of  the  Birth 
of  George  Washington.  In  May  1928,  the  70th  Con- 
gress passed  a  law  directing  the  Bicentennial  Com- 
mission, acting  through  and  using  the  services  of  the 
Department  of  Agriculture,  to  construct  a  suitable 
memorial  highway  to  connect  Mount  Vernon,  the 
home  of  George  Washington,  with  the  south  end  of 
the  Arlington  Memorial  Bridge  which  crosses  the 
Potomac  River  at  the  city  of  Washington.  The  ob- 
jective was  to  have  the  Mount  Vernon  Memorial 
Parkway  completed  in  time  for  the  bicentennial  cele- 
bration in  1932. 

The  concept  of  a  highway  to  Mount  Vernon  origi- 
nated with  a  group  of  public-spirited  citizens  organ- 
ized in  1886  and  incorporated  by  the  Virginia 
Legislature  as  the  Mount  Vernon  Avenue  Association 
in  1888.  An  interesting  sidelight  is  that  the  Virginia 
Legislature  simultaneously,  by  a  joint  resolution, 
transferred  to  the  Association  a  claim  for  $120,000. 
(The  State  had  loaned  this  money  to  the  United  States 
Government  in  1790  to  be  used  toward  the  erection  of 
the  public  buildings  at  the  permanent  seat  of  govern- 
ment in  the  United  States.  The  loan  was  paid  in 
person  to  President  George  Washington,  and  the 
money  was  disbursed  under  his  supervision.)  The 
General  Assembly  empowered  the  Association  to  col- 
lect and  receive  the  claim  and  the  interest  on  it  from 
the  U.S.  Government  and  to  use  the  funds  to  con- 
struct the  proposed  memorial  avenue  to  Mount 
Vernon.^* 


508 


No  tangible  progress  was  made  until  the  passage  of 
the  1928  Act.  The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  imme- 
diately delegated  the  duty  of  surveying  and  super- 
vising the  construction  of  the  highway  to  the  Bureau 
of  Public  Roads.  Earlier  the  Bureau  had  made  re- 
connaissance surveys  of  two  possible  locations  at  the 
request  of  the  Committee  on  Roads  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  one  an  inland  route  and  the  other  a 
route  along  the  shore  of  the  Potomac  River.  With 
the  approval  of  the  Bicentennial  Commission,  the 
river  route  was  selected  as  having  the  greater  scenic 
and  historical  advantage,  and  offering  superiority  for 
the  development  of  park  areas  between  the  highway 
and  the  river.^''  Surveying  and  determining  the  final 
location  were  begun  on  June  15,  1928,  and  the  work 
was  pursued  with  all  possible  vigor.  The  development 
of  the  Mount  Vernon  Memorial  Highway  was  most 


fortuitous  because  it  provided  an  opportunity  for  the 
BPR  to  further  develop  the  parkway  design  concept. 

In  1930  Congress  enlarged  the  concept  of  the  Mount 
Vernon  Memoi'ial  Parkway  to  provide  for  the  devel- 
opment of  a  parkway  along  the  shores  of  the  Potomac 
all  the  way  up  to  Great  Falls  in  Virginia  and  from 
Fort  Washington  to  Great  Falls  in  Maryland,  in- 
corporating the  parkway  section  already  under  con- 
struction as  part  of  the  George  Washington  Memorial 
Parkway. 

The  Mount  Vernon  Memorial  Parkway  was  com- 
pleted on  schedule  and  was  dedicated  in  a  special 
ceremony  in  conjunction  with  the  annual  meeting  of 
the  American  Association  of  State  Highway  Officials 
in  1932.  This  occasion  afforded  highway  engineers  a 
chance  to  see  at  firsthand  an  example  of  the  full  de- 
velopment of  the  parkway  concept.     Forty-four  years 


The  Mount  Vernon  Memorial  Parkway  in  Virginia  a  couple 
years  after  it  was  opened  to  traffic  in  1932. 


509 


George  Washington  Memorial  Parkway  in  Virginia  in  1959. 


later,  the  Mount  Vernon  Memorial  Parkway,  now  the 
George  AVashington  Memorial  Parkway,  remains  one 
of  the  most  scenic  drives  in  the  national  capital  area 
and  a  continuing  tribute  to  our  first  President. 

The  Blue   Ridge   Parkway 

The  establishment  of  the  Great  Smoky  Mountains 
National  Park  and  the  Shenandoah  National  Park 
and  the  success  of  the  Skyline  Drive  as  it  was  devel- 
oping in  the  Shenandoah  National  Park  led  almost 
to  a  natural  conclusion — the  construction  of  a  park- 
way connecting  the  two  parks. 

The  southern  Appalachian  region  between  these  two 
parks  was  one  of  great  natural  beauty  and  an  area 
depressed  economically  even  before  the  Great  Depres- 
sion. Because  of  the  mountainous  terrain,  large  sec- 
tions of  the  Appalachian  area  had  become  isolated 
from  the  mainstream  of  national  development.  Im- 
proved highway  transportation  was  recognized  as 
essential  to  the  economic  development  of  the  area. 

As  early  as  1911,  Colonel  Joseph  Hyde  Pratt,  head 
of  the  North  Carolina  Geological  and  Economic  Sur- 
vey, had  promoted  the  idea  of  a  recreational  road 
opening  up  the  beauty  of  the  North  Carolina  moun- 
tains to  be  called  the  "Crest  of  the  Blue  Ridge  High- 
way." Subsequently,  an  Appalachian  Highway 
Company  was  organized  which  undertook  to  build 
such  a  road  as  a  toll  facility.  The  effort,  however, 
was  abandoned  with  the  onset  of  World  War  I.^^ 


However,  by  1933  a  combination  of  many  factors, 
together  with  the  enabling  funds  of  the  National 
Industrial  Recovery  Act,  made  the  construction  of 
such  a  tremendous  public  works  project  feasible. 

There  was  great  competition  between  North  Caro- 
lina and  Tennessee  over  the  location  for  the  park-to- 
park  highway,  but  the  final  location  was  a  North 
Carolina  routing.  (An  agreement  between  President 
Roosevelt  and  Secretary  of  the  Interior  Ickes  pro- 
vided that  the  Government  would  select  the  route  and 
the  States  would  donate  the  right-of-way.)  In  De- 
cember 1933,  the  National  Park  Service  received  an 
additional  appropriation  of  nearly  $4  million  to  start 
the  Blue  Ridge  Parkway. 

The  design  and  construction  of  this  parkway  was  to 
become  a  major  effort  for  the  Region  15*  staff  for 
many  years.-  Few  roads  have  presented  such  a  variety 
of  location  problems.  The  terrain  varies  from  gentle 
to  the  most  rugged  in  which  road  construction  has 
been  undertaken  east  of  the  Mississippi  River.  The 
Blue  Ridge  Parkway,  from  the  Shenandoah  National 
Park  in  Virginia  to  the  Great  Smoky  Mountains 
National  Park  in  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee, 
covers  a  distance  of  476  miles.  With  the  Skyline 
Drive  in  the  Shenandoah  National  Park,  it  provides 
573  miles  of  scenic  parkway  extending  from  Front 
Royal,  Virginia,  to  Cherokee,  North  Carolina. 


*  The  Eastern  Parks  and  Forests  District  headquarters  be- 
came BPR's  Region  15  in  1957. 


510 


W^: 


The  Blue  Ridge  Parkway  winds  along  the  crest  of  the  mountains. 


''Wvy'-;^- 


.*'■■*■  X' 


The  Blue  Ridge  Parkway  in  the  fall. 


r 


i  -J 


/  V, 


M- 


;  -*< 


-"■^^ 


The  James  River  Bridge  on  the  Blue  Ridge  Parkway  has  a  pedestrian 
walkway  beneath  the  motor  vehicle  deck. 


1 


Most  of  the  parkway  is  above  3,000  feet.  It  does 
not  drop  below  2,000  feet  except  for  a  few  river  cross- 
ings, such  as  the  James,  Roanoke,  and  French  Broad 
Rivers.  Sections  of  the  parkway  near  Mount  Mitchell, 
North  Carolina,  and  on  the  Pisgah  Ridge  rise  above 
5,000  feet. 

By  the  end  of  1939,  47  miles  had  been  surfaced  and 
an  additional  87  miles  graded,  drained,  and  gravel- 
base  constructed  on  the  Blue  Ridge  Parkway.  An 
additional  170  miles  were  under  construction.^^  ^^ 

After  World  War  II,  work  was  resumed  on  the 
Blue  Ridge  Parkway.  By  1975  the  Blue  Ridge  Park- 
way was  complete  except  for  a  short  gap  near  Grand- 
father Mountain  in  North  Carolina. 


The  Natchez  Trace  Parkway 

In  1934  Congress  passed  an  act  directing  the  study 
of  an  additional  parkway,  the  Natchez  Trace  Park- 
way, to  follow,  as  nearly  as  possible,  the  original 
route  of  the  old  Natchez  Trace.^^  The  Natchez  Trace 
was  one  of  the  early  important  Indian  Trails,  extend- 
ing from  the  Cumberland  River  at  Nashville  in  a 
southwest  course  through  the  Chickasaw  and  Choctaw 
Indian  lands  near  Jackson,  Mississippi,  to  Natchez, 
Mississippi. 

As  early  as  1798,  Governor  Winthrop  Sargent  of 
the  Mississippi  Territory  was  urging  the  construction 
of  a  post  road  to  the  Natchez  District,  and  in  1801 
and  1802  treaties  made  with  the  Chickasaw  and  Choc- 


512 


taw  Nations  permitted  construction  of  a  wagon  road 
through  their  lands.  This  old  Natchez  Trace  was 
used  by  the  early  pioneers  who  rafted  their  produce 
from  the  Ohio  and  Cumberland  River  valleys  via  the 
Ohio  and  Mississippi  Rivers  to  New  Orleans  and  then 
returned  over  the  Trace  to  their  homes.*"  It  was  also 
an  important  military  route  for  General  Andrew 
Jackson's  army  of  Tennessee  volunteers  during  the 
war  of  1812."  Today  the  Natchez  Trace  Parkway 
extends  approximately  455  miles  and  is  about  75  per- 
cent completed. 

The  George  "Washington  Memorial  Parkway,  the 
Blue  Ridge  Parkway,  and  the  Natchez  Trace  Parkway 
are  covered  here  to  show  what  is  involved  in  estab- 
lishing a  national  parkway.  One  additional  parkway 
should  be  mentioned. 

In  1930  Congress  passed  an  act  establishing  a 
Colonial  National  Monument  of  the  area  which  in- 
cludes Jamestown  Island,  the  1607  site  of  the  first 
permanent  English  settlement,  and  Yorktown,  the 
scene  of  the  culminating  battle  of  the  American  Revo- 
lution in  1781.  The  Act  also  authorized  the  Secretary 
of  the  Interior  to  examine  the  feasibility  of  a  park- 
way through  the  monument. 

The  Colonial  Parkway,  covering  23  miles  from 
Yorktown  to  Jamestown  Island  via  Williamsburg, 
Virginia,  was  opened  to  traffic  in  time  for  the  350th 
anniversary  celebration  of  the  founding  of  Jamestown. 


Defense  Access  Roads 

During  the  years  of  World  War  II,  the  normal 
construction  of  all  highways  was  stopped,  and  many 
employees  engaged  in  this  work  entered  war  service. 
A  large  contingent  of  direct  Federal  construction 
employees,  particularly  in  the  western  districts,  were 
assigned  to  the  construction  of  the  Alaska  Highway. 
Others  were  engaged  in  the  construction  of  roads  to 
war  establishments  such  as  the  Indian  Head  Access 
Road  to  the  Naval  Powder  Factory  and  the  military 
highway  to  Andrews  Air  Force  Base  in  Maryland, 
which  was  later  transferred  to  the  National  Park 
Service  and  renamed  the  Suitland  Parkway.  But 
aside  from  the  Alaska  Highway  project,  the  biggest 
highway  project  undertaken  during  the  years  of  the 
war  was  the  building  of  the  road  system  servicing  the 
new  War  Department  building  constructed  in  Arling- 
ton, Virginia. 

The   Pentagon   Road   Network 

In  the  summer  of  1941,  Congress  appropriated  $35 
million  to  be  used  by  the  War  Department  for  the 
construction  of  a  new  office  building,  now  known  as 
the  Pentagon.  The  building  was  to  provide  office 
space  for  40,000  workers,  and  in  addition,  other  de- 
fense installations  were  planned  in  the  immediate 
vicinity.  The  War  Department  requested  the  Federal 
Works  Agency  to  undertake  the  layout  and  design  and 
to  supervise  the  construction  of  the  highway  network 
to  service  the  new  War  Department  building. 


The  Natchez  Trace  Parkway  in  Mississippi. 


513 


The  inadequacy  of  roads  approaching  the  Potomac 
River  bridges  crossing  from  Virginia  to  Washington, 
D.C.,  had  been  a  matter  of  increasing  concern  for 
many  years.  For  example,  in  January  1934,  Chief 
MacDonald  prepared  a  report  on  the  situation  for  the 
National  Capital  Parks  and  Planning  Commission. 
The  report  proposed  a  plan  for  a  system  of  arterial 
highways  to  be  used  as  a  basis  for  a  progressive  pro- 
gram of  improvements.  Through  the  years,  little  was 
accomplished  toward  these  objectives,  and  by  1941  the 
traific  flow  across  the  Memorial,  Key,  and  14th  Street 
bridges  had  reached  an  average  daily  total  of  118,000 
vehicles,  with  an  hourly  peak  flow  close  to  11,000 
vehicles. 

The  request  from  the  War  Department  required  the 
best  design  and  planning  engineers  available.  A  spe- 
cial design  section  was  established  in  the  Public  Roads 
Administration's  headquarters.  Engineers  were  as- 
sembled from  field  offices  to  work  on  the  largest  single 
design  project  ever  undertaken  by  Public  Roads  up 
to  that  time. 

The  design  problem  was  superimposing  a  new  high 
traffic  volume  created  by  the  new  government  office 
buildings  on  an  already  congested  road  system.  The 
location  of  the  existing  bridges  across  the  Potomac 
River,  the  proximity  of  Arlington  Cemetery,  the  ne- 
cessity of  connecting  the  principal  highways,  and  the 
requirement  that  the  design  be  functional  as  well  as 
esthetically  compatible,  posed  formidable  problems. 

Coincident  with  the  studies  for  the  Pentagon  net- 
work, the  Virginia  Department  of  Highways  con- 
ducted studies  for  a  new  highway  from  Woodbridge, 
Virginia,  to  Arlington,  to  bypass  Alexandria  and  con- 
nect with  the  Potomac  River  bridges.  (This  highway 
today  is  known  as  the  Henry  G.  Shirley  Memorial 
Highway.) 


In  September  1942,  agreement  was  reached  that  the 
portion  of  the  Shirley  Highway  from  an  interchange 
with  Virginia  Route  7  to  the  connection  with  the 
Pentagon  network  would  be  certified  by  the  War 
Department  as  a  defense  access  road  project,  and  the 
Public  Roads  Administration  was  directed  to  build  it. 
Responsibility  for  construction  of  the  two  projects 
was  assigned  to  Region  15,  Eastern  Parks  and  Forests 
Roads.  The  work  was  completed  in  1952.*^  The 
Pentagon  network  today  is  a  part  of  1-95  and  has 
been  reconstructed  with  some  new  alinement  under 
the  Interstate  program. 

Access  Roads  for  the  Bureau  of  Land  Management 

In  1949  the  Interior  Department  Appropriation 
Act  for  1950  provided  for  construction  of  access  roads 
on  and  to  grant  lands  that  had  been  returned  to  the 
Federal  Government  in  the  early  1900's.  These  lands, 
known  as  "O  &  C  lands,"  were  under  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  Bureau  of  Land  Management  (BLM),  and  in 
1950  a  Memorandum  of  Agreement  was  drawn  up 
between  BLM  and  BPR  identifying  responsibilities 
for  the  work.  The  Interior  Department  Appropria- 
tion Act  for  1951  directed  that  funds  be  turned  over 
to  BPR. 

The  O  &  C  lands  were  originally  two  separate  land 
grants.  The  first  was  the  Oregon  and  California 
Railroad  grant  in  1866  for  a  railroad  from  Portland 
to  the  California  border  consisting  of  odd  numbered 
sections  on  each  side  of  the  road  location  for  a  20-mile 
wide  strip.  In  1869  limitations  were  imposed  that 
the  land  could  be  sold  only  to  bona  fide  settlers  and 
that  not  more  than  160  acres  at  not  more  than  $2.50 
per  acre  could  be  sold  to  any  one  person.  However, 
the  conditions  of  the  grant  were  violated,  and  in  1915 


The  Suitland  Parkway  near  Andrews  Air  Force  Base,  Maryland. 


514 


board  feet  presently  available,  or  about  3  percent  of 
the  Nation's  total  production.  In  addition,  receipts 
for  fiscal  year  1976  were  $118  million,  of  which  50 
percent  is  returned  to  the  18  counties  for  such  uses  as 
roads,  schools,  public  works,  and  other  needs  of  the 
counties.  The  Treasury  Department  receives  25  per- 
cent of  the  remainder  and  BLM  uses  the  other  25 
percent  to  manage  the  lands.^* 

Funds  transferred  to  BPR  for  design  and  construc- 
tion have  ranged  from  an  initial  $550,000  for  fiscal 
year  1951  to  $11.6  million  for  fiscal  year  1975.  Since 
1954  BPR  has  also  been  responsible  for  the  perform- 
ance of  the  maintenance  work  on  these  roads.  To  date, 
BPR  has  constructed  4,900  miles  of  one-  and  two-lane 
roads  on  the  O  &  C  lands.  Although  initially  devel- 
oped as  timber  access  roads,  most  of  the  roads  are 
open  to  the  public,  and  recreational  use  of  these  roads 
has  increased  substantially  in  recent  years. 


The  Xestucca  River  Road  in   the  Oregon   Coast  Range  was 
improved  m  1967  for  use  as  a  timber  access  road,  but  it  has 
become  an  area  also  used  for  recreational  purposes. 


the  Supreme  Court  enjoined  the  Company  from  fur- 
ther disposition  of  lands.  About  2.9  million  acres 
were  returned  to  the  Federal  Government  in  1916. 
The  other  piece  of  land  was  granted  in  1868  to  the 
Southern  Oregon  Company  for  a  wagon  road  between 
Coos  Bay  and  Roseburg  consisting  of  three  alternate 
sections  per  mile  in  a  strip  3  miles  on  either  side  of 
the  wagon  road  location.  When  this  land  was  re- 
turned in  1919  for  similar  reasons,  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment reclaimed  93,000  acres.*^ 

The  O  &  C  lands  are  located  in  the  Coast  Range 
and  on  the  western  slope  of  the  Cascades  in  Oregon 
and  contain  very  valuable  and  productive  timber 
lands.  At  the  time  of  the  1950  agreement,  the  O  &  C 
lands  were  essentially  unroaded  and  isolated.  The 
roads  designed  and  constructed  under  BPR  super- 
vision made  these  lands  accessible  for  timber  produc- 
tion. 

The  major  impact  of  the  road  construction  was  the 
improvement  in  the  local  economy  stimulated  by  the 
logging  operations.  Timber  available  for  sale  went 
from   500   million   board   feet  in   1937  to   1.2  billion 


Demonstration  Projects  Program 

In  1969  a  Demonstration  Projects  Program  was 
established  in  Region  15  with  the  objective  of  pro- 
moting, by  demonstration,  the  application  of  new 
technology  as  it  applied  to  highway  location,  design, 
construction,  maintenance,  and  operation.  This  pro- 
gram was  to  reestablish  one  of  the  most  successful 
programs  initiated  by  the  original  Office  of  Road 
Inquiry  in  1897  and  carried  on  as  a  major  program 
effort  for  many  years  thereafter — the  construction  of 
"object  lesson  roads"  and  the  conduct  of  demonstra- 
tion programs.  This  program  was  established  in 
Region  15  because  this  office  had  experienced  most 
every  type  of  highway  construction  under  a  wide 
range  of  field  conditions  and  because  the  Region  15 
project  personnel  included  competent  practicing  high- 
way engineers  and  technicians  who  could  communicate 
readily  with  their  counterparts  in  the  FHWA  head- 
quarters R  and  D  and  field  offices  and  State  transpor- 
tation agencies. 

Since  the  establishment  of  the  Demonstration 
Projects  Program,  many  successful  demonstration 
projects  have  been  carried  out.  Particularly  note- 
worthy was  the  construction  on  the  grounds  of  Dulles 
Airport  in  1972  of  one  of  the  first  prestressed  rein- 
forced concrete  pavements  and  the  construction  of  a 
large  parking  lot  in  conjunction  with  the  Transpo  '72 
exhibition,  using  a  calcium  sulphate  sludge  and  fly 
ash  as  a  base  stabilization  product. 


The  Chaco  Wash  Bridge  on  the 
Navajo  Indian  Reservation  in 

New  Mexico  was  built  by  agree- 
ment for  the  Bureau  of  Indian 

Affairs.    Note  the  rock  and  loire 

channel  protection  in  the  right 

foreground. 


515 


The  Woodrow  Wilson  Memorial  Bridge  on  I-Jf95,  the  Capital  Beltway, 
crosses  the  Potomac  River  south  of  Washington,  D.G. 


In  1974-75  a  program  for  detecting  the  premature 
deterioration  of  reinforced  concrete  highway  bridge 
decks  as  a  result  of  using  deicing  salts  became  avail- 
able for  demonstration.  It  was  a  two-part  project, 
the  initial  project  being  a  series  of  evaluation  tech- 
niques to  determine  the  degree  of  damage  already 
occurring  in  the  bridge  deck  and  the  second  project 
demonstrated  an  electrical  method  to  stop  the  corro- 
sion of  reinforcing  steel  occurring  in  the  bridge  deck. 

Erosion  along  highway  rights-of-way,  particularly 
at  major  drainage  structures,  has  presented  the  high- 
way engineer  with  numerous  design,  construction,  and 
maintenance  problems.  These  problems  exist  because 
the  construction  of  a  highway  system  often  disrupts, 
and  in  many  instances  alters,  natural  drainage  net- 
works. This  disruption  and  alteration  generally  re- 
sults in  high  velocity  flow  within  highway  drainage 
structures.  While  this  is  desirable  from  the  stand- 
point of  carrying  large  volumes  of  runoff  in  relatively 
small  structures,  it  frequently  leads  to  serious  erosion 
problems.  A  demonstration  project  was  established 
to  educate  and  train  highway  engineers  on  the  proper 
selection  and  design  of  a  broad  range  of  flow  control 
devices  which  serve  to  dissipate  the  hydraulic  energy. 

Two  other  demonstration  projects  expected  to  bene- 
fit State  agencies  in  cost-effectiveness  planning  are  the 
demonstration  of  noise  measurement  techniques, 
equipment  systems,  data  interpretation,  and  the  dem- 
onstration of  air  quality  monitoring  devices.  By  the 
requirements  of  the  1970  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act, 
noise  level  standards  and  air  quality  guidelines  were 


developed.  The  demonstration  projects  make  known 
to  the  State  agencies  the  equipment  available  to  make 
necessary  measurements,  techniques  for  analyzing  the 
data  and  projecting  the  impact  of  planned  construc- 
tion projects,  and  to  assist  the  States  in  selecting  the 
equipment  suitable  to  their  particular  needs  based  on 
cost/benefit. 

The  Demonstration  Projects  Program  attempts  to 
touch  on  every  aspect  of  concern  within  the  highway 
industry.  In  addition  to  the  five  projects  above,  the 
Demonstration  Program  included  demonstrations  on 
safety  (High  Performance  and  Energy  Absorbing 
Bridge  Rails),  waste  materials  (Discarded  Tires  in 
Highway  Construction),  conservation  of  natural  re- 
sources (Recycling  Asphalt  Pavements),  public  edu- 
cation (Highway  Photomontage)  to  translate  the 
technical  information  of  highway  planning  and  de- 
sign so  that  the  community  can  become  knowledgeably 
involved,  design  (Automated  Design  System),  and 
many  other  features,  concepts  and  techniques. 

The  success  of  any  program  is  its  measure  of  effec- 
tiveness in  terms  of  real  world  results.  Just  as  the 
object  lesson  roads  of  the  early  days  of  the  Federal 
Highway  Administration  broadcast  the  knowledge 
available  and  how  to  do  it  with  the  materials  at  hand 
for  cost/benefit,  so  also  is  the  purpose  of  today's 
Demonstration  Projects  Program.  The  long-range 
objective  of  both  efforts  is  a  more  economical  environ- 
mentally acceptable  transportation  system  for  the 
good  of  the  country. 


516 


A   Program   to    Enrich   the   Quality   of   Life 

In  addition  to  the  work  performed  for  the  Forest 
Service,  the  National  Park  Service,  the  War  Depart- 
ment, and  the  Bureau  of  Land  Management,  the 
Federal  Highway  Administration  has  standing  agree- 
ments with  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs,  in  the  De- 
partment of  the  Interior,  and  with  several  other 
agencies  to  construct  roads  on  lands  under  their 
jurisdictions  upon  request. 

An  interesting  project  developed  when,  in  1956, 
Congress  directed  that  the  Bureau  of  Public  Eoads 
should  build  the  "Woodrow  Wilson  Memorial  Bridge. 
This  5,900-foot  bridge  across  the  Potomac  River  is  a 
vital  link  in  the  Capital  Beltway  around  Washington, 
D.C.  Region  15  supervised  the  construction  of  the 
bridge  because  the  bridge  involved  three  govern- 
mental jurisdictions — Virginia,  the  District  of  Co- 
lumbia, and  Maryland.  The  Woodrow  Wilson 
Memorial  Bridge  was  opened  to  traffic  in  1961. 

The  Federal  Highway  Administration  has,  for  a 
continuous  span  of  70  years,  contributed  its  highway 
engineering  expertise  to  the  planning,  location,  design, 
and  construction  of  roads  in  the  Federal  domain  for 
other  government  agencies.  The  many  beautiful 
highways  and  parkways  constructed  under  this  pro- 
gram are  a  legacy  for  future  generations  to  enjoy  as 
they  continue  to  serve  the  transportation  system  in 
the  national  forests  and  parks  and  other  Federal  do- 
main areas. 

In  1973,  citizens  visited  the  national  forests  and 
national  park  system  areas  in  record  numbers — 188 
million  visitor-days  in  national  forests  and  215  million 
visits  to  national  park  system  areas.  These  figures 
speak  for  themselves  in  rating  the  contribution  the 
direct  Federal  highway  program  has  made  to  enrich- 
ing the  quality  of  life  for  our  Nation. 


REFERENCES 

'  R.  Lee,  Family  Tkee  of  the  National  Park  Service 
(Eastern  National  Park  and  Monument  Association,  Phila- 
delphia, 1972)  p.  9. 

'  Public  Roads  Administration,  Report  to  the  Committee 
On  Roads,  House  of  Representatives,  Forest  Highway 
System  (Federal  Works  Agency,  Washington,  D.C,  1940) 
p.  2. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1906,  p.  23 ; 
1907,  p.  21. 

*  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1916,  pp.  5,  6. 

'A.  LoDEB,  The  Location  and  Building  of  Roads  in  the 
National  Forests,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  1,  No.  4,  Aug.  1918,  p.  7. 

'Id.,  p.  5. 

'  L.  Hewes,  Federal  Road  Building  in  the  National  Forests 
of  the  West,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  3,  No.  26,  Jun.  1920,  p.  18. 

'  BuTBEAU  OF  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1921,  p.  20. 

'Bu'REAU  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1929,  pp.  37,  38. 

'"Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1939,  pp.  62,  63. 

"  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Annual  Report  of  the 
Forester  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C,  1932)  p.  23. 

"  Forest  Lands  of  the  United  States,  S.  Doc.  32,  77th 
Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  p.  9. 

"  Bureau  of  Pl^blic  Roads  Annual  Report,  1948,  pp.  24,  35. 

"  Bu'REAU  OF  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1949,  p.  38. 


"Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Report  On  the  Forest  High- 
way Study  Required  By  Section  3(b)  of  the  Federal- Aid 
Highway  Act  of  1958  (Dept.  of  Commerce,  Washington,  D.C, 
1960)  pp.  1,  2. 

"  Id.,  p.  2. 

"A.  LoDER,  supra,  note  5,  pp.  11,  12. 

"  B.  O'Brien,  The  Yellowstone  National  Park  Road  System : 
Past,  Present  and  Future  (unpublished  dissertation,  University 
of  Washington,  1965)  p.  10. 

"/d.,  pp.  81,  96-102. 

"•  Memorandum  of  Agreement  Between  the  National  Park 
Service  and  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Relating  to  the 
Survey,  Construction,  and  Improvement  of  Roads  and  Trails 
in  the  National  Parks  and  National  Monuments,  .Jan. -Feb. 
1926. 

"  S.  Mather,  Report  of  the  Director  of  the  National  Park 
Service,  Annual  Report  of  the  Department  of  the  Interior, 

1924  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C,  1924)  p.  14. 

"  B.  O'Brien,  supra,  note  18,  p.  125. 

"  S.  Mather,  Report  of  the  Director  of  the  National  Park 
Service,  Annual  Report  of  the  Department  of  the  Interior, 

1925  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C,  1925)  p.  65. 

"  S.  Mather,  Report  of  the  Director  of  the  National  Park 
Service,  Annual  Report  of  the  Department  of  the  Interior, 
1923  (GPO,  Washington,  D.C,  1923)  p.  14. 

"U.S.  Department  of  the  Interior,  Final  Report  of  the 
Southern  Appalachian  National  Park  Commission  to  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior,  .June  30,  1931  (GPO,  Wasliington, 
D.C,  1931)  p.  8. 

^°T.  MacDonald,  The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  and  Its 
Work   (BPR,  Washington,  D.C,  .June  1930)  pp.  42,  43. 

"Id.,  pp.  40-42. 

^  R.  Lee,  supra,  note  1,  pp.  21-35. 

''  BPR,  supra,  note  10,  pp.  63,  64. 

'"  B.  Smith,  The  Story  of  the  Skyline  Drive,  The  Virginia 
Road  Builder,  Vol.  I,  No.  4,  Nov.  1945,  pp.  11,  12 ;  Vol.  I,  No.  5, 
Jan.  1946,  pp.  6-8;  Vol.  I,  No.  6,  Mar.  1946,  pp.  8,  9;  Vol.  II, 
No.  1,  May-Jun.  1946,  pp.  8,  9;  Vol.  II,  No.  2,  Jul.-Aug.  1946, 
pp.  8-11 ;  Vol.  II,  No.  3,  Sept.-Oct.  1946,  pp.  10,  11. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1949,  p.  105. 

"  R.  Lee,  supra,  note  1,  p.  38. 

"E.  James,  Parkway  Features  of  Interest  to  the  Highway 
Engineer,  Public  Roads,  Vol.  10,  No.  2,  Apr.  1929,  pp.  21,  22. 

'*  J.  Reavis,  Mount  Vernon  Avenue,  A  National  Memorial 
Highway  From  Washington  to  Mount  Vernon  (Mount 
Vernon  Avenue  Association,  Washington,  D.C,  1888)  pp.  4—7. 

''  R.  Toms  &  J.  Johnson,  The  Design  and  Construction  of 
the  Mount  Vernon  Memorial  Highway,  Journal  of  the  Ameri- 
can Concrete  Institute,  Vol.  3,  No.  8,  Apr.  1932.  p.  563. 

'°H.  JoLLEY,  The  Blue  Ridge  Parkway  (University  of 
Tennessee  Press,  Knoxville,  1969)  pp.  12,  13. 

"  H.  Spelman,  Design  and  Construction  Features  of  the 
Blue  Ridge  Parkway,  Roads  and  Streets,  Vol.  79,  No.  7,  Jul. 
1936,  pp.  27,  28. 

^  H.  Spelman,  Tunnels  and  Bridges  Solve  Difficult  Location 
Problems  on  Ifl 6-Mile  Blue  Ridge  Parkway,  Civil  Engineering, 
Vol.  17,  No.  7,  Jul.  1947,  p.  20. 

'^  Natchez  Trace  Parkway  Survey,  S.  Doc.  No.  148,  76th 
Cong.,  3d  Sess.,  pp.  v,  150. 

'"  Id.,  pp.  26,  81,  32. 

"  Id.,  pp.  82,  83,  85. 

"  F.  Cron,  Appendix  A,  Statement  of  Historical  Reference 
Relating  to  the  Development  of  the  Pentagon  Road  System 
and  the  Connecting  Shirley  Memorial  Highway,  Oct.  24,  1960, 
unpublished  appendix  to  Pentagon  Area  Transportation 
Study  (BPR,  Washington,  D.C,  1961). 

"  Information  from  unpublished  material  in  the  Division  of 
Forestry  in  the  Bureau  of  Land  Management,  U.S.  Department 
of  the  Interior. 

"  Interview  with  Robert  Bainbridge  of  the  Division  of 
Forestry  in  the  Bureau  of  Land  Management,  U.S.  Department 
of  the  Interior. 


517 


Internotionol 
Operation/ 


Concurrent  with  the  extensive  development  of  high- 
ways in  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Highway 
Administration  and  its  predecessors  have  traditionally 
carried  out  a  number  of  important  projects  and  op- 
erations in  the  international  field.  Three  of  the  major 
international  efforts  undertaken  have  been  the  Alaska 
Highway,  the  Inter-American  Highway,  and  a  con- 
tinuing technical  assistance  program  to  foreign  coun- 
tries. Also,  with  transportation  research  assuming 
an  increasing  international  importance  in  recent 
years,  the  international  exchange  of  information  and 
the  coordinated  multinational  development  of  trans- 
portation research  has  become  an  important  function 
in  the  research  and  development  programs  of  the 
Federal  Highway  Administration  (FHWA). 

In  its  international  operations,  the  FHWA 
cooperates  with  major  financial  and  developmental 
institutions,  such  as  the  International  Bank  for  Re- 
construction and  Development,  the  Inter-American 
Development  Bank,  the  Export-Import  Bank,  the 
United  Nations,  the  Organization  of  American  States, 
and  the  Department  of  State  through  its  Agency  for 
International  Development  (AID).  In  addition,  for- 
eign contacts  have  been  established  through  interna- 
tional technical  seminars  and  technical  forums 
sponsored  by  such  groups  as  the  International  Road 
Federation  and  basic  engineering  societies. 

Perhaps  the  two  best  known  projects  the  FHWA 
has  worked  on  outside  of  the  United  States  are  the 
Alaska  Highway  and  the  Inter-American  Highway. 
The  Alaska  Highway  was  an  urgent  World  War  II 
undertaking,  requiring  slightly  over  2  years  to  con- 
struct, while  the  Inter-American  Highway,  begun 
about  1930,  has  only  recently  been  completed  with  a 


paved  surface.  Just  south  of  the  southern  terminus 
of  the  Inter-American  Highway,  the  Darien  Gap 
Highway  is  now  under  construction  as  a  final  link 
between  North  and  South  America.  Neither  of  these 
endeavors  has  been  the  sole  responsibility  of  the 
FHWA,  but  in  both  instances,  the  FHWA  has  been 
the  prime  motivator  on  the  technical  aspects  of  the 
undertaking.  The  greatest  contribution  to  world 
transportation  has  been  FHWA's  technical  assistance 
programs  in  many  countries  around  the  globe. 

Early  International   Exchanges 

Today  it  is  common  to  think  in  terms  of  global 
events  and  places,  but  near  the  turn  of  the  20th  cen- 
tury, American  engineers  were  already  very  much 
aware  of  the  events  and  technological  advances 
abroad.  With  the  clamor  for  roads  growing  con- 
stantly stronger  in  the  1890's,  the  Department  of  State 
initiated  a  project  to  gather  information  concerning 
European  road  laws  and  methods  of  construction. 
This  information  was  a  factor  in  stimulating  the 
Congress  in  1893  to  establish  in  the  Department  of 
Agriculture  the  Office  of  Road  Inquiry. 

One  of  the  first  published  studies  of  the  Office  was 
Cost  of  Hauling  Farm  Products  in  Europe.  An  in- 
ternational influence  can  also  be  seen  in  the  1901 
Annual  Report  of  the  Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries 
(OPRI).  In  the  section  on  Testing  of  Road  Ma- 
terials, Director  Martin  Dodge  stated  "The  importance 
of  laboratory  tests  on  road  materials  has  long  been 
recognized  both  in  this  country  and  in  Europe.  For 
over  thirty  years  the  national  schools  of  roads  and 
bridges  of  France  have  conducted  careful  tests  of  all 
materials  used  in  the  construction  of  National  high- 
ways.   These  laboratory  tests  have  been  the  means  of 


518 


highway  Expenditures 
for  1971 

Less  than  US  $  100  MilUoo 
Betweeo  US  $  100  and  $  500  Mlllk 
vXv^XvX;    Between  US  $  500  and  $  1000  Milli( 
More  than  US  %  1000  MtUion 


FHWA  Foreign  Assistance  Programs 

Major  Program # 

Other  Technical  Assistance  -  ♦ 


Use   of    the    base   map   granted    by   the 
I  INTERNATIONAL  ROAD  FEDERATION  I 


The  Federal  Highway  Administration  and  its  predecessors  have  sent  engineers 
and  technicians  throughout  the  world  to  help  build  and  maintain  roads. 


greatly  reducing  the  cost  of  road  construction,  and  it 
is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  French  roads  are  the 
best  in  the  world.  .  .  ."  ^ 

The  OPRI  first  participated  in  an  international 
event  in  1900  when  the  Office  built  an  object  lesson 
road  for  observation  of  engineers  and  officials  attend- 
ing the  First  International  Good  Roads  Convention 
at  Port  Huron,  Michigan.  "A  special  feature  of  the 
work  was  that  the  traction  engine  was  used  instead  of 
horses  to  draw  the  road  machine  and  dumping  wag- 
ons, which  plan  proved  very  satisfactory.  Thus,  the 
traction  engine  served  the  treble  purpose  of  furnishing 
power  for  the  crusher,  drawing  the  road  grader,  etc., 
and  rolling  the  road."  ^ 

In  1908  Maurice  O.  Eldridge,  Chief  of  Records, 
Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries,  submitted  a  paper  on 
"Cost  of  Road  Building  in  the  United  States"  for  the 
First  International  Road  Congress  in  Paris,  France. 
In  the  same  year,  a  new  investigation  by  OPRI  of 
road  construction,  maintenance  and  administration  in 
foreign  countries  was  also  in  progress.^ 

By  1910  the  library  of  the  Office  of  Public  Roads 
(OPR)  was  receiving  periodicals  and  reports  from 
the  major  European  countries.  In  1911  the  library 
reported   ".   .   .   Foreign  countries  which  are  issuing 


reports  concerning  highway  activities  have  also  placed 
this  office  on  their  mailing  list  in  exchange  for  similar 
courtesies  from  us  [Public  Roads]."  ** 

In  1913  the  OPR  made  its  first  exhibition  outside 
the  United  States.  Financed  by  a  special  appropria- 
tion from  Congress,  an  exhibit  was  set  up  at  the  Inter- 
national Dry  Farming  Congress  in  Lethbridge, 
Canada.  It  was  also  in  this  year  that  Congress  re- 
quested the  Department  of  State  to  obtain  the  latest 
information  available  concerning  17  items  of  highway 
development  from  some  19  countries  of  Europe  and 
Asia.  When  this  material  was  obtained,  it  was  studied 
by  OPR  officials  and  given  to  Congress  for  their  use 
in  considering  legislation. 

During  the  next  8  years,  which  included  World 
War  I,  the  Office  had  little  foreign  exchange  of  in- 
formation on  peacetime  road  developments,  but  U.S. 
research    and    development    in    this    area    accelerated 


*  The  1912  Annual  Report  noted,  "The  office  has  also  re- 
ceived large  collections  of  city  engineer's  reports  from  Aus- 
tralia, Austria,  Belgium,  British  Guiana,  Canada,  China,  Costa 
Rica,  Cuba,  Denmark,  Ecuador,  Egypt,  England,  France, 
Germany,  India,  Ireland,  Italy,  Jamaica,  the  Netherlands, 
Norway,  Peru,  Romania,  Russia,  Salvador,  Scotland,  Straits 
Settlements,  Sweden,  Switzerland  and  the  Union  of  South 
Africa." 


519 


rapidly.  When  the  Department  of  Agriculture  de- 
cided in  1922  to  send  an  exhibition  to  the  Brazilian 
International  Centennial  Exposition,  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  (BPR)  was  selected  to  participate.  Its 
exhibit  was  a  large  model  of  a  gravel  road  in  various 
phases  of  construction  placed  in  front  of  a  realistic 
background  supplied  by  an  oil  painting.  For  this 
meeting  a  special  report  explaining  the  work  of  the 
Bureau  and  its  exhibit  was  prepared,  translated  into 
Portuguese,  and  distributed.^ 

Following  the  successful  demonstration  at  the 
Brazilian  exhibit,  Chief  MacDonald  was  appointed 
as  a  delegate  to  attend  the  first  Pan-American  Road 
Congress  in  Argentina  in  October  1925.  H.  H.  Rice, 
Chairman  of  the  U.S.  Delegation,  clearly  defined  the 
reasons  for  participation  in  this  Congress  when  he 
stated : 

We  feel  that  our  mission  is  especially  important  on 
account  of  this  country's  long  and  costly  experience  in 
establishing  an  adequate  system  of  highways.  Those  who 
have  been  connected  with  the  good  roads  movement  in 
the  United  States  since  its  inception  have  learned  many 
lessons  which  should  be  of  the  greatest  value  to  any  other 
nation  in  the  earlier  stages  of  highway  development. 

If,  by  citing  our  own  experiences,  we  can  help  our 
sister  nations  of  the  south  to  avoid  the  needless  waste  of 
time  and  millions  of  dollars  of  money  which  we  were 
obliged  to  go  through  before  highway  construction  had 
become  systematized  as  it  is  now  in  this  country,  we  feel 
that  our  return  trip  to  South  America  will  be  productive 
of  .  .  .  good  results.  .  .  .' 

After  his  return  from  this  Congress,  Chief  Mac- 
Donald  presented  a  paper  titled  "Our  International 
Relations  as  Shown  by  the  Pan-American  Congress 
at  Buenos  Aires"  to  the  11th  Annual  Meeting  of 
AASHO.  In  concluding  his  address,  Chief  Mac- 
Donald  established  what  was  to  be  the  guiding  policy 
of  the  Bureau  when  he  stated : 

What  is  here  written  must  be  heard  for  its  one  pur- 
pose— rather  two  purposes.  The  first  is  to  stimulate  our 
own  imagination  and  to  sustain  a  more  profound  faith 
in  this  work  of  highway  building.  The  other  is  to  point 
one  way  in  which  we  may  be  of  the  greatest  service  to 
these  other  countries.  There  are  many  opportunities  open 
to  help  in  the  tremendous  highway  improvement  program 
they  must  have.  .  .  .  There  is  a  definite  responsibility 
upon  this  generation  for  the  establishment  of  international 
relations  of  enduring  character.  In  the  next  quarter 
century  these  will  be  of  greater  importance.  The  solidar- 
ity of  the  Western  Hemisphere  and  the  opportunity  for 
each  republic  to  work  out  its  own  destiny  under  favorable 
and  helpful  conditions  is  the  end  sought.  Without  high- 
way improvement  of  magnificent  proportions  these  condi- 
tions are  impossible.  Mutual  sympathy  and  helpfulness 
is  the  spirit  of  Pan  Americanism.  It  is  the  finer  states- 
manship.' 

Shortly  after  this,  the  Bureau  appointed  a  technical 
advisor  to  the  American  Delegation  at  a  Conference 
on  Automobile  Circulation  held  in  Paris,  France. 

In  October  1930  the  Sixth  International  Road 
Congress  was  held  in  Washington,  D.C.,  with  the 
Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  serving  as 
Secretary-General  of  the  American  Organizing  Com- 
mission. Engineers  from  64  countries  attended.  The 
Congress  consisted  of  general  discussions  and  reports 
of  road  problems  of  mutual  interest  to  all  engineers. 

At  about  this  same  time,  in  line  with  the  policy 
expressed  by  Chief  MacDonald,  the  Bureau  became 
actively  involved  in  the  design  and  construction  of 
the  Inter-American  Highway.    But  with  the  increased 


load  of  national  recovery  programs  in  the  mid-1930's, 
very  little  attention  was  given  to  other  overseas  oper- 
ations or  exchanges. 

In  1938,  Chief  MacDonald  presented  a  paper  at  the 
24th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  AASHO  titled  "Con- 
trasting United  States  and  European  Practice  in  Road 
Development."  He  pointed  out  significant  develop- 
ments on  the  European  scene,  such  as  the  German 
autobahn,  and  emphasized  the  benefits  to  be  gained  by 
the  study  and  application  of  events  and  programs 
undertaken  by  other  political  entities.  He  stressed 
that  "This  is  not  an  advocacy  that  we  should  or 
should  not  be  governed  by  or  adopt  the  policies  and 
methods  of  other  countries;  rather  that  we  should 
intelligently  appraise  the  results  of  the  cycles  of  time 
through  which  the  older  countries  have  gone  as  an 
invaluable  experience  from  which  we  can  profit  sans 
cost."  ® 

In  1938,  E.  W.  James,  who  was  deeply  involved  in 
the  Inter-American  Highway,  was  detailed  to  Cuba 
to  provide  assistance  to  Cuban  engineers  in  recon- 
struction of  the  central  highway.  By  1939  other 
requests  from  Latin-American  countries  for  technical 
assistance  began  to  come  to  the  Bureau.  Under  pro- 
visions of  Public  Law  No.  545  of  the  75th  Congress 
and  Public  Law  No.  63  of  the  76th  Congress,  the 
Bureau  sent  engineers  to  Venezuela,  Colombia,  and 
Ecuador  for  short-term  specialized  assistance.  On 
May  25,  1939,  the  Export-Import  Bank  of  Washing- 
ton officially  requested  the  Secretary  of  Agriculture 
to  arrange  for  the  assignment  of  engineers  from  the 
Bureau  to  assist  the  Bank  in  connection  with  the  ex- 
tension of  credits  for  public  road  construction  in 
Latin  America. 

Economic  Development  Becomes  the  Guiding  Force 

With  the  advent  of  World  War  II,  PRA  engineers 
became  involved  in  urgent  projects  in  Panama,  on  the 
Inter- American  Highway,  and  on  the  Alaska  High- 
way as  part  of  the  defense  effort.  In  addition  to 
these  high  priority  projects,  Public  Roads  engineers 
in  1943  were  detailed  to  highway  projects  in  Bolivia, 
Haiti,  and  Santo  Domingo.  By  the  end  of  the  war, 
these  projects  had  either  been  completed  or  were 
phased  down  to  a  peacetime  schedule. 

However,  a  new  priority  on  overseas  operations  had 
emerged.  The  United  States  took  on  the  responsibil- 
ity to  assist  in  the  recovery  of  our  friends  and  allies 
from  the  devastation  and  economic  ruin  resulting 
from  the  war.  Two  major  programs  were  soon  to  be 
initiated  under  separate  legislation  by  Congress.  The 
first  of  these  was  the  reconstruction  and  rehabilitation 
of  the  war-damaged  highway  system  of  the  Philip- 
pines. The  second  was  the  development  of  a  highway 
organization  in  Turkey  capable  of  the  construction 
and  maintenance  of  an  expanding  road  system  to  be 
undertaken  as  a  part  of  a  Mutual  Security  Program. 
From  1946  to  1950  these  two  programs  drew  heavily 
upon  the  manpower  and  technical  backup  skill  of 
Public  Roads.  Over  100  engineers  and  technicians 
were  sent  overseas  to  work  and  train  local  engineers 
and  equipment  personnel. 

The  effect  of  the  U.S.  highway  operations  in  the 
Philippines  was  probably  most  clearly  and  sincerely 
expressed  in  a  letter  written  to  the  Bureau  in  1952  by 


520 


Jose  Lozada,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Philippine  High- 
way Department,  in  which  he  said : 

Undoubtedly  untold  material  benefits  have  accrued  to 
the  Country  in  general  in  the  implementation  of  the 
Rehabilitation  Program.  But  the  benefits  derived  there- 
from by  the  Bureau  of  Public  Works,  particularly  the 
Division  of  Highways,  are  in  themselves  invaluable  and 
immeasurable.  The  wealth  of  new  knowledge  and  modern 
practices  in  the  design,  construction  and  maintenance  of 
highways,  unfolded  before  us  by  the  engineers  of  the 
U.S.  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  on  the  basis  of  their  past 
experience,  has  saved  the  Philippine  Government  time, 
effort  and  expense  in  ferreting  out  suitable  highway 
procedures  thru  the  usual  cumbersome  and  costly  channel 
of  'cut  and  try'  method.  .  .  . 

With  a  sound  foundation,  tempered  and  tried  during 
those  hectic  days  of  implementing  the  Rehabilitation 
Program  and  enriched  by  constant  associations  with  the 
U.S.  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  the  Division  of  Highways 
is  now  much  better  prepared  to  shoulder  the  responsibility 
of  executing  the  highway  building  programs  of  the  Philip- 
pine Government,  especially  in  connection  with  the  total 
Economic  Mobilization  of  the  Country." 

During  the  1950-1960  period,  Bureau  overseas  op- 
erations expanded  as  the  need  increased  for  technical 
assistance  to  the  developing  countries  throughout  the 
world.  Bureau  engineers  traveled  throughout  the 
world  on  special  assignments  undertaken  in  coopera- 
tion with  the  International  Cooperation  Administra- 
tion    (ICA),*    the    Export-Import    Bank,    and    the 


*  Now  known  as  the  Agency  for  International  Development 
(AID). 


International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Develop- 
ment (IBRD).  Major  programs  during  this  period 
were  initiated  or  completed  in  Ethiopia,  Iran,  Jordan, 
Liberia,  Turkey,  and  the  Philippines. 

From  1960  to  1970,  Bureau  technical  assistance  con- 
tinued at  about  the  same  level  with  major  programs 
initiated  or  completed  in  Laos,  Cambodia,  Yemen, 
Brazil,  Nepal,  Philippines,  Bolivia,  Dominican  Re- 
public, and  the  Sudan. 

During  these  two  decades,  all  technical  assistance 
programs  of  the  Bureau  were  characterized  by  an 
intensive  effort  to  provide  adequate  training  and  se- 
lective procurement  of  equipment  to  do  the  job. 

Mechanization  has  been  the  key  to  modern  road 
construction  on  the  scale  necessary  to  meet  the  needs 
of  transport  throughout  the  world.  Over  $250  million 
worth  of  equipment  and  spare  parts,  destined  for 
highway  departments  of  foreign  governments  or  for 
construction  projects  undertaken  by  the  Bureau  over- 
seas, have  been  procured  by  the  Bureau  since  1930. 
Because  timely  deliveries  of  spare  parts  and  servicing 
of  equipment  is  essential  throughout  its  life.  Bureau 
engineers  and  administrators  elected  to  utilize  the 
Bureau  procurement  and  contracting  office  for  this 
service.  The  Bureau  required  factory  inspection  prior 
to  shipping  on  all  major  equipment  purchases. 

In  addition  to  equipment  procurement.  Bureau 
engineers  designed  or  assisted  foreign  engineers  in  the 


This  thru  truss  bridge  was  built  with  BPR  assistance  in  the 
Philippines  during  the  rehabilitation  program. 


521 


design  of  many  bridges,  the  superstructures  of  which 
were  later  purchased  in  the  United  States.  For  the 
Philippines  alone,  of  the  approximately  500  bridges 
erected  in  the  rehabilitation  program,  over  300  bridges 
were  designed,  procured  in  the  United  States,  shipped, 
and  erected. 

By  the  end  of  1969,  major  programs  of  FHWA's 
overseas  operations  were  nearly  completed,  and  an 
overseas  force  of  over  200  engineers  and  technicians 
was  reduced  to  less  than  70.  From  1970  to  1974,  pro- 
grams consisted  of  relatively  small  teams  of  engineers 
assigned  to  Brazil,  Argentina,  Laos  and  Kuwait,  with 
specialists  being  detailed  to  other  countries  for  specific 
assignments  when  requested.  Although  current  tech- 
nical assistance  requirements  in  many  countries  have 
changed  to  more  sophisticated  elements  of  highway 
and  transportation  techniques,  such  as  the  design  and 
construction  of  limited  access  expressways  in  Kuwait, 
the  need  for  basic  highway  assistance  still  exists  in 
many  developing  nations. 

In  total,  the  Federal  Highway  Administration  and 
its  predecessors  have  sent  engineers  and  technicians 
to  over  50  countries  throughout  the  world.  From  the 
deserts  of  Sudan  and  Jordan  to  the  mountains  of 
Nepal  and  Bolivia,  from  the  jungles  of  the  Amazon 
and  Mindanao  to  the  plateaus  of  Yemen  and  Ethiopia, 
and  to  the  hills  of  Laos  and  Cambodia,  FHWA  engi- 
neers and  technicians  have  helped  develop  local  per- 
sonnel to  build  and  maintain  roads,  roads  that  provide 
much  needed  access  for  food,  medicines  and  all  of  the 
many  other  items  needed  to  improve  living.  In  more 
than  eight  countries  where  these  engineers  have 
worked,  revolutions  and  open  civil  warfare  have  taken 
place  during  the  life  of  the  projects,  but  no  Bureau 
employee  has  been  seriously  injured.  In  many  in- 
stances, the  Bureau  continued  operations  during  the 
unrest. 

However,  a  record  of  the  international  activities 
in  road  construction  by  the  United  States  is  not  com- 
plete without  a  discussion  of  its  work  on  the  Inter- 
American  Highway,  the  Alaska  Highway,  and  its 
major  technical  assistance  programs.  Whether  for 
the  purpose  of  defense  or  international  aid,  it  is  in 
these  operations  that  the  capabilities  of  the  United 
States,  through  its  agent.  Public  Roads,  was  tested  in 
imaginatively  meeting  totally  different  and  complex 
situations,  and  in  the  professional  competence,  tough- 
ness, and  diplomacy  of  its  personnel.  It  is  also  in 
these  operations  with  foreign  countries  that  major 
positive  impacts  were  effected  as  scores  of  engineers, 
technicians,  and  machine  operators  were  trained,  and 
as  roads,  which  facilitated  communications,  defense, 
and  economic  development,  were  built  or  repaired.  A 
more  detailed  examination  of  these  operations  presents 
a  glimpse  of  the  diversity  and  depth  of  the  programs 
undertaken  and  the  challenges  that  were  met  by  the 
Federal  Highway  Administration  and  its  predecessors 
as  it  worked  in  the  international  arena. 

The  Inter-American   Highway 

The  dream  of  linking  North  and  South  America  is 
an  old  one.  King  Charles  V  of  Spain,  in  the  early 
1500's,  ordered  a  road  built  from  Mexico  to  South 
America.^"  However,  practical  difficulties  at  that 
time  made  this  plan  impossible.  In  the  1880's,  Henry 
Clay  publicly  proposed  a  hemispheric  route  for  the 


purpose  of  promoting  good  will  and  improving  social 
and  economic  progress.^^  The  idea  gained  impetus 
when  a  proposal  was  advanced  in  the  U.S.  Congress 
in  1884  for  connecting  the  American  continents  by 
means  of  a  Pan-American  Railroad.  Congress 
authorized  the  creation  of  a  special  commission  to 
consult  with  the  American  Republics  about  the  pos- 
sibilities of  railroad  communication  between  their 
countries  and  the  United  States.  As  a  result,  at  the 
First  International  American  Conference  held  in 
December  1889  in  Washington,  D.C.,  the  railroad 
project  received  active  support.  Subsequently  the 
Pan-American  Railroad  Committee  was  created  and 
over  a  period  of  years  worked  diligently  but  unsuc- 
cessfully to  develop  interest  in  the  project. 

In  1923,  with  automotive  travel  coming  of  age,  the 
Fifth  Conference  of  American  States  meeting  in 
Santiago,  Chile,  recommended  the  holding  of  an  auto- 
mobile highway  conference,  looking  toward  the  con- 
struction of  a  network  of  roads  to  facilitate  freer 
passage  within  and  between  the  various  republics  of 
the  Americas.    This  was  the  start  that  was  needed. 

The  first  Pan-American  Highway  Congress  was 
held  in  Buenos  Aires  in  1925,  and  it  was  decided  to 
have  the  Highway  Congress  become  a  permanent 
activity  of  the  Pan  American  Union.  Three  years 
after  this  meeting,  the  Sixth  Conference  of  American 
States  met  at  Havana,  Cuba.  This  conference  au- 
thorized the  Pan-American  Highway  Congress  to  take 
the  actions  necessary  to  obtain  financing  and  technical 
cooperation  for  preliminary  studies  of  feasible  routes 
for  construction  of  an  Inter- American  Highway.  The 
U.S.  Congress  took  action  on  the  idea  of  an  Inter- 
American  Highway  on  March  4,  1929  (45  Stat  1697) 
when  a  joint  resolution  was  passed  authorizing  the 
appropriation  of  funds  for  the  reconnaissance  survey 
for  a  road  to  connect  North  and  South  America. 

The  concept  of  a  Pan-American  Highway  System, 
meanwhile,  was  advanced  at  the  Second  Pan-American 
Highway  Congress  held  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil,  in 
early  October  1929.  At  this  Congress  a  resolution  was 
adopted  stating  that  each  member  country  should  pre- 
pare a  complete  study  of  its  highway  system  plan  in 
order  to  meet  the  needs  of  intercommunication  of  its 
political  subdivisions  and  to  provide  the  most  con- 
venient junction  with  the  highway  system  of  the 
neighboring  countries.  The  governments  were  also 
requested  to  designate,  as  international  highways, 
those  main  arteries  of  transportation  which  connected 
or  would  connect  the  capitals  of  the  different  coun- 
tries with  a  view  to  incorporating  them  in  the  Pan- 
American  Highway  System. 

Following  the  Congress  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  the  Re- 
public of  Panama  invited  all  of  the  countries  of 
Central  America,  Mexico,  and  the  United  States  to  a 
conference  in  Panama  City  to  consider  ways  and 
means  of  furthering  the  proposed  plan  for  a  road 
survey  between  the  isthmus  and  the  Rio  Grande  River. 
On  October  7,  1929,  this  first  Inter-American  (Re- 
gional) Conference  was  held  at  the  National  Palace 
in  Panama  City.  The  representatives*  enthusiastically 
endorsed  the  proposed  survey  and  took  action  calling 


*  From    Panama,    Costa    Rica,    the   Canal   Zone,    Nicaragua, 
Honduras,  El  Salvador,  Guatemala,  and  the  United  States. 


522 


President  Calvin  CooUdge  welcomes  the  Pan  American  Highway  Commission  at  the  White  House  in  1924-  This  group, 
representing  19  Latin  American  countries,  toured  the  United  States  to  observe  construction  progress  under  the  Fed- 
eral-aid program. 


on  the  several  governments  to  furnish  transportation, 
assistance,  maps,  existing  survey  records  and  other 
such  cooperation  that  would  help  in  carrying  out  the 
required  field  work.  Office  space  and  drafting  quar- 
ters were  provided  rent-free  by  Panama  in  the  Na- 
tional Palace  until  the  conclusion  of  the  field  work  in 
May  1933.  This  was  the  genesis  of  the  "Inter- 
American  Highway,"  a  section  of  the  hemispheric 
Pan-American  Highway  System.* 

As  a  followup  in  March  1930,  the  U.S.  Congress 
appropriated  $50,000,  previously  authorized  in  the 
joint  resolution,  "To  enable  the  Secretary  of  State  to 
cooperate  with  the  several  Governments,  members  of 
the  Pan  American  Union,  when  he  shall  find  that  any 
or  all  of  such  States  having  initiated  a  request  or 
signified  a  desire  to  the  Pan  American  Union  to  co- 
operate in  the  reconnaissance  surveys  to  develop  the 
facts  and  to  report  to  Congress  as  to  the  feasibility  of 
possible  routes,  the  probable  cost,  the  economic  service 
and  such  other  information  as  will  be  pertinent  to  the 
building  of  an  inter-American  highway  or  high- 
ways. .  .  ."  ^^     The  Act  specified  that  all  official  con- 


*  Although  the  road  from  Laredo,  Texas,  to  Panama  City 
is  commonly  referred  to  as  the  Inter-American  Highway,  the 
section  of  road  from  the  southern  border  of  Mexico  to  Panama 
constitutes  the  length  in  which  the  U.S.  Government,  through 
the  BPR  (FHWA),  has  participated. 


tacts  were  to  be  made  by  the  Department  of  State, 
and  by  arrangement  with  the  Department  of  Agri- 
culture, the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  was  to  conduct 
the  reconnaissance. 

By  June  21,  1930,  an  engineering  party  of  BPR 
engineers  had  left  the  United  States  for  Panama,  and 
by  July  1,  1930,  the  Office  for  the  Technical  Commit- 
tee of  the  Commission  in  Panama  was  established  and 
located,  at  the  invitation  of  the  Government  of 
Panama,  in  the  National  Palace. 

By  May  1933  the  field  work  was  complete,  and  work 
began  in  Washington  on  the  report  to  be  submitted 
to  Congress. 

First  U.S.  Appropriation  for  Construction 

In  1934  an  appropriation  of  $5  million  was  re- 
quested from  the  U.S.  Congress.  It  was  estimated 
that  this  amount  would  be  required  to  construct  a 
passable  dirt  road  which  would  connect  the  existing 
stretches  of  road  and,  thus,  make  the  Inter-American 
Highway  a  continuous  reality.  Congress,  however, 
only  appropriated  $1  million  which  was  to  be  divided 
between  Guatemala,  Honduras,  Nicaragua,  Costa 
Rica,  and  Panama  for  plans  and  construction  of  a 
number  of  major  bridges  and  the  continuation  of 
survey  work.     The  first  construction  work  was  to  be 


523 


INTER- AMERICAN    HIGHWAY 


UNITED      STATES      DEPARTMENT    Or     STATE 

PnCPARCO     BV 

UNITED     STATES     BUREAU    OF    PUBLIC   ROADS 

WA5M1NOT0N.    D  C 

OCTOOtn,  r933 


Proposed  route  of  the  Inter-American  Highway  in  1933. 


done  on  a  cooperative  basis  with  the  United  States 
furnishing  the  plans,  specifications  and  estimates  for 
the  bridges,  all  the  steel  and  other  fabricated  materials 
for  the  superstructures,  mechanical  equipment,  and 
transportation  of  materials  and  equipment  to  the  work 
sites.  In  addition,  the  United  States  was  to  construct 
the  superstructures  and  furnish  all  supervision  and 
inspection.  Each  cooperating  country  was  to  furnish 
all  local  materials  and  transportation  of  these  ma- 
terials, purchase  right-of-way,  furnish  labor  needed 
to  construct  the  bridge  foundations  and  substructures, 
remove  bridge  falsework,  grade  bridge  approaches  and 
clean  up  the  job  site. 

Guatemala,  Honduras  and  Panama  quickly  agreed 
on  the  disposition  of  their  shares  for  bridge  construc- 
tion. Costa  Rica  did  not  wish  to  use  its  share  of  this 
allotment  for  bridges  but  desired,  instead,  to  construct 
portions  of  the  southern  section  of  the  highway  in 
order  to  open  up  promising  agricultural  areas.  After 
lengthy  negotiations,  it  was  agreed,  in  September 
1937,  that  the  United  States  would  provide  technical 
assistance,  furnish  adequate  modern  equipment  and 
provide  culvert  materials.  The  Government  of  Costa 
Rica  would  provide  the  labor  and  local  materials 
needed  for  the  work.  Because  of  the  difficult  terrain, 
work  on  these  sections  progressed  slowly  over  the  next 


few  years.  With  the  completion  of  surveys  handled 
from  the  Panama  office  and  the  initiation  of  construc- 
tion in  Costa  Rica,  the  Bureau  established  its  head- 
quarters office  in  San  Jose,  Costa  Rica,  in  October 
1935. 

The  Threat  of  War  Steps  Up  Construction 

In  1939  the  Commanding  General  of  the  Panama 
Canal  requested  the  PRA  to  administer  the  construc- 
tion of  a  61-mile  road  project  from  Chorrera  to  Rio 
Hato,  where  an  important  air  defense  facility  was 
located.  Panama  was  to  undertake  the  construction 
with  PRA  acting  principally  as  monitor.  For  this 
project.  Congress  provided  $1.8  million  to  the  U.S. 
Army,  and  in  1940  Panama  received  a  $2.5  million 
loan  from  the  Export-Import  Bank  to  cover  its  share 
of  the  cost.  With  the  advent  of  war  in  1941  and  the 
military  importance  of  the  highway,  the  U.S.  Govern- 
ment took  over  full  financing  of  the  project.  With 
some  45  miles  to  complete.  Public  Roads  took  charge, 
and  by  July  1942,  just  7  months  later,  the  project  was 
completed.  Although  this  project  was  originally  a 
military  requirement,  because  of  its  location  and  aline- 
ment,  it  was  later  incorporated  into  the  Inter-Ameri- 
can Highway. 


524 


Ouatemala  constructed  this  300-foot  bridge  over  the  Tamazulapa  River 
as  its  first  project  on  the  Inter-American  Highway. 


At  the  same  time,  Public  Roads  was  also  working 
with  the  military  on  the  transisthmus  highway,  also 
known  as  the  Boyd-Roosevelt  Highway.  Work  on 
this  project  began  in  1940,  but  due  to  heavy  rains  and 
other  problems,  work  did  not  proceed  rapidly.  With 
the  Japanese  attack  on  Pearl  Harbor,  work  began  on 
a  20-hour  day  basis,  and  by  April  1942,  a  battalion 
of  field  artillery  was  able  to  move  from  the  Pacific 
side  of  the  isthmus  to  the  Atlantic  side  in  3  hours  in 
contrast  to  the  previous  24  hours  required  by  other 
modes. 

Meanwhile,  because  of  the  possibility  of  attacks  on 
the  sea  routes  to  Panama,  Congress,  on  December  26, 
1941,  authorized  expenditure  of  $20  million  for  con- 
struction (55  Stat  196).  One-third  of  the  construction 
cost  was  to  be  contributed  by  the  Central  American 
countries  and  Panama.  This  established  the  pattern 
for  %-%  matching  formula  which,  in  general,  has 
been  followed  ever  since.  However,  Panama,  desiring 
that  the  road  there  be  built  in  its  entirety  with  a 
concrete  surface,  agreed  to  contribute  the  total  differ- 
ence between  what  would  otherwise  have  been  its 
matching  share  and  the  amount  necessary  to  complete 
the  road  at  the  higher  cost  of  the  concrete. 

First  priority  in  speeding  up  the  construction  of 
missing  sections  was  assigned  to  completion  of  the 
work  in  Costa  Rica.  Recognizing  the  difficulties  and 
cost  of  construction  in  the  rugged  Costa  Rica  moun- 
tain country,  Congress  appropriated  an  additional 
amount  of  $12  million  without  matching  requirements 
(55  Stat  540),     As  a  result  of  military  studies  and 


events  in  early  1942,  the  Secretary  of  War,  on  June  6, 
1942,  authorized  the  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  to 
initiate  necessary  surveys  and  preconstruction  work 
to  complete  the  highway  to  military  needs.  Soon 
after,  the  Secretary  authorized  construction  to  pro- 
ceed with  military  funds.  The  work  by  the  Corps 
was  to  be  undertaken  in  cooperation  with  Public 
Roads  and  the  respective  countries.  To  complete  the 
project  in  the  shortest  possible  time,  standards  were 
drastically  reduced. 

In  late  September  1943,  because  of  changing  priori- 
ties, the  Army  Chief  of  Engineers  received  orders  to 
begin  demobilization  of  their  activities  on  the  high- 
way. 

Prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  War  Department 
project,  the  local  governments  and  Public  Roads  had 
completed  696  miles  of  all-weather  road  through  the 
Central  American  Republics  south  of  Mexico.  This 
left  864  miles  to  be  constructed  or  completed.  Of 
this,  approximately  460  miles  was  to  be  new  construc- 
tion and  404  miles  was  to  be  widening  and  improving 
already  existing  dry-weather  roads.  When  the  U.S. 
Army  project  was  terminated  in  1943,  about  58  per- 
cent of  the  project  was  completed  at  a  cost  of  approxi- 
mately $36  million,  and  of  the  total  864  miles, 
approximately  600  miles  were  passable."  Work  con- 
tinued on  projects  in  the  respective  countries  until 
1951  when  appropriations  were  expended.* 


*  From  December  1941  to  December  1946,  333  miles  of  Inter- 
American  Higliway  and  62  miles  of  the  Rama  Road  were 
improved  under  Public  Roads  programs. 


525 


Edwin  Warley  James 


When  Edwin  Warley  James  left  the  Corps  of  Engineers'  New  London 
(Conn.)  District  Office  in  1910  to  work  for  the  Office  of  Public  Koads, 
the  fledgling  automobile  and  roadbuilding  industry  gained  a  hard  work- 
ing, brilliant  engineer  and  an  author  and  future  diplomat. 

James,  who  was  to  become  the  "Father  of  the  Inter- American  High- 
way," was  born  October  17,  1877,  in  Ossining,  N.Y.  After  he  graduated 
from  Phillip's  Exeter  Academy  in  1897,  he  continued  his  studies  at 
Harvard  University,  where  he  was  a  1901  cum  laude  graduate. 

He  went  to  work  in  a  publishing  office,  but  his  interest  in  engineering 
led  him  to  spend  his  evenings  studying  drafting  and  steel  detailing  at 
the  Boston  Evening  Institute.  This  schooling  only  increased  his  desire 
for  greater  engineering  knowledge,  and  in  1905  he  entered  the  Massa- 
chusetts Institute  of  Technology  where  he  completed  the  final  2  years 
of  engineering  study.  In  March  of  that  year  he  married  Ethel  Town- 
send. 

After  he  graduated  from  MIT,  James  received  an  appointment  with 
the  Corps  of  Engineers  and  6  months  later  was  on  his  way  to  the 
Philippine  Islands  as  a  district  engineer.  After  2  years  of  supervising 
public  works  projects  in  the  Provinces  of  Bulacan  and  Nueva  Ecija,  he 
returned  to  New  London. 

It  was  here  that  he  worked  on  design  and  surveys  for  the  intracoastal 
canal.  James  was  now  in  his  early  thirties  and  had  a  solid  background 
of  engineering  experience. 

When  in  May  1910  Public  Roads  needed  two  experienced  engineers, 
James  applied  for  one  of  the  positions  and  was  accepted. 

He  immediately  dug  into  the  problems  of  road  construction,  and  it 
wasn't  long  after  passage  of  the  Post  Road  Act  of  1912  that  Director 
Page  selected  and  assigned  responsibility  for  administration  of  the 
program  to  James. 

Under  this  Act,  experimental  roads  were  built  in  a  number  of  States 
with  the  cooperation  of  counties  and  other  legislative  districts.  From 
this  experience,  James  became  fully  aware  of  the  many  problems  en- 
countered with  Federal  assistance  at  the  operational  level. 

As  a  result,  he  realized  that  programs  funded  through  the  Federal 
Government  could  best  be  administered  through  State  organizations. 
At  every  opportunity,  he  supported  this  view  and  when  the  1916  Fed- 
eral Aid  Road  Act  was  passed,  enough  legislators  had  been  convinced 
to  establish  a  Federal-State  relationship — a  relationship  which  has  been 
fundamental  in  the  development  of  highway  systems  throughout  the 
United  States — to  make  it  part  of  the  law. 

After  passage  of  the  1916  Act,  James  was  placed  in  charge  of  project 
implementation.  Faced  with  project  submissions  and  no  uniform  pro- 
cedures or  criteria,  he  soon  established  standards  for  plan  sheets  and 
other  information  necessary  for  project  review  and  approval. 

It  wasn't  long  before  Federal  legislation  called  for  selection  of  a 
primary  highway  system,  and  criteria  were  required  to  assure  the  best 
route  selections  to  meet  the  purposes  of  the  law.  Once  again  he  ac- 
cepted the  challenge  and  when  Thomas  H.  MacDonald  became  the  Di- 
rector in  May  1919,  he  asked  James  to  select  a  small  committee  and 
assist  him  with  the  project.  Using  Post  Office  maps  and  Census  Bureau 
information,  James  and  his  assistants  established  a  formula  that  as- 
sured them  that  the  routes  selected  would  serve  to  a  maximum  extent 
the  greatest  needs  of  the  country  at  the  time.  This  method  withstood 
many  controversies  and  inquiries  that  flooded  the.  desk  of  the  adminis- 
trator. 

It  was  quite  natural  now  that  the  question  of  route  markings  and 
designation  would  be  required  for  interstate  travel.  Once  again  James 
was  called  upon  to  provide  a  solution.  Taking  advantage  of  his  ex- 
perience and  the  personal  relationships  developed  over  the  years,  he, 
along  with  others  from  the  Bureau,  was  able  to  get  the  cooperation  from 


526 


States,  road  associations,  and  other  elements  to  endorse  a  plan  for  U.S. 
route  numbering. 

Shortly  thereafter  as  Chief  of  the  Design  Division  he  spearheaded 
the  development  of  uniform  signs  and  markings.  His  great  interest  in 
traffic  control  devices  was  evidenced  with  his  appointment  in  1925  as 
Chairman  of  the  AASHO  Committee  on  Highway  Signs,  Signals  and 
Markers  and  the  subsequent  publication  in  1927  of  the  Manual  and 
Specif  cations  for  the  Manufacture^  Display  and  Erection  of  V.S. 
Standard  Road  Markers  and  Signs  prepared  under  his  supervision. 

From  1924  to  1943  he  served  as  chairman  of  the  AASHO  Committee 
on  Standards.  In  March  1930  James  became  Chief  of  the  new  Division 
of  Highway  Transport. 

This  Division,  under  his  leadership,  brought  the  Bureau  of  Public 
Roads  into  the  newly  reorganized  field  of  traffic  engineering  and  the 
developing  fields  of  highway  finance  and  economics. 

For  nine  years  James,  as  Chief  of  the  Division,  supervised  the  develop- 
ment in  the  Bureau  of  this  new  field  of  highway  transport,  including 
planning  surveys,  traffic  surveys  and  related  studies,  coordinating  ac- 
tivities with  AASHO  and  the  Highway  Research  Board. 

Although  occupied  with  the  duties  of  his  new  position,  he  was  still 
able  to  assume  responsibility  for  undertaking  a  comprehensive  feasibil- 
ity and  reconnaissance  study  of  an  Inter-American  Highway.  The 
resultant  report,  Reconnaissance  Survey  of  the  Proposed  Inter- American 
Highway  from  the  Republic  of  Panama  to  the  United  States,  became 
the  basis  of  construction  of  this  important  international  highway. 

By  1939  James  was  deeply  involved  with  construction  programs  on 
the  Inter- American  route  as  well  as  foreign  assistance  programs.  He 
continued  with  these  projects  until  he  retired  in  1953. 

During  the  course  of  his  career,  he  served  as  Chief  Inspector  of  Post 
Roads,  Chief  of  the  Division  of  Maintenance,  General  Inspector,  As- 
sistant Chief  Engineer,  Chief  of  Design,  Chief  of  Highway  Transport, 
and  Chief  of  the  Inter- American  Highway  Division. 

James  continually  found  time  to  express  his  thoughts  and  knowledge 
in  articles  prepared  for  publication  in  engineering  magazines  and  pe- 
riodicals. Well  over  200  such  articles  were  published,  with  many  of 
them  in  Spanish,  a  language  which  James  spoke  fluently. 

With  his  background  of  work  in  the  Philippines  and  his  knowledge 
of  design,  construction  and  planning,  he  prepared  the  book  titled 
Highway  Construction,  Administration,  and  Finance — 1929.  The  book, 
prepared  especially  for  the  purpose  of  acquainting  Latin  American 
officials  and  engineers  with  road  practice  in  the  United  States,  was 
translated  into  17  languages  and  distributed  throughout  the  world. 
In  1930  it  was  selected  for  the  Belgian  Award  as  first  prize  in  a  world- 
wide competition  by  the  International  Association  of  Road  Congresses. 

With  a  genuine  handshake,  sincerity,  and  directness  to  the  problem, 
James  represented  the  best  in  highway  engineering  that  the  first  half 
century  of  the  automobile  age  could  produce. 

His  greatest  assets  were  reflected  in  his  relentless  drive  to  achieve  or 
solve  problems  in  the  highway  field. 

Perhaps  the  James  theory  concerning  man  and  the  use  of  his  intellect 
were  best  expressed  in  a  letter  he  wrote  as  he  approached  his  90th  year. 

On  his  well-worn  typewriter  he  wrote  to  a  friend :  "I  have  never  been 
able  to  sympathize  with  the  fellow  who  retires  and  at  once  begins  to 
rust  out." 

During  his  career  he  received  many  awards  and  citations.  Receipt  of 
the  Citation  for  Meritorious  Service  and  Gold  Medal  Award  of  the 
Department  of  Commerce  in  1950  and  the  Citation  and  Decoration  of 
Foreign  Service  (U.S.)  in  1944  represented  acknowledgement  by  his 
government  of  his  devotion  to  his  job. 

Needless  to  say,  James  was  the  "amigo"  of  the  highway  engineering 
professionals  of  Latin  America  and  materially  extended  the  image  of 
the  Bureau  as  an  organization  dedicated  to  the  art  of  building  roads 
and,  in  foreign  assistance,  of  helping  those  who  wished  to  help  them- 
selves. 

527 


The  Selegua  Canyon  in  northern  Guatemala  as  it  was  in  1959  depicts 
the  rough  terrain  along  the  Inter-American  Highway. 


An  All-Weather  Road   Becomes  a   Reality 

Impressed  with  the  progress  being  made  on  the 
highway  and  the  cooperative  attitude  of  the  partici- 
pating countries,  Congress  in  the  early  1950's  au- 
thorized expenditures  aggregating  $64  million  in  the 
Public  Roads  Federal  Highway  Acts  of  1950,  1952, 
and  1954.  Of  this  total  amount,  however,  there  still 
remained  unappropriated  at  the  beginning  of  the  84th 
Congress  in  1955  the  sum  of  $49.3  million. 

The  most  dramatic  progress  in  financing  the  high- 
way began  after  President  Eisenhower's  message  to 
Congress  in  1955  urging  the  early  completion  of  the 
highway.  Congress  promptly  and  overwhelmingly 
passed  the  legislation  requested  by  the  President  and 
proposed  that  the  highway  be  finished  within  3  years. 
To  this  end,  the  Appropriation  Act  of  June  30,  1955 
(69  Stat  233)  appropriated  $25.3  million,  a  special 
act  of  July  1,  1955  (69  Stat  244)  appropriated  $24 
million  previously  authorized  and  an  additional  $25.7 
million,  and  an  act  of  August  4,  1955  (69  Stat  452) 
appropriated  an  additional  $37.7  million. 

Regular  appropriations  continued  during  subse- 
quent years,  permitting  construction  to  progress  in 
each  country  with  the  final  gaps  of  an  all-weather 
road  being  completed  in  Guatemala  and  Costa  Rica 
at  about  the  same  time  in  1963.  The  final  paving  of 
the  highway  was  not  completed  until  late  1973  when 
the  difficult  mountain  section  was  finally  surfaced. 


Formal  dedication  of  the  Inter-American  Highway 
took  place  in  the  form  of  a  motorcade  from  Panama 
to  Mexico  City  in  April  1963.  This  motorcade  of 
three  buses  carried  the  leading  officials  from  prac- 
tically every  country  in  the  Western  Hemisphere. 
Formal  dedication  ceremonies  were  held  at  each  bor- 
der crossing  with  Presidents  of  the  neighboring  coun- 
tries often  attending.  Receptions  were  held  at  major 
cities  and  enthusiastic  greetings  were  given  the  trav- 
elers throughout  the  trip. 

A  current  road  map  of  the  Central  American  Re- 
publics reveals  the  significant  role  of  the  Inter- 
American  Highway  in  the  overall  socio-economic  and 
highway  transportation  development  within  each  Re- 
public. Generally  located  in  the  more  heavily  popu- 
lated areas  of  the  western  or  Pacific  side  of  the 
isthmus,  the  Inter-American  Highway,  as  a  main 
artery,  serves  to  intensify  the  development  in  such 
areas,  provides  a  base  for  many  feeder  roads  to  vir- 
tually isolated  communities,  and  in  some  instances, 
opens  up  riches  in  the  interior  and  eastern  sections  of 
these  countries.  Initially,  the  opening  of  certain  sec- 
tions of  an  early  pioneer  road  were  strongly  resisted 
by  many  farmers  who  looked  upon  the  road  engineers 
and  the  small  construction  crews  as  invaders.  Soon, 
however,  they  recognized  the  benefits  that  the  highway 
was  bringing  to  them — a  ready  access  to  markets,  a 
means  for  more  frequent  visits  with  relatives  in  the 
city,  and  a  virtual  end  to  their  isolation. 


528 


The  Inter-American  Highway  in  rural  Honduras  in  1963. 


Thus,  the  forces  of  socio-economic  development 
emerged  slowly,  but  strongly,  sparked  in  a  small,  but 
very  significant,  manner  by  the  Inter- American  High- 
way which,  later,  contributed  toward  the  extensive 
advances  made  by  the  Republics  of  the  isthmus.  The 
Inter- American  Highway  found  its  rightful  place  in 
the  economic  history  of  these  countries  and  in  the 
hierarchy  of  events  that,  over  the  years,  led  to  the 
establishment  of  a  bond  of  friendship  between  them 
and  their  partner,  the  United  States  of  America. 

The  Darien   Gap* 

The  Pan-American  Highway  Congress,  meeting  in 
Lima,  Peru,  in  1951,  requested  the  Organization  of 
American  States  to  urgently  create  an  ad  hoc  commit- 
tee of  experts  to  determine  the  most  efficient  and 
expeditious  manner  for  opening  to  traffic  the  incom- 
plete stretches  of  the  "longitudinal  Pan-American 
Highway."  A  committee  was  established  in  1952  to 
study  and  develop  recommendations  by  which  each 
country  could  finance  and  construct  the  missing  sec- 
tions of  the  highway  within  its  borders. 

Subsequently,  this  technical  committee,  in  October 
1953,  recommended  studies  in  the  Darien  for  the  first 
time.  l^Tien  the  Sixth  Pan-American  Highway  Con- 
gress, met  in  July  1954,  it  recommended  that  a  tech- 
nical expedition  be  organized  to  conduct  research  and 
planning  surveys  in  the  Darien   Region  of  Panama 


*  "The  vast  jungle  region  adjoining  tiie  Republics  of  Panama 
and  Colombia,  known  as  Darien  Province  in  the  first  country 
and  as  the  Department  of  Choco  in  the  second,  bore  from  its 
discovery  the  generic  name  of  DARIEN.  This  possibly  re- 
sulted from  the  name  given  by  the  Indians  to  the  torrential 
river  now  known  as  Atrato.  .  .  ."  " 


and  the  adjacent  area  of  Colombia.^^  Finances  for 
early  explorations,  administration,  and  promotion 
were  provided  by  annual  contributions  of  $30,000  each 
from  Colombia  and  Panama. 

In  February  1955,  the  Darien  Subcommittee  was 
organized  to  be  made  up  of  technicians  designated  by 
each  of  the  Governments  of  Panama,  Colombia,  and 
the  United  States.  The  first  Darien  Subcommittee 
meeting  was  held  in  August  1955  in  Panama. 

The  south  or  Pacific  route  was  recommended  for 
both  countries  with  a  border  crossing  at  Cruce  de 
Espave,  but  both  countries  modified  this  recommenda- 
tion, making  the  border  point  at  the  landmark  known 
as  Palo  de  las  Letras.^^ 

With  an  apparent  feasible  route  for  a  highway 
through  the  Darien  having  been  agreed  upon,  efforts 
began  to  obtain  financing  for  surveys.  The  Eighth 
Pan-American  Highway  Congress  in  Bogota,  Colom- 
bia, in  May  1960,  adopted  a  financing  plan  requiring 
all  member  countries  of  the  Organization  of  American 
States  to  participate. 

By  late  1962,  the  Darien  Subcommittee  had  nego- 
tiated contracts  with  consulting  firms  from  the  United 
States,  Panama  and  Colombia  to  undertake  the  sur- 
veys and  studies  of  the  route.  A  BPR  engineer  was 
assigned  to  work  with  the  Darien  Subcommittee  in 
administering  the  $3  million  survey  program. 

As  the  surveys  progressed  in  Colombia,  it  became 
increasingly  evident  that  the  route  along  the  Pacific 
Coast  was  impractical;  the  mountainous  terrain,  the 
torrential  rains  exceeding  400  inches  per  year,  and  the 
length  of  the  route  clearly  made  it  unacceptable  for 
an  international  highway.    Thus,  at  the  seventh  meet- 


529 


The  Darien  Gap  highway  was  cut  through  almost  impenetrable 
swamps  adjoining  the  Republics  of  Panama  and  Colombia. 


ing  of  the  Permanent  Executive  Committee  of  the 
Pan-American  Highway  Congress  in  Mexico  City  in 
1964,  permission  was  obtained  for  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  to  undertake  geophysical  research 
studies  of  the  alternate  or  Atrato  route  along  the 
Caribbean  Coast  of  Colombia.  This  route  had  always 
been  considered  impossible  because  of  the  extensive 
Atrato  swamps. 

Using  a  helicopter  which  could  land  engineers  and 
equipment  on  the  surface  of  the  swamp,  field  investi- 
gations of  the  preselected  routes  were  made.  Visual 
examination  of  surface  conditions  was  supplemented 
by  peat  sampler  penetrations  into  the  swamp. 

Once  the  specific  route  had  been  recommended,  a 
geophysical  survey  was  made  by  using  electrical  re- 
sistivity methods  along  the  route  corridor  across  the 
swamp.  A  sufficient  number  of  tests  were  made  to 
indicate  a  reasonably  stable  sand  layer  could  be  antici- 
pated at  depths  of  about  20  to  36  feet  below  the 
swamp  surface  to  confirm  the  feasibility  that  the 
highway  could  be  built  across  the  Atrato  swamp  and 
it  would  save  205  miles  in  length,  about  $115  million 
in  cost,  and  5  years  in  construction  time. 

The  Atrato  route  was  approved,  and  as  a  result  of 
this  breakthrough  and  tremendous  saving,  the  entire 
Darien  project  received  international  publicity  and 
support  from  the  Organization  of  American  States. 
The  Darien  Gap  project  was  selected  by  the  National 
Society  of  Professional  Engineers  as  one  of  the  top 
10  engineering  achievements  in  1968. 

The  U.S.  Congress  authorized  the  initiation  of  con- 
struction on  the  Darien  program  by  an  amendment 


to  the  1970  Federal- Aid  Highway  Act.  This  amend- 
ment provided  that  funds  should  be  obligated  and 
expended  under  the  same  terms,  conditions,  and  re- 
quirements with  respect  to  the  Darien  Gap  Highway 
as  were  the  funds  authorized  for  the  Inter-American 
Highway.  The  amendment  authorized  the  appropria- 
tion of  $100  million  for  the  Darien  Gap  program. 

Administration  of  FHWA  interests  in  the  project 
is  under  the  direction  of  the  Region  19  office  in  the 
Panama  Canal  Zone,  with  field  supervision  being 
handled  from  division  offices  in  both  Panama  and 
Colombia.  The  entire  route,  except  for  14  miles  in 
Colombia,  has  now  been  designed  or  is  under  contract 
for  final  design,  with  construction  well  underway  in 
Panama.  It  is  anticipated  that  by  1982  the  vision  of 
many  legislators,  engineers,  and  highway  adminis- 
trators for  a  "land  bridge"  to  connect  the  Americas 
may  become  a  reality. 

The  Alaska  Highway 

The  Japanese  attack  on  Pearl  Harbor  on  December 
7,  1941,  and  their  closely  following  successes  in  the 
Pacific  found  Alaska,  located  on  the  great  circle  route 
between  the  United  States  and  Japan,  in  a  position 
highly  vulnerable  to  attack. 

On  January  16,  1942,  the  President  appointed  a 
Cabinet  Committee  consisting  of  the  Secretaries  of 
Navy,  War,  and  Interior  to  consider  the  necessity  of 
and  proper  route  for  a  highway  to  Alaska.  In  Feb- 
ruary, it  was  concluded  that  a  highway  was  necessary 
and  that  it  should  fulfill  two  major  i-equirements : 


530 


•  Furnish  a  supply  route  to  link  up  the  airfield 
established  in  Canada  and  Alaska  by  the  Canadian 
Government  and  the  United  States  Army  Air 
Force. 

•  Provide  an  auxiliary  overland  route  to  Alaska, 
relatively  secure  from  attack  by  the  enemy,  to 
supplement  sea  and  air  routes  and,  thus,  provide 
a  measure  of  safety  for  the  armed  forces  and  air- 
craft ferrying  personnel.*" 


Many  previous  studies  had  been  made  of  the  most 
desirable  routing  to  Alaska,  but  due  to  the  wartime 
emergency,  military  considerations  became  the  prime 
criteria.  The  project  was  approved  by  President 
Roosevelt  on  February  11,  1942,  with  work  on  the 
project  authorized  to  begin  at  once.  Final  agreement 
with  Canada  was  reached  on  March  18,  1942. 

The  work  to  be  performed  by  the  United  States 
would  begin  at  Dawson  Creek,  British  Columbia,  and 


The  Alaska  Highway  stretches  from  Dawson  Creek, 
British  Columbia,  to  Fairbanks,  Alaska. 


531 


extend  northwestward  to  Big  Delta,  Alaska,  where 
connections  were  to  be  made  with  existing  transpor- 
tation facilities.  The  authorization  provided  for  con- 
struction of  a  pioneer  road  by  U.S.  Army  engineer 
troops,  followed  by  contractors,  furnished  and  di- 
rected by  the  Public  Koads  Administration,  who 
would  improve  the  pioneer  road  to  an  authorized 
standard. 

Public  Roads  received  instructions  from  the  War 
Department  to  build  the  final  highway  according  to 
established  standard  specifications  for  roads  and 
bridges  in  national  forests  and  parks.  The  road  was 
to  be  two  lanes,  and  surfacing  was  to  be  of  local  ma- 
terials, with  final  surfacing  to  be  applied  only  after 
earthwork  had  stabilized.  Temporary  bridges  were 
to  be  trestles  of  local  timber.  Permanent  bridges 
were  to  be  left  to  future  financing  and  to  the  deter- 
mination of  the  government  authorities  charged  with 
operation  of  the  road.  The  Army  sector  commanders 
were  to  locate  the  pioneer  road  with  such  ultimate 
standards  in  mind  that  would  permit  maximum  use 
of  the  alinement  for  the  final  road.^^ 

As  originally  conceived,  the  work  of  constructing 
the  highway  was  divided  between  the  engineer  troops 
of  the  Army  and  civilian  contractors  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Public  Roads.  In  actuality,  however,  it  was 
a  combined  effort  with  overlapping  work  responsi- 
bility, shifts  in  priorities,  and  a  great  deal  of  truly 
cooperative  effort  from  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the 
first  Army  troops  at  Dawson  Creek  on  March  10,  1942, 
to  the  removal  of  all  contractor  personnel  and  super- 
visory engineers  of  Public  Roads  at  the  end  of  October 
1943.  As  a  highway  project  alone,  ignoring  military 
and  economic  considerations,  the  route  selected  was 
perhaps  inferior  to  one  located  west  of  the  main  range 
of  the  Rocky  Mountains  but  because  of  the  war,  a 
completely  different  set  of  requirements  and  priorities 
was  necessary. 

With  the  general  route  established,  decisions  had  to 
be  made  concerning  location  and  design  in  or  across 
canyons,    rivers,    mountain   passes   and   muskeg;    the 


weather  for  work  schedules;  the  use  and  source  of 
native  materials;  as  well  as  many  other  engineering 
and  logistic  considerations. 

Mobilization 

Immediately  upon  receiving  notice  of  the  impend- 
ing agreement,  the  PRA  Western  Headquarters 
started  a  search  of  the  whole  West  Coast  for  water 
transportation.  Eventually,  transportation  to  and 
from  the  project,  both  freight  and  personnel,  was 
handled  by  a  contractor  and  consisted  of  a  fleet  of 
4  freighters,  10  tugboats,  5  passenger  boats  (converted 
yachts)  and  1  manned  barge  built  in  1868,  assembled 
in  Lake  Union  and  Lake  Washington  in  Seattle.  In 
addition,  early  contingents  of  personnel  were  carried 
to  Skagway  by  the  Army  Transportation  Service, 
classified  as  either  passengers  or  cargo,  depending  on 
order  of  boarding  and  location  of  berth  above  or 
below  decks. 

Simultaneously  trucks,  tools,  and  other  equipment 
and  materials  were  gathered  from  the  camps  of  the 
Civilian  Conservation  Corps  (CCC)  in  the  northwest 
for  use  on  the  project.  These  were  started  north  by 
whatever  transport  could  be  obtained.  The  resources 
of  the  Work  Projects  Administration  (WPA)  were 
also  tapped  for  roadbuilding  and  office  equipment. 
Both  of  these  agencies  were  being  terminated  at  the 
time,  and  the  use  of  surplus  equipment  was  mutually 
beneficial. 

Field  headquarters  were  established  in  Whitehorse, 
Yukon  Territory,  with  a  subsidiary  office  at  Gulkana, 
Alaska,  and  in  Ft.  St.  John,  British  Columbia,  with 
a  subsidiary  office  at  Ft.  Nelson  on  the  Liard  River. 
PRA  work  in  the  Whitehorse  sector  did  not  commence 
until  over  a  month  after  activities  started  on  the 
Ft.  St.  John  end  of  the  project.  The  first  contingent 
of  12  men  from  Denver  arrived  in  Ft.  St.  John  on 
March  14  and  15,  and  the  first  troops  and  PRA  per- 
sonnel reached  Skagway,  Alaska,  early  in  April,  with 
Public  Roads  men  finally  reaching  Whitehorse  in 
mid-April. 


Personnel     carrier     arriving     in 
Alaska. 


I 


532 


A    location    crew    fording    the 
Donjck  River. 


Access  to  the  entire  project  was  limited  to  three 
major  routes:  by  rail  to  Dawson  Creek,  B.C.,  by  boat 
to  Skagway  and  then  rail  to  Whitehorse,  and  by  boat 
to  Valdez,  Alaska,  and  then  by  highway  to  Gulkana. 
This  restricted  access  inevitably  resulted  in  serious 
congestion  at  all  three  points.  In  the  spring  of  1942, 
600  carloads  arrived  by  rail  at  Dawson  Creek  within 
a  period  of  5  weeks.  At  one  time  200  carloads  were 
awaiting  shipment  at  Prince  Rupert,  B.C.,  for  Skag- 
way or  Valdez. 

The  level  of  activity  soon  made  it  apparent  to  PRA 
personnel  that  a  project  office  had  to  be  established 
close  to  the  scene  of  action,  and  in  April  1942,  a  dis- 
trict office  was  established  in  Seattle.  This  office  was 
later  moved  to  Edmonton,  Alberta,  in  January  1943 
as  contractor  operations  accelerated. 

Reconnaissance  and   Location 

Initial  reconnaissance  to  establish  a  preliminary 
location  for  the  Alaska  Highway  was  conducted  by 
air,  on  foot,  and  with  pack  trains  and  dog  sleds. 
Aerial  reconnaissance  was  new  but  invaluable  in  lo- 
cating the  route  from  Watson  Lake  to  Whitehorse 
and  crossing  the  Continental  Divide.  However,  it  was 
necessary  to  send  ground  reconnaissance  teams  on  foot 
or  with  dog  sleds  to  survey  many  sections  of  the  high- 
way. A\lTien  feasible,  a  winter  road  was  used  by  sur- 
veying parties,  but  the  very  nature  of  a  winter  road, 
located  through  the  wettest  areas  and  on  frozen  rivers 
in  contrast  to  the  requirements  for  an  all-weather 
route,  demanded  that  the  reconnaissance  teams  do 
much  hiking  to  locate  the  route  of  the  proposed  road 
some  distance  away.  When  dog  sleds  were  used, 
usually  a  couple  of  engineers,  their  guides  and  dog 
teams  would  set  off  for  weeks  at  a  time  and  cover 
hundreds  of  miles.  Much  of  this  work  was  performed 
in  temperatures  between  —20°  F.  and  4-40°  F.,  and 
with  the  exception  of  an  occasional  trapper's  cabin, 
the  men  lived  in  the  open  under  a  canvas  fly. 

When  sufficient  reconnaissance  work  had  been  done, 
though  far  from  complete,  work  began  on  locating  the 
centerline  for  the  pioneer  road.  Sixty  packhorse  out- 
fits were  organized  at  the  beginning  of  May  1942,  to 
accompany  survey  crews  working  out  of  Ft.  Nelson. 


These  PRA  survey  crews  began  flagging  line  for  the 
Army  clearing  crew.  In  late  May,  Army  and  Public 
Roads  location  parties  moved  north  from  St.  John  to 
establish  that  section  of  the  pioneer  road.  Aerial 
photographs  of  the  area  ahead  were  made  available 
to  the  location  engineers  in  the  field  camps,  enabling 
them,  by  use  of  compass  and  prominent  landmarks, 
to  locate  critical  "control"  points  in  the  route  selection. 
Much  of  the  time,  particularly  in  the  Ft.  St.  John 
sector,  this  preliminary  line  was  flagged  and  blazed 
just  ahead  of  the  bulldozers.  In  fact,  at  times  the 
locators  expressed  fear  of  being  run  over  by  the  heavy 
equipment.  In  some  areas  ground  reconnaissance  was 
not  really  completed  until  after  location  surveys  had 
started.  However,  no  significant  rerunning  of  surveys 
was  required. 

Construction,   1942 

The  rate  of  actual  construction  in  1942  is  difficult 
to  conceive,  but  the  fact  that  practically  all  of  the 
pioneer  road  was  built  in  5  months,  and  most  of  it  in 
4  months,  gives  an  idea  of  the  urgency  of  the  project. 
The  Army  involvement  in  construction  of  the  pioneer 
road  consisted  of  seven  engineer  regiments  comprising 
a  force  of  394  officers  and  10,765  enlisted  men." 

As  soon  as  the  Army  troops  started  construction, 
it  was  apparent  that,  without  help  from  the  civilian 
contractors,  it  would  be  impossible  to  complete  the 
access  road  or  keep  anything  resembling  the  originally 
planned  schedule.  Consequently,  work  forces  began 
to  be  merged.  By  the  end  of  July,  contractors  were 
being  shifted  about  and  rescheduled  all  up  and  down 
the  line  to  supplement  and  speed  up  construction  of 
the  pioneer  road  regardless  of  prior  arrangements. 

Army  requests  for  the  construction  of  the  Dawson 
Creek  railhead,  pipeline,  flight  strips,  and  other  in- 
stallations, coupled  with  a  labor  and  spare  parts 
shortage  and  increasing  equipment  breakdowns,  com- 
pounded to  further  delay  the  work  despite  the  closest 
kind  of  cooperation.  Perseverance  prevailed,  how- 
ever, and  on  October  25  the  final  breakthrough  came 
at  Beaver  Creek  in  the  Yukon  Territory  near  the 
Alaska  border.    A  formal  ceremony  at  Soldiers  Sum- 


533 


A  ribbon  separates  Royal  Ca- 
nadian Mounted  Police  and  U.S. 
Army  troops  at  the  dedication 
of  the  Alaska  Highway  in  1942. 


mit,  on  the  south  end  of  Kluane  Lake,  celebrated  the 
event  on  November  20, 1942. 

Winter,   1942-43 

After  the  breakthrough  at  Beaver  Creek,  much  re- 
mained to  be  done  to  make  the  truck  trail  a  usable 
road.  The  westerly  portion  presented  a  dreary  pros- 
pect, and  work  continued  on  into  the  winter  under 
extreme  weather  conditions.  Record  low  temperatures 
were  encountered,  reaching  72  degrees  below  zero  on 
the  northern  sector.  Diesel  fuel  failed  to  flow  from 
the  equipment  fuel  tanks  to  the  engines,  and  steel 
parts  broke  with  increasing  frequency.  Throughout 
the  project,  temporary  bridges  were  "freezing  in"  and 
going  out  when  forming  ice  pulled  them  apart.  How- 
ever, work  continued  at  a  fairly  high  level  during  the 


winter  on  major  structures  over  the  Peace,  Sikanni 
Chief,  Muskwa,  and  Liard  Rivers,  on  rock  cuts  where 
possible,  and  on  preparation  for  the  1943  construction 
season  by  repairing  equipment  and  building  shops  and 
camps. 

Engineering  design  work  in  preparation  for  the 
following  year's  construction  was  carried  on  through- 
out the  winter,  the  design  for  the  permanent  highway 
being  essentially  completed  by  the  beginning  of  the 
1943  season.  On  April  7,  1943,  however,  the  policies 
on  standards  and  alinement  were  radically  altered  by 
an  Army  directive.  This  directive  ordered  a  substan- 
tial lowering  of  design  standards  and  required  that 
construction  of  the  all-weather  route  follow  the  pio- 
neer truck  trail  to  the  maximum  extent  that  could 
provide  a  usable  road.^° 


Layers  of  trees  were  laid  over 
the  permafrost  as  the  first  step 
in  stabilizing   the  pioneer  road. 


534 


Moving  freight   along   the 
highway  near  the  Alaska- 
Yukon  border  was  a 
hazardous  operation  in  the 
summer  of  1943.     The  ditch 
on  the  left  was  the  original 
pioneer  road. 


In  retrospect,  the  first  year  was  one  of  many  prob- 
lems of  logistics,  establishment  and  reestablishment 
of  policy,  inconsistencies,  and  conflict,  but  also,  it  was 
a  year  in  which  a  spirit  of  full  cooperation  and  dedi- 
cation developed  in  all  workers  on  the  job,  regardless 
of  status.  A  truck  trail  of  sorts  was  built,  much  of 
it  improved  to  a  usable,  all-weather  standard,  and  the 
construction  of  a  highway  in  1943  was  made  a  possi- 
bility. 

Construction,    1943 

The  road,  as  it  evolved  at  the  end  of  1943,  was 
constructed  almost  entirely  in  that  year.  However, 
the  original  road,  resulting  from  the  1942  effort,  must 
be  given  full  credit  for  its  contribution  to  the  final 
effort  in  communication  and  transport. 


The  directive  changing  the  standards  and  alinement 
caused  a  substantial  shift  in  emphasis  of  the  1943 
work  of  the  contractors  under  the  direction  of  Public 
Roads.  As  a  result,  the  final  road  contained  a  con- 
siderable length  of  indirect  mileage,  excessively  steep 
grades  and  substandard  alinement.  This  was  an  out- 
growth of  the  fact  that  the  original  road  had  been 
constructed  to  a  large  degree  along  the  lines  of  least 
resistance,  with  no  appreciable  thought  given  at  that 
time  to  locating  it  as  a  permanent,  all-weather,  and 
reasonably  safe  facility. 

The  spring  breakup  during  May  destroyed  a  large 
number  of  temporary  bridges  south  of  Watson  Lake, 
but  stockpiled  materials  enabled  rapid  replacement. 
Although  this  was  a  temporary  setback,  over  all  prog- 
ress on  the  project  was  maintained  by  a  work  force 


The  completed  Alaska 
Highway  as  it  appeared  at 
Summit  Lake  in  the  Rocky 
Mountains  in  1943. 


535 


of  over  11,000  men.  Throughout  June  bad  weather 
seriously  delayed  the  construction  schedule  on  the 
southerly  section,  including  numerous  washouts  of 
structures.  Despite  this,  work  on  the  major  structures 
was  not  seriously  impeded  and  some  were  put  into 
use. 

On  June  9  and  10  disaster  struck  when  heavy  rains 
extending  200  miles  north  and  south  of  Ft.  Nelson 
caused  the  destruction  of  24  temporary  bridges.  A 
coordinated  effort  by  all  the  forces,  using  stockpiled 
and  salvaged  material,  resulted  in  reopening  this  sec- 
tion for  through  traffic  by  July  20,  nearly  2  weeks 
sooner  than  the  most  favorable  estimates  made  at  the 
time  of  the  floods. 

Even  with  the  temporary  loss  of  six  more  bridges 
to  high  water  west  of  Ft.  Nelson  early  in  August,  the 
opening  of  the  Peace  River  Bridge  to  one-way  traffic 
August  4,  and  later  that  month  to  two-way  traffic,  was 
accomplished.  Fortunately,  by  this  time  it  had  be- 
come almost  routine  to  replace  temporary  spans,  and 
5  days  after  the  washouts  traffic  was  again  moving 
over  the  sector. 

As  late  as  August  the  40-mile  section  near  the 
Alaska- Yukon  border  was  still  impassable.  Access  to 
the  area  was  possible  only  by  float  planes.  Finally 
on  October  13  the  gap  was  closed,  reopening  the  road 
permanently.  Followup  forces  improved  it  to  re- 
quired standards.  By  October  31,  99  bridges  had  been 
completed,  and  34  were  either  under  construction  or 
not  yet  started.  The  entire  pioneer  road  was  in  a 
usable  condition. 

At  the  peak  of  operations  in  September  1943,  there 
were  1,850  PEA  employees  and  14,100  civilian  em- 
ployees of  81  contractors  working  with  11,107  units 
of  equipment.  Except  for  two  companies,  the  Army 
engineer  regiments  had  been  moved  in  February  1943 
to  new  assignments  elsewhere.  As  with  the  pioneer 
road,  the  1,420  miles  of  final  highway  was  largely 
built  in  a  4-month  period,  with  the  final  overall  cost 
for  both  the  pioneer  road  and  completed  highway 
amounting  to  $138,312,166. 

Cost  of  Alaska  Highway 
Item  PRA  Funds     Army  Funds        Total 

Cost  of  pioneer  road  $  10,196,759  $  9,547,826  $  19,744,585 
Cost  of  final  type  road  87,205,328  6,874,307  94,079,635 
Other  work  11,615,913  11,615,913 

Final  job  inventory  12,872,033  12,872,033 


$121,890,033     $16,422,133     $138,312,166" 

The  challenge  of  administering  the  civilian  program 
in  constructing  the  Alaska  Highway  at  a  time  when 
Bureau  personnel  were  helping  to  complete  the  Inter- 
American  Highway  and  administering  wartime  ac- 
tivities on  domestic  highway  systems  required  a 
tremendous  effort  by  everyone  in  the  organization. 
In  retrospect,  these  undertakings  confirmed  the  sound- 
ness of  Commissioner  MacDonald's  personnel  and 
administrative  policies,  the  comprehensive  training 
programs  of  young  engineers,  especially  on  field  con- 
struction projects  in  the  national  forests  and  parks 
and  other  Federal  lands,  and  the  spirit  and  pride  of 
all  employees  in  maintaining  the  professional  stature 
of  the  Bureau. 


Postwar  Operations 

The  Philippine  Program — 1946  to   1969 

Public  Roads  began  work  in  the  Philippines  in 
1946  under  authorization  contained  in  Public  Law 
370,  79th  Congress,  an  Act  for  the  rehabilitation  of 
war  damage  to  the  Philippines  (usually  referred  to 
as  the  Rehabilitation  Act  of  1946).  The  Act  au- 
thorized Public  Roads  ".  .  .  after  consultation  with 
the  Philippine  Government,  to  plan,  design,  restore, 
and  build,  .  .  .  such  roads,  essential  streets  and  bridges 
as  may  be  necessary  .  .  .  for  national  defense  and 
economic  rehabilitation  and  development  of  the 
Philippines."  It  also  provided  authorization  for 
training  engineers  of  the  Philippine  Government. 

Under  this  authorization  and  with  a  fiscal  appro- 
priation of  slightly  more  than  $40  million.  Public 
Roads  assigned  three  of  its  highway  engineers  under 
F.  C.  Turner  to  begin  the  program. 

The  program  began  under  difficult  conditions.  Re- 
cruitment of  engineers  in  the  States  did  not  proceed 
readily  since  many  Public  Roads  engineers  had  just 
finished  difficult  wartime  assignments.  Housing  was 
practically  nonexistent,  office  facilities  limited,  and  at 
this  time,  there  was  a  Pacific  shipping  strike  in  pro- 
gress. For  the  Philippine  Bureau  of  Public  Works, 
only  a  few  experienced  engineers  were  immediately 
available. 

By  September  1947,  however,  many  of  the  initial 
problems  were  overcome  and  the  project  was  well 
underway  with  key  positions  filled  and  operating  pro- 
cedures well  defined.  A  highway  planning  and  pro- 
graming section  was  established  in  the  Philippine 
Bureau  of  Public  Works  to  undertake  a  complete 
road  and  bridge  inventory  necessary  for  future  eco- 
nomic development.  This  new  section  was  also  re- 
sponsible for  recommendations  on  the  organization  of 
a  Philippine  Division  of  Highways  separate  and  dis- 
tinct from  the  numerous  other  operations  of  the 
Philippine  Bureau  of  Public  Works.  The  recom- 
mendations of  the  highway  planning  survey  (HPS) 
were  accepted,  and  in  1948  a  Philippine  Division  of 
Highways  within  the  Bureau  of  Public  Works  was 
established  by  executive  order. 

Under  the  "Rehab"  program  administered  by  the 
reorganized  highway  department,  approximately  500 
bridges  and  360  miles  of  high-type  roads  and  streets 
were  constructed. 

The  work  of  the  U.S.  Division  Office  under  the 
Rehabilitation  Act  of  1946  continued  through  1951  at 
which  time  Public  Roads  was  requested  by  the  Inter- 
national Cooperation  Administration  (ICA)  to  remain 
in  the  Philippines  as  highway  consultants  to  the  ICA 
and  as  advisors  to  the  Philippine  Bureau  of  Public 
Highways.  Public  Roads  personnel  completed  the 
work  under  the  Rehabilitation  Act,  wliich  had  been 
extended  1  year,  and  accepted  new  work  authorized 
by  ICA.  Funds  were  provided  by  ICA  with  match- 
ing funds  by  the  Philippine  Government  for  a  pro- 
gram of  improvements  for  a  nationwide  highway 
network,  construction  of  development  roads  (prin- 
cipally on  the  Island  of  Mindanao),  replacement  of 
temporary  wooden  bridges,  and  the  development  of 
village  and  feeder  roads.  The  training  program  be- 
som in  1948  was  continued  and  was  so  successful  that 


536 


Unloading  steel  for  bridge  replacement  in  the  Philippines. 


537 


Construction  of  the  Mindanao  development  road. 


Turkish  terrain  required  intensive  maintenance. 


538 


by  1952  the  Philippine  Bureau  of  Public  Highways 
was  staffed  entirely  by  local  engineers  and  technicians 
and  was  recognized  as  one  of  the  most  capable  high- 
way organizations  in  Asia.  During  1961  and  1962  the 
BPR/ICA  activities  were  gradually  phased  out,  and 
the  Bureau  Division  Office  in  the  Philippines  was 
closed. 

Meanwhile,  however,  negotiations  were  underway 
between  the  Philippine  Government  and  the  Develop- 
ment Loan  Fund  (a  U.S.  Government  lending  insti- 
tution) for  a  substantial  loan  for  highway  purposes. 
Tliis  loan,  identified  as  DLF  No.  67,  was  approved  in 
June  1959  in  the  amount  of  $18.75  million.  The  loan 
agreement  specified  that  the  borrower  (Philippine 
Government)  make  arrangements  for  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads  to  act  as  liaison  between  the  Philippine 
Government  and  the  lending  agency.^- 

After  a  difficult  beginning,  the  program  progressed 
satisfactorily,  and  the  majority  of  program  activities 
were  completed  in  September  1969. 

The  Turkish   Program — 1947  to    1958 

On  May  22,  1947,  the  80th  Congress  enacted  Public 
Law  75,  known  as  the  Aid  to  Greece  and  Turkey 
Program.  The  law  included  a  sum  of  $5  million  to 
Turkey  for  highway  purposes.  Originally  scheduled 
to  be  administered  and  operated  by  the  U.S.  Army, 
it  was  shortly  found  more  suitable  for  the  Public 
Roads  Administration  (PRA).  Thus,  on  July  12, 
1947,  the  State  Department  and  the  PRA  signed  an 
agreement  in  which  Public  Roads  would  supervise  the 
highway  program  in  Turkey  under  the  terms  of  the 
Act.  By  the  end  of  1947,  the  PRA's  staff  consisted  of 
18  men,  engineers  and  specialists  sharing  space  with 
their  Turkish  counterparts  for  a  good  opportunity  for 
close  working  relationships  and  training.  The  initial 
objectives  of  the  administrative  and  planning  advisors 


were  to  prepare  a  report  on  the  status  of  highway 
development  and  to  negotiate  a  formal  agreement  with 
the  Turkish  Government  covering  the  objectives  of 
the  cooperative  program ;  establish  the  obligations  to 
be  assumed  by  each  party;  formulate  the  ways  of  at- 
taining the  desired  objectives;  and  arrange  the  finan- 
cial requirements  for  the  program.  The  report  was 
completed,  presented  to  the  Turkish  Government,  and 
an  agreement  executed  on  April  26,  1948.  This  agree- 
ment stated  that  the  Public  Roads  group  would  assist 
the  Ministry  of  Public  Works  of  Turkey  in  establish- 
ing a  long-range  highway  improvement  program  and 
in  establishing  a  pattern  for  highway  administration 
on  a  national  scale. 

The  initial  staffing  of  the  Public  Roads  group  pro- 
vided the  required  organizational  arrangement  for 
accomplishing  the  work.  Specialists  were  added  to 
the  organizational  units  as  required,  but  when  Turkish 
personnel  were  capable  of  taking  over  an  organiza- 
tional unit,  that  unit  was  dropped  from  the  Public 
Roads  organization.  The  first  division  to  be  trans- 
ferred to  exclusive  Turkish  administration  was  the 
Planning  and  Programing  Division  in  1954. 

The  11  years  of  training  and  working  together  be- 
tween BPR  and  the  Turkish  personnel  bore  fruit. 
"Wlien  the  technical  assistance  program  began  in 
Turkey,  BPR  personnel  could  not  identify  a  counter- 
part in  the  Turkish  organization  for  many  of  the 
divisions  such  as  in  Survey  and  Design  or  in  Ma- 
terials. Or,  if  there  were  counterpart  groups,  many 
of  the  techniques  used  were  not  mechanized.  Thus, 
units  had  to  be  organized  and  staffed,  and  training 
for  counterparts  and  their  sections  had  to  be  under- 
taken. The  better  graduates  from  this  instruction 
became  instructors  for  new  classes.  While  the  on-the- 
job   instruction   was   going  on,   further  practical   ex- 


Pack  animals  move  aggregate  in  remote  areas  of  Turkey. 


539 


perience  was  being  gained  by  the  Turkish  personnel 
as  they  built  and  maintained  the  highway  system. 

By  far  the  greatest  part  of  the  Bureau's  effort  was 
in  supplying  equipment.  The  initial  aid  program 
provided  for  shipment  to  Turkey  of  equipment,  ma- 
terials, and  parts  valued  at  approximately  $4.5  mil- 
lion; subsequent  aid  programs  increased  this  figure  to 
approximately  $41  million.  Equipment  was  already 
arriving  in  Turkey  in  December  1947  when  the  first 
of  the  PRA  group  arrived. 

The  task  of  institution  building*  required  innova- 
tive measures,  especially  in  training  matters.  Initially, 
recruiting  local  personnel  satisfactory  as  equipment 
operators  proved  to  be  difficult,  and  to  furnish  enough 
operators,  the  Turkish  Army  supplied  officers  and 
men  to  the  program.  This  speeded  up  construction 
of  strategic  highways  and  was  considered  to  be  suf- 
ficient justification  for  bringing  army  personnel  into 
the  training  progi'am.  Prior  to  starting  actual  road 
construction,  all  operators  received  training  on  the 
new  equipment. 

The  basic  program  was  essentially  completed  by  the 
mid-1950's,  and  the  last  advisor  returned  to  the  United 
States  in  late  1958.  Measured  in  terms  of  highway 
improvement,  the  mileage  of  all-weather  roads  on  the 
Turkish  National  Road  system  more  than  doubled 
between  1948  and  1958,  and  on  the  Provincial  System 
it  increased  fivefold.  In  1960  the  Turkish  highway 
department  was  maintaining  14,450  miles  of  national 
roads  and  13,182  miles  of  provincial  roads.  From 
1940  to  1960,  over  800  bridges  were  built  on  the  na- 
tional system  and  more  than  400  on  the  provincial 
roads.  In  evaluating  the  Turkish  program,  the  fol- 
lowing assessment  was  made  in  a  study  prepared  in 
1962  by  the  Columbia  University  School  of  Law: 

Financially,  the  extent  of  the  aid  hardly  comes  up  to 
the  level  of  the  aid  received  by  the  other  sectors  and 
organizations  in  Turkey.  Yet,  the  outstanding  feature  of 
the  aid  is  that  in  this  instance  the  technical  assistance 
has  been  rendered  directly  by  the  Federal  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads.  Consequently,  the  technical  aspect  of  the 
work  done  has  been  of  the  highest  level.  The  fact  that 
the  organization  was  set  up  and  put  into  operation  by  the 
U.S.  experts  has  been  the  principal  factor  in  the  eventual 
success  of  the  project. 

Within  a  short  time,  the  general  Directorate  of  High- 
ways has  evolved  into  a  first-class  organization.  So  much 
so  that  today  it  is  in  a  position  to  extend  technical  assist- 
ance to  certain  countries  in  the  Middle  East  implementing 
highway-construction  programs. 

The  aid  extended  to  Turkey  in  connection  with  her 
highway  program  and  the  results  achieved  through  that 
aid  confirm  the  fact  that,  in  the  case  of  underdeveloped 
countries,  technical  aid  is  more  important  than  financial 
and  that  it  should  be  given  priority.^' 

Training    Foreign   Nationals 

The  Federal  Highway  Administration  has  always 
placed  strong  emphasis  on  training.  The  training  of 
young  engineers  and  construction  operators  in  devel- 
oping the  roadbuilding  capability  in  this  country 
proved  so  significant  that  an  initial  emphasis  in  this 


*  Institution  building  is  assisting  in  the  development  of  a 
higlnvay  organization  equipped  with  adequate  laws  and  pro- 
cedures and  administered  and  operated  by  trained  persoiniel. 
The  ultimate  desired  result  of  technical  assistance  is  to  de- 
velop the  capability  of  a  country's  liigliway  organization  to 
administer,  l)uild,  and  maintain  a  highway  system  adequate 
to  develop  their  economy  and  improve  the  standard  of  living. 


area  was  naturally  of  high  priority  in  all  overseas 
projects  also. 

The  first  major  applications  of  overseas  training 
programs  were  undertaken  in  the  projects  in  Turkey 
and  the  Philippines.  Since  then  institution  building 
through  training  has  been  a  part  of  all  technical  as- 
sistance provided  by  FHWA.  Because  conditions  in 
each  country  vary  tremendously  in  facilities,  educa- 
tional level,  and  other  factors,  each  overseas  Division 
Office  has  been  required  to  develop  training  programs 
specifically  to  meet  the  needs  of  that  country. 

A  deficiency  Bureau  engineers  noted  in  all  overseas 
programs  immediately  after  World  War  II  was  the 
lack  of  manuals  or  procedural  guides.  In  order  to 
overcome  this,  early  in  each  program,  a  Bureau  ad- 
visor assisted  his  local  counterpart  in  preparing 
manuals  to  cover  his  specific  technical  field.  These 
manuals  were  in  the  local  language  and  were  designed 
to  fit  conditions  within  that  country.  Practically  all 
Bureau  technical  manuals  and  some  State  highway 
department  manuals  have  been  modified  and  issued  in 
the  language  of  the  various  countries.  Thus,  Ameri- 
can design  standards,  planning  techniques,  material 
tests  and  specifications,  and  equipment  practices  have 
been  adopted,  in  various  degrees,  throughout  the 
world.  The  use  of  these  manuals  by  the  respective 
countries  for  both  training  and  operations  has  been 
one  of  the  greatest  influences  on  the  growth  and  de- 
velopment of  their  highway  departments. 

Major  overseas  programs  where  training  was  the 
key  element  for  the  successful  establishment  of  a 
workable  highway  department  were  undertaken,  in 
addition  to  Turkey  and  the  Philippine  Republic,  in 
Ethiopia,  Iran,  and  Laos.  Less  extensive  programs 
were  undertaken  in  Nepal,  Lebanon,  Sudan,  Brazil, 
Bolivia,  Kuwait,  Jordan,  Dominican  Republic,  and 
Cambodia. 

While  the  overseas  divisions  carried  out  the  greater 
portion  of  their  training  activities  onsite,  the  need  to 
train,  in  this  country,  staff  engineers  and  adminis- 
trators of  foreign  highway  departments  was  also  rec- 
ognized. Since  1948,  the  Bureau  has  welcomed  over 
10,000  engineers  and  highway  officials  for  various 
types  of  formal  training  programs. 

In  1949  BPR  and  the  Department  of  State  decided 
to  offer  to  groups  of  foreign  engineers  a  formal  course 
of  lectures,  discussions,  demonstrations;  and  field  trips. 
The  course  included  6  weeks  of  lectures  and  discus- 
sions in  Washington,  2  weeks  visiting  equipment  and 
automobile  plants,  and  subsequent  visits  to  various 
State  highway  departments  where  field  operations  and 
Federal-State  cooperation  could  be  observed.  This 
program  continued  for  4  years,  the  final  course  being 
held  in  1952. 

By  combining  a  relatively  small  group  of  specialists 
overseas  with  the  extensive  backup  provided  by  the 
FHWA  headquarters  and  field  offices  working  in  co- 
operation with  State  highway  departments,  FHWA 
has  contributed  much  to  assist  the  world  in  its  struggle 
to  expand  economic  development  by  opening  new 
areas.  Certainly  the  work  of  the  FHWA  around  the 
world,  through  its  use  and  teaching  of  American  de- 
sign standards  and  construction  trades,  has  fulfilled 
Mr.  MacDonald's  charge  in  1925.  It  is,  indeed,  the 
finer  statesmanship. 


540 


REFERENCES 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1901,  p.  243. 

"  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1900,  p.  289. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1908,  p.  6. 

*  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  Annual  Report,  1911,  p.  46. 

'  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  The  Bureau  of  Public  Roads 
AND  Its  Exhibit  (U.S.  Dept.  of  Agriculture,  Washington,  D.C., 
1922)  pp.  5,  6. 

^  H.  H.  Rice  Appointed  Chninna7i  of  U.S.  Delegation  to 
Pan-American  Road  Congress  at  Buenos  Aires,  Good  Roads, 
Vol.  68,  No.  7,  Aug.  1925,  pp.  196,  197. 

'  T.  MacDonald,  Our  International  Relations  as  Shown  by 
the  Pan-American  Road  Congress  at  Buenos  Aires,  Address 
delivered  at  11th  Annual  Meeting,  American  Association  of 
State  Highway  Officials,  Detroit,  Mich.,  Nov.  19,  1925,  Papers, 
1924r-25,  p.  11. 

*T.  MacDonald,  Contrasting  United  States  and  European 
Practices  in  Road  Derclopment,  Address  delivered  at  24th 
Annual  Meeting,  American  Association  of  State  Highway 
Officials,  Dallas,  Tex.,  Dec.  5,  1938,  Papers,  1937-39,  pp.  3,  4. 

"Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  Testimonial  (Manila  Division 
Office,  Manila,  1952),  pp.  12,  13. 

"*  Staff  of  The  House  Comm.  On  Public  Works,  86th 
Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  Report  of  The  Construction  Progress  On 
Inter-American  Highway  in  Central  America  and  Panama 
(Comm.  Print  22)  p.  146. 

"  Staff  of  The  House  Comm.  On  Public  Works,  88th 
Cong.,  1st.  Sess.,  The  Final  Link,  Report  On  The  Darien 
Gap  and  Progress  Toward  Completion  of  The  Inter-Ameri- 
can Highway  (Connn.  Print  2)  p.  3. 

'=  Supplemental  Appropriations  Act  of  1930   (46  Stat  115). 


"  Staff  of  The  House  Comm.  On  Roads,  The  Inter- 
American  Highway — An  Interim  Report  Pursuant  To  H. 
Res.  255  (Comm.  Print,  Dec.  18,  1946)  pp.  vi,  vii,  11. 

"Darien  Subcommittee,  The  Darien  Gap  Project  (Darien 
(Jap  Subcommittee,  Panama,  Oct.  1965)  p.  1. 

"Final  Act,  Sixth  Pan-American  Highway  Congress, 
July  11-23,  1954  (Conun.  on  Economic  and  Social  Affairs, 
Pan  American  Union,  Washington,  D.C.,  1955)  p.  22. 

"Final  Conclusions  and  Recommendations  Regarding 
Location,  Design,  and  Constritction  of  The  Pan-Amekican 
Highway  Through  The  Darien  Gap  In  The  Republics  of 
P.vnama  and  Colombia  (Darien  Subcommittee,  I'anama,  1968) 
p.  11. 

"  The  Alaska  Highway,  H.  Rep.  1705,  79th  Cong.,  2d  Sess., 
pp.  9,  10. 

'"  lA'tter  to  Gen.  Clarence  L.  Sturdevant,  Office  of  the  Chief 
of  Engineers,  from  Thomas  II.  MacDonald,  Commissioner, 
Public  Roads  Administration,  Mar.  4,  1942,  in  Construction 
OF  The  Alaska  Highway  (I'ublic  Roads  Admin.,  Washington, 
D.C.,  1945)  pp.  102-105. 

'°H.  Rep.,  supra,  note  17,  p.  14. 

'■^  Letter  to  J.  S.  Bright,  Public  Roads  Administration,  from 
Col.  L.  D.  Worsham,  Corps  of  Engineers,  Division  Engineer, 
Apr.  7,  1943,  in  Construction  of  The  Alaska  Highway 
(I'ublic  Roads  Admin.,  Washington,  D.C.,  1945)  pp.  164,  165. 

■'  H.  Rep.,  supra,  note  17,  p.  26. 

"  Loan  Agreement  Between  Department  of  Public  Works 
AND  Communications,  Republic  of  The  Philippines,  and  The 
Development  Loan  Fund,  DLF  Loan  No.  67,  June  29,  1959. 

"  Columbia  University  School  of  Law,  Public  Interna- 
tional Development  Financing  In  Turkey  (Columbia  Uni- 
versity Press,  New  York,  1962)  pp.  132,  133. 


541 


Epilogue— 

The 

Succe// 

Story 


The  story  of  the  development  of  highways  and  of 
highway  transportation  in  the  United  States,  as  pre- 
sented here,  has  been  limited  largely  to  the  role  of 
the  Federal  Government  in  the  construction  of  our 
Nation's  highways  under  the  remarkably  successful 
Federal-aid  highway  program.  As  the  name  indi- 
cates, the  "Federal-aid"  program  is  one  involving 
joint  Federal-State  funding  and  execution  of  the  de- 
sign and  construction  of  highways  on  approved  sys- 
tems of  interconnected  routes  in  all  States.  The 
Federal-State  funding  varies  with  the  designated  sys- 
tem on  which  the  improvement  is  undertaken,  and  the 
States,  at  their  option,  may  schedule  construction 
without  Federal  funding  and  without  Federal  review. 

In  the  Federal-aid  highway  program,  each  of  the 
State  highway  departments  has  served  as  a  full  and 
equal  partner  in  that  State  and  merits  equal  credit 
for  the  program  accomplishments.  This  text  has  re- 
corded the  story  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  as  one 
of  the  partners.  The  accomplishments  of  each  State 
highway  department  in  a  common  and  parallel  en- 
deavor is  a  separate  story.  It  has  been  a  truly  suc- 
cessful partnership  program. 

The  agency  that  was  to  become  the  Bureau  of 
Public  Roads,  and  ultimately  the  Federal  Highway 
Administration,  was  created  in  1893  with  an  initial 
appropriation  of  $10,000  per  year.  The  activities  of 
the  agency  were  limited  to  making  "inquiries"  among 
State  and  local  units  as  to  road  construction  and 
maintenance  practices.  The  initial  "staff"  was  the 
Special  Agent  and  Engineer,  General  Roy  Stone,  and 
a  clerical  assistant,  and  the  first  year's  expenditures 
totaled  less  than  $3,000  of  the  available  appropriation. 


Thus,  at  the  outset,  frugality  in  manpower  and  ad- 
ministrative expenditures,  through  the  years,  charac- 
terized the  performance  of  the  Federal  Government's 
highway  agency,  by  whatever  title  it  was  termed  under 
law. 

Initially,  the  interest  of  the  Federal  Government  in 
road  improvement  was  minimal,  and  years  passed  be'- 
fore  the  public  demand  for  improved  rural  mail  de- 
livery service  resulted  in  a  Federal  enactment  of 
financial  aid  to  the  States  for  improvement  of  selected 
post  roads.  Experimentation  in  road  construction 
methods  and  in  the  use  of  construction  materials  was 
the  forerunner  of  today's  sophisticated  program  of 
construction  and  research  in  the  highway  industry. 
The  post  road  improvement  program  led  to  the 
Federal-aid  highway  program  and  provided  valuable 
experience  which  was  of  assistance  to  the  Congress 
in  its  framing  of  the  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916 — 
the  first  real  Federal-aid  highway  legislation. 

Early  efforts  toward  a  system  of  Federal  highways, 
constructed  and  maintained  by  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment, did  not  prevail.  Rather,  there  developed  an 
underlying  concept  of  State  ownership.  State  respon- 
sibility, and  State  program  initiation,  with  the  Fed- 
eral agency  advising  and  consulting  and  with  the 
Federal  Government  providing  financial  assistance. 

The  Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916  established  the 
partnership  role  of  the  State  and  Federal  Govern- 
ments in  a  program  of  Federal  aid  for  highway  con- 
struction, and  tlie  Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921, 
together  with  the  Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  of 
1922,  provided  a  multiyear  plan  of  Federal  funding 


542 


for   the    program — both    essential    to    the    continuous 
program  that  has  endured  to  the  present. 

During  the  time  period  in  which  congressional  ac- 
tion on  the  basic  highway  legislation  Avas  evolving, 
first  Logan  'Waller  Page  (1905-1918)  and  then  Thomas 
H.  MacDonald  (1919-1953)  were  appointed  to  be 
Director  of  Public  Roads  and  ably  developed  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  (as  it  is  known  to  most 
Americans).  Under  these  two  men,  the  Bureau  pro- 
cedures implemented  the  basic  concept  of  equal  Fed- 
eral-State partnership  roles  in  carrying  out  the 
congressional  mandate  for  Federal  assistance  in  con- 
structing a  highway  system  in  the  United  States.  The 
State  had  the  responsibility  to  locate  and  design  the 
proposed  highways,  to  secure  the  necessary  rights-of- 
way,  to  advertise  and  award  the  proposed  construction 
contracts,  and  to  supervise  the  construction  activity 
under  the  contract  which  followed.  The  role  of  the 
Bureau  of  Public  Roads  was  that  of  consultation, 
advice,  review  and  approval  at  each  of  the  successive 
steps  as  the  project  developed  from  its  initial  proposal 
to  its  final  contract  completion.  The  State  owned  and 
agreed  to  maintain  the  highways  on  which  Federal- 
aid  moneys  were  spent. 

While  the  size  of  the  program  has  increased  dra- 
matically— from  an  authorization  level  of  $75  million 
in  1922  to  a  program  level  in  excess  of  $5  billion  in 
1974 — the  same  basic  procedures  initiated  in  the  be- 
ginning years  of  the  program  are  still  followed.  This 
stability  of  program  operation  has  resulted  in  wide- 
spread confidence  in  and  acceptance  of  the  highway 
program  at  local,  State  and  Federal  levels,  both  in  and 
out  of  the  highway  program. 

The  success  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  program  is 
unquestioned,  and  the  reasons  are  many.  The  Con- 
gress consistently  provided  advance  authorizations 
and  timely  appropriations  so  that  the  States,  from 
the  beginning,  could  move  with  confidence  knowing 
in  advance  the  level  of  authorization  at  which  they 
could  operate  and  Imowing  that  appropriated  funds 
would  be  adequate  to  provide  cash  reimbursement  for 
their  expenditures.  The  Congress  increased  the  level 
of  financing  as  public  needs  I'equired,  and  expansion 
of  the  scope  of  program  activities  has  been  authorized 
as  special  needs  for  highway  transportation  became 
eAddent.  The  sage  action  of  Congress  in  highway 
legislation  has  been  a  most  important  factor  in  the 
success  of  the  Federal-aid  highway  program. 

A  second  and  equally  important  factor  has  been  the 
development  of  strong,  competent  individual  State 
highway  organizations  and  their  interaction  with 
members  of  the  construction  industry  in  implementing 
the  program  made  possible  by  the  congressional  au- 
thorizations. The  States  have  developed  organiza- 
tions with  the  technical  and  administrative  ability  to 
meet  the  changing  program  demands,  and  the  con- 
struction industry  nationwide  has  kept  pace  through 
advancing  construction  technology  and  integrity  of 
purpose  to  meet  the  growing  needs  in  highway  con- 
struction procedures. 

Recognizing  the  contributions  of  Congress,  the 
States,  and  the  construction  industry  toward  the  de- 
velopment of  highway  transportation  in  the  United 
States,  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  for  its  part,  has 
implemented   and   administered   the   legislation   since 


1916  and  has  fostered  the  successful  Federal-State 
partnership. 

In  the  formative  years,  the  Bureau  held  a  tight  rein 
in  guiding  development  of  the  program.  All  approval 
authority  was  administered  from  the  central  office  in 
Washington,  with  assistance  provided  through  10  field 
district  offices  to  which  routine  operating  responsi- 
bility and  authority  was  delegated,  and  a  Regional 
Office  which  served  as  an  extension  of  the  Washington 
Office  covering  operations  of  the  program  in  11  west- 
ern States  in  which  most  of  the  direct  Federal  con- 
struction work  was  performed.  Strong  central  office 
control  prevailed  over  all  system  approvals,  program 
actions,  and  project  plans  and  specifications.  Con- 
struction contract  administration  was  a  more  local 
responsibility  with  review  at  the  field  level. 

This  initial  strong  central  control  accomplished  a 
major  objective  of  uniformity  in  the  administration 
of  emerging  regulations  and  procedures  among  the 
States,  thus  establishing  Federal-aid  programs  in  each 
State  on  a  common  basis. 

Mr.  MacDonald  developed  within  the  Bureau  a 
spirit  of  organizational  pride  in  professional  excel- 
lence of  perfoi'mance  combined  with  a  dedication  to 
public  service  and  unquestioned  integrity.  The  ability 
of  the  Bureau  to  attract  competent  and  dedicated 
personnel  through  the  years  stemmed  in  a  large  part 
from  the  early  organizational  image.  The  well  or- 
dered, fully  professional  pi'ogram  was  attractive  to 
young  engineers  who  sensed  the  opportunity  to  par- 
ticipate in  a  rewarding  program  and  who  normally 
remained  in  that  service  throughout  their  professional 
careers. 

In  the  1940's  a  major  organizational  change  estab- 
lished BPR  offices  in  each  State,  with  geographical 
regional  offices  designated  to  serve  as  intermediary 
between  these  State  level  organizational  units  and  the 
central  office  in  Washington.  The  reorganization  re- 
sulted in  closer  operating  coordination  at  the  State 
level  and  the  development  of  staff  capability  at  the 
regional  level,  both  of  which  were  to  be  of  immense 
value  in  the  decentralization  of  program  control  and 
delegation  of  authority  which  were  to  follow  a  few 
years  later. 

The  increase  in  the  size  of  the  Federal-aid  program 
funding  in  the  postwar  years,  the  expanding  Federal 
interest  in  urban  transportation  problems,  and  the 
anticipated  legislation  for  separate  funding  for  con- 
struction of  the  Interstate  System  resulted  in  major 
delegation  of  operating  authority  in  1953,  and  in  the 
following  2  years,  authority  for  all  program  and 
project  approval  action  was  delegated.  The  submis- 
sion of  project  plans  to  Washington  was  discontinued 
as  a  general  requirement.  The  Washington  Office  role 
became  that  of  consultant  and  arbitrator  on  project 
matters  and  one  of  leadership  in  establishing  program 
policy  consistent  with  the  total  transportation  pro- 
gram objectives  of  the  Administration  and  of  Con- 
gress. The  result  was  that  the  Bureau  effectively 
administered  a  vastly  increased  program  with  very 
little  increase  in  the  number  of  personnel. 

Changes  in  the  program  have  been  many,  and  their 
impact  has  been  dramatic.  The  program  started  as  a 
rural  post  road  improvement  program.  With  the 
growth  of  the  Nation  and  of  its  urban  population,  the 


543 


program  became  one  of  meeting  the  complex  trans- 
portation and  social  problems  in  urban  areas  and  the 
needs  for  intercity  and  interstate  motor  vehicle  trans- 
portation. The  changing  focus  in  national  highway 
needs  and  in  national  transportation  objectives  had 
been  anticipated  by  BPR  leaders  and  had  prompted 
their  early  efforts  in  the  fields  of  highway  planning 
and  needs  studies,  highway  research  sponsorship, 
highway  design  and  construction,  highway  traffic  op- 
eration, and  highway  transportation  economics.  This 
capability  to  meet  the  demands  of  changing  national 
interests  with  major  program  changes  and  with  a 
modest,  but  flexible,  staff  is  the  real  success  story  of 
the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads.  It  is  a  story  of  dedi- 
cated and  competent  public  service  which  has  earned 
the  confidence  and  respect  of  the  American  people 
over  a  60-year  period.  Professional  excellence  with 
total  integrity  has  marked  that  performance  from  the 
beginning. 

But  what  about  tomorrow?  Is  it  not  only  natural 
to  expect  that  this  impressive  story  of  accomplishment 
will  continue  well  into  the  future? 

Engraved  on  the  facade  of  the  National  Archives 
building  is  the  phrase  "What  is  past  is  prologue." 
This  is  certainly  true  with  respect  to  the  long  and 
successful  highway  building  era  in  America.  We  can- 
not contemplate  the  present  without  knowledge  of  the 
past  nor  forecast  the  future  in  ignorance  of  either. 

The  national  highway  program  is  in  the  throes  of 
major  change  in  direction  and  emphasis.  These 
changes  are  emanating  from  complex  issues  and  prob- 
lems associated  with  growing  questions  of  government 
involvement.  For  instance,  the  appropriate  roles  of 
Federal,  State,  and  local  governments  in  highway  con- 
struction, operation,  and  maintenance  are  being  recon- 
sidered. We  realize  that  the  Interstate  System  is 
going  to  require  a  continuing  process  of  resurfacing, 
restoring,  and  rehabilitation  to  maintain  the  high  level 
of  transportation  service  demanded  by  the  public. 
This  will  be  quite  expensive  and  probably  beyond  the 
financial  capability  of  the  States  to  do  it  adequately. 
A  program  for  Federal  participation  in  the  upgrading 
and  rehabilitation  of  the  Interstate  System  has  been 
authorized  in  the  Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1976. 

The  Federal  role  in  other  highway  systems — the 
Primary,  Secondary,  and  Urban  Systems — will  also 
be  examined  closely  and  debated  in  the  coming  months 
and  years.  It  appears  likely  that  more  of  the  respon- 
sibility for  planning  the  construction,  maintenance, 
and  operation  of  these  systems  will  shift  away  from 
the  Federal  and  further  toward  State  and  local  levels 
of  government  over  time,  consistent  with  the  policy  of 
increasing  the  decisionmaking  flexibility  of  these  levels 
of  government  to  deal  with  issues  of  lesser  national 
significance. 

During  the  past  10  years,  although  the  total  invest- 
ment for  all  highway  functions  by  all  levels  of  govern- 
ment has  increased  substantially,  inflation  has  eroded 
the  highway  dollar  so  seriously  that  actual  construc- 
tion activities  on  highways  has  in  fact  decreased.  In 
the  same  10-year  period,  the  number  of  miles  of  high- 
ways in  the  United  States,  the  number  of  registered 
vehicles,  and  the  number  of  vehicle  miles  of  travel 
have  all  increased  substantially.  These  facts  indicate 
that,  at  best,  we  have  maintained  approximately  the 


same  lev(;l  of  performance  on  our  highway  system 
during  the  last  10  years.  As  more  facts  are  gathered, 
however,  we  may  learn  that  the  highway  system's 
overall  performance  has  deteriorated.  A  major  issue, 
then,  will  be  to  determine  appropriate  funding  levels 
to  maintain  a  reasonable  performance  level  on  our 
highways  and  to  provide  for  those  funds  fairly  and 
equitably  in  accordance  with  the  benefits  derived  by 
the  users  of  the  highway  system.  Included  in  this 
issue  is  the  question  of  what  funding  mechanisms  can 
be  used  to  adequately  finance  the  Nation's  highway 
system — for  example,  shall  we  retain  the  Highway 
Trust  Fund  or  establish  a  Transportation  Trust  Fund  ? 
Or  should  we  return  to  jjeneral  revenue  funding  for 
highways?  And  how  will  rising  State  and  local  fund- 
ing needs  be  satisfied?  These  are  questions  which  will 
also  be  debated  during  the  coming  months. 

More  attention  will  be  given  in  the  coming  years 
to  upgrading  public  transportation,  including  light 
and  heavy  rail  mass  transit  and  railroad  facilities. 
At  the  same  time,  more  rigorous  analytical  procedures 
will  be  needed  in  making  such  large  transportation 
investment  decisions  through  cost-effectiveness  studies 
and  analyses  of  alternatives.  Highway  builders,  the 
engineers  who  developed  the  highway  system  that  is 
the  envy  of  the  whole  world,  may  be  expected  to  assist 
in  the  rehabilitation  of  the  fixed  rail  systems  in  the 
Nation.  We  may  expect  that  State  and  Federal  high- 
way organizations  will  become  more  closely  involved 
in  this  new  major  thrust  within  the  transportation 
family. 

A  major  objective  now  and  in  the  years  to  come  will 
be  to  make  better  use  of  the  highway  facilities  we  al- 
ready have.  Land  and  other  resources  in  many  areas 
are  iDecoming  scarce,  and  fuel  is  becoming  more  pre- 
cious. Accordingly,  we  may  expect  to  see  in  the 
future  a  continuing  emphasis  on  the  more  efficient 
utilization  of  our  existing  facilities.  Better  traffic 
management,  auto-restricted  zones  in  our  dense  urban 
areas,  preferential  transit  bus  and  carpool  treatments, 
better  utilization  of  air  space  and  below  ground  space 
in  rights-of-way — all  of  these  concepts  will  receive 
more  attention  in  the  coming  years,  especially  in  the 
more  densely  populated  urban  areas  where  efficiency 
is  paramount. 

More  attention  will  be  given  to  the  conservation  of 
energy  and  the  development  of  new  sources  of  energy. 
We  will  need  to  discipline  ourselves  to  use  less  fuel 
by  driving  at  slower  speeds  and  developing  more  fuel 
efficient  vehicles.  It  would  be  comforting  to  predict 
the  development  of  new,  clean,  infinite  sources  of 
energy.  After  all,  the  United  States  did  not  become 
a  great  Nation  by  saving  energy,  but  by  using  huge 
quantities  of  it.  We  may  again  reach  a  time  when 
we  can  use  all  the  energy  we  want  without  polluting 
the  atmosphere  or  depleting  finite  resources,  but  this 
day  is  far  off,  and  in  the  interim,  conservation  must 
be  our  watchword. 

Improved  highway  safety  will  continue  as  a  high 
priority  goal.  Significant  improvement  has  been 
realized  in  very  recent  years,  due  in  part  to  the  nation- 
wide 55  mile  per  hour  maximum  speed  limit.  Since 
1973,  the  actual  number  of  fatalities,  as  well  as  the 
fatality  rate,  have  been  significantly  reduced.  But 
we   must   continue   to   improve   highway   design   and 


544 


engineering  so  that  the  roads  become  ever  more  "for- 
giving" of  errant  drivers  and  vehicles.  At  the  same 
time,  we  must  continue  to  make  the  vehicles  them- 
selves more  mechanically  safe,  and  we  must  tiy  to 
better  equip  the  human  beings  who  operate  those  ve- 
hicles to  do  so  safely. 

Past  investments  in  highway  improvements  have 
provided  a  high  level  of  mobility  for  the  general  pop- 
ulation. In  the  future  we  can  anticipate  greater  efforts 
to  provide  better  mobility  for  the  young,  the  elderly, 
and  the  handicapped  who  lack  ready  access  to  auto- 
mobile transportation.  In  this  regard,  local  elected 
officials  of  urbanized  areas  may  elect  to  use  certain 
apportioned  highway  funds  for  public  mass  trans- 
portation projects  instead  of  for  highways.  Such  an 
effort  may  be  expected  to  extend  to  the  transportation 
disadvantaged  segment  of  our  population  the  same 
opportunities  for  social,  cultural,  recreational,  and 
economic  benefits  enjoyed  by  the  rest  of  us. 

The  United  States  does  not  have  an  explicit  national 
land  use  policy.  The  uncertainty  regarding  the  nature 
and  direction  of  changes  in  land  use  and  settlement 


patterns  is  increased  by  the  lack  of  a  concensus  re- 
garding desirable  growth  within  and  among  regions 
and  between  urban  and  nonurban  areas.  The  Federal 
Highway  Administration  and  the  State  and  local  high- 
way organizations  have  responded  to  the  needs  of  our 
growing  Nation  well  in  the  past.  As  we  look  to  the 
future,  our  efforts  must  be  to  provide  even  greater 
flexibility  of  choice  to  the  States  and  local  governments 
to  provide  highway  services  to  meet  changing  popula- 
tion or  economic  developmental  patterns  that  may 
emerge  or  be  consciously  pursued. 

Out  of  all  our  past  efforts — planning,  designing, 
constructing,  bridge  building,  and  organizational  ef- 
forts at  all  levels  of  government — has  conie  a  superb 
system  of  highways  to  serve  a  growing  Nation.  The 
challenge  now  and  in  the  future  is  to  preserve  and 
enhance  the  performance  level  of  our  highways  and 
at  the  same  time  promote  within  a  multi-modal  trans- 
portation family  a  more  flexible  and  innovative  trans- 
portation system.  Our  past  performance,  in  all 
respects,  would  indicate  that  we  will  be  equal  to  the 
challenge.    We  must  demonstrate  that  we  are. 


545 


HIGHWAY  RELATED  LEGISLATION 


The  following  is  a  chronological  list  of  national  laws 
which  have  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  growth  and 
development   of   the   Federal-Aid   Highway    System. 

Title  Date  Number 

Land  Grant  to  Ohio  Act  of  1823      Feb.  28, 1823       3  Stat  727 

Mar.  3, 1893      27  Stat  134 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1894 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1895 


Aug.  8, 1894       28  Stat  264 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Mar.  2, 1895      28  Stat  727 

of  1896 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Apr.  25, 1896     29  Stat  99 

of  1897 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Apr.  28, 1897     30  Stat  1 

of  1898 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1899 


Mar.  22, 1898    30  Stat  30 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Mar.  1, 1899      30  Stat  47 

of  1900 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  May  25, 1900     31  Stat  191 

of  1901 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1902 


Mar.  2, 1901      31  Stat  22 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  June  3, 1902      32  Stat  286 

of  1903 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1904 


Mar.  3, 1903      32  Stat  1147 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Apr.  23, 1904     33  Stat  226 

of  1905 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1906 


Mar.  3, 1905      33  Stat  361 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  June  30, 1906    34  Stat  369 

of  1907 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Mar.  4, 1907      34  Stat  2256 

of  1908 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1909 


May  23, 1908     35  Stat  251 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Mar.  4, 1909      35  Stat  1039 

of  1910 


Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1911 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1912 

Post  Office  Appropriation  Act 
of  1913 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1914 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1915 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1916 


May  26, 1910  36  Stat  416 

Mar.  4, 1911  36  Stat  1235 

Aug.  24, 1912  37  Stat  551 

Mar.  4, 1913  37  Stat  828 

June  30, 1914  38  Stat  415 

Mar.  4, 1915  38  Stat  1088 


Federal  Aid  Road  Act  of  1916  July  11, 1916     39  Stat  355 

Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  July  28, 1916     39  Stat  412 

of  1917 


The  full  title,  date  of  passage  and  citation  number 
are  given  for  each  reference. 


Title 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1917 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1918 

Post  Office  Appropriation  Act 
of  1919 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1919 

Post  Office  Appropriation  Act 
of  1920 


Date  Number 

Aug.  11, 1916  39  Stat  446 

Mar.  4, 1917  39  Stat  1134 

July  2, 1918  40  Stat  742 

Oct.  1, 1918  40  Stat  973 

Feb.  28, 1919  40  Stat  1189 


Army  Appropriation  Act  of  1919      July  11, 1919     41  Stat  105 

July  24, 1919     41  Stat  234 


Agriculture  Appropriati(jn  Act 
of  1920 

Wadsworth-Kahn  Act  of  1920 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1921 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act 
of  1922 

Budget  and  Accounting  Act 

Federal  Highway  Act  of  1921 

Post  Office  Appropriation  Act 
of  1923 


Mar.  15, 1920  41  Stat  530 

May  31, 1920  41  Stat  694 

Mar.  3, 1921  41  Stat  1315 

June  10, 1921  42  Stat  207 

Nov.  9, 1921  42  Stat  22 

June  19, 1922  42  Stat  660 


Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment     Feb.  12, 1925     43  Stat  889 
of  1925 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment     June  22, 1926    44  Stat  760 
of  1926 

Agriculture  Appropriation  Act  Jan.  18, 1927     44  Stat  976 

of  1928 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment     Mar.  3, 1927      44  Stat  1398 
1927 

Federal- Aid  Highway  Amendment     May  21, 1928     45  Stat  683 
1928 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment     May  5, 1930       46  Stat  261 
1930 

George  Washington  Memorial  May  29, 1930     46  Stat  482 

Parkway  Act  1930 


Emergency  Construction  Act 
of  1930 


Dec.  20, 1930     46  Stat  1030 


Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment     Jan.  31, 1931     46  Stat  1053 
1931 


1 


Emergency   Relief  and 
Construction  Act  1932 


July  21, 1932     47  Stat  709 


National  Industrial  Recovery  Act  June  16, 1933  48  Stat  195 

Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of  1934  June  18, 1934  48  Stat  993 

Emergency  Relief  Appropriation  Apr.  8, 1935  49  Stat  115 
Act  of  1935 


Davis-Bacon  Act  1935 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act 
Amendment  1937 


Apr.  30, 1935     49  Stat  1011 
June  16, 1936    49  Stat  1519 


546 


Title 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1938 

Defense  Highway  Act  1941 

Inter-American  Highway  Act  1941 

Defense  Highway  Act  Amendment 
1942 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment 
1943 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1944 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment 
1945 

Philippine  Rehabilitation   Act 
1946 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment 
1946 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Amendment 
1947 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1948 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1950 

Budget  and  Accounting 
Procedures  Act 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1952 

Departments  of  State,  Justice 
and  Commerce  Appropriation 
Act  1954 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1954 

Department  of  Commerce  and 
Related  Agencies  Appropriation 
Act  1956 

Inter-American  Highway 
Appropriation  Act 

Supplemental  Appropriation  Act 
1956 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956 

Highway  Revenue  Act  of  1956 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1958 

Alaska  Statehood  Act 

Alaska  Omnibus  Act 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1959 

Mutual  Security  Appropriation 
Act  1960 


Date  Number 

June  8, 1938  52  Stat  633 

Nov.  19, 1941  55  Stat  765 

Dec.  26, 1941  55  Stat  860 

July  2, 1942  56  Stat  562 

July  13, 1943  57  Stat  560 

Dec.  20, 1944  58  Stat  838 

July  31, 1945  59  Stat  507 

Apr.  30, 1946  60  Stat  128 

July  29, 1946  60  Stat  709 

June  21, 1947  61  Stat  136 

June  29, 1948  62  Stat  1105 

Sept.  7, 1950  64  Stat  785 

Sept.  12, 1950  64  Stat  832 

June  25, 1952  66  Stat  158 

Aug.  5, 1953  67  Stat  367 

May  6, 1954  68  Stat  70 

June  30, 1955  69  Stat  226 

July  1, 1955  69  Stat  244 

Aug.  4, 1955  69  Stat  450 


June  29, 1956 
June  29, 1956 
Aug.  7, 1958 
Apr.  16, 1958 
June  25, 1959 
Sept.  21, 1959 
Sept.  28, 1959 


70  Stat  374 
70  Stat  387 
72  Stat  389 

72  Stat  89 

73  Stat  141 
73  Stat  611 
73  Stat  717 


Title 

National  Driver  Register  Service 
Act 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1961 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1962 

Federal-Aid  Highway 
Amendments  Act   1963 

Urban  Mass  Transportation  Act 
1964 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1964 

Government  Employees   Salary 
Reform  Act  of  1964 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1956 
Amendments  1965 

Highway  Beautiflcation  Act 
of  1965 

National  Traffic  and  Motor 
Vehicle  Safety  Act  1966 

Highway  Safety  Act  1966 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1966 

Historic  Preservation  Act  1966 

Department   of   Transportation 
Act  1966 

Highway  Interstate  Systems 
Modification  Act  1968 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1968 

National  Environmental  Policy 
Act  1969 

Clean  Air  Amendments  of  1970 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1970 

Highway  Safety  Act  1970 

Uniform  Relocation  Assistance 
and  Real  Property  Acquisition 
Policies  Act  of  1970 

Noise  Control  Act  of  1972 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1973 

Emergency  Highway  Energy 
Conservation  Act  1974 

National  Mass  Transportation 
Assistance  Act  1974 

Federal-Aid  Highway 
Amendments  of  1974 


Date  Number 

Aug.  14, 1960  74  Stat  526 

June  29, 1961  75  Stat  122 

Oct.  23, 1962  76  Stat  1145 

Oct.  24, 1963  77  Stat  276 

July  9, 1964  78  Stat  302 

Aug.  13, 1964  78  Stat  397 

Aug.  14, 1964  78  Stat  400 

Aug.  28, 1965  79  Stat  578 

Oct.  22, 1965  79  Stat  1028 

Sept.  9, 1966  80  Stat  718 

Sept.  9, 1966  80  Stat  731 

Sept.  13, 1966  80  Stat  766 

Oct.  15, 1966  80  Stat  915 

Oct.  15, 1966  80  Stat  931 

Jan.  2, 1968  81  Stat  772 

Aug.  -J,  1968  82  Stat  815 

Jan.  1, 1970  83  Stat  852 

Dec.  31, 1970  84  Stat  1676 

Dec.  31, 1970  84  Stat  1713 

Dec.  31, 1970  84  Stat  1739 

Jan. 2, 1971  84  Stat  1894 

Oct.  27, 1972  86  Stat  1234 

Aug.  13, 1973  87  Stat  250 

Jan. 2, 1974  87  Stat  1046 

Nov.  26, 1974  88  Stat  1565 

Jan.  4, 1975  88  Stat  2281 


Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1960         July  14, 1960     74  Stat  522 


Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  of  1976     May  5, 1976       90  Stat  425 


547 


PICTURE  CREDITS 


We  gratefully  acknowledge  all  those  whose  illus- 
trations were  used  in  this  book.  Many  of  the  color 
plates,  especially  in  Part  I,  are  paintings  in  a  series 
of  109  by  the  late  Carl  Rakeman  (1878-1965),  which 
were  completed  in  the  1930's  and  1940's  on  the  theme 
of  American  transportation  development.  Rakeman 
was  an  employee  of  the  Bureau  of  Public  Roads  who 
studied  at  the  Corcoran  Art  School  and  the  Royal 
Academies  of  Dusseldorf,  Munich  and  Paris.  Among 
other  accomplishments,  he  helped  complete  the  painted 
decorations  of  the  U.S.  Capitol.  Special  thanks  are 
also  extended  to  the  National  Archives  and  Records 

PART  I 
CHAPTER].     THE  COLONIAL  LEGACY 

Page  4  (BR)  :        Winter  Trail.    Drawing  by  H.  W. 

Hendley. 
Page  5   (BL)  :         Post  Rider.     Drawing  by  H.  W. 

Hendley. 
Page  7  (T)  :  Rolling  Tobacco.     Drawing  by  H. 

W.  Hendley,  after  H.  E.  Elliott. 

CHAPTER  3.     EARLY    FEDERAL   AID    FOR    ROADS   AND 
CANALS 

Page  18   (B)  :         Fairview  Inn.    Courtesy  of  Culver 
Pictures,  Inc. 

CHAPTER  5.     THE  GOOD  ROADS  MOVEMENT 

The  Cherrelyn  Horsecar.  Courtesy 
of  E.  H.  Maloney  and  Edie 
Dines. 

Bishop  Creek.  Courtesy  of  Cali- 
fornia Division  of  Highways. 

Plank  Road.  Courtesy  of  Cali- 
fornia Division  of  Highways. 

Sacramento  Canyon.  Courtesy  of 
California  Division  of  Highways. 

DAWN  OF  THE  MOTOR  AGE 

1907  Columbia.  Courtesy  of  Hank 
Head. 

The  Pasear  Highway.  Courtesy  of 
the  California  Division  of  High- 
ways. 

Scenes  of  El  Camino  Sierra.  Cour- 
tesy of  the  California  Division 
of  Highways. 

Challenge  of  early  AAA  tours. 
Courtesy  of  the  Michigan  De- 
partment of  State  Highways  and 
Transportation. 

CHAPTER  8.     THE  DRIVE   FOR   FEDERAL  AID 

Page  84   (T)  :  Spring  thaw  and  roads  in  Michi- 

gan.    Courtesy  of  the  Michigan 


Page 

40 

(T): 
(B): 

Page 

51 

(T): 

(BR): 

Page 

52 

(T): 

CHAPTER 

6.     C 

Page 

55 

(BR) 

Page 

58 

(T): 

Page 

59 

(M): 

Page 

60 

(T): 

Service,  which  stored  and  protected  much  of  the 
photographic  material  of  the  Federal  Highway  Ad- 
ministration and  its  predecessor  agencies  which  ap- 
pears in  this  history. 

The  following  is  a  listing  by  chapter  of  all  those 
individuals  and  organizations  outside  of  the  Federal 
Highway  Administration  who  contributed  illustra- 
tions printed  in  this  book.  The  abbreviations  with 
the  page  number  of  each  credit  indicate  position; 
i.e.,  Top  (T),  Top  Left  (TL),  Top  Right  (TR), 
Middle  (M),  Middle  Left  (ML),  Middle  Right  (MR), 
Bottom  (B),  Bottom  Left  (BL),  Bottom  Right  (BR). 


1 


Page  85  (B)  : 


Department  of  State  Highways 
and  Transportation. 
State  Highway  No.  1  (Now  1-25) 
in  New  Mexico.  Courtesy  of 
New  Mexico  State  Highway  De- 
partment. 

CHAPTER  9.     PLANNING  A  HIGHWAY  SYSTEM 


Page  93  (B)  : 
Page  94  (T)  : 

Page  95   (MR)  : 


W.  Hicks  and  Sons  General  Store, 
Rockville,  Md.  (1900).  Courtesy 
of  William  L.  Hicks. 

State  highway  officials  on  inspec- 
tion tour.  Courtesy  of  the  Mich- 
igan Department  of  State  High- 
ways and  Transportation. 

McConnellsburg,  Pa.  Courtesy  of 
the  Michigan  Department  of 
State  Highways  and  Transpor- 
tation. 


CHAPTER   10. 

Page  118   (T)  : 

Page  122   (M) 
Page  127  (T)  : 

CHAPTER   11. 

Page  151   (B)  : 

CHAPTER    12. 

Page  169   (T) 


THE  HIGHWAY  BOOM 

:  Concrete  Mixer  patching  a  bad 
spot  on  the  road.  Courtesy  of 
Hank  Head. 

:  Maryland  State  Roads  Commission 
testing  laboratory.  Courtesy  of 
the  Maryland  State  Roads  Com- 
mission. 
First  centerline  on  a  rural  state 
highway.  Courtesy  of  the  Mich- 
igan Department  of  State  High- 
ways and  Transportation. 

ROADS  FOR  NATIONAL  DEFENSE 

The  Pennsylvania  Turnpike.  Cour- 
tesy of  the  Pennsylvania  Turn- 
pike Commission. 

EVENTS    LEADING    TO    ENACTMENT    OF 
THE  1956  FEDERAL  AID  HIGHWAY  ACT 

:  Turnpike  toll  booth.  Courtesy  of 
the  Pennsylvania  Turnpike  Com- 
mission. 


I 


548 


PART  II 

CHAPTER   1.     ADMINISTRATION   OF  THE   FEDERAL  AID 
PROGRAM 


Page  207  (ML) 
Page  207  (BL)  : 
Page  210  (MR) 


Old  tour  bus.  Courtesy  of  the 
Grey  Line,  Inc. 

Modern  tour  bus.  Courtesy  of  the 
Urban  Mass  Transit  Authority. 

Lansing,  Michigan  street  scene. 
Courtesy  of  the  Michigan  De- 
partment of  State  Highways  and 
Transportation. 


Courtesy  of  Hank 


CHAPTER  2.      FINANCE  AND   ECONOMICS 

Page  240  (TL)  :     1905  Cadillac. 

Head. 
Page  244  (T)  :        1922  Superior  Motor  Coach  body. 
Courtesy  of  the  National  Asso- 
ciation of  Motor  Bus  Owners. 

Rio  Grande  Gorge  Bridge  near 
Taos,  N.M.  Courtesy  of  the  New 
Mexico  State  Highway  Depart- 
ment. 

40  ton  straddle-lift  crane.  Cour- 
tesy of  the  Southern  Pacific  Co. 

Air  Force  C-5  Galaxy.  Courtesy 
of  Tadder/Baltimore. 


Page  250  (T) 


Page  258   (BL)  : 
Page  259  (MR) 


CHAPTER 

Page  270 

Page  291 
Page  299 

CHAPTER 

Page  332 


Page  332 


CHAPTER 

Page  367 


Page  373 


PLANNING 


(T) 


(B) 
(T) 


Traffic  survey  station.  Courtesy  of 
the  New  Mexico  Highway  De- 
partment. 

Chicago  Post  Office.  Courtesy  of 
H.  Dean  Fravel. 

Stapleton  International  Airport. 
Courtesy  of  the  Denver  Post. 

4.     RESEARCH 

(T)  :  Circular  Track  in  Arlington,  Vir- 
ginia. Courtesy  of  Carl  A. 
Carpenter. 

(B)  :  Profilometer.  Courtesy  of  Carl  A. 
Carpenter. 


5.     RIGHT-OF-WAY  AND  ENVIRONMENT 

(TR)  :  Highway  road  crew  removing  lit- 
ter. Courtesy  of  the  Delaware 
Department  of  Highways. 

(BL)  :  Beverly's  Mill  in  Middleburg,  Vir- 
ginia. Courtesy  of  U.S.  News 
and  World  Report. 


CHAPTER  6.     DESIGN 

Page  383 


(BL) 


Page  384  (TR) 


Page  385 


(TL) 


Horse  towing  an  old  car  in  winter. 
Courtesy  of  the  Michigan  De- 
partment of  State  Highways  and 
Transportation. 

The  National  Road  near  Hancock, 
Maryland  (before  construction). 
Courtesy  of  the  Maryland  State 
Roads  Commission. 

The  National  Road  near  Hancock, 
Maryland  (after  construction). 
Courtesy  of  the  Maryland  State 
Roads  Commission. 


Page  391   (T) : 

Page  396  (MR)  : 
Page  404  (B)  : 

Page  406  (TL)  : 

Page  407  (T)  : 

Page  412  (T)  : 

Page  412  (B)  : 


Center  marked  highway  curve, 
1921.  Courtesy  of  the  Michigan 
Department  of  State  Highways 
and  Transportation. 

Arterial  highway  of  1940's.  Cour- 
tesy of  Donald  W.  Loutzenheiser. 

Automobile  Club  of  Maryland  post- 
ing directional  and  mileage  signs. 
Courtesy  of  the  Institute  of  Traf- 
fic Engineers. 

Jackson,  Miss,  route  markers.  Cour- 
tesy of  the  Institute  of  Traffic 
Engineers. 

Intersection  in  Detroit,  Mich. 
(1922).  Courtesy  of  the  Institute 
of  Traffic  Engineers. 

The  Baltimore- Washington  Boule- 
vard. Courtesy  of  the  Maryland 
State  Roads  Commission. 

The  Baltimore- Washington  Boule- 
vard widened  in  the  1930's.  Cour- 
tesy of  the  Maryland  State  Roads 
Commission. 


CHAPTER  7.     BRIDGES 


Page  419   (T)  : 


Page  420   (TL) 


Page  420  (TR) 


Page  420  (BL)  : 
Page  425   (T)  : 

Page  426  (BR)  : 

Page  427  (T)  : 
Page  427  (ML)  : 
Page  428   (T)  : 


Covered  bridge  reproduction  near 
Concord,  Massachusetts.  Cour- 
tesy of  the  Massachusetts  De- 
partment of  Public  Works. 

Camp  Nelson  Bridge  over  the  Ken- 
tucky River.  Courtesy  of  the 
Kentucky  Department  of  Trans- 
portation. 

Covered  timber  bridge  over  the 
Connecticut  River  between  Cor- 
nish, N.H.  and  Windsor,  Vt. 
Courtesy  of  the  New  Hampshire 
Department  of  Public  Works 
and  Highways. 

Indiana  covered  bridge  (1900). 
Courtesy  of  the  Indiana  Histori- 
cal Society. 

Roebling  Bridge  over  the  Ohio 
River  between  Cincinnati,  Ohio, 
and  Covington,  Kentucky.  Cour- 
tesy of  the  Kentucky  Department 
of  Transportation. 

Vertical  lift  bridge  over  the  Cape 
Fear  River  at  Wilmington,  North 
Carolina.  Courtesy  of  the  North 
Carolina  Department  of  Trans- 
portation. 

Lake  Washington  Pontoon  Bridge, 
Seattle,  Washington.  Courtesy 
of  the  Washington  Department 
of  Highways. 

George  P.  Coleman  Memorial 
Bridge.  Courtesy  of  the  Virginia 
Department  of  Highways  and 
Transportation . 

The  Morgan  Bulkeley  Bridge. 
Courtesy  of  the  Connecticut  De- 
partment of  Transportation. 


549 


Page  430  (T)  : 
Page  430  (B)  : 

Page  431  (TR)  : 
Page  431  (B)  : 

Page  433  (T)  : 

Page  434  (T)  : 
Page  435  (T)  : 

Page  435  (BR)  : 

Page  436  (B)  : 
Page  437  (T)  : 

Page  437  (B)  : 

Page  438  (T)  : 


San  Francisco's  Golden  Gate 
Bridge.  Courtesy  of  H,  Dean 
Fravel. 

Mackinac  Bridge  over  the  Straits 
of  Mackinac.  Courtesy  of  the 
Michigan  Department  of  State 
Highways  and  Transportation. 

Tacoma  Narrows  Bridge.  Courtesy 
of  the  National  Museum  of  Sci- 
ence and  Technology. 

New  River  Gorge  Bridge  in  West 
Virginia.  Courtesy  of  the  West 
Virginia  Department  of  High- 
ways. 

1-80  Bridge  over  the  Allegheny 
River.  Courtesy  of  the  Pennsyl- 
vania Department  of  Transpor- 
tation. 

1-480  exit  ramp  in  Omaha,  Ne- 
braska. Courtesy  of  the  Nebraska 
State  Highway  Department. 

Red  Bridge  over  the  Seekonk 
River.  Courtesy  of  the  Rhode 
Island  Department  of  Transpor- 
tation. 

Mission  Valley  Bridge  in  San 
Diego,  California.  Courtesy  of 
the  California  Department  of 
Transportation. 

Sitka  Harbor  Bridge  in  Sitka, 
Alaska.  Courtesy  of  the  Alaska 
Department  of  Highways. 

Sherman  Minton  Bridge  over  the 
Ohio  River.  Courtesy  of  the 
Kentucky  Department  of  Trans- 
portation. 

Poplar  Street  Bridge  over  the 
Mississippi  River.  Courtesy  of 
the  Illinois  Department  of  Trans- 
portation. 

Pedestrian  bridge  over  U.S.  41  in 
Menoraonee  Falls,  Wisconsin. 
Courtesy  of  the  Wisconsin  De- 
partment of  Transportation. 


Page  438   (B) 
Page  441   (B) 


47th  Street  Bypass  in  Boulder, 
Colorado.  Courtesy  of  the  Colo- 
rado Department  of  Highways. 

Demolition  of  C  &  O  Bridge  over 
the  Ohio  River.  Courtesy  of  the 
Kentucky  Department  of  Trans- 
portation. 


CHAPTER   10.     CONSTRUCTION  AND  MAINTENANCE 


Page  487  (T) 


Page  496: 


Page  499  (B)  : 
Page  504  (T)  : 
Page  504  (B)  : 

Page  508  (T)  : 
Page  511  (T)  : 
Page  511   (B)  : 

Page  512   (T)  : 

Page  514  (B)  : 


Mount  Rainer.  Courtesy  of  James 
L.  Obenschain,  Sr. 

Clakamas  River  flood.  Courtesy  of 
the  Oregon  State  Highway  De- 
partment. 

Going-to-the-Sun  Highway.  Cour- 
tesy of  James  L.  Obenschain,  Sr. 

Cole  Creek  Bridge.  Courtesy  of 
James  L.  Obenschain,  Sr. 

Creek  channel  in  the  Great  Smoky 
Mountains.  Courtesy  of  James 
L.  Obenschain,  Sr. 

Jordan  Pond.  Courtesy  of  James 
L.  Obenschain,  Sr. 

Blue  Ridge  Parkway.  Courtesy  of 
James  L.  Obenschain,  Sr. 

Blue  Ridge  Parkway  in  the  fall. 
Courtesy  of  the  National  Park 
Service. 

James  River  Bridge  on  the  Blue 
Ridge  Parkway.  Courtesy  of 
the  National  Park  Service. 

Suitland  Parkway.  Courtesy  of 
James  L.  Obenschain,  Sr. 


CHAPTER   11.     INTERNATIONAL  OPERATIONS 


Page  519   (T)  : 

Page  535   (B)  : 
End  papers: 


Map  of  FHWA  Foreign  Assistance 
Programs.  Courtesy  of  the  In- 
ternational Road  Federation. 

Alaska  Highway  at  Summit  Lake. 

Courtesy  of  Gail  Pinkstaff. 
Fairview  Inn  on  the  National  Pike. 

Courtesy  of  Culver  Pictures,  Inc. 


550 


INDEX 


Accidents,  115,  127-129,  135,  149,  246,  262,  278,  279, 

337,  342,  344-348,  352,  391-392,  401^03,  406,  408, 

440,  459,  460,  484,  485 
Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1893,  44 
Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1894,  200 
Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1905,  52 
Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1928,  138 
Agricultural  Appropriation  Act  of  1936,  125 
Alaska  Highway,  149,  530-536 
American    Association    of    State    Highway    Officials 

(A.A.S.H.O.),  79,  86,  96,  98,  101-102,  104,  106- 

108,  120,  145,  148,  152,  158,  163,  165-166,  172,  202, 

207-208,  296-297,  326,  334,  341 
American  Automobile  Association,  60-61,  74,  76,  84-85, 

102,  106 
Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  21,  31,  107,  138,  498 
Automobiles,  52,  54-57,  60,  115,  123-124,  147,  154,  162, 

238,   247,   370,   382,   384,   390,   411,   414    (also   see 

Registration) 

Bankhead  Act  1916,  107 

Barnett,  Joseph,  188-190 

Beautification,  (see  Highway  Beautification  Act  1965) 

Bridwell,  Lowell  K.,  194 

Bridges,  19,  240,  331-332,  418^42 

Bureau  of  Public  Roads,  102-110,  120-121,  124-126, 
129,  132,  134,  137-140,  150,  156,  163,  169-173,  208- 
209,  214,  218,  267-268,  271,  281-282,  298,  327,  330, 
337,  339,  341,  352,  368,  431,  448^51,  453^54 

Capper-Cramton  Act,  139 

Congestion,  115,  154,  165-166,  171,  261,  281,  300,  370, 

466 
Construction,  (see  Roads) 
Cumberland  Road,  (see  National  Road) 
Curtiss,  Charles  D.,  172,  193 

Defense,  (see  Roads) 

Defense  Highway  Act  1941,  150,  249,  269,  275 
Design,  337-341,  349,  381-382,  384r-398,  401,  411,  476 
Dodge,  Martin,  46-50,  52,  64,  191,  235 
Department  of  Transportation,  297,  298,  318,  319 
Department  of  Transportation  Act  1956,  218 
Department  of  Transportation  Act  1966,  221 
Department  of  Transportation  Act  1974,  372 
DuPont,  Francis  V.,  170,  192 

Eldridge,  Maurice  O.,  46,  50,  215-216,  519 
Emergency  Relief  &  Construction  Act  1932,  124 
Emergency  Relief  Appropriation  Act  1935,  125,  130 


Environment,   221,   223,   314,   349-352,   366,   378,   396, 

459^60 
Expressways,  150,  152,  160,  163,  169,  171,  397-467 

Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1934,  268-269,  467 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1938,  134,  278,  368 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1940,  249,  275,  369 
Federal-Aid   Highway   Act   1944,   153,   156-158,   214, 

249,  269,  274,  276,  321,  456,  468,  493 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1948,  165,  288 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act,  1950,  165,  221,  252,  258, 

494,  528 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1952,  166,  254,  469,  528 
Federal-Aid   Highway  Act   1954,   166,   171,  254,   292, 

294,  358,  469,  528 
Federal-Aid   Highway   Act   1956,   159,   174,  222,  228, 

234,  254,  256,  259-260,  292,  303,  317,  358,  362,  396, 

472,  476-477,  494 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1958,  478-479 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1959,  255,  479 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1961,  259,  481 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1962,  211,  269,  299,  305, 

315,  321,  363 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1966,  305 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1968,  262,  299,  315,  317, 

363,  364,  442,  472,  477 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1970,  223,  237,  262,  315, 

317,  358,  364,  376,  442,  495 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1973,  202,  262,  302,  377 
Federal-Aid  Highway  Act  1976,  226,  230 
Federal  Aid  Road  Act  1916,  83,  86,  93,  100,  103,  108, 

113,  144,  202,  204,  219,  240-242,  244 
Federal  Aid  System,  108-109,  113-114,  116,  125-126, 

136,  140-142,  156,  160-161,  164-165,  167,  170  (also 

see  Roads) 
Federal   Highway  Act  1921,   108-109,  113,   121,   126, 

136,    138,    142,   205-206,   214,   220,   242,   244,   246, 

321,  357-358 
Federal  Highway  Administration,  210,  219,  222,  226, 

231,  233,  236-237,  256,  298,  315,  352,  359,  et  al. 
Finance ; 

bonds,  41,  73,  89,  101-102,  114,  137,  151-152,  163-173, 

239,  243-244,  247,  248,  252,  256,  282,  431,  470^71 ; 
Federal  aid,  198-214,  220,  227-235,  240,  243,  245-247, 

253-255,  259-260,  266-267,  270,  273,  282,  289,  431- 

432,  470; 
State  aid,  43^4,  50,  57,  64,  76,  155,  199-200,  239, 

249,  260; 
taxes,  37-39,  41-42,  50,  57,  74,  84,  114,  118,  122-125, 

131,  148,  157,  163-164,  166-167,  169-173,  238,  242, 

245,  247,  250-251,  254-255,  267,  271,  295,  473 ; 
tolls,  7-11,  14,  18,  20-23,  30,  116,  136-137,  164-167, 

169,  244,  271,  290-291 
Forest  Roads,  (see  Roads) 


551 


Gallatin,  Albert,  17 

Good  Roads  Association  (see  Good  Roads  Movement) 
Good  Roads  Movement,  41-44,  46-50,  57,  67,  75,  124 
Good  Roads  Train,  48-50,  76 

Grade  Crossings,  125,  128-130,  136,  159,  165,  246-247, 
393-394 

Hayden-Cartwright  Act  of  1934,   124-125,   130,   134, 

139,  156-157,  167,  171,  247,  265,  270,  321 
Hewes,  L.  I.,  489^91 
Highway  Access,  (see  Right-of-Way) 
Highway  Beautification  Act  1965,  367-369 
Highway  Related  Legislation,  546-547 
Highway  Research  Board,  (see  Research) 
Highway  Revenue  Act  1956,  174,  228,  254,  472-474 
Highway  Trust  Fund,  173,  211,  227-230,  254-256,  262, 

276,  301,  473-475,  481 
Historic  Preservation,  373-374 
Holmes,  Edward  H.,  283-286 
Hubbard,  Prevost,  117,  322 

Inter-American  Highway,  139-140,  150,  522-530 
International  Roads  (see  Roads) 
Interstate  (see  Roads) 

James,  Edwin  W.,  73,  108,  110,  520,  526-527 

King  Drag  Laws,  22 

League  of  American  Wheelmen,  42-43,  56,  76 
Lincoln  Highway  Association,  83,  95,  109,  135 
Long  Distance  Roads,   (see  Roads,  Transcontinental) 

Maintenance,  (see  Roads) 

Mass  Transit,  262,  301-302,  312 

McAdam,  John  L.,  12-13,  21,  52,  117-118 

MacDonald,  Thomas  M.,  103,  105-107,  108,  113,  114, 
121,  123,  126,  135-136,  138,  142,  144,  147-148,  161, 
170,  176-179,  192,  206-208,  233,  257,  268,  271, 
273-274,  277,  289,  367,  467,  500,  520 

Mount  Vernon  Memorial  Highway,  134,  139,  394,  405 

National  Industrial  Recovery  Act  of  1933,  125,  130, 

139,  156-157,  246-247,  493 
National  Roads,  (see  Roads) 
National  Road,  (or  National  Pike,  Cumberland  Road), 

10,  14,  16-17,  19,  21-22,  24,  26,  29,  32,  109,  198- 

199,  201,  273,  382 
National   Good   Roads  Association,  48-50,    (also   see 

Good  Roads  Movement) 
Normann,  O.  K.,  338-341 

Object  Lesson  Roads,  45-48,  64-66,  72-75,  83,  320, 
515-516  (also  see  Good  Roads  Movement) 

Office  of  Public  Roads,  37,  52,  62,  64-69,  72-76,  80, 
82-84,  86-87,  89,  235,  240-241,  266,  367,  519 

Office  of  Public  Roads  and  Rural  Engineering,  87,  95- 
96,  100-101,  118,  204 

Office  of  Public  Road  Inquiries,  46-50,  52,  88 

Office  of  Road  Inquiry,  44-46 


Page,  Logan  W.,  47,  52,  57,  64-65,  67,  72-76,  80,  82-83, 

87,  89,  96,  98,  101-102,  114,  117,  191,  206,  323,  329 
Parkways,  56,  86,  133-134,  137-139,  154,  159-160,  163, 

167-169,  368-369,  396-397,  507-512 
Pioneer  Freighter,  62,  83 
Planning,   264,   265-271,   276-286,  294,   295,   299,  303, 

304,  306,  316-319,  351 
Pneumatic  Tires,  42,  54,  119,  145,  384,  394,  454 
Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  1912,  84,  240 
Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  1913,  81,  201 
Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  1919,  102,  103,  107 
Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  1922,  108 
Post  Office  Appropriation  Act  1923,  206,  227 
Post  Roads,  (see  Roads) 
Public  Roads  Administration,  142-145,  147-151,  166- 

158,  160-162,  165-166,  168-169 

Railroads,  13,  14,  23-24,  26,  29-34,  36,  39,  44,  49-50, 

76,  84,  90-93,  97-99,  113,  117,  127,  145,  150,  154, 

250,  257,  259,  420 
Registration,  57,  60,  109,  114,  123,  124,  126,  143,  146, 

154,  161,  169,  239-242,  245,  248,  251,  262,  263 
Relocation,  363-365 
Right-of-Way,   9,   12,   20-21,  24,   37,   56-57,   87,   102, 

114-115,  117,  126,  132-137,  139,  149-150,  152-153, 

159-160,  163,  165,  168,  199,  249,  294,  354-365,  473 
Remote  Sensing,  326,  389,  394 
Research,  208-210,  277,  320-352,  439 
Road  Signs,  61,  78,  109-110,  115,  130,  343,  404-410,  477 
Roads ; 

construction,  2,   9-13,  24-25,  37,  39,  45,  47-48,  50, 

56-57,   64-67,   87,  89,   98,   100,   10^106,   113-114, 

117-118,  121,  137,  147,  161,  171,  324,  325-329,  332, 

333,  335,  385,  388,  394,  395,  444-464,  495,  498,  519 ; 
defense,  18-19,  24,  26,  30-31,  62,  94-100,  138,  142- 

153,  166,  241,  249,  267,  275,  357,  468,  469,  513,  514, 

524,  525,  531-536; 
Federal  aid,  16-24,  26,  44,  47,  80-89,  98,  113-115, 

143-147,  155,  157-160,  165-167,  169-173,  295,  296, 

300,  302,  447-448,  494,  542-545; 
forests,  75,  126,  137-139,  170,  242,  247,  487-507 ; 
other  nations',  139-140,  149-150,  152,  518-536,  539, 

540; 
Interstate,  83,  96,  102,  107-110,  116,  136-137,  152- 

153,  156-159,  165-166,  168-174,  211,  213,  228,  230, 

243,  249,  252,  254,  256,  259-260,  263-264,  271,  273- 

277,  281-292,  295-296,  303,  341,  343,  345,  354,  466- 

485,  543-544; 
maintenance,   6,   8,   12-15,  20,  30,  36-37,  41,  43-44, 

47,  65,  68,  78,  80-81,  83,  93,  95,  98,  105,  118,  134, 

147,  161-163,  165,  249,  330,  331,  336,  444-464; 
national,  47,  62,  84-85,  95,  101-102,  106,  108,  137, 

151,  153,  173; 
post,  16,  22-23,  26,  80-87,  100-102,  106,  108,  114,  201- 

202,  240; 
rural,   36-37,   41,   48,   50,   56-57,   64,   66,   72,   80-81, 

85-86,  89,  102,  114-118,  128,  132,  151-152,  156-157, 

160-162,  238,  240-241,  262-264,  381-382,  384,  414, 

415,  468; 
toll,  8-12,  14,  21,  36,  50,  117,  135-137,  142,  150-152, 

165,  171,  247-248,  252,  256-257,  263,  272,  274,  294, 

466^67,  469; 


552 


transcontinental,  62,  83,  85,  101,  107-109,  113,  136, 

138, 152-153,  272,  277,  498 ; 
urban,  34,  39,  41,  47,  56,  66,  103,  125,  135-136,  151- 

152,  154,  156-158,  160,  163,  169-172,  263 

Safety  (see  Accidents) 
Settlements,  16,  26,  29,  32,  34 
Signs  (see  Road  Signs) 
Shirley,  Henry  G.,  106 
State  Aid  (see  Finance) 
Statute  Labor,  7,  10,  12,  36-37,  41,  238 
Steamboats,  29-31 

Stone,  Roy  (General),  44-47,  83,  191,  206,  213,  444 
Suburbs,  39,  133,  154 
Taxes  (see  Finance) 
Tiemann,  Norbert  T.,  195 

Trade,  10-12,  14,  18,  20,  24,  38-39,  44-45,  49,  57,  84-86, 
98-100,  102,  115,  121,  126,  166,  247,  257-259,  274 


Tresaquet,  J.P.M.,  12, 13,  20,  52, 117 

Trucking,   92-95,   97-99,   102,   114,   117-119,  122,  132, 

137,  145-147,  163,  169,  171,  241-242,  248,  250,  257- 

259,  288,  295 
Tunnels,  442 

Turner,  Francis  C,  185-187,  195 
Turnpikes,   8-16,  22-24,  29-31,  36,   136-137,   150-151, 

159,  166-169 
Turnpike  Companies,  8-13,  15,  22-24,  36 

Uniform     Relocation    Assistance    &    Real    Property 
Acquisitions  Policy  Act  1970,  211,  221,  363-364 

Volpe,  John  A.,  193 

Wheelmen  (see  League  of  American  Wheelmen) 
Whitton,  Rex  M.,  194 


Zane's  Trace,  16 


irU.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE  ;  1977     O-230-457 


553 


/■ 


k   ^. 


illllil^^^^^^^^^ 


^^°^£i\s^ 


^^ATtS  O*  ^ 


