1
16
PRESERVATION
BRIEFS
The Use of Substitute Materials 
on Historic Building Exteriors
John Sandor, David Trayte, and Amy Elizabeth Uebel
National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Technical Preservation Services
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation  
generally require that deteriorated distinctive architectural 
features of a historic property be repaired rather than 
replaced. Standard 6 of the Standards for Rehabilitation 
further states that when replacement of a distinctive 
feature is necessary, the new feature must “match the old 
in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual 
properties, and, where possible , materials” (emphasis 
added). While the use of matching materials to replace 
historic ones is always preferred under the Standards for 
Rehabilitation, the Standards also purposely recognize 
that flexibility may sometimes be needed when it comes 
to new and replacement materials as part of a historic 
rehabilitation project. Substitute materials that closely 
match the visual and physical properties of historic 
materials can be successfully used on many rehabilitation 
projects in ways that are consistent with the Standards.
The flexibility inherent in the Standards for Rehabilitation 
must always be balanced with the preservation of the 
historic character and the historic integrity of a building, 
of which historic materials are an important aspect. 
Any replacement work reduces the historic integrity of 
a building to some degree, which can undermine the 
historic character of the property over time. With limited 
exceptions, replacement should only be considered when 
damage or deterioration is too severe to make repair 
feasible. When needed replacement is made with a 
material that matches the historic material, the impact 
on integrity can be minimal, especially when only a small 
amount of new material is needed. When a substitute 
material is used for the replacement, the loss in integrity 
can sometimes, although not always, be greater than 
that of a matching material. Also, whether historic or 
substitute material, there is a point where the amount 
of replacement can become excessive and the building’s 
historic integrity is diminished to an unacceptable 
degree, regardless of the material used—that is, a loss of 
authenticity and the physical features and characteristics 
closely associated with the property’s historic significance.
The term substitute materials  is used to describe building 
materials that have the potential to match the appear-
ance, physical properties, and related attributes of historic 
materials well enough to make them alternatives for use 
in current preservation practice when historic materials 
require replacement.
Compelling reasons to use a substitute material instead 
of the historic material include the unavailability or poor 
performance of the historic material, or environmental 
pressures or code-driven requirements that necessitate a 
change in material. When using a substitute material for 
replacement it is critical that it match the historic material 
in all of its visual and physical properties to preserve the 
historic character of the building and minimize the impact 
on its integrity. 
Substitute materials can be cost-effective, permit the ac-
curate visual duplication of historic materials, and provide 
improved durability. While the behavior of traditional, his-
toric materials is generally well understood, the behavior 
of newer materials can be less established and sometimes 
less predictable. Substitute materials are most successful 
when the properties of both the original material and the 
substitute are thoroughly understood by all those involved 
in the design and construction process. The architect must 
be adept at the selection of substitute materials and their 
incorporation into architectural plans and specifications. 
The contractor or tradesperson in the field must also be 
experienced with their use.
This Preservation Brief provides general guidance on the 
use of substitute materials as replacement materials for 
distinctive features on the exterior of historic buildings. 
Due to the ever-evolving product market for construction 
materials, this Brief does not provide specifications 
for substitute materials. This guidance should be used 
in conjunction with qualified professionals who are 
knowledgeable in current construction and historic 
preservation practices. 

2
This Brief includes a discussion of the appropriate use 
of substitute materials and provides a path for decision-
making in their use. In considering the use of substitute 
materials, such issues as the deterioration or failure of 
the historic building component and material must be 
understood. The existing component’s physical and visual 
properties, profile, surface texture, dimensions, and 
performance should be identified to establish the basis for 
evaluating a possible replacement material. The physical 
and visual properties of the various substitute materials 
available should also be assessed and compared to the 
original material for their physical and visual compatibility. 
Lastly, the suitability of a given substitute replacement 
material should be determined based on how well the 
material matches both the physical and visual properties 
of the existing material as well as any specific performance 
or application needs. The Brief’s descriptions of common 
substitute materials are not meant to be comprehensive, 
and, as the performance history of newer materials 
continues to grow and new materials are developed, 
available options will change, and our understanding of 
current material performance will continue to evolve.
Historical Use of Substitute  
Materials 
The tradition of using affordable and common materials 
in imitation of more expensive and less available materi -
als is a long one. At Mount Vernon, for example, George 
Washington used wood painted with sand-  impregnated 
paint to imitate rusticated stone. This technique, along 
with scoring stucco into block patterns, was common in 
Colonial America to imitate stone.
Nineteenth-century technology made a variety of materi -
als readily available and widely used that were not only 
able to imitate traditional materials but were also cheaper 
to fabricate and easier to use. Traditionally, carved stone 
units were individually worked. Molded or cast materials 
greatly increased efficiency in creating repetitive ele -
ments. Cement-based products such as cast stone could 
provide convincing imitations of natural stone with care -
fully chosen aggregates and cements and was typically a 
commercially manufactured product. It could be tooled 
like natural stone, though that could reduce much of 
the cost advantage. These carefully-crafted cementitious 
products were widely used as trim elements for masonry 
structures or as the face material for an entire building. 
At the other end of the spectrum, mail-order catalogs 
provided a wide variety of forms for molding concrete 
that were merely evocative of natural stone and did little 
to match its appearance. Concrete masonry units could be 
fabricated locally and on site, avoiding expensive quarry -
ing and shipping costs. 
Offering similar efficiencies as cast stone for reproducing 
repetitive and even complex decorative shapes, terra cotta 
could mimic the surface characteristics of stone with vari -
ous textures and glazes. It was popular in the late nine -
teenth and early twentieth centuries for details on stone 
or brick buildings as well as for the entire skin of large and 
elaborately detailed buildings. 
Cast iron was also used to imitate stone, often with very 
decorative profiles, for a variety of architectural features 
ranging from window hoods to columns, piers, balus-
trades, and even whole façades. Cast iron offered its own 
set of efficiencies including cost, fabrication time, and 
weight, but required a painted finish.
While cast stone, terra cotta, and cast iron offered effi-
ciencies over quarried and, particularly, carved stone, they 
were not cheap or impermanent materials. Less costly, but 
also less durable, stamped or brake-formed sheet metal, 
typically galvanized, could also be used instead of masonry 
for cornices, window hoods, roofing tiles, and even entire 
building façades.
Substitute Materials and 
Applying the Standards for 
Rehabilitation
The Standards for Rehabilitation are focused on 
preserving the important and distinctive  
character-defining features of a historic property 
(Standards 2 and 6), and they are to be applied in a 
reasonable manner, taking into account economic 
and technical feasibility ( 36 CFR 67.7 and 36 CFR 
68). The Standards have an inherent flexibility that 
facilitates their application to diverse projects, 
historic properties, and conditions. They are to 
be applied on a “cumulative-effect” basis, when 
the overall effect of all work in the context of the 
specific conditions of the property and the project is 
consistent with the property's historic character. 
The Standards for Rehabilitation require that the 
replacement of a distinctive feature match the old 
in physical and visual properties. While the use of 
matching materials is always preferred, the Standards 
purposely allow for the use of substitute materials 
when the use of original materials is not reasonably 
possible, such as in consideration of economic and 
technical feasibility or in new construction. They 
also provide additional flexibility in the treatment 
of secondary, less distinctive features that are 
less important in defining the historic character 
of the property. The Standards for Rehabilitation 
recognize that flexibility is appropriate to facilitate 
“a compatible use for a property … while preserving 
those portions or features which convey its historical, 
cultural, or architectural values” (definition of 
“Rehabilitation,” 36 CFR 67.2(b)). 

3
Examples of Historical Use of Substitute Materials
Figure 2a. Casting concrete blocks to mimic quarried 
stone was a popular late 19th- to mid 20th-century 
technique. Concrete masonry units could be completed by 
local craftsman, saving time and shipping costs.  
Photo: John Sandor, NPS.
Figure 2b: The 19th century also produced a variety of 
metal products used to imitate other materials. Across the 
country, cast iron was used in storefronts to imitate stone. 
Photo: John Sandor, NPS.
Figure 2c: Stucco has been used to imitate a number of 
building materials for many centuries. Seen here, stucco 
was applied to a brick structure and scored to represent a 
stone façade. Photo: John Sandor, NPS.
Figure 2d: Terra cotta gained popularity in the late 19th 
century as a cheap and lightweight alternative to stone. 
Glazing techniques allowed the blocks to imitate a variety 
of natural stone materials. Photo: John Sandor, NPS.

4
These examples of one material used to imitate another, 
more often in initial construction than for later repair and 
replacement purposes, are referred to as imitative materi -
als in the Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restor -
ing & Reconstructing Historic Buildings , updated in 2017, 
that accompany the Secretary of the Interior's Standards 
for the Treatment of Historic Properties. These imitative 
materials, while evoking other materials, usually had dis-
tinctive qualities of their own and were not always a very 
close match in appearance to the historic material they 
were meant to imitate.
Many of the traditional materials discussed above are still 
available and used to replace damaged or missing original 
features, both to replace matching historic materials and 
sometimes as substitute materials. Because of their exten-
sive use over time and their known physical and chemical 
properties, cast stone, cast iron, and terra cotta are well 
understood substitute materials. This continued usage 
and familiarity means their installation requirements and 
service life are well established, which in turn makes it 
easier to determine when and how to use these traditional 
materials as substitutes for a deteriorated material. Howev -
er, innovation in replacement materials continues, and new 
products (many of them consisting of synthetic materials) 
are continually introduced. These non-traditional products 
are an increasing part of both the new construction and 
rehabilitation industries. Some materials, like glass fiber 
reinforced polymers, glass fiber reinforced concrete, or 
fiber cement, have been in use long enough for an accu-
rate prediction of their service life and performance. Other 
newer, non-traditional materials may be too new to have 
established performance records, thus, understanding 
their material properties is critical, and their use should be 
approached with more caution.
When to Consider Using Substitute 
Materials in Preservation Projects
According to the Standards for Rehabilitation , deteriora-
tion should generally be addressed through repair if in 
repairable condition. Repair can entail a variety of treat-
ments that retain the unit of building material and remove 
and patch or replace only the damaged portion. This ap-
proach can be done with traditional methods and materi-
als such as a dutchman, where like-kind material is pre-
cisely inserted into wood or stone, or it may employ other 
materials such as epoxies for wood repair or cementitious 
compounds for masonry. As long as the repair methods are 
sound and do not damage or accelerate the deterioration 
of the historic material, repairs are generally preferable to 
replacement of an entire element. More complex manufac-
tured products, typical of more recent historic materials (as 
well as a lot of modern building materials generally), may 
be more difficult to repair, if they can be repaired at all. 
There are situations, however, when the level of deterio-
ration makes localized repairs infeasible and entire fea-
tures or units of historic material must be replaced. While 
achieving an effective match of all of the visual qualities of 
a material can be challenging, even when replacement is 
in kind, it can be even more challenging when the replace-
ment is a substitute material. A good visual match is not 
the only consideration when a substitute material is to be 
used for incremental replacement within a larger assem-
bly of historic material. When an individual siding board 
or a single block of ashlar is being replaced, it is usually 
best achieved with the original material. Introduction of 
a different material into an intact assembly requires that 
its inherent properties, such as expansion and contraction, 
moisture resistance, or permeability, be thoroughly consid-
ered relative to those of the surrounding historic materials 
to avoid causing damage. 
Figure 3: Incremental repair is best done using in-kind material to 
minimize differences in the performance characteristics that could 
negatively affect the overall assembly. Photo: NPS.
Figure 4. While occasionally used to imitate other materials such as 
wood or slate shingle, many asbestos shingles and siding materials 
had their own distinct shape and profile. No longer manufactured 
today, alternative materials must be found to replace these 
materials when they are distinctive features on a historic structure. 
Drawing: Association for Preservation Technology, Building 
Technology Heritage Library.

5
Figure 5. (Left) Asbestos shingles were often used as a substitute for traditional slate roof shingles. The historic asbestos roof on this rehabilitation 
project had reached the end of its lifespan and required complete replacement. (Right) Given the limited replacement materials available to match 
the historic asbestos shingles, utilizing natural slate was determined to be the best visual match for the original shingles and design intent in this 
instance. Photos: Crosskey Architects.
Circumstances in which the use of substitute materials 
may generally be considered appropriate, taking into 
consideration technical and economic feasibility reasons, 
include: the unavailability of historic materials; the 
unavailability of skilled artisans or historic craft techniques; 
inadequate durability of the original materials; the 
replacement of a secondary feature; construction of a  
new addition; the reconstruction of a missing feature; 
code-required performance; and for enhanced resilience 
and sustainability: 
• 
 Unavailability of historic material. A common 
reason for using substitute materials is the difficulty 
in finding a good match using the historic material 
(particularly a problem for masonry materials where 
the color and texture are derived from the material 
itself). This may be due to the actual unavailability 
of the material or to protracted delivery dates, 
particularly if the material cannot be sourced 
domestically. It is not uncommon for a local quarry 
that is no longer in operation to have been the source 
of an original stone. If another quarry cannot supply 
a satisfactory match, a substitute material such as dry-
tamp cast stone or textured precast concrete may be 
an appropriate alternative, if care is taken to ensure 
that the detail, color, and texture of the original 
stone are matched. Even when the color is successfully 
matched, the appearance of a cementitious product 
may diverge from that of the historic stone as the 
substitute material ages. 
Many m
anufactured materials that were used 
historically on buildings are no longer made. Terne-
plated steel, which was the material most typically 
used for painted standing-seam or flat-seam roofing, 
is no longer made. However, because it was always 
painted, other metals including galvanized steel or 
copper can generally be substituted if painted. When 
the historic material needing to be replaced is a 
manufactured product developed as an imitation of 
a natural material, which was the case with asbestos 
shingles meant to imitate slate, the natural material 
may now be an appropriate substitute material to 
consider for the manufactured one that is no longer 
produced. 
• 
 Unavailability of skilled artisans or historic 
craft techniques . These two issues can complicate 
any preservation or rehabilitation project. This is 
particularly true for intricate ornamental work, such 
as carved wood, carved stone, wrought iron, or cast 
iron. While skilled craftsmen may not be as difficult 
to find as they once were, there can still be limitations 
geographically, even in finding less specialized skills, 
and particularly if a project is small. Technical advances 
have allowed some stone or wood carvers to take 
advantage of computerized equipment, but complex 
designs will likely still require hand work. It may 
also be possible to mimic a carved element using a 
material that can be cast in a mold, adding significant 
efficiency where an historic element survives from 
which a mold can be made. Options for casting include 
aluminum, cast stone, fiberglass, glass fiber reinforced 
concretes, and terra cotta, but not all carved elements 
can be duplicated by a casting, and mold-making and 
casting still require skilled craftsmen.
•  Inadequate durability of the original material. 
Some historic building materials were of inherently 
poor quality or were not durable. In other cases, 
one material was naturally incompatible with other 
materials on the building, causing staining or galvanic 
corrosion. Examples of poor-quality materials are 
very soft sandstones, which eroded quickly, and 
brownstone, which is vulnerable to delamination. 
In some cases, more durable natural stones may be 
visually similar enough to stand in for these soft stones 
but cast stone or another material may be needed to 
achieve an appropriate match.  

6
Figure 6. The dramatic 
difference in the number 
of growth rings between 
old-growth wood and 
wood that was recently 
harvested from second- 
or third-growth forests 
is indicative of the 
diminished dimensional 
stability and durability 
of most lumber currently 
available. Photo:  
Zachary Dettmore. 
The ready availability of manufactured ornamental 
wood features fed a nineteenth-century taste for 
decorative architectural details that were often 
used on the exterior of buildings with little concern 
for how they would be affected by moisture or 
maintained. Even old-growth wood from decay-
resistant species often could not prevent features 
with severe exposure from eventually needing to be 
replaced. Today’s available commercial supplies of 
lumber no longer provide the denser, more decay-
resistant wood of old-growth forests, so even careful 
matching to species, which is not always possible, will 
not yield a replacement equal in performance to the 
historic material. Old-growth wood is likely to be very 
expensive, if it can be found, and may not be available 
from a sustainable, environmentally responsible 
source. When features with severe exposure need to 
be replaced or reproduced, substitute materials that 
are less susceptible to decay can have a longer life, and 
when the feature is painted, as exterior wood features 
generally are, the visual effect of a substitute material 
can be minimal.
•  Replacement of a secondary feature. When it 
is necessary to replace a less distinctive, secondary 
feature that is less important in defining the historic 
character of the property, there is more flexibility in 
how it can be replaced. While it may be less important 
to find an exact match in materials when replacing 
such a feature, the retention of the overall historic 
character should still guide selection of an appropriate 
replacement material. For example, replacing 
secondary features such as those with limited visibility 
(e.g., siding materials on a rear elevation) may permit 
replacement materials that are similar in appearance 
or character without having to be a perfect match. 
•  Construction of a new addition. The Standards 
require t
hat new additions to historic buildings and 
related new construction be differentiated from the 
old as well as be compatible with the historic character 
of the property and its site and environment. Using 
materials that evoke, without matching, the historic 
material can be an effective means of achieving 
the needed balance between compatibility and 
Figure 7. A new addition replaced non-historic construction on the rear elevation of this building. Fiber cement gives the addition a compatible 
appearance without replicating the exposure for thickness of the historic siding. Photo: Ward Architecture + Preservation. 

7
Figure 8. A long-missing cast-iron steeple was reconstructed in aluminum and 
fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP). Photo: John Sandor, NPS, Inset: Quinn Evans.
differentiation for new additions and 
new construction. Even if differentiation 
is achieved through design rather than 
materials, there generally is no basis for 
requiring the use of matching historic 
materials for new additions and new 
construction as part of a rehabilitation 
project. 
•  Reconstruction of a missing feature. 
Many buildings lose significant features 
over the course of their lives for reasons 
such as those previously discussed. When a 
missing feature is to be reconstructed, the 
importance of matching the original mate-
rial may be less important to the effect 
replacing the missing feature may have on 
the overall historic character and appear-
ance of the building. Though replacement 
of missing features must be substantiated 
by documentary, physical, or pictorial 
evidence, in many cases the authenticity 
of the material may be secondary to the 
overall visual qualities. The use of a more 
cost-effective substitute material for the 
construction of a missing feature can often 
be an important factor in the feasibility of 
undertaking such work. 
•  Code-required performance.  
Modern building codes are regularly 
amended to require higher performance 
levels for new and existing buildings in such 
areas as life safety, seismic retrofits, and 
accessibility. Rehabilitation projects often 
trigger compliance with code requirements 
that were not in place when a building 
was constructed. Although building codes 
may often allow for the retention of 
historic materials and assemblies, substitute 
materials can offer an alternative in 
situations when the historic materials are 
non-compliant and cannot otherwise be 
reasonably retained. In these instances, a 
change in material may be appropriate to 
meet code requirements, while in other 
instances selecting the optimal code 
compliance method for the project may 
achieve code-compliant solutions that also 
allow for the preservation of a building’s 
historic materials and finishes.  
For example, fire codes may require 
increased resistance to flame spread for 
buildings within dense urban environments 
where building proximity and separation 
between buildings is a concern. Some 
substitute materials are non-combustible, 
have good ratings for flame spread, and 
can provide an alternative to help meet 

8
fire code requirements. Depending on the building 
component and the material, however, a substitute 
material may not resist fire any better than the 
historic material. In addressing code issues, all feasible 
alternatives should be considered to minimize the 
impact on the historic character of the building while 
still meeting code requirements.  
 
With specific provi
sions in building code related to 
issues such as seismic hazards, the choice of materials 
for features inherently unstable in a seismic event can 
be a key part of a code-compliant retrofit solution. 
Elements at risk of falling such as parapets, finials, and 
overhanging cornices may be made safe by anchoring 
them to new structural frames. However, for some 
heavy masonry features, especially where there is 
deterioration or the feature is difficult to effectively 
brace, adequately anchoring the existing feature 
may not prove feasible. In such cases removing and 
replacing these features with lighter-weight replicas 
that incorporate a resilient structural framework can 
help preserve the historic character of the building 
while improving life safety performance. 
•  Enhanced resilience and sustainability. Wildfires, 
ea
rthquakes, floods, hurricanes, and other extreme 
weather events put historic buildings and their occu-
pants at risk and may require adaptive treatments that 
are more invasive than might be accepted in other cir-
cumstances, including related to the use of substitute 
materials. In these contexts, it is still necessary to try 
to minimize impacts on a building’s historic character 
as much as possible while still adapting it to be more 
resilient. Widespread wildfires, for example, have 
increased demand for fire resistant materials for the 
exterior building envelope. Flood events may neces -
sitate the replacement of historic materials that have 
been damaged or inundated with hazardous substanc-
es in contaminated floodwaters. When undertaking 
repairs in such circumstances, substitute materials may 
offer greater resilience to anticipated future exposure 
to natural hazard risks.  
Similarly, efforts to improve energy efficiency and 
performance m
ay include the use of substitute materi-
als as replacement components when modifications to 
building assemblies are required and the historic mate-
rials cannot be preserved. When evaluating substitute 
materials in the context of sustainability objectives, 
factors such as the environmental impact of produc-
tion, the full life cycle of products, and the embodied 
carbon of the materials already in place should be 
carefully analyzed. There may be more sustainable 
choices for a replacement material, including the use 
of more traditional materials in place of manufactured 
products that may consist of non-renewable resources 
or hazardous materials. While some synthetic substi-
tute materials are made from recycled materials or 
are otherwise sustainably produced, many are not 
repairable, salvageable, or recyclable themselves, and 
they may have shorter lifespans to their historic mate-
rial counterparts. When either greater resilience or 
sustainability is a factor, all feasible alternatives should 
be considered in finding a balanced approach that 
maintains historic character while meeting resilience 
and sustainability goals.
Substitute Materials and  
Economic Feasibility
Economic feasibility is inevitably a concern when choosing 
a material for any part of a project, whether a historic 
or substitute material, but it should not be the sole 
determinant factor at the expense of maintaining the 
Figure 9. Previously bricked-in openings below the flood line were 
reopened and new aluminum windows installed with cellular 
PVC trim detailed to hold back moderate flood waters and survive 
exposure to water. Photo: John Sandor, NPS.
historic character and historic integrity of a building. Other 
factors may prompt the consideration of a substitute 
material, such as the cost of maintaining the historic 
material, because it is comparatively difficult or costly to 
reach or access, or the frequency of required maintenance 
the historic material needs. Additionally, where in-
kind replacement material is found to be prohibitively 
expensive, it may be reasonable to consider a substitute 
that offers an alternative and is a good physical and 
visual match. Not all substitute materials are, however, 
cost-effective replacements. Long-term durability and 
maintainability are other factors that should be considered 
in conjunction with initial cost.
Maintenance of a material, particularly where accessibil-
ity is difficult or expensive, can be an important part of a 

9
cost evaluation. Maintenance costs should not be consid-
ered without also considering life-cycle expenses. While 
some substitute materials may offer reduced initial costs, 
they may be as or more costly than traditional materials to 
maintain over time. For example, many substitute materials 
are not readily repairable, necessitating full replacement 
when damaged. The cost to replace a material or assem-
bly at the end of its lifespan may also be greater than the 
accumulated incremental expense to maintain the historic 
material, particularly if it is a more traditional, repairable 
material. Maintenance cost should never be the sole reason 
for replacing a historic material that is not deteriorated.
Criteria for the Appropriate Use 
of Substitute Materials 
Substitute materials must meet three basic criteria to be 
considered: they must be compatible with the historic 
materials in appearance; their physical properties must be 
similar to those of the historic materials, or the materials 
must be installed in a manner that tolerates differences; 
and they must meet certain basic performance expecta-
tions over an extended period of time.
• Matching the Appearance of the Historic
Mat
erial
Any mat
erial’s appearance varies depending on the
nature of the material and how it is used. Some
historic materials, such as wood and ferrous metals,
were typically painted, making the color of the
substitute unimportant, though the texture of the
surface, which telegraphs through a paint layer, is
still an important consideration. Texture can be a
large part of distinguishing a material formed by
hand from one that is machine-made. Many historic
materials, such as most building stones, are used
without any coating, making the color, pattern, and
reflectivity, as well as surface texture, dependent on
the material itself. Matching the color and surface
characteristics of a historic natural material with a 
man-made substitute can often be quite difficult.  
When the color and surface characteristics of 
an existing material are important, cleaning the 
material should be the starting point for evaluating 
a potential matching material. In situations where 
there are subtle variations in color and texture 
within the original material, the substitute 
material should be similarly varied so that it is not 
conspicuous by its uniformity. If a material is custom 
fabricated, a sufficient number of samples should 
be supplied to permit on-site comparison of color, 
texture, detailing, and other critical visual qualities. 
For a manufactured product with preset choices 
of color or texture, it may be necessary to look at 
samples from more than one manufacturer to find 
the best match. Similarly, prefabricated products, 
such as roofing slate, may offer limited, if any, 
choice of unit size, which can be a critical factor 
for achieving a good match. A substitute material 
should not be used to replace distinctive, character-
defining materials and features if an adequate 
match in design and appearance is not possible. 
As all exposed materials are subject to ultraviolet 
degradation, samples of a new material, particularly 
when custom formulated, should be prepared 
during the early planning phases to allow for 
evaluation of the effects of weathering on 
color stability. When that is not possible, or if a 
prefabricated product is used, the fabricator or 
manufacturer may be able to identify regional 
locations where equivalent products have been 
installed long enough ago to get a better sense of 
how the material weathers and performs.  
While a perfect match is the desired goal for 
replacing distinctive features, it is not always 
possible, even when the same matching material is 
chosen for the replacement. When any compromise 
Figure 10. Polymer slates 
offer a choice of shapes but 
not sizes, limiting their 
ability to achieve a good 
visual match for some 
historic slate. With the size 
of the polymer slates (right) 
being nearly twice that of 
the historic slates (
left), the 
scale of the entire feature is 
incompatibly altered. The 
molded edges of this mate-
rial, which contribute to its 
ability to replicate slate, 
would be lost if each shingle 
was resized by cutting. 
Photo: John Sandor, NPS.

10
must be made in the precision of the match, it is 
wise to consider the vantage point from which 
the material will be seen. Sometimes what seems 
important at close range, such as variations in the 
texture of a surface, may be secondary to other 
aspects of the material when viewed from some 
distance. The closer a feature is to the viewer, the 
more closely the material and craftsmanship should 
match the original. An on-site mock-up using a 
sample of the proposed material can help evaluate 
whether it is an adequate visual match. 
Figure 11. The thickness of the wood siding on the front (left) 
creates a deeper shadow line than is achieved with the fiber cement 
siding used on the side (right) elevation. While the exposure can 
be adjusted, fiber cement siding is not available in a matching 
thickness. Photo: John Sandor, NPS.
•  Matching the Physical Properties of the
Historic Material
Carefully chosen substitute materials can often
closel
y match the appearance of historic materials,
but their physical properties may differ greatly. These
differences are most critical when incrementally
replacing components of a larger assembly that retains
significant historic material. The chemical composition
of the material (e.g., the presence of acids, alkalis,
salts, or metals) should be evaluated to ensure that
the replacement materials will be compatible with the
adjacent historic materials. Materials that will cause
galvanic corrosion or other chemical reactions must be
isolated from one another.
The thermal- and moisture-driven expansion and 
contraction coefficients of each adjacent material 
must be within narrow limits or be accommodated 
by carefully designed joints and fasteners. Joints 
can play a role both in accommodating movement 
of materials as well as in managing moisture, either 
to keep it from entering the enclosure assembly or 
to let it escape from the building envelope, or both. 
Because some synthetic materials are less permeable 
to moisture than more traditional materials, 
installations must take into account the potential 
to trap moisture and cause deterioration of historic 
and new materials. An assembly incorporating new 
and historic materials should be designed so that if 
material failures occur, the failures occur within the 
new material rather than the historic one. 
During installation, surface preparation is critical to 
ensure proper attachment. Deteriorated underlying 
material must be removed or stabilized. Non-
corrosive anchoring devices or fasteners that are 
designed to carry the new material and to withstand 
wind, rain, snow, and other destructive elements 
should be used. Since physical failures often result 
from poor anchorage or improper installation 
techniques, a structural engineer should be 
included in planning any major project. For readily 
available, off-the-shelf materials, manufacturers’ 
recommendations for attachment and spacing should 
be followed.  
Nearly all substitute materials have some properties 
that are different from the historic materials they 
may replace. Even when substitute materials are 
isolated from historic materials and features, it is 
important to understand the substitute materials’ 
properties in order to use them successfully. 
•  Performance of the Material Over Time
When more traditional materials are used to replace
damage
d historic materials and features, their perfor -
mance is predictable in most cases. An exception may
be modern wood that has durability and other prop -
Figure 12. Cellulose composite materials, like wood, expand and 
contract with moisture. Here it was used to reconstruct a missing 
storefront. Unlike solid wood that is dimensionally stable parallel to 
the grain, this composite moves equally in all dimensions, resulting 
in gaps that were not adequately anticipated in the design.  
Photo: John Sandor, NPS. 

11
Figure 13. Cast stone was used to effectively replace individual blocks of sandstone. Both the original ( left) and the substitute material (right) 
retain similar physical and visible properties. Having weathered for over 30 years, some erosion of the binder has revealed quartz grains of 
the aggregate (inset), but it is only noticeable upon close inspection. Photo: John Sandor, NPS. 
erties different than those of historic wood from old-
growth forests. Many of the materials used as substi -
tutes have been in use long enough to provide some 
idea of how they perform over time. Other material 
may only have test results from accelerated weather -
ing. The length of manufacturer warranties may be an 
indicator of expected durability and lifespan. War -
ranties only predict a manufacturer’s expectation of 
a product’s performance and are no guarantee that 
the manufacturers will still be in business at the time 
needed to stand behind them. Just as new manufac -
turers emerge with new materials, others disappear. 
Where possible, projects involving substitute materi -
als in similar installations and exposures should be 
examined before selecting a new, less-tested material. 
It is unrealistic to expect a substitute material, which 
can be quite different in composition than the historic 
material, not to age differently.  
Even traditional materials will not perform well if 
not used or detailed appropriately, and experienced 
architects, engineers, fabricators, and installers rely 
on their professional knowledge and experience to 
ensure proper installation and techniques when work -
ing with familiar materials. This is just one of many 
reasons that using the original materials for needed 
replacement is usually the best choice. Some of the 
materials now available as substitutes have properties 
that differ greatly from the traditional materials they 
may be used to replace. It is critical to the successful 
performance of substitute materials that everyone 
involved in the selection, design, and installation fully 
understands the material’s properties, especially how 
it is different than the material it is replacing, and 
how that will affect the surrounding materials and 
building systems.  
Many traditional building materials can be repaired 
either with traditional methods and materials or with 
more modern conservation techniques using sub-
stances like epoxies. However, many modern substitute 
materials (particularly synthetic ones) are not as easily 
repaired, if repairable at all, as their more traditional 
counterparts. Confirming that a material is repairable 
may be important for those used, e.g., where impact 
or significant wear or abrasion is likely. 
Finally, it is critical that the substitute materials be 
documented as part of the historical record of the 
building so that proper care and maintenance of all of 
the building materials continue, ensuring the contin -
ued life of the historic building.
Choosing an Appropriate  
Substitute Material
Once all reasonable options for repair and replacement 
in kind have been considered and sufficient justification 
for substitute materials has been established, the choice 
among the variety of substitute materials currently 
available must be made. Rapidly developing technologies 
allow a wide variety of materials to choose from that are 
intended to mimic historic materials. Many of the materials 
that were historically used as substitutes for more 
traditional historic materials have themselves become 
historic, and some of these early substitutes continue to 
be reasonable options as substitute materials today. No 
substitute material will exactly match the historic material 
in all aspects, but many are able to adequately match 
the appearance and relevant physical attributes to make 
for a potential substitute. If a substitute material is not 

12
an adequate physical and visual match given the specific 
conditions of the building and the project, then it should 
not be used to replace distinctive, character-defining 
materials and features.
Listed below are various building components or 
features and the substitute materials which may, in 
some circumstances, be considered for use as possible 
replacement materials in a historic rehabilitation project 
consistent with the Standards for Rehabilitation . This list 
includes different substitute material options available 
today for these building features and poses questions 
that should be asked and considered when choosing 
between the original material and various types of 
substitute materials. This is followed by a list of some of 
the more commonly used, currently available materials 
that may have some applications as substitute materials 
and the properties of each that affect their suitability 
for use as substitutes. This list should not be read as an 
endorsement of any of these materials, generally, or their 
appropriateness for use as a substitute material, but it 
serves as a reminder that the successful use of any building 
material requires a careful consideration of its properties 
relative to where and how it will be used. 
The above chart lists materials that are sometimes used as substitutes for replacement of historic building features. Even within a given 
category, all materials may not be equally suitable as a substitute replacement material for the actual historic material or feature. Any 
substitute material should be selected based on its specific physical and visual characteristics, conditions, and intended application 
consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.
Masonry 
Stone, terra 
cotta
Architectural 
Metals 
Cast & wrought 
iron, steel, 
pressed metal
Siding 
Wood, asbestos
Roofing 
Wood shingle, 
slate, tile
Decking 
Tongue-and-
groove & 
square-edge 
wood
Molding / Trim 
Wood
Aluminum • • • •
Cast Stone & Precast 
Concrete • •
Fiber Reinforced 
Concretes
•
Glass Fiber Reinforced 
Polymers
• •
Fiber Cement • • •
Mineral / Polymer 
Composite
• • • •
Cellulose Fiber / 
Polymer Composite
• • • •
Non-composite 
Polymers
• • •
Cellular PVC • • •
Potential Substitute Materials 
Historic Building Features
Considering Substitute 
Materials 
Considering the use of a substitute material 
should begin with the following questions about 
the conditions and location where it will be used:
•  Will the significance or visibility of the
historic feature require a very precise match?
• Is the entire feature being replaced or just a 
component of it?
• Are pre-existing conditions contributing to 
the failure of the existing material, and, if so, 
how will they be addressed/corrected?
• Is the need for replacement due to inherent 
deficiencies of the original material? 
•  Will the material need to resist any 
environmental hazards such as flooding  
or fire?
Historic Features and Substitute Materials
Historic Building Features

13
Historic Building Features: Criteria for selecting an 
appropriate replacement material
Masonry
FEATURES: corbels, brackets, balusters, cornices, 
window and door surrounds, friezes, wall surfaces, 
horizontal surfaces, incidental ornament, columns
HISTORIC MATERIALS: terra cotta, cast stone,  
stone, concrete 
POTENTIAL SUBSTITUTES : cast stone, pre-cast concrete, 
GFRC, GFRP, non-composite polymers (polyurethane), 
cast or stamped metal
Questions to ask about the replacement material:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Can it serve a structural function?
How is the material affected by moisture?
 Can the material survive flooding and be 
reused?
 Can it reproduce the surface texture of the 
original?
 Is its shrinkage in curing low enough to allow it 
to be molded from existing stones?
 Can matching color be achieved without a 
coating and with UV stability?
 Can an adequate match of the surface (color 
and texture) be achieved with a coating?   
 Is a coating required?
 If it is not self-supporting, is it lightweight 
enough to be supported by an underlying 
framework?
 Can multiple original units be replicated with a 
single replacement piece?
 Where thermal movement is different from the 
original material, how will joints accommodate? 
 Is the material combustible? 
Architectural Metals
FEATURES: pilasters, door and window surrounds, 
cornices, incidental ornament, columns, spandrels, 
ceilings, sheathing, roofing 
HISTORIC MATERIALS: cast and wrought iron, steel, 
bronze, lead, aluminum, and stamped steel (usually 
galvanized or terne-coated)
POTENTIAL SUBSTITUTES: GFRP, aluminum,  
non-composite polymer (polyurethane), GFRC,  
metallic/polymer composite
Questions to ask about the replacement material:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 Will the replacement material serve a structural 
or cosmetic role?
 Will it expand and contract with temperature 
change enough to require special 
accommodation in its installation?
 If part of an assembly of mixed materials, how 
will any expansion and contraction of the 
dissimilar materials be accommodated? 
 Will the replacement material increase 
deterioration of the historic or surrounding 
elements, for instance due to galvanic corrosion, 
moisture entrapment, jacking of original 
material, off-gassing creating a corrosive 
environment, or poor original design of the 
historic material?
 How will the replacement material mimic the 
surface color/patination of the original material?  
 If a coating is needed, what preparation is 
needed, and what is its durability or service life 
of the finish? 
 What attachment and support systems are 
necessary?
 If the original element is structural, but the new 
material is not, how can supplemental structure 
be introduced to support the new?

14
Figure 14. Surface texture is an important aspect in matching the appearance of a historic material, especially when a material is viewed at close 
range. As seen in these two images, many of the substitute materials produced for siding and trim have an embossed wood grain, making them 
incompatible for replacing historic wood that was typically planed to a smooth surface. Some substitute products are available with a smooth 
surface as well. Photos: John Sandor, NPS. 
Siding
FEATURES: clapboard, tongue-and-groove or shiplap 
siding, board and batten, shingles
HISTORIC MATERIALS: wood and asbestos
POTENTIAL SUBSTITUTES : cellular PVC, wood fiber/
polymer composite, fiber cement, mineral/polymer 
composite 
Questions to ask about the replacement material: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 What are the widths, lengths, profiles, thicknesses, 
and textures available?
 What, if any, are the finishing requirements,  
and/or is it available factory-finished?
 How well does it hold paint, and can prefinished 
surfaces be renewed? 
 What tools are needed to cut it, and can it be 
machined?
 Does it absorb moisture and, if so, to what effect? 
 Can the material survive flooding and be reused?
 Will it expand and contract with temperature  
change enough to require special 
accommodation in its installation? 
 What characteristics can affect its handling  
(e.g., weight, flexibility, brittleness)?
 Does it have specific fastening requirements? 
Is it susceptible to insect damage?
What is its impact resistance?  
Does it have a flame spread rating?
What is the expected lifespan and/or warranty?
Roofing
HISTORIC MATERIALS: wood shingle, slate shingle, 
asbestos shingle, clay tile, concrete tile, metal
POTENTIAL SUBSTITUTES : fiber cement, mineral/poly -
mer composite, wood fiber/polymer composite, pre-cast 
concrete, metal 
Questions to ask about the replacement material: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
What sizes and shapes are available?
What are color choices? 
 What is the color stability of the new material, 
and how will it age/weather? 
What is the impact resistance? 
What is its flame spread rating?
 What are the installation requirements of the 
new material? 
 Can the feature being replaced be custom-
produced if ready-made ones of the new 
material are not an accurate match? 
 What is the expected lifespan and/or warranty?

15
Figure 15. Tongue-and-
groove porch flooring is 
manufactured in several 
different substitute 
materials. Each type has 
different properties, though 
most are more moisture-
resistant than wood. The 
prefinished product shown 
can be painted when 
worn, but repainting is not 
recommended for some 
product choices. Photo: Oak 
Alley Foundation. 
Decking 
FEATURES: tongue-and-groove, square-edge flooring
HISTORIC MATERIALS: wood
POTENTIAL SUBSTITUTES: cellular PVC, wood fiber/
polymer composite, mineral/polymer composite, non-
composite polymers (solid PVC)
Questions to ask about the replacement material: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 What are the widths, lengths, and textures 
available?
Is it site painted or prefinished? 
 How well does it hold paint, and can prefinished 
surfaces we renewed?
 What tools are needed to cut it, and can it be 
machined?
 What dimensional span does its strength allow?
 Does it absorb water, and if so, to what effect?
 Can the material survive flooding and be 
reused?
 Does it require a drainage plane, or can it be  
installed atop a membrane?
 Will it expand and contract with temperature 
change enough to require special 
accommodation in its installation? 
 Is it susceptible to insect damage?
 Is it impact resistant?  
 Does it have a flame spread rating?
 What is the expected lifespan and/or warranty?
Molding / Trim 
FEATURES: run moldings, flat boards, casings, cornice, 
frieze, railings, balustrade, columns
HISTORIC MATERIALS: wood, metal
POTENTIAL SUBSTITUTES : cellular PVC, wood fiber/
polymer composite, mineral/polymer composite, non-
composite polymer (polyurethane), GFRP, sheet metal
Questions to ask about the replacement material:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 What are the widths, lengths, and textures 
available?
 What, if any, are the finishing requirements  
and/or is it available factory-finished?
 How well does it hold paint, and can prefinished 
surfaces be renewed?
 What tools are needed to cut it, and can it  
be machined?
 Does it absorb moisture, and if so, to what 
effect?
 Can the material survive flooding and be 
reused?
 Will it expand and contract with temperature  
change enough to require special 
accommodation in its installation? 
 What characteristics can affect its handling  
(e.g., weight, flexibility, brittleness)?
 Does it have specific fastening requirements? 
 Is it susceptible to insect damage?
 What is its impact resistance?  
 Does it have a flame spread rating?
 What is the expected lifespan and/or warranty?

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Potential Substitute Materials: Matching properties  
and performance needs 
Physical Composition and Properties 
After assessing different material options based on the intended application, the appropriateness 
of a substitute material should also be considered in context of the material’s physical composition, 
associated properties, and necessary visual match. 
Aluminum 
MATERIAL:  Aluminum is a highly corrosion-resistant 
alloy that can be cast, wrought, or extruded. Molten alu-
minum is cast into permanent (metal) molds or one-time 
sand molds forming cast aluminum. Extruded aluminum 
is formed by passing heated aluminum through a die 
which produces the desired form. Wrought aluminum 
is worked using the heated metal and then bending, 
stamping, and otherwise shaping the metal. If not self-
supporting, aluminum elements are generally screwed or 
bolted to a structural frame. Aluminum can be welded, 
but more often sections, particularly extruded ones, are 
mechanically connected. 
PROPERTIES: 
Isotropic 
Lightweight 
Thermal movement greater than cast iron or wood 
Corrosion-resistant, but direct contact with other 
metals may trigger galvanic corrosion 
Lower structural strength that iron or steel 
Ductile - less brittle than cast iron 
Non-combustible 
Retains high defnition through molding process and 
produces crisp profles through extrusion 
Can be given a durable metallic fnish through 
anodization. Surface etching required for paint 
adhesion 
Can be machined into a large variety of shapes/ 
dimensions 
Figure 16. Aluminum is a highly corrosion-resistant metal 
that is commonly used as a substitute material for cast iron. 
Aluminum can be a more afordable and lightweight alternative 
to cast iron that retains a similar texture, shape, and 
maintenance cycle. Photo: NPS. 
16 

 
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
Cast Stone & Precast Concrete 
MATERIAL: A cement lime and aggregate mixture that 
is dry-tamped into a mold is generally referred to as 
cast stone. Cast stone is one of the original substitute 
materials. Its longevity has proved that the material ages 
compatibly with stone. A wet mix of cement and aggre-
gate poured into molds also has a long history of being 
used to produce concrete masonry units mimicking stone 
and roofng tiles mimicking clay tile. Both methods have 
minimal shrinkage during curing, though they employ  
different curing and fnishing techniques. Both can 
include reinforcing bars and anchorage devices installed 
during fabrication. The dry-tamp fabrication method is 
especially effective at producing an outer surface with 
the appearance of stone.  
Figure 17. The balustrade con-
sists of multiple prior campaigns 
of using cast stone to replace 
the natural stone. The efective  
match for the surface texture 
and color of the original stone 
allowed individual elements  
to be incrementally replaced 
only when they had failed, thus 
retaining the maximum amount  
of original material as long as 
possible. Photo: EverGreene 
Architectural Arts.  
PROPERTIES: 
• Isotropic 
• Weight equivalent to stone 
• Expansion/contraction similar to stone 
• Water absorption may differ from that of any 
particular stone 
• Can be structural 
• Non-combustible 
• Vapor-permeable 
• May achieve a wide range of color and surface 
textures by varying mix, but use of pigments may 
reduce UV stability 
• Can be coated 
• May be tooled to match the appearance of 
tooled stone 
• Repairs similarly to stone 
17 

 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
Figure 18. Missing 
historic terra cotta 
spandrel panels on 
all foor levels were 
recreated utilizing glass  
fber reinforced concrete  
(GFRC) replacements.  
New spandrels were 
fabricated as individual  
components and  
attached with metal  
clips between historic 
terra cotta piers. Photo: 
Kris Frail, Dewberry. 
Fiber Reinforced Concretes (GFRC, CFRC) 
MATERIAL: Fiber reinforced concretes are lightweight 
concrete compounds modifed with additives and rein-
forced with alkaline resistant glass fbers (GFRC), or less 
frequently carbon fbers (CFRC). They are generally fab-
ricated as thin-shelled panels and applied to a separate 
structural frame or anchorage system. GFRC is typically 
sprayed into forms, although it can be poured, and an-
choring devices are included in the fabrication. The color 
is derived from the natural aggregates and, if necessary, 
a small percentage of added pigments. Because of its 
low shrinkage in curing, it can be produced using molds 
taken directly from the building. 
PROPERTIES: 
• Isotropic 
• Lighter weight than solid masonry 
• Expansion/contraction similar to stone 
• No load bearing capacity, so underlying framework 
must be used to accommodate any loads 
• Material can be fre-rated 
• Vapor-permeable 
• Can be produced in larger sections effciently 
reproducing repetitive elements or features that 
were originally made up of small individual units 
• Large range of colors achievable by varying 
aggregates, but when pigments are needed UV 
stability may be reduced 
• May be left uncoated or may be painted 
18 

 
  
   
  
  
   
   
  
 
  
 
  
Figure 19. A new, lightweight fber reinforced polymer is attached to a new metal armature to replicate damaged and missing 
elements of a terra cotta cornice. Photo: Quinn Evans. 
Glass Fiber Reinforced Polymers (FRP , Fiberglass) 
MATERIAL: Fiberglass is the most well-known of 
the FRP products generally produced as a thin, rigid, 
laminate shell formed by pouring a polyester or 
epoxy resin gelcoat into a mold. When tack-free, 
layers of chopped glass or glass fabric are added 
along with additional resins. The surface gel coat 
can be pigmented or painted. Reinforcing rods and 
attachment devices can be added when necessary. 
Because of is low shrinkage in curing, it can be 
produced using molds taken directly from the building. 
Rather than being produced as standard components, 
FRP is custom fabricated for individual applications. 
PROPERTIES 
• Isotropic 
• Lighter weight than masonry, similar to sheet metal 
• More thermally driven expansion than masonry 
or metals 
• No load bearing capacity, so underlying framework 
must be used to accommodate any loads 
• High strength to weight ratio 
• Flammable 
• Not vapor-permeable 
• Can be produced in larger sections effciently 
reproducing repetitive elements or features that 
were originally made up of small individual units 
• May be diffcult to match false joints in multi-
unit assemblies to actual joints that need to 
accommodate movement 
• Color can be incorporated into the surface gel-coat, 
or the surface may be coated  
19 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Figure 20. Cement board was used to replace a non-historic infll and mimics the confguration of a typical vehicular door of the period. 
Photos: Historic Augusta. 
Fiber Cement 
MATERIAL: Fiber cement products are made from 
fber, sand that is ground to a powder, cement, and 
proprietary additives to reduce moisture absorption. 
The fber used in roof products is glass fber alone, 
whereas siding and trim board products are primarily 
wood fber. The material is formed with a smooth or 
textured surface, cut to standard sizes of panels, boards, 
or shingles, and cured in an autoclave. Roofng material 
has integral color, but board and siding products are 
produced with a primer, if not fully factory fnished. 
Most siding and trim boards are embossed with a wood 
grain on one surface and are smooth on the other, the 
smooth side being the appropriate surface to imitate 
planed wood. 
PROPERTIES: 
• Products are minimally orthotropic 
• Heavier and more brittle than wood, limiting 
available lengths 
• Very little thermal- and no moisture-driven 
movement 
• Low water absorption, but not recommended for 
ground or roof contact 
• Class A fame spread 
• Resists insect damage 
• Available in limited thicknesses and widths 
• Not machinable, but may be cut with special carbide 
blades; cutting requires dust collection and personal 
protective equipment 
• Cut edges require sealing 
• Available unfnished, primed, or prefnished, and 
must be painted (with latex paint) 
• 15-year limited warranty typical 
20 

Mineral / Polymer Composite 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
MATERIAL: Calcium carbonate or fy ash are mineral 
ingredients held in a matrix of various polymers to 
produce materials formed or molded into a number of 
building products. Additives found in some of the roof-
ing products include pigments and UV stabilizers. Some 
use a substantial portion of recycled material. Different 
combinations yield products with different properties, 
each formulated for a specifc building component. 
When the material is fy ash with some glass fbers 
bound in a matrix of polyurethane, it is identifed as 
polyash. Siding, trim, bead board, and deck products 
are primed or prefnished, whereas roof products have 
integral color. 
PROPERTIES: 
Fly ash (siding and trim) 
• Isotropic 
• Heavier and more brittle than wood, and lacking 
structural capacity 
• Little thermal or moisture-driven movement 
• Suffciently low water absorption to permit ground 
contact 
• Class C fame spread 
• Resists insect damage 
• Available in limited thicknesses and widths 
• Machinable with carbide tools blades; requires dust 
collection 
• Cut edges do not require sealing 
Figure 21. A mineral 
polymer composite  
siding was available in 
the profle very similar 
to the historic siding. 
The replacement siding  
was used where the 
original material was 
almost completely  
missing beneath 
a more modern 
covering. Areas where 
the original wood 
was largely intact  
were replaced with 
matching wood to 
sustain more of the 
material integrity of 
the building. Photo: 
Belk Architecture. 
• Must be painted 
• 30-year limited warranty typical 
Calcium carbonate or recycled rubber (roofng) 
• Isotropic 
• More thermally-driven movement than slate 
or wood 
• Little to no moisture absorption 
• As shingles: lighter and more fexible than slate 
• As tongue-and-groove decking: heavier and 
harder than wood 
• Not vulnerable to insect damage 
• Available in limited dimensions 
• As shingles: Class 4 impact resistance, and fame 
spread ratings ranging from Class A to Class C 
depending on the specifc product 
• As shingles: integral color, that may be subject 
to fading 
• As tongue-and-groove decking: prefnished 
with non-renewable fnish, and can be cut with 
woodworking tools 
• 50-year limited warranties on roofng products 
typical 
21 

  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Cellulose Fiber / Polymer Composite 
MATERIAL: Wood strands or fbers are coated with 
resin for moisture resistance and zinc-borate for insect 
and fungal-decay resistance, then consolidated under 
heated pressure. Solid composite core boards are cut 
from sheets of material, then factory-primed or fnished. 
Resulting siding and trim board products can be referred 
to as engineered wood, fber board, or hardboard. 
Products may be embossed with a wood grain or have 
a smooth fnish, the smooth side being the appropriate 
surface to imitate planed wood. Siding, trim, and 
tongue-and-grove decking with a slightly different 
properties are produced by extruding polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) combined with non-wood cellulose. Roofng 
shingles are molded from fne wood fbers, color 
additives, and UV stabilizers bound with polypropylene 
or polyethylene (thermoplastics). 
Figure 22. A porch was reconstructed using posts fabricated on 
site from a smooth-surface cellulose/polymer composite material. 
Though the face of the posts are painted, the lack of paint on the 
bottom at the cut ends is not consistent with manufacturers’ 
recommendations. This treatment will allow moisture to be 
absorbed, shortening the life of the new replacement feature. 
Photo: John Sandor, NPS. 
PROPERTIES: 
Predominantly Cellulose (siding, trim and decking)  
• Minimal thermal movement 
• Resistant to moisture-driven movement 
• Lighter and more fexible than solid wood, but lacks 
structural capacity 
• Rice hull cellulose: can span typical foor-framing 
spacing as decking 
• Low water absorption (for wood, no ground or roof 
contact) 
• Class A or Class C fame spread 
• Resists insect damage 
• Available in limited dimensions 
• Machinable with woodworking tools 
• Wood cellulose: Cut edges must be sealed and 
may need additional surface prep for fnish; must 
be painted if unfnished or primed, also available 
prefnished 
• Rice hull cellulose: Accepts stain/paint, but no 
fnish required 
• 30–50 year limited warranty, depending on 
manufacturer 
Predominantly Polymer (roofng) 
• Minimal thermal movement 
• Little to no moisture absorption 
• Lighter and more fexible than slate 
• Class 4 impact-resistance 
• Class A fame spread 
• Available in limited shingle size 
• 50-year limited warranty typical 
22 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Figure 23. 3-D printing using various polymers is occasionally used to replicate missing metal or wood features. This new application is 
continually being refned, but the application can be successful when a painted, lightweight feature needs to be replicated. Photo: NPS. 
Non-composite Polymers 
MATERIALS: The main two polymer materials used 
without signifcant other components are polyurethane 
and polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Polyurethane millwork is 
constructed of urethane foam created by mixing isocya-
nate and resin. The polyurethane mixture is kept under 
pressure in a mold as it expands to any desired shape. 
These molded products have a closed-cell, foamed core 
with a denser surface skin. Polyurethane products can 
have exterior applications but are more often used 
for interior features. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) in a solid 
extruded form is another polymer that can have archi-
tectural application as tongue-and-groove decking. Vari-
ous polymers formed using 3-D printing are also being 
explored as replacements for painted metal or wood 
ornamental features. 
PROPERTIES: Each of the two groupings has distinct 
physical properties 
Urethane Foam (moldings and decorative elements) 
• Lightweight and fexible, but lacking structural 
capacity 
• More thermally-driven movement than wood or 
stone, but less than cellular PVC 
• Does not absorb water 
• Flammable 
• Resists insect damage 
• Can be cut with standard woodworking tools 
• Adhesive and mechanical fasteners both 
recommended for installation 
• Supplied primed and must be painted (latex paint) 
• Lifetime limited warranty typical 
Solid PVC (fooring) 
• Isotropic 
• Heavier and less fexible that wood 
• Minimal thermal movement 
• Does not absorb water 
• Strength to span typical foor-framing spacing 
• Impact-resistance greater than wood 
• Class A fame spread 
• No insect susceptibility 
• Good paint adhesion, but also available prefnished 
• 20-year warranty typical 
23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
Cellular Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) 
MATERIAL: Varying amounts of calcium carbonate 
and a foaming agent are added to melted PVC before 
passing through an injection die and then a calibrator 
to produce the shape and size of the fnished product. 
Cellular PVC is produced as sheets, boards, and mold-
ings. Differences in the specifcs of the equipment and 
the rate of cooling create two varieties of product, with 
distinct properties. One is known as free-foam, having a 
fairly consistent structure throughout its section, and the 
other is identifed as Celuka, having a skin that is denser 
than its core. This primarily affects the ease with which 
the product can be milled and shaped. The material is 
white and needs no applied fnish. When produced for 
decking the material has a colored and textured wear 
layer over the PVC core. 
PROPERTIES 
• Isotropic 
• Lighter and more fexible than wood 
• Less strong than wood (in tension and shear), but can 
span typical foor- framing spacing as decking 
• More impact-resistance than wood 
• Negligible water absorption; no moisture-driven 
movement, unlike wood 
• Subject to thermal expansion and contraction 
signifcantly greater than wood, though the thermal 
movement is less for the same dimension than the 
cross-grain moisture-driven movement of wood 
• For longer pieces, thermal movement requires 
manufacturer’s specifcations to be followed for 
attachment, and inclusion of expansion joints when 
installed at low temperature (joints should be glued) 
• Class A fame spread 
• Resists insect damage 
• Machinable with woodworking tools, though cut 
edges may need additional surface prep for fnish 
• Good paint adhesion; if painted, high light 
refectance (HLV) is recommended to minimize heat 
driven expansion 
• 25–30-year limited warranty, depending on 
manufacturer 
Figure 24. Cellular PVC when painted can be used to replace  
deteriorated wood features. This beadboard set in a wood frame  
was not historically designed to shed water efectively and had  
deteriorated. Cellular PVC was able to match the appearance of the  
wood details, while its properties were well matched to the shady  
location, painted fnish, and limited size and confguration within  
the overall assembly; thus, it should provide a long-lasting solution  
for this application. Photo: Jennifer Balson Alvarez, NPS. 
Acknowledgements 
John Sandor, Architectural Historian, David Trayte, Historical Architect, and Amy Elizabeth Uebel, Architectural Historian, 
Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, revised Preservation Brief 16: The Use of Substitute Materials on Historic 
Building Exteriors, originally written by Sharon C. Park, FAIA, FAPT, and published in 1988. The revised Brief contains expanded 
and updated information as well as new color photographs describing the general issues and application of substitute 
materials on historic buildings. 
The authors wish to thank the following: Peyton Hall, FAIA, Principal Architect Emeritus, Historic Resources Group, Mary 
Jablonski, President, Jablonski Building Conservation, Inc., Thomas Jester, FAIA, FAPT, LEED AP, Principal, Quinn Evans, Sharon 
Park, FAIA, FAPT, Associate Director Emerita, Smithsonian Institution, Debra Slaton, Principal, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, 
Inc., for their guidance and review of this revision; and to Brian Goeken, Chief of Technical Preservation Services, National Park 
Service, and Jo Ellen Hensley, Elizabeth Tune, and Jennifer Oeschger, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, 
for their help in the editing of the publication. Illustrations not specifcally credited are f rom National Park Service fles. Front 
cover image: Installation of a new roof feature on a ca.1895 commercial building. The dome was constructed of fber-reinforced 
polymer to replicate the missing original feature in Aurora, Illinois, 2023. Photo: Kelsey Cozens/JH Real Estate Partners LLC. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs 
the Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. This publication is 
available from the Technical Preservation Services website at http://www.nps.gov/tps/ or hard copies may be purchased from 
the Government Printing Offces at the U.S. Government Bookstore a t https://bookstore.gpo.gov/. Comments about this 
publication should be addressed to Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Mail Stop 7243, 
Washington, DC 20240, or by email to NPS_TPS@nps.gov. 
This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and 
the National Park Service are appreciated. The photographs used in this publication may not be used to illustrate other 
publications without permission of the owners. 
October 2023 
24 