U.S. Departmen t of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resou rces 
Heritage Preservation Services 
30 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
The Preservation and Repair of Historic 
Clay Tile Roofs 
Anne E. Grimmer and Paul K. Williams 
Clay tiles are one of the most distinctive and decorative 
historic roofing materials because of their great variety of 
sha pes , colors, profile s, pattern s, and textures. Traditionally, 
clay tiles were formed by hand , and later by machine 
extrusio n of natural clay, textur ed or g lazed with color, 
and fired in high -temperature kilns. The unique visual 
qualities of a clay tile roof often make it a prominent 
SOUTH ELEVATION v,. 
feature in defining the overall c haracter of a historic 
building (Fig. 1). T he s ignificance a nd inherently fragile 
nature of histor ic tile roofs dictate that spec ial care a nd 
precaution be take n to preserve and repair them . 
Clay tile has one of the longest life expec tan cies among 
historic roofing materials-generally about 100 years, 
Figure 1. Clay tiles used as roof covering and as vertical cladding on the third story and gable ends are important in _defining the historic character of the 
Alfred W McCune Mans10n m Salt Lake City. Designed by the architect S.C. Dallas, and completed m 1901, this bnck and brownstone structure is a tiled 
variation of the Shingle style. Drawing: Clay Fraser, HABS Collection. 
1 

2 
and often several hundred. Yet, a regularly scheduled 
maintenance program is necessary to prolong the life of 
any roofing system. A complete internal and external 
inspection of the roof structure and the roof covering is 
recommended to determine condition , potential causes of 
failure, or source of leaks, and will help in developing a 
program for the preservation and repair of the tile roof. 
Before initiating any repair work on historic clay tile roofs, 
it is important to identify those qualities important in 
contributing to the historic significance and character of 
the building . 
This Brief will review the history of clay roofing tiles and 
will include a description of the many types and shapes 
of historic tiles , as well as their different methods of 
attachment. It will conclude with general guidance for the 
historic property owner or building manager on how to 
plan and carry out a project involving the repair and 
selected replacement of historic clay roofing tiles . Repair of 
historic clay tile roofs is not a job for amateurs; it should 
be undertaken only by professional roofers experienced in 
working with clay tile roofs. 
Historical Background 
The origin of clay roofing tile can be traced independently 
to two different parts of the world: China , during the 
Neolithic Age, beginning around 10,000 B.C.; and the 
Middle East, a short time later. From these regions , the 
use of clay tile spread throughout Asia and Europe. Not 
only the ancient Egyptians and Babylonians, but also the 
Greeks and Romans roofed their buildings with clay tiles, 
and adaptations of their practice continue in Europe to the 
present. European settlers brought this roofing tradition to 
America where it was established in many places by the 
17th century. 
Archeologists have recovered specimens of clay roofing 
tiles from the 1585 settlement of Roanoke Island in North 
Carolina. Clay tile was also used in the early English 
settlemen ts in Jamestown, Virginia, and nearby St. Mary's 
in Maryland. Clay roofing tiles were also used in the 
Spanish settlement of St. Augustine in Florida, and by 
both the French and Spanish in New Orleans. 
Fig. 2. Sunnyside, Washington Irvi11g's house i11 Tarrytown, New York, 
dates to about 1656. Although extensively remodeled during the years 
1836-1849, the stepped gables and tiled roof still reflect the heritage of its 
original Dutch builders. Photo: Jack E. Boucher, HABS Collection. 
Dutch settlers on the east coast first imported clay tiles 
from Holland. By 1650, they had established their own 
full-scale production of clay tiles in the upper Hudson 
River Valley, shipping tiles south to New Amsterdam 
(Fig. 2). Several tile manufacturing operations were in 
business around the time of the American Revolution , 
offering both colored and glazed tile and unglazed natural 
terra-cotta tile in the New York City area, and in neighboring 
New Jersey. A 1774 New York newspaper adver tised the 
availability of locally produced, glazed and unglazed 
pantiles for sale that were guaranteed to "stand any 
weather." On the west coast clay tile was first manufactured 
in wooden molds in 1780 at Mission San Antonio de 
Padua in California by Indian neophytes under the 
direction of Spanish missionaries (Fig. 3). 
By far the most significant factor in popularizing clay 
roofing tiles during the Colonial period in America was 
the concern with fire. Devastating fires in London, 1666, 
and Boston in 1679, prompted the establishment of 
building and fire codes in New York and Boston. These 
fire codes, which remained in effect for almost two 
centuries, encouraged the use of tile for roofs, especially 
Fig. 3. Clay tiles were first produced on the west coast in 1780 at Mission San Antonio de Padua in Monterey County, California. The present church 
shown here dates from 1810. Photo: Gene Falk. 

2 1 2 3 4 5 6 
tt llllll 
Diamond Gothic Round Round New- York Washing- Square 
Corner End Cut ton Cut End 
Fig. 4. Many mid-and late-19th century buildings had roofs with 
uniquely shaped tiles such as fishscale, or another one of the tile shapes 
that Charles Thomas Davis described as "t he six forms of roofing tiles 
in most common use in this country," and illustrated in his 1884 book 
A Practical Treatise on the Manufactur e of Bricks, Tiles, 
Terra-Cotta, Etc. 
in urban areas , because of its fireproof qualities . Clay 
roofing tile was also preferred because of it s durability , 
ease of maintenance , and lack of thermal condu ctivity. 
Although more efficient production methods had lowered 
the cost of clay tile, its use began to decline in much of the 
northeastern United States during the second quarter of 
the 19th century . In most areas outside cit y-de signated 
fire districts, wood shingles were used widely; they were 
more affordable and much lighter, and required less heavy 
and less expensive roof framing . In addition, new fire­
resistant materials were becoming available that could 
be used for roofing , including slate , and metals such as 
copper, iron, tinplate , zinc, and galvanized iron . Many of 
the metal roofing materials could be installed at a fraction 
of the cost and weight of clay tile. Even the appearance of 
clay tile was no longer fashionable , and by the 1830s clay 
roofing tiles had slipped temporarily out of popularity in 
man y parts of the country. 
Revival Sryles Renew Interest in 
Clay Roofmg Tiles 
By the mid-19th century, the introduction of the Italianate 
Villa style of architecture in the United States prompted a 
new interest in clay tiles for roofing . This had the effect of 
revitalizing the clay tile manufacturing industr y, and by 
the 1870s, new factories were in business, including large 
operations in Akron , Ohio , and Baltimore , Maryland. 
Clay tiles were promoted by the Centennial Exhibition in 
Philadelphia in 1876, which featured several prominent 
buildings with tile roofs, including a pavilion for the state 
of New Jersey roofed with clay tiles of local manufacture . 
Tile-making machines were first patented in the 1870s , and 
although much roofing tile continued to be made by hand , 
by the 1880s more and more factories were beginning 
to use machines (Fig . 4). The development of the 
Romanesque Revival style of architecture in the 1890s 
further strengthened the role of clay roofing tiles as an 
American building material (Fig. 5) . 
Alternative substitutes for clay tiles were also needed to 
meet this new demand . By about 1855, sheet metal roofs 
designed to replicate the patterns of clay tile were being 
produced. Usually painted a natural terracotta color to 
emulate real clay tile, these sheet metal roofs became 
popular because they were cheaper and lighter, and easier 
to install than clay tile roofs. 
Clay roofing tiles fell out of fashion again for a short time 
at the end of the 19th century, but once more gained 
acceptance in the 20th century , due primarily to the 
popularity of the Romanti c Revival architectural styles, 
Figure 5. (a) Clay tile was a popular roofing material during the 
Romanesque Revival period, not only for residential structures including 
these rowhouses in the Dupont Circle Historic District in Washington, 
D.C., and designed and built /Jy Thomas F. Schneider between 
1889-1892, but also for large-scale public buildings such as (b) the Old 
Federal Courts Building (1894-1901) in St. Paul, Minnesota, designed 
/Jy Willough/Jy]. Edbrooke. Photo: (a) Anne Grimmer, and (b) 
Winsor/Faricy Architects. 
including Mission , Spanish, Mediterranean, Georgian and 
Renaissance Revival in which clay tile roofs featured 
prominently. With the availability of machines capable of 
extruding clay in a variety of forms in large quantities, clay 
tiles became more readily available across the nation. More 
regional manufacturing plants were established in areas 
with large natural deposits of clay, including Alfred, New 
York; New Lexington, Ohio; Lincoln, California; and 
Atlanta, Georgia; as well as Indiana, Illinois and Kansas. 
The popularity of clay tile roofing, and look-alike substitute 
roofing materials, continues in the 20th century, especially 
in areas of the South and West-most notably Florida and 
California-where Mediterranean and Spanish-influenced 
styles of architecture still predominate (Fig. 6). 
3 

4 
Fig. 6. Like many other house of this period in Florida, the roof of the Chester C. Bolton House in Pa/111 Beach features tiles imported from Cuba. These 
tiles, with their richly varied earth colors, were often laid in thick cement mortar that was intended lo give a "rustic" appearance. The residence, which 
includes the main house (1918-1919) designed by James A. Garfield, and an addition built in 1929 designed bi; Prentice Sanger, has been described as an 
English manor house with Spanish details. Photo: Jack E. Boucher, HABS Collectio11. 
Early Tiles 
During the 17th and 18th centuries the most common 
type of clay roofing tiles used in America were flat and 
rectangular. The y measured approximately 10 • x 6" x 
1/2" (25cm x 15cm x 1.25cm), and had two nail or peg 
holes at one end through which they were anchored t o 
the roofing laths . Sometimes a strip of mortar was placed 
between the overlapping rows of tile to prevent the tiles 
from lifting in high wind s. In addition to flat tiles , 
interlocking S-shaped pantiles were also used in th e 18th 
century. These were formed by molding clay over tapered 
sections of logs, and were generally quite large . Alternatel y 
termed pan , crooked , or Flemish tiles, and measuring 
approximately 14 1 /2" x 9 1/2 " (37cm x 24cm), these 
interlocking tiles were hung on roofing lath by means of a 
ridge or l ug located on the upper part of the underside of 
each tile . Both p lain (flat) tile and pantile (S -shaped or 
curved) roofs were capped at the ridge with semicircular 
ridge tiles. Clay roofing tiles on buildings in mid -18th 
century Moravian sett lements in Pennsylvania closely 
resemb led those used in Germany at the time. These tile s 
were about 14" - 15" long x 6"-7 " wide (36cm-38cm x 
15cm-18cm) with a curved butt , and with vertical groove s 
to he lp drainage. They were also designed with a lug or 
nib on the back so that the tiles could hang on lath 
without nails or pegs . 
The accurate dating of early roofing tiles is difficult and 
often impossib le. Fragments of tile found at archeological 
sites may indicate the existence of clay tile roofs , but the 
same t ype of tile was also sometimes used for other 
purpo ses s uch a s paving, and in bake oven s. To further 
complicate dating , since clay tile frequentl y outlasted 
man y of th e earliest , less permanent structures , it wa s 
often reu sed on later building s. 
Clay Tile Substi tutes 
In addition to sheet metal "tile " roofs introduced in the 
middle of the 19th centur y, concrete roofing tile was 
developed a s another substitute for clay tile in the latter 
part of the 19th century (Fig . 7). It became quite popular 
by the beginning of the 20th century . Concrete tile is 
composed of a dense mixture of portland cement blended 
with aggregates , including sand , and pigment , and extruded 
from high -pressure machines . Although it tends to lack 
the col or permanence and the subtle color variations 
inherent in natural clay tile , concrete tile continues to be a 
popular roofing material today because it reproduces the 
gener al look of clay tile, if not always the exact profile or 
proportion s of historic clay tile , at a somewhat lower cost 
and weight . Another modern , slightly cheaper and light er 
substitute for cla y tile more recently developed consists of 
a mixture of mineral fiber and cement with pigments 
added to supply color. While these aggregate tiles also 
replicate the shape and appearance of clay roofing tiles , 
the y have man y of the same dissimilarities to clay tiles 
that ar e found in concrete tiles. Thus , like concrete tiles , 
they are seld om appropriate substitutes for clay tiles. 

Fig. 7. (a) Metal ''tile" roofs of galva11ized steel closely resemble the clay 
tiles thei; mimic. Often painted to look like terra cot/a, their identity can 
sometimes be revealed by peeling paint or dented "t iles." (b-c) Concrete 
roofi11g tiles are generally thicker tha11 clay tiles, and tend to fade and 
lose their color. Photos: (a-b) Ann e Grimmer, (c) National Park Service 
Files. 
Traditional Tile Shapes and Colors 
There are two types of clay roofing tiles: interlocking and 
overlapping. Interlocking tiles are desi gned in pair s so that 
an extrusion or "lip" on one of th e tiles " hook s" o ver th e 
other tile thereby "locking " or securin g th e two together ; 
th ey are also usually nailed t o the roof stru ctur e. 
Overlapping tiles, which can al so functi on in pair s, 
generall y do not have any sort of "lip" a nd mu st be nailed
in place. There is a wide range of shap es of historic cla y 
roofing tiles, and many, som etimes with sli ght variati ons, 
are still produced today. There are many variations , and 
the country of origin of some of them may be revealed in 
their names , but there are essentially only two kind s of 
shapes: pantiles and flat tiles. Both pantile s and flat tiles 
may be either interlocking or overlapping (Figs . 8-9). 
Pantiles. The shape most commonly associated with 
historic clay roofing tiles is probably that of convex or 
rounded tiles , often grouped together generically as "pan 
tiles" or "pantiles. " These include Spanish tiles-sometimes 
called "S " tiles, or the similarly shaped Mission tiles, also 
known as Barrel or Barrel Mission tiles , straight or 
tapered , as well as Roman tiles , and their Greek variation . 
Flat Tiles. Flat, shingle tiles are another type of historic 
clay roofing tiles. Flat tiles can be completely plain and 
flat, and , like roofing slates, overlap one another, attached 
with nails to the roof sheathing. Or they may interlock at 
the top and on one side. Although the "interlock" holds 
them together , most interlocking shingle tiles also have 
one or more holes, usually near the top, for nailing to the 
roof sheathing. Flat tiles are mostly variations of English 
or Shingle tiles, and include English Shingle , Closed 
Shingle, Flat, Shingle or Slab Shingle, as well as French 
tiles which have a slightly higher and more contoured 
profile . 
Any of the standard tile shapes may be known by a 
different name in another region of the country, or in 
different parts of the world . For example, what are known 
as Spanish or "S " tiles in the United States, may be called 
Single Roman tiles in England . Sometimes Spanish and 
Mission tiles are equated despite the fact that the former 
are usually 1-piece interlocking tiles and the latter are 
single ½ cylinders that overlap . Since missions and the 
Mission style are associated with the Americas, Mission 
tiles in the United States are more commonly referred to 
as Spanish tiles in England and Europe. In a similar vein, 
Spanish or "S " tiles, or Barrel tiles, might seem to be more 
typical of some tiles used in France than what are 
marketed as French tiles by American manufacturers. 
Today some tile manufacturers have given their own 
trademark name to historic tile shapes . Other companies 
market uniquely shaped "S" tiles that are more in the 
shape of a true , but rather low profile "s" without the 
customary flat portion of traditional American "S" tiles . 
Field and Specialty Tile. The tiles that cover the majority 
of the flat surface of the roof are called field tile. Some roof 
shapes, particularly conical towers or turrets, require tiles 
of graduated sizes , and some shapes or patterns of field 
tile also require specially shaped finish tiles to complete 
the roof covering package . Other uniquely-shaped tiles 
were made to fit odd-shaped spaces and places including 
dormers and valleys , roof hips, rakes , ridges and corners . 
There are also finish tiles that fulfill certain needs, such as 
eave closures or clay plugs called 'birdstops." These are 
intended to keep out snow and rain , and birds from 
nesting in the voids under the bottom row of curved tiles . 
Different patterns and designs can also be created by 
combining, or mixing and matching flat tiles with 
dimensional tiles. 
Tile Colors. A terra cotta red is the color most commonly 
associated with historic clay roofing tiles. The reddish 
color comes from clay with a large percentage of iron 
oxide, and there are many variations of this natural color 
to be found in tiles ranging from deep reddish browns to 
softer and paler oranges and pinks. Lighter buff and beige 
colors , as well as black , also appear on traditional tile-
5 

Traditional Clay Roofing Tile Shapes and Methods of Attachment 
Pantiles 
Description Average Size Type 
Spanish or "S" tiles are 1-piece interlocking tiles with both a convex 
and a flat, or almost flat, horizontal surface. A raised lip that projects 
from the edge of the flat portion is designed to interlock with the 
edge of the convex , barrel end of the adjacent tile. Spanish tiles are 
usually laid directly on the wood sheathing, or on roofing felt, and 
fastened by two nails through holes at the top of the tiles, or 
sometimes mortared in place. Spanish tiles give a roof surface a fairly
low and undulating profile. 
Tapered or Straight Mission, Barrel, Barrel Mission, or Pan and 
Cover tile roofs are created with both a concave and a convex 1/, 
cylinder-shaped tile. The concave (pan) tiles are laid first in vertical 
rows, and nailed directly to the roof sheathing. The convex (cover) 
tiles are laid to overlap and cover the vertica l spaces, or joints , that 
separate the vertical rows of the concave tiles . The convex tiles may 
be fastened to the roof sheathing with very long nails , hooks or 
hangers , or more commonly laid over, and nailed to vertical wood 
battens underneath . Mission tile roofs hav e a high er profile than 
Spanish or Roman 
tile roofs . 
14"- 18" 
up to 
22"-24" long 
Each half cylinder 
about 3" high x 
about 8" in diameter 
Exposure: 11 "- 15" 
Pantile 
Roman, 
Pan and Roll, 
or 
Pan and Cover 
Interlockin g 
and 
Overlapping 
Roman , or Pan and Roll, roofs consist of a two-part tile system 
which includes a convex barrel cover tile with a rather low profile 
placed over a flat tile laid directly on the roof sheathing. Like 
Mission tiles, the convex tiles may be nailed either to battens laid 
vertically on the roof or directly onto the roof sheathing. Both th e 
convex cover tile and the flat tile may also have nibs at the t op by 
which they interlock with tiles laid in rows above them . Roman tiles 
may also be cemen ted in place. A Roman tile roof appears as a 
series of fairly wide or broad, flat "valleys" alternating with rather 
low ridges or hills, much like a Spanish tile roof but with wider 
"flat" sec tion s. 
12 3/4" long 
Width from center of 
1 cover tile to center 
of next including 
width of 1 flat tile 
is 12" 
Exposure: 10 " 
Same size 
and 
dimension s 
as 
Roman tile s 
Greek 
Interl ocking 
and 
Overlapping 
Greek tiles are essentially a varia tion of Roman tiles, but the convex 
tiles that cover the vertical joints between the rows of "pan" til es are 
shaped like a gable end or inverted "V". Greek tiles are attached to 
the roof in the same manner as Roman tiles . 
13 1/4" long x 
9 3/4" wide 
Exposure: 10 l/4" 
Spanish 
or 
''S'' 
Interlocking 
6 
English Shingle 
or 
Closed Shingle 
Interlocking 
English Flat 
or 
Slab Shingle 
Overlapping 
French 
Interlocking 
Flat Tiles 
English Shingle: 
13 1/4" long x 
8 3/4" wide 
Exposure: 10 l i8" 
long x 7 3/4" wide 
Closed Shingle: 
11" long x 
8 3/4" wide 
Exposure: 8 " x 8" 
12" x 15" long 
x 6" x 7" wide, 
or 12" long 
x 9"-10" wide 
Exposure varies 
according to size of the 
tile, but is generally 
slightly less than ½ 
length of the tile 
161/4" long x 9" wide 
Exposure: 9" 
English or Shingle tiles are generally plain and smooth- surfaced, 
but some are intended to imitate slate or wood shingles and are 
textured accordingly. The underside of the se tiles can be either flat 
and smooth , or may have a corrugated appearance with 4-5 
toothlike projections ; all are attached with nails . 
French tiles feature two deep vertical grooves on the surface that 
facilitate drainage , and create interesting light and shadow contrasts. 
A vertical lug projects from th e top of these tiles that interlocks with 
the bottom of the tile laid over it. French tile s also have two nail 
holes at the top for nailing , and are often given a dab of cement for 
added security. 
Fig. 8. Traditional Clay Roofing Tile Shapes and Methods of Atlach111ent. Orawi11g: Karin Murr Link. 
Average Size
Description
English or Shingle tiles are generally plain and smooth-surfaced, but some are intended to imitate slate or wood shingles and are textured accordingly. The underside of 
these tiles can be either flat and smooth, or may have a corrugated appearance with 4 to 5 tooth-like projection; all are attached with nails.
Type

Spanish or "S" 
Straight Mission, 
Barrel, 
Barrel Mission 
or 
Pan and Cover 
Roman 
English Shingle or 
Closed 
Shingle 
Clay Roofing Tile Installation Patterns 
Greek 
English Flat or Slab Shingle 
I I 
Fig. 9. Clay Roofing Tile Installation Patterns. Drawing: Karin Murr Link. 
7 

roofed buildings . Buff-colored tiles were made from nearly 
pure fire clay, and pouring manganese dissolved in water 
over the tile before firing resulted in smoke brown or black 
glazed tiles . Toward the end of the 19th century the 
popularity of colored glazes for roofing tiles increased, 
and their use and the range of colors continues to expand 
today. Most historic glazed roofing tiles are in fairly 
natural hues that range from reds and browns and buffs, 
to blacks and purples, blues (often created with smalt, 
or powdered blue glass), and a wide variety of greens 
(usually created with copper slag). There could be a 
considerable range in the colors of tiles that were baked 
over a wood fire because the temperature within the kiln 
was so uneven ; tiles closest to the fire cooked all the way 
through and turned a darker red, while tiles farthest from 
the flames were likely to be smoke-stained, and lighter 
orange in color. 
How Tiles are Attached 
The method used to attach clay roofing tiles varies 
according to the shape, size and style of the particular tile . 
For the most part, traditional and modern methods of 
installing clay roofing tiles are very similar, except that 
modern practice always includes the use of wood 
sheathing and roofing felt. But most of the earliest clay 
roofing tiles were laid without benefit of wood sheathing 
and hung directly on roofing laths and battens that were 
nailed to the roof rafters; this practice continued up into 
the mid-19th century in some regions. While this method 
of attachment allowed for plenty of ventilation, and made 
it easy to find leaks and make repairs, it also meant that 
the overall watertightness of the roof depended entirely 
on the tiles themselve s. 
8 
Gradually, the practice evolved of nailing roofing tiles 
directly onto continuous wood sheathing, or hanging 
them from "nibs " on horizontal lath that was attached to 
roof rafters or sheathing. Some kinds of tile, especially the 
later Mission or Barrel tiles were laid over vertical strips or 
battens nailed to the sheathing, or the tiles were fastened 
to wood purlins with copper wire . 
Partly because they do not always fit together very closely, 
some tile shapes, including Spanish, Barrel or Mission as 
well as other types of interlocking tiles, are not themselves 
completely water-repellent when used on very low-pitched 
roofs. These have always required some form of sub-roofing, 
or an additional waterproof underlayer, such as felting, a 
bituminous or a cementitious coating. In some traditional 
English applications, a treatment called "torching," involved 
using a simple kind of mortar most commonly consisting 
of straw, mud , and moss . The tapered Mission tiles of the 
old Spanish missions in California were also laid in a bed 
of mud mortar mixed with grass or straw which was their 
only means of attachment to the very low-pitched reed or 
twig sheathing (latia) that supported the tiles (Fig. 10). 
More recent and contemporary roofing practices require 
that the tiles be laid on solid 1" (2.5cm) wood sheathing 
felted with coated base sheets of at least 30 lbs., or built ­
up membranes or single-ply roof membranes . This 
su bstantially increases the watertightness of the roof by 
adding a second layer of waterproofing. Horizontal and 
vertical chalk lines are drawn to serve as a guide in laying 
Fig. 10. The underside of this roof on the restored barracks at Santa 
Cruz Mission reveals the twig sheathing or latia to which '.he clay tiles 
were traditionally attached with mud mortar. Photo: Gil Sanchez, FAIA. 
the tile and to indicate its patterning. Most tiles are 
designed with one or two holes so they can be attached by 
copper nails or hangers, and /or with projecting nibs, to 
interlock or hang on battens or lath attached to the base 
sheathing. 
Before laying the tiles, the copper or lead gutters , 
flashings and valleys must be installed, preferably using at 
least #26 gauge (20-24 ounce) corrosion-resistant metal 
extending a minimum of 12" (30.5cm) under the tile from 
the edge, or in accordance with the manufacturer's 
specifications. The long life and expected durability of clay 
tiles require that, as with the roofing nails, only the best 
quality metal be selected for the flashing and guttering . 
"Field tile" is usually ordered by the number of "squares" -
that is, a flat section 10' x 10' (25cm x 25cm)-needed to 
cover a roof section. The tile company or roofing contractor 
should calculate the number of tiles needed according to 
the type of roof, and based on architect's drawings to 
ensure accuracy. This should include specialty ridge and 
eave tiles, decorative trim, partial "squares", approximately 
10-20 per cent allowance for breakage, and extra tiles to 
store for repairing incidental damage later on. Once at 
the site, the tile is evenly distributed in piles on the roof , 
within easy reach for the roofers. 
The tiles are laid beginning with the first course at the 
lower edge of the roof at the eaves . The method by which 
roofing tiles are laid and attached varies , depending on 
the type and design of the tiles and roof shape, as well as 
on regional practice and local weather conditions. A raised 
fascia, a cant strip, a double or triple layer of tiles, or 
special "birdstop" tiles for under the eaves, may be used 
to raise the first row of tiles to the requisite height and 
angle necessary for the best functioning of the roof 
(Fig. 11). The tile is positioned to overhang the previously 
installed gutter system by at least 1 1/2" (4cm) to ensure 
that rainwater discharges into the central portion of the 
gutter. Once this first course is carefully fitted and 
examined from the ground level for straightness and color 
nuances, and adjusted accordingly, successive courses are 
lapped over the ones below as the roofer works diagonally 
up the roof toward the ridge. Positioning and laying tiles 
in a lO'x 10 ' (25cm x 25cm) square may take on the 
average of 16½ man hours. 

FACE OF~ IC~ 
~•F"e: LT 
CAN T ~ Tl<:IP 
\',o--------l- TW l:e=>T~D I~ • 
Gl!TT~J:: 5l"l'<AP0 
1 z•.c,;o .c . 
' lf< ·V Eft. lP'Y ~CLE 
ex.Jll.T· IN 
COPP!!:!'; G UTTER 
N!!:W W::00 MOI.D i>GO 
N. L. WOtX) "'"M!:>el'.~ "T 
l!~YE!!I , ~P IT 1 F;..c i~ 
10 OE. Ato.\NTe.0. 
Fig. 11. Both a cant strip and a double layer of tiles are used here to raise 
the first row of tiles to ensure proper roof drainage. This drawing was 
prepared for the restoration of the 1911-1912 fariaica Pond Boathouse, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, which is part of the original Boston Park 
system designed by Frederick Law Olmsted in the late-19th century. 
Drawing: Richard White, Architect/Planner. 
Flat Tiles 
Most flat clay tiles have one or two holes located at the 
top, or on a "nib" or "lug " that projects vertically either 
from the face or the underside of the tile s, for nailing the 
tile to the sheathing , battens , or furring strips beneath . As 
successive rows of tile are installed these holes will be 
covered by the next course of tiles above. Traditionally , 
clay tiles on the oldest tile roofs were hung on roofing 
laths with oak wooden pegs . As these wood pegs rotted , 
they were commonly replaced with nails. Toda y, copper 
nails, 13/4" (4.5cm) slaters ' nails, are preferred for 
attaching the tiles because they are the longest lasting , 
although other corrosion-resistant nails can also be used . 
Less durable nails reduce the longevit y of a clay tile roof 
which depends on the fastening agents and the other 
roofing components , as much as on the tiles themselves . 
Clay roofing tiles, like roofing slate s, ar e intended to hang 
on the nails , and nailheads should alway s be left to 
protrude slightly above the surface of th e tile. Nails 
should not be driven too deepl y into th e furr ing strip s 
because too much pressure on the tile can cause it to 
break during freeze /thaw cycle s, or when someone wal ks 
on th e roof . 
Plain flat tiles, like roofing slates , are attached to the 
roof sheathing only with nails . They are laid in a pattern 
overlapping one another in order to provide the degree of 
impermeability necessary for the roof covering . Because 
plain flat tiles overlap in most cases almost a s much of on e 
half of the t ile, this type of tile roof covering results in a 
conside rably heavier roof than does an interlocking tile 
roof which does not require that the tiles overlap to such 
an extent . Interlocking flat tiles form a single la yer, and an 
unbroken roof covering . Although mo st interlocking tiles 
on all but the steepest roofs can technically be expected to 
remain in place because they hang on protruding nibs 
from the roofing laths or battens , in contemporar y roofing 
practices they are often likely to be nailed for added 
securit y. In most case s it is usuall y a good idea to nail at 
least every other tile ( Fig. 12). 
Pantiles 
With Mission or Barrel tiles, where one half-cylinder 
overlaps another inverted half-cylinder to form a cover 
and pan (cap and trough) arrangement, the fastening is 
more complicated . While the pantiles that rest directly on 
the sheathing are simply nailed in place, there are two 
ways of attaching the cover tiles that rest on the pantiles. 
They can be secured by a copper wire nailed to the 
sheathing or tied to vertical copper strips running behind 
the tiles (Fig. 13). Another method requires the installation 
of vertical battens or nailing strips on the roof to which 
the cover tiles are nailed, or the use of tile nails or hooks, 
which are hooked to the pantile below and secured with 
twisted copper wire. 
Sometimes cement mortar , or another underlayer such 
as grass, moss or straw, or hair-reinforced mortar was 
added under the tiles. Before the use of felting this was a 
particularly common practice on some of the plain flat tile 
or Spanish tile roofs with low rises that were themselves 
not especially waterproof . Mortar also helped to keep 
driving rain from getting under the pantiles , and it is still 
customary in contemporary roofing to add a dab of 
cement mortar to help secure them (Fig . 14). 
Ridge or Hip Tiles 
At the roof ridge or hip, clay tile is usually attached to a 
raised stringer with nails and a small amount of mortar , 
elastic cement or mastic. The joint is sealed with a flexible 
flashing such as copper or lead . Ridge tiles are often 
somewhat larger and more decorative than the field tile 
utilized on the broad sections of the roof . 
Roof Pitch and Weather are Factors in Tile 
Attachment 
The means by which clay tile is attached to the sheathing 
is also partly determined by the roof pitch . Generally the 
fastening requirements increase with an increase of roof pitch. 
For low-pitched rises of 4 "- 6" (10cm-15cm) in a 12" 
(30.5cm) run the weight of the tiles is usually sufficient 
to hold them in place on the lath by the ridge or "lug" on 
the underside of the tile, with only the perimeter tiles 
requiring metal clips to secure them to the sheathing. But 
the tiles on even these low-pitched roofs are usually 
nailed for added security , and additional fastening 
measures are necessary on roofs with a higher pitch, or 
in areas subject to high winds or earthquakes. For steeper 
pitched roofs , such as towers , 7" -11 " (18cm-28cm), or 
12" -15 " (30.Scm-38cm) in a 12" (30.5cm) run the tiles are 
nailed and a band of perimeter tiles three to four tiles 
thick is secured with clips. For roof rises over 16" (41cm) in 
a 12" (30.5cm) run, and in areas prone to earthquakes or 
hurricanes , every tile may be secured with both a nail and 
a copper or non-corrosive metal clip, and often also with a 
dab of roofing mastic or mortar. 
The installation of clay roofing tiles in areas with 
significant amounts of snowfall-over 24" (61cm) per 
year-also varies somewhat 
from the normal guidelines. 
Larger battens may be necessary, as well as additional 
clipping or tying of the tile to securely attach it to the 
sheathing . The roof structure itself may also need added 
bracing, as well as the insertion of small snow clips or 
snow birds that protrude above the surface of the tile to 
prevent snow and ice from sliding off the roof and 
damaging th e tile. 
9 

b 
10 
Figure 12. When constructed in Frankfort, Kentucky, in 1900, the 
Colonial Revival-style Berry Hill Mansion, and its 1912 Music Room 
addition were both roofed with "Imperial" tiles manufactured tJy 
Ludowici-Celadon (a). In 1992 the entire roof was replaced because of 
deterioration and surface spa/ling of many of the tiles (b). It was not 
possible to reproduce the original tiles due to budget limitations, thus 
Ludowici-Celadon's stock "Classic Interlocking" Shingle tiles were 
selected as replacements which could provide a close, if not exact, match. 
After tearing off and removing the old tiles, 30 lb. roofing felt was laid 
over the existing wood sheathing, new lead gutters and valleys were 
installed, and 90 lb. roll roofing was laid, on which the new tiles were 
laid. Although most of the field tiles were simply attached tJy 2 nails to 
the substrate (c), many of the tiles that had to be cut to fit hips, valleys 
and dormers were left with only one hole, and had to be wired and then 
nailed in place (d-e). The exact color and glaze of the original tiles also 
could not be duplicated because the coloring material is no longer 
available; however, the new hipped roof terminus for the Music Room roof 
was custom-made and the replacement field tiles are very similar to the 
originals (f). The original ridge tiles were designed to "nest" and fit 
perfectly over the field tiles beneath them whereas the new ridge tiles 
simply overlap one another, but this is barely perceptible when viewed 
from the ground. Photos: Edwin C. Krebs, AJA. 

Figure 13 (a-b). These custom-made tapered mission tiles are being attached to the roof using a special system. This consists of twisted 10-gauge brass or 
copper wires that run up the roof slope through a new treated roof ridge, and down the other side of the roof. _These twisted wires are placed about 12" 
(30.5cm) apart, and diamond shapes are twisted into them every 6" (15cm). The vert1ca! wires are secured_ with 10-gauge_copper or brass anchors 
approximately even; 4' (1.22111) on center depending on the roof slope. Although !hes~ tiles would have originally been laid m mud mortar, this method of 
attachment is particularly successful in seismic areas. The random placement of the tiles accurately replicates the pattern trad1t10nally used on the early 
missions. Photos: Gil Sanchez, FAIA. 
Preservation and Repair 
Identifying Common Problems and Failures 
While clay roofing tiles themselves are most likely to 
deteriorate because of frost damage, a clay tile roof system 
most commonly fails due to the breakdown of the 
fastening system. As the wooden pegs that fastened the 
early tiles to hand-riven battens rotted, they were often 
replaced with iron nails which are themselves easily 
corroded by tannic acid from oak battens or sheathing. 
The deterioration of metal flashing , valleys, and gutters 
can also lead to the failure of a clay tile roof . 
Another area of potential failure of a historic clay tile 
roof is the support system. Clay tiles are heavy and it is 
important that the roof structure be sound. If gutters and 
downspouts are allowed to fill with debris, water can back 
up and seep under roofing tiles, causing the eventual 
deterioration of roofing battens , the sheathing and 
fastening system, or even the roof's structural members 
(Fig. 15). During freezing weather, ice can build up under 
tiles and cause breakage during the freeze /thaw cycle. 
Thus, as with any type of roof, water and improperl y 
maintained rainwater removal and drainage systems are 
also chief causes for the failure of historic clay tile roofs. 
Clay tiles may be either handcrafted or machine-made; in 
general, roofs installed before the end of the 19th century 
consist of hand-formed tiles, with machine-made tiles 
becoming more dominant as technology improved during 
the 20th century. Clay tile itself , whether made by hand or 
made b y machine, can vary in quality from tile to tile . 
Efflorescence of soluble salts on the surface may indicate 
that a tile has excessive porosity which results from 
underburning during its manufacture . Poor quality porous 
tiles are particularly susceptible to breaking and exterior 
surface spalling during freeze-thaw cycles. By letting in 
moisture , porous tiles can permit the roof battens and roof 
structure to rot . The problem may be compounded by 
waterproof building paper or building felt laid underneath 
which can, in some instances, prevent adequate 
ventilation. 
Clay roofing tiles can also be damaged by roofers walking 
carelessly on an unprotected roof while making repairs, or 
by overhanging tree branches , falling tree limbs, or heavy 
hail. Broken tiles may no longer provide a continuous 
waterproof surface, thereby allowing water to penetrate 
the roofing structure, and may eventually result in its 
deterioration if the broken tiles are not replaced in a 
timely manner . 
Although modern , machine-made clay tiles are more 
uniform in appearance than their hand-made counterparts, 
they also have the potential for failure. Occasionally, entire 
batches of mass-produced tile can be defective. 
Fig. 14. The Spanish or "S" tiles used to re-roof the Mission Revival 
st11le Hoitt Cross Episcopal Church in Sanford, Florida, have corrugated 
projectio1·1s or "teeth" on the underside of the flat portion of each tile 
which adhere to the cement mortar holding them to the roof sheathing. 
Photo: Walter S. Marder, AJA. 
11 

Figure 15. (a) A regular cleaning schedule would have eliminated the 
plant growth and leaf build-up in this gutter, which, if not removed, 
will result zn serious damage to roof sheathing and structure (b). 
Photos: (a) Paul K. Williams, and (b) Walter S. Marder. AIA. 
Regular Inspection and Maintenance 
Broken or missing tiles, or leaks on the interior of the 
building, are obvious clues that a historic clay tile roof 
needs repair . Even though it may be clear that the roof is 
leaking, finding the source of the leak may not be so easy. 
It may require thorough investigation in the attic , as well 
as going up on the roof and removing tiles selectively in 
the approximate area of the roof leak. The source of the 
leak may not actually be located where it appears to be. 
Water may come in one place and travel along a roofing 
member some distance from the actual leak before 
revealing itself by a water stain, plaster damage, or rotted 
wooden structural members. 
Temporary Protection during Repair 
In some instances temporary protection and stabilization 
may be necessary to prevent further damage or 
deterioration of a historic clay tile roof . Plywood sheets, 
plastic, roll roofing, or roofing felt can provide short-term 
protection until repair or replacement materials can be 
purchased. Another option may be to erect a temporary 
scaffold that is epcased or covered with clear or semi­
transparent polyethylene sheeting over the entire roof. 
This will not only protect the exposed roofing members 
during repair or until repairs can be made, but also lets in 
enough natural light to enable the re-roofing work to take 
place while sheltering workmen from cold or wet weather. 
12 
General Repair Guidance 
Once the source and cause of a leak has been identified, 
appropriate repairs must be made to structural roofing 
members , wood sheathing, felt or roofing paper if it is 
part of the roofing membrane, or possibly to vertical roof 
battens to which the tiles may be attached. If the problem 
appears limited to gutters and flashing in disrepair, repair 
or replacement will probably require temporary removal of 
some of the adjacent tiles to gain access to them. If the 
roofing tiles are extremely fragile and cannot be walked on 
even with adequate protection (see below), it may also be 
necessary to remove several rows or a larger area of tiles 
and store them for later reinstallation in order to create a 
"path" to reach the area of repair without damaging 
existing tiles. Even if most of the tiles themselves appear 
to be intact but no longer securely attached to the roof 
substrate due to deterioration of the fastening system or 
roofing members, all the tiles should be labeled and 
removed for storage. Regardless of whether the repair 
project involves removal of only a few damaged tiles, or 
if all the tiles must be removed and relaid , historic clay 
roofing tiles are inherently fragile and should be pulled 
up carefully with the use of a slate ripper. The tiles can be 
reattached one-by-one with new corrosion-resistant copper 
nails , copper straps or tabs, "tingles ", or another means 
after the necessary repairs have been made to the roof. 
Replacing Individual Tiles 
The most difficult aspect of replacing a single broken clay 
roof tile is doing so without breaking neighboring tiles . 
While flat shingle tiles can generally be walked on by a 
careful roofer without likelihood of much damage , high 
profile pantiles are very fragile and easily broken. By 
using sheets of plywood, planks, or burlap bags filled 
with sand to distribute weight, the professional roofer can 
move about the roof to fix broken tiles or flashing without 
causing additional damage . Another method involves 
hooking a ladder on the ridge to support and evenly 
distribute the weight of the roofer . 
A broken tile should be carefully removed with a slate 
ripper or hacksaw blade inserted under the tile to cut the 
nail or nails holding it in place. If successive layers of tile 
are already in place covering the nailholes, it will not be 
possible to attach the replacement tile with nails through 
the holes , so an alternative method of attachment will be 
necessary . By nailing a tab of double thickness copper 
stripping on the sheathing below the tile , the new 
replacement tile can be slipped into position and secured 
in place by bending the copper strip up with a double 
thickness of the copper over the tile . A slate hook or 
"tingle" can be used in the same way . This fastening 
system functions in place of nails (Fig . 16). 
When replacing hard -to-match historic tile, and if matching 
clay tile cannot be obtained, it may be possible to relocate 
some of the original tiles to the more prominent locations 
on the roof where the tile is damaged, and insert the new 
replacement tile in secondary or rear locations, or other 
areas where it will not show, such as behind chimney 
stacks, parapets, and dormer windows. Even though 
replacement tile may initially match the original historic 
tile when first installed, it is likely to weather or age to a 
somewhat different color or hue which will become more 
obviou s with time. Thus , care should be taken to insert 
new replacement tile in as inconspicuous a location as 

possible. New, machine-made clay tile or concrete tiles 
should generally not be used to patch roofs of old, hand­
made tile because of obvious differences in appearance. 
Sources for Replacement Tiles 
When restoring or repairing a clay tile roof it is always 
recommended that as many of the original tiles be 
retained and reused as possible. Sometimes, particularly 
when working with "pan and cover" type tile roofs, while 
many of the "cover" tiles may be broken and require 
replacement, it may be possible to reuse all or most of 
the "pan" tiles which are less susceptible to damage than 
the "cover" tiles. But, in most cases, unless matching 
replacements can be obtained , if more than about 30 per 
cent of the roofing tiles are lost, broken, or irreparably 
damaged , it may be necessary to replace all of the historic 
tiles with new matching tiles. When counting the number 
or percentage of missing or broken tiles that need to be 
replaced , it is important to order extra tiles to allow for 
breakage and damage during shipping and on the job 
site. The size of the tiles must be noted, whether they are 
all the same size, the same size but laid with different 
amounts of exposure to compensate for changes in 
perspective, or of graduated sizes according to horizontal 
rows-typica l, for example, on conical or tower roofs 
(Fig. 17). 
Many late-19th and early-20th century tiles are marked on 
the back with the name of the company that made them , 
along with the size and the name of that particular tile 
shape. Some companies that were in business in the 
United States at the turn of the century are still producing 
many of the traditional tile shapes, and may be able to 
supply the necessary replacements. But it is important 
to be aware that in some cases, although the name of a 
particular tile pattern may have remained the same, 
the actual shape, size, thickness and profile may have 
changed slightly so that the new tile does not match 
the historic tile closely enough to permit it to serve as a 
compa tible replacement for missing or broken tiles. While 
such tiles may be acceptable to use on a secondary or less 
prominent elevation, or to use when an entire tile roof 
needs replacement, they would not be suitable to use on 
an area of the roof that is highly visible. 
Figure 16. Attachments for repair and replacement of clay tiles include: 
(a) copper tab, (b) stainless steel or other non-corrosive metal clip, slate 
hook or "tingle,'' and (c) nailing and wire nailing. Drawing: Karin Murr Link. 
Fig. 17. The rhythm and pattern of these tiles which is so important in 
defining the character of this roof was created by laying the tiles with 
different amounts of exposure and using graduated tiles that decrease in 
size as they reach the top of the cone. Photo: National Park Service Files. 
Even if the particular tile is no longer manufactured by a 
company, the original molds may still exist which can be 
used to make new tiles to match the historic tiles if the 
quantity needed is sufficiently large to warrant a custom 
order. Other companies stock and sell salvaged tile, and 
keep a variety of old tiles available which can be identified 
and matched by the number and company imprint on the 
back of the tiles. Still other companies specialize entirely 
in custom-made reproduction of historic clay tiles for a 
specific preservation project. 
Modern clay tiles are even more varied than historic tiles. 
Many shapes and styles are offered in a wide variety of 
colors and glazes. Several manufacturers produce special 
color-blended tiles, as well as tiles of different hues that 
are intended to be carefully mixed when installed. Yet, it is 
important to remember that many of these modem tiles may not 
be appropriate for use on historic clay tile roofs. The place of 
manufacture must also be taken into consideration. For 
instance, tiles made for use in a hot, dry climate may not 
be able to withstand wet weather, drastic temperature 
changes or freeze-thaw cycles. Some of the tile shapes, 
and many of the colors-especially those that are very 
bright and highly glazed-are completely contemporary in 
design, and do not represent traditional American styles, 
and thus, are not suitable for use on historic buildings. 
Repairing a Failed Fastening System 
Clay roofing tiles, as noted before, frequently outlast their 
fastening systems. Wood pegs rot, nails rust, and even 
copper nails that are not adequately driven in can pull out 
of the roof's structural members . Although it is unusual 
that all of the clay tiles on a roof need to be replaced 
unless matching replacements cannot be obtained, it is 
not uncommon for old tile roofs to be stripped of all their 
tiles in order to re-lay the tiles with new fastenings and 
battens. When the fastening system has failed, all the roof 
tiles must be removed and reattached with new corrosion­
resistant fasteners. If possible , all the tiles should be 
numbered and a diagram should be drawn showing the 
location of each tile to aid in replicating the original 
pattern and color variations when the tiles are relaid. 
Ideally, each tile should be numbered to ensure that it is 
reinstalled in its original location . But this may not always 
13 

◄ 1 • C • • 
Taking adva11tage of high quality local shale ideal for making terra cot/a and clay tiles, the Celadon Terra Cotta Company was established in Alfred, New York, 
in 1889. As a result, an unusually large percentage of historic buildings in this small toum are roofed with clay tiles. This includes commercial and residential
structures as well as other types of structures not commonly roofed with tile, such as barns and 011tb11ildi11gs. Even early-19th century houses were re-roofed­
sometimes incongruously-with clay tiles. Today, the town roofs display an amazing variety of styles and patterns of tiles, many of which 111ay have been factory 
seco11ds or experi111e11tal designs. In operation for only 20 years when it was destroyed by fire, the company continued 111a1111fac/11ri11g roofing tiles in New Lexington, 
Ohio, under the name Ludowici-Celadon. Photos: Terry Palmiter, Courtesy Alfred Historical Society. 
14 

be feasible or practical, and it may be enough simply t o 
group the tiles as they are removed by type and size or 
function-such as field tiles, custom tiles for hips , dormers 
and ridges, and specially cut pieces . This will help 
facilitate reinstallation of the tiles . If all of the tiles have 
to be removed, it is probably a good idea to consider 
installing a layer of modern roofing felt over the wood 
sheathing. This will add another layer of waterproofing, 
while providing temporary protection during re-roofing . 
Even if the tiles were originally attached with wooden 
pegs, it is generally recommended that they be rehung 
with corrosion-resistant, preferably heavy copper , or 
aluminum alloy nails or hooks. Today there are numerous 
non-traditional fastening systems for clay tile roofs , and 
many of them are patented. Roofing contractors and 
architects may have individual preferences , and some 
systems may be better suited than others to fit a particular 
roof shape or to meet a specific climatic or seismic 
requirement . Original battens or other roof members th at 
may have deteriorated should be replaced to match the 
original using pressure-treated wood . Additional support 
may be necessary, particularly if the original roof was 
inadequate or poorly designed. 
Replacing Flashing 
Deteriorated flashing , gutters and downspouts should 
generally be replaced in kind to match the historic 
material. Copper or lead-coated copper , if appropriate 
to the building, or terne-coated stainless steel , is often 
preferred for use on historic clay tile roofs because of their 
durability and long lasting qualities . However, copper 
staining from downspouts can sometimes be a problem on 
light-colored masonry walls which should be taken into 
consideration when planning replacements to rainwater 
removal systems. Clay tile roofs usually have an open 
valley system where the tiles are separated by metal 
flashing at intersections of roof sections with different 
angles . This makes the insertion of new flashing quite 
easy, as only a few surrounding tiles must be removed in 
the process. New copper flashing that i s too "bright " can 
be made to blend in and "mellowed" by brush-coating it 
with boiled linseed oil or proprietary solutions . 
Inappropriate Repairs 
The most important repair to avoid is replacing broken or 
missing roof tiles on a historic building with materials 
other than matching natural clay tiles. Concrete, metal or 
plastic tiles are generally not appropriate substitutes for 
clay roofing tiles. They lack the natural color variations of 
clay tile , and they do not have the same texture, shape , 
thickness or surface irregularities . 
Although much concrete tile and composition tile is 
produced to resemble the general shape, if not the exact 
profile, of clay roofing tiles, concrete tile is generally too 
thick and also lacks the range of colors inherent in natural 
clay tile. Concrete tile is not a compatible substitute 
material to repair or replace individual historic clay tiles. 
Patching a historic clay tile roof with roofing tar , caulk , 
asphalt, pieces of metal , or non-matching clay tiles is also 
inappropriate . Such treatments are visually incompatible . 
They also have the potential for causing physical damage . 
Water can collect behind these patches, thus accelerating 
deterioration of roof sheathing and fastening systems , and 
during the expansion and contraction of a freeze-thaw 
cycle ice build-up at patches can break surrounding tiles. 
Summary 
Clay roofing tile itself, when correctly installed, requires 
little or no maintenance . Often , it is the fastening system 
used to secure the tiles to the sheathing that fails and 
needs to be replaced rather than the tiles themselves. In 
fact, because clay tiles frequently outlasted the building 
structure , it was not unusual for them to be reused on 
another building . When the fastening system has 
deteriorated, or the roofing support structure has failed, 
clay tiles can be removed relatively easily, necessary 
repairs can be made, and the historic tiles can be re-laid 
with new corrosion-resistant nails or hooks. Broken or 
damaged tiles should be replaced promptly to prevent 
further damage to neighboring tiles or to the roof structure 
itself . 
As with any kind of historic roofing material , regular 
maintenance , such as cleaning gutters and downspouts , 
can add to the life of a tile roof . Additional preventive 
mea sures may include placing wire mesh over downspout 
openings or over the entire gutter to prevent debris from 
collecting and water from backing up. Periodic inspection 
of th e underside of the roof from the attic after a heavy 
rain or ice storm for water stains may reveal leaks in their 
earl y stages which can be eliminated before they escalate 
into larger, more seriou s repair problems . 
If replacement tile is required for the project , it should 
match the original tile as closely as possible, since a 
historic clay tile roof is likely to be one of the building's 
most significant features . Natural clay tiles have the 
inherent color variations , texture and color that is so 
important in defining the character of a historic tile roof . 
Thu s, only traditionally shaped , clay tiles are appropriate 
for repairing a historic clay tile roof . 
Selected Reading 
Azevedo, J. "Tile Roofing." Fine Homebuilding. No. 60 (April/May 
1990), pp . 36- 41. 
Belle, John , John Ray Hoke, Jr., and Stephen A. Kliment , editors . 
Traditional Details for Building Restoration, Renovation, and 
Rehabilitation. From the 1932- 1951 Editions of [Ramsey /Sleeper] 
Architectur al Graphic St andards ." New York: John Wiley & 
Son s, Inc. 1991. 
Davis, Charle s Thomas. A Practical Treatise on The Manufacture of 
Brick, Tiles, Terra Cotta, Etc. Philadelphia : Henry Carey Baird & 
Co., 1884. 
Fidler, John . "Tile, Slate and Stone Roofs." Traditional Homes 
Technical Information Leaflet. Number 1. 1991. 
Labine , Clem. "How to Repair an Old Roof." The Old-House 
Journal. Vol. XI, No. 3 (April 1983) , pp. 64- 69 
Labine , Clem , and Judith Siegel Lief. "The Rise of the 
Ornamental Roof ," and "Traditional Building's Source List of 
Traditional Roofing & Specialties ." Traditional Building. Vol. 5, 
No. 3 (May/June /1992), pp . 35-46. 
Melville, Ian A., and Ian A. Gordon. The Repair and Maintenance 
of Houses. London: The Estates Gazette Limited , 1973. 
Poore, Patricia. "Tile Roofs." The Old-House Journal. Vol XV, No. 5 
(September /October 1987), pp . 22-29. 
"Special Roof Issue. " The Old-House Journal. Vol XI, No. 3 
(April 1983) . 
15 

16 
Sweetser, Sarah M. Preservation Briefs 4: Roofing for Historic 
Buildings. Washington, D.C.: National Park Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior , 1978. 
Vogel, Neal A. Roofing Houses of Worship: Roofing Guidance for 
Church and Temple Administrators. Information Series No. 59. 
Chicago: National Trust for Historic Preservation and Inspired 
Partnerships, 1992. 
White, Richard. Olmsted Park System, Jamaica Plain Boathouse, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts: Planning for Preservation of the 
Boathouse Roof. Preservation Case Studies. Washington , D.C.: 
Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 1979. 
Selected Sources of Clay Roofing Tiles 
Boston Valley Terra Cotta 
6860 South Abbott Road 
Orchard Park, NY 14127 
Custom-made architectural terra cotta and clay roofing tiles 
C.C.N. Ciay Roof Tiles (Canteras Cerro Negro S.A.) 
8280 College Parkway, Suite 204 
Ft. Myers, FL 33919 
Distributors of C.C.N . clay roofing tiles from Argentina 
Earth/Forms of Alfred 
5704 East Valley Road 
Alfred Station, NY 14803 
Made-to-order reproduction clay roofing tiles 
Gladding, McBean & Co. 
P.O. Box 97 
Lincoln, CA 95648 
Manufacturer since 1875 of terra cotta and clay roofing 
tiles, and custom reproductions 
Hans Sump£ Company, Inc. 
40101 Avenue 10 
Madera, CA 93638 
Made-to-order Mission-style clay roofing tiles 
International Roofing Products, Inc. 
4929 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 750 
Los Angeles, CA 90010 
New clay roofing tiles, some suitable for historic buildings 
London Tile Co. 
65 Walnut Street 
New London, OH 44851 
Made-to-order reproduction clay roofing tiles 
Ludowici-Celadon, Inc. 
4757 Tile Plant Road 
New Lexington, OH 43764 
Manufacturer since 1880s of clay roofing tiles, and custom 
reproductions 
M.C.A. (Maruhachi Ceramics of America, Inc.) 
1985 Sampson Avenue 
Corona, CA 91719 
New clay roofing tiles, some suitable for historic buildings 
The Northern Roof Tile Sales Company 
P.O. Box 275 
Millgrove, Ontario LOR lVO, Canada 
Traditional clay roofing tiles imported from England and 
South America 
Raleigh, Inc. 
6506 Business U.S. Route 20 
P.O. Box 448 
Belvidere, IL 61008-0448 
Inventory of new and salvage clay roofing tiles 
Supradur Manufacturing Corp. 
P.O. Box 908 
Rye, NY 10580 
Imports Spanish (''S") clay roofing tiles from France 
Tile Search 
P.O. Box 580 
Roanoke, TX 76262 
Computerized network for new and salvage clay roofing 
tiles 
United States Tile Company 
P.O. Box 1509 
909 West Railroad Street 
Corona, CA 91718 
New clay roofing tiles, some suitable for historic buildings 
Note: Measurements in this publication are given in both 
the U.S. Customary System and International (Metric) 
System for comparative purposes. Metric conversions are, 
in some cases, approximate and should not be relied upon 
for preparing technical specifications. 
Acknowledgements 
Anne Grimmer is a senior Architectural Historian with the Preservation 
Assistance Division of the National Park Service; Paul K . Williams is a Cultural 
Resource Manager with the Air Force. Both authors wish to thank the following 
individuals for the technical assistance they provided in the preparation of this 
publication: Edna Kimbro, Architectural Conservator, Watsonville, CA; Edwin 
S. Krebs, AJA, K. Norman Berry Associates, Louisville, KY; Melvin Mann, 
TileSearch, Roanoke, TX; Walter S. Marder, AJA, Division of Histori cal 
Resources, Tallahassee, FL; Gil Sanchez, FAIA, Gilbert Arnold Sanchez, 
Incorporated, Santa Cruz, CA; Terry Palmiter and Sandra Scofield, Alfred, NY; 
and National Park Service professional staff members. In addition, the authors 
wish to thank Karin Murr Link, who produced the drawings which illustrate 
this Brief. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the 
Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic 
properties. Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be directed to 
H. Ward Jandl , Chief, Technical Preservation Services Branch, National Park 
Service, P.O. Box 37127, Washington , D.C. 20013-7127. This publication is not 
copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for 
credit to the authors and the National Park Service are appreciated. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 Spring 1993 
Cover photograph: Restoration of the 1820s Indian barracks at 
Mission Santa Cruz in California included custom-made tapered 
barrel clay roof tiles based on archeological data found at the 
site. Photo: Ron Starr Photography, 