U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
 
Rehabilitating Interiors 
in Historic Buildings 
Identifying and Preserving Character-defining 
Elements 
H. Ward Jandl 
A floor plan, the arrangement of spaces , and features and applied finishes may be individually or collectively important in 
defining the historic character of the building and the purpose for which it was constructed . Thus , their identificati on, reten­
tion , protection , and repair should be given prime consideration in every preservation project. Caution sho uld be exercised in 
developing plans that would radically change character-defining spaces or that wou ld obscure, damage or destroy interior 
features or finishes . 
While the exterior of a building may be its most 
prominent visible aspect, or its "public face," its in­
terior can be even more important in conveying the 
building's history and development over time. 
Rehabilitation within the context of the Secretary of 
the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation calls for the 
preservation of exterior and interior portions or 
features of the building that are significant to its 
historic, architectural and cultural values . 
Interior components worthy of preservation may in­
clude the building's plan (sequence of spaces and cir­
culation patterns), the building's spaces (rooms and 
volumes), individual architectural features, and the 
various finishes and materials that make up the 
walls, floors, and ceilings . A theater auditorium or 
sequences of rooms such as double parlors or a lobby 
leading to a stairway that ascends to a mezzanine 
may comprise a building's most important spaces. In­
dividual rooms may contain notable features such as 
plaster cornices, millwork, parquet wood floors, and 
hardware. Paints, wall coverings, and finishing 
techniques such as graining, may provide color, tex­
ture, and patterns which add to a building's unique 
character . 
Virtually all rehabilitations of historic buildings in­
volve some degree of interior alteration, even if the 
buildings are to be used for their original purpose. 
Interior rehabilitation proposals may range from 
preservation of existing features and spaces to total 
reconfigurations. In some cases, depending on the 
building, restoration may be warranted to preserve 
historic character adequately; in other cases, extensive 
alterations may be perfectly acceptable . 
This Preservation Brief has been developed to assist 
building owners and architects in identifying and 
evaluating those elements of a building's interior that 
contribute to its historic character and in planning for 
the preservation of those elements in the process of 
rehabilitation. The guidance applies to all building 
types and styles, from 18th century churches to 20th 
century office buildings. The Brief does not attempt 
to provide specific advice on preservation technique s 
and treatments, given the vast range of buildings , but 
rather suggests general preservation approaches to 
guide construc tion work. 
Identifying and Evaluating the Importance 
of Interior Elements Prior to Rehabilitation 
Before determining what uses might be appropriate 
and before drawing up plans, a thorough professional 
assessment should be undertaken to identify those 
tangible architectural components that, prior to 
rehabilitation, convey the building 's sense of time 
and place-that is , its "historic character." Such an 
assessment, accomplished by walking through and 
taking account of each element that makes up the in­
terior, can help ensure that a truly compatible use for 
the building, one that requires minimal alteration to 
the building, is selected. 
Researching The Building's History 
A review of the building 's history will reveal why 
and when the building achieved significance or how 
it contributes to the significance of the district. This 
information helps to evaluate whether a particular 
rehabilitation treatment will be appropria te to the 
building and whether it will preserve those tangible 
components of the building that convey its 
significance for association with specific events or 
persons along with its architectural importance. In 
this regard, National Register files may prove useful 
in explaining why and for what period of time the 

building is significant. In some cases research may 
show that later alterations are significant to the 
building; in other cases, the alterations may be 
without historical or architectural merit, and may be 
removed in the rehabilitation. 
Identifying Interior Elements 
Interiors of buildings can be seen as a series of 
primary and secondary spaces. The goal of the 
assessment is to identify which elements contribute to 
the building's character and which do not. 
Sometimes it will be the sequence and flow of spaces, 
and not just the individual rooms themselves, that 
contribute to the building's character. This is par­
ticularly evident in buildings that have strong central 
axes or those that are consciously asymmetrical in 
design. In other cases, it may be the size or shape of 
the space that is distinctive. The importance of some 
interiors may not be readily apparent based on a 
visual inspection; sometimes rooms that do not ap­
pear to be architecturally distinguished are associated 
with important persons and events that occurred 
within the building. 
Primary spaces, are found in all buildings, both 
monumental and modest. Examples may include 
foyers, corridors, elevator lobbies, assembly rooms, 
stairhalls, and parlors. Often they are the places in 
the building that the public uses and sees; sometimes 
they are the most architecturally detailed spaces in 
the building, carefully proportioned and finished with 
costly materials. They may be functionally and ar­
chitecturally related to the building's external ap­
pearance. In a simpler building, a primary space may 
be distinguishable only by its location, size, propor­
tions, or use. Primary spaces are always important to 
the character of the building and should be 
preserved. 
Secondary spaces are generally more utilitarian in 
appearance and size than primary spaces. They may 
include areas and rooms that service the building, 
such as bathrooms, and kitchens. Examples of 
secondary spaces in a commercial or office structure 
may include storerooms, service corridors, and in 
some cases, the offices themselves. Secondary spaces 
tend to be of less importance to the building and may 
accept greater change in the course of work without 
compromising the building's historic character. 
Spaces are often designed to interrelate both visu­
ally and functionally. The sequence of spaces, such 
as vestibule-hall-parlor or foyer-lobby-stair-auditorium 
or stairhall-corridor-classroom, can define and express 
the building's historic function and unique character. 
Important sequences of spaces should be identified 
and retained in the rehabilitation project. 
Floor plans may also be distinctive and 
characteristic of a style of architecture or a region. Ex­
amples include Greek Revival and shotgun houses. 
Floor plans may also reflect social, educational, and 
medical theories of the period. Many 19th century 
psychiatric institutions, for example, had plans based 
on the ideas of Thomas Kirkbride, a Philadelphia doc­
tor who authored a book on asylum design. 
In addition to evaluating the relative importance of 
the various spaces, the assessment should identify ar­
chitectural features and finishes that are part of the 
2 
Figure 1. This architect-designed interior reflects early 20th cen­
tury American taste: the checkerboard tile floor, wood wainscot, 
coffered ceiling, and open staircase are richly detailed and crafted 
by hand. Not only are the individual architectural features worthy 
of preservation, but the planned sequence of spaces-entry hall, 
stairs, stair landings, and loggia-imparts a grandeur that is 
characteristic of high style residences of this period. This interior 
is of Greystone, Los Angeles, California. Photography for HABS 
by Jack E. Boucher 
Figure 2. The interiors of mills and industrial buildings frequently 
are open, unadorned spaces with exposed structural elements. 
While the new uses to which this space could be put are many­
retail, residential, or office-the generous floor-to-ceiling height 
and exposed truss system are important character-defining features 
and should be retained in the process of rehabilitation. 

DINING 
ROOM 
PARLOR 
KITCHEN 
SITTING 
ROOM 
APT #2
I 
I 
APT #1
Figure 3. The floor plan at left is characteristic of many 19th century Greek Revival houses, with large rooms flanking a central hall. 
In the process of rehabilitation, the plan (at right) was drastically altered to accommodate two duplex apartments. The open stair was 
replaced with one that is enclosed, two fireplaces were eliminated, and Greek Revival trim around windows and doors was removed. 
The symmetn; of the rooms themselves was destroyed with the insertion of bathrooms and kitchens. Few vestiges of the 19th century 
interior survived the rehabilitation. Drawing by Neal A. Vogel 
Figure 4. Many institutional buildings possess distinctive spaces 
or floor plans that are important in conveying the significance of 
the property. Finding new compatible uses for these buildings and 
preserving the buildings' historic character can be a difficult, if 
not impossible, task. One such case is Mechanics Hall in 
Worcester, Massachusetts, constructed between 1855 and 1857. 
This grand hall, which occupies the entire third floor of the 
building, could not be subdivided without destroying the integrity 
of the space. 
interior's history and character. Marble or wood 
wainsco ting in corridors, elevator cabs, crown 
molding, baseboards , mantels , ceiling medallions, 
window and door trim, tile and parquet floors, and 
staircases are among those features that can be found 
in historic buildings . Architectural finishes of note 
may include grained woodwork, marbleized columns, 
and plastered walls. Those features that are 
characteristic of the building's style and period of 
construction should, again, be retained in the 
rehabilitation. 
Figure 5. The interior of a simply detailed worker's house of the 
19th century may be as important historically as the richly or­
namented interior seen in figure 1. Although the interior of this 
house has not been properly maintained, the wide baseboards, flat 
window trim, and four-panel door are characteristic of workers' 
housing during this period and deserve retention during 
rehabilitation. 
Features and finishes, even if machine-made and 
not exhibiting particularly fine craftsmanship, may be 
character-defining; these would include pressed metal 
ceilings and millwork around windows and doors. 
The interior of a plain, simple detailed worker's 
house of the 19th century may be as important 
historically as a richly ornamented, high-style 
townhouse of the same period. Both resources , if 
equally intact, convey important information about 
the early inhabitants and deserve the same careful at­
tention to detail in the preservation process. 
3 

HALL 
The location and condition of the building's existing 
heating, plumbing, and electrical systems also need 
to be noted in the assessment. The visible features of 
historic systems-radiators, grilles, light fixtures, 
switchplates, bathtubs, etc.-can contribute to the 
overall character of the building, even if the systems 
themselves need upgrading. 
Assessing Alterations and Deterioration 
In assesessing a building's interior, it is important 
to ascertain the extent of alteration and deterioration 
that may have taken place over the years; these fac­
tors help determine what degree of change is ap­
propriate in the project. Close examination of existing 
fabric and original floorplans, where available, can 
reveal which alterations have been additive, such as 
new partitions inserted for functional or structural 
reasons and historic features covered up rather than 
destroyed. It can also reveal which have been sub­
tractive, such as key walls removed and architectural 
features destroyed . If an interior has been modified 
by additive changes and if these changes have not ac­
quired significance, it may be relatively easy to 
remove the alterations and return the interior to its 
historic appearance. If an interior has been greatly 
altered through subtractive changes, there may be 
more latitude in making further alterations in the 
process of rehabilitation because the integrity of the 
interior has been compromised. At the same time, if 
the interior had been exceptionally significant, and 
solid documentation on its historic condition is 
available, reconstruction of the missing features may 
be the preferred option. 
It is always a recommended practice to photograph 
interior spaces and features thoroughly prior to 
rehabilitation. Measured floor plans showing the ex­
isting conditions are extremely useful. This documen­
tation is invaluable in drawing up rehabilitation plans 
and specifications and in assessing the impact of 
changes to the property for historic preservation cer­
tification purposes. 
Drawing Up Plans and Executing Work 
If the historic building is to be rehabilitated, it is 
critical that the new use not require substantial altera­
tion of distinctive spaces or removal of character­
defining architectural features or finishes. If an in­
terior loses the physical vestiges of its past as well as 
its historic function, the sense of time and place 
associated both with the building and the district in 
which it is located is lost. 
The recommended approaches that follow address 
common problems associated with the rehabilitation 
of historic interiors and have been adapted from the 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation 
and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
Adherence to these suggestions can help ensure that 
character-defining interior elements are preserved in 
the process of rehabilitation. The checklist covers a 
range of situations and is not intended to be all­
inclusive. Readers are strongly encouraged to review 
the full set of guidelines before undertaking any 
rehabilitation project. 
4 
Figure 6. This corridor, located in the historic Monadnock 
Building in Chicago, has glazed walls, oak trim, and marble 
wainscotting, and is typical of those found in late 19th and early 
20th century office buildings. Despite the simplicity of the 
features, a careful attention to detail can be noted in the patterned 
tile floor, bronze mail chute, and door hardware. The retention of 
corridors like this one should be a priority in rehabilitation proj­
ects involving commercial buildings. 
Figure 7. When the Monadnock Building was rehabilitated, ar­
chitects retained the basic floor plan on the upper floors consisting 
of a double-loaded corridor with offices opening onto it. The 
original floor-to-ceiling height in the corridors and outside 
offices-the most important spaces-was maintained by installing 
needed air conditioning ductwork in the less important anterooms. 
In this way, the most significant interior spaces were preserved 
intact. Drawing by Neal A. Vogel 

Recommended Approaches for Rehabilitating Historic Interiors 
1. Retain and preserve floor plans and interior 
spaces that are important in defining the overall 
historic character of the building. This includes the 
size, configuration, proportion, and relationship of 
rooms and corridors; the relationship of features to 
spaces; and the spaces themselves such as lobbies, 
reception halls, entrance halls, double parlors, 
theaters, auditoriums, and important industrial or 
commercial use spaces . Put service functions 
required by the building's new use, such as 
bathrooms, mechanical equipment, and office 
machines, in secondary spaces. 
2. Avoid subdividing spaces that are characteristic 
of a building type or style or that are directly 
associated with specific persons or patterns of 
events. Space may be subdivided both vertically 
through the insertion of new partitions or horizon­
tally through insertion of new floors or mez­
zanines. The insertion of new additional floors 
should be considered only when they will not 
damage or destroy the structural system or 
obscure, damage, or destroy character-defining 
spaces, features, or finishes . If rooms have already 
been subdivided through an earlier insensitive 
renovation, consider removing the partitions and 
restoring the room to its original proportions and 
size. 
3. Avoid making new cuts in floors and ceilings 
where such cuts would change character-defining 
spaces and the historic configuration of such 
spaces. Inserting of a new atrium or a lightwell is 
appropriate only in very limited situations where 
the existing interiors are not historically or architec­
turally distinguished. 
4. A void installing dropped ceilings below or­
namental ceilings or in rooms where high ceilings 
are part of the building 's character. In addition to 
obscuring or destroying significant details, such 
treatments will also change the space's propor­
tions . If dropped ceilings are installed in buildings 
that lack character-defining spaces, such as mills 
and factories, they should be well set back from 
the windows so they are not visible from the 
exterior. 
5. Retain and preserve interior features and 
finishes that are important in defining the overall 
historic character of the building . This might in­
clude columns, doors , cornices, baseboards , 
fireplaces and mantels, paneling, light fixtures, 
elevator cabs, hardware , and flooring; and 
wallpaper, plaster, paint , and finishes such as sten­
ciling, marbleizing , and graining; and other 
decorative materials that accent interior features 
and provide color, texture, and patterning to walls, 
floors, and ceilings. 
6. Retain stairs in their historic configuration and 
location. If a second means of egress is required, 
consider constructing new stairs in secondary 
spaces. (For guidance on designing compatible new
additions, see Preservation Brief 14, "New Exterior 
Additions to Historic Buildings .") The application 
of fire-retardant coatings, such as intumescent 
paints; the installation of fire suppression systems, 
such as sprinklers; and the construction of glass 
enclosures can in many cases permit retention of 
stairs and other character-defining features. 
 
7. Retain and preserve visible features of early 
mechanical systems that are important in defining 
the overall historic character of the building, such 
as radiators , vents, fans, grilles, plumbing fixtures, 
switchplates, and lights. If new heating, air condi­
tioning, lighting and plumbing systems are in­
stalled, they should be done in a way that does 
not destroy character-defining spaces, features and 
finishes. Ducts, pipes, and wiring should be in­
stalled as inconspicuously as possible: in secondary 
spaces, in the attic or basement if possible, or in 
closets. 
8. Avoid "furring out" perimeter walls for insula­
tion purposes. This requires unnecessary removal 
of window trim and can change a room's propor­
tions . Consider alternative means of improving 
thermal performance , such as installing insulation 
in attics and basements and adding storm 
windows. 
9. Avoid removing paint and plaster from tradi­
tionally finished surfaces, to expose masonry and 
wood. Conversely, avoid painting previously un­
painted millwork. Repairing deteriorated plaster­
work is encouraged. If the plaster is too 
deteriorated to save, and the walls and ceilings are 
not highly ornamented, gypsum board may be an 
acceptable replacement material. The use of paint 
colors appropriate to the period of the building's 
construction is encouraged. 
10. Avoid using destructive methods-propane and 
butane torches or sandblasting-to remove paint or 
other coatings from historic features. Avoid harsh 
cleaning agents that can change the appearance of 
wood. (For more information regarding appropriate 
cleaning methods, consult Preservation Brief 6, 
"Dangers of Abrasive Cleaning to Historic 
Buildings.") 
5 

Figure 8. Furring out exterior walls to add insulation and suspending new ceilings to hide ductwork and wiring can change a room's 
proportions and can cause interior features to appear fragmented. In this case, a school was converted into apartments, and individual 
classrooms became living rooms, bedrooms, and kitchens. On the left is an illustration of a classroom prior to rehabilitation; note the 
generous floor-to-ceiling height, wood wainscotting, molded baseboard, picture molding, and Eastlake Style door and window trim. After 
rehabilitation, on the right, only fragments of the historic detailing survive: the ceiling has been dropped below the picture molding, the 
remaining wainscotting appears to be randomly placed, and some of the window trim has been obscured. Together with the subdivision 
of the classrooms, these rehabilitation treatments prevent a clear understanding of the original classroom's design and space. If thennal 
performance must be improved, alternatives to furring out walls and suspending new ceilings, such as installing insulation in attics and 
basements, should be considered. Drawings by Neal A. Vogel 
Figure 9. The tangible reminders of early mechanical systems can 
be worth saving. In this example, in the Old Post Office in 
Washington, D. C., radiators encircle Corinthian columns in a 
decorative manner. Note, too, the period light fixtures. These 
features were retained when the building was rehabilitated as 
retail and office space. Photo: Historic American Buildings Survey 
6 
Figure 10. In this case plaster has been removed from perimeter 
walls, leaving brick exposed. In removing finishes from historic 
masonry walls, not only is there a loss of historic finish, but raw, 
unfinished walls are exposed, giving the interior an appearance it 
never had. Here, the exposed brick is of poor quality and the 
mortar joints are wide and badly struck. Plaster should have been 
retained and repaired, as necessary. 

Figure 11. These dramatic "before" and "after" photographs show a severely deteriorated space restored to its original elegance: plaster 
has been repaired and painted, the scagliola columns have been restored to match marble using traditional craft techniques, and missing 
decorative metalwork has been re-installed in front of the windows. Although some reorganization of the space took place, notably the 
relocation of the front desk, the overall historic character of the space has been preserved. These views are of the lobby in the Willard 
Hotel, Washington, D. C. Credit: Commercial Photographers (left); Carol M. Highsmith (right) 
Meeting Building, Life Safety and Fire 
Codes 
Buildings undergoing rehabilitation must comply 
with existing building , life safe ty and fire codes. The 
application of codes to specific projects varies from 
building to building , and town to town . Code re­
quirements may make some reuse proposals imprac­
tical; in other cases, only minor changes may be 
needed to bring the project into compliance. In some 
situations , it may be possible to obtain a code 
variance to preserve distinctive interior features. (It 
should be noted that the Secretary's Standards for 
Rehabilitation take precedence over other regulations 
and codes in determining whether a rehabilitation 
project qualifies for Federal tax benefits.) A thorough 
understanding of the applicable regulations and close 
coordination with code officials, building inspectors, 
and fire marshals can prevent the alteration of signifi­
cant historic interiors . 
Sources of Assistance 
Rehabilitation and restoration work should be 
undertaken by professionals who have an established 
reputation in the field. 
Given the wide range of interior work items , from 
ornamental plaster repair to marble cleaning and the 
application of graining, it is possible that a number of 
specialists and subcontractors will need to be brought 
in to bring the project to completion. State Historic 
Preservation Officers and local preservation organiza­
tions may be a useful source of information in this 
regard. Good sources of information on appropriate 
preservation techniques for specific interior features 
and finishes include the Bulletin of the Association for 
Preservation Technology and The Old-House Journal; 
other useful publications are listed in the 
bibliography . 
Protecting Interior Elements During 
Rehabilitation 
Architectural features and finishes to be preserved 
in the process of rehabilitation should be clearly 
marked on plans and at the site. This step, along with 
careful supervision of the interior demolition work 
and protection against arson and vandalism, can pre­
vent the unintended destruction of architectural 
elements that contribute to the building's historic 
character. 
Protective coverings should be installed around 
architectural features and finishes to avoid damage in 
the course of construction work and to protect 
workers. Staircases and floors, in particular, are sub­
jected to dirt and heavy wear, and the risk exists of 
incurring costly or irreparable damage. In most cases, 
the best, and least costly, preservation approach is to 
design and construct a protective system that enables 
stairs and floors to be used yet protects them from 
damage . Other architectural features such as mantels , 
doors , wainscotting, and decorative finishes may be 
protected by using heavy canvas or plastic sheets. 
Summary 
In many cases, the interior of a historic building is 
as important as its exterior. The careful identification 
and evaluation of interior architectural elements, after 
undertaking research on the building's history and 
use , is critically important before changes to the 
building are contemplated. Only after this evaluation 
should new uses be decided and plans be drawn up. 
The best rehabilitation is one that preserves and pro­
tects those rooms, sequences of spaces , features and 
finishes that define and shape the overall historic 
character of the building . 

This Preservation Brief is based on a discussion paper 
prepared by the author for a National Park Service 
regional workshop held in March, 1987, and on a 
paper written by Gary Hume, "Interior Spaces in 
Historic Buildings," October, 1987. Appreciation is 
extended to the staff of Technical Preservation Serv­
ices Branch and to the staff of NPS regional offices 
who reviewed the manuscript and provided many 
useful suggestions. Special thanks are given to Neal 
A. Vogel, a summer intern with the NPS, for many 
of the illustrations in this Brief. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the 
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as 
amended. Preservation Briefs 18 was developed 
under the editorship of Lee H . Nelson, FAIA, Chief, 
Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Serv­
ice, U.S. Department of the Interior, P.O . Box 37127, 
Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. Comments on the 
usefulness of this information are welcomed and may 
be sent to Mr. Nelson at the above address . This 
publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced 
without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the 
author and the National Park Service are appreciated . 
Selected Reading List 
There are few books written exclusively on preserv­
ing historic interiors, and most of these tend to focus 
on residential interiors. Articles on the subject appear 
regularly in The Old-House Journal, the Bulletin of the 
Association for Preservation Technology, and Historic 
Preservation Magazine. 
Ferro , Maximilian L., and Melissa L. Cook . Electric 
Wiring and Lighting in Historic American Buildings. 
New Bedford, Massachusetts: AFC/A Nortek 
Company, 1984. 
Fisher , Charles E. Temporary Protection of Historic Stair­
ways During Rehabilitation Work. Preservation Tech 
Note . Washington, D. C.: Preservation Assistance 
Division, National Park Service, U.S. Department 
of the Interior, 1985. 
Jennings, Jan, and Herbert Gottfried. American Ver­
nacular Interior Architecture 1870-1940. New York : 
Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1988. 
Johnson, Ed . Old House Woodwork Restoration: How to 
Restore Doors, Windows, Walls, Stairs and Decorative 
Trim to Their Original Beauty. Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. , 1983. 
Labine, Clem , and Carolyn Flaherty (editors). The 
Old-House Journal Compendium. Woodstock, New 
York: The Overlook Press, 1980. 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation 
and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
Washington, D. C.: Preservation Assistance Divi­
sion , National Park Service , U.S. Department of 
the Interior, rev . 1983. 
U .S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop­
ment . Rehabilitation Guidelines, volumes 1-11. 
Washington , D. C. : U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, 1980-84. 
Winkler , Gail Caskey, and Roger W . Moss . Victorian 
Interior Decoration: American Interiors 1830-1900. 
New York: Henry Holt and Company , 1986. 
October 1988 
Cover: Detail of carving on interior shutter. Hammond-Han.vood 
House, Annapolis, Maryland. 
For sale by the S uperintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printin g Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 