27 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
The Main tenance and Repair of 
Arch itectu ral Cast Iron 
John G. Waite, AlA 
Historical Overview by Margot Gayle 
U.S. Departme nt of the Interior 
Natio nal Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Preservation Assistance 
In Cooperation with the 
New York Landmarks Conservancy 
The preservation of cast-iron architectural elements, 
including entire facades, has gained increasing attention in 
recent years as commercial districts are recognized for their 
historic significance and revitalized. This Brief provides 
general guidance on approaches to the preservation and 
restoration of historic cast iron . 
Cast iron played a preeminent role in the industrial 
development of our country during the 19th century. Cast­
iron machinery filled America's factories and made possible 
the growth of railroad transportation. Cast iron was used 
extensively in our cities for water systems and street 
lighting. As an architectural metal, it made possible bold 
new advances in architectural designs and building 
technology, while providing a richness in ornamentation 
(Fig. 1). 
This age-old metal, an iron alloy with a high carbon content, 
had been too costly to make in large quantities until the 
mid-18th century, when new furnace technology in England 
made it more economical for use in construction. Known 
for its great strength in compression, cast iron in the form of 
slender, non-flammable pillars, was introduced in the 1790s 
in English cotton mills, where fires were endemic. In the 
United States, similar thin columns were first employed in 
the 1820s in theaters and churches to support balconies. 
By the mid-1820s, one-story iron storefronts were being 
advertised in New York City. Daniel Badger, the Boston 
foundryman who later moved to New York, asserted that in 
1842 he fabricated and installed the first rolling iron 
shutters for iron storefronts, which provided protection 
against theft and external fire. In the years ahead, and into 
the 1920s, the practical cast-iron storefront would become a 
favorite in towns and cities from coast to coast. Not only 
did it help support the load of the upper floors, but it 
provided large show windows for the display of wares and 
allowed natural light to flood the interiors of the shops . 
Most importantly, cast-iron storefronts were inexpensive to 
assemble, requiring little on-site labor. 
A tireless advocate for the use of cast iron in buildings was 
an inventive New Yorker, the self-taught architect/engineer 
James Bogardus. From 1840 on, Bogardus extolled its 
virtues of strength, structural stability, durability, relative 
lightness, ability to be cast in almost any shape and, above 
all, the fire-resistant qualities so sought after in an age of 
serious urban conflagrations. He also stressed that the 
foundry casting processes, by which cast iron was made 
into building elements, were thoroughly compatible with 
the new concepts of prefabrication, mass production, and 
use of identical interchangeable parts. 
Fig. 1. The Haughwout Building in New York City is all excellent 
example of the quality and character of mass-produced cast-iron 
architecture. On.ce wood patterns were made, any number of elements 
could be cast, as was done with each of these repetitive bays. Photo: 
New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. 

ROOF (CONSTRUCTION NOT ACCESSIBLE) 
WINDOW 
CONSTRUCTION 
(NOT ORIGINAL) 
WOODEN~~===t~j 
SPACER 
BOLT 
WOODEN JOIST 
IRON COLUMN 
I 
~ 
I PLAN OF COLUMN IRON PANEL 
IRON PANEL 
FLOOR 
FLANGE 
BOLT 
<> 
WOODEN JOIST 
SECTION THROUGH WALL 
2 
In 1849 Bogardus created something uniquely American 
when he erected the first structure with self-supporting, 
multi-storied exterior walls of iron. Known as the Edgar 
Laing Stores, this corner row of small four-story 
warehouses that looked like one building was constructed 
in lower Manhattan in only two months. Its rear, side, and 
interior bearing walls were of brick; the floor framing 
consisted of timber joists and girders. One of the cast-iron 
walls was load-bearing, supporting the wood floor joists. 
The innovation was its two street facades of self-supporting 
cast iron, consisting of multiples of only a few pieces­
Doric-style engaged columns, panels, sills, and plates, along 
with some applied ornaments (cover photo and Fig. 2). 
Each component of the facades had been cast individually 
in a sand mold in a foundry, machined smooth, tested for 
fit, and finally trundled on horse-drawn drays to the 
building site. There they were hoisted into position, then 
bolted together and fastened to the conventional structure 
of timber and brick with iron spikes and straps (Fig. 3). 
The second iron-front building erected was a quantum leap 
beyond the Laing Stores in size and complexity. Begun in 
April 1850 by Bogardus, with architect Robert Hatfield, the 
five-story Sun newspaper building in Baltimore was both 
cast-iron-fronted and cast-iron-framed. In Philadelphia, 
Fig. 2. The Edgar Lazng zn New was t1eS:lqm~t1 
by James Bogardus. It was the first building constructed with facades 
of self-supporting cast iron. This corner view shows the Doric-style 
engaged columns, panels, and spandrel beams; the loss of most of the 
original ornamental castings give it an austere look. As part of an 
urban renewal project, the facades were carefully disassembled in 1971 
for later re-erection in another location-only to have its iron parts 
stolen for scrap. Photo: Jack E. Boucher, HABS Collection. 
several ironfronts were begun in 1850: The Inquirer 
Building, the Brock Stores, and the Penn Mutual Building 
(all three have been demolished). The St. Charles Hotel of 
1851 at 60 N. Third Street is the oldest ironfront in America. 
Framing with cast-iron columns and wrought-iron beams 
and trusses was visible on a vast scale in the New York 
Crystal Palace of 1853. 
In the second half of the 19th century, the United States was 
in an era of tremendous economic and territorial growth. 
The use of iron in commercial and public buildings spread 
rapidly, and hundreds of iron-fronted buildings were 
erected in cities across the country from 1849 to beyond the 
turn of the century. Outstanding examples of ironfronts 
exist in Baltimore, Galveston, Louisville, Milwaukee, New 
Orleans, Philadelphia, Richmond, Rochester (N.Y.), and 
especially New York City where the SoHo Cast Iron 
Historic District alone has 139 iron-fronted buildings 
(Fig. 1). Regrettably, a large proportion of ironfronts 
nationwide have been demolished in downtown 
redevelopment projects, especially since World War II. 
Fig. 3. Section drawing through the wall of Edgar Laing Stores showing 
how the cast-iron facade components were anchored to the wood floor and 
roof framing members. Drawing: John G. Waite, HABS Collection. 

Fig. 4. The 1904 grand stairway of the former Frear's department 
store in Troy, N.Y. was constructed of cast iron, as was the frame of 
the skylight above. Some ornamental wrought iron was also 
employed. This use of iron was typical in major commercial bllildings 
constructed throughout the United States. Courtesy: Rensselaer 
County Historical Society. 
In addition to these exterior use s, man y public buildings 
display magnificent exposed interior ironwork, at once 
ornamental and structural (Fig. 4). Remarkable examples 
have survived across the countr y, including the Peabody 
Library in Baltimore; the Old Executive Office Building in 
Washington, D.C.; the Bradbur y Building in Los Angeles; 
the former Louisiana State Capitol; the former City Hall in 
Richmond; Tweed Courthouse in New York; and the state 
capi tols of California, Georgia, Michigan, Tennessee, and 
Texas. And it is iron, of course, that forms the great dome 
of the United States Capitol, completed during the Civil 
War. Ornamental cast iron was a popular material in the 
landscape as well, appearing as fences, fountains with 
stat uary , lampposts, furniture, urns, gazebos, gates, and 
enclos ures for cemetery plots (Fig. 5). With such 
widesp read demand , many American foundries that had 
been casting machine parts, bank safes, iron pipe, or 
cookstoves added architectural iron departments (Fig. 6). 
These called for patternmakers with sophis ticated design 
capabili ties, as well as knowledge of metal shrinkage and 
other technical aspects of casting . Major companies 
included the Hayward Bartlett Co. in Baltimore; James L. 
Jackson, Cornell Brothers, J. L. Mott, and Daniel D. Badger's 
Architect ural Iron Works in Manhattan; Hecla Ironworks in 
Brooklyn; Wood & Perot of Philadelphia; Leeds & Co., the 
Shakspeare (sic) Foundry, and Miltenberger in New 
Orlean s; Winslow Brothers in Chicago; and James 
McKinney in Albany , N.Y. 
Cast iron was the metal of choice throughout the second 
half of the 19th century. Not only was it a fire-resistant 
material in a period of major urban fires, but also large 
facades could be produced with cast iron at less cost than 
comparable stone fronts, and iron buildings could be 
erected with speed and efficiency. The largest standing 
example of framing with cast-iron columns and wrought­
iron beams is Chicago 'S sixteen-story Manhattan Building, 
the world's tallest skyscraper when built in 1890 by William 
LeBaron Jenney . By this time, however, steel was becoming 
available nationally , and was structurally more versatile 
and cost-competitive. Its increased use is one reason why 
building with cast iron diminished around the turn of the 
century after having been so eagerly adopted only fifty 
years before . Nonetheless, cast iron continued to be used in 
substantial quantities for many other structural and 
ornamental purposes well into the 20th century : storefronts; 
marquees; bays and large window frames for steel-framed, 
masonry-clad buildings ; and street and landscape 
furnishings, including subway kiosks. 
The 19th century left us with a rich heritage of new building 
methods, especially construction on an altogether new scale 
that was made possible by the use of metals. Of these, cast 
iron was the pioneer, although its period of intensive use 
lasted but a half century. Now the surviving legacy of cast­
iron architecture, much of which continues to be threatened , 
merits renewed appreciation and appropriate preservation 
and restoration treatments . 
Fig. 5. The Slatter Falllily Tomb ill Mobile, Alabama, consisting of a 
cast-irol/ mausoleum and fence, exhibits the wide rallge of uses of the 
material ill the 19th century. Photo: Jack E. Boucher, HABS 
Collectioll. 
3 

T 
1 ): 
~: 
r. 
",,£?j, El 
'" ~ 
~ 
~ 
'; 
~ , ~ 
0 El ~J' 0 :\''.1 
~ o/r 
, ~ 
, ~ 
T 
.A. 
f, ...... S ..... N.1! 
:B! 'J.' .cl :FJ. ~~ §)7'~ 
..... yv~ ~ 
t 
~] 
Ii . 
, ~ ; 
- -~ 
Jt.
f/," I. . ~J J' 
4 
What is Cast Iron? 
Cast iron is an alloy with a high carbon content (at 
least 1.7% and usually 3.0 to 3.7%) that makes it more 
resistant to corrosion than either wrought iron or steel. 
In addition to carbon, cast iron contains varying 
amounts of silicon, sulfur, manganese, and 
phosphorus. 
While molten, cast iron is easily poured into molds, 
making it possible to create nearly unlimited 
decorative and structural forms. Unlike wrought iron 
and steel, cast iron is too hard and brittle to be shaped 
by hammering, rolling, or pressing. However, because 
it is more rigid and more resistant to buckling than 
other forms of iron, it can withstand great compression 
loads. Cast iron is relatively weak in tension, however, 
and fails under tensile loading with little prior 
warning. 
The characteristics of various types of cast iron are 
determined by their composition and the techniques 
used in melting, casting, and heat treatment. 
Metallurgical constituents of cast iron that affect its 
brittleness, toughness, and strength include ferrite, 
cementite, pearlite, and graphite carbon. Cast iron 
with flakes of carbon is called gray cast iron. The 
"gray fracture" associated with cast iron was probably 
named for the gray, grainy appearance of its broken 
edge caused by the presence of flakes of free graphite, 
which account for the brittleness of cast iron. This 
brittleness is the important distinguishing 
characteristic between cast iron and mild steel. 
Compared with cast iron, wrought iron is relatively 
soft, malleable, tough, fatigue-resistant, and readily 
worked by forging, bending, and drawing. It is almost 
pure iron, with less than 1 % (usually 0.02 to 0.03%) 
carbon. Slag varies between 1 % and 4% of its content 
and exists in a purely physical association, that is, it is 
not alloyed. This gives wrought iron its characteristic 
laminated (layered) or fibrous structure. 
Wrought iron can be distinguished from cast iron in 
several ways. Wrought-iron elements generally are 
simpler in form and less uniform in appearance than 
cast-iron elements, and contain evidence of rolling or 
hand working. Cast iron often contains mold lines, 
flashing, casting flaws, and air holes. Cast-iron 
elements are very uniform in appearance and are 
frequently used repetitively. Cast-iron elements are 
often bolted or screwed together, whereas wrought­
iron pieces are either riveted or forge-molded (heat 
welded) together. 
Mild steel is now used to fabricate new hand-worked 
metal work and to repair old wrought-iron elements. 
Mild steel is an alloy of iron and is not more than 2% 
carbon, which is strong but easily worked in block or 
ingot form. Mild steel is not as resistant to corrosion as 
either wrought iron or cast iron. 
Maintenance and Repair 
Many of the maintenance and repair techniques described 
in the Brief, particularly those relating to cleaning and 
painting, are potentially dangerous and should be carried 
out only by experienced and qualified workmen using 
protective equipment suitable to the task. In all but the 
most simple repairs, it is best to involve a preservation 
architect or building conservator to assess the condition of 
the iron and prepare contract documents for its treatment. 
As with any preservation project, the work must be 
preceded by a review of local building codes and 
env ironmental protection regulations to determine whether 
any conflicts exist with the proposed treatments. If there are 
conflic ts, particularly with cleaning techniques or painting 
materials, then waivers or variances need to be negotiated, 
or alternative treatments or materials adopted. 
Deterioration 
Fig. 6. Sheet from a late 19th century manufacturer's trade catalog 
illustrates some of the products available from foundries, such as 
storefronts, girders and beams, columns, stairs, window lintels and sills, 
and roof crestings. Courtesy: Albany Institute of History and Art. 
Common problems encountered today with cast-iron 
cons truction include badly rusted or missing elements, 
impact damage, structural failures, broken joints, damage to 
connections, and loss of anchorage in masonry (Figs. 7,8). 
Oxidation, or rusting, occurs rapidly when cast iron is 
exposed to moisture and air. The minimum relative 
humidity necessary to promote rusting is 65%, but this 

figure can be lower in the presence of corro sive agents , such 
as sea water, salt air, acids, acid precipitation , soils, and 
some sulfur compounds present in the atmo sphere, which 
act as catalysts in the oxidation proces s. Rus ting is 
accelerated in situations where architectural details provide 
pockets or crevices to trap and hold liquid corro sive agents . 
Furthermore, once a rust film form s, its porou s surfac e acts 
as a reservoir for liquids , which in turn cau ses further 
corrosion . If this process is not arrested , it will continue 
until the iron is entirely consumed by corrosion , leaving 
nothing but rust. 
Galvanic corrosion is an electrochemical action that results 
when two dissimilar metals react together in the presence of 
an electrolyte, such as water containing salts or hydrogen 
ions (Fig. 9). The severity of the galvanic corrosion is based 
on the difference in potential between the two metals, their 
relative surface areas, and time. If the more noble metal 
(higher position in electrochemical series) is much larger in 
area than the baser , or less noble, metal, the deterioration of 
the baser metal will be more rapid and severe. If the more 
noble metal is much smaller in area than the baser metal, 
the deterioration of the baser metal will be much less 
significant. Cast iron will be attacked and corroded when it 
is adjacent to more noble metals such as lead or copper. 
Fig. 8. Structural cracks, gaps at joints between components, and a 
large opening where part of the console bracket is missing are the 
problems evident in this cast-iron assembly. Photo: Ford, Powell & 
Carson. 
Fig. 7. Despite Illl 
illlpilct thllt sllllttered 
the IIlllill CIlstings, 
th is felice post 
rell1aillS IIpright, 
dell10llstmtillg the 
grl'llt strellgth of CIlst 
iroll. Origilllllly, the 
post WIlS held 
together by Il 10llg 
bolt thllt extcllded 
frolll the fill ill I to the 
bllsc. Photo: Johll G. 
Wilite. 
Fig. 9. Galvanic 
corrosion occurred 
where Il patch of 
copper was installed 
Illongside the cast­
iron CIlp Ilt the base 
ofilfolllltaill. The 
lise of teme-coated 
stainless flashings 
with Ilppropriate 
CIllllkillg would hllve 
beell a more sllitable 
repllir. Photo: John 
G. Wilite. 
Graphitization of cast iron , a less common problem, occurs 
in the presence of acid precipitation or seawater. As the 
iron corrodes, the porous graphite (soft carbon) corrosion 
residue is impregnated with insoluble corrosion products . 
As a result, the cast-iron element retains its appearance and 
shape but is weaker structurally. Graphitization occurs 
where cast iron is left unpainted for long periods or where 
caulked joints have failed and acidic rainwater has corroded 
pieces from the backside . Testing and identification of 
graphitization is accomplished by scraping through the 
surface with a knife to reveal the crumbling of the iron 
beneath . Where extensive graphitization occurs, usually the 
only solution is replacement of the damaged element. 
Castings may also be fractured or flawed as a result of 
imperfections in the original manufacturing process, such as 
air holes, cracks , and cinders, or cold shuts (caused by the 
"freezing" of the surface of the molten iron during casting 
because of improper or interrupted pouring). Brittleness is 
another problem occasionally found in old cast-iron 
elements. It may be a result of excessive phosphorus in the 
iron , or of chilling during the casting process. 
Condition Assessment 
Before establishing the appropriate treatment for cast-iron 
elements in a building or structure, an evaluation should be 
made of the property's historical and architectural 
significance and alterations, along with its present 
condition . If the work involves more than routine 
maintenance, a qualified professional should be engaged to 
develop a historic structure report which sets forth the 
historical development of the property, documents its 
existing condition, identifies problems of repair, and 
provides a detailed listing of recommended work items 
5 

DETERIORATED 
FLASHING, RAISED --------~-"""'= 
EDGES 
HOLE:----------
OPEN JOINTS 
MISSING LEAVES 
AND SCROLL FROM 
CAPITAL 
DETERIORATED 
FLASHING, GAP 
AT EDGE 
HOLE AND OPEN 
JOINT ---
STRIP FLASHING 
LACKS CAULK ------
:::::i::;::::::::::::=:==----- FAILED PATCH 
____ MISSING PIECE OF 
SOFFIT MOLDING 
---- FRACTURE IN CASTING 
___ FRACTURE IN CASTING 
OPEN JOINT AT 
------- SCROLL 
------- MISSING LEAVES 
':----"'---'7Iiililiiii~r_----- CORROSION 
6 
The nature and extent of the problems with the cast-iron 
elements must be well understood before proceeding with 
work. If the problems are minor, such as surface corrosion, 
flaking paint, and failed caulking, the property owner may 
be able to undertake the repairs by working directly with a 
knowledgeable contractor. If there are major problems or 
extensive damage to the cast iron, it is best to secure the 
services of an architect or conservator who specializes in the 
conservation of historic buildings. Depending on the scope 
of work, contract documents can range from outline 
specifications to complete working drawings with 
annotated photographs and specifications 
To thoroughly assess the condition of the ironwork, a close 
physical inspection must be undertaken of every section of 
the iron construction including bolts, fasteners, and brackets 
(Fig. 10). Typically, scaffolding or a mechanical lift is 
employed for close inspection of a cast-iron facade or other 
large structures. Removal of select areas of paint may be 
the only means to determine the exact condition of 
connections, metal fasteners, and intersections or crevices 
that might trap water. 
witn priorities. Through this process the significance and 
condition of the cast iron can be evaluated and appropriate 
treatments proposed. For fences, or for single components 
of a building such as a facade, a similar but less extensive 
analytical procedure should be followed. 
Fig. 11. Major cracks in the piers of this cast-iron storefront in 
Galveston, Texas resulted from the transfer of load onto the iron from 
internal brick piers eroded by rising damp. This crack was 
inappropriately filled with concrete, which trapped moisture and 
accelerated internlll corrosion, pushing the iron further apart. Photo: 
Ford, Powell & Carson. 
Fig. 10. During close-up inspection of the Gunther Building in New York City, photographs of each bay were taken to use in a survey of existing 
conditions. Photo: Willcox Dunn. 

An investigation of load-bearing elements, such as columns 
and beams, will establish whether these components are 
performing as they were originally designed, or the stress 
patterns have been redistributed. Areas that are abnormally 
stressed must be examined to ascertain whether they have 
suffered damage or have been displaced (Fig. 11). Damage 
to a primary structural member is obviously critical to 
identify and evaluate; attention should not be given only to 
decorative features. 
The condition of the building, structure, or object; diagnosis 
of its problems; and recommendations for its repair should 
be recorded by drawings, photographs, and written 
descriptions, to aid those who will be responsible for its 
conservation in the future. 
Whether minor or major work is required, the retention and 
repair of historic ironwork is the recommended 
preservation approach over replacement. All repairs and 
restoration work should be reversible, when possible, so 
that modifications or treatments that may turn out to be 
harmful to the long-term preservation of the iron can be 
corrected with the least amount of damage to the historic 
ironwork. 
Cleanin g and Paint Removal 
When there is extensive failure of the protective coating 
and/ or when heavy corrosion exists, the rust and most or 
all of the paint must be removed to prepare the surfaces for 
new protective coatings. The techniques available range 
from physical processes, such as wire brushing and grit 
blasting, to flame cleaning and chemical methods. The 
selection of an appropriate technique depends upon how 
much paint failure and corrosion has occurred, the fineness 
of the surface detailing, and the type of new protective 
coating to be applied. Local environmental regulations may 
restrict the options for cleaning and paint removal methods, 
as well as the disposal of materials. 
Many of these techniques are potentially dangerous and 
should be carried out only by experienced and qualified 
workers using proper eye protection, protective clothing, 
and other workplace safety conditions. Before selecting a 
process, test panels should be prepared on the iron to be 
cleaned to determine the relative effectiveness of various 
techniques. The cleaning process will most likely expose 
additional coating defects, cracks, and corrosion that have 
not been obvious before (Fig. 12 ). 
There are a number of techniques that can be used to 
remove paint and corrosion from cast iron: 
Hand scraping, chipping, and wire brushing are the most 
common and least expensive methods of removing paint 
and light rust from cast iron (Fig. 13a, b). However, they do 
not remove all corrosion or paint as effectively as other 
methods. Experienced craftsmen should carry out the work 
to reduce the likelihood that surfaces may be scored or 
fragile detail damaged. 
Low-pressure grit blasting <Commonly called abrasive 
cleaning or sandblasting) is often the most effective 
approach to removing excessive paint build-up or 
substantial corrosion. Grit blasting is fast, thorough, and 
economical, and it allows the iron to be cleaned in place. 
The aggregate can be iron slag or sand; copper slag should 
not be used on iron because of the potential for electrolytic 
reactions. Some sharpness in the aggregate is beneficial in 
that it gives the metal surface a "tooth" that will result in 
better paint adhesion. The use of a very sharp or hard 
aggregate and/ or excessively high pressure (over 100 
pounds per square inch) is unnecessary and should be 
avoided. Adjacent materials, such as brick, stone, wood, 
and glass, must be protected to prevent damage. Some 
local building codes and environmental authorities prohibit 
or limit dry sandblasting because of the problem of airborne 
dust. 
Wet sandblasting is more problematic than dry 
sandblasting for cleaning cast iron because the water will 
cause instantaneous surface rusting and will penetrate deep 
into open joints. Therefore, it is generally not considered an 
effective technique. Wet sandblasting reduces the amount 
of airborne dust when removing a heavy paint build-up, 
but disposal of effluent containing lead or other toxic 
substances is restricted by environmental regulations in 
most areas. 
Flame cleaning of rust from metal with a special multi­
flame head oxyacetylene torch requires specially skilled 
operators, and is expensive and potentially dangerous. 
However, it can be very effective on lightly to moderately 
corroded iron. Wire brushing is usually neccessary to finish 
the surface after flame cleaning. 
Chemical rust removal, by acid pickling, is an effective 
method of removing rust from iron elements that can be 
easily removed and taken to a shop for submerging in vats 
of dilute phosphoric or sulfuric acid. This method does not 
damage the surface of iron, providing that the iron is 
neutralized to pH level 7 after cleaning. Other chemical 
rust removal agents include ammonium citrate, oxalic acid, 
or hydrochloric acid-based products. 
Fig. 12. Paint stripping exposed a large defect ullder a faulty patch at a 
joint of this wide cast-iron watertable. The damage can be repaired 
mechanically by splicing in a cast-iron replacemellt piece. Photo: Peter 
Jensen, Kapell and Kostow Architects. 
7 

8 
Fig. 13. S~rface preparation may involve several different techniques. Where chemical paint stripping is involved, careful planning of the sequence of 
work and inspectIOn by an architect or con~ervator to ensure stnct compliance ~Ith the cont~act documents is important to minimize the risk of 
probLems. After the chemical paste and pall1twas scraped off, the remamlng paint and chemicaL residue were removed with a wire brush (a) and 
scraper~ selected or cut to fit the shape of the Iron surfaces (b). The surface was then wiped with solvent to create a compLetely clean surface prior to 
repainting (c). Photos: Raymond M. Pepl, BUlLdlllg ConservatIOn Associates. 
Chemical paint removal using alkaline compounds, such as 
methylene chloride or potassium hydroxide, can be an 
effective alternative to abrasive blasting for removal of 
heavy paint build-up (Fig. 13). These agents are often 
available as slow-acting gels or pastes. Because they can 
cause burns, protective clothing and eye protection must be 
worn. Chemicals applied to a non-watertight facade can 
seep through crevices and holes, resulting in damage to the 
building's interior finishes and corrosion to the backside of 
the iron components. If not thoroughly neutralized, 
residual traces of cleaning compounds on the surface of the 
iron can cause paint failures in the future (Fig. 14). For 
these reasons, field application of alkaline paint removers 
and acidic cleaners is not generally recommended. 
Following any of these methods of cleaning and paint 
removal, the newly cleaned iron should be painted 
immediately with a corrosion-inhibiting primer before new 
rust begins to form. This time period may vary from 
minutes to hours depending on environmental conditions. 
If priming is delayed, any surface rust that has developed 
should be removed with a clean wire brush just before 
priming, because the rust prevents good bonding between 
the primer and the cast iron surface and prevents the primer 
from completely filling the pores of the metal. 
Painting and Coating Systems 
The most common and effective way to preserve 
architectural cast iron is to maintain a protective coating of 
paint on the metal. Paint can also be decorative, where 
historically appropriate. 
Before removing paint from historic architectural cast 
iron, a microscopic analysis of samples of the historic 
paint sequencing is recommended. Called paint 
seriation analysis, this process must be carried out by an 
experienced architectural conservator. The analysis will 
identify the historic paint colors, and other conditions, 
such as whether the paint was matte or gloss, whether 
sand was added to the paint for texture, and whether 
the building was polychromed or marbleized. 
Traditionally many cast-iron elements were painted to 
resemble other materials, such as limestone or 
sandstone. Occasionally, features were faux-painted so 
that the iron appeared to be veined marble. 
Thorough surface preparation is necessary for the adhesion 
of new protective coatings. All loose, flaking, and 
deteriorated paint must be removed from the iron, as well 
as dirt and mud, water-soluble salts, oil, and grease. Old 
paint that is tightly adhered may be left on the surface of 
the iron if it is compatible with the proposed coatings. The 
retention of old paint also preserves the historic paint 
sequence of the building and avoids the hazards of removal 
and disposal of old lead paint. 
It is advisable to consult manufacturer's specifications or 
technical representatives to ensure compatibility between 
the surface conditions, primer and finish coats, and 
application methods. 
For the paint to adhere properly, the metal surfaces must be 
absolutely dry before painting. Unless the paint selected is 

specifically designed for exceptional conditions, painting 
should not take place when the temperature is expected to 
fall below 50 degrees Fahrenheit within 24 hours or when 
the relative humidity is above 80 per cent; paint should not 
be applied when there is fog, mist, or rain in the air. Poorly 
prepared surfaces will cause the failure of even the best 
paints, while even moderately priced paints can be effective 
if applied over well-prepared surfaces. 
Selection of Paints and Coatings 
The types of paints available for protecting iron have 
changed dramatically in recent years due to federal, state, 
and local regulations that prohibit or restrict the 
manufacture and use of products containing toxic 
substances such as lead and zinc chromate, as well as 
volatile organic compounds and substances (VOC or VOS). 
Availability of paint types varies from state to state, and 
manufacturers continue to change product formulations to 
comply with new regulations . 
Fig. 14. Major problems can result if work is undertaken without 
proper sequencing and precautions. On this building, a strong alkaline 
paint remover was used, and apparently was not adequately rinsed or 
neutralized. Over a period of months, the newly applied paint began to 
peel and streaks of rust appeared on the iron. Photo: Kim Lovejoy. 
Traditionally, red lead has been used as an anti-corrosive 
pigment for priming iron. Red lead has a strong affinity for 
linseed oil and forms lead soaps, which become a tough and 
elastic film impervious to water that is highly effective as a 
protective coating for iron. At least two slow-drying 
linseed oil-based finish coats have traditionally been used 
over a red lead primer, and this combination is effective on 
old or partially-deteriorated surfaces. Today, in most areas, 
the use of paints containing lead is prohibited, except for 
some commercial and industrial purposes. 
Today, alkyd paints are very widely used and have largely 
replaced lead-containing linseed-oil paints . They dry faster 
than oil paint, with a thinner film, but they do not protect 
the metal as long. Alkyd rust-inhibitive primers contain 
pigments such as iron oxide, zinc oxide, and zinc 
phosphate. These primers are suitable for previously 
painted surfaces cleaned by hand tools. At least two coats 
of primer should be applied, followed by alkyd enamel 
finish coats. 
Latex and other water-based paints are not recommended for 
use as primers on cast iron because they cause immediate 
oxidation if applied on bare metal. Vinyl acrylic latex or 
acrylic latex paints may be used as finish coats over alkyd 
rust-inhibitive primers , but if the primer coats are 
imperfectly applied or are damaged, the latex paint will 
cause oxidation of the iron. Therefore, alkyd finish coats are 
recommended. 
High-performance coatings, such as zinc-rich primers 
containing zinc dust, and modern epoxy coatings, can be 
used on cast iron to provide longer-lasting protection . 
These coatings typically require highly clean surfaces and 
special application conditions which can be difficult to 
achieve in the field on large buildings (Fig. 13c). These 
coatings are used most effectively on elements which have 
been removed to a shop, or newly cast iron. 
One particularly effective system has been first to coat 
commercially blast-cleaned iron with a zinc-rich primer, 
followed by an epoxy base coat, and two urethane finish 
coats. Some epoxy coatings can be used as primers on clean 
metal or applied to previously-painted surfaces in sound 
condition. Epoxies are particularly susceptible to 
degradation under ultraviolet radiation and must be 
protected by finish coats which are more resistant. There 
have been problems with epoxy paints which have been 
shop-applied to iron where the coatings have been nicked 
prior to installation. Field touching-up of epoxy paints is 
very difficult, if not impossible. This is a concern since iron 
exposed by imperfections in the base coat will be more 
likely to rust and more frequent maintenance will be 
required. 
A key factor to take into account in selection of coatings is 
the variety of conditions on existing and new materials on a 
particular building or structure. One primer may be needed 
for surfaces with existing paint; another for newly cast, 
chemically stripped, or blast-cleaned cast iron; and a third 
for flashings or substitute materials; all three followed by 
compatible finish coats. 
Application Methods 
Brushing is the traditional and most effective technique for 
applying paint to cast iron. It provides good contact 
between the paint and the iron, as well as the effective 
filling of pits, cracks, and other blemishes in the metal. 
The use of spray guns to apply paint is economical, but 
does not always produce adequate and uniform coverage. 
For best results, air less sprayers should be used by skilled 
operators. To fully cover fine detailing and reach recesses, 
spraying of the primer coat, used in conjunction with 
brushing, may be effective. 
Rollers should never be used for primer coat applications 
on metal, and are effective for subsequent coats only on 
large, flat areas. The appearance of spray-applied and 
roller-applied finish coats is not historically appropriate and 
should be avoided on areas such as storefronts which are 
viewed close at hand. 
9 

~ 
NEW STAINLESS '? > 
STEEL BOLTS -. ~ / 
COLUMN 
10 
Caulking, Patching, and Mechanical Repairs 
Most architectural cast iron is made of many small casting s 
assembled by bolts or screws (Fig. 16a) . Joints between 
pieces were caulked to prevent water from seeping in and 
causing rusting from the inside out. Historically , the seams 
were often caulked with white lead paste and sometimes 
backed with cotton or hemp rope; even the bolt and screw 
heads were caulked to protect them from the elements and 
to hide them from view . Although old caulking is 
sometimes found in good condition, it is typically crumbled 
from weathering, cracked from the structural settlement, or 
destroyed by mechanical cleaning. It is essential to replace 
deteriorated caulking to prevent water penetration . For 
good adhesion and performance, an architectural-grade 
polyurethane sealant or traditional white lead paste is 
preferred. 
Water that penetrates the hollow parts of a cast-iron 
architectural element causes rust that may streak down over 
other architectural elements . The water may freeze, causing 
the ice to crack the cast iron . Cracks reduce the strength of 
the total cast-iron assembly and provide another point of 
entry for water. Thus, it is important that cracks be made 
weathertight by using caulks or fillers, depending on the 
width of the crack . 
Filler compounds containing iron particles in an epoxy resin 
binder can be used to patch superficial, non-structural 
cracks and small defects in cast iron . The thermal 
expansion rate of epoxy resin alone is different from that of 
iron, requiring the addition of iron particles to ensure 
compatibility and to control shrinkage. Although the 
repaired piece of metal does not have the same strength as a 
homogeneous piece of iron, epoxy-repaired members do 
have some strength. Polyester-based putties, such as those 
used on auto bodies, are also acceptable fillers for small holes . 
In rare instances, major cracks can be repaired by brazing or 
welding with special nickel-alloy welding rods. Brazing or 
welding of cast iron is very difficult to carry out in the field 
and should be undertaken only by very experienced welders . 
In some cases, mechanical repairs can be made to cast iron 
using iron bars and screws or bolts . In extreme cases, 
deteriorated cast iron can be cut out and new cast iron 
spliced in place by welding or brazing. However, it is 
frequently less expensive to replace a deteriorated cast-iron 
section with a new casting rather than to splice or reinforce 
it. Cast-iron structural elements that have failed must either 
be reinforced with iron and steel or replaced entirely. 
A wok! ; cast-iron balustrade or railing can often be fixed 
by tightening all bolts and screws . Screws with stripped 
threads and seriously rusted bolts must be replaced. To 
compensate for corroded metal around the bolt or screw 
holes, new stainless steel bolts or screws with a larger 
diameter need to be used. In extreme cases, new holes may 
need to be tapped. 
The internal voids of balusters, newel posts, statuary, and 
other elements should not be filled with concrete; it is an 
inappropriate treatment that causes further problems (Fig. 
15). As the concrete cures, it shrinks, leaving a space 
between the concrete and cast iron . Water penetrating this 
space does not evaporate quickly, thus promoting further 
rusting . The corrosion of the iron is further accelerated by 
the alkaline nature of concrete. Where cast-iron elements 
have been previously filled with concrete, they need to be 
taken apart, the concrete and rust removed, and the interior 
surfaces primed and painted before the elements are 
reassembled . 
Fig. 15. In an effort to repair this stair railing, concrete was poured 
around the wood spacer inside the railing casting. Water penetrated 
the railing and reacted with the concrete to accelerate the corrosion of 
the iron. Photo: John C. Waite. 
Fig. 16. Architectural cast iron is made of many small components bolted 
and screwed together. (a) This exploded view of a storefront illustrates 
the variety of elements, including brackets, fasteners, and holes for bolts. 
(b) The storefront was replicated in cast iron because of the extensive 
damage and structural failure, a detail of which is shown in Fig. 11 . 
Drawing and photo: Historical Arts & Casting, Inc. 

Duplication and Replacement 
The replacement of cast-iron components is often the only 
practical solution when such features are missing, severely 
corroded, or damaged beyond repair, or where repairs 
would be only marginally useful in extending the functional 
life of an iron element (Fig. 16). 
Sometimes it is possible to replace small, decorative, non­
structural elements using intact sections of the original as a 
casting pattern. For large sections, new patterns of wood or 
plastic made slightly larger in size than the original will 
need to be made in order to compensate for the shrinkage of 
the iron during casting (cast iron shrinks approximately 1/8 
inch per foot as it cools from a liquid into a solid). 
Occasionally, a matching replacement can be obtained from 
the existing catalogs of iron foundries. Small elements can 
be custom cast in iron at small local foundries, often at a 
cost comparable to substitute materials. Large elements 
and complex patterns will usually require the skills and 
facilities of a larger firm that specializes in replication. 
The Casting Process 
Architectural elements were traditionally cast in sand 
molds. The quality of the special sands used by 
foundries is extremely important; unlike most sands 
they must be moist. Foundries have their own 
formulas for sand and its admixtures, such as clay, 
which makes the sand cohesive even when the mold is 
turned upside down . 
A two-part mold (with a top and a bottom, or cope and 
drag) is used for making a casting with relief on both 
sides, whereas an open-top mold produces a flat 
surface on one side (Fig. 17a). For hollow elements, a 
third pattern and mold are required for the void. 
Many hollow castings are made of two or more parts 
that are later bolted, screwed, or welded together, 
because of the difficulty of supporting an interior core 
between the top and bottom sand molds during the 
casting process. 
The molding sand is compacted into flasks, or forms, 
around the pattern. The cope is then lifted off and the 
pattern is removed, leaving the imprint of the pattern 
in the small mold. Molten iron, heated to a 
temperature of approximately 2700 degrees 
Fahrenheit, is poured into the mold and then allowed 
to cool (Fig. 17b). The molds are then stripped from 
the casting; the tunnels to the mold (sprues) and risers 
that allowed release of air are cut off; and ragged 
edges (called "burrs") on the casting are ground 
smooth. 
The castings are shop-primed to prevent rust, and laid 
out and preas sembled at the foundry to ensure proper 
alignment and fit. When parts do not fit, the pieces are 
machined to remove irregularities caused by burrs, or 
are rejected and recast until all of the cast elements fit 
together properly. Most larger pieces then are taken 
apart before shipping to the job site, while some small 
ornamental parts may be left assembled. 
Fig. 17. (a) A two-part mold, consisting of a cope (top) and drag (bottom) for a newel post. Photo: Architectural Iron Company, Inc. 
(b) Molten iron being poured into a mold containing sand at a foundry. The iron casting process has changed little in the past two centuries. 
Photo: Karen Huebner. 
11 

Fig. 18. This cast-iron storefront cornice was corroded beyond the 
point of repair, and could not be removed easily for replacement. 
Terne-coated stainless steel, the most durable metal for flashing cast 
iron, was applied to the cornice and fitted as closely as possible to the 
historic profile. Although painting is not necessary to protect terne­
coated stainless steel, the cornice should be painted to be consistent 
with the historic character of the building. A primer which is 
compatible with the terne coating should be used. Photo: Dean Koga, 
Robert E. Meadows, P.C , Architects. 
Dismantling and Assembly of Architectural 
Comp onents 
It is sometimes necessary to dismantle all or part of a cast­
iron structure during restoration, if repairs cannot be 
successfully carried out in place. Dismantling should be 
done only under the direction of a preservation architect or 
architectural conservator who is experienced with historic 
cast iron. Extreme care must be taken since cast iron is very 
brittle, especially in cold weather. 
Dismantling should follow the reverse order of construction 
and re-erection should occur, as much as possible, in the 
exact order of original assembly. Each piece should be 
numbered and keyed to record drawings. When work must 
be carried out in cold weather, care needs to be taken to 
avoid fracturing the iron elements by uneven heating of the 
members. 
Both new castings and reused pieces should be painted with 
a shop-applied prime coat on all surfaces. All of the 
components should be laid out and preas sembled to make 
sure that the alignment and fit are proper. Many of the 
original bolts, nuts, and screws may have to be replaced 
with similar fasteners of stainless steel. 
After assembly at the site, joints that were historically 
caulked should be filled with an architectural-grade 
polyurethane sealant or the traditional white lead paste 
White lead has the advantage of longevity, although its use 
is restricted in many areas. 
12 
Flashings 
In some instances, it may be necessary to design and 
install flashings to protect areas vulnerable to water 
penetration. Flashings need to be designed and 
fabricated carefully so that they are effective, as well 
as unobtrusive in appearance. The most durable 
material for flashing iron is terne-coated stainless steel 
(Fig. 18). Other compatible materials are terne-coated 
steel and galvanized steel; however, these require 
more frequent maintenance and are less durable. 
Copper and lead-coated copper are not recommended 
for use as flashings in contact with cast iron because of 
galvanic corrosion problems. Galvanic problems can 
also occur with the use of aluminum if certain types of 
electrolytes are present. 
Substitute Materials 
In recent years, a number of metallic and non-metallic 
materials have been used as substitutes for cast iron, 
although they were not used historically with cast iron . The 
most common have been cast aluminum, epoxies, 
reinforced polyester (fiberglass), and glass fiber-reinforced 
concrete (GFRC). Factors to consider in using substitute 
materials are addressed in Preservation Briefs 16, which 
emphasizes that "every means of repairing deteriorating 
historic materials or replacing them with identical materials 
should be examined before turning to substitute materials ." 
Cast aluminum has been used recently as a substitute for 
cast iron, particularly for ornately-detailed decorative 
elements. Aluminum is lighter in weight, more resistant to 
corrosion, and less brittle than cast iron. However, because 
it is dissimilar from iron, its placement in contact with or 
near cast iron may result in galvanic corrosion, and thus 
should be avoided. Special care must be taken in the 
application of paint coatings, particularly in the field. It is 
often difficult to achieve a durable coating after the original 
finish has failed. Because aluminum is weaker than iron, 
careful analysis is required whenever aluminum is being 
considered as a replacement material for structural cast-iron 
elements. 
Epoxies are two-part, thermo-setting, resinous materials 
which can be molded into virtually any form . When 
molded, the epoxy is usually mixed with fillers such as 
sand, glass balloons, or stone chips. Since it is not a metal, 
galvanic corrosion does not occur. When mixed with sand 
or stone, it is often termed epoxy concrete or polymer 
concrete, a misnomer because no cementitious materials are 
included. Epoxies are particularly effective for replicating 
small, ornamental sections of cast iron. Since it is not a 
metal, galvanic corrosion does not occur. Epoxy elements 
must have a protective coating to shield them from 
ultraviolet degradation. They are also flammable and 
cannot be used as substitutes for structural cast-iron 
elements. 
Reinforced polyester , commonly known as fiberglass, is 
often used as a lightweight substitute for historic materials, 
including cast iron, wood, and stone. In its most common 
form, fiberglass is a thin, rigid , laminate shell formed by 
pouring a polyester resin into a mold and then adding 
fiberglass for reinforcement. Like epoxies, fiberglass is non-

corrosive, but is susceptible to ultraviolet degradation. 
Because of its rather flimsy nature, it cannot be used as a 
substitute for structural elements, cannot be assembled like 
cast iron and usually requires a separate anchorage system. 
It is unsuitable for locations where it is susceptible to 
damage by impact (Fig. 20), and is also flammable. 
Glass fiber-reinforced concrete, known as GFRC, is similar 
to fiberglass except that a lightweight concrete is 
substituted for the resin. GFRC elements are generally 
fabricated as thin shell panels by spraying concrete into 
forms. Usually a separate framing and anchorage system is 
required. GFRC elements are lightweight, inexpensive, and 
weather resistant. Because GFRC has a low shrinkage co­
efficient, molds can be made directly from historic elements. 
However, GFRC is very different physically and chemically 
from iron. If used adjacent to iron, it causes corrosion of the 
iron and will have a different moisture absorption rate. 
Also, it is not possible to achieve the crisp detail that is 
characteristic of cast iron. 
13 
Fig. 19. (a) Fiberglass columns and aluminum capitals were installed 
to replicate the ornamental features on the east facade of the New 
Market Theater ill Portland, Oregon, that had been destroyed by 
previous occupants. Like cast iron, crisp ornamental details can be 
achieved with cast aluminum. Although aluminum may be in contact 
with fiberglass, galvanic corrosion may resuIt when aluminum is in 
direct contact with cast iron. Photo: William J. Hawkins, III. (b) The 
west facade of the theatre retains its original cast iron features. 
Photo: George McMath. 
Fig. 20. The location of the feature must be taken into account if a 
substitute replacement material is being considered. This lightweight 
fiberglass column at street level sustained damage from impact within a 
few years of installation. The great strength of cast iron makes it ideal 
for storefronts and elements that must withstand heavy use. Photo: 
Building Conservation Associates. 
Maintenance 
A successful maintenance program is the key to the long­
term preservation of architectural cast iron. Regular 
inspections and accurate record-keeping are essential. 
Biannual inspections, occurring ideally in the spring and 
fall, include the identification of major problems, such as 
missing elements and fractures, as well as minor items such 
as failed caulking, damaged paint, and surface dirt. 
Records should be kept in the form of a permanent 
maintenance log which describes routine maintenance tasks 
and records the date a problem is first noted, when it was 
corrected, and the treatment method. Painting records are 
important for selecting compatible paints for touch-up and 
subsequent repainting. The location of the work and the 
type, manufacturer, and color of the paint should be noted 
in the log. The same information also should be assembled 
and recorded for caulking. 
Superficial dirt can be washed off well-painted and caulked 
cast iron with low-pressure water. Non-ionic detergents 
may be used for the remo\',li of heavy or tenacious dirt or 
stains, after testing to determine that they have no adverse 
effects on the painted surfaces. Thick grease deposits and 
residue can be removed by hand scraping. Water and 
detergents or non-caustic degreasing agents can be used to 
clean off the residue. Before repainting, oil and grease must 
be removed so that new coatings will adhere properly. 

14 
The primary purpose of the maintenance program is to 
control corrosion. As soon as rusting is noted, it should be 
carefully removed and the protective coating of the iron 
renewed in the affected area. Replacement of deteriorated 
caulking, and repair or replacement of failed flashings are 
also important preventive maintenance measures . 
Summary 
The successful conservation of cast-iron architectural 
elements and objects is dependent upon an accurate 
diagnosis of their condition and the problems affecting 
them, as well as the selection of appropriate repair, 
cleaning, and painting procedures. Frequently, it is 
necessary to undertake major repairs to individual elements 
and assemblies; in some cases badly damaged or missing 
components must be replicated. The long-term 
preservation of architectural cast iron is dependent upon 
both the undertaking of timely, appropriate repairs and the 
commitment to a regular schedule of maintenance. 
Detail of polychromed cast-iron facade at 23 Petaluma Boulevard, 
Petaluma, Calif. (1886; O'Connell and Lewis, Architectural Iron 
Work, San Francisco). Photo: Don Meacham. 
Reading List 
Ashurst, John, and Nicola Ashurst with Geoff Wallis and Dennis Toner. 
Practical Building Conservation: English Heritage Technical Handbook: 
Volume 4 Metals. Aldershot, Hants: Gower Technical Press, 1988. 
Badger, Daniel D., with a new introduction by Margot Gayle. Badger's 
Illustrated Catalogue of Cast-Iron Architecture. New York: Dover 
Publications, Inc., 1981; reprint of 1865 edition published by Baker & 
Godwin, Printers, New York. 
Gayle, Margot, and Edmund V. Gillon, Jr. Cast-Iron Architecture in New 
York: A Photographic Survey. New York: Dover Publications Inc., 1974. 
Gayle, Margot, David W. Look, AlA, and John G. Waite. Metals in 
America's Historic Buildings: Part I. A Historical Survey of Metals; Part II. 
Deterioration and Methods of Preservillg Metals. Washington, D.C; 
Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, 
U.s . Department of the Interior, 1980. 
Hawkins, William John III. The Grand Era of Cast Iron Architecture in 
Portland. Portland, Oregon: Binford & Mort, 1976. 
Howell, J. Scott. "Architectural Cast Iron: Design and Restoration," The 
Journal of the Association for Preservation Technology. Vol XIX, Number 3 
(1987), pp. 51-55. 
Park, Sharon C, AlA. Preservation Briefs 16: The Use of Substitute 
Materials on Historic Building Exteriors. Washington D. c.: Preservation 
Assistance Division, National Park Service, U. S. Department of the 
Interior, 1988. 
Robertson, E. Graeme, and Joan Robertson. Cast Iron Decoration: A World 
Survey. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1977. 
Southworth, Susan and Michael. Ornamental Ironwork: An Illustrated 
Guide to Its Design, History, and Use in American Architecture. Boston: 
David R. Godine, 1978. 
Waite, Diana S. Ornamental Ironwork: Two Centuries of Craftsmanship in 
Albany and Troy, New York. Albany, NY: Mount Ida Press, 1990. 
Acknowledgements 
This Preservation Brief was developed by the New York Landmarks Conservan cy's 
Technical Preservation Services Center under a cooperative agreement with the 
National Park Service 's Preservation Assistance Division, and with partial funding 
from the New York State Council on the Arts. The following individuals are to be 
thanked for their technical assistance: Robert Baird, Historical Arts & Casting ; 
Willcox Dunn, Architect and Cast Iron Consultant; William Foulks, Mesick Cohen 
Waite Architects; Elizabeth Frosch, New York City Landmarks Preservation 
Commission; William Hawkins, III, FAIA, McMath Hawkins Dortignacq; J. Scott 
I lowell, Robinson Iron Company; David Look, AlA, National Park Service ; Donald 
Quick, Architectural Iron Company; Maurice Schickler, Facade Consultants 
International; Joel Schwartz, Schwartz and Schwartz Metalworks; and Diana Waite , 
Mount Ida Press. Kim Lovejoy was project coordinator and editor for the 
Conservancy; Charles Fisher was project coordinator and editor for the National 
Park Service. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the Nationa l Historic Preservation 
Act amendments of 1980, which direct the Secretary of the Interior to develop and 
make available information concerning historic properties. Comments on the 
usefulness of this information and information on how to obtain copies may be 
directed either to the Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, ational Park 
Service, US. Department of the Interior, P.O. Bo, 37127, Washington, D.C. 20013-
7127, or to the Director, Technical Preservation Services Center, New York 
Landmarks Conservancy, 141 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY IDOlO. 
This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without p~nalty. 
Normal procedures for credit to the authors, the New York Landmarks 
Conservancy, and the National Park Service are appreciated. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 October 1991 
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 