U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Preservation Assistance 
38 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Removing Graffiti from Historic Masonry 
Martin E. Weaver 
In Cooperation with the 
New York Landmarks Conservancy 
Figure 1. Many stones resemble others, and even concrete can sometimes be 
mistaken for stone. The stone trim on the Old Merchant's (Seabun) 
TredwelI) House (1832), in Greenwich Village, New York City, is 
documented as Vermont marble. After establishing the stone type, cleaning 
methods should be tested in a discrete location in order to determine the most 
effective means of removing the graffiti without damaging the stone. More 
than one kind of removal technique may be required when both stone and 
brick require cleaning. Photo: Mark A. Weber 
Removing graffiti as soon as it appears is the key to its 
elimination-and recurrence . Thus, the intent of this 
Preservation Brief is to help owners and managers of historic 
masonry structures find the best way to remove exterior, 
surface-applied graffiti* quickly, effectively, and safely. The 
Brief will discuss the variety of materials used to apply 
graffiti, and offer guidance on how to remove graffiti from 
all types of historic masonry without harming either the 
surface or the substrate . Suggestions will also be given 
regarding the use of physical barriers to protect masonry 
surfaces from graffiti, and the application of barrier coatings 
to facilitate graffiti removal. Building managers and owners 
of historic properties will be advised on the importance of 
being prepared for rapid graffiti removal by testing different 
cleaning techniques in advance in order to select the most 
appropriate and sensitive cleaning technique. Health and 
safety and environmental concerns are addressed, as well as 
regulatory matters . Removing graffiti without causing 
damage to historic masonry is a job for trained maintenance 
crews, and in some cases, professional conservators, and 
generally should not be attempted by untrained workers, 
property owners or building managers. Although the focus 
of this Preservation Brief is on historic masonry, the same 
guidance may be applied equally to removing graffiti from 
non-historic masonry. 
Identifying the Graffiti and the Masonry 
Successful graffiti removal from historic masonry depends 
on achieving a balance between breaking the bond between 
the graffiti and the masonry surface without damaging the 
masonry. This generally requires knowledge both of the 
materials used to make the graffiti and the masonry on 
which the graffiti has been executed, as well as knowledge 
of cleaning methods and materials (Fig. 1). Without this, 
masonry surfaces can be badly disfigured or damaged 
during graffiti removal. 
Graffiti. Most graffiti is made with spray paints. Although 
a number of solvents and paint strippers are capable of 
dissolving or breaking down these paints, some may 
permanently discolor or stain the masonry surface if not 
used correctly . As a result, the remaining paint may become 

.... '1 I-h.J;~ I<;.;,'r 
I '" IL ". E:rl r 
2 
more difficult, or even impossible, to remove. Poorly 
thought-out and generally hasty attempts to remove graffiti 
using harsh chemicals or abrasives can also cause 
permanent damage to the masonry that may be worse than 
the graffiti (Fig. 2). 
The ability to identify the graffiti material is an important 
step in successful removal. Numerous kinds of spray paint 
(polyurethanes, lacquers, and enamels), and brush-applied 
paints (oils and synthetic resins such as vinyls, acrylics , 
acetates, methacrylates, or alkyds), as well as permanent 
felt markers are the materials most often used to make 
graffiti. But other materials are also used for graffiti, 
including water-soluble felt markers, ballpoint pens, chalk , 
graphite and colored pencils, pastels, wax and oil crayons , 
liquid shoe polish, and lipstick (Fig. 3). The range of 
materials adopted by graffitists continues to expand. 
Figure 2. Harsh, but ineffective, graffiti removal methods have resulted in 
permanent damage to granite walls at the General Grant National 
Memorial in New York City. Photo: Judith M. Jacob 
Paints are composed of pigments that provide color and 
hiding power; binder that holds the pigments together and 
to the substrate; and a solvent that allows the 
pigment / binder mixture to flow. Some spray paints and 
markers may contain dyes instead of pigments . Paints are 
applied wet. Generally, as the solvent evaporates, the 
binder solidifies . The greater the solvent content of the 
paint, the greater the flow rate , and thus, the greater the 
ability of the paint to penetrate into masonry pores 
The two primary components contained in most graffiti 
materials-pigment or dye, and binder-may simply 
remain on the masonry surface , or penetrate into the 
masonry to varying depths depending on a number of 
factors , including the surface tension of the substrate and 
viscosity of the solvent or vehicle. Thus, even the total 
removal of the pigment or the binder may leave residues of 
the other component actually in, or below, the surface of the 
stone . Residual stains, or graffiti "ghosts ," such as those 
from any kind of red paint or the fine black pigments used 
in spray paints, may be particularly difficult to remove (Fig. 
4). With painted graffiti, it is helpful to establish how long 
it has been on the surface . For most paints that have been 
on the surface for several weeks or months, hardening 
processes are likely to be complete or well-advanced; the 
solubility of the paint is proportionately reduced and it will 
be more difficult to remove. 
Figure 3 (a-d). A wide 
variety of materials is 
used to make sllrface­
applied graffiti on 
masonry, including 
(a) chalk, (b) felt-tip 
marker, (c) felt-tip 
marker combined with 
crayon, alld (d) felt-tip 
marker and spray 
paint all concrete. 
Photos: (a) Anne 
Grimmer, (b) Frallces 
Gale, (c) Martin 
Weaver, (d) Anile 
Grimmer. 

Figure 4 (a-b). After cleaning with an alkaline paint remover, remnants 
or ghosts of black spray-painted graffiti are still visible and may require 
poulticing, while the blue paint has been almost completely removed. 
Photos: Mark A. Weber. 
Masonry. The historic masonry substrate must also be 
identified . As used here, the term masonry encompasses all 
types of natural stones; manufactured clay materials , 
including brick and terra cotta; and cementitious materials , 
such as cast stone, concrete and mortar . The common factor 
among masonry materials is that they are porous, to a 
greater or lesser extent, and sensitive to abrasion . After 
identifying the masonry, its condition, including fragility, 
porosity and permeability, must also be assessed prior to 
beginning graffiti removal. For example , a smooth , newly­
polished granite surface is comparatively easy to clean 
because it is relatively impermeable and paint vehicles tend 
to stay on the surface rather than penetrate into microscopic 
pores . A very smooth, polished surface also has no pits or 
crevices that will retain particles of pigment or binder . In 
contrast, weathered marble or limestone may be extremely 
porous and permeable, with a rough surface on which 
particles of pigment can easily lodge . The fragility of such a 
surface can make it impossible to clean the surface even 
with a bristle brush without risking severe surface loss. A 
difference in surface texture or finish may also be the reason 
that a particular cleaning agent will work in one situation 
but not another. 
Some types of masonry may react adversely to contact with 
the various cleaning agents required to break or dissolve 
the bond between the graffiti and the masonry surface . 
Thus, for purposes of cleaning, masonry types are often 
categorized according to whether they are acid-sensitive, 
non-acid sensitive, or alkali-sensitive. Acid-sensitive stones 
consisting of carbonate materials may be damaged or even 
destroyed by contact with acids. Although, in many 
instances, acidic cleaning compounds are not effective for 
graffiti removal and generally should not be used for this 
purpose, it is useful to know that some acid-sensitive 
materials include: stones such as limestone, marble, 
travertine, calcareous sandstones and shales; most polished 
stones; and glazed architectural terra cotta and glazed brick. 
Non-acid sensitive masonry materials include slate, granite, 
unglazed architectural terra cotta and unglazed brick. 
Alkali-sensitive stones may contain silicates, or ferrous, 
soluble iron compounds that can react with alkalis or water 
to form severe staining. Alkali-sensitive stones include some 
granites, Indiana limestone, and many types of sandstone, 
especially those that are green or grey in color. Glazed and 
polished surfaces tend to be damaged by both strong acids 
and strong alkalis. 
Graffiti Removal Methods and Materials 
A variety of treatments are available from which to choose 
the most appropriate method of graffiti removal that will 
not damage the surface of historic masonry. Removal 
techniques, which are chosen according to the type of 
graffiti and the masonry , range from simply erasing 
pencilled graffiti with soft erasers, or removing chalked 
graffiti with soft brushes, to poulticing with water (with or 
without detergents), poulticing with organic solvents or 
alkali-based paint removers, or applying bleach to remove 
painted graffiti. In very limited situations, it may mean 
using very delicate and controlled abrasive means. 
Successful graffiti removal often requires a combination of 
cleaning materials and methods. 
Poulticing 
The most effective method of removing graffiti from 
masonry usually involves the use of a poultice. A poultice 
consists of an absorbent material or powder-inert clays such 
as kaolin or sepiolite, diatomaceous earth (fuller's earth); or 
cellulose products such as fluff puIp celluIose or shredded 
paper-mixed with a cleaning solution (a liquid reagent such 
as water, organic solvent, paint stripper or bleach) to form a 
paste or slurry. The purpose of a poultice is twofold: it 
enables a cleaning solution to be kept in contact with the 
stained area as long as possible, while allowing the cleaning 
solution to pull the staining material out of the substrate via 
the poultice without redepositing it in, or restaining, the 
masonry . A poultice is often covered with a plastic sheet to 
retard evaporation (Fig. 5). With some extremely porous 
types of stone, such as marble, although a poultice may 
remove a stain from one side of the stone, stains can pass 
completely through the stone and be redeposited on the 
other side of the masonry slab. Thus, caution should always 
be exercised in stain and graffiti removal. 
Water and Detergent. Graffiti removal from historic 
masonry should always begin with the gentlest means 
possible . In some instances, this means low-pressure water 
washing. Fresh graffiti- one or two days old-made with 
water-soluble markers may sometimes be removed with 
water, possibly aided by a neutral or non-ionic detergent. 
3 

4 
Figure 5. (a) Here, a commercially-manufactured poultice is being 
applied to the graffiti ghost that remains on this limestone building after 
an initial treatment with paint remover; (b) a plastic sheet has been taped 
over the poultice to slow dowll the rate of evaporatioll of the solvents 
contained in the poultice. Photos: Ken Lustbadel'. 
(Non-ionic detergents which do not ionize in solution, do 
not deposit a solid, visible residue .) Ammonia can also be 
effective in removing fresh graffiti. Any detergent should 
be approached with caution and tested before using 
because most commercial laundry detergents are not 
neutral and contain substances which may leave 
undesirable residues on masonry materials . Usually, the 
water and detergent should be mixed with an absorbent 
material and applied in the form of a poultice. Although 
water washing is often likely to be the gentlest cleaning 
method for historic masonry, it may not be as effective for 
removing graffiti because many graffiti materials are not 
soluble in water. 
Organic Solvents and Paint Removers. Most graffiti can be 
removed without damaging the masonry with proprietary 
graffiti-removal products and commercial paint strippers 
containing organic solvents. But, these products should 
always be tested and used in accordance with 
manufacturer's instructions included in the product 
literature. Normally, solvents should be used in a poultice 
form to prevent them from penetrating into the substrate, 
and permanently discoloring or staining the masonry . A 
number of paint-removers are manufactured as thick gels 
or pastes that cling to the surface, and some commercial 
paint-removal products include a tough fiber-reinforced 
paper or cloth backing that retards evaporation and also 
facilitates neat and clean removal of the used stripper. The 
advantage of using organic solvents is that they evaporate 
completely, leaving no residual material in the masonry. 
However, organic solvents may present a severe health 
hazard, and workers using them must wear adequate 
protection. "Off-the-shelf" aerosol graffiti removers 
generally should not be used because the dissolved paint 
being removed may run down the wall "staining" a 
previously clean area; or pigments may also be 
redistributed by the rinsing and scrubbing recommended 
by the product manufacturer (Fig. 6). 
Alkaline Compounds. Alkaline compounds may be used 
to remove some oils and greases, and waxes from non-aLkali 
sensitive masonry. Like organic solvents, alkaline 
compo unds should generally be used in conjunction with a 
poultice when removing graffiti. The use of alkaline 
compounds should always be followed by a weak acid 
Figure 6. Although all aerosol graffiti remover has taken off much of the 
graffiti, it has left Ilew stains where it dripped down the masonry surface. 
Photo: Kell Lustbader. 

wash and a water rinse in order to neutraliz~r remove-­
all the alkaline residues from the masonry. Strong alkalies 
(pH13-14), such as sodium hydroxide-based paint removers 
(caustic soda or lye), generally should not be used as they 
can cause efflorescence and staining on masonry surfaces, if 
not properly neutralized. Potassium and other hydroxide 
paint removers may react with iron compounds in some 
masonry, particularly Indiana limestone, to form dark 
brown (rust-colored), or black ferric hydroxide stains, 
which are very difficult to remove. 
Bleaches. Alkali-based bleaches such as calcium 
hypochlorite can sometimes be used very successfully in a 
poultice to bleach or decolorize certain dyes contained in 
some paints and inks that cannot readily be removed by 
other means. 
Mechanical or Abrasive Methods. Mechanical treatments 
include dry or wet blasting, using abrasive grits, such as 
sand, dolomite powder, aluminum oxide, ground-walnut 
shells, sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), and others; high­
pressure water washing; and mechanical sanding or 
grin ding . All of these abrasive methods will cause damage 
to masonry and, in most instances, should never be 
considered as a method of removing graffiti from historic 
masonry. Abrasive methods used mistakenly by untrained 
workers to remove graffiti usually result in etching the 
outline of the graffiti permanently into the masonry (Fig. 7). 
Some historic masonry materials can be easily damaged by 
pressure washing even at low or moderate pressures 000-
400 psi). Occasionally, however , under very controlled 
circumstances, a micro-abrasive technique may be 
appropriate for removing graffiti from delicate masonry 
surfaces, if used at low pressures of 35-40 psi with fine 
abrasives. This treatment, which must be done very slowly 
and carefully to avoid damaging the masonry, should be 
tested first, and undertaken only by a professional 
conservator. Another exception, even though it is not 
strictly an abrasive treatment, is using a razor blade as a 
first step to remove spray paint or felt-tip marker from 
polished granite. However, this too, should be undertaken 
only by a professional conservator, and only on polished 
granite, which is very hard and generally impervious to 
scra tches. 
Laser Cleaning. Although not in general use as a cleaning 
technique, laser technology offers great promise in the 
future as a non-damaging method of graffiti removal. 
Testing 
Before selecting a removal method , all cleaning materials 
and techniques for removing graffiti from a historic 
masonry building should be tested on mock-ups or areas of 
the resource that are not highly visible, but which are 
representative of typical conditions . Visual observation 
sho uld be supplemented by the use of a magnifying glass, 
and spot tests should be carried out with various solvents to 
help identify the specific graffiti medium, which will aid in 
its removal. More complex testing using laboratory 
equipme nt and more scientific analytical processes may 
sometimes be necessary in complex situations. Sample 
areas that represent the desired degree of "cleanliness" 
sho uld be approved in writing by client, architect, 
conservator or other appropriate authority . The materials 
and all the other data necessary to reproduce the desired 
Figure 7 (a-b). The first time this spray-painted graffiti appeared it was 
removed abrasively. As a result, the graffiti was permanently etched into 
the limestone and cal1not be concealed even by the pigmented barrier 
coating painted over it later. The barrier coating did, however, facilitate 
110n-abrasive removal of graffiti the next time it was applied. 
Photos: Anne Grimmer. 
cleaning results should be meticulously recorded and the 
accepted sample area preserved for reference until the end 
of the job. The existence of a "clean" sample for comparison 
and a signed agreement can avoid unpleasant surprises, 
misunderstandings, and perhaps legal acti~ns. 
When a type of graffiti appears for the first time that was 
executed with a material not immediately recognizable and 
for which no countermeasures have been developed, tests 
may need to be carried out by an architectural conservator 
to identify the material and to determine effective removal 
treatments. Agencies with large inventories of graffiti­
prone buildings and structures should watch for graffiti 
made with new materials and experiment with different 
cleaning methods in order to be prepared when it appears. 
Such early action can save large sums of money in the long 
term. (See "Development of a Treatment Plan .") 
5 

6 
Developmen t of a Treatment Plan 
For managers or owners of historic masonry buildings, 
or agencies responsible for large inventories of graffiti­
prone properties, including parks, highway and 
railroad bridges and viaducts, bus, train and subway 
stations, and cemeteries, the development of a 
treatment plan may be the first step toward an effective 
graffiti-removal program. It is becoming increasingly 
common for large or important historic properties to 
have regular maintenance and disaster plans that 
include graffiti removal. 
When feasible, a separate treatment plan should be 
prepared for each structure. However, if this is not 
possible, it is advisable to prepare a variety of 
treatment plans for specific masonry types. Plans 
should be prepared to cover all types of masonry that 
fall under one jurisdiction, management or ownership 
that are potential targets for graffiti. 
Guidance contained in treatment plans should be based 
on the results of carefully controlled testing to remove a 
wide variety of common graffiti materials safely, and 
withou t damaging the various types of masonry. 
Individual treatment plans should address all parts of 
the building or structure that could be disfigured by 
graffiti, and any features too fragile to be cleaned by 
anyone other than a conservator should be noted on 
the plan . 
A treatment plan is essentially a cleaning 
specification, but it should also include information 
on the following : 
• the types and conditions of masonry likely to be 
targeted by graffiti; 
• methods, materials and techniques known to work 
most successfully in the removal of specific types 
of graffiti from the surface of each type of masonry; 
• sources for materials; 
• a list of contractors with expertise in graffiti 
removal, including names, telephone numbers, 
information on emergency access to the property, 
and storage location of materials; 
• graffiti-removal methods which may be harmful to 
the masonry surface ; 
• contractors or consultants who are not acceptable 
and should not be considered for graffiti removal; 
• scaffolding, pumps, or safety equipment that might 
be required, where it is available, and costs 
involved; and 
• health and safety concerns regarding specific 
removal treatments, product literature and 
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS). 
Health and Safety Considerations 
Most of the chemicals used for graffiti removal are dangerou s 
to workers, as well as to others who may be in the vicinity. 
Organic solvents are toxic by ingestion, inhalation, and skin 
contact. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), available from 
the product manufacturer for all paint-removal products, 
should always be consulted and followed. Identification of 
hazardous components and checking with chemical reference 
works will help assure that the least hazardous, but most 
effective, products are selected. 
Generally speaking, it is a sensible policy to carry out all 
graffiti removal in well-ventilated conditions . Some 
solvents can be used only outdoors, and sometimes forced 
ventilation may be necessary even there, requiring workers 
to use air-fed respiratory equipment to avoid wind-blown 
fumes. Smoking, eating or drinking must not be allowed 
when cleaning is in progress. 
Some materials used for graffiti removal are so corrosive 
that accidental contact can cause serious, permanent 
scarring and painful injuries. Wearing appropriate 
protective clothing must be strictly enforced . Mandatory 
personal protective equipment (PPE) normally includes face 
shields or safety glasses; long, chemical-resistant gloves; 
face masks with respirators for organic solvents; and 
possibly, full protective clothing with an independent 
air supply. 
All smoking and open flames should be rigorously 
excluded from work areas; many solvents are flammable or 
highly explosive in vapor or liquid form when mixed with 
air. Solvent residue, used swabs, cloths, overalls and all 
other solvent-contaminated items should be safely and 
legally disposed of, or properly stored-even overnight­
away from potential sources of fire. Electrical equipment 
may require explosion-proof fittings when used with 
certain solvents. 
When electric pumps and pressure-spraying equipment are 
used, it is especially important that all necessary 
precautions be taken to avoid electric shock. Water sprays 
and puddles on the ground present a potentially dangerous 
situation, if they come into contact with temporary wiring 
at worksites where graffiti is being removed. Such hazards 
must be carefully monitored and controlled. 
As with any construction project, attention should always 
be directed toward the general safety of the workers and 
passers-by, but also toward possible damage to the resource 
itself that might result from careless placement of ladders, 
or scaffolding. Chemicals used for masonry cleaning can 
also damage adjacent metals, glass, and painted surfaces, as 
well as vegetation (Fig. 8). Product manufacturers' 
instructions should always be closely followed to avoid 
such inadvertent "collateral" damage . 
Environmental Considerations 
To protect against environmental contamination, including 
the formation of unwanted ozone at ground level and 
damage to the ozone layer in the earth's outer atmosphere, 
legislation has been enacted in some states making it illegal 
to use even moderate quantities of some solvents - voLatiLe 
organic compounds (VOCs) contained in paint removers . In 
response to this legislation, many new products are being 
developed that do not contain VOCs. 

After completing graffiti removal, the disposal of chemical 
products and rinsing effluent must be taken into account. 
Arrangement for disposal of the cleaning waste should be 
made prior to beginning graffiti removal, especially if it is a 
project of considerable size. In many places it is illegal to 
discharge solvents and/or paint residues into sewers or 
storm drains . The owner or manager of a historic property, 
or in some cases the individual or firm doing the cleaning 
or graffiti removal, is responsible for being informed of, and 
complying with, relevant laws and regulations. Under 
provisions of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 
as amended, approval may be required from a state or 
federal preservation agency before any work can be 
undertaken on buildings or structures listed in or eligible 
for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, if such 
a project involves federal funding or licensing. Many state 
and local historic district commissions and review boards 
have their own regulations that require approval for 
cleaning or graffiti removal work that is undertaken on 
landmarks or properties in locally designated historic 
districts . 
Barrier Coatings 
Anti-graffiti or barrier coatings are intended to facilitate the 
removal of graffiti from porous as well as non-porous 
surfaces. These coatings are most commonly transparent, 
but may also be pigmented. They are available in a variety 
of formulations designed to serve different needs . The use 
of barrier coatings to protect graffiti-prone historic masonry 
surfaces may seem to be an easy preventive solution to a 
persistent graffiti problem. However, for the most part, 
these coatings are not the panacea that some advertising 
might suggest. Some of them simply do not work, and 
others may cause physical or aesthetic changes or damage 
to the masonry. 
Transparent Coatings. Transparent coatings serve as a 
barrier between the masonry surface and graffiti, 
preventing graffiti from penetrating into the masonry. 
They are also intended to make graffiti removal easier since 
most graffiti does not adhere well to them. Generally, 
graffiti applied over transparent barrier coatings can be 
removed with low-pressure water and a detergent, or with 
a solvent. 
There are basically two kinds of transparent barrier 
coatings: temporary and permanent. Temporary, or 
"sacrificial" coatings are removed when graffiti is removed 
and then must be reapplied. Permanent transparent barrier 
coatings are more resistant to the water or solvents used to 
remove graffiti, and remain on the masonry surface when 
graffiti is removed (although this type of coating also must 
usually be reapplied after several cleanings). A third type 
of transparent barrier coating combines temporary and 
permanent coatings, based on a two-part system . A water­
based acrylic sealer is first applied to the masonry surface, 
after which a sacrificial layer consisting of a polyethylene 
wax emulsion or dispersion coat is applied over the sealer. 
When graffiti is removed, the sealer coat remains on the 
masonry, but the sacrificial coat dissolves and is removed 
with the graffiti, and thus must be reapplied . (With this 
two-part system, even the first coat will eventually wear off 
after multiple cleanings, and must also be reapplied .) 
Unfortunately, in application, there are a number of 
negative aspects of transparent barrier coatings that 
generally prevent their being recommended for use on 
historic masonry. First, clear coatings may alter the color of 
the masonry surface and add a gloss that may be highly 
visible, or apparent only in certain lighting conditions or 
when it rains. Second, clear coatings may reduce the water­
vapor permeability of the masonry, thereby contributing to 
possible water-related deterioration. Third, the coating 
may discolor and change over time. Exposure to ultra­
violet light can cause a coating to yellow; dirt build-up may 
darken the treated surface; and some coatings acquire a 
sheen when rubbed or brushed against. Such changes are 
especially noticeable when only a portion of the building 
has been coated. Furthermore, if coatings are not 
maintained on a regular basis, usually through periodic 
removal and reapplication, many coatings tend to fail. 
What often results is an uneven, "patchy" look to the 
masonry that can have a very negative impact on the 
character of the historic building (Fig. 9). 
Despite these potential drawbacks, there may be some 
instances in which the graffiti problem or frequency of 
occurrence is so severe that application of a transparent 
barrier coating on historic masonry may be worth 
considering. Some water-based polysaccharide coatings, 
and silicone and silicone-based coatings have been used 
with success on masonry structures . They are essentially 
Criteria to Consider Before Selecting 
a Barrier Coating as the Primary 
Protective Means of 
Combating Graffiti 
What to look for in a Barrier Coating: 
• Water-vapor permeable, or "breathable". 
• "Invisible" without gloss or sheen, when applied to 
masonry. 
• No change in appearance from uncoated areas when 
masonry is wet. 
• Does not discolor or attract dirt. 
• Weathers evenly. 
Questions to Ask: 
• Will the coating last long enough to offset its cost? 
• Will the application and reapplication of the coating 
be cost effective? 
• Will the coating be effective against more than one 
type of graffiti? 
• Can the coating be completely and thoroughly 
removed, so that, if necessary, paint, or another 
coating will adhere to the masonry surface? 
• Will the building ever need to be repointed or 
patched? A barrier coating may make this difficult 
or even impossible. 
Before Application: 
• Seek advice of an architectural conservator. 
• Test coating on an inconspicuous area of masonry, or 
study the success/ failure of the coating in other 
locations where it has been used. 
7 

8
Figure 8. The cast-iron railing and light fixtures on this stone stoop have been wrapped with plastic sheeting to protect them from damage by chemicals being 
used to remove the graffiti. Photo: Mark A. Weber. 
Figure 9. These photographs illustrate some of the problems inherent in clear 
barrier coatings. (a) The transparent coating applied to the lower portion of 
this granite entranceway has darkened it, thus changing the character of the 
historic masonry. (b) But it is not nearly so obvious or damaging to the 
building's historic character as the thick and shiny clear coating applied here 
which resembles a plastic sheathing over the brick. Scratches are highly 
visible and a surface haze indicates that the coating has begun to deteriorate. 
(c) This transparent coating is peeling and has failed completely; 110t only is 
it an eyesore, but it may also be hard to remove from the brick. Photos: (a-b) 
Mark A. Weber, (c) Martin E. Weaver. 

invisible, and do not change the natural appearance of the 
masonry. Although less durable than solvent-borne 
coa tings, they are water-vapor permeable (breathable), and 
may be reapplied to the masonry surface immediately after 
remov ing graffiti, while the surface is still damp . 
Howeve r, extreme caution must be exercised before 
applying a transparent barrier coating. Experimental test 
app lications should always be tried first on discrete areas 
that are not highly visible, and the treat ed areas evaluated 
over a period of time . Laboratory test results on the 
perfo rmance of coatings applied to samples of like masonry 
types may be useful to some extent. But because the tests 
are carried out in a controlled environment, they may not 
be as accurate or reliable as tests actually carried out on-site 
where the factors of weather and pollution are the same as 
those at the location where the coating will be used. If 
circumstances warrant, and the use of a barrier coating is 
determined necessary , an architectural conservator should 
eva luate the test performance of a variety of coatings before 
selecting one to be applied to historic masonry . Because of 
the potential for disfigurement , owners of landmark­
designated buildings are required by some preservation 
review boards and landmark commissions to obtain 
approval before they apply a barrier coating . 
Pigmented Coatings. A pigmented barrier coati ng may be 
used on masonry as a permanent , preventive barrier 
coating , or as a temporary mean s of concealing graffiti until 
it can be removed . 
Like a transparent barrier coating, a pigm ented barrier coating 
facilitates the removal of graffiti because graffiti does not 
adhere well to it. Pigmented barrier coatings that are water­
vapor permeable may sometimes be used as a permanent 
barrier coating on non-historic masonry where there is 
frequent recurrence of graffiti, and when constant surveillance 
is not possible (Fig. 10). Although there are some instances in 
which pigmented barrier coatings may be appropriate on 
painted historic masonry, they are not recommended for 
unpainted historic masonry because they will change the 
appearance of the masonry. There is also another kind of 
pigmented coating that is specially formulated to be used as a 
temporary measure to conceal graffiti that cannot be removed 
right away. This temporary, vapor-permeable paint is 
removed when the graffiti is removed. 
Pigmented coatings are also not generally recommended as 
a permanent measure to cover up graffiti. Some graffiti 
materials , particularly felt markers, bleed through the 
coating; and repeated applications of the coating or paint 
can result in a heavy paint build-up on a masonry surface. 
Another disadvantage of using paint or a pigmented 
coating to hide graffiti is that it usually appears as an 
obvious patch on unpainted masonry and tends to attract 
more graffiti unless the paint can be applied in a discrete, 
and well-defined area (Fig. 11). If incompatible with either 
the masonry or the graffiti, such a coating may peel off the 
masonry surface in an unsightly manner. Like transparent 
coatings, pigmented coatings may be difficult or impossible 
to remove completely once their performance or 
appearance is no longer satisfactory (Fig. 12). 
Preventing and Controlling Graffiti 
Experience shows that prompt removal of graffiti is one of 
the most effective measures against its recurrence . Graffiti 
that is not removed quickly tends to attract more graffiti. 
Often motivated by a need to have their work seen, 
graffitists tend to be discouraged from repeating their 
efforts in a location where their work is quickly removed . 
Figure 10 (a) It may be appropriate to cOl1sider the applicatiol1 of a barrier 
coating in order to facilitate removal il1 some out-of-the-way 10catiol1s 
where ftlll-time security is not possible, sHch as this stairway and bridge 
underpass next to the C&O Canal. (b) Overpainting graffiti on the stone 
wall at the left has not been successful; it has resulted il1 highlighting the 
defaced stones, thereby attracting more graffiti. Photos: Al1ne Grimmer. 
9 

10 
Figure 11. (a) The first floor of this 
Iimestol1e storefrol1t was pail1ted il1 al1 
effort to cover graffiti. However, because 
the pail1t is poorly matched to the color 
of the buildil1g stol1e, it is highly visible 
al1d 110W acts as a "magl1et" for l1ew 
graffiti. (b) Similarly, the lowest 
horizol1tal bal1d 011 this stol1e buildil1g, 
overpail1ted to cover graffiti, has also 
attracted more graffiti. Photos: (a) Mark 
A. Weber, (b) Martil1 E. Weaver 
Apart from removal, effective graffiti-prevention measures 
can be considered under two headings. The first consists of 
physical measures involving maintenance, lighting, 
security and the erection of barriers on or around the 
property itself. The second focuses on community 
awareness programs that include neighborhood patrols, 
community service programs and educational programs in 
the schools. 
Maintenance and Security. Neglect invites vandalism, 
whereas a well-maintained property encourages civic 
pride. Thus, careful attention should be given to 
establishing regular maintenance programs which do not 
allow properties to reach a point of obvious deterioration 
or abandonment. Cyclical maintenance also makes good 
sense economically. 
Graffiti is less likely to occur if graffitists can be clearly 
seen. It is often recommended that accessible, graffiti­
prone areas be illuminated with floodlighting or spotlights. 
Graffiti may also be reduced or prevented by the presence 
of security guards, park rangers or police officers, or by the 
visible presence of surveillance cameras. Publicity about 
arrests and punitive measures against the graffitists, and 
the general vigilance of the security system may also reduce 
graffiti. 
If they are historically appropriate and compatible with the 
historic property, soft barriers in the form of low, pOSSibly 
thorny, shrubs and bushes or other forms of landscaping 
and planting may be effective deterrents. Such plantings 
can make it difficult to reach the property by any route 
other than the approved secure one. Hard barriers 
provided by fences and transparent screens or shields, such 
as clear acrylic or other polycarbonate sheets, may also 
afford some degree of protection. But these can have a 
negative aesthetic impact on the property's appearance, 
particularly if the barriers themselves become disfigured 
by graffiti. 
Community Awareness. Community action and education 
often play an important role in a successful anti-graffiti 
program. Neighborhood watches can effectively deter 
graffitists, and can help police and other security agencies in 

a 
the detection and prevention of graffiti. Intensive public 
campaigns against graffiti, including presentations in schools, 
developing programs to foster community pride, and 
sentencing offenders to remove graffiti in their own 
community can also be useful. Publicity concerning arrests of 
graffitists can be a useful preventive tool. (But, on the other 
hand, frequent newspaper coverage of graffiti outbreaks or 
even of new community efforts at deterring graffiti can 
sometimes have the opposite effect by challenging the 
"creativity" of graffitists.) Community groups trained in 
proper cleaning techniques can also assist property owners in 
prompt and non-damaging graffiti removal. 
Figure 12. (a) Graffiti that was overpainted has been exposed here as a result of the coating's failure. The uneven edges where the overpainting has peeled 
away will make inconspicuous touch-up difficult. (b) The unsightliness of graffiti bleeding through layers of cracked and peeling paint makes an obvious 
point that using a pigmented coating was not an appropriate maintenance technique for this stone sculpture base. Photos: (a) Martin E. Weaver, (b) Judith 
M. Jacob. 

12 
Tips for Successful Graffiti Removal 
- It is important to pre-wet the masonry 
surface when using an alkaline paint 
remover; it is also advisable to pre-wet the 
masonry surrounding a graffitied area to 
dilute the effect of any cleaning agents that 
might be inadvertently splashed or spilled on 
the unsoiled surface. Do not wet the area to 
be cleaned if the cleaning agent is solvent­
based or incompatible with water. 
- Always rinse the cleaning agent off the 
masonry surface starting at the bottom and 
moving up. This prevents the cleaning agent 
from running down and staining a lower 
surface . 
- Air temperature can be a factor in graffiti 
removal. Most paint removers do not work 
when the air temperature is either very cold 
or very hot. This may sometimes explain 
why a method that worked in one instance 
may not be effective again in another, similar 
situation. 
- Variations within the same type of stone, 
such as bedding planes, density, finish, or 
degree of weathering, may explain why some 
areas of the same stone sometimes clean 
better that others. 
- Even if advance testing has been done and a 
treatment plan exists, at least some on-the­
spot testing will probably be necessary. 
- Mortar joints react differently from masonry 
units, and may require a different cleaning 
material and/ or method to be cleaned 
effectively. 
- Graffiti removal may result in an obviously 
"clean" spot. Always clean the entire 
masonry unit that is bounded by mortar 
joints (but not the joints themselves, unless 
necessary). The prominence of the clean spot 
may be minimized by fanning the cleaning 
out from the spot, and "feathering" it by 
gradually reducing the strength or 
thoroughness of the cleaning. 
- If it is not possible to completely remove all 
traces of graffiti without removing some of 
the masonry surface, it may be preferable to 
leave the masonry alone. Some graffiti 
ghosts become less noticeable with time due 
to fading of the dyes used in paints and 
markers. Sometimes it may be possible to 
conceal more obvious graffiti ghosts with 
carefully-matched paint. 
- After graffiti removal, the masonry surface 
should always be tested with pH strips to 
make sure all the cleaning materials have 
been completely removed. Non-staining pH 
strips, available from chemical supply 
companies, will indicate whether acids or 
alkalis remain on the masonry surface. 
- Although alkaline paint removers are 
sometimes ineffective on modern 
formulations of aerosol paints, they can 
work well in removing multi-layered graffiti 
because they last longer. 
- What removes graffiti in one instance may 
not always work again even in what appears 
to be an identical situation. 
- More than one cleaning material and 
technique may be required to clean a heavily 
graffitied area if different materials were 
used to make the graffiti. For example, 
shapes are often outlined with broad-tip felt 
markers and then filled in with spray paint. 
- Effective graffiti removal often depends on 
trial-and-error testing, as well as a 
knowledge of masonry materials, graffiti 
materials and cleaning techniques. 

Suggestions for Removing Graffiti from Historic Masonry 
Graffiti Removal Method Health and Safety Cautions 
Pencil 1. Erase with non-abra sive pencil eraser . None. 
2. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. 
3. Rinse with water. 
Chalk / Pastel 
(not wax or oil-base) 
1. Brush off with bristle brush. None. 
2. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. 
3. Rinse with water . 
Paint 
Spray (aerosol) 
Non-spray paint 
1. Poultice with paint remover organic 
solvent , or petroleum-based compound**. 
*, +See cautions below for NMP, solvents 
and petroleum-based compounds. 
2. Rinse with water, denatured alcohol or 
mineral spirits. Wear proper respirator, gloves 
and eye protection . 3. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. 
4. Rinse with water. 
Permanent (felt-tip) 
Marker 
1. Wash with water and non-ionic 
detergent, if necessary . 
+See cautions below for NMP, solvents 
and petroleum-based compounds. 
2. Poultice with bleach  
paint remover  organic solvent 
or petroleum-based compound**. 
*,
***,
Bleach is corrosive, causes chemical 
burns, and forms toxic gases (chlorine). 
Wear proper respirator, gloves 
and eye protection . 
3. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. 
4. Rinse with water. 
Water Soluble 
(felt-tip) Marker 
1. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. Bleach is corrosive, causes chemical 
burns, and forms toxic gases (chlorine). 
Wear proper respirator, gloves 
and eye protection. 
2. Poultice with bleach  ***.
3. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. 
4. Rinse with water. 
Ballpoint Pen 1. Erase with non-abrasive pencil eraser. +See cautions below for NMP, solvents 
and petroleum-based compounds . 
Wear proper respirator, gloves 
and eye protection . 
2. Poultice with organic solvent 
or petroleum-based compound  **.
3. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. 
4. Rinse with water. 
Crayon 
Lipstick 
Shoe Polish 
1. Poultice with denatured alcohol, paint 
remover* or organic solvent  **.
+See cautions below for NMP, solvents 
and petroleum-based compounds . 
Wear proper respirator, gloves 
and eye protection . 
2. Wash with water and non-ionic detergent. 
3. Rinse with water . 
.. Paint Remover based on N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). 
** Organic Solvent such as acetone, lacquer-thinner , or petroleum-based compound such as dimethyl adipate. 
*** Bleach such as calcium hypochlorite. 
+ N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) is mildly toxic and may have adverse reproductive effects. 
Solvents and petroleum-based compounds have toxic vapors, are flammable, and require well-ventilated conditions. 
These are suggestions to assist in graffiti removal. Method s should always be tested first under the supervision and guidance of an 
architectural conservator. 
13 

14 
Summary 
Although rapid graffiti removal is the most effective 
weapon in eliminating graffiti and preventing its recurrence 
in the same location, hasty, untested removal attempts can 
disfigure and cause harm to historic masonry. Thus, it is 
important that the owner or manager of a historic masonry 
building or structure be prepared with a plan to ensure the 
prompt removal of graffiti when it occurs. Regularly 
scheduled maintenance and cleaning programs to eliminate 
graffiti from historic masonry properties may be assisted by 
the installation of physical barriers, security systems and 
Selected Reading 
American Geological Institute. AGI Glossary of Geology and 
Related Sciences. Washington, D.C: American Geological 
Institute, 1960. 
Ashurst, Nicola. Cleaning Historic Buildings. Vol. I: 
Substrates, Soiling and Investigations; Vol. II: Cleaning 
Materials and Processes. London: Donhead Publishing Ltd., 
1994. 
"Chemistry Leaves Its Mark on Graffiti." Chemical 
Marketing Reporter. November 14, 1993. 
Ehrenkrantz & Eckstut Architects, P.C Technical Tips: 
Removing Graffiti. New York: New York Landmarks 
Conservancy, n.d. (1994). 
Graffiti Removal Manual. Providence, RI: Keep Providence 
Beautiful, September 1986. 
Grimmer, Anne E. Keeping it Clean: Removing Exterior Dirt, 
Paint, Stains and Graffiti from Historic Masonry Buildings. 
Washington, D.C : Preservation Assistance Division, 
National Park Service, U.s. Department of the Interior, 1988. 
Lewis, Richard J. Hazardous Chemicals Desk Reference. 
Second Edition. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991. 
NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards. Washington, D.C: 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Health 
Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
June 1994. 
lighting, as well as increased community involvement. 
Successful graffiti removal from historic masonry requires 
knowledge of a variety of cleaning methods and materials, 
and an awareness that what works to remove graffiti from 
one kind of masonry surface may not remove it from 
another. By testing different cleaning methods in advance, 
treatment plans will be available, when needed, to provide 
guidance for safe and sensitive graffiti removal from 
historic masonry. 
Reisner, Robert. Graffiti: Two Thousand Years of Wall 
Writing. Chicago: Cowles Book Company, 1971. 
Science for Conservators: Conservation Teaching Series. The 
Conservation Unit of the Museums and Galleries 
Commission. 3 volumes. New York: Routledge, A 
Division of Routledge, Chapman and Hall, Inc., 1992. 
Torraca, Giorgio. Porous Building Materials. Rome: 
ICC ROM, 1988. 
Torraca, Giorgio. Solubility and Solvents for Conservation 
Problems. Rome: ICC ROM, 1990. 
Weaver, Martin E. Conserving Buildings: A Guide to 
Techniques and Materials. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc., 1993. 
Whitford, Maurice J. Getting Rid of Graffiti: A practical guide 
to graffiti removal and anti-graffiti protection. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, Inc., 1992. 
Wollbrinck, Thomas. "The Composition of Proprietary 
Paint Strippers." Journal of the American Institute for 
Conservation. Vol. 32 (1993), pp. 43-57. 
Young, Daniel J. How to Comply with the OSHA Hazard 
Communication Standard: A Guide to Compliance with OSHA 
Worker Right-to-Know Regulations. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1989. 
,., u.s. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1995 387-091/20004 

Acknowledgements 
This Preservation Brief was developed under a cooperative 
agreement between the New York Landmarks Conservancy 
and the National Park Service. Mark A. Weber, Director, 
Technical Services Center, served as project coordinator for 
the Conservancy. The author, Martin E. Weaver, is the 
Director of the Center for Preservation Research at 
Columbia University. He is an internationally recognized 
expert in the conservation of architectural and cultural 
resources, a noted lecturer, and author of Conserving 
Buildings: A Guide to Techniques and Materials, as well as 
numerous articles on the subject. 
Anne E. Grimmer, Senior Architectural Historian, 
Technical Preservation Services, Preservation Assistance 
Division, National Park Service, coordinated the 
development of this Preservation Brief and served as 
Technical Editor. Technical review of this publication by 
the following is gratefully acknowledged: Frances Gale, 
Training Coordinator, National Center for Preservation 
Technology and Training, National Park Service, 
Natchitoches, LA; Judith M. Jacob, Architectural 
Conservator, Building Conservation Branch , Northeast 
Cultural Resources Center, National Park Service, NY, NY; 
Andrea Mones -O'Hara , Regional Historic Preservation 
ISSN: 0885 7016 October 1995 
'The word grnffito Igrnffiti, plural) - is derived from the o ld Italian diminutive of 
graffio - to scratch, and the Latin grnphire - to write. Grnffiti in contemporary 
usage has come to mean an inscription , drawings , or markin gs, Except in very 
formal or techni cal appli cations , graffiti is generally consider ed a "mass" noun 
and pair ed with a Singular verb , 
Officer, National Capital Region, General Services 
Administration, Washington, DC; Nicolas F. Veloz, 
Conservator of Outdoor Sculpture and Monuments, 
National Capital Area Office, National Park Service, 
Washington, DC; and Michael J. Auer, Timothy Buehner, 
Charles E. Fisher, and especially Kay D, Weeks, Technical 
Preservation Services, Preservation Assistance Division, 
National Park Service, Washington, DC. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the 
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, 
which directs the Secretary of the Interior to develop and 
make available information concerning historic properties . 
Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be 
directed to: Technical Preservation Services, Preservation 
Assistance Division, Center for Cultural Resource 
Stewardship and Partnerships, National Park Service, P.O. 
Box 37127, Washington, DC 20013-7127, or Technical 
Services Center, New York Landmarks Conservancy, 141 
Fifth A venue, NY, NY 10010. This publication is not 
copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. 
Normal procedures for credit to the author, the National 
Park Service, and the New York Landmarks Conservancy 
are appreciated. 
Cover Photograph: Sandstone gatepost, Springfield Armory National 
Historic Site, Springfield, Massachusetts. Photo: Judith M, facob, 
15 