U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
10 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Exterior Paint Problems 
on Historic Woodwork 
Kay D. Weeks and David W. Look, AlA 
A cautionary approach to paint removal is included in the guidelines to 'The Secretary of the Interior Standards for Historic Preservation 
Projects." Removing paints down to bare wood surfaces using harsh methods can permanently damage those surfaces; therefore such methods 
are not recommended . Also , total removal obliterates evidence of the historical paints and their sequence and architectural context. 
This Brief expands on that advice for the architect, build­
ing manager, contractor, or homeowner by identifying 
and describing common types of paint surface conditions 
and failures, then recommending appropriate treatments 
for preparing exterior wood surfaces for repainting' to 
assure the best adhesion and greatest durability of the new 
paint. Although the Brief focuses on resp.Q.rlsible methods 
of "paint removal," several paint surface conditions will 
be described which do not require any paint removal, and 
still others which can be successfully handled by limited 
paint removal. In all cases, the information is intended to 
address the concerns related to exterior wood . It will also 
be generally assumed that , because houses built before 1950 
involve one or more layers of lead-base paint,2 the majori­
ty of conditions warranting paint removal will mean deal­
ing with this toxic substance along with the dangers of the 
paint removal tools and chemical strippers themselves. 
, 
l 
General paint type recommendations will be made , but paint color recommenda­
tions are beyond the scope of this Brief. 
Douglas R. Shier and William Hall , Analysis of Housing Data Collected in a Lead­
Based Paint Survey in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , Part 1, National Bureau of Stan ­
dards, Inter-Report 77-1250, May 1977. 
Purposes of Exterior Paint 
Paint 3 applied to exterior wood must withstand yearly ex­
tremes of both temperature and humidity . While never ex­
pected to be more than a temporary physical shield­
requiring re-application every 5-8 years-its importance 
should not be minimized. Because one of the main causes 
of wood deterioration is moisture penetration , a primary 
purpose for painting wood is to exclude such moisture, 
thereby slowing deterioration not only of a building 's ex­
terior siding and decorative features but, ultimately, its 
underlying structural members. Another important pur­
pose for painting wood is, of course , to define and accent 
architectural features and to improve appearance. 
, Any pigmented liquid , liquefiable , or mastic composition designed for application 
to a substrate in a thin layer which is converted to an opaque solid film after ap­
plication, Paint and Coatings Diction ary , 1978, Federation of Societies for Coat ­
ings and Technology. 
Treating Paint Problems in Historic Buildings 
Exterior paint is constantly deteriorating through the proc­
esses of weathering , but in a program of regular mainte­
nance-assuming all other building systems are function­
ing properly-surfaces can be cleaned, lightly scraped, 
and hand sanded in preparation for a new finish coat. Un­
fortunately, these are ideal conditions. More often, com­
plex maintenance problems are inherited by owners of 
historic buildings, including areas of paint that have 
failed 4 beyond the point of mere cleaning, scraping, and 
hand sanding (although much so-called "paint failure" is 
attributable to interior or exterior moisture problems or 
surface preparation and application mistakes with 
previous coats). 
Although paint problems are by no means unique to 
historic buildings, treating multiple layers of hardened , 
brittle paint on complex, ornamental-and possibly 
fragile-exterior wood surfaces necessarily requires an ex­
tremely cautious approach (see figure 1). In the case of re­
cent construction, this level of concern is not needed 
because the wood is generally less detailed and, in addi­
tion, retention of the sequence of paint layers as a partial 
record of the building's history is not an issue. 
When historic buildings are involved, however, a 
special set of problems arises-varying in complexity 
depending upon their age, architectural style, historical 
importance, and physical soundness of the wood-which 
must be carefully evaluated so that decisions can be made 
that are sensitive to the longevity of the resource. 
4 For purposes of the Brief, this includes any area of painted exterior woodwork 
displaying signs of peeling , cracking , or alligator ing to bare wood. See descrip ­
tions of these and other paint su rface conditions as well as recommended treat ­
ments on pp . 5-10. 
Justification for Paint Removal 
At the outset of this Brief, it must be emphasized that 
removing paint from historic buildings-with the excep­
tion of cleaning, light scraping, and hand sanding as part 
of routine maintenance-should be avoided unless abso­
lutely essential. Once conditions warranting removal have 

been identified, the general approach should be to remove 
paint to the next sound layer using the gentlest means 
possible, then to repaint (see figure 2). Practically speak­
ing as well, paint can adhere just as effectively to existing 
paint as to bare wood, providing the previous coats of 
paint are also adhering uniformly and tightly to the wood 
and the surface is properly prepared for repainting­
cleaned of dirt and chalk and dulled by sanding. But, if 
painted exterior wood surfaces display continuous patterns 
of deep cracks or if they are extensively blistering and 
peeling so that bare wood is visible, then the old paint 
should be completely removed before repainting. The only 
other justification for removing all previous layers of 
paint is if doors, shutters, or windows have literally been 
"painted shut," or if new wood is being pieced-in adjacent 
to old painted wood and a smooth transition is desired 
(see figure 3). 
Fig. 1 Excessive paint build-up on architectural details such as 
this ornamental bracket does not in itself justify total paint 
removal. If paint is cracked and peeling down to bare wood , 
however, it should be removed using the gentlest means possible. 
Photo: David W. Look , AlA. 
Fig. 2 A traditionally painted bay window has been stripped to 
bare wood , then varnished. In addition to being historically inac­
curate , the varnish will break down faster as a result of the sun 's 
ultraviolet rays than would primer and finish coats of paint. 
Photo: David W. Look , AlA. 
Fig. 3 If damage to parts of a wooden element is severe, new 
sections of wood will need to be pieced-in. When such piecing is 
required, paint on the adjacent woodwork should be removed so 
that the old and new woods will make a smooth profile when 
joined . After repainting , the repair should be virtually impossible 
to detect. Photo : Morgan W. Phillips. 
Paint Removal Precautions 
Because paint removal is a difficult and painstaking proc­
ess, a number of costly, regrettable experiences have oc­
curred-and continue to occur-for both the historic 
building and the building owner. Historic buildings have 
been set on fire with blow torches; wood irreversibly 
scarred by sandblasting or by harsh mechanical devices 
such as rotary sanders and rotary wire strippers; and 
layers of historic paint inadvertently and unnecessarily 
removed. In addition, property owners, using techniques 
that substitute speed for safety, have been injured by toxic 
lead vapors or dust from the paint they were trying to 
remove or by misuse of the paint removers themselves. 
Owners of historic properties considering paint removal 
should also be aware of the amount of time and labor in­
volved. While removing damaged layers of paint from a 
door or porch railing might be readily accomplished 
within a reasonable period of time by one or two people, 
removing paint from larger areas of a building can, with-
2 

out professional assistance, easily become unmanageable 
and produce less than satisfactory results. The amount of 
work involved in any paint removal project must there­
fore be analyzed on a case-by-case basis. Hiring qua lified 
professionals will often be a cost-effective decision due to 
the expe nse of materials, the special equipment required, 
and the amount of time involved. Further, paint removal 
companies experienced in dealing with the inherent health 
and safety dangers of pa int removal should have pur­
chased such protective devices as are needed to mitigate 
any dangers and should also be aware of State or local en­
vironmental and ! or health regulations for hazardous 
waste disposal. 
All in all, paint removal is a messy, expensive, and 
potentially dangerous aspect of rehabilitating or restoring 
historic buildings and should not be undertaken without 
careful thought concerning first , its necessity, and second, 
which of the available recommended methods is the safest 
and most appropriate for the job at hand. 
Repainting Historic Buildings for Cosmetic 
Reasons 
If existing exterior paint on wood siding , eaves, window 
sills, sash, and shutters, doors , and decorative features 
shows no evidence of paint deterioration such as chalking, 
blistering, peeling, or cracking, then there is no physical 
reason to repaint , much less remove paint! Nor is color 
fading, of itself, sufficient justification to repaint a historic 
building. 
The decision to repaint may not be based altogether on 
paint failure. Where there is a new owner, or even where 
ownership has remained constant through the years, taste 
in colors often changes. Therefore, if repainting is 
primarily to alter a building's primary and accent colors , 
a technical factor of paint accumulation should be taken 
into consideration . When paint builds up to a thickness of 
approximately 1/16 " (approximately 16-30 layers), one or 
more extra coats of paint may be enough to trigger crack­
ing and peeling in limited or even widespread areas of the 
building's surface. This results because excessively thick 
paint is less able to withstand the shrinkage or pull of an 
additional coat as it dries and is also less able to tolerate 
thermal stresses . Thick paint invariably fails at the 
weakest point of adhesion-the oldest layers next to the 
wood. Cracking and peeling follow . Therefore, if there 
are no signs of paint failure, it may be somewhat risky to 
add still another layer of unneeded paint simply for 
color's sake (extreme changes in color may also require 
more than one coat to provide proper hiding power and 
full color). When paint appears to be nearing the critical 
thickness, a change of accent colors (that is, just to 
limited portions of the trim) might be an acceptable com­
promise without chancing cracking and peeling of paint 
on wooden siding. 
If the decision to repaint is nonetheless made , the "new" 
color or colors should , at a minimum , be appropriate to 
the style and setting of the building. On the other hand , 
where the intent is to restore or accurately reproduce the 
colors originally used or those from a significant period in 
the building's evolution, they should be based on the 
results of a paint analysis. 5 
Identification of Exterior Paint Surface 
Conditions/ Recommended Treatments 
It is assumed that a preliminary check will already have 
been made to determine, first, that the painted exterior 
surfaces are indeed wood-and not stucco, metal, or other 
wood substitutes-and second, that the wood has not 
decayed so that repainting would be superfluous. For ex­
ample, if any area of bare wood such as window sills has 
been exposed for a long period of time to standing water, 
wood rot is a strong possibility (see figure 4). Repair or 
replacement of deteriorated wood should take place before 
repainting. After these two basic issues have been 
resolved, the surface condition identification process may 
commence. 
The historic building will undoubtedly exhibit a variety 
of exterior paint surface conditions. For example, paint on 
the wooden siding and doors may be adhering firmly; 
paint on the eaves peeling ; and paint on the porch 
balusters and window sills cracking and alligatoring. The 
accurate identification of each paint problem is therefore 
the first step in planning an appropriate overall solution. 
Paint surface conditions can be grouped according to 
their relative severity: CLASS I conditions include minor 
blemishes or dirt collection and generally require no paint 
removal; CLASS II conditions include failure of the top 
layer or layers of paint and generally require limited paint 
removal; and CLASS III conditions include substantial or 
multiple-layer failure and generally require total paint 
removal. It is precisely because conditions will vary at dif­
ferent points on the building that a careful inspection is 
critical. Each item of painted exterior woodwork (i.e., 
siding, doors, windows, eaves, shutters, and decorative 
elements) should be examined early in the planning phase 
and surface conditions noted. 
CLASS I Exterior Surface Conditions Generally Requiring 
No Paint Removal 
• Dirt , Soot , Pollution, Cobwebs, Insect Cocoons, etc. 
Cause of Condition 
Environmental "gri me" or organic matter that tends to 
cling to painted exterior surfaces and, in particular , pro­
tected surfaces such as eaves, do not constitute a paint 
problem unless painted over rather than removed prior to 
repainting. If not removed, the surface deposits can be a 
barrier to proper adhesion and cause peeling. 
Recommended Treatment 
Most surface matter can be loosened by a strong, direct 
stream of water from the nozzle of a garden hose. 
Stubborn dirt and soot will need to be scrubbed off using 
1fz cup of household detergent in a gallon of water with a 
medium soft bristle brush. The cleaned surface should 
then be rinsed thoroughly, and permitted to dry before 
further inspection to determine if repainting is necessary . 
Quite often, cleaning provides a satisfactory enough result 
to postpone repainting. 
, See the Reading List for paint research and documentation information. See also 
Tilt? Sl?cretary of tilt? Interior's Standards for Historic Prt?ser..'atiotl Projects i.vitl, 
Guid,lilles for Applyillg the Stalldards for recommended appr oaches on paints 
and finishes within various types of project work treatments. 
3 

• Mildew 
Cause of Condition 
Mildew is caused by fungi feeding on nutrients 
contained in the paint film or on dirt adhering to any sur­
face. Because moisture is the single most important factor 
in its growth, mildew tends to thrive in areas where 
dampness and lack of sunshine are problems such as 
window sills, under eaves, around gutters and down­
spouts, on the north side of buildings, or in shaded areas 
near shrubbery. It may sometimes be difficult to distin­
guish mildew from dirt, but there is a simple test to 
differentiate: if a drop of household bleach is placed on 
the suspected surface, mildew will immediately turn white 
whereas dirt will continue to look like dirt. 
Recommended Treatment 
Because mildew can only exist in shady, warm, moist 
areas, attention should be given to altering the environ­
ment that is conducive to fungal growth. The area in 
question may be shaded by trees which need to be pruned 
back to allow sunlight to strike the building; or may lack 
rain gutters or proper drainage at the base of the building. 
If the shady or moist conditions can be altered, the mildew 
is less likely to reappear. A recommend solution for 
removing mildew consists of one cup non-ammoniated 
detergent, one quart household bleach, and one gallon 
water. When the surface is scrubbed with this solution 
using a medium soft brush, the mildew should disappear; 
however, for particularly stubborn spots, an additional 
quart of bleach may be added. After the area is mildew­
free, it should then be rinsed with a direct stream of water 
from the nozzle of a garden hose, and permitted to dry 
thoroughly. When repainting, specially formulated 
"mildew-resistant" primer and finish coats should be used. 
• Excessive Chalking 
Cause of Condition 
Chalking-or powdering of the paint surface-is caused 
by the gradual disintegration of the resin in the paint film. 
(The amount of chalking is determined both by the for­
mulation of the paint and the amount of ultraviolet light 
to which the paint is exposed.) In moderation, chalking is 
the ideal way for a paint to "age," because the chalk, 
when rinsed by rainwater, carries discoloration and dirt 
away with it and thus provides an ideal surface for 
repa inting. In excess, however, it is not desirable because 
the chalk can wash down onto a surface of a different 
color beneath the painted area and cause streaking as well 
as rapid disintegration of the paint film itself. Also, if a 
pain t contains too much pigment for the amount of binder 
(as the old white lead carbonate/oil paints often did), 
excessive chalking can result. 
Recommended Treatment 
The chalk should be cleaned off with a solution of 1/2 
cup household detergent to one gallon water, using a 
medium soft bristle brush. After scrubbing to remove the 
chalk, the surface should be rinsed with a direct stream of 
water from the nozzle of a garden hose, allowed to dry 
thoroughly, (but not long enough for the chalking process 
to recur) and repainted, using a non-chalking paint. 
• Staining 
Cause of Condition 
Staining of paint coatings usually results from excess 
Fig. 4 Paint films wear unevenly depending on exposure and 
location . Exterior locations which are susceptible to accelerated 
deterioration are horizontal surfaces such as window sills. These 
and similar areas will require repainting more often than less 
vulnerable surfaces. In the case of this window sill where paint 
has peeled off and adjacent areas have cracked and alligatored, 
the paint should be totally removed . Prior to repainting, any 
weathered wood should be rejuvenated using a solution of 3 
cups exterior varnish, 1 oz. paraffin wax, and mineral spirits/ 
paint thinner / or turpentine to make 1 gallon. Liberal brush ap­
plication should be made. This formula was tested over a 
20-year period by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Forest 
Products Laboratory and proved to be just as effective as water­
repellent preservatives containing pentachlorophenol . After the 
surface has thoroughly dried (2-3 days of warm weather), the 
treated surface can be painted. A high quality oil-base primer 
followed by two top coats of a semi-gloss oil-enamel or latex­
enamel paint is recommended. Photo: Baird M. Smith, AlA. 
moisture reacting with materials within the wood sub­
strate. There are two common types of staining, neither of 
which requires paint removal. The most prevalent type of 
stain is due to the oxidation or rusting of iron nails or 
metal (iron, steel, or copper) anchorage devices . A second 
type of stain is caused by a chemical reaction between 
moisture and natural extractives in certain woods (red 
cedar or redwood) which results in a surface deposit of 
colored matter . This is most apt to occur in new replace­
ment wood within the first 10-15 years . 
Recommended Treatment 
In both cases, the source of the stain should first be lo­
cated and the moisture problem corrected . 
When stains are caused by rusting of the heads of nails 
used to attach shingles or siding to an exterior wall or by 
rusting or oxidizing iron, steel, or copper anchorage 
devices adjacent to a painted surface, the metal objects 
themselves should be hand sanded and coated with a rust ­
inhibitive primer followed by two finish coats . (Exposed 
nail heads should ideally be countersunk, spot primed , 
and the holes filled with a high quality wood filler except 
where exposure of the nail head was part of the original 
construction system or the wood is too fragile to with­
stand the countersinking procedure.) 
Discoloration due to color extractives in replacement 
wood can usually be cleaned with a solution of equal 
parts denatured alcohol and water. After the affected atea 
4 

/ 
has been rinsed and permitted to dry, a "stain-blocking 
primer " especially developed for preventing this type of 
sta in should be applied (two primer coats are recommended
for severe cases of bleeding prior to the finish coat) . Each 
primer coat should be allowed to dry at least 48 hours . 
CLASS II Exterior Surface Conditions Generally 
Requiring Limited Paint Removal 
• Crazing 
Cause of Condition 
Crazing-fine, jagged interconnected breaks in the top 
layer of paint-results when paint that is several layers 
thick becomes excessively hard and brittle with age and is 
conseq uently no longer able to expand and contract with 
the wood in response to changes in temperature and hu­
midity (see figure 5). As the wood swells , the bond be­
tween paint layers is broken and hairline cracks appear. 
Although somewhat more difficult to detect as opposed to 
other more obvious paint problems , it is well worth the 
time to scrutinize all surfaces for crazing. If not corrected, 
exterior moisture will enter the crazed surface, resulting in 
further swe lling of the wood and , eventually , deep crack­
ing and alligatoring , a Class III condition which requires 
total paint removal. 
Recommended Treatment 
Crazing can be treated by hand or mechanically sa ndin g 
the surface , then repainting . Although the hairline cracks 
may tend to show through the new paint, the surface will 
be protected against exterior moisture penetration. 
Fig. 5 Crazing-or surface cracking-is an exterior surface condi-
tion whic h call be successfu lly treated by sanding and painting. 
Photo: Courtesy , National Decorating Products Associatioll. 
• Intercoat Peeling 
Cause of Condition 
Intercoat peeling can be the result of improper surface 
preparation prior to the last repainting. This most often 
occurs in protected areas such as eaves and covered 
porches because these surfaces do not receive a regular 
rinsing from rainfall , and salts from air-borne pollutants 
thus accumulate on the surface. If not cleaned off, the 
new paint coat will not adhere properly and that layer 
will peel. 
Another common cause of intercoat peeling is incom­
patibility between paint types (see figure 6). For example , 
if oil paint is applied over latex paint, peeling of the top 
coat can sometimes result since , upon aging, the oil paint 
becomes harder and less elastic than the latex paint. If 
 latex paint is applied over old, chalking oil paint, peeling 
can also occur because the latex paint is unable to pene­
trate the chalky surface and adhere. 
Recommended Treatment 
First , where salts or impurities have caused the peeling, 
the affected area should be washed down thoroughly after 
scraping, then wiped dry . Finally, the surface should be 
hand or mechanically sanded , then repainted. 
Where peeling was the result of using incompatible 
paints , the peeling top coat should be scraped and hand 
or mechanically sanded. Application of a high quality oil 
type exterior primer will provide a surface over which 
either an oil or a latex topcoat can be successfully used. 
fig. 6 Th is is an example of intercoat peeling. A latex top coat 
was applied directly over old oil paint and , as a result , the latex 
paint was unable to adh ere. If latex is being used over oil, an ai/­
base primer shou ld be applied first. Although much of the peel­
ing latex paint can be scraped off, in this case, the best so lution 
may be to chemica lly dip strip the entire shutter to remove all of 
the paint down to bare wood, rinse thoroughly , then repaint. 
Photo: Mary L. O ehrlein, AlA. 
• Solvent Blistering 
Cause of Condition 
Solvent blistering, the result of a less common applica­
tion error, is not caused by moisture, but by the action of 
ambient heat on paint solvent or thinners in the paint 
film. If solvent-rich paint is applied in direct sunlight, the 
top surface can dry too quickly and, as a result, solvents 
become trapped beneath the dried paint film. When the 
solvent vaporizes, it forces its way through the paint film, 
resulting in surface blisters. This problem occurs more 
often with dark colored paints because darker colors ab­
sorb more heat than lighter ones. To distinguish between 
solvent blistering and blistering caused by moisture, a 
blister should be cut open. If another layer of paint is visi­
ble, then solvent blistering is likely the problem whereas if 
bare wood is revealed , moisture is probably to blame. 
Solvent blisters are generally small. 
5 

Recommended Treatment 
Solvent-blistered areas can be scraped, hand or mechan­
ically sanded to the next sound layer, then repainted. In 
order to prevent blistering of painted surfaces, paint 
should not be applied in direct sunlight. 
• Wrinkling 
Cause of Condition 
Another error in application that can easily be avoided 
is wrinkling (see figure 7). This occurs when the top layer 
of paint dries before the layer underneath. The top layer 
of paint actually moves as the paint underneath (a primer , 
for example) is drying. Specific causes of wrinkling in­
clude: (1) applying paint too thick; (2) applying a second 
coat before the first one dries; (3) inadequate brushing 
out; and (4)" painting in temperatures higher than recom­
mended by the manufacturer. 
Recommended Treatment 
The wrinkled layer can be removed by scraping followed 
by hand or mechanical sanding to provide as even a sur­
face as possible, then repainted following manufacturer 's 
application instructions. 
Fig. 7 Wrinkled layers can generally be removed by scraping anc 
sanding as opposed to total paint removal. Followin g manufac ­
turers' applicati on instruction s is the best way to avoid this s ur­
face conditi on. Phot o: Courte sy , Nati onal Decorating Produ cts 
Association . 
CLASS III Exterior Surface Conditions Generally 
Requiring Total Paint Removal 
If surface conditions are such that the majority of paint will have to 
be removed prior to repainting, it is suggested that a small sample 
of intact paint be left in an inconspicuous area either by coverin g 
the area with a metal plate , or by marking the area and identifyin g 
it in some way. (When repainting does take place , the sample 
should not be painted over) . This will enable future investi gat ors to 
have a record of the building 's paint history. 
• Peeling 
Cause of Condition 
Peeling to bare wood is most often caused by excess in­
terior or exterior moisture that collects behind the paint 
6 
film, thus impairing adhesion (see figure 8). Generally 
beginning as blisters , cracking and peeling occur as mois­
ture causes the wood to swell , breaking the adhesion of 
the bottom layer. 
Recommended Treatment 
There is no sense in repainting before dealing with the 
moisture problems because new paint will simply fail. 
Therefore, the first step in treating peeling is to locate and 
remove the source or sources of the moisture , not only 
because moisture will jeopardize the protective coating of 
paint but because, if left unattended, it can ultimately 
cause permanent damage to the wood . Excess interior 
moisture should be removed from the building through in­
stallation of exhaust fans and vents. Exterior moisture 
should be eliminated by correcting the following condi­
tions prior to repainting : faulty flashing ; leaking gutters ; 
defective roof shingles; cracks and holes in siding and 
trim ; deteriorated caulking in joints and seams; and 
shrubber y growing too close to painted wood . After the 
moisture problems have been solved, the wood must be 
permitted to dry out thoroughly . The damaged paint can 
then be scraped off with a putty knife , hand or mechani ­
cally sanded , primed , and repainted . 
Fig. 8 Peeling to bare w ood-one of the m os t comm on ty pes of 
paint failure- is usually caused by an interior or exterior 
moisture pro blem. Photo: Ann e E. Grimm er. 
• Cracking / Alligatoring 
Cause of Condition 
Cracking and alligatoring are advanced stages of cra z­
ing (see figure 9). Once the bond between layers has been 
broken due to intercoat paint failure , exterior moisture is 
able to penetrate the surface cracks , causing the wood to 
swell and deeper cracking to take place . This process con­
tinues until cracking, which forms parallel to grain , ex­
tends to bare wood. Ultimately, the cracking becomes an 
overall pattern of horizontal and vertical breaks in the 
paint layers that looks like reptile skin; hence , " alligator ­
ing." In advanced stages of cracking and alligatoring , the 
surfaces will also flake badly . 
Recommended Treatment 
If cracking and alligatoring are present only in the top 
layers they can probably be scraped, hand or mechanical­
ly sanded to the next sound layer , then repainted. How ­
ever , if cracking and / or alligatoring have progressed to 

... 
bare wood and the paint has begun to flake, it will need 
to be totally removed. Methods include scraping or paint 
removal with the electric heat plate, electric heat gun, or 
chemical strippers, depending on the particular area in­
volved. Bare wood should be primed within 48 hours, 
then repainted. 
--Fig. 9 Cracking , alligatoring , and flaking are evidence of long­
term neglect of painted surfaces. The remaining paint on the 
clapboard shown here can be removed with an electric heat plate 
and wide-bladed scraper. In addition, unsound wood should be 
replaced and moisture problems corrected before primer and top 
coats of paint are applied. Photo : David W. Look , AlA . 
Selecting the Appropriate / Safest Method to 
Remove Paint . 
After having presented the "hierarchy" of exterior paint 
surface conditions-from a mild condition such as mildew­
ing which simply requires cleaning prior to repainting to 
serious conditions such as peeling and alligatoring which 
require total paint removal-one important thought bears 
repeating: if a paint problem has been identified that war­
rants either limited or total paint removal, the gentlest 
method possible for the particular wooden element of the 
historic building should be selected from the many avail­
able methods. 
The treatments recommended-based upon field testing 
as well as onsite monitoring of Department of Interior 
grant-in-aid and certification of rehabilitation projects­
are therefore those which take three over-riding issues into 
consideration (1) the continued protection and preserva­
tion of the historic exterior woodwork ; (2) the retention 
of the sequence of historic paint layers; and (3) the health 
and safety of those individuals performing the paint 
removal. By applying these criteria, it will be seen that no 
paint removal method is without its drawbacks and all 
recommendations are qualified in varying degrees. 
Methods for Removing Paint 
After a particular exterior paint surface condition has 
been identified , the next step in planning for repainting-if 
paint removal is required-is selecting an appropriate 
method for such removal. 
The method or methods selected should be suitable for 
the specific paint problem as well as the particular 
wooden element of the building. Methods for paint 
removal can be divided into three categories (frequently, 
however , a combination of the three methods is used) . 
Each method is defined below, then discussed further and 
specific recommendations made: 
Abrasive-"Abrading" the painted surface by manual 
and/or mechanical means such as scraping and sanding. 
Generally used for surface preparation and limited paint 
removal. 
Thermal-Softening and raising the paint layers by apply­
ing heat followed by scraping and sanding. Generally used 
for total paint removal. 
Chemical-Softening of the paint layers with chemical 
strippers followed by scraping and sanding. Generally used 
for total paint removal. 
• Abrasive Methods (Manual) 
If conditions have been identified that require limited 
paint removal such as crazing, intercoat peeling, solvent 
blistering, and wrinkling, scraping and hand sanding 
should be the first methods employed before using 
mechanical means. Even in the case of more serious condi­
tions such as peeling-where the damaged paint is weak 
and already sufficiently loosened from the wood surface­
scraping and hand sanding may be all that is needed prior 
to repainting. 
Recommended Abrasive Methods (Manual) 
Putty Knife / Paint Scraper: Scraping is usually accom­
plished with either a putty knife or a paint scraper, or 
both. Putty knives range in width from one to six inches 
and have a beveled edge. A putty knife is used in a push­
ing motion going under the paint and working from an 
area of loose paint toward the edge where the paint is still 
firmly adhered and, in effect, "beveling" the remaining 
layers so that as smooth a transition as possible is made 
between damaged and undamaged areas (see figure 10). 
Paint scrapers are commonly available in 1%6, 21/2, and 
3 lj2 inch widths and have replaceable blades. In addition, 
profiled scrapers can be made specifically for use on 
moldings. As opposed to the putty knife, the paint scraper 
is used in a pulling motion and works by raking the 
damaged areas of paint away. 
The obvious goal in using the putty knife or the paint 
scraper is to selectively remove the affected layer or layers 
of paint; however, both of these tools, particularly the 
paint scraper with its hooked edge, must be used with 
care to properly prepare the surface and to avoid gouging 
the wood. 
Sandpaper / Sanding Block/ Sanding sponge: After manually 
removing the damaged layer or layers by scraping, the 
uneven surface (due to the almost inevitable removal of 
varying numbers of paint layers in a given area) will need 
to be smoothed or "feathered out" prior to repainting. As 
stated before, hand sanding, as opposed to harsher 
mechanical sanding, is recommended if the area is rela­
tively limited. A coarse grit, open-coat flint sand­
paper-the least expensive kind-is useful for this purpose 
because, as the sandpaper clogs with paint it must be 
discarded and this process repeated until all layers adhere 
uniformly. 
Blocks made of wood or hard rubber and covered with 
sandpaper are useful for handsanding flat surfaces. Sand­
ing sponges-rectangular sponges with an abrasive aggre­
gate on their surfaces-are also available for detail work 
that requires reaching into grooves because the sponge 
easily conforms to curves and irregular surfaces. All sand­
ing should be done with the grain. 
7 

Summary of Abrasive Methods (Manual) 
Recommended: Putty knife, paint scraper, sandpaper, 
sanding block, sanding sponge. 
Applicable areas of building: All areas. 
For use on: Class 1, Class II, and Class III conditions . 
Health / Safety factors: Take precautions against lead dust,
eye damage; dispose of lead paint residue properly. 
Fig. 10 An exce llent example of inadequate scraping before re­
painti ng, the problems here are far more than cosmetic. This im­
proper ly prepared surface will permit moisture to get behind the 
paint film which, in turn , will resu lt in chipping and peeling. 
Photo: Baird M. Smith , AlA. 
• Abrasive Methods (Mechanical) 
If hand sanding for purposes of surface preparation has 
not been productive or if the affected area is too large to 
consider hand sanding by itself, mechanical abrasive 
methods, i.e. , power-operated tools may need to be 
emp loyed ; however, it should be noted that the majority 
of tools available for paint removal can cause damage to 
fragile wood and must be used with great care . 
Recommended Abrasive Methods (Mechanical) 
Orbital sander : Designed as a finishing or smoothing tool­
not for the removal of multiple layers of paint-the 
oribital sander is thus recommended when limited paint 
removal is required prior to repainting. Because it sands 
in a small diameter circular motion (some models can also 
be switched to a back-and-forth vibrating action), this 
tool is particularly effective for "feathering" areas where 
paint has first been scraped (see figure 11) . The abrasive 
surface varies from about 3'X 7 inches to 4 X 9 inches and 
sandpaper is attached either by clamps or sliding clips . A 
medium grit, open-coat aluminum oxide sandpaper should 
be used; fine sandpaper clogs up 50 quickly that it is inef­
fective for smoothing paint. 
Belt sander : A second type of power tool-the belt sander ­
can also be used for removing limited layers of paint but , 
8 
in this case, the abrasive surface is a continuous belt of 
sandpaper that travel s at high speeds and consequently of­
fers much less control than the orbital sander. Because of 
the potential for more damage to the paint or the wood, 
use of the belt sander (also with a medium grit sandpaper) 
sho uld be limited to flat surfaces and only skilled 
operators should be permitted to operate it within a 
historic preservation project. 
Fig. 11 The orbi tal sander can be used for lilllited paint remo val, 
i. e., for smoothing flat surfaces after the majority of deteriorated 
paint has already been scraped off. Ph oto : Charles E. Fisher, III. 
Not Recommended 
Rotary Drill Attachments: Rotary drill attachments such 
as the rotary sanding disc and the rotary wire stripper 
should be avoided. The disc sander-usually a disc of 
sandpaper about 5 inches in diameter secured to a rubber 
based attachment which is in turn connected to an electric 
drill or other motorized housing-can easily leave visible 
circular depressions in the wood which are difficult to 
hide , even with repainting. The rotary wire stripper-clus­
ter s of metals wires similarly attached to an electric drill­
type unit-can actually shred a wooden surface and is 
thus to be used exclusively for removing corrosion and 
paint from metals. 
Waterblasting: Waterblasting above 600 p .s.i. to remove 
pa int is not recommended because it can force water into 
the woodwork rather than cleaning loose paint and grime 
from the surface; at worst , high pressure waterblasting 
causes the water to penetrate exterior sheathing and 
damages interior finishes . A detergent solution , a medium 
soft bristle brush , and a garden hose for purposes of rins­
ing , is the gentlest method involving water and is recom­
mended when cleaning exterior surfaces prior to repaint­
ing. 

Sandblasting: Finally-and undoubtedly most vehemently 
"not recommended" -sandblasting painted exterior wood­
work will indeed remove paint , but at the same time can 
scar wooden elements beyond recognition . As with rotary 
wire strippers, sandblasting erode s the soft porous fibers 
(spring wood) faster than the hard , dense fibers (summer 
wood), leaving a pitted surface with ridges and valleys . 
Sandblasting will also erode projecting areas of carvings 
and moldings before it removes paint from concave areas 
(see figure 12). Hence , this abrasive method is potentially 
the most damaging of all possibilities , even if a contractor
promises that blast pressure can be controlled so that the 
paint is removed without harming the historic exterior 
woodwork. (For Additional Information, See Presevation 
Briefs 6, "Dangers of Abrasive Cleaning to Historic Build­
ings" .) 
Fig. 12 Salldblasting has permallently damaged this ornamental 
bracket . Evell paillt will not be able to hide the deep eros ion of 
the wood. Photo: Da vid W. Look , AlA. 
Summary of Abrasive Methods (Mechanical) 
Recommended: Orbital sander, belt sander (skilled opera­
tor only). 
Applicable areas of building: Flat surfaces , i.e., siding, 
eaves, doors, window sills. 
For use on: Class II and Class III conditions. 
Health / Safety factors: Take precautions against lead dust 
and eye damage; dispose of lead paint residue properly . 
Not Recommended: Rotary drill attachments, high 
pressure waterblasting , sandblasting. 
• Thermal Methods 
Where exterior surface condition s have been identified 
that warrant total paint remo val such as peeling , crack­
ing, or alligatoring , two thermal devices - the electric heat 
plate and the electric heat gun-have proven to be quite 
successful for use on different wooden elements of the 
historic building. One thermal method-the blow torch - is 
not recommended because it can scorch the wood or even 
burn the building down! 
Recommended Thermal Methods 
Electric heat plate : The electric heat plate (see figure 13) 
operates between 500 and 800 degrees Fahrenheit (not hot 
enough to vaporize lead paint), using about 15 amps of 
power . The plate is held close to the painted exterior sur­
face until the layers of paint begin to soften and blister, 
then moved to an adjacent location on the wood while the 
softened paint is scraped off with a putty knife (it should 
be noted that the heat plate is most successful when the 
paint is very thick!). With practice, the operator can suc­
 cessfully move the heat plate evenly across a flat surface 
such as wooden siding or a window sill or door in a con­
tinuous motion , thus lessening the risk of scorching the 
wood in an attempt to reheat the edge of the paint suffi­
ciently for effective removal. Since the electric heat plate 's 
coil is "red hot ," extreme caution should be taken to 
avoid igniting clothing or burning the skin. If an extension 
cord is used, it should be a heavy-duty cord (with 3-prong 
grounded plugs) . A heat plate could overload a circuit or, 
even worse , cause an electrical fire ; therefore , it is recom­
mended that this implement be used with a single circuit 
and that a fire extinguisher always be kept close at hand . 
Fig. 13 The electric heat plate (with paint scraper) is particularly 
useful for removing paint down to bare wood on flat surfaces 
such as doors , window frames , and siding. After scraping , some 
light sanding w ill probably be necessary to smooth the surf ace 
prior to application of primer and top coats. Photo: David W. 
Look , A lA. 
Electric heat gun: The electric heat gun (electric hot-air 
gun) looks like a hand-held hairdryer with a heavy-duty 
metal case (see figure 14). It has an electrical resistance 
coil that typically heats between 500 and 750 degrees 
Fahrenheit and , again , uses about 15 amps of power 
which requires a heavy-duty extension cord. There are 
some heat guns that operate at higher temperatures but 
they should not be purchased for removing old paint 
9 

because of the danger of lead paint vapors. The tempera­
ture is controlled by a vent on the side of the heat gun. 
When the vent is closed, the heat increases. A fan forces a 
stream of hot air against the painted woodwork, causing a 
blister to form. At that point, the softened paint can be 
peeled back with a putty knife. It can be used to best ad­
vantage when a paneled door was originally varnished, 
then painted a number of times. In this case, the paint 
will come off quite easily, often leaving an almost pristine 
varnished surface behind. Like the heat plate, the heat gun 
works best on a heavy paint build-up. (It is, however, not 
very successful on only one or two layers of paint or on 
surfaces that have only been varnished. The varnish sim­
ply becomes sticky and the wood scorches.) 
Although the heat gun is heavier and more tiring to use 
than the heat plate, it is particularly effective for remov­
ing paint from detail work because the nozzle can be 
directed at curved and intricate surfaces. Its use is thus 
more limited than the heat plate, and most successfully 
used in conjunction with the heat plate. For example, it 
takes about two to three hours to strip a paneled door 
with a heat gun, but if used in combination with a heat 
plate for the large, flat area, the time can usually be cut in 
half. Although a heat gun seldom scorches wood, it can 
cause fires (like the blow torch) if aimed at the dusty 
cavity between the exterior sheathing and siding and in­
terior lath and plaster. A fire may smolder for hours be­
fore flames break through to the surface. Therefore, this 
thermal device is best suited for use on solid decorative 
elements, such as molding, balusters, fretwork, or "ginger­
bread." 
Fig. 14 The nozzle on the electric heat gun permits hot air to be 
aimed into cavities on solid decorative elements such as this ap­
plied column. After the paint has been sufficiently softened , it 
can be removed with a profiled scraper. Photo: Charles E. 
Fisher, III. 
10 
Not Recommended 
Blow Torch: Blow torches, such as hand-held propane or 
butane torches, were widely used in the past for paint 
removal because other thermal devices were not available. 
With this technique, the flame is directed toward the paint 
until it begins to bubble and loosen from the surface. 
Then the paint is scraped off with a putty knife. Although 
this is a relatively fast process, at temperatures between 
3200 and 3800 degrees Fahrenheit the open flame is not 
only capable of burning a careless operator and causing 
severe damage to eyes or skin, it can easily scorch or ig­
nite the wood. The other fire hazard is more insidious. 
Most frame buildings have an air space between the ex­
terior sheathing and siding and interior lath and plaster . 
This cavity usually has an accumulation of dust which is 
also easily ignited by the open flame of a blow torch. 
Finally, lead-base paints will vaporize at high tempera­
tures, releasing toxic fumes that can be unknowingly in­
haled. Therefore, because both the heat plate and the heat 
gun are generally safer to use-that is, the risks are much 
more controllable-the blow torch should definitely be 
avoided! 
Summary of Thermal Methods 
Recommended: Electric heat plate, electric heat gun. 
Applicable areas of building: Electric heat plate-flat sur­
faces such as siding, eaves, sash, sills, doors. Electric heat 
gun-solid decorative molding, balusters, fretwork, or 
"gingerbread." 
For use on: Class III conditions. 
Health/Safety factors: Take precautions against eye 
damage and fire. Dispose of lead paint residue properly. 
Not Recommended: Blow torch. 
• Chemical Methods 
With the availability of effective thermal methods for 
total paint removal, the need for chemical methods-in 
the context of preparing historic exterior woodwork for 
repainting-becomes quite limited. Solvent-base or caustic 
strippers may, however, playa supplemental role in a 
number of situations, including: 
• Removing paint residue from intricate decorative 
features, or in cracks or hard to reach areas if a heat gun 
has not been completely effective; 
• Removing paint on window muntins because heat 
devices can easily break the glass; 
• Removing varnish on exterior doors after all layers of 
paint have been removed by a heat plate/heat gun if the 
original varnish finish is being restored; 
• Removing paint from detachable wooden elements 
such as exterior shutters, balusters, columns, and doors 
by dip-stripping when other methods are too laborious. 
Recommended Chemical Methods 
(Use With Extreme Caution) 
Because all chemical paint removers can involve potential 
health and safety hazards, no wholehearted recommenda­
tions can be made from that standpoint. Commonly known 
as "paint removers" or "strippers," both solvent-base or 
caustic products are commercially available that, when 
poured, brushed, or sprayed on painted exterior wood­
work are capable of softening several layers of paint at a 
time so that the resulting "sludge" -which should be 
remembered is nothing less than the sequence of historic 

• Marking the original location of the shutter by number {either by stamping 
numbers into the end grain with metal numeral dies or cutting numbers into the 
end with a pen knife} will minimize difficulties when rehanging them. 
paint layers-can be removed with a putty knife. 
Detachable wood elements such as exterior shutters can 
also be "dip-stripped." 
Solvent-base Strippers: The formulas tend to vary, but 
generally consist of combinations of organic solvents such 
as methylene chloride, isopropanol, toluol, xylol, and 
methanol; thickeners such as methyl cellulose; and various 
additives such as paraffin wax used to prevent the volatile 
solvents from evaporating before they have time to soak 
through multiple layers of paint. Thus, while some 
solvent-base strippers are quite thin and therefore un­
suitable for use on vertical surfaces, others, called "semi­
paste" strippers, are formulated for use on vertical sur­
faces or the underside of horizontal surfaces. 
However, whether liquid or semi-paste, there are two 
important points to stress when using any solvent-base 
stripper: First, the vapors from the organic chemicals can 
be highly toxic if inhaled; skin contact is equally danger­
ous because the solvents can be absorbed; second, many 
solvent-base strippers are flammable. Even though appli­
cation out-of-doors may somewhat mitigate health and 
safety hazards, a respirator with special filters for organic 
solvents is recommended and, of course, solvent-base 
strippers should never be used around open flames, lighted 
cigarettes, or with steel wool around electrical outlets. 
Although appearing to be the simplest for exterior use, 
a particular type of solvent-base stripper needs to be men­
tioned here because it can actually cause the most prob­
lems. Known as "water-rinsable," such products have a 
high proportion of methylene chloride together with emul­
sifiers. Although the dissolved paint can be rinsed off with 
water with a minimum of scraping, this ultimately creates 
more of a problem in cleaning up and properly disposing 
of the sludge. In addition, these strippers can leave a 
gummy residue on the wood that requires removal with 
solvents. Finally, water-rinsable strippers tend to raise the 
grain of the wood more than regular strippers. 
On balance, then, the regular strippers would seem to 
work just as well for exterior purposes and are perhaps 
even better from the standpoint of proper lead sludge 
disposal because they must be hand Scraped as opposed to 
rinsed off (a coffee-can with a wire stretched across the 
top is one effective way to collect the sludge; when the 
putty knife is run across the wire, the sludge simply falls 
into the can. Then, when the can is filled, the wire is 
removed, the can capped, and the lead paint sludge dis­
posed of according to local health regulations). 
Caustic Strippers: Until the advent of solvent-base strip­
pers, caustic strippers were used exclusively when a 
chemical method was deemed appropriate for total paint 
removal prior to repainting or refinishing. Now, it is more 
difficult to find commercially prepared caustic solutions in 
hardware and paint stores for home-owner use with the 
exception of lye (caustic soda) because solvent-base 
strippers packaged in small quantities tend to dominate 
the market. 
Most commercial dip stripping companies, however, 
continue to use variations of the caustic bath process 
because it is still the cheapest method available for remov­
ing paint. Generally, dip stripping should be left to 
professional companies because caustic solutions can 
dissolve skin and permanently damage eyes as well as 
present serious disposal problems in large quantities . 
If exterior shutters or other detachable elements are be-
ing sent out for stripping in a caustic solution, it is wise 
to see samples of the company's finished work. While 
some companies do a first-rate job, others can leave a 
residue of paint in carvings and grooves. Wooden ele­
ments may also be soaked too long so that the wood 
grain is raised and roughened, requiring extensive hand 
sanding later. In addition, assurances should be given by 
these companies that caustic paint removers will be 
neutralized with a mild acid solution or at least 
thoroughly rinsed with water after dipping (a caustic 
residue makes the wood feel slippery). If this is not done, 
the lye residue will cause new paint to fail. 
6 
Summary of Chemical Methods 
Recommended, with extreme caution: Solvent-base strip­
pers, caustic strippers. 
Applicable areas of buildings: decorative features, window 
muntins, doors, exterior shutters, columns, balusters, and 
railings. 
For use on: Class III Conditions. 
Health/Safety factors: Take precautions against inhaling 
toxic vapors; fire; eye damage; and chemical 'poisoning 
from skin contact. Dispose of lead residue properly 
General Paint Type Recommendations 
Based on the assumption that the exterior wood has been 
painted with oil paint many times in the past and the ex­
isting top coat is therefore also an oil paint, it is recom­
mended that for CLASS I and CLASS II paint surface con­
ditions, a top coat of high quality oil paint be applied 
when repainting. The reason for recommending oil rather 
than latex paints is that a coat of latex paint applied 
directly over old oil paint is more apt to fail. The con­
siderations are twofold. First, because oil paints continue 
to harden with age, the old surface is sensitive to the 
added stress of shrinkage which occurs as a new coat of 
paint dries. Oil paints shrink less upon drying than latex 
paints and thus do not have as great a tendency to pull 
the old paint loose. Second, when exterior oil paints age, 
the binder releases pigment particles, causing a chalky 
surface. Although for best results, the chalk (or dirt, etc.) 
should always be cleaned off prior to repainting, a coat of 
new oil paint is more able to penetrate a chalky residue 
and adhere than is latex paint. Therefore, unless it is 
possible to thoroughly clean a heavy chalked surface, oil 
paints-on balance-give better adhesion. 
 * 
If however, a latex top coat is going to be applied over 
several layers of old oil paint, an oil primer should be 
applied first (the oil primer creates a flat, porous surface 
to which the latex can adhere). After the primer has 
thoroughly dried, a latex top coat may be applied. In the 
long run, changing paint types is more time consuming 
and expensive. An application of a new oil-type top coat 
on the old oil paint is, thus, the preferred course of 
action. 
• If the top coat is latex paint {when viewed by the naked eye or , preferably, with 
a magnifying glass, it looks like a series of tiny craters} it may either be repainted 
with new latex paint or with oil paint. Normal surface preparation should precede 
any repainting. 
11 

For snIp hy the Superilltpll(](l'ut of Document::;, U.S. Goyernment Printing Office 
" ·",hlng'toll. n.r. 20402 
If CLASS III conditions have necessitated total paint 
removal, there are two options, both of which assure pro­
tection of the exterior wood: (1) an oil primer may be ap­
plied followed by an oil-type top coat, preferably by the 
same manufacturer; or (2) an oil primer may be applied 
followed by a latex top coat, again using the same brand 
of paint. It should also be noted that primers were never 
intended to withstand the effects of weathering; therefore, 
the top coat should be applied as soon as possible after 
the primer has dried. 
Conclusion 
The recommendations outlined in this Brief are cautious 
because at present there is no completely safe and effec­
tive method of removing old paint from exterior wood­
work. This has necessarily eliminated descriptions of 
several methods still in a developmental or experimental 
stage, which can therefore neither be recommended nor 
precluded from future recommendation. With the ever­
increasing number of buildings being rehabilitated, 
however, paint removal technology should be stimulated 
and, in consequence, existing methods refined and new 
methods developed which will respect both the historic 
wood and the health and safety of the operator. 
Reading List 
Batcheler, Penelope Hartshorne, "Pai nt Color Research and Restorati on." 
Technical Leaflet 15. Nashville: American Association for State 
and Local History (undated). 
"Da nger : Restoration May Be Hazardous to Your Health ." The Old 
House Journal. Vol. 4, No.5 (May 1976), pp. 9-11. 
Gola, Edward F. "Avo iding Mistakes in Exterior Painting." The Old 
House Journal. Vol. 4, No . 6 (June 1976), pp. 1, 4-5. 
"How to Assure a Satisfactory Paint Job. " Scientific Section: Circular 
784. Washington, DC: National Paint, Varnish and Lacquer 
Association (undated). 
Labine, Clem. "Selecting the Best Exterior Paint." The Old Hou se Jour­
nal. Vol. 4, No .7 (July 1976), pp. 1, 10-1l. 
Morton, W. Brown III and Hume , Gary L. The Secretary of the Interior's 
Standards for Historic Preservation Projects with Guidelines for 
Applying the Standards. Washington, DC: Department of In­
terior, 1979. 
Paint Problem Solver. St. Louis: National Decorating Products Associa­
tion, 1980. 
"Special Issue: Exterior Painting." The Old House Journal. Vol. 4, No.4 
(April 1981), pp . 7l-94. 
Thorsen, John W. "Hazardous Waste : What is it? How to Handle it." 
Professional Decorating & Coating Action. Vol. 43, No.4 
(September 1981), pp. 4-5. 
Special thanks go to Baird M. Smith, AlA (formerly Chief. Preservation Tech­
nology Branch, TPS) for providing general direction in the development of the 
manuscript. In addition, the following individuals are to be thanked for their 
contributions as technical experts in the field: Royal T. Brown, National Paint and 
Coatings Association , Washington , D.C.; Dr. Judith E. Selwyn, Preservation 'J"ech­
nology Associates, Boston , Massachusetts; and Dennis R. Vacca, Pratt & Lambert 
Co., Carlstadt, New Jersey. Finally, thanks go to several National Park Service staff 
members whose valuable comments were incorporated into the text and who con­
tributed to the production of the brief: James A. Caufield, Anne E. Grimmer, Jean 
E. Travers , David G. Battle, Sharon C. Park, AlA, Charles E. Fisher Ill, Sara K. 
Blumenthal, and Martha A. Gutrick. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to The Economic Recovery Tax Act 
of 1981, which directs the Secretary of the Interior to certify rehabilitations of 
historic buildings that are consistent with their historic character; the advice and 
guidance in this brief will assist property owners in complying with the re­
quirements of this law. 
Preservation Briefs 10 has been developed under the technical editorship of Lee 
H. Nelson, AlA, Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, 
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C. 20240. Comments on the 
usefulness of this information are welcomed and can be sent to Mr. Nelson at the 
above address. 
This publication is not copyr ighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Nor­
mal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park Service are appre­
ciated. 
September 1982 