1
41
PRESER
 
V ATION  
BRIEFS 
The Seismic Rehabilitation 
of Historic Buildings 
Antonio Aguilar
National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Technical Preservation Services
Earthquakes result from sudden movements of the 
geological plates that form the earth’s crust, generally 
along cracks or fractures known as “faults.” When 
buildings are not designed and constructed to withstand 
these unpredictable and often violent ground motions, 
major structural damage, or outright collapse, can result, 
with grave risk to human life. Historic buildings are 
especially vulnerable to seismic events, particularly 
those built before seismic codes were adopted. Also, 
more and more communities continue to adopt higher 
standards for seismic retrofit of existing buildings. And, 
despite popular misconceptions, the risks of earthquakes 
are not limited to the West Coast (Figures 1 and 7), but 
exist across much of the United States.
Figure 1. In 2011, a 5.6 magnitude 
earthquake substantially damaged all four 
turrets atop St. Gregory’s University 
Benedictine Hall in Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
Photo: St. Gregory University.
Although historic and other older buildings can be 
retrofitted to survive earthquakes, the process of doing 
so may damage or destroy the very featur
es that make 
such buildings significant. While life-safety issues 
remain foremost concerns, fortunately, there are various 
approaches which can help protect historic buildings 
from both the devastation caused by earthquakes 
and from the damage inflicted by well-intentioned, 
but insensitive, retrofit procedures. Building owners, 
managers, consultants, and communities need to 
be actively involved in planning for and readying 
irreplaceable historic resources from these threats.
This Preservation Brief provides information on how 
earthquakes affect historic buildings, how a historic 
preservation ethic can guide responsible retrofit 
decisions, and how various methods of seismic 
rehabilitation can protect human lives and historic 
structures. The Brief provides a description of the most 
common vulnerabilities of various building construction 
types and the seismic strengthening methods most often 
needed to remedy them. A glossary of technical terms is 
also provided at the end of the Brief. 
Undertaking the seismic rehabilitation of a historic 
building is a process that requires careful planning 
and execution, and the coordinated work of architects, 
engineers, code officials, contractors, and agency 
administrators. Project personnel working together 
can ensure that the architectural, structural, financial, 
programmatic, cultural, and social values of historic 
buildings are preserved, while rendering them safe for 
continued use.
Achieving Seismic Retrofit as well  
as Preservation
Major repairs 
and alterations, 
additions, change 
in occupancy, and 
local ordinances 
can trigger 
compliance with 
current building 
code requirements, 
including seismic 
strengthening 
requirements that 
specify a minimum 
level of protection 
from earthquake 
hazards to building
occupants. They 
also specify 
the process 
for the seismic 
evaluation of 
buildings, outline 
the methods for 
rehabilitation, 
specify limitations 

2
on selecting str
uctural analysis procedures, identify 
acceptable rehabilitation strategies, and specify when 
alternative compliance methods may be used.
Building codes are primarily intended to guide the 
design and construction of new buildings and often 
require the application of certain design and construction 
methods that are critical for good seismic performance. 
However, determining the seismic adequacy of historic 
buildings by comparing them to the requirements 
for new construction can be difficult, and sometimes 
impossible, because some archaic building materials 
and construction methods are not included in the new 
building codes. While many jurisdictions have adopted 
prescriptive standards, primarily for certain building 
types such as unreinforced masonry load bearing walls, 
more sophisticated, performance-based evaluation 
methods allowed by some codes offer more flexibility. 
Many prescriptive code complying standards can result 
in the destruction of much of a historic building’s 
appearance and integrity
. This is because the most 
expedient way to reinforce a building is to introduce a 
completely new complying structural system, to add 
new structural members, and to fill in irregularities or 
large openings without regard to how the new structural 
elements or modifications affect its architectural design. 
The results of these approaches can be quite intrusive 
(Figures 2-3). However, structural reinforcement can 
be introduced sensitively while still meeting code 
requirements. In such cases, its design, placement, 
patterning, and detailing will respect the historic 
character of the building, even when the reinforcement 
itself is visible (Figures 4-5). 
Figures 2-3. Standard approaches to seismic rehabilitation, such as adding diagonal bracing to reinforce window and storefront openings as seen in 
these photos, can be visually intrusive. Figure 2 (left). Figure 3 (right). Photo: Steade Craigo.
Figures 4-5. Using moment frames (horizontal and vertical 
steel members identified by the arrows) set back behind 
storefront openings as seen in Figure 4 (left), or placing brace 
frames (in red) away from the windows as illustrated in  
Figure 5 (right) are solutions that meet historic preservation 
goals. Figure 4. Photo: Elizabeth Hilton.
Successful seismic rehabilitations of historic buildings 
require both skillful use of the best available technology 

3
as well a proper understanding of historic preservation, 
and the inherent strength of archaic materials and 
structural systems. The seismic retrofit of historic 
buildings is as much an art as it is a science; it is, 
therefore, extremely important to select a professional 
who is not only experienced with seismic rehabilitation 
of existing buildings, but is also closely familiar with 
The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment 
of Historic Properties. While some degree of change or 
alteration to a historic building may be inevitable and 
acceptable in a seismic rehabilitation, the Standards 
can provide  critical decision-making guidance in 
the process of planning and designing a successful 
seismic rehabilitation. The goal of a successful 
seismic rehabilitation should be to reduce the seismic 
vulnerabilities of a building while retaining its historic 
materials and features to the greatest extent possible and 
avoiding or minimizing alterations to significant historic 
features and spaces.
Four important preservation principles should be kept 
in mind when undertaking seismic retrofit projects:
• Historic features and materials, both structural and 
nonstructural, should be preserved and retained, not 
as museum artifacts, but to continue to fulfill their 
historic function to the greatest extent possible, and 
not be replaced wholesale in the process of seismic 
strengthening.
• If historic features and materials are damaged beyond 
repair, or must be removed during the retrofit, they 
should be replaced in kind or with compatible 
substitute materials. If they must be removed during 
the retrofit, they should be removed carefully and 
thoroughly documented to ensure they can be properly 
re-installed in their original location.
• New seismic retrofit systems should work in concert 
with the inherent strengths of the historic structural 
system, and, whether hidden or exposed, should 
respect the character and integrity of the historic 
building, be visually unobtrusive and compatible 
in design, and be selected and designed with due 
consideration to limiting the damage to historic features 
and materials during installation.
• Seismic work should be reversible whenever feasible 
to allow its removal for future installation of improved 
systems as well as repair of historic features and 
materials.
Putting a Team Together
A team that is experienced with both seismic retrofit 
requirements and historic preservation, and can 
adopt an inter-disciplinary approach, is important 
for achieving a seismic rehabilitation that is sensitive 
to the building’s historic character, features, and 
materials. Team members should be selected for their 
experience with similar projects, and may include 
architects, engineers, code specialists, contractors, 
and preservation consultants. Because the typical 
seismic codes are written for new construction, it 
is important that both the architect and structural 
engineer be knowledgeable about historic buildings 
and about meeting building code equivalencies and 
finding other options. 
Local and state building officials can identify regulatory 
requirements, alternative approaches to meeting 
these requirements, and a historic preservation or 
building conservation code if one has been adopted 
by the jurisdiction. Even on small projects that 
cannot support a full professional team, consultants 
should be familiar with historic preservation goals. 
The State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and 
the local historic preservation office or commission 
may be able to identify consultants with experience 
in seismic rehabilitation of historic buildings, or be 
able to provide initial technical assistance on how to 
approach a seismic retrofit.
Earthquakes and Historic Buildings: 
Assessing Principal Risk Factors
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
defines seismic risk as a function of earthquake hazard 
and vulnerability. Assessing the seismic risk of a historic 
property is the first step to avoid the potential loss of life 
and injuries, damage and loss of property, or disruption 
of services. Seismic evaluations of historic buildings 
within areas of earthquake hazard should be conducted 
if they have not been previously performed. This 
evaluation should identify both the potential structural 
deficiencies of the building (any structural component 
such as columns, beams, floors, etc., required to resist 
seismic forces), as well as the potential vulnerabilities 
of the nonstructural components of the building (all 
components that are not part of the structural system, 
which include exterior cladding, glazing, chimneys, 
interior partitions, ceilings, and other architectural 
features, as well as building systems, and equipment). 
Nonstructural failures generally account for the majority 
of earthquake damage repair costs during earthquakes. 
Thus, it is critical to consider the risk and consequences 
of potential nonstructural failures. This is particularly 
important for historic buildings located in areas of low 
or moderate earthquake hazard, where the danger of 
collapse may be relatively small, but nonstructural 
elements such as unanchored stone veneers, cornices, 
parapets, chimneys, and gable ends may dislodge and 
fall to the ground during a moderate earthquake and 
pose severe life-safety hazards (Figure 6).

4
Other important nonstructural hazards to consider are 
the possibility that gas and water lines may rupture 
during an earthquake, which can cause fire and water 
damage. Many of these vulnerabilities can be mitigated 
by understanding how the forces unleashed in an 
earthquake affect a building, and then planning and 
implementing appropriate remedial treatments  
(Figure 7).
Factors that influence how and why historic buildings 
are damaged in an earthquake:
1. Depth of the earthquake and subsequent strength of 
earthquake waves reaching the surface
2. Duration of the earthquake, including aftershock 
tremors
3. Proximity of the building to the earthquake epicenter, 
although distance is not necessarily a direct 
relationship
4. Building construction type, including structural 
systems and materials
5. Building design, including plan and elevation 
configuration, overall massing,  arrangement of 
interior spaces, and detailing of nonstructural elements
6. Existing building condition, including maintenance 
level
7. Site and soil conditions
In the process of assessing the potential seismic risk, 
these are crucial factors that should be considered:
1. Type of construction and condition of the building 
2. Site seismic hazards
3. Occupancy and use  
Type of Building Construction. To a great extent, a 
historic building’s construction and materials determine 
its behavior during an earthquake. Some buildings, 
such as a broad class of wood-frame structures, are 
able to absorb substantial movements with little risk 
of collapse. Others, such as unreinforced masonry 
or adobe buildings, tend to be more susceptible to 
damage from shaking (Figure 8). If an earthquake is 
strong, or continues for a long time, building elements 
that are poorly attached or unreinforced may collapse 
or dislodge. Buildings of more rigid or stronger 
construction methods such as reinforced concrete or 
steel-frame buildings may also have seismic deficiencies 
depending on when they were constructed and whether 
or not they have been well-maintained over time. 
A thorough assessment of the building’s existing 
conditions is the basis for any seismic rehabilitation. 
This begins by gathering any available information 
about the building’s original construction. Many historic 
buildings in earthquake zones have survived episodes of 
ground shaking and may even have undergone previous 
seismic reinforcement work. Compiling any available 
documentation that quantifies their proven seismic 
resistance or describes seismic reinforcement work 
or any other changes that have occurred over time is 
extremely useful. Some of these records may have been 
already compiled in previous documentation assembled 
to nominate the structure to the National Register of 
Historic Places or for a Historic Structure Report. (If 
not previously done, for many buildings preparing a 
Historic Structure Report is highly recommended; see 
Preservation Brief 43: The Preparation and Use of Historic 
Structure Reports). Early real estate or insurance maps, 
such as Sanborn Maps, and assessor’s records may also 
note building changes over time.
Original construction documents, plans and 
specifications, when available, and engineering 
drawings, in particular, which include structural layout 
and connection details are especially useful. When 
drawings documenting improvements or alterations 
over time are not available, building permits can also 
provide useful information. Historic photographs of 
the building under construction or before and after 
previous earthquakes are also invaluable. The compiled 
information, along with a thorough evaluation of the 
condition and strength of the existing building materials, 
will provide a sound basis for calculating the potential 
seismic hazards of the building and preparing a seismic 
retrofit plan.
Building Configuration. The geometry and shape of 
a building also play a role in how a building behaves 
during an earthquake. Buildings with regular plans, 
whether they are round, square, or rectangular, have 
a greater resistance to damage during an earthquake 
because their geometry allows for equal resistance of 
lateral forces in all directions. 
Buildings with complex and irregular plans, however, 
may be more prone to damage during an earthquake 
because of uneven strength and stiffness. For example, 
structures with an L,T, H, or other plan  configurations 
with inward-facing, or re-entrant corners, have unequal 
resistance to stress concentrated at those corners and 
intersections (Figure 9). This is of particular concern if 
the buildings have flexible structural systems and/or 
have an irregular layout of shear walls, which may cause 
portions of the building to pull apart. 
Similarly, the more complex and irregular buildings are 
in elevation, the more susceptible they are to damage, 
especially tall structures. Other building features such 
as large ground-level storefront or garage openings, 
or floors with columns and walls running in only one 
direction, are commonly known as “soft” or “weak” 
stories, which increase the seismic vulnerability of 
historic buildings (Figures 10 and 11).

5
Figure 6. 
Failing 
nonstructural 
elements 
such as the 
stone-veneer 
window and 
door surrounds 
shown in this 
image can 
become a life-
safety hazard 
when they 
block or impede 
an exit path. 
Photo: Wiss, 
Janney, Elstner 
and Associates, 
Inc.
Figure 7. A simplified 2014 United States Geological Survey (USGS)  seismic hazard map. Owners of certain classes of high-risk buildings in 
regions of high seismic activity are advised, and often required by local ordinances, to take immediate action in undertaking a comprehensive 
vulnerability assessment and make any necessary seismic rehabilitation measures. Owners of buildings in moderate seismic zones are advised to do 
further investigation of their building’s exposure to earthquake risk, identify seismic rehabilitation needs, and consider mitigation of risks primarily 
due to nonstructural hazards. Owners of buildings in low seismic areas are advised to consider low-cost rehabilitation measures that protect against 
casualties and property loss, if such measures are found to be necessary, even though the potential occurrence of an earthquake might be low.
Figure 8. Unreinforced masonry buildings, such as this 1875 
stone building damaged during the 2014 South Napa, California 
earthquake, can be particularly vulnerable to earthquake damage.  
Photo: Architectural Resour
ces Group.
EUSGS 
Highest hazard 
s,:ience for a cball9;ng wo1/d 
Lowest hazard 
,. 
·. -...... .. / 

6
Figure 9. This image shows structural deformation due to stress 
concentration in structures with re-entrant corners, the inside corner 
where the two perpendicular exterior walls meet.
Figure 10. (left) Open first floor. Figure 11. (right) Double height second floor. These renderings show 
examples of “weak” or ”soft” story irregularities.
Basic Maintenance/Earthquake 
Preparedness
Regular maintenance ensures that existing historic 
materials remain in good condition and are not 
weakened by rot, rust, decay, or other moisture 
problems. Without exception, historic buildings 
should be well maintained. An evacuation plan 
should also be developed. With the knowledge that 
an earthquake may occur at any time in the future, 
building owners should have emergency information 
and supplies on hand.
•	 Check roofs, gutters, and foundations for 
moisture problems, and check for corrosion 
of metal ties at parapets and chimneys. Make 
repairs and keep metal painted and in good 
condition.
•	 Inspect and keep termite and wood-boring 
insects away from wooden structural members.
•	 Check exit steps and porches to ensure that 
they are tightly connected and will not collapse 
during an emergency exit.
•	 Check masonry for deteriorating mortar, and 
never defer repairs. Repoint, matching the 
historic mortar in composition and detailing.
•	 Contact utility companies for information on 
flexible connectors for gas and water lines and 
earthquake-activated gas shut-off valves. Strap 
oil tanks down and anchor water heaters to wall 
framing.
•	 Collect local emergency material for reference 
and implement simple household or office 
mitigation measures, such as installing latches 
to keep cabinets from flying open or braces to 
attach tall bookcases to walls. Keep drinking 
water, tarpaulins, and other emergency supplies 
on hand.
Building Condition. Damaged and deteriorated 
building materials increase the risk of serious damage 
during an earthquake. This condition can be the result 
of poor quality workmanship and materials from when 
the building was built, or lack of proper maintenance. 
Material damage and degradation due to moisture, 
erosion, mold, or insect infestation are typical problems 
resulting from poor maintenance. Well-maintained 
buildings, even without added reinforcement, survive 
better than similar buildings that have not been 
maintained. In unreinforced masonry buildings, 
deteriorated mortar joints can weaken entire walls. 
Regular cyclical maintenance is therefore essential. 
The capacity of the structural system to resist 
earthquakes may also be severely r
educed if previous 
alterations or earthquakes have weakened structural 
connections. Unrepaired cracks or damage from 
previous earthquakes can progressively weaken a 
building, increasing the potential for greater damage 
during the next earthquake. Cumulative earthquake 
damage can be significant; therefore, it is important to 
analyze the structural capacity of the building. 
Over time, structural members 
can become loose and pose a 
major liability. Unreinforced 
masonry buildings typically have 
a friction-fit connection between 
horizontal and vertical structural 
members, and the shaking 
caused by an earthquake pulls 
them apart. Insufficient bearing 
surfaces for beams, joists, and 
rafters against the load-bearing 
walls or support columns is 
another important factor to 
consider. The resulting structural 
inadequacy can cause a partial 
or complete building collapse, 

7
depending on the severity of the earthquake and the 
internal wall configuration. 
Evaluation of the general physical condition of the 
building’s interior and exterior, and identification of 
areas vulnerable to seismic damage, often requires 
testing and analysis to determine the durability 
and strength of materials and structure. This 
should be performed by a qualified engineer who is 
knowledgeable of historic materials and construction 
methods. In order to evaluate the actual strength and 
condition of the historic materials, selective destructive 
testing may be required.
Site Seismic Hazards. In addition to the shaking 
motion of the ground during an earthquake, there is 
risk of damage due to site-specific hazards, such as fault 
rupture; liquefaction and other soil failures; landslides; 
hazards from adjacent buildings, including pounding; 
or potential inundation from nearby dam failure or a 
tsunami. If such hazards exist, they should be addressed 
along with any needed seismic rehabilitation of the 
building. 
Occupancy and Use. A building’s occupancy and use 
have a direct relationship to its seismic risk, as well as 
the social, economic, or environmental consequences 
that an earthquake may pose. From a life-safety 
perspective, warehouses, barns, and certain industrial 
buildings and structures with low human occupancy 
may present a lower risk compared to high-rise office 
buildings, theaters, and other high-occupancy buildings. 
Specific uses such as medical facilities, housing for 
persons of limited mobility, or buildings that support 
vital community services or utilities fall within use 
categories where the risk of damage or collapse during 
an earthquake requires special consideration. Owners of 
historic buildings that are being repurposed for a new 
use should be aware that, depending on the change, the 
new use may pose a higher risk to life safety and may 
require significant seismic reinforcement to mitigate its 
seismic risk. Inversely, if the change in use lowers the 
risk to life safety, the need for extensive seismic retrofit 
work may not be necessary. 
Evaluating Significant Historic Features  
and Spaces
Just as important as the assessment of the material 
and structural condition of a building is the careful 
identification of the interior and exterior features and 
components that help define its historic character. 
Establishing a protection and preservation plan that 
identifies significant interior spaces, features, and 
finishes is essential. Significant architectural elements 
include domes and atriums and important or  
highly-decorative features such as staircases, ornate 
ceilings, mosaics, murals, and other historic treatments. 
Conversely, it is also important to identify secondary or 
tertiary areas of the building, or any spaces, features, or 
finishes that have been changed over time and no longer 
have historic significance. Less important spaces may 
provide areas for additional structural reinforcement 
to be installed during a seismic rehabilitation without 
having an adverse impact on the overall historic 
character of the building. 
The placement of additional structural reinforcement 
should be carefully considered to avoid or appreciably 
minimize any impact on the building’s significant or 
primary exterior and interior spaces (Figure 12). New 
structural elements should be located within interstitial 
or utilitarian spaces whenever possible. Alterations 
within secondary spaces are preferable to alterations of 
primary spaces, but care should be taken to preserve 
historic materials and character to the greatest extent 
feasible in these areas as well. When new structural 
elements must be added within significant interior 
spaces, the placement and location should avoid 
major alterations to the overall volume, distinctive 
architectural features, or finishes within the space, as 
well as to its character (Figures 13-15). (See Preservation 
Brief 17: Architectural Character—Identifying the Visual 
Aspects of Historic Buildings as an Aid to Preserving their 
Character, and Preservation Brief 18: Rehabilitating Interiors 
in Historic Buildings: Identifying and Preserving Character-
Defining Elements.)
Figure 12. A mezzanine was added to the original banking hall of 
this 1921 former bank building as a seismic strengthening measure. 
Subdividing such an important character-defining space can result in 
a severe loss to a building’s historic integrity.
Developing a Seismic Rehabilitation Plan
Seismic Vulnerability. Seismic vulnerability is 
represented as a sliding scale of potential damage based 
on the probability of hazard by locale (site-specific data) 
and building use. This helps the owner understand 
the building’s vulnerability to damage, both structural 
and nonstructural, in the event of an earthquake. 
Consequences of earthquake vulnerability may be 
characterized as:

8
Figures 13-14. Vertical steel 
reinforcement members were inserted 
and grouted into the walls of the main 
waiting room in Seattle’s historic 1906 
King Street Railroad Station to 
strengthen them (top left). To replace 
the original plaster ornamentation, 
molds were made to cast new 
replacement plaster elements as shown 
on this work-in-progress photo (top 
right). Photos: John Stamets.
Figure 15. After completion of the 
seismic r
einforcement, the replicated 
plaster ornamentation was installed 
and the decorative painted finishes 
restored, returning the waiting room 
of King Street Station to its historic 
appearance. Photo: Doug Scott.
• Deaths and injuries to building occupants and related 
liability
• Building collapse or damage to building components, 
and related cost for repairs
• Damage to building contents and related cost or 
liabilities
• Disruption of building operations and related cost or 
liabilities
Performance Objectives. Once the risks and 
vulnerabilities of a building have been assessed, the 
next step in the process is usually setting goals for 
reducing the seismic risks. Knowing what rehabilitation 
requirements are mandated by the local jurisdiction 
is critical, as well as knowing whether a locality has 
separate codes for historic structures. There may be 
other triggers, such as a lender requiring retrofit or 
earthquake insurance when refinancing a loan, or 
a change of occupancy. The owner should also be 
aware of the different levels of seismic risk-reduction 
measures that can be chosen and their associated 
cost. Alternative ways of reducing seismic risk to life 
and property, such as reducing the occupancy of a 
building or providing alternative facilities in case of an 
earthquake, should be studied. 
After all alternatives have been considered, modification 
options for reducing the risk of damage to a historic 
building should be evaluated. Before undertaking a 
seismic rehabilitation, objectives that define the level 
of acceptable damage or loss for a building during 
a potential earthquake must be determined. These 
are referred to as “rehabilitation objectives.” The 
rehabilitation objectives are usually set by the local 
code, ordinance, or code official in mandatory seismic 
strengthening programs, or chosen by the owner and 
engineer in a voluntary seismic rehabilitation (see ASCE 
Standard 41-13).

9
Figure 16. Computer modelling is a useful analytic tool that helps 
assess the strengths and weaknesses of a building and evaluate 
different seismic strengthening options. Three-dimensional dynamic 
analysis is required for a number of different structures located in 
certain seismic zones.
Photo: Wiss, Janney, Elstner and Associates, Inc.
The rehabilitation objectives are based on target 
“building performance levels” which provide a limiting 
range to the amount of predicted damage that a 
building should sustain during an earthquake. Building 
performance levels fall into four general classifications 
that rank from higher performance (lower risk) to lower 
performance (more risk):  
1. Operational. Backup utility services maintain function; 
the building sustains very little damage. This approach 
is intended for critical facilities, such as hospitals 
and emergency management centers, which must 
remain open and operational after a major earthquake. 
For some historic buildings, achieving this level of 
performance may be difficult or next to impossible 
without a great deal of modification. However, as more 
buildings that were engineered to sustain ground-
shaking become historic, more may achieve this level 
of performance.
2. Immediate Occupancy. The building remains safe to 
occupy. Damage and expected repairs are minor. 
3. Life Safety. The building remains stable and has 
substantial structural reserve capacity; hazardous 
nonstructural damage is controlled. 
4. Collapse Prevention. This addresses the most serious 
life-safety concerns by correcting those deficiencies 
that could lead to serious human injury or total 
building collapse. The building remains standing in 
order for occupants to exit the building; any other 
damage or loss is acceptable. It is expected that if an 
earthquake were to occur, the building should not 
collapse but would be seriously damaged, could not be 
occupied, and would require major repairs or need to 
be demolished.
Figures 17 and 18. Careful placement of the new structural reinforcement, painted to match the surrounding building elements, if left exposed, 
minimizes its visual impact. New added structural elements may be left exposed when their visibility does not impair the historic character of the 
building. Figure 17 (left). Photo: Jason Hagin. Figure 18 (right). Photo: Architectural Resources Group.
From a design perspective, the vast majority of historic 
buildings can tolerate a well-planned and placed system 
of seismic reinforcement. Utilitarian structures, such 
as warehouses, may be able to receive fairly visible 
reinforcement systems without undue damage to 
their historic character (Figures 17-18). Other, more 
architecturally detailed buildings or those with more 
finished or decorative interior surfaces will benefit 
from more hidden systems. However, installation of 
such systems may require the temporary removal and 
reinstallation of significant features as part of the seismic 
rehabilitation work. Most buildings can incorporate 

10
seismic hazard mitigation during other construction 
work in a way that ensures a high degree of in-place 
retention of historic materials.
Building performance levels are established for both 
structural and nonstructural damage. While reducing 
life-safety risks and ensuring safe post-earthquake 
occupancy of a building might be the primary concerns 
for many owners, potential damage to contents may be 
extremely important in certain circumstances. Important 
archives and records, invaluable art objects, and book 
and other collections are often housed in historic 
buildings. Risk-reduction measures associated with 
hazardous materials or valuable equipment must also 
be considered. 
Hazard Mitigation of Nonstructural Components
Nonstructural components are all those elements other 
than the columns, bearing walls, floors, beams or trusses, 
bracing elements, foundation, and other elements that 
make up a building’s structure (Figures 19-20). In the 
past, seismic rehabilitation of existing buildings has 
focused on mitigating structural deficiencies. However, 
nonstructural components represent a substantial 
portion of a building’s initial capital investment; 
and, based on post-earthquake surveys, losses from 
nonstructural components also represent a high 
percentage of losses during an earthquake (see FEMA 
E-74: Reducing the Risk of Nonstructural Earthquake 
Damage—A Practical Guide).
Figure 19. Chimneys are 
common nonstructural 
features susceptible to 
earthquake damage, 
even in zones of low-to 
medium-seismic activity 
as shown on this building 
2011 earthquake. 
Photo: Suzanne Tripp.
Figure 20. Bracing parapet walls, as illustrated in the typical detail drawing 
on the left, and as installed in the image on the right, helps avoid hazards 
fr
om falling debris.
Similar to structural components, a risk assessment of 
nonstructural components should be completed based 
on the hazards they present. The potential consequences 
of earthquake damage to nonstructural components 
depend on the type of risk they pose:
Life Safety. Could anyone be hurt by this component in 
an earthquake? 
Property Loss. Could a large property loss result? 
Functional Loss. Could the loss of this component cause 
an outage or interruption in operations? 
111RCIICH BOL.T 
WITH BEARING 
PLATE 
22° 
OIIIUJ:D DDWEL----r,~ 
ALTEIINATE 
INIEINFORCED 
MASONRY WALL 
ANSLE WITH BOLT EACH IHI 
SHEATHING 
ANlil.l: Wmt LAG SCRl:WS 
JOISTS 

11
Hazardous Nonstructural Components
The following list represents typical components and 
is not exhaustive:
Architectural
•	 Exterior walls (including masonry veneers, 
prefabricated panels, glazing, glass block, and 
curtain wall and storefront window systems) 
•	 Partitions (hollow- clay tile, unreinforced 
masonry, or similar)
•	 Ceilings (plaster or other heavy material, 
particularly if suspended)
•	 Parapets, cornices, turrets, and other projecting 
decorative elements (unreinforced masonry) 
•	 Balconies, canopies, marquees, and signs 
•	 Chimneys and exhaust/ vent stacks (unreinforced 
masonry)
•	 Stairways 
Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Systems
•	 Boilers, furnaces, pumps, and chillers
•	 Water and fuel storage tanks
•	 Plumbing and piping, both nonhazardous and 
hazardous materials, including sprinkler systems
•	 Conduits
•	 Ductwork
•	 Light fixtures
•	 Electrical and communication equipment
Furnishings and Interior Equipment
•	 Storage racks
•	 Bookcases
•	 Filing cabinets
•	 Hazardous material storage units
•	 Elevators
•	 Conveyors
•	
Other c
ontents in museums and historic houses
Cost and Implementation
Designing a successful seismic rehabilitation takes 
into consideration not only seismic performance and 
historic preservation concerns, but financial ones as well. 
The rehabilitation of historic buildings often triggers 
mandated seismic strengthening work to comply with 
local codes. This often occurs when the amount of work 
crosses a certain threshold or when the rehabilitation 
involves a change in use, such as the conversion of an 
industrial building into a residential use. In these cases, 
the rehabilitation includes all the work necessary to 
meet the new programmatic requirements as well as 
the seismic performance objectives in a “single-stage” 
project. All the costs and occupancy disruptions are also 
incurred at one time, and a significant upfront capital 
investment is required. 
When budgetary constraints and/or occupancy 
restrictions do not make a single-stage project 
feasible, a “multi-stage” project that spreads the cost 
and occupancy disruptions over a set period of time 
should be considered. The term used for a planned 
rehabilitation, implemented over a period of time to 
meet a predetermined seismic performance objective, 
is an “incremental rehabilitation.” In an incremental 
rehabilitation, the work is integrated into ongoing 
facility maintenance and capital improvement 
operations. An incremental approach has been shown to 
have many advantages from a benefit/cost analysis (see 
FEMA 227, 395, and 399).
Preparation of Construction Documents and Execution 
of the Work
Whether the seismic rehabilitation will be done as a 
single project or incrementally, construction documents 
must be prepared. The documents should clearly 
define the overall scope of the work. In the case of an 
incremental rehabilitation, the scope and sequence 
of each phase must also be clearly detailed. A good 
set of construction documents along with a quality 
assurance program to ensure that the design is carried 
out as specified is critical for any successful seismic 
rehabilitation. It is also critical that the construction 
documents include details and specifications for the 
treatment of historic features and materials. Selecting 
a contractor with a proven record of successful historic 
rehabilitation work is extremely important. It is also 
recommended that the project team schedule a meeting 
with the local building code official to discuss the 
seismic retrofit approach and to explore potential code 
compliance alternatives. 

12
Questions to Ask  
These questions should be discussed with the team to 
determine acceptable alternatives. Since there is never a 
single “right” answer, the design team and code officials 
should work together to determine the appropriate level of 
seismic retrofit with the lowest visual impact on significant 
spaces, features, and finishes on both the interior and 
exterior of historic buildings. This guide is not intended to 
prescribe how seismic retrofit should be done, but rather, 
to illustrate that every physical change to a building will 
have some consequence. By asking how impacts can be 
reduced, the owner will have several options from which 
to choose.
•	 C
an bracing be installed without damag
ing decorative 
details or the appearance of parapets, chimneys, or 
balconies?
•	 Are the visible features of the reinforcement, such as 
anchor plates/washers or added exterior buttresses 
adequately designed to blend in with the historic 
building?
•	 Can hidden or grouted bolts be used to tie floors and 
walls together, instead of using traditional bolts and 
exposed washers or rosettes if they might detract from 
a building’s historic character?
•	 Are diagonal frames, such as X- or K-braces or other 
located to have a minimal impact on the primary 
facade? Are they set back and painted a receding color 
if visible through windows or storefronts?
•	 Can moment frames or reinforced bracing be added 
around historic storefronts in order to avoid exposed 
reinforcement, such as X-braces, within the immediate 
viewing range of the public?
•	 Can shorter sections of reinforcement be “stitched” 
into the existing building to avoid removing or 
covering large sections of historic materials? This is 
particularly important for the insertion of additional 
roof framing supports.
•	 Can shear walls be located in utilitarian interior spaces 
to reduce the impact on finishes in the primary areas?
•	 Are there situations where a thinner, applied fiber-
reinforced coating would adequately strengthen walls 
or supports without the need for heavier reinforced 
concrete?
•	 Can diaphragms be added to non-significant floors in 
order to protect highly decorated ceilings below, or the 
reverse if the floor is more ornamental than the ceiling?
•	 Are there adequate funds to retain, repair, or reinstall 
ornamental features and finishes once structural 
reinforcements have been installed?
•	 Should alternative seismic reinforcement methods 
such as base isolation, wall damping systems, or core 
drilling be considered? Could they protect significant 
features and materials by reducing the amount of 
intervention required?
•	 Are the seismic treatments under consideration 
“reversible” in a way that allows the most amount of 
historic materials to be retained and allows future 
repair and restoration?
•	 Could the seismic rehabilitation add excessive 
strengthening that could have unintended negative 
consequences to the historic structure during an 
earthquake?
Remediating Seismic Deficiencies 
Achieving desired building performance objectives 
depends on the specific occupant needs, site, and 
building conditions. The particular approaches to 
achieving this should also be tailored to the unique 
historic character and conditions of each building, and 
the specific seismic deficiencies that need to be remedied 
or mitigated. Most seismic deficiencies and possible 
required mitigation techniques can be divided into the 
general categories described here. Although not an 
exhaustive list, it is intended to provide an overview of 
the scope of work a building owner or project manager 
might expect during a seismic rehabilitation.
Inadequate Global Strength or Stiffness. Historic 
buildings which were not designed to resist the lateral 
forces of a ground-shaking event often lack adequate 
overall strength, or “global strength.” While this is 
seldom the only deficiency that needs to be mitigated, 
lack of sufficient global strength makes a building 
particularly vulnerable during a seismic event. 
Approaches to mitigating this deficiency often require 
reinforcing the existing structure or adding structural 
components to strengthen the building. Mitigating the 
lack of sufficient overall stiffness, or “global stiffness,” is 
also necessary in many seismic rehabilitations. While the 
methods used to improve stiffness are often the same as 
those used to correct inadequate strength, strength and 
stiffness are considered separately because they relate 
to specific building responses. A building may have 
minimum acceptable strength to prevent its collapse, 
but if it is too flexible the building may be vulnerable 
to excessive movement or drift. Too much drift often 
results in extensive damage to exterior and interior walls 
and nonstructural components.
The addition of steel moment frames, braced frames 
of various configurations, and concrete shear walls are 
typical methods for increasing the strength and stiffness 
of a building. Careful placement of new structural 
elements is critical to avoid negatively affecting 
windows and doorways, particularly on highly-visible 
elevations. Alterations to significant interior spaces such 

13
as lobbies, assembly spaces, and other character-defining 
spaces should likewise be avoided.
Building Irregularities. Plan irregularities such as 
re-entrant corners place extraordinary demands on 
building elements due to torsional or twisting reactions 
to the ground-shaking forces of an earthquake. Vertical 
irregularities create an uneven distribution of the  
mass or stiffness between the vertical elements of the 
building which can be particularly problematic in  
multi-story buildings. The vulnerability to seismic 
damage that these types of irregularities impose was 
seldom considered in the original design of many 
historic buildings, and normally requires retrofit 
measures to mitigate them. 
Plan and elevation irregularities are too many to 
enumerate here. Mitigation measures for this type of 
deficiency can be challenging to undertake in historic 
buildings, as some of these irregularities may be 
important to the building’s historic character. Some of 
the most problematic solutions involve adding shear 
walls directly behind window and door openings, 
particularly when they are on highly-visible elevations. 
Solutions that involve inserting a new floor or a large 
mezzanine into an architecturally significant, two-story 
space should be avoided. 
Load Path. There should be a positive and continuous 
load path to convey lateral forces. Inadequate connection 
between structural and nonstructural components of 
a building is one of the most critical deficiencies to be 
addressed in many seismic rehabilitations. Forces acting 
on building components must be able to be transferred 
down to the supporting soil. For example, in order to 
resist the forces of an earthquake, a panel of cladding 
must be adequately connected to the floor, walls, frames, 
braces, and other structural members that connect it to 
the building’s foundation. 
A strong connection between all of the elements of the 
building allows for the transfer of the stressing forces 
down to the foundation, where it is absorbed by the 
soil. Breaks or failures along this load path render 
any existing seismic system ineffective. Methods for 
mitigating load path deficiencies range from simple 
reinforcement measures such as adding metal straps, 
threaded bolts, and other mechanical fasteners to more 
elaborate engineered connections. Adequate connections 
between walls, roof, floors, and foundation are critical, 
as well as between the components of all the vertical and 
horizontal structural components of the building such as 
joist to beams or walls, and columns to beams and floors 
or footings. 
Diaphragms. Floors and roofs are commonly referred to 
as “diaphragms” in seismic design. Diaphragms act as 
horizontal “beams” between the vertical elements (walls 
and/or columns) that resist the lateral forces during 
an earthquake. Inadequate shear, bending strength, 
and stiffness are some of the most common diaphragm 
deficiencies. Strengthening methods for diaphragms 
can entail adding sheathing to roofs or floors, installing 
tension rods in shallow-vaulted concrete floors, and 
various other methods. 
Reinforcement around openings, re-entrant corners, 
and mitigation of other plan irregularities may also 
be necessary. Ensuring proper transfer of the lateral 
earthquake forces spread over the diaphragm to the 
lateral force-resisting system (vertical elements of 
the structure) is also an important component of a 
seismic retrofit. Adequate diaphragm “collectors,” 
structural elements that collect the lateral force and 
transfer it to the lateral force-resisting system, need 
to be strengthened or added to compensate for any 
deficiencies in the existing construction. 
Foundations. Foundation deficiencies can vary greatly 
and include deficiencies within the foundation system 
itself or with the soil conditions. Foundation deficiencies 
are independent of building or construction type, and 
remedial work can include replacing or upgrading the 
existing foundation, adding a new foundation next to 
the existing one, or adding new pilings or drilled piers. 
While often expensive and disruptive to correct or 
mitigate, foundation deficiencies are critical to address. 
Remediating Seismic Deficiencies According 
to Building Construction Type
Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall. Unreinforced 
masonry (URM) buildings are most commonly brick 
or stone without steel reinforcement bars imbedded in 
them. In many historic buildings of this type, masonry 
bearing walls support the weight of the roof and floors. 
Joists bear directly on the wall at the perimeter of the 
building and are supported by post and beams on the 
interior. Unreinforced masonry is one of the oldest and 
most diverse construction types and encompasses a 
wide range of materials and wall construction methods 
such as solid clay brick, cut or field stone, hollow-clay 
brick, structural tile, concrete masonry units, and adobe. 
URM buildings are generally considered to be some 
of the most susceptible to earthquake damage. In 
strong earthquakes, the walls may fall outward and 
cause a partial or total collapse of the building. Poor 
connection between the exterior walls and diaphragms 
severely impair the capacity of a URM building to resist 
an earthquake, and thus it is important that this be 
remediated. Other significant hazards that can be life 
threatening are falling debris from parapets, cornices, 
chimneys, or other nonstructural elements. 
A basic seismic rehabilitation program for a URM 
building may involve bracing the parapets and 
chimneys, and securing other elements that can break 
away from the building, as well as securing the walls to 
the floors and roof. Engineering analysis of the structure 

14
may indicate that additional reinforcement of the roof 
and floor may be necessary. This may be accomplished 
by adding columns or shear walls in order to adequately 
transfer lateral loads to the ground. 
Preventing the collapse of the walls, particularly load-
bearing walls, is critical in URM buildings. This entails 
strengthening the walls through various methods such 
as adding strongbacks, or secondary support members, 
to the wall; adding a layer of steel-reinforced concrete; 
adding shotcrete bonded to the URM wall; core drilling; 
or adding a fiber composite layer (epoxy embedded 
fiberglass mesh). Adding interior wall bracing or 
inserting vertical steel bars embedded in grout into 
the wall itself are also widely-used wall reinforcement 
methods. These techniques must be carefully evaluated 
to balance building performance and preservation 
objectives (Figures 21-27).
Figure 21. Epoxy-embedded fiberglass 
mesh is being bonded to the back of the 
brick pilasters of this 1906 unreinforced 
masonry building. New finishes 
matching the appearance and detailing 
of the original finishes will be applied 
over the mesh. Photo: Wiss, Janney, 
Elstner and Associates, Inc.
Figure 22. A new steel stud wall is 
being added to one side of this interior 
hollow-clay tile wall. The side with the 
least amount of historic finishes was 
chosen as the least disruptive location for 
the added reinforcement. The wall will 
be returned to its original appearance 
by installing new finishes matching the 
historic finishes. Photo: Wiss, Janney, 
Elstner and Associates, Inc.
Concrete Frame. Most historic concrete building 
assemblies consist of concrete columns and floor 
systems of various types (flat slabs, two-way slabs, and 
beam-and-slab). Exterior and interior walls are often 
unreinforced masonry, commonly called infill, and 
are typically nonstructural, presenting the deficiencies 
described previously. The most important structural 
vulnerability of this construction type is the lack of 
ductility. Prior to 1960, building codes may not have 
required concrete-frame buildings to be designed 
and detailed for ductile performance (i.e., not fail 
when loaded beyond capacity) to resist lateral forces, 
depending on the region. Concrete-frame buildings were 
required to be “ductile” in the 1976 Uniform Building 
Code. In many historic concrete-frame buildings, 
because the connection between the columns and beams 
is not strong enough to resist the lateral loads during an 
earthquake, the buildings are in danger of collapsing. 
Particularly vulnerable buildings of this type are those 
with relatively few concrete walls and columns that 
are weaker than the beams or slabs. Mitigating this 
condition is typically accomplished by adding a new 
system, such as shear walls (Figure 28).

15
Figure 23. Historic wine cellar 
building in Napa, California.
Figure 24. Drawing of the wine 
cellar’s front wall showing the 
locations of the center cores for 
continuous steel reinfor
cement 
rods to be inserted and grouted 
in place.
Figure 25. View of one of the center cores 
drilled down through the wall.
Figure 26. Eye bolts used to anchor the 
floor to the wall.
Figure 27. Location of the eye bolts 
after grouting
The seismic rehabilitation of this 
historic wine cellar building shown 
in Figure 23 included center coring 
of the exterior stone walls to add steel 
reinforcement, as illustrated in Figures 
24 and 25. The floors were tied to the 
steel reinforcement in the walls using 
eye bolts, as seen in Figures 26 and 
27, eliminating the need for exterior 
washers or plates. Figure 23 Photo: 
Architectural Resources Group. Figures 
24-27 Photos: MKM & Associates.

16
Figure 28. Steel 
reinforcement for the new 
sheer walls, perpendicular 
to the windows, is being 
installed in this concrete-
frame building. 
Photo: Robert Chattel.
Steel Frame. This type of construction consists of a 
complete frame of steel columns and beams. Floors 
are usually concrete slabs or metal decks filled 
with concrete. Exterior walls can be reinforced or 
unreinforced masonry, architectural terra cotta, glass 
curtain walls, or other types of construction. Mitigating 
the seismic deficiencies of the nonstructural elements 
must be done according to their construction methods. 
Steel-frame construction is used in a wide variety of 
building types such as offices, hospitals, government, 
and academic buildings, as well as industrial and other 
utilitarian structures. This type of construction started 
to gain widespread use in the latter part of the 19th 
century. 
There are two general categories of steel-frame 
construction: Steel moment frame, which consists of 
steel columns and beams with rigid connections using 
angles and plates that can be riveted, welded, or bolted 
together; and braced frame. Braced-frame structures 
have diagonal steel members placed in selected bays of 
the structure to improve the lateral force resistance of 
the overall structure, whereas moment frames rely on 
the strength of rigid corner connections to resist lateral 
forces.
Steel-frame buildings, particularly braced-frame 
buildings, have superior seismic performance over other 
construction methods. Moment-frame buildings are very 
elastic during seismic activity, and, although they are 
able to withstand strong lateral forces, they are subject 
to significant movement between stories, or interstory 
drifts, and are also prone to pounding on adjacent 
buildings. Their flexibility can also result in damage to 
structural connections as well as to interior walls and 
cladding.
Large interstory drifts may make steel-frame buildings 
more difficult to repair after an earthquake. Typical 
remedies to improve the stiffness of steel-frame 
buildings include adding new concrete shear walls 
or brace frames, or adding steel cover plates to the 
existing steel columns. The latter technique may not 
be recommended if it requires significant removal or 
damage to existing historic features or finishes. 
Light Wood Frame. Light wood-frame construction 
is common in much residential and small commercial 
building construction. It includes both post-and-beam 
construction as well as stud-wall construction. Life-
safety performance of light wood-frame construction 
during an earthquake is typically very good. The 
most common seismic deficiency of this building type 
is the lack of, or poor, anchorage of the walls to the 
foundation, deterioration of existing structural fasteners, 
and/or an insufficient number of fastened connections. 
Inadequate strength of the lower stories in multi-story 
buildings may also be a vulnerability. In many dwellings 
this includes structures resting on intermittent wood or 
masonry piers, unfinished garages, and/or crawlspaces. 

17
Unbraced cripple walls and poor foundation anchorage 
are common vulnerabilities in many one-and two-
family detached dwellings of one or more stories. In 
these buildings, interior walls usually provide sufficient 
bracing to resist lateral loads during a seismic event, but 
the crawlspace often only has perimeter framing which 
may become highly stressed and collapse during an 
earthquake. Adequate anchorage to the foundation in 
wood-frame dwellings prevents them from sliding off 
their foundation. Mitigating the lack of adequate bracing 
of cripple walls and proper foundation anchoring are 
high priority seismic rehabilitation measures in light 
wood-frame buildings (Figure 29).























Figure 29. Cripple-wall reinforcement. Simple approaches such as 
nailing plywood between crawlspace studs, bolting sill plates to the 
foundation, and strapping the cripple wall to the floor above can make 
a dramatic difference in protecting a building from seismic damage.
Multi-story, multi-unit residential wood-frame buildings 
with parking, common areas, or commercial uses on 
the ground floor are a sub-category of this construction 
type that is also very susceptible to damage during 
earthquakes. The upper floors of these buildings 
typically have a repetitive interior layout which 
gives them uniform strength and stiffness. The lower 
floors however, because they typically have larger 
exterior openings and may have more varied interior 
configurations and large open spaces, often create a 
“weak story” condition (Figure 30).
Figure 30. Large perimeter openings and a limited number of interior 
partitions on the ground floor can create a “weak story” condition 
that makes buildings particularly vulnerable to earthquake damage. 
Photo: USGS.
Seismic rehabilitation requirements for one-and  
two-family residential and other small-scale buildings 
commonly include securing chimneys and correcting 
other life-safety nonstructural deficiencies, such as 
bolting the sill plate to the foundation and adding 
plywood sheathing to reinforce knee walls. Structures 
built over intermittent wood or masonry piers are also 
vulnerable during earthquakes. Providing connection 
between the piers or installing a new continuous support 
element of adequate strength under the walls is often 
required. Large exterior openings such as garage doors 
or structural irregularities such as cantilevers must also 
be evaluated and mitigated. In the case of multi-story 
apartment buildings with a soft or weak story, additional 
steel frames or masonry shear walls may be necessary 
to give adequate strength to the ground floor (see FEMA 
P-807).
Seismic Isolation and Energy Dissipation 
Systems
Seismic isolation and energy dissipation systems are 
relatively new, highly sophisticated methods that require 
extensive design and engineering analysis. Seismic 
isolation systems involve disconnecting, or greatly 
reducing, the transmission of the seismic forces from 
the ground to the building. Energy dissipation methods 
involve either passive or active energy dissipation 
devices that dampen the effects of the lateral and vertical 
motion of an earthquake. Energy dissipation systems 
are sometimes used in tall buildings where installing 
seismic isolation systems may not be feasible. However, 
implementing either of these systems is often too costly 
or impractical for most seismic rehabilitations of historic 
buildings.
Important Preservation Considerations
Reinforcing the connection between various structural 
and nonstructural elements, installing new structural 
elements, and performing other seismic rehabilitation 
work may require selective removal of historic wall and 
ceiling finishes. Attention should be given to minimize 
the amount of historic material removed, as well as 
performing the necessary repair or replacement of the 
historic features and finishes after the seismic work is 
completed. 
Completely removing a character-defining feature such 
as a chimney, cornice, or parapet in order to mitigate its 
seismic vulnerability is not a recommended treatment. 

18
Instead, such building elements should be braced and 
secured whenever possible. If a significant architectural 
feature has sustained earthquake damage, it should 
be repaired rather than removed. If the damage is 
so extensive that it requires complete replacement, 
using in-kind replacement materials is generally the 
recommended approach. In some circumstances, 
however, a compatible substitute material that meets 
technical performance requirements may be appropriate, 
such as a lighter weight material that matches the 
original in design and appearance. 
Historic corridor walls constructed of unreinforced 
masonry, hollow-clay tile in particular, need careful 
consideration. Every effort should be made to retain 
the historic materials while taking measures to secure 
the wall and the historic materials to prevent them 
from the possibility of injuring occupants or blocking 
an egress path. Every available reinforcement method 
and technique that allows the corridor walls and their 
historic materials and detailing to be preserved in place 
should be considered. If retention of the core masonry 
elements is not feasible, but there are extant features 
and finishes, such as a marble wainscot, doors and 
transoms, wood trim, or other features, they should be 
retained, even if they have to be reinstalled over a new 
framing structure for the corridor that replicates the 
ceiling height, corridor width, and the relationship and 
installation details of the historic features. 
Post-Earthquake Issues 
In most municipalities, a survey or inspection, usually 
by professionals or trained volunteers, will be conducted 
as soon as possible after an earthquake, and buildings 
will be tagged on the front with a posted notice stating 
whether they are safe to enter. Typically red, yellow, 
and green tags are used to indicate varying levels 
of damage—no entry, limited entry, and useable, 
respectively—and their relative safety. Heavily-
damaged areas are often secured and determined 
off-limits, and, unfortunately, many red-tagged, but 
repairable, buildings have been torn down unnecessarily 
because owners were unable to evaluate and develop 
a stabilization plan in time. Owners or members of 
the preservation community may engage their own 
engineers with specialized knowledge to challenge a 
demolition order. 
During times of emergencies, many communities, 
banks, and insurance agencies will not be in a position 
to evaluate alternative approaches to dealing with 
damaged historic buildings. Therefore, they often 
require full compliance with codes for new construction 
for the major rehabilitation work required. Because 
seismic aftershocks may further damage a weakened 
building, the inability to act quickly—even to shore up 
or stabilize the structure on a temporary basis—can 
result in the building’s demolition. 
Penetrating rain, uneven settlement, vandalism, 
and continuing aftershocks can easily undermine a 
building’s remaining structural integrity. Moreover, 
the longer a building is unoccupied or non-income-
producing, the sooner it is likely to be torn down in a 
negotiated settlement with the insurance company. All 
of these factors work against saving buildings damaged 
in earthquakes. Thus, having a recovery plan already in 
place is highly recommended.
Having an established emergency plan, complete with 
access to plywood, tarpaulins, bracing timbers, and 
equipment, will allow quick action to save a building 
following an earthquake. Technical assistance programs 
are available from the federal government after a natural 
disaster. Grant funds or low-cost loans from federal, 
state, and Congressional special appropriations are 
targeted for qualified properties, which can help offset 
the cost of rehabilitation (see information about FEMA).
Summary
Recognizing the seismic vulnerability of historic 
buildings is an important step toward saving and 
protecting the built heritage in earthquake-prone areas. 
Vulnerability resulting from lack of maintenance and 
improper repairs that weaken the structural integrity of a 
building must not be overlooked. Even prior mitigation 
work can become ineffective over time if buildings are 
not adequately maintained. Unlike many other natural 
disasters, earthquakes come with no warning and can 
result in devastating loss of life and property. Therefore, 
preparedness cannot be overemphasized.
Damage to historic buildings after an earthquake can 
be as great as the initial damage from the earthquake 
itself. The ability to act quickly to shore up and stabilize 
a building and to begin its sensitive rehabilitation is 
imperative. Communities without earthquake-hazard-
reduction plans in place put their historic buildings—as 
well as the safety and economic well-being of their 
communities—at risk.
Simple measures such as bracing parapets and 
chimneys, tying buildings to foundations, and anchoring 
brick walls to floors and the roof, are extremely effective 
mitigation measures. However, even simple measures 
such as these can cause damage to historic materials 
or impact the visual qualities of a historic building 
when not properly executed. For this reason, engaging 
qualified and experienced professionals and workers 
when undertaking seismic retrofit work is important. 
Finally, modern research has helped develop various 
new seismic retrofit techniques that, added to more 
traditional methods, provide many approaches to 
strengthen buildings in earthquake-prone areas. These 
techniques must be carefully evaluated and chosen so 
that the process of mitigating potential seismic damage 
avoids unnecessary removal of historic materials and 
retains the character of historic properties.

19
Glossary 
BASE ISOLATION: Also referred to as Seismic Base Isolation 
or Base Isolation System, is a technique aimed at isolating or 
separating a building or structure from the movement caused by 
earthquakes by means of a flexible layer between the foundation 
and the vertical supports.
BRACED FRAME:  Essentially, a vertical truss, or its equivalent, 
added to a building frame to resist lateral forces.
COLLECTOR: A member or element provided to transfer lateral 
forces from a portion of a structure to vertical elements of the 
lateral force-resisting system (also called a drag strut).
CORE DRILLING: A vertical reinforcement system that relies 
on drilling a continuous vertical core that is filled with steel 
reinforcing rods and grouting to resist in-plane or out-of-plane 
bending.
CRIPPLE WALL: A short wall between the foundation and the 
first-floor framing.
DAMPING: The internal energy absorption characteristic of a 
structural system that acts to attenuate induced free vibration.
DIAGONAL BRACES: Inclined components designed to carry 
axial loads, enabling a structural frame to act as a truss to resist 
lateral forces.
DIAPHRAGM: A horizontal, or nearly horizontal, system 
designed to transmit lateral forces to the vertical elements of the 
lateral force-resisting system. The term “diaphragm” includes 
horizontal bracing systems.
FIBER WRAP REINFORCEMENT: A synthetic compound of 
filaments that increase the shear capacity of structural members. 
DUCTILITY: The ability of a structure or element to dissipate 
energy inelastically when displaced beyond its elastic limit 
without a significant loss in load-carrying capacity.
FAULT RUPTURE: A break in the ground along the fault line 
during an earthquake.
GLOBAL STRENGTH: 
The lateral strength of the vertical 
oriented lateral force-resisting system at the effective global 
yield point.
GLOBAL STIFFNESS: The stiffness of the entire lateral force-
resisting system.
GROUTED BOLTS: Anchor bolts set in a grout mixture. 
INTERSTORY DRIFT: The displacement of one floor level 
relative to the floor level above or below.
LATERAL FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM: The part of the 
structural system assigned to resist lateral forces.
LIQUIFACTION: A condition where the soil underneath or 
around the building loses cohesive strength and behaves like a 
liquid during an earthquake.
LIFE SAFETY: Providing a level of assurance that risk of loss 
of life is kept to minimal levels. For buildings, this includes 
strengthening to reduce l) structural collapse, 2) falling debris, 
3) blocking exits or emergency routes, and 4) prevention of 
consequential fire. 
MOMENT FRAME: A structural frame system in which seismic 
shear forces are resisted by shear and flexure in members and 
joints of the frame.
POUNDING: The action of two adjacent buildings coming 
into contact with each other during an earthquake as a result 
of their close proximity and differences in dynamic response 
characteristics.
RE-ENTRANT CORNER: A corner on the exterior of a building 
that is directed inward such as the inside corner of an L-shaped 
building, where the two perpendicular portions of the building 
meet.
SEISMIC REHABILITATION: Modifications to existing 
components, or installation of new components, that correct 
deficiencies identified in a seismic evaluation to achieve a selected 
rehabilitation objective.
SHEAR WALL: A wall, bearing or nonbearing, designed to resist 
lateral forces acting in the plane of the wall.
SHOTCRETE: Concrete that is pneumatically placed on vertical 
or near vertical surfaces, typically with a minimal use of forms.
SOFT STORY: A story in which the lateral stiffness is less than 70 
percent of the stiffness of the story above.
STRUCTURE: An assemblage of framing members designed to 
support gravity loads and resist lateral forces. Structures may be 
categorized as building structures or non-building structures.
WEAK STORY: A story in which the lateral strength is less than 
80 percent of that in the story above.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
In March 2003, FEMA and 22 other federal agencies, programs 
and offices became part of the Department of Homeland Security. 
FEMA’s role and mission continues to focus on building, 
sustaining, and improving the nation’s capacity to prepare 
for, protect against, respond to, recover from, and mitigate all 
hazards. FEMA offers a variety of earthquake-related resources 
including reports, handbooks, guides, manuals, software, web-
based tools, and instructional materials. These documents contain 
nationally-applicable technical criteria intended to ensure that 
buildings will withstand earthquakes better than before. There is 
a great deal of information that is applicable to historic buildings, 
although they are not necessarily identified as a separate category. 
Most of the information is available online at www.fema.gov/
earthquake. Information on how to obtain hard copies may be 
found on the web site. 
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP)
The National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) 
leads the federal government’s efforts to reduce the fatalities, 
injuries, and property losses caused by earthquakes. Congress 
established NEHRP in 1977, directing that four federal agencies 
coordinate their complementary activities to implement and 
maintain the program. These agencies are FEMA, the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the National 
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 
More information about NEHRP is available online at www.
nehrp.gov.

References
Agbabian, M.F. Masri, and R.L. Nigbor. “Evaluation of Seismic 
Migration Measures for Art Objects.” Getty Conservation Institute 
Scientific Program Report (1990).
American Society of Civil Engineers. Seismic Rehabilitation of 
Existing Buildings. ASCE/SEI Standard 41-13 (2014). Reston, VA.
California Historical Building Code, California Code of 
Regulations. Title 24, Part 8. California Building Standards 
Commission, 2010.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). A Benefit-Cost 
Model for the Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings. FEMA 227 (1992). 
Washington, DC.
FEMA. Engineering Guideline for Incremental Seismic Rehabilitation. 
FEMA P-420 (2009). Washington, DC.
FEMA. Incremental Seismic Rehabilitation of Retail Buildings.  
FEMA 399 (2014). Washington, DC.
FEMA. Incremental Seismic Rehabilitation of School Buildings.  
FEMA 395 (2003). Washington, DC.
FEMA. Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of Multi-Unit Wood-Frame 
Buildings With Weak First Stories. FEMA P-807 (2012).  
Washington, DC.
FEMA. Techniques for the Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings. 
FEMA 547 (2007). Washington, DC. 
International Code Council (ICC). International Existing Building 
Code (2015). Falls Church, VA.
National Park Service (NPS). Museum Handbook, Part I, Museum 
Collections, Chapter 10, Emergency Planning. 
http://www.nps.
gov/museum/publications/MHI/CHAP10A-B.pdf
Acknowledgements
Antonio Aguilar, Senior Historical Architect, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, revised Preservation Brief 41: The 
Seismic Retrofit of Historic Buildings: Keeping Preservation in the Forefront, originally written by David W. Look, AIA, Terry Wong, PE, 
and Sylvia Rose Augustus and published in 1997. The revised Brief contains expanded and updated information as well as new color 
photographs describing the general issues and needs associated with the seismic rehabilitation of historic buildings. 
The author wishes to thank the following: Melvyn Green, SE, Melvyn Green & Associates, Inc., for his guidance and expertise in the 
revision of the Brief; Stephen Day, AIA, Stephen Day Architecture, Andrew Phillips, Associate Architect, SMR Architects, and Meredith 
Wirsching, NCARB, for their input in the initial planning of the revision;  Alan Dreyfuss, AIA, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Asssociates, 
Inc., Loring A. Wyllie Jr., Senior Principal, Degenkolb Engineers, Timothy Brandt, AIA, Senior Restoration Architect, and Mark C. 
Huck, AIA, Restoration Architect, from the California Office of Historic Preservation, Nicholas Vann, AIA, State Historical Architect, 
Washington Department of Archaeology & Historic Preservation, Sueann Brown, Regional Historical Architect, Pacific West Region, 
and Jason Hagin, Historical Architect, Golden Gate National Recreational Area, National Park Service, for their assistance in reviewing 
various drafts of the brief; and to Charles Fisher, Brian Goeken, Anne Grimmer, Elizabeth Milnarik, and Gary Sachau, Technical 
Preservation Services, National Park Service, for their help in the final edits of the publication. Illustrations not specifically credited 
are from National Park Service files. Front cover image: Damage to a ca. 1910 building in Napa, California caused by the South Napa 
earthquake in 2014. Photo: Wiss, Janney, Elstner and Associates, Inc.
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary 
of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. This publication is available from the 
Technical Preservation Services website at http://www.nps.gov/tps/ or hard copies may be purchased from the Government Printing 
Offices at the U.S. Government Bookstore. 
Comments about this publication should be addressed to: Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, 
Washington, DC 20240. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to 
the authors and the National Park Service are appreciated. The photographs used in this publication may not be used to illustrate other 
publications without permission of the owners.
Section 508 Compliant PDF, June 2016