1 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Assessing Cleaning and Water-Repellent 
Treatments for Historic Masonry Buildings 
Robert C. Mack, AIA 
Anne Grimmer 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park 
Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
Inappropriate cleaning and coating treatments are a major 
cause of damage to historic masonry buildings. While 
either or both treatments may be appropriate in some cases, 
they can be very destructive to historic masonry if they are 
not selected carefully. Historic masonry, as considered 
here, includes stone, brick, architectural terracotta, cast 
stone, concrete and concrete block. It is frequently cleaned 
because cleaning is equated with improvement. Cleaning 
may sometimes be followed by the application of a water­
repellent coating. However, unless these procedures are 
carried out under the guidance and supervision of an 
architectural conservator, they may result in irrevocable 
damage to the historic resource. 
The purpose of this Brief is to provide information on the 
variety of cleaning methods and materials that are available 
for use on the exterior of historic masonry buildings, and 
to provide guidance in selecting the most appropriate 
method or combination of methods. The difference between 
water-repellent coatings and waterproof coatings 
is explained, and the purpose of each, the suitability of 
their application to historic masonry buildings, and the 
possible consequences of their inappropriate use are 
discussed. 
The Brief is intended to help develop sensitivity to the 
qualities of historic masonry that makes it so special, and 
to assist historic building owners and property managers 
in working cooperatively with architects, architectural 
conservators and contractors (Fig. 1). Although specifically 
intended for historic buildings, the information is applicable 
to all masonry buildings. This publication updates and 
expands Preservation Brief 1: The Cleaning and Waterproof 
Coating of Masonry Buildings. The Brief is not meant to be 
a cleaning manual or a guide for preparing specifications. 
Rather, it provides general information to raise awareness 
of the many factors involved in selecting cleaning and 
water-repellent treatments for historic masonry buildings. 
Figure 1. Low-to medium-pressure steam (hot-pressurized water washing), is being used to clean the exterior of the U.S. Tariff Commission Building, the 
first marble building constructed in Washington, D.C., in 1839. This method was selected by an architecural conservator as the "gentlest means possible" 
to clean the marble. Steam can soften heavy soiling deposits such as those on the cornice ana column capitals, and facilitate easy removal. Note how 
these deposits have been removed from the right side oJ the cornice which has already been cleaned. 

2 
Figure 2. Biological growth as shown on this marble f oundation 
can usually be removed using a low-pressure water wash, possibly wit h 
a non-ionic detergent added to it, and scrubbing wi th a natural or 
synth etic bristle brush. 
Preparing for a Cleaning Project 
Reasons for cleaning. First, it is important to determine 
whether it is appropriate to clean the masonry. The objective 
of cleaning a historic masonry building must be considered 
carefully before arriving at a decision to clean . There are 
several major reasons for cleaning a historic masonr y 
building: improve the appearance of the building by 
removing unattractive dirt or soiling materials, or non ­
historic paint from the masonry; retard deterioration by 
removing soiling materials that may be damaging the 
masonry; or 
provide a clean surface to accurately match 
repainting mortars or patching compounds, or to conduct 
a condition survey of the masonry . 
Identify what is to be removed. The general nature and 
source of dirt or soiling material on a building must be 
identified to remove it in the gentlest means possible -
that is, in the most effective, yet least harmful, manner. 
Soot and smoke, for example, require a different cleaning 
agent to remove than oil stains or metallic stains. Other 
common cleaning problems include biological growth such 
as mold or mildew, and organic matter such as the tendrils 
left on masonry after removal of ivy (Fig. 2) . 
Consider the historic appearance of the building. If the 
proposed cleaning is to remove paint, it is important in 
each case to learn whether or not unpainted masonry is 
historically appropriate . And, it is necessary to consider 
why the building was painted (Fig. 3). Was it to cover bad 
repainting or unmatched repairs? Was the building 
painted to protect soft brick or to conceal deteriorating 
stone? Or, was painted masonry simply a fashionable 
Figure 3. This small test area has revealed a red brick patch that does not 
111atch the original beige brick. This may exp lain why the building was 
painted, and may suggest to the owner that it may be preferable to keep 
it painted. 
treatment in a particular historic period? Many building s 
were painted at the time of construction or shortly ther eafter; 
retention of the paint, therefore, ma y be more appropriate 
historicall y than removing it. And, if the building appears 
to have been painted for a long time, it is also important 
to think about whether the paint is part of the character of 
the historic building and 
if it has acquired significanc e over 
time. 
Consider the practicalities of cleaning or paint removal. 
Some gypsum or sulfate crusts may have become integral 
with the stone and, if cleaning could result in remo ving 
some of the stone surface, it may be preferable not to clean. 
Even where unpainted masonry is appropriate, the retention 
of the paint may be more practical than removal in term s 
of long range preservation of the masonry . In some case s, 
however, removal of the paint may be desirable. For 
example, the old paint layers may have built up to such 
an extent that removal is necessary to ensure a sound 
surface to which the new paint will adhere. 
Study the masonry. Although not always necessar y, in 
some instances it can be beneficial to have tl1e coating or 
paint type, color, and layering on the masonry researched 
before attempting its removal. Analysis of the nature of 
the soiling or of the paint to be removed from the masonr y, 
as well as guidance on the appropriate cleaning method, 
may be provided by professional consultants, including 
architectural conservators, conservation scientists and 
preservation architects. The State Historic Preservation 
Office (SHPO), local historic district commissions, 
architectural review boards and preservation-oriented 
websites may also be able to supply useful information on 
masonr y cleaning techniques. 

Understanding the Building Materials 
The construction of the building must be considered when 
developing a cleaning program because inappropriate 
cleaning can have a deleterious effect on the masonry as 
well as on other building materials. The masonry material 
or materials must be correctly identified. It is sometimes 
difficult to distinguish one type of stone from another; for 
example, certain sandstones can be easily confused with 
limestones. Or, what appears to be natural stone may not 
be stone at all, but cast stone or concrete. Historically, cast 
stone and architectural terracotta were frequently used in 
combination with natural stone, especially for trim elements 
or on upper stories of a building where, from a distance, 
these substitute materials looked like real stone (Fig. 4). 
Other features on historic buildings that appear to be stone, 
such as decorative cornices, entablatures and window 
hoods, may not even be masonry, but metal. 
Identify pri or treatments. Previous treatments of the 
building and its surroundings should be researched and 
building maintenance records should be obtained, if 
available. Sometimes if streaked or spotty areas do not 
seem to get cleaner following an initial cleaning, closer 
inspection and analysis may be warranted. The 
discoloration may turn out not to be dirt but the remnant 
of a water-repellent coating applied long ago which has 
darkened the surface of the masonry over time (Fig. 5). 
Successful removal may require testing several cleaning 
agents to find something that will dissolve and remove the 
coating. Complete removal may not always be possible. 
Repairs may have been stained to match a dirty building, 
and cleaning may make these differences apparent. De­
icing salts used near the building that have dissolved can 
Figure 4. The foundation of this brick building is limestone, but the 
decorative trim above is architectural terracotta intended to simulate 
stone. 
Figure 5. Repeated water washing did not remove the staining inside 
this limestone porte cochere. Upon closer examination, it was 
determined to be a water-repellent coating that had been applied many 
years earlier. An alkaline cleaner may be effective in removing it. 
3 
Choose the appropriate cl eaner. The importance of testing 
cleaning methods and materials cannot be over emphasized. 
Applying the wrong cleaning agents to historic masonry 
can have disastrous results. Acidic cleaners can be extremely 
damaging to acid-sensitive stones, such as marble and 
limestone, resulting in etching and dissolution of these 
stones. Other kinds of masonry can also be damaged by 
incompatible cleaning agents, or even by cleaning agents 
that are usually compatible. There are also numerous kinds 
of sandstone, each with a considerably different geological 
composition. While an acid-based cleaner may be safely 
used on some sandstones, others are acid-sensitive and 
can be severely etched or dissolved by an acid cleaner. 
Some sandstones contain water-soluble minerals and can 
be eroded by water cleaning. And, even if the stone type 
is correctly identified, stones, as well as some bricks, may 
contain unexpected impurities, such as iron particles, that 
may react negatively with a particular cleaning agent and 
result in staining. Thorough understanding of the physical 
and chemical properties of the masonry will help avoid 
the inadvertent selection of damaging cleaning agents. 
migrate into the masonry . Cleaning may draw the salts to 
the surface, where they will appear as efflorescence (a 
powdery, white substance), which may require a second 
treatment to be removed. Allowances for dealing with 
such unknown factors, any of which can be a potential 
problem, should be included when investigating cleaning 
methods and materials. Just as more than one kind of 
masonry on a historic building may necessitate multiple 
cleaning approaches, unknown conditions that are 
encountered may also require additional cleaning 
treatments. 

4 
Figure 6. Timed water soaking can be very effective for cleaning 
limestone and marble as shown here at the Marble Collegiate Church 
in New York City. In this case, a twelve-lio11r water soak using a 
111ulti-11ozzle 111anifold was followed by a final water rinse. Photo: Diane 
5. Kaese, Wiss, Ja11ney, Elstner Associates, Inc., N. Y., N. Y. 
Other building materials also may be affected by the 
clea.nmg process . Some chemicals, for example, may have 
a corrosive effect on paint or glass. The portions of building 
elements most vulnerable to deterioration may not be 
visible, such as embedded ends of iron window bars . 
Other totally unseen items, such as iron cramps or ties 
which hold the masonry to the structural frame, also may 
be subject to corrosion from the use of chemicals or even 
from plain water. The only way to prevent problems in 
these cases is to study the building construction in detail 
and evaluate proposed cleaning methods with this 
information in mind. However, due to the very likely 
possibility of encountering unknown factors, any clea.nmg 
project involving historic masonry should be viewed as 
unique to that particular building. 
Cleaning Meth ods and Materials 
Masonry clea.nmg methods generally are divided into 
three major groups: water, chemical, and abrasive. Water 
methods soften the dirt or soiling material and rinse the 
deposits from the masonry surface. Chemical cleaners 
react with dirt, soiling material or paint to effect their 
removal, after which the clea.nmg effluent is rinsed off the 
masonry surface with water. Abrasive methods include 
blasting with grit, and the use of grinders and sanding 
discs, all of which mechanically remove the dirt, soiling 
material or paint (and, usually, some of the masonry 
surface). Abrasive clea.nmg is also often followed with a 
water rinse. Laser cleaning, although not discussed here 
in detail, is another technique that is used sometimes by 
conservators to clean small areas of historic masonry. It 
can be quite effective for clea.nmg limited areas, but it is 
expensive and generally not practical for most historic 
masonry clea.nmg projects. 
Although it may seem contrary to common sense, masonry 
clea.nmg projects should be carried out starting at the 
bottom and proceeding to the top of the building always 
keeping all surfaces wet below the area being cleaned. 
The rationale for this approach is based on the principle 
that dirty water or clea.nmg effluent dripping from clea.nmg 
in progress above will leave streaks on a dirty surface but 
will not streak a clean surface as long as it is kept wet and 
rinsed frequently. 
Water Cleaning 
Water clea.nmg methods are generally the gentlest means 
possible, and they can be used safely to remove dirt from 
all types of historic masonry . There are essentially four 
kinds of 
water-based methods: soaking; pressure water 
washing; water washing supplemented with non-ionic 
detergent; and steam, or hot-pressurized water clea.nmg. 
Once water clea.nmg has been completed, it is of ten 
necessary to follow up with a water rinse to wash off the 
loosened soiling material from the masonry. 
* 
Soaking. Prolonged spraying or 
misting with water is 
particularly effective for clea.nmg limestone and marble. 
It is also a good method for removing heavy accumulations 
of soot, sulfate crusts or gypsum crusts that tend to form 
in protected areas of a building not regularly washed by 
rain. Water is distributed to lengths of punctured hose or 
pipe with non-ferrous fittings hung from moveable 
scaffolding or a swing stage that continuously mists the 
surface of the masonry with a very fine spray (Fig. 6). A 
timed on-off spray is another approach to using this 
cleaning technique. After one area has been cleaned, the 
apparatus is moved on to another . Soaking is often used 
in combination with water washing and is also followed 
by a final water rinse. Soaking is a very slow method -
it may take several days or a week-but it is a very gentle 
method to use on historic masonry. 
Water Washing. Washing with low-pressure or medium­
pressure water is probably one of the most commonly 
used methods for removing dirt or other pollu tant soiling 
from historic masonry buildings (Fig. 7). Starting with a 
very low pressure (100 psi or below), even using a garden 
hose, and progressing as needed to slightly higher pressure 
-generally no higher than 300-400 psi-is always the 
recommended way to begin . Scrubbing with natural bristle 
or synthetic bristle brushes-never me tal which can abrade 
the surface and leave metal particles that can s tain the 
masonry-can help in clea.nmg areas of the masonry that 
are especially dirty. 
Water Washing with De tergents . Non-ionic detergents 
-which are not the same as soaps -are synthetic organic 
compounds that are especially effective in removing oily 
soil. (Examples of some of the numerous proprietary non­
ionic detergents include Igepal by GAF, Tergitol by Union 
Carbide and Triton by Rohm 
& Haas.) Thus, the addition 
of a non-ionic detergent, or surfactant, to a low- or medium­
pressure water wash can be a useful aid in the clea.nmg 
•wa ter cleaning method s may not be appropriate to use on some badly 
deteriorated masonry because water may exacerbate the deterioration, 
or on gypsum or alabaster which are very soluble in water. 

process . (A non-ionic detergent , unlike most household 
detergents, does not leave a solid, visible residue on the 
masonry.) Adding a non-ionic detergent and scrubbing 
with a natural bristle or synthetic bristle brush can facilitate 
cleaning textured or intricately carved masonry. Thi s 
should be followed with a final water rinse . 
Steam/Hot-Pressurized Water Cleaning. Steam cleaning 
is actually low-pressure hot water washing because the 
steam condenses almost immediately upon leaving the 
hose . This is a gentle and effective method for cleaning 
stone and particularly for acid-sensitive stones. Steam can 
be especially useful in removing built-up soiling deposits 
and dried-up plant materials, such as ivy disks and tendrils. 
It can also be an efficient means of cleaning carved stone 
details and, because it does not generate a lot of liquid 
water, it can sometimes be appropriate to use for cleaning 
interior masonry (Figs . 8-9). 
Potential hazards of water cleaning. Despite the fact that 
water-based methods are generally the most gentle, even 
they can be damaging to historic masonry. Before beginning 
a water cleaning project, it is important to make sure that 
all mortar joints are sound and that the building is 
watertight. Otherwise water can seep through the walls 
to the interior, resulting in rusting metal anchors and 
stained and ruined plaster . 
Some water supplies may contain traces of iron and copper 
which may cause masonry to discolor . Adding a chelating 
or complexing agent to the water, such as EDTA (ethylene 
diamine tetra-acetic acid), which inactivates other me tallic 
ions , as well as softens minerals and water hardness, will 
help prevent staining on light-colored masonry. 
Any cleaning method involving water should never be 
done in cold weather or if there is any likelihood of frost 
or freezing because water within the masonry can freeze, 
causing spalling and cracking . Since a masonry wall may 
take over a week to dry after cleaning, no water cleaning 
should be permitted for several days prior to the first 
average frost date, or even earlier if local forecasts predict 
cold weather. 
Most essential of all, it is important to be aware that using 
water at too high a pressure, a practice common to "power 
washing" and "water blasting", is very abrasive and can 
easily etch marble and other soft stones, as well as some 
types of brick (Figs . 10-11). In addition, the distance of the 
nozzle from the masonry surface and the type of nozzle , 
as well as gallons per minute (gpm), are also import ant 
variables in a water cleaning process that can have a 
significant impact on the outcome of the project. This is 
why it is imperative that the cleaning be closely monitored 
to ensure that the cleaning operators do not raise the 
pressure or bring the nozzle too close to the masonry in 
an effort to "speed up" the process . The appearance of 
grains of stone or sand in the cleaning effluent on the 
ground is an indication that the water pressure may b e too 
high . 
Figure 7. Glazed architectural terra cotta oft en may be cleaned 
successfully with a low-pressure water wash and hand scrubbing 
supplemented, if necessary, w ith a non-ionic detergent . Photo: National 
Park Service Files. 
Chemical Cleaning 
Chemical cleaners, generally in the form of proprietary 
products, are another material frequently used to clean 
historic masonry. They can remove dirt, as well as paint 
and other coatings, metallic and plant stains, and graffiti. 
Chemical cleaners used to remove dirt and soiling include 
acids, alkalies and organic compounds. Acidic cleaners, 
of course, should not be used on masonry that is acid 
sensitive. Paint removers are alkaline, based on organic 
solvents or other chemicals . 
Chemical Cleaners to Remove Dirt 
Both alkaline and acidic cleaning treatments include the 
use of water . Both cleaners are also likely to contain 
surfactants (wetting agents), that facilitate the chemical 
reaction that removes the dirt. Generally, the masonry is 
wet first for both types of cleaners, then the chemical 
cleaner is sprayed on at very low pressure or brushed onto 
the surface. The cleaner is left to dwell on the masonry 
for an amount of time recommended by the product 
manufacturer or, preferably, determined by testing, and 
rinsed off with a low- or moderate-pressure cold, or 
sometimes hot, water wash. More than one application 
of the cleaner may be necessary, and it is always a 
good practice to test the product manufacturer's 
recommendations concerning dilution rates and dwell 
times. Because each cleaning situation is unique, dilution 
rates and dwell times can vary considerably. The masonry 
surface may be scrubbed lightly with natural or synthetic 
bristle brushes prior to rinsing . After rinsing, pH strips 
should be applied to the surface to ensure that the masonry 
has been neutralized completely . 
5 

6 
Figure 8. (Left) Low-pressure (under 100 psi) steam cleaning 
(hot-pressurized water washing), is part of the regular maintenance 
program at the Jefferson Memorial, Washington, D.C. The white marble 
interior of this open structure is subject to constant soiling by birds, 
insects and visitors. (Right) This portable steam cleaner en.ables prompt 
cleanup when necessary. Photos: National Park Service Files. 
Acidic Cleaners. Acid-based cleaning products may be 
used on non-acid sensitive masonry, which generally 
includes: granite, most sandstones, slate, unglazed brick 
and unglazed architectural 
terra cotta, cast stone and 
concrete (Fig. 12). Most commercial acidic cleaners are 
composed primarily of hydrofluoric acid, and often include 
some phosphoric acid to prevent rust-like stains from 
developing on the masonry after the cleaning. Acid cleaners 
are applied to the pre-wet masonry which should be kept 
wet while the acid is allowed to "work", and then removed 
with a water wash. 
Alkaline Cleaners. Alkaline cleaners should be used on 
acid-sensitive masonry, including: limestone, polished 
and unpolished marble, calcareous sandstone, glazed brick 
and glazed architectural terracotta, and polished granite. 
(Alkaline cleaners may also be used sometimes on masonry 
materials that are not acid sensitive-after testing, of course 
-but they may not be as effective as they are on acid­
sensitive masonry.) Alkaline cleaning products consist 
primarily of two ingredients: a non-ionic detergent or 
surfactant; and an alkali, such as potassium hydroxide or 
ammonium hydroxide. Like acidic cleaners, alkaline 
products are usually applied to pre-wet masonry, allowed 
to dwell, and then rinsed off with water. (Longer dwell 
times may be necessary with alkaline cleaners than with 
acidic cleaners.) Two additional steps are required to 
remove alkaline cleaners after the initial rinse. First the 
masonry is given a slightly acidic wash-often with acetic 
acid-to neutralize it, and then it is rinsed again with water. 
Chemical Cleaners to Remove Paint and Other Coatings, 
Stains and Graffiti 
Removing paint and some 
other coatings, stains and graffiti 
can best be accomplished with alkaline paint removers, 
organic solvent paint removers, or other 
cleaning 
compounds. The removal of layers of paint from a masonry 
surface usually involves applying the remover either by 
brush, roller or spraying, followed by a thorough water 
wash. As with any chemical cleaning, the manufacturer's 
recommendations regarding application procedures should 
always be tested before beginning work. 
Alkaline Paint Removers. These are usually of much the 
same composition as other alkaline cleaners, containing 
potassium or 
ammonium hydroxide, or trisodium 
phosphate. They are used to remove oil, latex and acrylic 
paints, and are effective for removing multiple layers of 
paint. Alkaline cleaners may also remove some acrylic, 
water-repellen t coatings. As with other alkaline cleaners, 
both an acidic neutralizing wash and a final water rinse 
are generally required following the use of alkaline paint 
removers. 
Organic Solvent Paint Removers. The formulation of 
organic solvent paint removers varies and may include a 
combination of solvents, including methylene chloride, 
methanol, acetone, xylene and toluene. 
Figure 9. (Left) This small steam cleaner- the size of a vacuum cleaner- offers a very controlled and gentle means of cleaning limited, or hard-to-reach 
areas or carved stone details. (Right) It is particularly useful for interiors where it is important to keep moisture to a minumum, such as inside 
the Washington Monument, Washington, D.C., where it was used to clean the commemorative stones. Photos: Audrey T. Tepper. 

Figure 10. High-pressure water was/ting too close to the surface has 
abraded and, consequently, marred the limestone on this early-20th 
century building. 
Other Paint Removers and Cleaners. Other cleaning 
compounds that can be used to remove paint and some 
painted graffiti from historic masonry include paint 
removers based on N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), or on 
petroleum-based compounds. Removing stains, whether 
they are industrial (smoke, soot, grease or tar), metallic 
(iron or copper), or biological (plant and fungal) in origin, 
depends on carefully matching the type of remover to the 
type of stain (Fig. 13). Successful removal of stains from 
historic masonry often requires the application of a number 
of different removers before the right one is found. The 
removal of layers of paint from a masonry surface is usually 
accomplished by applying the remover either by brush, 
roller or spraying, followed by a thorough water wash 
(Fig. 14). 
Potential hazards of chemical cleaning. Since most 
chemical cleaning methods involve water, they have many 
of the poten tial problems of plain water cleaning. Like 
water methods, they should not be used in cold weather 
because of the possibility of freezing. Chemical cleaning 
should never be undertaken in temperatures below 40 
degrees F ( 4 degrees C), and generally not below 50 degrees 
F. In addition, many chemical cleaners simply do not work 
in cold temperatures. Both acidic and alkaline cleaners 
can be dangerous to cleaning operators and, clearly, there 
are environmental concerns associated with the use of 
chemical cleaners. 
Figure 11. Rinsing with high-pressure water following chemical 
cleaning has left a horizontal line of abrasion across the bricks on this 
late-19th centun; row house. 
If not carefully chosen, chemical cleaners can react adversely 
with many types of masonry. Obviously, acidic cleaners 
should not be used on acid-sensitive materials; however, 
it is not always clear exactly what the composition is of 
any stone or other masonry material. For, this reason, 
testing the cleaner on an inconspicuous spot on the building 
is always necessary. While certain acid-based cleaners 
may be appropriate if used as directed on a particular type 
of masonry, if left too long or if not adequately rinsed from 
the masonry they can have a negative effect. For example, 
hydrofluoric acid can etch masonry leaving a hazy residue 
(whitish deposits of silica or calcium fluoride salts) on the 
surface. While this efflorescence may usually be removed 
by a second cleaning-although it is likely to be expensive 
and time-consuming- hydrofluoric acid can also leave 
calcium fluoride salts or a colloidal silica deposit on 
masonry which ma y be impossible to remove (Fig. 15). 
Other acids, particularly hydrochloric (muriatic) acid, 
which is very powerful, should not be used on historic 
masonry, because it can dissolve lime-based mortar, 
damage brick and some stones, and leave chloride deposits 
on the masonry. 
Figure 12. A mild acidic cleaning agent is being used to clean this 
heavily soiled brick and granite building. Additional applications of the 
cleaner and hand-scrubbing, and even poulticing, may be necessary to 
remove the dark stains on the granite arches below. Photo: Sharon C. 
Park, FAIA. 
7 

8 
Alkaline cleaners can stain sandstones that contain a ferrous 
compound. Before using an alkaline cleaner on sandstone 
it is always important to test it, since it may be difficult to 
know whether a particular sandstone may contain a ferrous 
compound. Some alkaline cleaners, such as sodium 
hydroxide (caustic soda or lye) and ammonium bifluoride, 
can also damage or leave disfiguring brownish-yellow 
stains and, in most cases, should not be used on historic 
masonry. Although alkaline cleaners will not etch a 
masonry surface as acids can, they are caustic and can burn 
the surface. In addition, alkaline cleaners can deposit 
potentially damaging salts in the masonry which can be 
difficult to rinse thoroughly. 
Abrasive and Mechanical Cleaning 
Generally, abrasive cleaning methods are not appropriate 
for use on 
historic masonry buildings. Abrasive cleaning 
methods are just that-abrasive. Grit blasters, grinders, 
and sanding discs all operate by abrading the dirt or paint 
off the surface of the masonry, rather than reacting with 
the dirt and the masonry which is how water and chemical 
methods work. Since the abrasives do not differentiate 
between the dirt and the masonry, they can also remove 
the outer surface of the masonry at the same time, and 
result in permanently damaging the masonry. Brick, 
architectural terra cotta, soft stone, detailed carvings, and 
polished surfaces are especially susceptible to physical and 
aesthetic damage by abrasive methods. Brick and 
architectural terra cotta are fired products which have a 
smooth, glazed surface which can be removed by abrasive 
blasting or grinding (Figs. 18-19). Abrasively-cleaned 
masonry is damaged aesthetically as well as physically, 
and it has a rough surface which tends to hold dirt and 
the roughness will make future cleaning more difficult. 
Abrasive cleaning processes can also increase the likelihood 
of subsurface cracking of the masonry. Abrasion of carved 
details causes a rounding of sharp corners and other loss 
of delicate features, while abrasion of polished surfaces 
removes the polished finish of stone. 
Figure 13. Sometimes it may be preferable to paint over a thick asphaltic 
coating rather than try to remove it, because it can be difficult to remove 
completely. However, in this case, many layers of asphaltic coating 
were removed through multiple applications of a heavy duty chemical 
cleaner. Each application of the cleaner was left to dwell following the 
manufacturer's reccommendations, and then rinsed thoroughly. 
(As much as possible of the asphalt was first removed with wooden 
scrapers.) Although not all the asphalt was removed, this was 
determined to be an acceptable level of cleanliness for the project. 
Figure 14. Chemical removal of paint from this brick building has 
revealed that the cornice and window hoods are metal rather than 
masonry. 
Mortar joints, especially those with lime mortar, also can 
be eroded by abrasive or mechanical cleaning. In some 
cases, the damage may be visual, such as loss of joint detail 
or increased joint shadows. As mortar joints constitute a 
significant portion of the masonry surface (up to 20 per 
cent in a brick wall), this can result in the loss of a 
considerable amount of the historic fabric. Erosion of the 
mortar joints may also permit increased water penetration, 
which will likely necessitate repainting. 
Figure 15. The whitish deposits left on the brick by a chemical paint 
remover may have resulted from inadequate rinsing or from the 
chemical being left on the surface too long and may be impossible to 
remove. 

Poulticing to Remove Stains and Graffiti 
a 
C 
d 
Figure 16. (a) The limestone base was heavily stained by runoff 
from the bronze statue above. (b) A poultice consisting of copper 
stain remover and ammonia mixed with fuller's earth was applied 
to the stone base and covered with plastic sheeting to keep it from 
drying out too quickly. (c) As the poultice dr ied, it pulled the stain 
out of the stone. (d) The poultice residue was removed carefully 
from the stone surface with wooden scrapers and the stone was 
rinsed with water. Photos: John Dugger. 
b 
Graffiti and stains , which have penetrated into the masonry, 
often are be st removed b y using a poultice. A poultice 
consists of an absorbent material or clay powder (such as 
kaolin or fuller 's earth , or even shredded paper or paper 
towel s), mixed with a liquid (solvent or other remo ver) to 
form a paste which is applied to the stain (Figs. 16-17) . 
As it drie s, the paste absorb s the staining material so that 
it is not redeposited on the masonry surface. Some 
commercial cleaning products and paint removers are 
speciall y formulated as a paste or gel that will cling to a 
vertical surface and remain moist for a longer per iod of 
time in order to prolong the action of the chemical on the 
stain. Pre-mixed poultice s are also available as a paste or 
in powder form needing only the addition of the 
appropriate liquid. The masonry must be pre-wet before 
appl ying an alkaline cleaning agent , but not when using 
a solvent. Once the stain ha s been removed, the masonr y 
mu st be rin sed thoroughl y. 
Figure 17. A poultice is being used to re move salts from the brownstone 
statuary on the facade of this late-19t h century stone church. Photo: 
National Park Service Files. 
9 

10 
Figure 18. The glazed bricks in the center of the pier were covered by a 
signboard that protected them being damaged by the sandblasting 
which removed the glaze from the surrounding bricks. 
Abrasive Blasting. Blasting with abrasive grit or another 
abrasive material is the most frequently used abrasive 
method. Sandblasting is most commonly associated with 
abrasive cleaning. Finely ground silica or glass powder, 
glass beads, ground garnet, powdered walnut and other 
ground nut shells, grain hulls, aluminum oxide, plastic 
particles and even tiny pieces of sponge, are just a few of 
the other materials that have also been used for abrasive 
cleaning. Although abrasive blasting is not an appropriate 
method of cleaning historic masonry, it can be safely used 
to clean some materials. Finely-powdered walnut shells 
are commonly used for cleaning monumental bronze 
sculpture, and skilled conservators clean delicate museum 
objects and finely detailed, carved stone features with very 
small, micro-abrasive units using aluminum oxide. 
Figure 19. A comparison of undamaged bricks surroundng the electrical 
conduit with the rest of the brick facade e111plwsizes the severity of the 
erosion caused by sandblasting. 
A number of current approaches to abrasive blasting rely 
on materials that are not usually thought of as abrasive, 
and not as commonly associated with traditional 
abrasive grit cleaning. Some patented abrasive cleaning 
processes - one dry, one wet -use finely-ground glass 
powder intended to "erase" or remove dirt and surface 
soiling only, but not paint or stains (Fig. 20). Cleaning with 
baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) is another patented 
process. Baking soda blasting is being used in some 
communities as a means of quick graffiti removal. 
However, it should not be used on historic masonry which 
it can easily abrade and can permanently "etch" the graffiti 
into the stone; it can also leave potentially damaging salts 
in the stone which cannot be removed . Most of these 
abrasive grits may be used either dry or wet, although dry 
grit tends to be used more frequently. 
Figure 20. (Left) A comparison of the limestone surface of a 1920s office building before and after "cleaning" with a proprietary abrasive process using 
fine g lass powder clearly shows the effectiveness of this method. But this is an abrasive technique and it has "cleaned" by removing part of the 11iasonry 
su,face with the dirt. Because it is abrasive, it is generally not recommended for lnrge-scale cleaning of historic masonry, although it may be suitable to 
use in certain, very limited cases under controlled circumstances. (Right) A vacum chamber where the used glass powder is collected for e11viro11111entally
safe disposal is a unique feature of this particular process. The specially-trained operators in the chamber wear protective clothing, masks and breathing 
equipment. Photos: Tom Keohan. 

Figure 21. Low-pressure blasting with ice pellets or ice crystals (left) is 
an abrasive cleaning method that is sometimes recommended for use 
on interior masonry because it does not involve large amounts of water. 
However, like other abrasive materials, ice crystals "clean" by removing 
n portion of the masonry surface with the dirt, and may not remove 
so111e stains that have penetrated into the masonry withou t causing 
f urther abrasion (right). Photos: Audrey T. Tepper. 
Ice particles, or pelletized dry ice (carbon dioxide or CO2), 
are another medium used as an abrasive cleaner (Fig. 21). 
This is also too abrasive to be used on most historic masonry, 
but it may have practical application for removing mastics 
or asphaltic coatings from some substrates. 
Some of these processes are promoted as being more 
environmentally safe and not damaging to historic masonry 
buildings. However , it must be remembered that they are 
abrasive and that they "clean" by removing a small portion 
of the masonry surface, even though it may be only a 
minuscule portion. The fact that they are essentially 
abrasive treatments must always be taken into consideration 
when planning a masonry cleaning project. In general, 
abrasive methods should not be used to clean historic 
masonry buildings. In some, very limited instances, highly­
controlled, gentle abrasive cleaning may be appropriate 
on selected, hard-to-clean areas of a historic masonry 
building if carried out under the watchful supervision of 
a professional conservator. But, abrasive cleaning should 
never be used on an entire building. 
Grinders and Sanding Disks. Grinding the masonry 
surface with mechanical grinders and sanding disks is 
another means of abrasive cleaning that should not be used 
on historic masonry. Like abrasive blasting, grinders and 
disks do not really clean masonry but instead grind away 
and abrasively remove and, thus, damage the masonry 
surface itself rather than remove just the soiling material. 
Planning A Cleaning Project 
Once the masonry and soiling material or paint have been 
identified, and the condition of the masonry has been 
evaluated, planning for the cleaning project can begin . 
Testing cleaning methods. In order to determine the 
gentlest means possible, several cleaning methods or 
materials may have to be tested prior to selecting the best 
one to use on the building. Testing should always begin 
with the gentlest and least invasive method proceeding 
gradually, if necessary, to more complicated methods, or 
a combination of methods. All too often simple methods, 
such as low-pressure water wash, are not even considered, 
yet they frequently are effective, safe, and not expensive. 
Water of slightly higher pressure or with a non-ionic 
detergent additive also may be effective. It is worth 
repeating that these methods should always be tested prior 
to considering harsher methods; they are safer for the 
building and the environment, often safer for the applicator, 
and relatively inexpensive. 
The level of cleanliness desired also should be determined 
prior to selection of a cleaning method . Obviously, the 
intent of cleaning is to remove most of the dirt, soiling 
material, stains, paint or other coating. A "brand new" 
appearance, however, may be inappropriate for an older 
building, and may require an overly harsh cleaning method 
to be achieved. When undertaking a cleaning project, it is 
important to be aware that some stains simply may not be 
removable. It may be wise, therefore, to agree upon a 
slightly lower level of cleanliness that will serve as the 
standard for the cleaning project. The precise amount of 
residual dirt considered acceptable may depend on the 
type of masonry, the type of soiling and difficulty of total 
removal, and local environmental conditions. 
Cleaning tests should be carried out in an area of sufficient 
size to give a true indication of their effectiveness. It is 
preferable to conduct the test in an inconspicuous location 
on the building so that it will not be obvious if the test is 
not successful. A test area may be quite small to begin , 
sometimes as small as six square inches, and gradually 
may be increased in size as the most appropriate methods 
and cleaning agents are determined . Eventually the test 
area may be expanded to a square yard or more, and it 
should include several masonry units and mortar joints 
(Fig. 22). It should be remembered that a single building 
may have several types of masonry and that even similar 
materials may have different surface finishes. Each material 
and different finish should be tested separately. Cleaning 
tests should be evaluated only after the masonry has dried 
completely. The results of the tests may indicate that 
several methods of cleaning should be used on a single 
building. 
When feasible, test areas should be allowed to weather for 
an extended period of time prior to final evaluation. A 
waiting period of a full year would be ideal in order to 
expose the test patch to a full range of seasons. If this is 
not possible, the test patch should weather for at least a 
month or two. For any building which is considered 
historically important, the delay is insignificant compared 
to the potential damage and disfigurement which may 
result from using an incompletely tested method. The 
successfully cleaned test patch should be protected as it 
will serve as a standard against which the entire cleaning 
project will be measured. 
11 

12 
Figure 22. Cleaning test areas may be quite small at f irst and gradually 
increase in size as testing determines the "gentlest means possible". 
Photo: Frances Gale. 
Water-Repellent Coatings and Waterproof 
Coatings 
To begin with, it is important to understand that waterproof 
coatings and water-repellent coatings are not the same . 
Although these terms are frequently interchanged and 
commonly confused with one another, they are completely 
different materials . Water-repellent coatings -often 
referred to incorrectly as "sealers", but which do not or 
should not seal- are intended to keep liquid water from 
penetrating the surface but to allow water vapor to enter 
and leave, or pass through, the surface of the masonry (Fig. 
24). Water-repellent coatings are generally 
transparent, or 
clear, although once applied some may darken or discolor 
certain types of masonry while others may give it a glossy 
or shin y appearance. Waterproof coatings seal the surface 
from liquid water and from water vapor . They are usuall y 
opaque, or pigmented, and include bituminous coatings 
and some elastomeric paints and coatings. 
cleaning applicators , and the necessary precautions mu st 
be taken. 
The precautions listed in Material Safety Data 
Sheet s (MSDS) that are provided with chemical products 
should always be followed. Protective clothing, respirators, 
hearing and face shields, and gloves must be provided to 
workers to be worn at all times. Acidic and alkaline 
chemical cleaners in both liquid and vapor forms can also 
cause se rious injury to passers-by (Fig. 23) . It may be 
neces sary to schedule cleaning at night or weekends if the 
building i s located in a busy urban area to reduce the 
potential danger of chemical overspra y to pedestrians . 
Cleaning during non-business hours will allow HVAC 
system s to be turned off and vents to be covered to prevent 
dangerous chemical fumes from entering the building 
which will also ensure the safety of the building's occupants. 
Abrasi ve and mechanical methods produce dust which 
can pose a serious health hazard, particularly 
if the abrasive 
or the m asonry contains silica . 
Safety considerations. Possible health dangers of each 
method selected for the cleaning project must be considered 
before selecting a cleaning method to avoid harm to the 
Cleaning can also cause damage to non-masonry materials 
on a building, including glass, metal and wood. Thus , it 
is usually necessary to cover windows and doors, and 
other features that may be vulnerable to chemical cleaners . 
They should be covered with plastic or polyethylene, or a 
masking agent that is applied as a liquid which dries to 
form a thin protective film on glass, and is easily peeled 
off after the cleaning is finished. Wind drift, for example , 
can also damage other property by carrying cleaning 
chemicals onto nearby automobiles, resulting in etching 
of the glass or spotting of the paint finish. Similarly, 
airborne dust can enter surrounding buildings, and exces s 
water can collect in nearby yards and basements. 
Concern over the release of volatile organic compound s 
(VOCs) into the air has resulted in the manufacture of new , 
more environmentally responsible cleaners and paint 
removers, while some materials traditionally used in 
cleaning may no longer be available for these same reasons. 
Other health and safety concerns have created additional 
cleaning challenges, such as lead paint removal, which is 
likely to require special removal and disposal techniques . 
Vinyl guttering or polyethylene-lined troughs placed around 
the perimeter of the base of the building can serve to catch 
chemical cleaning waste as it is rinsed off the building . 
This will reduce the amount of chemicals entering and 
polluting the soil , and also will keep the cleaning wa ste 
contained until it can be removed safel y. Some patented 
cleaning systems have developed special equipment to 
facilitate the containment and later disposal of cleaning 
waste . 
Environmental considerations. The potential eff ect of any 
method proposed for cleaning historic masonr y should be 
evaluated carefully. Chemical cleaners and paint r emovers 
may damage trees, shrubs, grass, and plants . A plan mu st 
be provided for environmentally safe remo val and dispo sal 
of the cleaning materials and the rinsing effluent before 
beginning the cleaning project. Authorities from the local 
regulatory agency- usually under the jurisdiction of the 
federal or state Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
should be consulted prior to beginning a cleaning project , 
especially if it involves anything more than plain water 
washing. This advance planning will ensure that the 
cleaning effluent or run-off, which is the combination of 
the cleaning agent and the substance removed from the 
masonry, is handled and disposed of in an environmentall y 
sound and legal manner . Some alkaline and acidic cleaner s 
can be neutralized so that they can be safel y discharged 
into storm sewers . However , most solvent-based cleaner s 
cannot be neutralized and are categorized as pollutant s, 
and must be disposed of by a licensed transport, storage 
and disposal facility. Thus, it is always advisable to consult 
with the appropriate agencies before starting to clean to 
ensure that the project progresses smoothly and i s not 
intermpted by a stop-work order because a required permit 
was not obtained in advance . 

Water-Repellent Coatings 
Water-repellent coatings are formulated to be vapor 
permeable, or "breathable". They do not seal the surface 
completely to water vapor so it can enter the masonr y 
wall as well as leave the wall. While the first water ­
repellent coatings to be developed were primarily acr ylic 
or silicone resins in organic solvents, now most water­
repellent coatings are water-based and formulated from 
modified siloxanes, silanes and other alkoxysilanes, or 
metallic stearates . While some of these products are 
shipped from the factory ready to use, other waterborne 
water repellents must be diluted at the job site . Unlike 
earlier water-repellent coatings which tended to form a 
"film" on the masonry surface , modern water-repellent 
coatings actually penetrate into the masonr y substrat e 
slightly and, generally, are almost invisible if properl y 
applied to the masonry. They are also more vapor 
permeable than the old coatings , yet they still reduce the 
vapor permeability of the masonry. Once inside the wall, 
water vapor can condense at cold spots producing liquid 
water which, unlike water vapor, cannot escape through 
a water-repellent coating . The liquid water within the 
wall, whether from condensation, leaking gutters, or other 
sources, can cause considerable damage. 
Water-repellent coatings are not consolidants . Altho ugh 
modern water repellents may penetrate slightly beneath 
the masonry surface, instead of just "sitting" on top of it, 
they do not perform the same function as a consolidant 
which is to "consolidate " and replace lost binder to 
strengthen deteriorating masonry . Even after many years 
of laboratory study and testing few consolidants hav e 
proven very effective. The composition of fired products 
such as brick and architectural terracotta , as well as many 
types of building stone, does not lend itself to consolidation. 
Some modern water-repellent coating s which contain a 
binder intended to replace the natural binders in stone 
that have been lost through weathering and natural erosion 
are described in product literature as both a water repellent 
and a consolidant. The fact that newer water-repellent 
coatings penetrate beneath the masonry surface instead 
of just forming a layer on top of the surface may indeed 
convey at least some consolidating properties to certain 
stones . However, a water-repellent coating cannot be 
considered a consolidant. In some instances, a water­
repellent or "preservative " coating, if applied to alread y 
damaged or spalling stone, may form a surface crust which, 
if it fails, may exacerbate the deterioration by pulling off 
even more of the stone (Fig. 25) . 
Is a Water-Repellent Treatment Necessary? 
Water-repellent coatings are frequently applied to historic 
masonry buildings for the wrong reason. They also are 
often applied without an understanding of what they are 
and what they are intended to do. And these coatings can 
be very difficult, if not impossible, to remove from 
the masonry if they fail or become discolored. Most 
importantly, the application of water-repellent coating s to 
histor ic masonry is usually unnecessary . 
Figure 23. A tarpaulin prot ects and shields pedestrians from potentially 
harmful spray while chemical cleaning is underway on the granite 
exterior of the U .S. Treasury Buildin g, Washington, O.C. 
Most historic masonry buildings, unless they are painted, 
have survived for decades without a water-repellent 
coating and, thus, probably do not need one now. Water 
penetration to the interior of a masonry building is seldom 
due to porous masonry, but results from poor or deferred 
maintenance. Leaking roofs, clogged or deteriorated 
gutters and downspouts, missing mortar, or cracks and 
open joints around door and window openings are almost 
always the cause of moisture-related problems in a historic 
masonry building . If historic masonry buildings are kept 
watertight and in good repair, water-repellent coatings 
should not be necessary. 
Rising damp (capillary moisture pulled up from the 
ground), or condensation can also be a source of excess 
moisture in masonry buildings. A water-repellent coating 
will not solve this problem either and, in fact, may be 
likely to exacerbate it. Furthermore, a water-repellent 
coating should never be applied to a damp wall. Moisture 
in the wall would reduce the ability of a coating to adhere 
to the masonry and to penetrate below the surface. But, 
if it did adhere, it would hold the moisture inside the 
masonry because, although a water-repellent coating is 
permeable to water vapor, liquid water cannot pass through 
it. In the case of rising damp, a coating may force the 
moisture to go even higher in the wall because it can slow 
down evaporation, and thereby retain the moisture in the 
wall. 
Excessive moisture in masonry walls may carry waterborne 
soluble salts from the masonry units themselves or from 
the mortar through the walls. If the water is permitted to 
come to the surface, the salts may appear on the masonry 
surface as efflorescence (a whitish powder) upon 
evaporation. However, the salts can be potentially 
dangerous if they remain in the masonry and crystallize 
13 

14 
Figure 24. Althou gh the application of a water-repellent coating was 
probably not needed on either of th ese buildings, the coating on the 
brick building (above), is not visible and /,as not changed the clrnrncter 
of th e brick. But th e coating 0 11 the brick column (below), has a /1igh 
gloss that is incompatible with the historic character of th e 111aso11ry. 
When a Water-Repellent Coating May be Appropriate 
There are some instances when a water-repellent coating 
may be considered appropriate to use on a historic masonry 
building . Soft, incompletely fired brick from the 18th- and 
early-19th centuries may have become so porous that paint 
or some type of coating is needed to protect it from further 
deterioration or dissolution. When a masonry building 
has been neglected for a long period of time, necessary 
repairs may be required in order 
to make it watertight. 
If, following a reasonable period of time after the building 
has been made watertight and has dried out completely , 
moisture appears actually to be penetrating through the 
repainted and repaired masonry walls, then the application 
of a water-repellent coating may be considered in selected 
areas only. This decision should be made in consultation 
with an architectural conservator. And, if such a treatment 
is undertaken, it should not be applied to the entire exterior 
of the building. 
Anti-graffiti or barrier coatings are another type of clear 
coating - although barrier coatings can also be pigmented ­
that may be applied to exterior masonry , but they are not 
formulated primarily as water repellents . The purpose of 
these coatings is to make it harder for graffiti to stick to 
a masonry surface and, thus, easier to clean. But, like 
water-repellent coatings, in most cases the application 
of anti-graffiti coatings is generally not recommended for 
historic masonry buildings. These coatings are often quite 
shiny which can greatly alter the appearance of a historic 
masonr y surface, and they are not always effective (Fig . 
26). Generally, other ways of discouraging graffiti, such 
as improved lighting, can be more effective than a coatin g. 
However , the application of anti-graffiti coatings ma y be 
appropriate in some instances on vulnerable areas of 
historic masonry buildings which are frequent targets of 
graffiti that are located in out-of-the-way places where 
constant sur veillance is not possible. 
Some water-repellent coatings are recommended b y 
product manufacturers as a means of keeping dirt and 
pollutants or biological growth from collecting on the 
surface of masonr y buildings and, thus, reducing the need 
for frequent cleaning. While this at times may be true , in 
some cases a coating may actually retain dirt more than 
uncoated masonry. Generally, the application of a water­
repellent coating is not recommended on a historic masonry 
building as a means of preventing biological growth . 
Some water-repellent coatings may actually encourage 
biological growth on a masonry wall . Biological growth 
on masonry buildings has traditionally been kept at bay 
through regularly-scheduled cleaning as part of a 
maintenance plan. Simple cleaning of the masonry with 
low-pressure water using a natural- or synthetic-bristled 
scrub brush can be very effective 
if done on a regular basi s. 
Commercial products are also available which can 
be sprayed on masonry to remove biological growth. 
In most instances, a water-repellent coating is not 
necessary if a building is watertight. The application of 
a water-repellent coating is not a recommended treatment 
for historic masonry buildings unless there is a specific 
beneath the surface as subflorescence. Subflorescence 
eventually may cause the surface of the masonr y to 
spall, 
particularly if a water-repellent coating has been applied 
which tends to reduce the flow of moisture out from the 
subsurface of the masonry. Although many of the newer 
water-repellent products are more breathable than their 
predecessors, they can be especially damaging if applied 
to masonry that contains salts, because they limit the flow 
of moisture through masonry . 

Figure 25. The clear coating applied to this limestone molding has 
failed and is taking off so111e of the stone surface as it peels. Photo: 
Frances Gale. 
prob lem which it may help solve. If the problem 
occurs on only part of the building, it is best to treat only 
that area rather than an entire building. Extreme exposures 
such as parapets, for example, or portions of the building 
subject to driving rain can be treated more effectively and 
less expensively than the entire building. Water-repellent 
coatings are not permanent and must be reapplied 
Figure 26. The anti-graffiti or barrier coating on this column is very 
shiny and wou ld not be appropriate to use on a historic masonry 
buildi11g. The coating has discolored as it has aged and whi tish streaks 
reveal areas of bare concrete where the coating was incompletely 
applied. 
periodically although, if they are truly invisible, it can be 
difficult to know when they are no longer pro viding the 
intended protection. 
Testing a water-repellent coating by applying it in one 
small area may not be helpful in determining its suitability 
for the building because a limited test area does not allow 
an adequate evaluation of such a treatment. Since water 
may enter and leave through the surrounding untreated 
areas, there is no way to tell if the coated test area is 
''breathable." But trying a coating in a small area may help 
to determine whether the coating is visible on the surface 
or if it will otherwise change the appearance of the masonry. 
Waterproof Coatings 
In theory, waterproof coatings usually do not cause 
problems as long as they exclude all water from the 
masonry. If water does enter the wall from the ground or 
from the inside of a building, the coating can intensify the 
damage because the water will not be able to escape. 
During cold weather this water in the wall can freeze 
causing serious mechanical disruption, such as spalling. 
In addition, the water eventually will get out by the path 
of least resistance. If this path is toward the interior, 
damage to interior finishes can result; if it is toward the 
exterior, it can lead to damage to the masonry caused by 
built-up water pressure (Fig. 27). 
In most instances, waterproof coatings should not be 
applied to historic masonry. The possible exception to 
this might be the application of a waterproof coating to 
below-grade exterior foundation walls as a last resort to 
stop water infiltration on interior basement walls. 
Generally, however, waterproof coatings, which include 
elastomeric paints, should almost never be applied above 
grade to historic masonry buildings. 
Figure 27. Instead of correcting the roof drainage problems, an 
elastomeric coating was applied to the already saturated limestone 
cornice. An elastomeric coating holds moisture in the masonry because 
it does not "breathe" and does not allow liquid moisture to escape. If 
the water pressure builds up sufficiently it can cause the coating to 
break and pop off as shown in this example, often pulling pieces of the 
masonry with it. Photo: National Park Service Files. 
15 

16 
Summary 
A well-planned cleaning project is an essential step in 
preserving, rehabilitating or restoring a historic masonry 
building. Proper cleaning methods and coating treatments, 
when determined necessary for the preservation of the 
masonry, can enhance the aesthetic character as well as the 
structural stability of a historic building. Removing years 
of accumulated dirt, pollutant crusts, stains, graffiti or 
paint, if done with appropriate caution, can extend the life 
and longevity of the historic resource. Cleaning that is 
carelessly or insensitively prescribed or carried out by 
inexperienced workers can have the opposite of the intended 
effect. It may scar the masonry permanently, and may 
actually result in hastening deterioration by introducing 
harmful residual chemicals and salts into the masonry or 
causing surface loss. Using the wrong cleaning method or 
using the right method incorrectly, applying the wrong 
kind of coating or applying a coating that is not needed 
can result in serious damage, both physically and 
aesthetically, to a historic masonry building . Cleaning a 
historic masonry building should always be done using 
the gentlest means possible that will clean, but not damage 
the building. It should always be taken into consideration 
before applying a water-repellent coating or a waterproof 
coating to a historic masonry building whether it is really 
necessary and whether it is in the best interest of preserving 
the building . 
Selected Reading 
Architectural Ceramics: Their History, Mnmifacture and 
Conservation. A Joint Symposium of English Heritage and the 
United Kingdom Institute for Conservation, September 22-25,
1994. London: English Heritage, 1996. 
Ashurst, Nicola. Cleaning Historic Buildings. Volume One: 
Substrates, Soiling & Investigation. Volume Two: Cleaning 
Materials & Processes. London: Donhead Publishing Ltd., 1994. 
Association for Preservation Technology. Special Issue: 
Preservation of Historic Masonry. Papers from the Symposium 
on Preservation Treatments for Historic Masonry: Consolidants, 
Coatings, and Water Repellents, New York, New York, November 
11-12, 1994. APT Bulletin. Vol. XXVI, No. 4 (1995). 
Grimmer, Anne E . Preservation Brief 6: Dangers of Abrasive 
Cleaning to Historic Buildings. Washington, D.C.: Preservation 
Assistance Division, National Park Service, U.S. Department 
of the Interior, 1979. 
Grimmer, Anne E. Kie ing it Clean: Removing Exterior Dirt, 
Paint, Stains and Gra ·ti Jrom Historic Masonry Buildings. 
Washington, D.C.: reservation Assistance Division, National 
Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1988. 
Park, Sharon C., AIA. Preservation Brief 39: Holding the Line: 
Controlling Unwanted Moisture in Historic Buildings. 
Washington, D.C.: Heritage Preservation Services, National Park 
Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1996. 
Powers, Robert M. Preservation Tech Note, Masonry No. 3, 
"Water Soak Cleaning of Limestone". Washington, D.C.: 
Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 1992. 
Sinvinski, Valerie. "Gentle Blasting." Old-House Journal. Vol. 
XXIV, No. 4 Ouly-August 1996), pp. 46-49. 
Weaver, Martin E. Conserving Buildings: A Guide to 
Techniques and Materials. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
1993. 
Weaver, Martin E. Preservation Brief 38: Removing Graffiti from 
Historic Masonry. Washington, D.C.: Preservation Assistance 
Division, National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 
1995. 
Winkler, E.M. Stone in Architecture: Properties, Durability. 
Third, completely revised and extended edition. Berlin, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1997. 
Acknowledgments 
Robert C. Mack, FAIA, is a principal in the firm of MacDonald 
& Mack Architects, Ltd., an architectural firm that specializes in 
historic buildings in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
Anne Grimmer is a Senior Architectural Historian in the Technical 
Preservation Services Branch, Heritage Preservation Services 
Program, National Park Service, Washington, D.C. 
The original version of Preservation Brief 1: The Cleaning and 
Waterproof Coating of Masonry Buildings was written by Robert C. 
Mack, AIA. It inaugurated the Preservation Briefs series when 
it was published in 1975. 
The following historic preservation specialists provided technic al 
review of this publication: Frances Gale, Training Director, 
National Center for Preservation Technology and Training, 
National Park Service, Natchitoches, LA; Judith M. Jacob, 
Architectural Conservator, Building Conservation Branch, 
Northeast Cultural Resources Center, National Park Service, N.Y., 
NY; Robert 
M. Powers, Architectural Conservator, Powers and 
Company, Inc., Philadelphia, PA; Antonio Aguilar, Kaaren Dodge, 
JoEllen Hensley, Gary Sachau, John Sandor and Audrey T. Tepper, 
Technical Preservation Services Branch, Heritage Preservation 
Services Program, National Park Service, Washington, D.C.; and 
Kay D. Weeks, Heritage Preservation Services Program, National 
Park Service, Washington, D.C. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to 
 the National 
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the 
Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available information 
concerning historic properties. Comments on the usefulness of 
this publication may be directed to: Sharon C. Park, FAIA, Chief, 
Technical Preservation Services Branch, Heritage Preservation 
Services Program, National Park Service, 1849 C Street, N.W., 
Suite NC200, Washington, D.C. 20240 (  
This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without 
penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the 
National Park Service are appreciated. 
www2.cr.nps.gov /tps).
Front Cover: Chemical cleaning of the brick and architectural terra 
cotta frieze on the 1880s Pension Building, Washington, D.C. (now tlze 
National Building M11se11111), is shown here in progress. Photo: 
Christina Henry. 
Photographs used to illustrate tl1is Brief were taken by Anne Grimmer unless 
otherwise credited. 
ISSN:0885-7016 November 2000 