U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Serv ice 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
11 
PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
Rehabilitating Historic Storefronts 
H. Ward Jandl 
The storefront is the most important architectural feature 
of many historic commercial buildings . It also plays a 
crucial role in a store's advertising and merchandising 
stra tegy to draw customers and increase business. Not 
surprisingly, then, the storefront has become the feature 
most commonly altered in a historic commercial building .
In the process, these alterations may have completely 
changed or destroyed a building 's distinguishing architec­
tural features that make up its historic character . 
As more and more people come to recognize and appre
ciate the architectural heritage of America 's downtowns , 
however , a growing interest can be seen in preserving the
historic character of commercial buildings . The sensitive 
rehabilitation of storefronts can result not only in in ­
creased business for the owner but can also provide evi ­
dence that downtown revitalization efforts are succeeding 
(see figure 1) . 
­
 
Once a decision is made to rehabilitate a histori .c com ­
mercial building, a series of complex decisions faces the 
owner, among them : 
• if the original storefront has survived largely intact but 
is in a deteriorated condition, what repairs should be 
undertaken 7 
• if the storefront has been modernized at a later date, 
should the later alterations be kept or the building 
restored to its original appearance or an entirely new 
design chosen? 
• if the building's original retail use is to be changed to 
office or residential, can the commercial appearance of 
the building be retained while accommodating the new 
use? 
Figure 1. lnapprop_nat~ st~rep-_on~ al~erations over the years- metal cladding, oversized signs and canopies - have detracted from 
the character of this h1sto"!c d1str! ct m Van Buren , Arkan sas, A carefully considered rehabilitation plan for Main Street , including 
the removal o( poorly ~esigned sign s, false fronts and the selection of an appropriate exterior paint color palette , serves to 
enhance the visual environment and preserve s the district's sense of time and place. Photo above : Bob Dunn ; Drawing , David Fitts 
This Preservation Brief is intended to assist owners, ar­
chitects, and planning officials in answering such ques­
tions about how to evaluate and preserve the character of 
historic storefronts. In so doing, it not only addresses the 
TH& Sil( HUNm.ED ILOCK NAIN S'l'REET 
1 

Ill, L. ■ llllll I It. ........... 
\:.■ · ■ -1 - ■ .■ -,·■ ■ :,:■ •·1· ■ l•·k-
1 .. ,■ II ■ II 11 111 
---~---- ~-- -· 
...... ,, -----~----'! ·-~--· 1•--1•-- 1-- I 
ei· ~-•, •• ■ •• •• 
.. ~-IJ!f .. , ,■ ~ •~ 
■· . 
cor nice 
window lintel 
window sill 
transom 
displa y window 
lower window panel 
basic design issues associated with storefront rehabilita­
tion, but recommends preservation treatments as well. 
Finally, although the Brief focuses on storefront rehabilita­
tion, it is important to review this specific work in the 
broader context of preserving and maintaining the overall 
structure. Money spent on storefront rehabilitation may 
be completely wasted if repair and maintenance problems 
on the rest of the building are neglected . 
Historical Overview 
Commercial establishments of the 18th and early 19th cen­
turies were frequently located on the ground floor of 
buildings and, with their residentially scaled windows and 
doo rs, were often indistinguishable from surrounding 
houses. In some cases, however , large bay or oriel win­
dows comprised of small panes of glass set the shops 
apart from their neighbors. Awnings of wood and canvas 
and signs over the sidewalk were other design features 
seen on some early commercial buildings . The ground 
floors of large commercial establishments , especially in the 
first decades of the 19th century , were distinguished by 
regularly spaced, heavy piers of stone or brick , infilled 
with paneled doors or small paned window sash . Entrances 
were an integral component of the facade, typically not 
given any particular prominence although sometimes 
wider than other openings. 
The ready availability of architectural cast iron after the 
1840's helped transform storefront design as architects and 
builders began to experiment using iron columns and 
lintels at the ground floor level. Simultaneous advances in 
the glass industry permitted manufacturing of large panes 
of glass at a reasonable cost. The combination of these 
two technical achievements led to the storefront as we 
know it today-large expanses of glass framed by thin 
structural elements. The advertisement of the merchant 
and his products in the building facade and display win­
dows quickly became critical factors in the competitive 
commercial atmosphere of downtowns. In the grouping of 
these wide-windowed facades along major commercial 
streets, the image of America's cities and towns radically 
changed. 
The first cast iron fronts were simple post-and-lintel 
construction with little decoration. As iron craftsmen 
became more adept and as more ornate architectural 
styles became popular , cast iron fronts were given 
Italianate, Venetian Gothic, and French Second Empire 
details . Cast iron storefronts could be selected directly 
from catalogs, which began to appear in the early 1850's. 
Standardized sills, columns, and lintels could be arranged 
to c reate fronts of all sizes, styles and configurations . In 
the 1870's sheet metal storefronts became popular; they 
were also sold in standardized sizes and configurations 
through manufacturers' catalogs (see figure 2). 
The typical 19th century storefront consisted of single 
or double doors 
flanked by display windows (see figure 
3). The entrance was 
frequently recessed, not only to pro­
tect the customer from inclement weather but to increase 
the amount of space in which to display merchandise . In 
some cases an additional side door provided access to the 
upper floors . Thin structural members of cast iron or 
wood, rather than masonry piers, usually framed the 
storefront. The windows themselves were raised off the 
ground by wood, cast iron or pressed metal panels or 
bulkheads; frequently, a transom or series of transoms 
(consisting of single or multiple panes of glass) were 
2 
Figure 2. These 19th century galvanized iron stor efronts could b e 
purchased from George L. Mesker & Co. in Evansville , Indiana . 
Figure 3 . Become familiar with the architectural features typical 
of historic commercial buildings. A close look at a storefront 's 
construction materials , features and relationship to the upper 
stories will help in determining how much of the original facade 
remains . 
This particular storefront is No . 4016 in the George L. Mesker 
and Company catalog of 1905. One of Mesker's most popular 
designs, it featured cast-iron sills, columns and lintels, galvanized 
iron lintel and main cornice , window caps and pediment. 

placed above each window and door. The signboard 
above the storefront (the fascia covering the structural 
beam) became a prominent part of the building. Canvas 
awnings, or in some cases tin or wooden canopies, often 
shaded storefronts of the late 19th century. Iron fronts 
were frequently put onto existing buildings as a way of 
giving them an up-to-date appearance. Except for expand­
ing the display window area to the maximum extent possi­
ble and the increasing use of canvas awnings, few major 
technical innovations in storefront design can be detected 
from the 1850's through 1900. 
The first decades of the 20th century saw the growing 
use of decorative transom lights (often using small 
prismatic glass panes) above display windows; in some 
cases, these transoms could be opened to permit air circu­
lation into the store. Electric incandescent lights enabled 
storeowners to call attention to their entrance and display 
windows and permitted nighttime shopping. In the 1920's 
and 1930's a variety of new materials were introduced 
into the storefront, including aluminum and stainless steel 
framing elements, pigmented structural glass (in a wide 
variety of colors), tinted and mirrored glass, glass block 
and neon. A bewildering number of proprietary products 
also appeared during this period, many of which went 
into storefronts including Aklo, Vitrolux, Vitrolite, and 
Extrudalite. Highly colored and heavily patterned marble 
was a popular material for the more expensive storefronts 
of this period. Many experiments were made with recessed 
entries, floating display islands, and curved glass. The 
utilization of neon lighting further transformed store signs 
into elaborate flashing and blinking creations. During this 
period design elements were simplified and streamlined; 
transom and signboard were often combined. Signs utilized 
typefaces for the period, including such stylized lettering 
as "Broadway," "Fino" and "Monogram." Larger buildings 
of this period, such as department stores, sometimes had 
fixed metal canopies, with lighting and signs as an integral 
component of the fascia (see figure 4). 
Because commercial architecture responds to a variety 
of factors-environmental, cultural, and economic, 
distinct regional variations in storefronts can be noted. 
Fixed metal canopies supported by guy wires, for exam­
ple, were common in late 19th and early 20th century 
storefronts in southern states where it was advantageous 
to have shaded entrances all year long. Such a detail was 
less common in the northeast where moveable canvas 
awnings predominated. These awnings could be lowered 
in summer to keep buildings cooler and raised in winter 
when sunlight helps to heat the building. 
Evaluating the Storefront 
The important key to a successful rehabilitation of a 
historic commercial building is planning and selecting 
treatments that are sensitive to the architectural character 
of the storefront. As a first step, it is therefore essential to 
identify and evaluate the existing storefront's construction 
materials; architectural features; and the relationship of 
those features to the upper stores (see figure 5). This 
evaluation will permit a better understanding of the store­
front's role in, and significance to, the overall design of 
the building. A second and equally important step in 
planning the rehabilitation work is a careful examination 
of the storefront's physical conditions to determine the ex-
tent and nature of rehabilitation work needed (see figure 
6). In most cases, this examination is best undertaken by a 
qualified professional. 
Figure 4. This storefront in New York City design ed by Ray­
mond Loewy typifies the streamlined look of the 1930's. Added 
to an earlier buiding, the front utilizes glass, stainless steel and 
neon to make a modem statement. This is a good example of a 
s later storefront which ha acquired sign ificance and should be re­
tained in any rehabilitation. 
Figure 5. In some cases, as in the storefront on the extreme left, 
it is a simple matter to determine original appearance by looking 
at neighboring storefronts. Removal of the board and batten 
fasciaboard, pent roof, and "colonial" style door, all of which 
could be undertaken at minimal cost, would restore the original 
proportions and lines of the building. Photo: Day Johnston 
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Existing Historic Storefronts 
1. Become familiar with the style of your building and the role 
of the storefront in the overall design. Don't"earlyup" a front 
Avoid stock "lumberyard coloniaf' detailing such as coach 
lanterns, mansard overhangings, wood shakes, nonoperable 
shutters, and small paned windows except where they existed 
historically. 
2. Preserve the storefront's character even though there is a 
new use on the interior. ff less exposed window area is 
desirable, consider the use of interior blinds and insulating 
curtains rather than altering the existing historic fabric. 
3. Avoid use of materials that were unavailable when the 
storefront was constructed; this includes vinyl and aluminum 
siding, anodized aluminum. mirrored or tinted glass, artificial 
stone, and brick veneer. 
4. Choose paint colors based on the building's historical 
appearance. In general do not coat surfaces that have never 
been painted. For 19th century storefronts, contrasting colors 
may be appropriate, but avoid too many different colors on a 
single facade. 
3 

Figure 6 . Storefronts of the 1940 's, SO's, and 60 's were frequently 
installed by attaching studs or a metal grid over an early front 
and applying new covering materials . If the existing storefront is 
a relatively recent addition with little or no architectural merit , 
begin by removing the covering materials in several places as 
was done here . If this preliminary investigation reveals evidence 
of an earlier front , such as this cast-iron column , carefully 
remove the later materials to assess the overall condition of the 
historic storefront . The black mastic visible on the lower 
masonry panels was used for installing pigmented structural 
glass. Some attachment methods for modern facings , such as 
mastic or metal lath , may have seriously damaged the original 
fabric of the buiding , and this must be taken into account in the 
rehabilitation process. Photo : Bob Dunn 
The following questions should be taken into considera ­
tion in this two-part evaluation: 
Construction Materials, Features, 
and Design Relationships 
Storefront 's Construction Materials: What are the con­
struction materials? Wood? Metal? Brick or other 
masonry? A combination? 
Storefront's Architectural Features: What are the various 
arch itectural features comprising the storefront and how 
are they arranged in relationship to each other? 
• Supporting Columns/Piers: 
What do the columns or piers supporting the store­
front look like? Are they heavy or light in appearance? 
Are they flush with the windows or do they protrude? 
Are they all structural elements or are some columns 
decorative? 
• Display Windows and Transoms: 
Are the display windows and transoms single panes 
of 
glass or are they subdivided? Are they flush with the 
4 
facade or are they recessed? What is the proportion of 
area between the display windows and transom? Are 
there window openings in the base panels to allow 
natural light into the basement? 
• Entrances: 
Are the entrances centered? Are they recessed? Is one 
entrance more prominent than the others? How is the 
primary retail entrance differentiated from other en­
trances? Is there evidence that new entrances have been 
added or have some been relocated? Are the doors 
original or are they later replacements? 
Decorative Elements: 
Are there any surviving decorative elements such as 
molded cornices, 
column capitals, fascia boards, 
brackets, signs, awnings or canopies? Is there a belt­
course, cornice, or fascia board between the first and 
second floor? Are some elements older than others indi­
cating changes over time? 
Storefront's Relationship to Upper Stories : Is there a dif ­
ference in materials between the storefront and upper 
stories? Were the storefront and floors above it created as 
an overall design or were they very different and unrelated 
to each other? 
It is also worthwhile to study the neighboring commer­
cial buildings and their distinctive characteristics to look for 
similarities (canopies, lighting, signs) as well as differences. 
This can help determine whether the storefront in question 
is significant and unique in its own right and / or whether 
it is significant as part of an overall commercial street­
scape. 
Physical Condition 
Mild Deterioration: Do the surface materials need repair? 
Is paint flaking? Are metal components rusting? Do joints 
need recaulking where materials meet glass windows? 
Mild deterioration generally requires only maintenance 
level treatments. 
Moderate Deterioration : Can rotted or rusted or broken 
sections of material be replaced with new material to 
match the old? Can solid material (such as Carrara glass) 
from a non-conspicuous location be used on the historic 
facade to repair damaged elements? Do stone or brick 
components need repointing7 Is the storefront watertight 
with good flashing connections? Are there leaky gutters or 
air conditioner units which drip condensation on the 
storefront? Is caulking needed? Moderate deterioration 
generally requires patching or splicing of the existing ele ­
ments with new pieces to match the deteriorated element. 
Severe Deterioration: Have existing facing materials 
deteriorated beyond repair through vandalism, settlement , 
or water penetration? Is there a loss of structural integ­
rity? Is the material rusted through, rotted , buckling , 
completely missing? Are structural lintels sagging? Are 
support columns settled or out of alignment? Severe dete­
rioration generally requires replacement of deteriorated 
elements as part of the overall rehabilitaton. 
In evaluating whether the existing storefront is worthy 
of preservation, recognize that good design can exist in 
any period ; a storefront added in 1930 
may have greater 
architectural merit than what is replaced (see figure 4). In 
commercial historic districts, it is often the diversity of 

styles and detailing that contribute to the character; 
removing a storefront dating from 1910 simply because 
other buildings in the district have been restored to their 
1860's appearance may not be the best preservation ap­
proach. If the storefront design is a good example of its 
period and if it has gained significance over time, it 
should be retained as part of the historical evolution of 
the building (this architectural distinctiveness could also 
be an economic asset as it may attract attention to the 
building). 
Deciding a Course of Action 
The evaluation of the storefront's architectural features 
and physical condition will help determine the best course 
of action in the actual rehabilitation work. The following 
recommendations, adapted from the Secretary of the In­
terior's "Standards for Rehabilitation" and the accom­
panying interpretive guidelines, are designed to ensure 
that the historic commercial character of the building is 
retained in the rehabilitation process. 
If the original or significant storefront exists, repair and 
retain the historic features using recommended treatments 
(see following sections on rehabilitating metal, wood and 
masonr
y 
storefronts as well as the guidelines for rehabili­
tating existing historic storefronts found on page 3 ). 
If the original or significant storefront no longer exists 
or is too deteriorated to save, undertake a contemporary 
design which is compatible with the rest of the buiding in 
scale, design, materials, color and texture; or undertake 
an accurate restoration based on historical research and 
physical evidence (see section on "Replacement Store­
fronts"). Where an original or significant storefront no 
longer exists and no evidence exists to document its early 
appearance, it is generally preferable to undertake a con­
temporary design that retains the commercial "flavor" of 
the building. The new storefront design should not draw 
attention away from the historic building with its detailing 
but rather should respect the existing historic character of 
the overall building. A new design that copies traditional 
details or features from neighboring buildings or other 
structures of the period may give the building a historical 
appearance which blends in with its neighbors but which 
never, in fact, existed. For this reason , use of conjectural 
designs, even if based on similar buildings elsewhere in 
the neighborhood or the availability of different architec­
tural elements from other buildings or structures, is gen­
erally not recommended. 
Rehabilitating Metal Storefronts 
Rehabilitating metal storefronts can be a complex and 
time-consuming task. Before steps are taken to analyze or 
treat deteriorated storefronts, it is necessary to know 
which metal is involved, because each has unique prop­
erties and distinct preservation treatments. Storefronts 
were fabricated using a variety of metals, including cast 
iron, bronze, copper, tin, galvanized sheet iron, cast zinc, 
and stainless steel. Determining metallic composition can 
be a difficult process especially if components are en­
crusted with paint. Original architect's specifications 
(sometimes available from permit offices, town halls, or 
records of the original owner) can be important clues in 
this regard and should be checked if at all possible. 
Iron-a magnetic, gray-white malleable metal, readily 
susceptible to oxidation. Cast iron, most commonly found 
in storefronts, is shaped by molds and can withstand great 
compressive loads. Rolled sheet iron, sometimes galvanized 
with zinc, also was used in storefront construction. Stain­
less steel began to appear in storefronts after 1930. 
Zinc-a medium-hard, bluish-white metal, widely used 
as a protective coating for iron and steel. It is softer than 
iron and is nonmagnetic. 
Copper-a nonmagnetic, corrosion-resistant, malleable 
metal, initially reddish-brown but when exposed to the at­
mosphere turns brown to black to green. 
Bronze and brass-nonmagnetic, abrasive-resistant 
alloys combining copper with varying amounts of zinc, 
lead, or tin. These copper alloys, more commonly found 
in office buildings or large department stores, range in 
color from lemon yellow to golden brown to green 
depending on their composition and are well suited for 
casting (see figure 7). 
Aluminum-a lightweight, nonmagnetic metal common­
ly found on storefronts dating from the 1920's and 30's. 
Its brightness and resistance to corrosion has made it a 
popular storefront material in the 20th century. 
Figure 7. Part of a large office building constructed in Wash­
ington, D. C. in 1928, this finely detailed bronze storefront is 
typical of many constructed during this period. It should be 
noted that the original grilles, spandrel panel and window above 
are all intact. Photo: David W. Look, AJA 
s 

Repair and Replacement of Metal 
Simply because single components of a storefront need 
repair or replacement should not be justification for 
replacing an entire storefront. Deteriorated metal architec­
tural elements can be repaired by a variety of means, 
although the nature of the repair will depend on the ex­
tent of the deterioration, the type of metal and its loca­
tion, and the overall cost of such repairs. Patches can be 
used to mend, cover or fill a deteriorated area. Such 
patches should be a close match to the original material to
prevent galvanic corrosion. Splicing-replacement of a 
small section with new material-should be undertaken on
structural members only when temporary bracing has 
been constructed to carry the load. Reinforcing-or brac­
ing the damaged element with additional new metal 
material-can relieve fatigue or overloading in some situa­
tions. 
If metal components have deteriorated to a point where 
they have actually failed (or are missing), replacement is 
the only reasonable course of action. If the components 
are significant to the overall design of the storefront, they 
should be carefully removed and substituted with com­
ponents that match the original in material, size and 
detailing (see figure 8). 
6 
Figure 8. When the Grand Opera House in Wilmington, Dela­
ware, was rehabilitated, missing cast-iron columns were cast of _ aluminum to match the original; in this particular case, because 
these columns do not carry great loads, aluminum proved to be 
successful substitute. Photo: John G. Waite 
Before going to the expense of reproducing the original, 
it may be useful to check salvage yards for compatible 
components. Missing parts of cast iron storefronts can be 
replaced by new cast iron members that are reproductions 
of the original. New wooden patterns, however, usually 
need to be made if the members are large. This procedure 
tends to be expensive (it is usually impossible to use ex­
isting iron components as patterns to cast large elements 
because cast iron shrinks 1/5 inch per foot as it cools). In 
some situations, less expensive substitute materials such as 
aluminum, wood, plastics, and fiberglass, painted to 
match the metal, can be used without compromising the 
architectural character of the resource. 
Cleaning and Painting 
Cast iron storefronts are usually encrusted with layers of 
paint which need to be removed to restore crispness to the 
details. Where paint build-up and rust are not severe 
problems, handscraping and wire-brushing are viable 
cleaning methods. While it is necessary to remove all rust 
before repainting, it is not necessary to remove all paint. 
For situations involving extensive paint build-up and cor­
rosion, mechanical m ethods such as low-pressure gentle 
dry grit blasting (80-100 psi) can be effective and eco­
nomical, providing a good surface for paint. Masonry and 
wood surfaces adjacent to the cleaning area, however, 
should be protected to avoid inadvertent damage from the 
blasting. It will be necessary to recaulk and putty the 
heads of screws and bolts after grit blasting to prevent 
moisture from entering the joints. Cleaned areas should be 
painted immediately after cleaning with a rust-inhibiting 
primer to prevent new corrosion. Before any cleaning is 
undertaken, local codes should be checked to ensure com­
pliance with environmental safety requirements. 
Storefronts utilizing softer metals (lead, tin), sheet metals 
(sheet copper), and plated metals (tin and terneplate) 
should not be cleaned mechanically (grit blasting) because 
their plating or finish can be easily abraded and damaged. 
It is usually preferable to clean these softer metals with a 
chemical (acid pickling or phosphate dipping) method. 
Once the surface of the metal has been cleaned of all cor­
rosion, grease, and dirt, a rust-inhibiting primer coat 
should be applied. Finish coats especially formulated for 
metals, consisting of lacquers, varnishes, enamels or 
special coatings, can be applied once the primer has dried. 
Primer and finish coats should be selected for chemical 
compatibility with the particular metal in question. 
Bronze storefronts, common to large commercial office 
buildings and m ajor department stores of the 20th cen­
tury, can be cleaned by a variety of methods; since all 
cleaning removes some surface metal and patina, it should 
be undertaken only with good reason (such as the need to 
remove encrusted salts, bird droppings or dirt). Excessive 
cleaning can remove the texture and finish of the metal. 
Since this patina can protect the bronze from further 
corrosion, it should be retained if possible. If it is 
desirable to remove the patina to restore the original sur­
face of the bronze, several cleaning methods can be used: 
chemical compou nds including rottenstone and oil, whit­ 
ing and ammonia, or precipitated chalk and ammonia, can 
be rubbed onto bronze surfaces with a soft, clean cloth 
with little or no damage. A number of commercial 
cleaning companies successfully use a combination of 5% 
oxalic acid solution together with finely ground India 
pumice powder. Fine glass-bead blasting (or peening) and 
crushed walnut shell blasting also can be acceptable 
mechanical methods if carried out in controlled circum- 
stances under low (80-100 psi) pressure. Care should be 
taken to protect any adjacent wood or masonry from the 
blasting. 
The proper cleaning of m etal storefronts should not be 
considered a "do-it-yourself" project. The nature and 
condition of the material should be assessed by a compe­
tent professional, and the work accomplished by a 
com­pany specializing in such work. 
Rehabilitating Wooden Storefronts 
The key to the successful rehabilitation of wooden store­
fronts is a careful evaluation of existing physical condi­
tions. Moisture, vandalism, insect attack, and lack of 
main tenance can all contribute to the deterioration of 
wooden storefronts. Paint failure should not be mistaken-

ly interpreted as a sign that the wood is in poor condition 
and therefore irreparable. Wood is frequently in sound 
physical condition beneath unsightly paint. An ice pick or 
awl may be used to test wood for soundness-decayed 
wood that is jabbed will lift up in short irregular pieces; 
sound wood will separate in long fibrous splinters. 
Repair and Replacement of Wood 
Storefronts showing signs of physical deterioration can 
often be repaired using simple methods. Partially decayed 
wood can be patched, built up, chemically treated or con­
solidated and then painted to achieve a sound ccmdition, 
good appearance, and greatly extended life. 
To repair wood showing signs of rot, it is advisable to 
dry the wood; carefully apply a fungicide such as penta­
chlorophenol (a highly toxic substance) to all decayed 
areas; then treat with 2 or 3 applications of boiled linseed 
oil (24 hours between applications). Afterward, fill c racks 
and holes with putty; caulk the joints between the various 
wooden members; and finally prime and paint the surface. 
Partially decayed wood may also be strengthened and 
stabilized by consolidation, using semi-rigid epoxies which 
saturate porous decayed wood and then harden. The con­
solidated wood can then be filled with a semi-rigid epoxy 
patching compound, sanded and painted . More informa­
tion on epoxies can be found in the publication "Epoxies 
for Wood Repairs in Historic Buildings," cited in the 
bibliography. 
Where components of wood storefronts are so badly 
deteriorated that they cannot be stabilized, it is possible to 
replace the deteriorated parts with new pieces (see figure 
9). These techniques all require skill and some expense, 
but are recommended in cases where decorative elements 
such as brackets or pilasters, are involved. In some cases: 
missing edges can be filled and rebuilt using wood putty 
or epoxy compounds. When the epoxy cures, it can be 
sanded smooth and painted to achieve a durable and 
waterproof repair. 
Figure 9. Rather than replace an entire wooden storefront when 
there is only localized deterioration , a new wooden component 
can be pieced-in, as seen here in this column base. The new 
wood will need to be given primer and top coats of a high qual­
ity exterior paint -e ither an oil -base or latex system . Also wood 
that is flaking and peeling should be scraped and hand-sanded 
prior to repainting. Photo: H. Ward Jandl 
Repainting of Wood 
Wooden storefronts were historically painted to deter the 
harmful effects of weathering (moisture, ultraviolet rays 
from the sun, wind, etc.) as well as to define and accent 
architectural features . Repainting exterior woodwork is 
thus an inexpensive way to provide continued protection 
from weathering and to give a fresh appearance to the 
storefront. 
Before repainting, however, a careful inspection of all 
painted wood surfaces needs to be conducted in order to 
determine the extent of surface preparation necessary, that 
is, whether the existing layers of paint have deteriorated 
to the point that they will need to be partially or totally 
removed prior to applying the new paint. 
As a general rule, removing paint from historic exterior 
woodwork should be avoided unless absolutely essential. 
Once conditions warranting removal have been identified, 
however, paint can be removed to the next sound layer 
using the gentlest method possible, then the woodwork re­
painted . For example, such conditions as mildewing, ex­
cessive chalking, or staining (from the oxidization of 
rusting nails or metal anchorage devices) generally require 
only thorough surface cleaning prior to repainting. Inter­
coat peeling, solvent blistering, and wrinkling require 
removal of the affected layer using mild abrasive methods 
such as hand scraping and sanding. In all of these cases of 
limited paint deterioration, after proper surface prepara­
tion the exterior woodwork may be given one or more 
coats of a high quality exterior oil finish paint. 
On the other hand, if painted wood surfaces display 
continuous patterns of deep cracks or 
if they are exten­
sively blistering and peeling so that bare wood is visible, 
the old paint should be completely removed before repaint­
ing. (It should be emphasized that because peeling to bare 
wood-the most common type of paint problem-is most 
often caused by excess interior or exterior moisture that 
collects behind the paint film, the first step in treating 
peeling is to locate and remove the source or sources of 
moisture. If this is not done, the new paint will simply 
peel off.) 
There are several acceptable methods for total paint 
removal, depending on the particular wooden element in­
volved. They include such thermal devices as an electric 
heat plate with scraper for flat surfaces such as siding, 
window sills, and doors or an electric hot-air gun with 
profiled scraper for solid decorative elements such as 
gingerbread or molding . Chemical methods play a more 
limited, supplemental role in removing paint from historic 
exterior woodwork; for example, caustic or solvent-base 
strippers may be used to remove paint from window mun­
tins because thermal devices can easily break the glass. 
Detachable wooden elements such as exterior shutters 
balusters and columns, can probably best be stripped 
1
by 
means of immersion in commercial dip tanks because 
other methods are too laborious. Care must be taken in 
rinsing all chemical residue off the wood prior to painting 
or the new paint will not adhere. 
Finally, if the exterior woodwork has been stripped to 
bare wood, priming should take place within 48 hours 
(unless the wood is wet, in which case it should be per­
mitted to dry before painting). Application of a high 
quality oil type exterior primer will provide a surface over 
which either an oil or latex top coat can be successfully 
used. 
7 

Rehabilitating Masonry Storefronts 
Some storefronts are constructed of brick or stone , and 
like their metal and wooden counterparts, also may have 
been subjected to physical damage or alterations over 
time. Although mortar may have disintegrated, inappro ­
priate surface coatings applied, and openings reduced or 
blocked up, careful rehabilitation will help restore the 
visual and physical integrity of the masonry storefront. 
Repair and Replacement of Masonry 
If obvious signs of deterioration-disintegrating mortar, 
spalling bricks or stone-are present, the causes (ground 
moisture, leaky downspouts, etc.) should be identified and 
corrected . Some repointing may be necessary on the 
masonry surface, but should be limited to areas in which 
so much mortar is missing that water accumulates in the 
mortar joints, causing further deterioration . New mortar 
should duplicate the composition, color, texture, and 
hardness, as well as the joint size and profile of the 
original. Badly spalling bricks may have to be replaced . 
Deteriorated stone may be replaced in kind, or with a 
matching substitute material; in some cases where not 
visually prominent, it may be covered with stucco, possi­
bly scored to resemble blocks of stone. 
Cleaning Masonry 
Inappropriate cleaning techniques can be a major source 
of damage to historic masonry buildings. Historic masonry 
should be cleaned only when necessary to halt deteriora­
tion or to remove graffiti and stains, and always with the 
gentlest means possible, such as water and a mild deter­
gent using natural bristle brushes, and/ or a non-harmful 
chemical solution, both followed by a low-pressure water 
rinse. 
It is important to remember that many mid-19th cen­
tury brick buildings were painted immediately or soon 
after construction to protect poor quality brick or to im­
itate stone. Some historic masonry buildings not originally
painted were painted at a later date to hide alterations or 
repairs, or to solve recurring maintenance or moisture 
problems. Thus, whether for reasons of historical tradi­
tion or practicality, it may be preferable to retain existing 
pa int. 
If it is readily apparent that paint is not historic 
and is a later, perhaps unsightly or inappropriate treat­
ment, removal may be attempted, but only if this can be 
carried out without damaging the historic masonry. Gen­
erally, paint removal from historic masonry may be ac­
complished successfully only with the use of specially for ­
mulated chemical paint removers. No abrasive techniques,
such as wet or dry sandblasting should be considered. 
If 
non-historic paint cannot be removed without using abra­
sive methods, it is best to leave the masonry painted, 
although repainting in a compatible color may help 
visually. 
Removing unsightly mastic from masonry presents a 
similarly 
serious problem. Its removal by mechanical 
means may result in abrading the masonry, and chemical 
and heat methods may prove ineffective, although solvents 
like acetone will aid in sofening the hardened mastic. If 
the mastic has become brittle , a flat chisel may be used to 
pop it off; but this technique, if not undertaken with care , 
may result in damaging the masonry. And even if total 
removal is possible, the mastic may have permanently 
stained the masonry. Replacement of these masonry sec-
8 
tions marred by mastic application may be one option in 
limited situations; individual pieces of stone or bricks that 
have been damaged by inappropriate alterations may be 
cut out and replaced with new pieces that duplicate the 
original. However, since an exact match will be nearly im­
possible to achieve, it may be necessary to paint the 
repaired masonry in order to create a harmonious facade. 
Replacement of a large area with new materials may not 
be acceptable as it may give the building a new, non­
historic appearance inappropriate to the building style and 
period. 
Designing Replacement Storefronts 
Where an architecturally or historically significant store ­
front no longer exists or is too deterioriated to save , a 
new front should be designed which is compatible with 
the s ize, scale, color, material, and character of the build ­
ing. Such a design should be undertaken based on a 
thorough understanding of the building's architecture and, 
where appropriate, the surrounding streetscape (see figure 
10). For example, just because upper floor windows are 
arched is not sufficient justification for designing arched 
openings for the new storefront. The new design should 
"read" as a storefront; filling in the space with brick or 
similar solid material is inappropriate for historic build­
ings . Similarly the creation of an arcade or other new 
design element, which alters the architectural and historic 
character of the building and its relationship with the 
street, should be avoided. The guidelines on page 8 can 
assist in developing replacement storefront designs that 
respect the historic character of the building yet meet cur­
rent economic and code requirements . 
Guidelines for Designing Replacement Storefronts 
1. Scale: Respect the scale and proportion of the existing 
building in the new storefront design. 
2. Materials: Select construction materials that are appro­
priate to the storefronts; wood, cast iron, and glass are 
usually more appropriate replacement materials than 
masonry which tends to give a massive appearance. 
3. Cornice: Respect the horizontal separation between the 
storefront and the upper stories. A cornice or fascia board 
traditionally helped contain the store's sign. 
4. Frame: Maintain the historic planar relationship of the 
storefront to the facade of the building and the streetscape 
(if appropriate). Most storefront frames are generally 
composed of horizontal and vertical elements. 
S. Entrances: Differentiate the primary retail entrance 
from the secondary access to upper floors. In order to 
meet current code requirements, out-swinging doors 
generally must be recessed. Entrances should be placed 
where there were entrances historically, especially when 
echoed by architectural detailing (a pediment or projecting 
bay) on the upper stories. 
6. Windows: The storefront generally should be as trans­
parent as po111ible. Use of s}ass in doors, transoms, and 
display areas allows for visibility into and out of the 
store. 
7. Secondary Design Elements: Keep the treatment of 
secondary design elements such as graphics and awnings 
as simple as possible in order to avoid visual clutter to the 
building and its streetscape. 

Figure 10. (A) This existing storefront , added in the 1950 's to a late 19th century brick building, extends beyond the plane of the 
facade; faced with anodized aluminum and permastone , it does not contribute to the architectural and historic character of the 
building. (B) This replacement design uses "lumberyard colonial" detailing, such as barn-type doors , shutters, small paned win­
dows , and a wood shake pent roof. The design, detailing , and choice of materials are clearly inappropriate to this commercial 
building . (C) This replacement design retains the 1950 's projecting canopy but symmetrical placement of the doors relates well to 
the second floor windows above ; this contemporary design is compatible with the scale and character of the building. (D) This 
replacement design accurately restores the original appearance of the building; based on historical research and physical evidence, 
it too is an acceptable preservation approach . Drawings : Sharon C. Park, AJA 
A restoration program requires thorough documenta­
tion of the historic development of the building prio r to 
initiating work. If a restoration of the original storefront 
is contemplated , old photographs and prints, as well as 
physical evidence, should be used in determining the form 
and details of the original. Because storefronts are particu­
larly susceptible to alteration in response to changing 
marketing techniques, it is worthwhile to find visual docu­
mentation from a variety of periods to have a clear under­
standing of the evolution of the storefront. Removal of 
later additions that contribute to the character of the 
building should not be undertaken . 
Other Considerations 
Pigmented Structural Glass 
The rehabilitation of pigmented structural glass store ­
fronts, common in the 1930's, is a delicate and often 
frustrating task, due to the fragility and scarcity of the 
material. Typically the glass was installed against 
masonry walls with asphaltic mastic and a system of 
metal shelf angles bolted to the walls on three-foot 
centers. Joints between the panels were filled with cork 
tape or an elastic joint cement to cushion movement and 
prevent moisture infiltration. 
The decision to repair or replace damaged glass panels 
should be made on a case-by-case basis . In some in­
stances, the damage may be so minor or the likelihood of 
finding replacement glass so small, that repairing, rean­
choring and/ or stabilizing the damaged glass panel may 
be the only prudent choice. If the panel is totally 
destroyed or missing, it may be possible to replace with 
glass salvaged from a demolition; or a substitute material, 
such as "spandrel glass," which approximates the ap­
pearance of the original. Although pigmented structural 
glass is no longer readily available, occasionally long­
established glass "jobbers" will have a limited supply to 
repair historic storefronts. 
Awnings 
Where based on historic precedent, consider the use of 
canvas awnings on historic storefronts (see figure 11). 
Awnings can help shelter passersby, reduce glare, and 
conserve energy by controlling the amount of sunlight hit­
ting the store window, although buildings with northern 
exposures will seldom functionally require them. Today's 
canvas awnings have an average life expectancy of between 
4 and 7 years. In many cases awnings can disguise, in an 
inexpensive manner, later inappropriate alterations and 
can provide both additional color and a strong store iden­
tification. Fixed aluminum awnings and awnings simulat­
ing mansard roofs and umbrellas are generally inappro­
priate for older commercial buildings. 
If awnings are 
added, choose those that are made from soft canvas or 
vinyl materials rather than wood or metal; be certain that 
they are installed without damaging the building or 
visually impairing distinctive architectural features and 
can be operable for maximum energy conservation effect. 
Figure 11 . Try to locate old photographs or prints to determine 
what alterations have been made to the storefront and when 
they were undertaken . Awnings were common elements of store­
fronts at the tum of the century . They can be equally useful 
today . 
9 

Signs 
Signs were an important aspect of 19th and early 20th 
century storefronts and today play an important role in 
defining the character of a business district. In examining 
historic streetscape photographs, one is struck by the 
numLer of signs-in windows, over doors, painted on ex­
terior walls, and hanging over (and sometimes across) the 
street. While this confusion was part of the character of 
19th century cities and towns, today's approach toward 
signs in historic districts tends to be much more conserva­
tive. Removal of some signs can have a dramatic effect in 
improving the visual appearance of a building; these in­
clude modem backlit fluorescent signs , large applied signs 
with distinctive corporate logos, and those signs attached 
to a building in such a way as to obscure significant ar­
chitectural detailing. For this reason, their removal is en­
couraged in the process of rehabilitation. 
If new signs are 
designed, they should be of a size and style compatible 
with the historic building and should not cover or obscure 
significant architectural detailing or features. For many 
19th century buildings, it was common to mount signs on 
the lintel above the first story. Another common approach, 
especially at the tum of the century, was to paint signs 
directly on the inside of the display windows . Frequently 
this was done in gold leaf. New hanging signs may be ap ­
propriate for historic commercial buildings, 
if they are of 
a scale and design compatible with the historic buildings . 
Retention of. signs and advertising painted on historic 
walls, if of historic or artistic interest (especially where 
they provide evidence of early or original occupants), is 
encouraged. 
Paint Color 
Paint analysis can reveal the storefront's historic paint 
colors and may be worth undertaking if a careful restora­
tion is desired. If not, the paint color should be, at a 
minimum, appropriate to the style and setting of the 
building. This also means that if the building is in a 
historic district, the color selection should complement the 
building in question as well as other buildings in the 
block. In general, color schemes for wall and major 
decorative trim or details should be kept simple; in most 
cases the color or colors chosen for a storefront should be 
used on other painted exterior detailing (windows, shut­
ter, cornice, etc.) to unify upper and lower portions of the 
facade. 
Windows 
Glass windows are generally the most prominent features 
in historic storefronts, and care should be taken to ensure 
that they are properly maintained. For smaller paned win­
dows with wooden frames, deteriorated putty should be 
removed manually, taking care not to damage wood 
along the rabbet. To reglaze, a bead of linseed oil-based 
putty should be laid around the perimeter of the rabbet ; 
the glass pane pressed into place; glazing points inserted 
to hold the pane; and a final seal of putty beveled around 
the edge of the glass . For metal framed windows , glazing 
compound and special glazing clips are used to secure the 
glass; a final seal of glazing compound then is often ap­
plied. 
If the glass needs replacing, the new glass should 
match the original in size, color and reflective qualities. 
Mirrored or tinted glass are generally inappropriate 
10 
replacements for historic storefronts. The replacement of 
cracked or missing glass in large windows should be 
undertaken by professional glaziers. 
Code Requirements 
Alterations to a storefront called for by public safety , 
handicapped access, and fire codes can be difficult design 
problems in historic buildings . Negotiations can be under­
taken with appropriate officials to ensure that all appli­
cable codes are being met while maintaining the historic 
character of the original construction materials and fea­
tures . If, for instance, doors opening inward must be 
changed, rather than replace them with new doors, it may 
be possible to reverse the hinges and stops so that they 
will swing outward. 
Summary 
A key to the successful rehabilitation of historic commer­
cial buildings is the sensitive treatment of the first floor 
itself (see figure 12). Wherever possible , significant store ­
fronts (be they original or later alterations), including 
windows , sash , doors, transoms, signs and decorative fea­
tures, should be repaired in order to retain the historic 
character of the building . Where original or early store ­
fronts no longer exist or are too deteriorated to save, the 
commercial character of the building should nonetheless 
be preserved-either through an accurate restoration based 
on historic research and physical evidence or a contem­
porary design which is compatible with the scale, design , 
materials , color and texture of the historic building . The 
sensitive rehabilitation of historic storefronts will not only 
enhance the architectural character of the overall building 
but will contribute to rejuvenating neighborhoods or busi­
ness districts as well. Figure 12. This photograph of three late 19th century commer­
cial buildings clearly shows the impact of preserving and rehabil­
itating storefronts . The one on the right has been totally 
obscured by a "modem " front added in the 1950 's. Although 
inappropriate alterations have taken place on the left storefront , 
it is still possible to determine the original configuration of the 
doors and display windows . The storefront in the middle has re ­
mained intact . Although in need of some minor maintenance 
work, the appeal of the original design and materials is im­
mediately apparent . 

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U .S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D .C. 20402 
Additional Reading 
Bryan , John M. and the Triad Architectural Associates. Abbeville , South 
Carolina: Using Grant-in-Aid Funds for Rehabilitation Planning 
and Project Work in the Commercial Town Square . Washing­
ton, D.C.: Technical Preservation Services Division , U.S . 
Department of the Interior, 1980. 
Gayle , Margot and Edmund V . Gillon, Jr. Cast Iron Architecture in New
York. New York: Dover Publications , Inc., 1971. 
Gayle , Margot and David W. Look and John G . Waite . Metals in Amer­
ica's Historic Buildings : Uses and Preservation Treatments . 
Washington , D .C.: Technical Preservation Services Division , 
U.S. Department of the Interior, 1980. 
Gelbloom , Mara. "Old Storefronts ." The Old-House Journal VI, No. 3 
(March 1978), pp. 25-34. 
Grimmer , Anne E . " Dangers of Abrasive Cleaning to Historic Buildings. " 
(Preservation Briefs 6), Washington , D .C. : Technical Preserva­
tion Services Division , U.S. Department of the Interior, 1979. 
::;uthrie, Susan. Main Street Historic District, Van Buren , Arkansas : 
Using Grant-in-Aid Funds for Storefront Rehabilitation . Wash­
ington , D.C.: Technical Preservation Services Division , U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 1980. 
Hartmann, Robert R . "Design for the Business District , Part I." Racine , 
Wisconsin: Racine Urban Aesthetics , Inc., 1979. 
Hensley, Tom . "The Preservation of Historic Pigmented Structural Glass 
(Vitrolite and Carra'ra Glass) ." Denver : Rocky Mountain 
Regional Office, National Park Service, 1981. 
Marsh, Ellen. "An Introduction to Storefront Rehabilitation. " Conserve 
Neighborhoods, No . 7 (Summer 1979). 
Mintz , Norman . "A Practical Guide to Storefront Rehabilitation ." Tech­
nical Series No . 2.: Albany, N .Y.: Preservation League of New 
York State, 1977 . 
Myers, John H. The Repair of Historic Wooden Windows . (Preservation 
Briefs 9). Washington, D.C. : Technical Preservation Services 
Division, U .S. Department of the Interior , 1980. 
Park, Sharon C. Storefront Rehabilitation: A 19th Century Commercial 
Building. Washington, D.C. : Technical Preservation Services 
Division, U .S. Department of the Interior , 1980. 
Phillips, Morgan W. and Dr. Judith E. Selwyn. "Epoxies for Wood 
Repairs in Historic Buildings ." Washington, D.C. : Technical 
Preservation Services Division, U.S. Department of the Interior , 
1978. 
Rifkind, Carole. Main Street: The Face of Urban America . New York: 
Harper and Row, 1977. 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guide ­
lines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. Washington, D.C.: 
Technical Preservation Services Division , U.S. Department of 
the Interior , 1980. 
Weeks, Kay D . and David W . Look . " Exterior Paint Problems on Historic 
Woodwork ." (Preservation Briefs 10). Washington, D.C. : Tech­
nical Preservation Services , U.S. Department of the Interior , 
1982. 
Special thanks go to Kay D. Weeks and Sharon C. Park , AJA, for providing tech­
nical and editorial direction in the development of this Preservation Brief. The 
following individuals are also to be thanked for reviewing the manuscript and mak­
ing suggestions: Norman Mintz , New York , N.Y.: Judith Kitchen , Columbus, Ohio ; 
Jim Vaseff, Atlanta , Georgia, ; and Tom Moriarity , Washington, D.C. Finally 
thanks go to Technical Preservation Service Branch staff members, especially 
Martha A . Gutrick , Michael J. Auer and Anne E. Grimmer, whose valuable com­
ments were incorporated into the final text and who contributed to the publication 
of the brief . 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the Economic Recovery Tax Act 
of 1981 which directs the Secretary of the Interior to certify rehabilitations of 
historic buildings that are consistent with their historic character; the advice and 
guidance provided in this brief will assist property owners in complying with the re­
quirements of this law. 
Preservation Briefs 11 has been developed under the technical editorship of Lee 
H. Nelson , AIA, Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service , 
U.S. Department of the Interior , Washington , D.C. 20240. Comments on the use­
fulness of this information are welcomed and can be sent to Mr. Nelson at the 
above address. 
This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. 
Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National Park Service are 
appreciated . 
Cover drawing : This woodcut of the Joy Building, built in 1808 in Boston, shows 
early storefronts with shutters; note the profusion of signs covering the facade , 
advertising the services of the tenants. 
September 1982 
11 