 PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
Repairing Historic Flat Plaster­
Walls and Ceilings 
Marylee MacDonald 
U.S. Department of the Interior National Park Service 
Preservation Assistance Division Technical Preservation Services 
Plaster in a historic building is like a family album . The 
handwriting of the artisans, the taste of the original 
occupants, and the evolving styles of decoration are 
embodied in the fabric of the building. From modest 
farmhouses to great buildings, regardless of the ethnic 
origins of the occupants, plaster has traditionally been 
used to finish interior walls. 
A versatile material , plaster could be applied over 
brick, stone, half-timber, or frame construction. It pro­
vided a durable surface that was easy to clean and that 
could be applied to flat or curved walls and ceilings. 
Plaster could be treated in any number of ways: it 
could receive stenciling, decorative painting, wallpaper, 
or whitewash. This variety and the adaptability of the 
material to nearly any building size, shape, or configu­
ration meant that plaster was the wall surface chosen 
for nearly all buildings until the 1930s or 40s (Fig. 1). 
Historic plaster may first appear so fraught with prob­
lems that its total removal seems the only alternative. 
But there are practical and historical reasons for saving 
it. First, three-coat plaster is unmatched in strength 
Fig. 1. Left: Schifferstadt, Frederick, Maryland, 1756. Right: First Christian Church, Eugene, Oregon, 1911. Although these two structures are 
separated in history by over 150 years and differences in size, ethnic origin, geography, construction techniques, and architectural character, their 
builders both used plaster as the interior surface coating for flat and curved walls. Photo left: Kay Weeks. Photo right: Kaye Ellen Simonson. 

/ h) 
/p) 
and durability. It resists fire and reduces sound trans­
mission. Next, replacing plaster is expensive. A build­
ing owner needs to think carefully about the condition 
of the plaster that remains; plaster is often not as badly 
damaged as it first appears. Of more concern to preser­
vationists, however, original lime and gypsum plaster 
is part of the building's historic fabric-its smooth­
troweled or textured surfaces and subtle contours 
evoke the presence of America's earlier craftsmen. Plas­
ter can also serve as a plain surface for irreplaceable 
decorative finishes. For both reasons, plaster walls and 
ceilings contribute to the historic character of the inte­
rior and should be left in place and repaired if at all 
possible (Fig. 2). 
Fig. 2. A hole in the wall of a 1760s Custom House in Chestertown, 
Maryland illustrates the evolution of the room. (a) The original 
plaster was applied directly to an exterior masonry wall and the 
chairrail (missing here, see arrow) was in place before the wet plas­
ter was applied to the wall. Sometime later when the interior was 
modified, the masonry was furred out. Machine-sawn wood lath (b) 
was nailed to the furring strips and (c) new three-coat plaster was 
applied. Photo: Maryland Historical Trust. 
The approaches described in this Brief stress repairs 
using wet plaster, and traditional materials and tech­
niques that will best assist the preservation of historic 
plaster walls and ceilings-and their appearance. Dry 
wall repairs are not included here, but have been writ­
ten about extensively in other contexts. Finally, this 
Brief describes a replacement option when historic 
plaster cannot be repaired. Thus, a veneer plaster sys­
tem is discussed rather than dry wall. Veneer systems 
include a coat or coats of wet plaster-although thinly 
applied-which can, to a greater extent, simulate tradi­
tional hand-troweled or textured finish coats. This sys­
tem is generally better suited to historic preservation 
projects than dry wall. 
To repair plaster, a building owner must often enlist the 
help of a plasterer. Plastering is a skilled craft, requir­
ing years of training and special tools (Fig. 3). While 
minor repairs can be undertaken by building owners, 
most repairs will require the assistance of a plasterer. 
2 
Fig. 3. Many of these traditional plastering tools are still used 
today: (a) screen to separate coarse sand from fine sand; (b) lime 
screen to remove unslaked particles of lime; (c) hoe; (d) shovel; (e) 
hawk to hold small amounts of plaster; (f) angle fl.oat to apply fin­
ishes to inside angles; (g), (h), (i) assorted trowels to apply base­
coats and finish coat; (j) padded fl.oat to level off humps and fill in 
hollows caused by other tools; (k) a two-handled fl.oat or "darby" to 
fl.oat larger surfaces; (I) a simple straight edge; (m) a square to test 
the trueness of angles; (n) plumb to check verticality of plastered 
surfaces; (o), (p), (q), (r) jointing and mitering tools to pick out 
angles in decorative moldings; (s) comb made of sharpened lath 
pieces to scratch the basecoat of plaster; (t) brush to dampen plaster 
surfaces while they are worked smooth; (u) template made of wood 
and metal to cut a required outline for a fancy mold. 

paint outline 
of wood trim 
(nailed to ground) 
Historical Background 
Plasterers in North America have relied on two materi­
als to create their handiwork-lime and gypsum. Until 
the end of the 19th century, plasterers used lime plas­
ter. Lime plaster was made from four ingredients: lime , 
aggregate, fiber, and water. The lime came from 
ground-and-heated limestone or oyster shells; the ag­
gregate from sand; and the fiber from cattle or hog 
hair. Manufacturing changes at the end of the 19th 
century made it possible to use gypsum as a plastering 
material. Gypsum and lime plasters were used in com­
bination for the base and finish coats during the early 
part of the 20th century; gypsum was eventually fa­
vored because it set more rapidly and , initially, had a 
harder finish. 
Not only did the basic plastering material change, but 
the method of application changed also. In early Amer­
ica, the windows, doors, and all other trim were in­
stalled before the plaster was applied to the wall (Fig. 
4). Generally the woodwork was prime-painted before 
plastering. Obtaining a plumb, level wall, while work­
ing against built-up mouldings, must have been diffi­
cult . But sometime in the first half of the 19th century, 
builders began installing wooden plaster "grounds" 
around windows and doors and at the base of the wall. 
Installing these grounds so that they were level and 
plumb made the job much easier because the plasterer 
could work from a level, plumb, straight surface. 
Woodwork was then nailed to the "grounds" after the 
walls were plastered (Fig. 5). Evidence of plaster be­
hind trim is often an aid to dating historic houses, or to 
discerning their physical evolution. 
Fig. 4. The builders of this mid-18th century house installed the 
baseboard moulding first, then applied a mud and horse hair plaster 
(called paling) to the masonry wall. Lime was used for the finish 
plaster. Also shown are the hacking marks which prepared the wall 
for a subsequent layer of plaster. Photo: Kay Weeks. 
Fig. 5 (a). The photo above shows the use of wooden plaster 
"grounds" nailed to the wall studs of the mid-19th century Lock­
wood House in Harpers Ferry, West Virginia. This allowed the 
plasterer to work flush with the surface of the grounds. Afterwards, 
the carpenter could nail the finish woodwork to the ground, effec­
tively hiding the joint between the plaster and the ground. The trim 
was painted after its installation, leaving a paint outline on the 
plaster. Fig. 5 (b). The photo below shows door trim and mouldings 
in place after the plastering was complete. Photos: Kaye Ellen 
Simonson. 
Lime Plaster 
When building a house, plasterers traditionally mixed 
bags of quick lime with water to "hydrate" or "slake" 
the lime. As the lime absorbed the water, heat was 
given off. When the heat diminished, and the lime and 
water were thoroughly mixed, the lime putty that re­
sulted was used to make plaster. 
When lime putty, sand, water, and animal hair were 
mixed, the mixture provided the plasterer with "coarse 
stuff." This mixture was applied in one or two layers to 
build up the wall thickness. But the best plaster was 
done with three coats. The first two coats made up the 
coarse stuff; they were the scratch coat and the brown 
coat. The finish plaster, called "setting stuff" contained 
a much higher proportion of lime putty, little aggre­
gate, and no fiber, and gave the wall a smooth white 
surface finish. 
Compared to the 3/8-inch-thick layers of the scratch 
and brown coats, the finish coat was a mere 1/8-inch 
thick . Additives were used for various finish qualities. 
3 

0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
For example, fine white sand was mixed in for a "float 
finish." This finish was popular in the early 1900s. (If 
the plasterer raked the sand with a broom, the plaster 
wall would retain swirl marks or stipples.) Or marble 
dust was added to create a hard-finish white coat 
which could be smoothed and polished with a steel 
trowel. Finally, a little plaster of Paris, or "gauged 
stuff;' was often added to the finish plaster to acceler­
ate the setting time. 
Although lime plaster was used in this country until 
the early 1900s, it had certain disadvantages. A plas­
tered wall could take more than a year to dry; this de­
layed painting or papering. In addition, bagged quick 
lime had to be carefully protected from contact with air, 
or it became inert because it reacted with ambient 
moisture and carbon dioxide. Around 1900, gypsum 
began to be used as a plastering material. 
Gypsum Plaster 
Gypsum begins to cure as soon as it is mixed with 
water. It sets in minutes and completely dries in two to 
three weeks. Historically, gypsum made a more rigid 
plaster and did not require a fibrous binder. However, 
it is difficult to tell the difference between lime and 
gypsum plaster once the plaster has cured. 
Despite these desirable working characteristics, gyp­
sum plaster was more vulnerable to water damage than 
lime. Lime plasters had often been applied directly to 
masonry walls (without lathing), forming a suction 
bond. They could survive occasional wind-driven mois­
ture or water wicking up from the ground. Gypsum 
plaster needed protection from water. Furring strips 
had to be used against masonry walls to create a dead 
air space. This prevented moisture transfer. 
In rehabilitation and restoration projects, one should 
rely on the plasterer's judgment about whether to use 
lime or gypsum plaster . In general, gypsum plaster is 
the material plasterers use today. Different types of 
aggregate may be specified by the architect such as 
clean river sand, perlite, pumice, or vermiculite; how­
ever, if historic finishes and textures are being repli­
cated, sand should be used as the base-coat aggregate. 
Today, if fiber is required in a base coat, a special gyp­
sum is available which includes wood fibers. Lime 
putty, mixed with about 35 percent gypsum (gauging 
plaster) to help it harden, is still used as the finish coat. 
Lath 
Lath provided a means of holding the plaster in place. 
Wooden lath was nailed at right angles directly to the 
structural members of the buildings (the joists and 
studs), or it was fastened to non-structural spaced 
strips known as furring strips. Three types of lath can 
be found on historic buildings (Fig. 6). 
Wood Lath. Wood lath is usually made up of narrow, 
thin strips of wood with spaces in between. The plas­
terer applies a slight pressure to push the wet plaster 
through the spaces. The plaster slumps down on the 
inside of the wall, forming plaster "keys." These keys 
hold the plaster in place. 
4 
Fig. 6. Top to bottom: Hand-riven lath, machine-sawn wood lath, 
expanded metal (diamond mesh) lath, and perforated gypsum board 
lath. Profile views of their keying characteristics are shown to the 
right. For plaster repairs or replastering, galvanized metal lath is 
the most reliable in terms of longevity, stability, and proper keying. 
Drawing: Kaye Ellen Simonson. 

Metal Lath. Metal lath, patented in England in 1797, 
began to be used in parts of the United States toward 
the end of the 19th century. The steel making up the 
metal lath contained many more spaces than wood lath 
had contained. These spaces increased the number of 
keys; metal lath was better able to hold plaster than 
wood lath had been. 
Rock Lath. A third lath system commonly used was 
rock lath (also called plaster board or gypsum-board 
lath). In use as early as 1900, rock lath was made up of 
compressed gypsum covered by a paper facing. Some 
rock lath was textured or perforated to provide a key 
for wet plaster. A special paper with gypsum crystals in 
it provides the key for rock lath used today; when wet 
plaster is applied to the surface, a crystalline bond is 
achieved. 
Rock lath was the most economical of the three lathing 
systems . Lathers or carpenters could prepare a room 
more quickly. By the late 1930s, rock lath was used 
almost exclusively in residential plastering . 
Common Plaster Problems 
When plaster dries, it is a relatively rigid material 
which should last almost indefinitely. However, there 
are conditions that cause plaster to crack, effloresce, 
separate, or become detached from its lath framework 
(Fig. 7). These include: 
• Structural Problems 
• Poor Workmanship 
• Improper Curing 
• Moisture 
Structural Problems 
Overloading. Stresses within a wall, or acting on the 
house as a whole, can create stress cracks. Appearing 
as diagonal lines in a wall, stress cracks usually start at 
a door or window frame, but they can appear any­
where in the wall, with seemingly random starting 
points. 
Fig. 7 (a) to (d). series of photographs taken in different rooms of an early 20th century house in West Virginia reveal a variety of plaster wall 
surface problems, most of which can easily be remedied through sensitive repair: Hairline cracks (a) in an otherwise sound wall can be filled with joint 
compound or patching plaster. The wall can also be canvassed or wallpapered. Stress cracks (b) in plaster over a kitchen door frame can be repaired 
using fiberglass mesh tape and joint compound. Settlement cracks (c) in a bedroom can be similarly repaired. The dark crack at the ;uncture between 
walls, however, may be a structural crack and should be investigated for its underlyingcause. Moisture damage (d) from leaking plumbing
on the second fioor has damaged both wallpaper and plaster in the dining room. After fixing the leaking pipes, the wall covering and rotted plaster 
will need to be replaced and any holes repaired. Photos: Kay Weeks. 
5 

Builders of now-historic houses had no codes to help 
them size the structural members of buildings . The 
weight of the roof, the second and third stories, the 
furniture, and the occupants could impose a heavy 
burden on beams, joists, and studs. Even when houses 
were built properly, later remodeling efforts may have 
cut in a doorway or window without adding a struc­
tural beam or "header" across the top of the opening . 
Occasionally, load-bearing members were simply too 
small to carry the loads above them. Deflection or 
wood "creep" (deflection that occurs over time) can 
create cracks in plaster. 
Overloading and structural movement (especially when 
combined with rotting lath, rusted nails, or poor qual­
ity plaster) can cause plaster to detach from the lath. 
The plaster loses its key. When the mechanical bond 
with the lath is broken, plaster becomes loose or 
bowed. If repairs are not made , especially to ceilings , 
gravity will simply cause chunks of plaster to fall to the 
floor. 
cheaper material . Oversanding can cause the plaster to 
weaken or crumble (Fig. 8). Plaster made from a poorly 
proportioned mix may be more difficult to repair. 
SettlementNibration. Cracks in walls can also result 
when houses settle . Houses built on clay soils are espe­
cially vulnerable. Many types of clay (such as mont­
morillonite) are highly expansive. In the dry season, 
water evaporates from the clay particles , causing them 
to contract. During the rainy season, the clay swells. 
Thus, a building can be riding on an unstable footing . 
Diagonal cracks running in opposite directions suggest 
that house settling and soil conditions may be at fault . 
Similar symptoms occur when there is a nearby source 
of vibration-blasting, a train line, busy highway, or 
repeated sonic booms. 
Lath movement. Horizontal cracks are often caused by 
lath movement. Because it absorbs moisture from the 
air, wood lath expands and contracts as humidity rise s 
and falls. This can cause cracks to appear year after 
year. Cracks can also appear between rock lath panels . 
A nail holding the edge of a piece of lath may rust or 
loosen, or structural movement in the wood framing 
behind the lath may cause a seam to open. Heavy 
loads in a storage area above a rock-lath ceiling can also 
cause ceiling cracks . 
Errors in initial building construction such as improper 
bracing, poor corner construction, faulty framing of 
doors and windows, and undersized beams and floor 
joists eventually "telegraph" through to the plaster 
surface . 
Poor Workmanship 
In addition to problems caused by movement or weak ­
ness in the structural framework , plaster durability can 
be affected by poor materials or workmanship. 
Poorly proportioned mix. The proper proportioning 
and mixing of materials are vital to the quality of the 
plaster job. A bad mix can cause problems that appear 
years later in a plaster wall. Until recently, proportions 
of aggregate and lime were mixed on the job . A plas­
terer may have skimped on the amount of cementing 
material (lime or gypsum) because sand was the 
6 
Fig. 8. Too much aggregate (sand) and not enough cementing mate­
rial (lime or gypsum) in the base coat has made this plaster surface 
weak and crumbly. Besides losing its key with the lath, the layers 
are disintegrating. It will most likely need to be totally removedand 
replaced with all new plaster. Photo: Marylee MacDonald.
Incompatible basecoats and finish coats. Use of perlite 
as an aggregate also presented problems. Perlite is a 
lightweight aggregate used in the base coat instead of 
sand. It performs well in cold weather and has a 
slightly better insulating value. But if a smooth lime 
finish coat was applied over perlited base coats on 
wood or rock lath, cracks would appear in the finish 
coat and the entire job would have to be re-done. To 
prevent this, a plasterer had to add fine silica sand or 
finely crushed perlite to the finish coat to compensate 
for the dramatically differing shrinkage rates between 
the base coat and the finish coat. 
Improper plaster application. The finish coat is subject 
to "chip cracking" if it was applied over an excessively 
dry base coat, or was insufficiently troweled, or if too 
little gauging plaster was used. Chip cracking looks 
very much like an alligatored paint surface. Another 
common problem is called map cracking-fine , irregu­
lar cracks that occur when the finish coat has been 
applied to an oversanded base coat or a very thin base 
coat. 
Too much retardant. Retarding agents are added to slow 
down the rate at which plaster sets, and thus inhibit 
hardening. They have traditionally included ammonia, 

glue, gelatin, starch, molasses, or vegetable oil. If the 
plasterer has used too much retardant , however, a gyp­
sum plaster will not set within a normal 20 to 30 min­
ute time period. As a result, the surface becomes soft 
and powdery. 
Inadequate plaster thickness. Plaster is applied in three 
coats over wood lath and metal lath-the scratch, 
brown , and finish coats . In three-coat work, the scratch 
coat and brown coat were sometimes applied on suc­
cessive days to make up the required wall thickness. 
Using rock lath allowed the plasterer to apply one base 
coat and the finish coat-a two-coat job. 
If a plasterer skimped on materials, the wall may not 
have sufficient plaster thickness to withstand the nor­
mal stresses within a building. The minimum total 
thickness for plaster on gypsum board (rock lath) is 1/2 
inch. On metal lath the minimum thickne ss is 5/8 inch ; 
and for wood lath it is about 3/4 to 7/8 inch. This mini­
mum plaster thickness may affect the thicknes s of trim 
projecting from the wall 's plane . 
Improper Curing 
Proper temperature and air circulation during curing 
are key factors in a durable plaster job. The ideal tem­
perature for plaster to cure is between 55- 70 degrees 
Fahrenheit. However, historic houses were sometimes 
plastered before window sashes were put in. There 
was no way to control temperature and humidit y. 
Dryouts, freezing, and sweat-outs. When temperatures 
were too hot, the plaster would return to its original con­
dition before it was mixed with water, that is, calcined 
gypsum. A plasterer would have to spray the wall with 
alum water to re-set the plaster. If freezing occurred be­
fore the plaster had set, the job would simply have to be 
re-done . If the windows were shut so that air could not 
circulate, the plaster was subject to sweat-out or rot. Since 
there is no cure for rotted plaster, the affected area had to 
be removed and replastered. 
Moisture 
Plaster applied to a masonry wall is vulnerable to water 
damage if the wall is constantly wet . When salts from 
the masonry substrate come in contact with water, they 
migrate to the surface of the plaster, appearing as dry 
bubbles or efflorescence. The source of the moisture 
must be eliminated before replastering the damaged 
area . 
Sources of Water Damage. Moisture problems occur for 
several reasons . Interior plumbing leaks in older 
houses are common . Roofs may leak, causing ceiling 
damage. Gutters and downspouts may also leak , pour­
ing rain water next to the building foundation. In brick 
buildings , dampness at the foundation level can wick 
up into the above-grade walls. Another common 
source of moisture is splash-back. When there is a 
paved area next to a masonry building , rainwater 
splashing up from the paving can dampen masonry 
walls . In both cases water travels through the masonr y 
and damages interior plaster . Coating s applied to the 
interior are not effective over the long run. The mois­
ture problem must be stopped on the outside of the 
wall. 
Repairing Historic Plaster 
Many of the problems described above may not be easy 
to remedy . If major structural problems are found to be 
the source of the plaster problem, the structural prob­
lem should be corrected. Some repairs can be made by 
removing only small sections of plaster to gain access. 
Minor structural problems that will not endanger the 
building can generally be ignored. Cosmetic damages 
from minor building movement, holes, or bowed areas 
can be repaired without the need for wholesale demoli­
tion . However, it may be necessary to remove deterio­
rated plaster caused by rising damp in order for 
masonry walls to dry out. Repairs made to a wet base 
will fail again. 
Canvassing Uneven Wall Surfaces 
Uneven wall surfaces, caused by previous patching or 
by partial wallpaper removal, are common in old 
houses . As long as the plaster is generally sound, cos­
metically unattractive plaster walls can be "wallpa­
pered" with strips of a canvas or fabric-like material. 
Historically, canvassing covered imperfections in the 
plaster and provided a stable base for decorative paint­
ing or wallpaper . 
Filling Cracks 
Hairline cracks in wall and ceiling plaster are not a 
serious cause for concern as long as the underlying 
plaster is in good condition. They may be filled easily 
with a patching material (see Patching Materials, page 
13 ). For cracks that re-open with seasonal humidity 
change, a slightly different method is used. First the 
crack is widened slightly with a sharp, pointed tool 
such as a crack widener or a triangular can opener. 
Then the crack is filled . For more persistent cracks, it 
may be necessary to bridge the crack with tape. In this 
instance, a fiberglass mesh tape is pressed into the 
patching material. After the first application of a quick­
setting joint compound dries , a second coat is used to 
cover the tape, feathering it at the edges . A third coat 
is applied to even out the surface , followed by light 
sanding. The area is cleaned off with a damp sponge , 
then dried to remove any leftover plaster residue or 
dust . 
When cracks are larger and due to structural move­
ment , repairs need to be made to the structural system 
before repairing the plaster. Then, the plaster on each 
side of the crack should be removed to a width of 
about 6 inches down to the lath. The debris is cleaned 
out, and metal lath applied to the cleared area, leaving 
the existing wood lath in place. The metal lath usually 
prevents further cracking . The crack is patched with an 
appropriate plaster in three layers (i.e., basecoats and 
finish coat) . If a crack seems to be expanding , a struc­
tural engineer should be consulted. 
7 

Replacing Delaminated Areas of the Finish Coat 
Sometimes the finish coat of plaster comes loose from 
the base coat (Fig. 9). In making this type of repair, the 
plasterer paints a liquid plaster-bonding agent onto the 
areas of base-coat plaster that will be replastered with a 
new lime finish coat . A homeowner wishing to repair 
small areas of delaminated finish coat can use the 
methods described in Patching Materials. 
Fig. 9. The smooth-troweled lime finish coat has delaminated from 
the brown coat underneath. This is another repair that can be un­
dertaken without further loss of the historic plaster. Photo: Marylee 
MacDonald. 
Patching Holes in Walls 
For small holes (less than 4 inches in diameter) that 
involve loss of the brown and finish coats, the repair is 
made in two applications . First, a layer of basecoat 
plaster is troweled in place and scraped back below the 
level of the existing plaster . When the base coat has set 
but not dried, more plaster is applied to create a 
smooth , level surface. One-coat patching is not gener­
ally recommended by plasterers because it tends to 
produce concave surfaces that show up when the work 
is painted. Of course, if the lath only had one coat of 
plaster originally, then a one-coat patch is appropriate 
(Fig. 10). 
For larger holes where all three coats of plaster are 
damaged or missing down to the wood lath, plasterers 
generally proceed along these lines. First, all the old 
plaster is cleaned out and any loose lath is re-nailed. 
Next, a water mist is sprayed on the old lath to keep it 
from twisting when the new, wet plaster is applied, or 
better still, a bonding agent is used. To provide more 
reliable keying and to strengthen the patch, expanded 
metal lath ( diamond mesh) should be attached to the 
wood lath with tie wires or nailed over the wood lath 
with lath nails (Fig. 11). The plaster is then applied in 
three layers over the metal lath, lapping each new layer 
of plaster over the old plaster so that old and new are 
evenly joined. This stepping is recommended to pro­
duce a strong, invisible patch (Fig. 12). Also, if a patch 
is made in a plaster wall that is slightly wavy, the con­
tour of the patch should be made to conform to the 
irregularities of the existing work. A flat patch will 
stand out from the rest of the wall. 
Fig. 10 (a) and (b). In this New Hampshire residence dating from the 1790s, the original plaster was a single coat of lime, sand, and horsehair ap­
plied aver split lath. A one-coat repair, in this case, is appropriate. To the left: a flat sheet of galvanized expanded metal lath is placed aver the patch 
area and an outline marked with a large soft lumber crayon. The metal lath is then cut to fit the hole and nailed to the lath. To the right: the edges of 
the original plaster and wood lath beneath have been thoroughly soaked with water. A steel trowel is used to apply the plaster in large, rough strokes. 
Finally, it will be scraped and smoothed off. Because only one coat of plaster is used, without a finish coat, a clean butt-joint is made with the original 
plaster. Photos: John Leeke. 
8 

The patch is stepped 
so that each new coat 
of plaster laps over 
the others 
2 x 4 studs 
I 
Fig. 13. This beaded ceiling in one of the bedrooms of the 1847 
Lockwood House, Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, is missing portions 
of plaster due to broken keys. This is attributable, in part, to deterio­
ration of the wood lath. Photo: Kaye Ellen Simonson . 
Fig. 11. Repairs are being made to the historic plaster in an early 
20th century residence in Tennessee. A fairly sizeable hole in three­
coat plaster extends to the wood lath. Expanded metal lath has been 
cut to fit the hole, then attached to the wood lath with a tie-wire. 
Two ready-mix gypsum base coats are in the process of being ap­
plied. After they set, the finish coat will be smooth-troweled gauged 
lime to match the existing wall. Photo: Walter Jowers. 
Fig. 12. This explains how a hole in historic plaster is repaired over 
the existing wood lath. First, metal lath is secured over the wood 
lath with a tie wire, then the new plaster is applied in three layers, 
"stepped" so that each new coat overlaps the old plaster to create a 
good adhesive bond. Drawing: Kaye Ellen Simonson. 
Patching Holes in Ceilings 
Hairline cracks and holes may be unsightly, but when 
portions of the ceiling come loose, a more serious prob­
lem exists (Fig. 13). The keys holding the plaster to the 
ceiling have probably broken. First, the plaster around 
the loose plaster should be examined. Keys may have 
deteriorated because of a localized moisture problem, 
poor quality plaster, or structural overloading; yet, the 
surrounding system may be intact. If the areas sur­
rounding the loose area are in reasonably good condi­
tion, the loose plaster can be reattached to the lath 
using flat-head wood screws and plaster washers 
(Fig. 14). To patch a hole in the ceiling plaster, metal lath 
is fastened over the wood lath; then the hole is filled 
with successive layers of plaster, as described above. 
• 
• 
Fig. 14. In a late 18th century house in Massachusetts, flat-head 
wood screws and plaster washers were used to reattach loose ceiling 
plaster to the wood lath. After the crack is covered with fiberglass 
mesh tape, both the taped crack and the plaster washers will be 
skim-coated with a patching material. Photo: John Obed Curtis. 
9 

Establishing New Plaster Keys 
If the back of the ceiling lath is accessible (usually from 
the attic or after removing floor boards), small areas of 
bowed-out plaster can be pushed back against the lath. 
A padded piece of plywood and braces are used to 
secure the loose plaster. After dampening the old lath 
and coating the damaged area with a bonding agent, a 
fairly liquid plaster mix (with a glue size retardant 
added) is applied to the backs of the lath, and worked 
into the voids between the faces of the lath and the 
back of the plaster. While this first layer is still damp, 
plaster-soaked strips of jute scrim are laid across the 
backs of the lath and pressed firmly into the first layer 
as reinforcement. The original lath must be secure, 
otherwise the weight of the patching plaster may 
loosen it. 
Loose, damaged plaster can also be re-keyed when the 
goal is to conserve decorative surfaces or wallpaper. Large 
areas of ceilings and walls can be saved. This method 
requires the assistance of a skilled conservator-it is not a 
repair technique used by most plasterers. The conservator 
injects an acrylic adhesive mixture through holes drilled 
in the face of the plaster ( or through the lath from be­
hind, when accessible). The loose plaster is held firm 
with plywood bracing until the adhesive bonding mixture 
sets. When complete, gaps between the plaster and lath 
are filled, and the loose plaster is secure (Fig. 15). 
Fig. 15. When ceiling repairs are made with wet plaster or with an 
injected adhesive mixture, the old loose plaster must be supported 
with a plywood brace until re-keying is complete. Photo: John Leeke. 
10 
Replastering Over the Old Ceiling 
If a historic ceiling is too cracked to patch or is sagging 
(but not damaged from moisture), plasterers routinely 
keep the old ceiling and simply relath and replaster 
over it. This repair technique can be used if lowering 
the ceiling slightly does not affect other ornamental 
features. The existing ceiling is covered with 1x3-inch 
wood furring strips, one to each joist, and fastened 
completely through the old lath and plaster using a 
screw gun. Expanded metal lath or gypsum board lath 
is nailed over the furring strips. Finally, two or three 
coats are applied according to traditional methods. 
Replastering over the old ceiling saves time, creates 
much less dust than demolition, and gives added fire 
protection. 
When Damaged Plaster Cannot be 
Repaired-Replacement Options 
Partial or complete removal may be necessary if plaster 
is badly damaged, particularly if the damage was 
caused by long-term moisture problems. Workers un­
dertaking demolition should wear OSHA-approved 
masks because the plaster dust that flies into the air 
may contain decades of coal soot. Lead, from lead­
based paint, is another danger. Long-sleeved clothing 
and head-and-eye protection should be worn. Asbes­
tos, used in the mid-twentieth century as an insulating 
and fireproofing additive, may also be present and 
OSHA-recommended precautions should be taken. If 
plaster in adjacent rooms is still in good condition, 
walls should not be pounded-a small trowel or pry 
bar is worked behind the plaster carefully in order to 
pry loose pieces off the wall. 
When the damaged plaster has been removed, the 
owner must decide whether to replaster over the exist­
ing lath or use a different system. This decision should 
be based in part on the thickness of the original plaster 
and the condition of the original lath. Economy and 
time are also valid considerations. It is important to 
ensure that the wood trim around the windows and 
doors will have the same "reveal" as before. (The "re­
veal" is the projection of the wood trim from the sur­
face of the plastered wall). A lath and plaster system 
that will give this required depth should be selected. 
Replastering-Alternative Lath Systems for New 
Plaster 
Replastering old wood lath. When plasterers work with 
old lath, each lath strip is re-nailed and the chunks of 
old plaster are cleaned out. Because the old lath is dry, 
it must be thoroughly soaked before applying the base 
coats of plaster, or it will warp and buckle; further­
more, because the water is drawn out, the plaster will 
fail to set properly. As noted earlier, if new metal lath is 
installed over old wood lath as the base for new plaster, 

many of these problems can be avoided and the his­
toric lath can be retained (Fig. 16). The ceiling should 
still be sprayed unless a vapor barrier is placed behind 
the metal lath. 
Replastering over new metal lath . An alternative to re­
using the old wood lath is to install a different lathing 
system . Galvanized metal lath is the most expensive , 
but also the most reliable in terms_ of longevity, stabil­
ity, and proper keying. When lathing over open joists, 
the plasterer should cover the joists with kraft paper or 
a polyethylene vapor barrier . Three coats of wet plaster 
are applied consecutively to form a solid, monolithic 
unit with the lath . The scratch coat keys into the metal 
lath; the second, or brown, coat bonds to the scratch 
coat and builds the thickness; the third, or finish coat, 
consists of lime putty and gauging plaster. 
Replastering over new rock lath. It is also possible to 
use rock lath as a plaster base. Plasterers may need to 
remove the existing wood lath to maintain the wood­
work's reveal. Rock lath is a 16x36-inch 1/2-inch thick 
gypsum-core panel covered with absorbent paper with 
gypsum crystals in the paper. The crystals in the paper 
bond the wet plaster and anchor it securely . This type 
of lath requires two coats of new plaster-the brown 
coat and the finish coat. The gypsum lath itself takes 
the place of the first, or scratch, coat of plaster . 
Painting New Plaster 
The key to a succe ssful paint job is proper drying of 
the plaster . Histo rically, lime p lasters w ere allowed to 
cure for at least a year befor e the w alls were painted or 
papered . With modern ventilation , plaster cure s in a 
shorter time ; however , fresh gypsum plaster with a 
lime finish coat should still be perfectl y dry before 
paint is applied-or the paint may peel. (Plasterers 
traditionally used the "match test" on new plaster. If a 
match would light by striking it on the new plaster 
surface , the plaster was considered dry.) Today it is 
best to allow new plaster to cure two to three week s. A 
good alkaline-resistant primer , specifically formulated 
for new plaster , should then be used. A compatible 
latex or oil-based paint can be used for the final coat . 
A Modern Replacement System 
Veneer Plaster. Using one of the traditional lath and 
plaster systems provides the highest qualit y plaster job. 
However , in some cases , budget and time cons ider­
ations may lead the owner to consider a less expensive 
replacement alternative. Designed to reduce the cost of 
materials, a more recent lath and plaster system is less 
expensive than a two-or-three coat plaster job, but onl y 
slightly more expensive than drywall. This plaster sys­
tem is called veneer plaster . 
Fig. 16. In the restoration of a ca. 1830s house in Maine, split-board lath has been covered with expanded metal lath in preparation for new 
coats of plaster. This method permits the early lath to be saved whzle the metal lath, wzth zts superior keying, serves as reinforcement. Photo· 
National Park Service files. 
11 

the system uses gypsum-core panels that are the same 
size as drywall (4x8 feet), and specially made for ve­
neer plaster . They can be installed over furring chan­
nels to masonry walls or over old wood lath walls and 
ceilings. Known most commonly as "blueboard;' the 
panelsare covered with a special paper compatible 
with veneer plaster. Joints between the 4-foot wide 
sheets are taped with fiberglass mesh, which is bedded 
in the veneer plaster. After the tape is bedded, a thin, 
1/16-inch coat of high-strength veneer plaster is applied 
to the entire wall surface. A second veneer layer can be 
used as the "finish" coat, or the veneer plaster can be 
covered with a gauged lime finish-coat-the same coat 
that covers ordinary plaster (Fig. 17). 
Fig. 17. This contemporary plasterer is mixing a lime finish coat in 
much the same way as America's earlier artisans. The ring consists 
of lime putty; the white powder inside is gauging plaster. After the 
mixture 1s blended, a steel trowel will be used to apply it. It should 
be noted that a traditional lime finish coat can be applied over a 
veneer plaster base coat to approximate the look of historic plaster 
walls and ceilings. Photo: Marylee MacDonald. 
Although extremely thin, a two-coat veneer plaster 
system has a 1,500 psi rating and is thus able to with­
stand structural movements in a building or surface 
abrasio_n._ With either a veneer finish or a gauged lime­
putty finish coat, the room will be ready for painting 
almost immediately. When complete, the troweled or 
textured wall surface looks more like traditional plaster 
than drywall. 
The thin profile of the veneer system has an added 
benefit, especial!y for owners of uninsulated masonry 
buildings . Insulation can be installed between the 
pieces of furring channel used to attach blueboard to 
masonry walls. This can be done without having to 
furr out the window and door jambs. The insulation 
plus the veneer system will result in the same thick­
ness as the original plaster. Occupants in the rooms 
will be more comfortable because they will not be los­
ing heat to cold wall surfaces. 
Summary 
The National Park Service recommends retaining his­
tone plaster if at all possible. Plaster is a significant part 
of the "fabric" of the building.Much of the building's 
history 1s documented in the layers of paint and paper 
found covering old plaster. For buildings with decora­
tive painting, conservation of historic flat plaster is 
even more important. Consultation with the National 
Park Service, with State Historic Preservation Officers 
local preservation organizations, historic preservation' 
consultants, or with the Association for Preservation 
Technology is recommended. Where plaster cannot be 
repaired or conserved using one of the approaches 
outlined in this Brief, documentation of the layers of 
wallpaper and paint should be undertaken before re­
moving the historic plaster. This information may be 
needed to complete a restoration plan. 
12 

PatchingMaterials
Plasterers generallyuse ready-mix base-coat plaster for 
patchiespeciallywhere large holes need to be filled. 
Theready-mix plaster contains gypsum and aggregate 
in proper pproportions. The plasterer only needs tu add 
Another mix plasterers use to patch cracks or small 
holes, or for finish-coat repair, is a "high gauge" lime 
putty (50 percent limlime; 50 percent gauging plaster). 
Thismaterial will produce a white, smooth patch. It is 
especially suitable for surface repairs. 
Although propertyowners cannot duplicate the years 
of accumulated knowledge and craft skills of a profes­
sional plasterer, there are materials that can be used for 
do-it-yourself repairs. For example, fine cracks can be 
filled with an an-purpose drywall jjoint compound . For 
bridging larger cracks using fiberglasstape, a home­
owner can use a "quick-setting" joint compound. This 
compoundhas a fast drying titime-60, 90, or 120 min­
utes. Quick-setting joint compound dries because of a 
chemical reaction, not because of water evaporation. It 
shrinks less than all-purpose joint compound and has 
much the same wrokability as ready-nux base-coat 
plaster. However, because quick-set joint compounds
are hard to sand, they should only be used to bed tape 
or to fill large holes. All-purpose joint compound 
should g, espbe used as the final coat prior to sanding. 
Homeowners may also want to try using a ready -mix 
perlited base-coat plaster for scratch and brown coat 
repair. The plaster can be hand-mixed in small quanti­
ties, but bagged ready-mix should be protected from 
ambient moisture. A "mill-mixed pre-gauged" lime 
finish coat plaster can also be used by nomeowners. A 
base coat utilizing pperlite or other lightweight aggre-
gates should only be used for making small repairs 
(less than 4 ft. patches). For large-scale repairs and 
entire room re-plastering, see the precautions in Table 1 
for using perlite. 
Homeowners may see a material sold as "patching 
plaster" or "plaster of Paris" in hardware stores. This 
dry powder cannot be used by itself for plaster repairs. 
It must be combined with lime to create a successful 
patching mixture. 
When using a lime finish coat for any repair, wait 
longer to paint, or use an alkaline-resistant primer. 
TABLE 1 
REPLASTERING 
Selected Plaster Bases/Compatible Basecoats and Finish Coats 
Traditional Plaster Bases Compatible Basecoats Compatible Finish Coats 
OLD WOOD LATH gypsum /sand plaster 
gypsum /perlite plaster 2 
lime putty /gauging plaster 
lime putty /gauging plaster 
METAL LATH gypsum/sand plaster1gh strength 
gypsum/perlite plaster 2 
lime putty/gauging plaster 
lime putty/gauging plaster 
GYPSUM (ROCK) LATH PANELS gypsum/sand plaster 
gypsum/perlite plaster 2 
lime putty/gauging plaster 
lime putty /gauging plaster 
UNGLAZED BRICK/CLAY TILE gypsum /perlite plaster 
(masonry type) 
2 lime putty /gauging plaster 
Mod ern Plast er Base Compatible Basecoat Compatible Finish Coat 
GYPSUM CORE VENEER PANELS 
(BLUE BOARD) 
veneer plaster veneer plaster 
or 
lime putty /gauging plaster 
1 On traditional bases (wood, metal , and rock lath) , the thickness or base coat plaster is one of the most important elements or a good plaster job Grounds should be set to obtain the following minimum 
plaster thicknesse s: (1) Over rock lath -1/2" (2) Over brick, clay tile, or other masonry -5/8" (3) Over metal lath, measured from face of lath-5/8" (4) Over wood lath-7 /8". In no case shou ld the total 
plaster thickne ss be less than 1/2". The allowance for the finish coat is approximately 1/16" which requires the base coat to be 7/16" for 1/2" grounds. This is a minimum base coat thickness on rock lath . 
The standard for other masonry units and metal lath is 5/8" thick, including the finish. Certain types of construction or fire ratings may require an increase in plaster thickness (and/or an increase in the 
gypsum to aggregate ration) but never a thinn er application of plaster than recommended above. Job experience indicates that thin applications of plaster often evidence cracking where normal applica­
tions to standard ground s do not . This conditi on is a direct result of the inability of thin section areas to resist external forces as adequately as thicker, normal applications of plaster. 
2 Perlite is a lightweight aggregate often used in gypsum plaster in place of sand. It performs well in cold weather and has a slightly better insulating value than sand. In a construction with metal lath, 
perlite aggregate is not recommend ed in the basecoat except under a sand or "float'' finish. When gypsum/perlite basecoats are used over any other base (i.e., wood, rock lath, brick) and the finish coat is 
to be a "white" finish coat (smooth-troweled gauged lime putty) it is necessary to add fine silica sand or perlite fines to the finish coat. This measure prevents cracking of the "white" finish coat due to 
differential shrinkage . 
13 

Plaster 1enns 
Scratch coat. The first base coat put on wood or metal lath. 
The wet plaster is "scratched" with a scarifier or comb to 
provide a rough surface so the next layer of base coat will 
stick to it. 
Brown coat. The brown coat is the second application of wet, 
base-coat plaster with wood lath or metal systems. With 
gypsum board lath (rock lath, plasterboard), it is the only 
base coat needed. 
Finish coat. Pure lime, mixed with about 35 percent gauging 
plaster to help it harden, is used for the very thin surface 
finish of the plaster wall. Fine sand can be added for a 
sanded finish coat. 
Casing Bead. Early casing bead was made of wood. In the 
19th century, metal casing beads were sometimes used 
around fireplace projections, and door and window 
openings. Like a wood ground, they indicate the proper 
thickness for the plaster. 
Corner Bead. Wire mesh with a rigid metal spline used on 
outside comers. Installing the comer bead plumb is 
important. 
Cornerite. Wire mesh used on inside comers of adjoining 
walls and ceilings. It keeps comers from cracking. 
Ground. Plasterers use metal or wood strips around the edges 
of doors and windows and at the bottom of walls. These 
grounds help keep the plaster the same thickness and 
provide a stopping edge for the plaster. Early plaster work, 
however, did not use grounds. On early buildings, the 
woodwork was installed and primed before plastering began . 
Some time in the early 19th century, a transition occurred, 
and plasterers applied their wall finish before woodwork was 
installed. 
Gypsum. Once mined from large gypsum quarries near Paris 
(thus the name plaster of Paris), gypsum in its natural form is 
calcium sulfate. When calcined (or heated), one-and-a-half 
water molecules are driven off, leaving a hemi-hydrate of 
calcium sulfate. When mixed with water, it becomes calcium 
sulfate again. While gypsum was used in base-coat plaster 
from the 1890s on, it has always been used in finish coat and 
decorative plaster. For finish coats, gauging plaster was added 
to lime putty; it causes the lime to harden. Gypsum is also 
the ingredient in moulding plaster, a finer plaster used to 
create decorative mouldings in ornamental plasterwork. 
Lime. Found in limestone formations or shell mounds, 
naturally occurring lime is calcium carbonate. When heated, 
it becomes calcium oxide. After water has been added, it 
becomes calcium hydroxide. This calcium hydroxide reacts 
with carbon dioxide in the air to recreate the original calcium 
carbonate. 
Screed.Screeds are strips of plaster run vertically or 
horizontally on walls or ceilings. They are used to plumb and 
straighten uneven walls and level ceilings. Metal screeds are 
used to separate different types of plaster finishes or to 
separate lime and cement plasters. 
Reading List 
Ashurst , John and Ashurst, Nicola. Practical Building Conservation, 
English Heritage Technical Handbook, Volume 3. Mortars, Plasters and 
Renders. New York: Halsted Press, 1988. 
Gypsum Construct10n Handbook. Chicago: United States Gypsum 
Company, 1986. 
Hodgson, Frederick Thomas. Plaster and Plastering: Mortars and 
Cements, How to Make and How to Use. New York: The Industrial 
Publication Company, 1901. 
Jowers, Walter. "Plas ter Patching, Part II." Restoration Primer. New 
England Builder, November, 1987, pp. 41-43. 
Leeke, John. "Problems with Plaster, Part One." Landmarks Observer, 
Vol. 12. March/April, 1985., pp. 10, 14. Also "Prob lems with Plaster, 
Part Two." Vol. U., May/June, 1985, p. 12.
_____ . "Saving Irreplaceable Plaster." Old House Journal. Vol. 
XV, No. 6, November/December, 1987, pp. 51-55. 
McKee, Harley J., FAIA. Introduction to Early American Masonry-Stone, 
Brick, Mortar, and Plaster. New York: National Trust for Historic 
Preservation and Columbia University, 1973. 
Phillips, Morgan . "Adhesives for the Reattachment of Loose Plaster," 
A.P. T. Bulletin, Vol. XII, No. 2, 1980, pp. 37-63 . 
Poore, Patricia. "The Basics of Plaster Repair." Old House Journal, Vol. 
16, No. 2, March/April, 1988, pp. 29-35. 
Shivers, Natalie. Walls and Molding: How to Care for Old and Historic 
Wood and Plaster. Washington, D.C.: National Trust for Historic 
Preservation, 1989. 
Stagg, W. D. and 8. Pegg. Plastering: A Craftsman's Encyclopedia. 
Woodstock , New York: Beekman Publishers, 1976. 
Van den Branden, F. and Thomas L. Hartsell . Plastering Skills. 
Homewood, Illinois: American Technical Publishers, Inc., 1984. 
Weaver, Martin . "Nuts and Bolts: Properly Plastered." Canadian 
Heritage. Aug./Sept., 1981, pp. 34-36. Also "Nuts and Bolts: Fixing 
Plaster." Oct., 1981, pp. 33-35. 
Acknowledgements 
Preservation Brief 21 was based on an article in Old House Restoration on 
repairing historic plaster published by the University of Illinois at Urbana­
Champaign, 1984. Kay D. Weeks, Preservation Assistance Division, Technical 
Preservation Services Branch, expanded the article and made substantial 
contributions to its development as a Brief. Special thank s go to the technical 
experts in the field who reviewed and comment upon the draft manuscript: 
Andrew Ladygo (Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities) , 
David Flaharty, Gilbert Wolf (National Plastering Industries), Michael 
Kempster, and Walter Jowers. Insightful comments were offered by the 
Technical Preservation Services Branch which is directed by H. Ward Jandl. 
Finally, staff member Karen Kummer, Small Homes Council-Building Research 
Council, University of Illinois, provided invaluable production assistance. 
The publicalion has beenprepared pursuant to the National Historic PreservationAct of 1966, as 
amended.PreservationBriefs 21 was developedunder the tee/mica/ editorship of Lee H. Nelson, FAIA,
Chief, PreservationAssistance Division, National Park Service, Department of the Interior, P.O. Box
37127, Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. Commentson the usefulness of this infom1ation are welcomed 
and may be sent to Mr. Nelson al the above address. This publication is not copyrighted and can be 
reproduced without penalty. Normalprocedures for credit to the author and the National Park Service 
are appreciated. October, 1989 
For sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington , DC 20402-9328 
14 