12 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
The Preservation of 
Historic Pigmented 
Structural Glass 
(Vitrolite and Carrara Glass) 
U.S. Department of the Interior , National Park Service 
Rocky Mountain Regional Office , Cultural Resources Division 
The dramatic growth and popularization of the early 20th 
century Art Deco, Streamline, and Moderne architectural 
styles were fueled, in part, by technological advances in the 
building materials industry. New products, such as 
stainless steel and plastics, enlarged the realm of 
architectural design. The more traditional materials, on the 
other hand, quickly developed fresh, innovative forms and 
uses. For example, the architectural glass industry became 
especially creative, introducing a series of new glass 
products known as structural glass. Used predominately 
for wall surfacing, these now familiar products included 
glass building blocks, reinforced plate glass, and pigmented 
structural glass. Pigmented structural glass, popularly 
known under such trade names as Carrara Glass, Sani 
Onyx ( or Rox), and Vitrolite, revolutionized the business 
and rapidly became a favorite building material of the 
period's architects and designers. 
The versatility of pigmented structural glass contributed 
to its popularity. Not only could the material be applied to 
both the exterior and interior, the glass could be 
sculptured, cut, laminated, curved, colored, textured , and 
illuminated. Often applied directly over existing 
architecture to remodel older buildings - as well as in new 
construction-a veneer of pigmented structural glass had 
the ability to define a building's architectural character as 
new and up-to-date. Pigmented structural glass also 
complemented the period's silvery metal accents and 
affinity for slick, shiny surfaces. A successful application of 
a structural glass veneer often resulted in a streamlined 
look characteristic of the Art Moderne architectural style. 
As tastes changed and production costs rose, however , 
pigmented structural glass fell into disfavor and disuse by 
mid-20th century. With today's rekindled interest in the 
Art Deco, Art Moderne, and Streamline styles the 
preservation and replacement of pigmented structural glass 
have now become an integral part of many rehabilitation 
projects, particularly in relation to commercial storefronts. 
This brief, then, was developed in order to address some of 
the major deterioration problems associated with 
pigmented structural glass and to recommend methods for 
maintaining, repairing, and - if necessary - replacing 
damaged or missing pieces of pigmented structural glass. 
Early Manufacture and Use of Pigmented 
Structural Glass 
Although pigmented structural glass enjoyed widespread 
popularity from the beginning of the Great Depression to 
the outbreak of World War II, its origins can be traced to 
the turn of the century. In 1900, the Marietta 
Manufacturing Company claimed to be the first producer 
of pigmented structural glass, rolling the first sheet of a 
"substitute for marble," Sani Onyx. Penn-American Plate 
Glass Company quickly joined its ranks, manufacturing 
white and black Carrara Glass around 1906. Penn­
American Plate Glass no doubt selected the name 
"Carrara" for the white glass's close resemblance to the 
white marble of the Carrara quarries of Italy. Shortly 
thereafter, Libby-Owens-Ford Glass began production of 
their own version called Vitrolite. 
Initially , Sani Onyx was produced for such utilitarian 
purposes as refrigerator linings. Manufacturers perceived 
the glass as a practical, easily cleaned, and sanitary 
product. Its uses, however , expanded rapidly. By the 
second decade of the 20th century, consumers viewed 
pigmented structural glass as an inexpensive substitute for 
marble counter tops, table tops, wainscoting, and restroom 
partitions. The first large-scale interior architectural 
application of pigmented structural glass was in the 
Woolworth Building (1912- I 913) when Architect Cass 
Gilbert sheathed the restrooms with Carrara Glass. Later 
in the decade, the decorative possibilities of the glass 
received even more attention. 
As the century progressed, architects began to substitute 
pigmented structural glass for traditional building 
materials in new construction. Large expanses of 
architectural detailing such as sleek door surrounds , 
polished interior lobbies, and striking commercial 
storefronts became expected and familiar features within 
new, expanding downtown business districts in the 1920s 
and 1930s (see fig. 1). 
In addition, designers quickly found pigmented 
structural glass to be an increasingly popular modernizing 
material for older and out-of-date buildings. As a result, 
storefronts became a favorite subject for "modernization." 
New Deal programs, including low-rate insured Federal 

\1()"11N(I 
¢'NINO(J\; 
!>l(,N 
I \ '\ ~ 
,, .. , .. ~·~. ' ~ 
-=.J...J::..1..1-.L.J..~W L 
Housing Administration loans in combination with a 
"Modernize Main Street" competition sponsored by the 
Architectural Record and Libby-Owens-Ford Glass , 
stimulated the remodeling fervor. By 1940 , pigmented 
structural glass veneers had become synonymous with the 
"modern look ." The numerous pigmented structural glass 
storefronts surviving today are testimony to the popularity 
of these remodelings. 
Fig. I. The Club Mod erne, Ana conda, Montana , refl ects the excepti onal 
historic detailing associated with pigment ed stru ctural glass- po /ished­
mirror finish , rounded corners, and h orizontal p olychrome band s. Photo: 
Jet Low e, Historic Am erican En gineering Record. 
The winners of the 1935 "Modernize Main Street" 
competition illustrated what many considered good 
contemporary design . The judges of the competition, 
including Albert Kahn, William Lescaze , and John Root, 
awarded architects who incorporated "simplicity ," 
"economy," "unbroken horizontal lines ," "expressed 
function," and "pure colors contrasting light and shadow " 
in their designs . Simplicity of design often translated into 
curvilinear recessed entries which protected consumers 
from inclement weather - eliminating cumbersome canvas 
or metal awnings - and providing additional display 
window space (see fig . 2). The 
 first and second stories of 
many 19th century storefronts had disappeared by 1940 , 
hidden behind simple, yet striking, modern pigmented 
structural glass veneers. 
Although the glass was originally produced only in 
white, 
the range of colors from which architects could 
choose soon included black, beige, and ivory. By the 
1930s, more exotic colors such as tropic green , forest 
green, robin blue, suntan, and jade were offered by the 
principal manufacturers in addition to the stock colors of 
gray, yellow, and tan. Agate or marbleized treatments in 
fanciful imitation of the "real" materials were also 
available. The back surface was occasionally silvered to 
give a rich mirror finish (see fig. 3) . Most of these colors 
and 
finishes were available in standard thicknesses from 
11 / 32 inch to 1-1 / 4 inches. The glass's smooth exterior 
was obtained either by fire polishing during the normal 
glass fabrication process or by mechanical polishing when 
a high mirror finish was desired. In both cases, the 
smooth , slick, reflective surface made the material intensely 
popular with architects or designers who sought the 
"modern look ." 
2 
Although focusing on exterior applications , architects 
also utilized pigmented structural glass for interior spaces 
(see fig. 4) , replacing the porous and more expensive 
marble and offering a highly polished , uniform visual 
appearance in keeping with design trends of the 1920s and 
1930s. Other 
uses of the material included small , high-style 
installations in hotels , office lobbies, bars, and lounges (see 
figs. 5 and 6) . 
Fig. 2. The ex tensive use of rich, black Vi trolite in thi s design impressed 
the j udges of the /935 "Modernize Main Str eet" co mpetition, and the 
architects wer e aw arded fi rst pri ze. Co urtesy, The Architectural Re cord . 
Fig. 3. The Russell St over Candies , Nashville, Tennessee, s hows the 
company's historic use of d eep , mirrored violet pigmented stru ctural glass 
storefronts. Photo: Douglas A. Yorke, Jr ., AJA. 

Fig. 4. Whire pigmenred srrucrural glass was used in rhis remodeling of rhe 
U.S . Custom House, D enver, Colorado. Pharo: Gregory D. K endrick. 
Fig. 5. Genr/emen's Loung e, Hermirage Hot el, Nashville, Tennessee, 
presenrs a d ynami c v isual arran gemenr of horizon/al bla ck and green 
pigmenred srructural glass pan els. Pharo: D ouglas A . Yorke, Jr .. A/A . 
Historic Material and Installation Specifications 
Early 20th century advertisers often promoted pigmented 
structural glass as a new panacea of the building mate rials 
industry . Their claims were not without substance . Unlike 
masonry units such as terra cotta , pigmented structu ral 
glass would not warp , swell, or craze . Nor was the glass 
highly susceptible to staining , fading , or burning. Like 
most glass products , it was imperv ious to moisture and 
could be easily maintained and usuall y cleaned with a 
damp cloth. Adaptable to a wide range of uses , the glass 
could be colored and textured to attain brilliant visual 
qualities. Perhaps most important , when compared t o 
marble , the glass was easier to handle , less expensive to 
use, and simpler to install. 
The key to proper preservation and repair of both 
interior and exterior pigmented structural glass is a 
thorough understanding of the original material 
specifications and detailed installation techniques. 
Fortunately , these specifications and techniques rema in 
virtuall y unchanged from their first early 20th centur y 
application (see fig. 7). 
Exterior Installation 
Essentially, the glass veneer was applied to a dry , smooth, 
and solid masonry or plaster-on-masonry substrate using 
an asphaltic masonry adhesive. Manufacturers 
recommended against affixing the glass directly to wood , 
either lath or paneling. Glass thicknesses of 11 / 32 inc h or 
7 / 16 inch were most common for commercial storefronts. 
Shelf angles-18-gauge brass or stainless steel , 3 inch 
square with a 
1 / 2 inch leg fastened directl y to the masonry 
substrate - were used to provide additional support. 
Inserted along the bottom edge of the panels , they 
supported every second course of glass and were thus 
spaced not more than 3 feet apart. Horizontally , the angles 
were spaced approximately one ever y 18 inches with at 
least two used for any piece. 
Actual installation involved apply ing daubs 
(2 inches to 3 
inches in diameter) of hot asphalt-based mastic adhesive to 
the glass and then attaching the glass directly to the 
substrate. Manufacturers of the mastic recommended 
coverage of about 50 percent of the glass panels. A full 3 
inch width of mastic coverage was recommended around 
detail edges or any holes in the panels. The mastic was 
applied in a molten state after being melted in an electric 
"hot cup." (Hot cups are still manufactured for this 
specific purpose and are made to hold enough mastic for a 
single daub.) 
The next step in the installation procedure was to push 
the glass panel onto the masonry substrate . Every 
horizontal seam and abutment was separated by a I / 16 
inch thick adhesive cork tape recessed from the front 
surface by 1 / 8 inch. Vertical edges were kept apart at a 
uniform I / 32 inch . In either case, the joint opening was 
then buttered with a joint cement which was colored to 
match the surrounding glass. 
Proper detailing at the edges of the veneer could prolong 
the life 
of the pigmented structural glass. For example , to 
prevent possible chipping and cracking of the glass where 
it met the sidewalk , a cushion of neoprene or leather was 
provided and the exposed surface then caulked (see fig . 8). 
The side edges of the glass were detailed in a variety of 
methods 
or the glass simply terminated at the desired 
location with the ends ground smooth (see fig. 9). In either 
case, the 
edge was secured to the substrate with a mastic 
and the joints or void filled with joint cement or caulking 
compound . Where the edge of the glass abutted another 
material , such as the brickwork of a neighboring 
storefront , the glass was held back 1 / 8 inch to I / 4 inch 
from the adjacent material. The gap was usually filled with 
pliable caulk to permit expansion and to prevent moisture 
migration (see figs. 10 and 11). 
Interior Installation 
Construction methods 
and materials were quite similar 
for interior and exterior uses of pigmented structural glass. 
Most interior veneers were the same thickness and 
approximate dimension of those used for exteriors . Minor 
differences did , however, exist. For example, joints 
between the pieces of glass could be reduced to little more 
3 

mastic 
glass 
1oin1 
cement 
cork 
tape 
mast ic 
lla:!111111--glass 
shelf angle 
Basic exterior construction details !Dwgs: D Beals for Building Conservauon Technology! 
Fig. 6. Owners of the Hadley Dean Glass Company Warehouse. St. Loui s, Missouri, preserved the unusual po(ychrome pigmented structural gla ss 
interior lobby. Photo : Paul Marshall. 
Fig. 7. In the installation process, hot asphaltic mastic was applied to 
the ribbed or textured back of each glass panel. The panel was then 
pressed against a masonry wall and supported by metal shelf angles which 
were usually bolted to the masonry substrate on 3-foot centers. The joints 
between the panels were filled with cork tape or joint cement. The end 
result was a modular veneer of clean, uniform glass panels . Courtesy, 
Bulletin for the Association for Preservation Technology, /3 (198/). 
than hairline cracks for interior applications due to the 
limited thermal expansion of the substrate. On the other 
hand, the use of glass as an indoor ceiling material created 
unusual installation requirements. 
Ceiling slabs 11 / 32 inch in thickness were attached to 
I 
inch x 4 inch wood furring strips with mastic (a full 4 
inch width coverage was recommended around the edge of 
the panels). Brass wood screws and small rosettes, 
protected with felt exterior covers, provided additional 
support (see fig. 12). 
As a nonveneer material, pigmented structural glass was 
generally used for counter and table tops and restroom 
partitions. Counter tops presented little or no unusual 
installation problems. Partitions, however, often involved 
formidable installation challenges; for example, enormous 
glass panels, weighing up to 16.25 pounds per square foot 
and measuring I inch to 1-1 / 4 inches in thickness were 
used . The desired thickness was obtained by cementing two 
7 / 16 inch slabs together with mastic. To accommodate this 
heavy yet fragile load, a reinforced support and connection 
system was developed which utilized metal sleeves, iron 
anchors, and steel straps bolted directly into the glass 
panels. 
Reasons for D amage 
Although deterioration of pigmented structural glass itself 
is rare or unheard of, failure of the mechanical support 
system which bonds the glass modules to the wall is almost 
always the cause of failure, cracking, slipping, or loss . 
Therefore, damage is usually attributable to one or a 
combination of the following: 
4 
• Deterioration of the Joint Cement 
• Hardening and Failure of the Mastic Adhesive 
• Impact Due to Accident / Vandalism 
Deterioration of the Joint Cement 
Historically , the cement joint between glass panels was 
intended to provide an integrated, watertight surface. 
Unfortunately, the traditional joint cement did not possess 
a long lifespan. Cracked or open joints have been the 
consequence, usually resulting from improper original 
application of the cement or from the normal thermal 
expansion and contraction cycle associated with 

Sections at sidewalk level. 
Mitered Bullnose Square 
Exterior corners. 
adjoining building pointing 
('/ 11 • minimum) 
Termination details . 
weathering. Cracked or open cement Joints then 
accelerated deterioration of the masonry substrate and / or 
the mastic adhesive bond by allowing water to penetrate 
the internal system. Water entering the system weakened 
the bond between the mastic and the masonry substrate or 
rusted the anchoring shelves. This caused the individual 
glass panels to gradually slip away from their original 
positions and fall. 
Fig. 8. Courtesy, Bulletin for the Association for Preservation 
Technology, 13 (1981) . 
Fig. 9. Court;sy, Bulletin for the Association for Preservation 
Technology, 13 (1981 ). 
Fig. 10 . Courtesy, Bulletin for the Association for Preservation 
Technology, 13 (1981 ). 
Hardening and Failure of Mastic Adhesive 
Failure due to long-term hardening of the original mastic 
adhesive has accounted for a substantial loss of pigme nted 
structural glass panels. The petroleum-based mastics 
normally possessed a 30 to 40 year lifespan. Once 
flexibility of the adhesive is lost , the glass panels become 
vulnerable to slippage and eventual destruction (see 
fig. 13). 
Impact Due to Accident / Vandalism 
Glass breakage through impact is virtually impossible to 
prevent. The material is, by its nature , vulnerable to loss 
through vandalism or accident (see fig . 14). 
Maintenance and Repair of Pigmented 
Structural Glass 
The maintenance of a dry masonry substrate , mastic, and 
metal anchors is essential to the longevity of a pigmented 
structural glass veneer. Thus , repointing cracked or open 
joints - particularly at ground level where glass abuts 
concrete - and caulking of slightly cracked glass panels is 
an ongoing concern. Where drainage to conduct water 
away from the wall is faulty or insufficient , the problem 
should be immediately corrected . For example , roof 
flashing, downspouts, and gutters should be repaired or 
new systems installed . 
Repair of Cement Joints 
Cracked or open cement joints, particularly in exterior 
applications, 
can present a serious preservation problem 
because they permit water to penetrate the internal system 
of a pigmented structural glass veneer. Rusting metal 
anchors or deteriorating mastic adhesive may be the result. 
Although the traditional joint cements are easily colored 
and may be neatly applied , they are no longer 
recommended for the repair of pigmented structural glass 
because their longevity is limited. Present-day silicone 
compounds, on the other hand , offer flexibility, relative 
impermeability to moisture, ease of installation, and a long 
lifespan. The proper color match can be obtained by 
mixing the compound with tinted polyester resins. 
Patching Glass Cracks 
Any glass panel that can be repaired should not be 
replaced . Thus, the decision to repair or replace damaged 
historic pigmented structural glass panels always needs to 
be made on a case-by-case basis. In many instances , the 
damage may be so minor or the likelihood of finding 
suitable replacement glass panels so small that repairing, 
reanchoring , and / or stabilizing the damaged glass is the 
only prudent choice. 
A slightly chipped or cracked pigmented structural glass 
panel left unrepaired will inevitably become a source of 
water infiltration. Careful patching of those cracks with an 
appropriately colored, flexible caulk will deter moisture 
penetration while still allowing expansion and contraction 
with temperature fluctuations. Although patching is by no 
5 

•
flas~::edmetal 
10ml 
cement 
mas t,c ~ 
~et:hods of finishing tops o( glass. 
Ceiling cons1ructton. 
means a permanent solution, it will help to protect the 
material from further damage due to the effects of weather 
(see fig. 15). 
Fig. 11. Courtesy, Bulletin for the Association for Preservation 
Technology, 13 (1981). 
6 
Fig. 12. Courtesy, Bulletin for the Association for Preservation 
Technology, 13 (1981). 
Fig. 13. The pigmented structural glass panel has separated and fallen, 
exposing the substrate and hardened, brittle daubs of mastic. Photo: 
Douglas A . Yorke, Jr., A/A. 
Fig. 14. The vast majority of damaged pigmented structural glass panels 
are found at ground level, the result of vandalism or improper caulking 
between the glass panel and the concrete sidewalk. Photo: Thomas 
Keohan . 
Removal of Pigmented 
Structural Glass Panels 
Removal of existing glass panels from a wall in order to 
reapply mastic adhesive that is failing or to replace broken 
panels (see also paragraphs on "Replacement of . 
Damaged/ Missing Glass Panels") is an exacting operation 
because the mastic used to attach the glass panels to the 
wall may have become hard and extremely difficult to 
separate from the ribbed backing of the gla~s. Fortunately, 
commercial solvents may be purchased which are capable 
of softening the hardened mastic, such as methyl ethyl 
ketone, methyl isobutyl ketone, and acetone. These 
solvents may be introduced into the cavity behind the glass 
with a crook-necked polyethylene laboratory squeeze bottle 
or a large syringe without a needle. (Solvents should be 
stored in fire-safe metal containers until used and should 
also be handled with extreme care so that they do not 
come into contact with the skin.) Such methods make it 
easy to direct the solvent into the narrow separation 
between the glass panel and the wall with a minimum of 
waste and effort. After the mastic has softened, two people 
using a taut piano wire sawing down from the top can 
safely and efficiently separate the glass from the wal;. 
If time is a concern, a fast, simple removal method 1s to 
carefully pry the panels off with a broad flat tool such as a 
nail puller. A small piece of wood placed between the flat 
tool and glass will minimize splintering of the edges. 
Stubborn pieces can be removed by squirting the mastic 
with a solvent (as described above), then letting it set 
several minutes. This procedure softens the mastic, making 
it more pliable . The piano wire/ sawing method may be 
useful in removing the topmost glass panels of a 
continuous face where no edges occur. The wire can be 
effectively worked into the joints and will cut through the 
mastic. With care, a high percentage of the glass panels 
can be salvaged using this method (see fig. 16). 
Another method of removing 
glass panels that has 
proven to be effective if the solvent-and-wire method 
cannot be used, involves directing steam at the face of the 
panel in order to soften the mastic . Although this method 
can be time-consuming, averaging up to 10 minutes per 
panel, the glass can be successfully removed. Remaining 

mastic may then be removed by directing additional steam 
on the panel, soaking the panels in hot water to further 
soften the mastic-or applying appropriate chemical 
solvents- and scraping off the softened mastic . 
Reinstallation of Glass Panels 
Due to an accumulation 
of soot behind the glass , the 
surface of the masonry substrate usually needs to be 
cleaned before panels or a wall of pigmented structural 
glass are reinstalled. After removal of the glass panels has 
been completed, the substrate should be cleaned using a 
mild detergent and water , then allowing sufficient time for 
it to dry . The old glass must also be thoroughly cleaned of 
soot , grease, or old mastic that would impair bonding of 
the new adhesive. A mild solution of water and household 
ammonia will generally clean the surface adequately . The 
glass may then be reinstalled following a system 
established during removal. 
In reinstalling the glass panels ( or new panels to replace 
any historic glass that has been broken), it is recommended 
that the mastic adhesive used throughout the 1930s and 
1940s be used, because it is still the best bonding material. 
Although modern silicone compounds offer workability , 
adhesion , and flexibility, they tend to be expensive w hen 
used in the necessary quantity . On the other hand , butyl 
adhesives do not provide sufficient adhesion on non­
porous materials such as pigmented structural glass . 
Polysulfide-based, synthetic rubber sealants do not have 
the short set-up time of the traditional hot-melt asphalt 
mastic and thus present installation difficulties . Finally, 
epoxies do not appear to have the plasticity essential for 
longevity of a glass veneer. 
Fig . 15. Owners of this small barber shop , Denver, Colorado, have 
successfully preserved the histori c character of their pigment ed structural 
glass storefront b y pat ching the cra cked panels with a dark caulking 
comp ound. Photo : Gregory D. Kendrick. 
Fig. 16. A wo rker carefully removes a large glass panel b y pla cing a 
small piece of wood between a flat pr y ing bar and the glass. then exerting 
steady pressure. The majority o f panels were removed without damage 
using this procedure . Photo : Thomas Keohan . 
Replacement of Damaged/ Missing Glass Panels 
Production of pigmented structural glass in the United 
States ceased several years ago , and only in rare cases have 
inventories been discovered . Yet, checking all the obvious 
and not so obvious sources for replacement may prove to 
be rewarding. Occasionally, long established "jobbers" will 
have a limited supply of pigmented structural glass . It is 
not uncommon for glass contractors to buy entire stocks 
of glass when companies or supply houses go out of 
business and to use this original material to make repairs 
on historic buildings . 
Locating a source for new glass similar to the historic 
pigmented structural glass is as much of a problem as 
finding the original glass. Until about 10 years ago, glass 
companies near Bavaria in Western Germany were 
producing a pigmented structural glass called "Detopak ." 
At present , these factories appear to be the only suppliers 
in the world . The glass is made in small batches, and the 
color can vary due to the lack of modern mechanization in 
the pigmenting process . For this reason, American 
importers generally only deal in white and black glass. 
If a satisfactory replacement panel cannot be located, 
one alternative is to remove a piece of glass from an 
inconspicuous part of the building and position it on the 
more prominent facade. Modern spandrel glass, a new 
substitute material described below, may be considered as 
a replacement for the less visible area . 
Substitute Material for Damaged/ Missing Glass 
Panels 
If replacement glass cannot be found to replace broken or 
missing panels , a compatible substitute material may be 
considered if it conveys the same visual appearance as the 
historic material, i.e. , color, size, and reflectivity . Two of 
the historic producers of pigmented structural glass now 
manufacture a similar product known generically as 
7 

"spandrel glass" and marketed under the trade names of 
Spandrelite and Vitrolux. This heavy plate glass has a 
ceramic frit or colored ceramic surface fired to the back of 
the glass. Stock colors are available in a range of grays, 
browns, bronzes, and black. Custom colors are also 
available. 
A second option simulates the appearance of pigmented 
structural glass by spraying paint, carefully tinted 
to match 
the historic glass, onto the back of plate glass. However, 
the paint may fade over a long period of time and thus 
require periodic reapplication. 
Sheet plastics may also be used and are available in a 
range of colors, sizes, and thicknesses. These materials are 
more suitable for interior applications, however, where the 
negative effects of ultra-violet light are lessened. 
Conclusion 
The preservation of pigmented structural glass remains more 
a materials issue than a detailing problem. The glass panels 
were and are extremely susceptible to breakage due to 
accident or vandalism. In addition, many of the historic 
installation materials such as the mastic adhesive and joint 
cement did not possess a long lifespan. Periodic maintenance , 
inspection, careful repair, and selective replacement -in like 
kind- are essential for the longevity of any historic pigmented 
structural glass veneer. 
Even though the architectural glass industry has 
continued to expand its production of different types of 
glazing, the imaginative innovations of Carrara Glass , Sani 
Oxyx, and Vitrolite in the early part of this century have 
not been surpassed. New technology , combined with 
human artistry, produced exteriors and interiors alive with 
color and dimension. Glittering movie palaces, sparkling 
restaurants, and streamlined storefronts as well as the 
more mundane kitchens, restrooms, and laboratories 
exemplified the extensive variety and potential of 
pigmented structural glass. Carrara Glass , Sani Onyx, and 
Vitrolite were integrally linked to the architecture and 
interior design of the 1930s and 1940s and helped to define 
what was "modern." Thus, every effort should be made to 
preserve this significant historic material in both the 
innovative buildings of the Art Deco, Streamline, and 
Moderne styles as well as the "modernization" of earlier 
structures. 
This Preservation Brief is partially adapted from an article entitled 
"Material Conservation for the Twentieth Century: The Case for 
Structural Glass ," written by Douglas A . Yorke , Jr ., AIA , which 
appeared in the Bulletin for the Association for Preservation Technolog y, 
13 (1981), and from an unpublished manuscript by Thomas L. Hensley of 
the National Park Service . Preservation Brief 12 was edited by Gregory 
D. Kendrick, Historian , under the technical editorship of de Teel 
Patterson Tiller, both of the Rocky Mountain Regional Office , National 
Park 
Service. We wish to thank Mr . Yorke for permission to use his 
article and photographic material. Finally, we want to acknowledge 
Thomas G. Keohan, Field Representative , Mountains / Plains Regional 
Office, National Trust for Historic Preservation for donating photographs 
and assistance to this project. 
Comments on the usefulness of this information are welcomed and 
should be sent to Lee H. Nelson, AJA, Chief, Preservation Assistance 
Division, National Park Service, Department of the Interior. This 
publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. 
Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park 
Service are appreciated. 
8 
Additional Reading 
Gay, Charles Merick and Parker , Harry. Materials and Methods of 
Architectural Construction. New York: John Wile y and Sons, 
Inc., 1931. 
Glass, Paints, Varnishes and Brushes: Their History, Manufacture and 
Use. New York: Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company, 1923. 
Hornbostel, Caleb. Construction Materials. New York: John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc. , 1978. 
Kidder, Frank E. and Parker , Harry . The Architect's and Builder 's 
Handbook, 15th ed., New York : John Wiley and Sons Inc ., 
1913. 
McGrath, Raymond and Frost, A.C. Glass in Architecture and 
Decoration. London: The Architectural Press , I 937. 
"Modernize Main Street." Architectural Record 78 (October 1935): 
209-266. 
Ramsey, Charles George and Sleeper, Harold Reeves . Architectural 
Graphic Standards, 3rd ed., New York: John Wile y and Sons, 
Inc., I 941. 
Richey, H. G. Richey's Reference Handbook for Builders, Architects and 
Construction Engineers. New York: Simmons-Boardman 
Publishing Corporation, 195 I. 
The Secretary of the Interior 's Standards for Rehabilitation and 
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Histori c Buildings (Revised 1983). 
Washington, D .C. : Technical Preservation Services Division , 
U.S. Department of the Interior. 
Standard Building Code. Birmingham , Alabama: Southern Building Code 
Congress International , Inc., 1979. 
Sweet's Architectu ral Catalogue, 22nd annual ed., New York: F.W. 
Dodge Corporation, Sweet's Catalogue Service, 1927-1928; 
Section B, pp. 1406-1409, (Vitrolite product literature). 
Sweet's Indexed Catalogue of Building Construction. New York: 
Architectural Record Company, 1906. 
Time Saver Standards, 1st ed., New York: Architectural Record , 1946. 
Yorke, Douglas A. Jr., AJA. "Materials Conservation for the Twentieth 
Century: The Case for Structural Glass." APT 13 (1981): 19-30. 
February 1984 