U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
2 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Repointing Mortar Joints 
in Historic Masonry Buildings 
Robert C. Mack, FAIA 
John P. Speweik 
Figure 1. After removing deteriorated mortar, an experienced mason repoillts 
a portion of this early-20th century limestone building. Photo: Robert C. 
Mack,FAIA. 
Masonry - brick, stone, terra-cotta , and concrete block -
is found on nearly every historic building. Structures 
with all-masonry exteriors come to mind immediately, 
but most other buildings at least have masonry 
foundations or chimneys. Although generally considered 
"permanent," masonry is subject to deterioration, 
especially at the mortar joints . Repointing, also known 
simply as "pointing" or-somewhat inaccurately-"tuck 
pointing" *, is the process of removing deteriorated mortar 
from the joints of a masonry wall and replacing it with 
new mortar (Fig. 1). Properly done, repointing restores 
the visual and physical integrity of the masonry. 
Improperly done, repointing not only detracts from the 
appearance of the building, but may also cause physical 
damage to the masonry units themselves . 
The purpose of this Brief is to provide general guidance 
on appropriate materials and methods for repointing 
historic masonry buildings and it is intended to benefit 
building owners, architects , and contractors. The Brief 
should serve as a guide to prepare specifications for 
repointing historic ma sonry buildings . It should also 
help develop sensitivity to the particular needs of historic 
masonry , and to assist historic building owners in 
working cooperatively with architects, architectural 
conservators and historic preservation consultants, and 
contractors. Although specifically intended for historic 
buildings, the guidance is appropriate for other masonry 
buildings as well. This publication updates Preservation 
Briefs 2: Repainting Mortar Joints in Historic Brick Buildings 
to include all types of historic unit masonry. The scope of 
the earlier Brief has also been expanded to acknowledge 
that the many buildings constructed in the first half of the 
20th century are now historic and eligible for listing in 
the National Register of Historic Places, and that they 
may have been originally constructed with portland 
cement mortar. 
*Tuckpointi ng technically describes a primaril y decorative application 
of a raised mortar joint or lime putty joint on top of flush mortar joint s. 
1 

2 
Figure 2. Much of the mortar on this building has been leached away by 
water from a leaking downspout. The downspout must be replaced and any 
other drainage problems repaired before repainting. Photo: Robert C. Mack, 
FAIA. 
prepare specifications which reflect the particular require­
ments of each job and can provide oversight of the work 
in progress. Referrals to preservation consultants 
frequently can be obtained from State Historic 
Preservation Offices, the American Institute for 
Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works (AIC), the 
Association for Preservation Technology (APT), and local 
chapters of the American Institute of Architects (AIA). 
Finding an Appropriate Mortar Match 
Preliminary research is necessary to ensure that the 
proposed repointing work is both physically and visually 
appropriate to the building. Analysis of unweathered 
portions of the historic mortar to which the new mortar will 
be matched can suggest appropriate mixes for the 
repointing mortar so that it will not damage the building 
because it is excessively strong or vapor impermeable. 
Examination and analysis of the masonry units-brick, 
stone or terra cotta-and the techniques used in the original 
construction will assist in maintaining the building's 
historic appearance (Figs. 3-4). A simple, non-technical, 
evaluation of the masonry units and mortar can provide 
information concerning the relative strength and 
permeability of each-critical factors in selecting the 
repointing mortar-while a visual analysis of the historic 
mortar can provide the information necessary for 
developing the new mortar mix and application techniques. 
Although not crucial to a successful repointing project, for 
projects involving properties of special historic significance, 
a mortar analysis by a qualified laboratory can be useful by 
providing information on the original ingredients. 
However, there are limitations with such an analysis, and 
replacement mortar specifications should not be based 
solely on laboratory analysis. Analysis requires 
interpretation, and there are important factors which affect 
the condition and performance of the mortar that cannot be 
established through laboratory analysis. These may 
include: the original water content, rate of curing, weather 
conditions during original construction, the method of 
mixing and placing the mortar, and the cleanliness and 
condition of the sand. 
The most useful information that can 
come out of laboratory analysis is the identification of sand by 
Use of Consultants. Because there are so many possible 
causes for deterioration in historic buildings, it may be 
desirable to retain a consultant, such as a historic 
architect or architectural conservator, to analyze the 
building. In addition to determining the most 
appropriate solutions to the problems, a consultant can 
The decision to repoint is most often related to some 
obvious sign of deterioration, such as disintegrating 
mortar, cracks in mortar joints, loose bricks or stones, 
damp walls, or damaged plasterwork. It is, however, 
erroneous to assume that repointing alone will solve 
deficiencies that result from other problems (Fig. 2) . The 
root cause of the deterioration-leaking roofs or gutters, 
differential settlement of the building, capillary action 
causing rising damp , or extreme weather exposure-­
should always be dealt with prior to beginning work. 
Without appropriate repairs to eliminate the source of 
the problem, mortar deterioration will continue and any 
repointing will have been a waste of time and money. 
Identifying the Problem Before Repointing 
In the 1930s more new mortar products intended to 
hasten and simplify masons' work were introduced in 
the U.S. These included masonry cement, a premixed, 
bagged mortar which is a combination of portland 
cement and ground limestone, and hydrated lime, 
machine-slaked lime that eliminated the necessity of 
slaking quicklime into putty at the site. 
Portland cement was patented in Great Britain in 1824. 
It was named after the stone from Portland in Dorset 
which it resembled when hard. This is a fast-curing, 
hydraulic cement which hardens under water. Portland 
cement was first manufactured in the United States in 
1872, although 
it was imported before this date. But it 
was not in common use throughout the country until the 
early 20th century. Up until the turn of the century 
portland cement was considered primarily an additive, 
or "minor ingredient" to help accelerate mortar set time. 
By the 1930s, however, most masons used a mix of equal 
parts portland cement and lime putty. Thus, the mortar 
found in masonry structure s built between 1873 and 1930 
can range from pure lime and sand mixes to a wide 
varie ty of lime, portland cement, and sand combinations. 
Mortar consisting primarily of lime and sand has been 
used as an integral part of masonry structures for 
thousands of years. Up until about the mid-19th century, 
lime or quicklime (sometimes called lump lime) was 
delivered to construction sites, where it had to be slaked, 
or combined with water. Mixing with water caused it to 
boil and resulted in a wet lime putty that was left to 
mature in a pit or wooden box for several weeks, up to a 
year. Traditional mortar was made from lime putty, or 
slaked lime, combined with local sand, generally in a 
ratio of 1 part lime putty to 3 parts sand by volume. 
Often other ingredients, such as crushed marine shells 
(another source of lime), brick dust, clay, natural 
cements, pigments, and even animal hair were also 
added to mortar, but the basic formulation for lime putty 
and sand mortar remained unchanged for centuries until 
the advent of portland cement or its forerunner, Roman 
cement, a natural, hydraulic cement. 
Historical Background 

Figure 3. Good-quality repainting closely replicates the original in composition, texture, joint type and profile on this 19th centun; brick building (left), and on this 
late-19th century granite on H.H. Richardson's Glessner House in Chicago (right). Photos: Charles E. Fisher: Sharon C. Park, FAIA. 
gradation and color. This allows the color and the texture of 
the mortar to be matched with some accuracy because 
sand is the largest ingredient by volume. 
In creating a repointing mortar that is compatible with the 
masonry units, the objective is to achieve one that matches 
the historic mortar as closely as possible, so that the new 
material can coexist with the old in a sympathetic, 
supportive and, if necessary, sacrificial capacity. The exact 
physical and chemical properties of the historic mortar are 
not of major significance as long as the new mortar 
conforms to the following criteria : 
•The new mortar must match the historic mortar in colo r, 
texture and tooling. 
(If a laboratory analysis is undertaken, 
it may be possible to match the binder components and 
their proportions with the historic mortar, if those materials 
are available .) 
•The sand must match the sand in the historic mortar. 
(The color and texture of the new mortar will usually fall 
into place if the sand is matched successfully.) 
•The new mortar must have greater vapor permeability 
and be softer (measured in compressive strength) than the 
masonry units. 
•The new mortar must be as vapor permeable and as soft 
or softer (measured in compressive strength) than the 
historic mortar. (Softness or hardness is not necessarily an 
indication of permeability; old, hard lime mortars can still 
retain high permeability.) 
Properties of Mortar 
Mortars for repointing should be softer or more 
permeable than the masonry units and no harder or 
more impermeable than the historic mortar to prevent 
damage to the masonry units. It is a common error to 
assume that hardness or high strength is a measure of 
appropriateness, particularly for lime-based historic 
mortars. Stresses within a wall caused by expansion, 
contraction, moisture migration, or settlement must be 
accommodated in some manner; in a masonry wall these 
Figure 4. (left) The poor quality of this repainting-it appears to have been "tooled" with the mason's finger-does not match the delicacy of tlie original beaded joint on 
this 19th-century brick wall. (right) It is obvious that the repainting on this "test patch" is not an appropriate replacement mortar joint for this early-19th centun; 
stone foundation. Photos: Lee H. Nelson, FAIA. 
3 

4 
Permeability, or rate of vapor transmission, is also critical. 
High lime mortars are more permeable than denser 
cement mortars. Historically, mortar acted as a bedding 
material-not unlike an expansion joint-rather than a 
"glue" for the masonry units, and moisture was able to 
migrate through the mortar joints rather than the 
masonry units. When moisture evaporates from the 
masonry it deposits any soluble salts either on the surface 
as efflorescence or below the surface as subfl.orescence. While 
salts deposited on the surface of masonry units are 
usually relatively harmless, salt crystallization within a 
masonry unit creates pressure that can cause parts of the 
outer surface to spall off or delarninate. If the mortar does 
not permit moisture or moisture vapor to migrate out of 
the wall and evaporate, the result will be damage to the 
masonry units. 
Components of Mortar 
Sand. Sand is the largest component of mortar and the 
material that gives mortar its distinctive color, texture and 
cohesiveness. Sand must be free of impurities, such as 
salts or clay. The three key characteristics of sand are: 
particle shape, gradation and void ratios. 
Figure 5. The use of hard, port/and-cement mortar that is less permeable than 
the soft bricks has resulted in severe damage to this brick wall. Moisture 
trapped in the wall was unable to evaporate through the mortar which is 
intended to be sacrificial, and thus protect the bricks. As a result the moisture 
remained in the walls until water pressure eventually popped the surface off 
the bricks. Photo: National Park Service Files. 
When viewed under a magnifying glass or low-power 
microscope, particles of sand generally have either 
rounded edges, such as found in beach and river 
sand, or sharp, angular edges, found in crushed or 
manufactured sand. For repointing mortar, rounded or 
natural sand is preferred for two reasons. 
It is usually 
similar to the sand in the historic mortar and provides a 
better visual match . It also has better working qualities 
or plasticity and can thus be forced into the joint more 
easily, forming a good contact with the remaining 
historic mortar and the surface of the adjacent masonry 
units. Although manufactured sand is frequently more 
readily available, it is usually possible to locate a supply 
of rounded sand. 
The gradation of the sand (particle size distribution) 
plays a very important role in the durability and 
cohesive properties of a mortar. Mortar must have a 
certain percentage of large to small particle sizes in order 
to deliver the optimum performance. Acceptable 
guidelines on particle size distribution may be found in 
ASTM C 144 (American Society for Testing and 
Materials). However, in actuality, since neither historic 
nor modem sands are always in compliance with ASTM 
C 144, matching the same particle appearance and 
gradation usually requires sieving the sand. 
A scoop of sand contains many small voids between the 
individual grains. A mortar that performs well fills all 
these small voids with binder (cement/lime combination 
or mix) in a balanced manner. Well-graded sand 
generally has a 30 per cent void ratio by volume. Thus, 
30 per cent binder by volume generally should be used, 
unless the historic mortar had a different binder: 
aggregate ratio. This represents the 1:3 binder to sand 
ratios often seen in mortar specifications. 
For repointing, sand generally should conform to ASTM 
C 144 to assure proper gradation and freedom from 
impurities; some variation may be necessary to match 
the original size and gradation. Sand color and texture 
also should match the original as closely as possible to 
provide the proper color match without other additives. 
Lime. Mortar formulations prior to the late-19th century 
used lime as the primary binding material. Lime is 
derived from heating limestone at high temperatures 
which burns off the carbon dioxide, and turns the 
limestone into quicklime. There are three types of 
limestone-calcium, magnesium, and dolomitic­
differentiated by the different levels of magnesium 
carbonate they contain which impart specific qualities to 
mortar . Historically, calcium lime was used for mortar 
rather than the dolomitic lime (calcium magnesium 
carbonate) most often used today. But it is also 
important to keep in mind the fact that the historic limes, 
and other components of mortar, varied a great deal 
because they were natural, as opposed to modem lime 
which is manufactured and, therefore, standardized . 
Because some of the kinds of lime, as well as other 
components of mortar, that were used historically are no 
longer readily available, even when a conscious effort is 
made to replicate a "historic" mix, this may not be 
achievable due to the differences between modem and 
historic materials. 
stresses 
should be relieved by the mortar rather than by 
the masonry units. A mortar that is stronger in 
compressive strength than the masonry units, will not 
"give," thus causing the stresses to be relieved through 
the masonry units-resulting in permanent damage to 
the masonry, such as cracking and spalling, that cannot 
be repaired easily (Fig. 5). While stresses can also break 
the bond between the mortar and the masonry units, 
permitting water to penetrate the resulting hairline 
cracks, this is easier to correct in the joint through 
repointing than if the break occurs in the masonry units. 

Lime, itself, when mixed with water into a paste is very 
plastic and creamy. It will remain workable and soft 
indefinitely, if stored in a sealed container. Lime 
(calcium hydroxide) hardens by carbonation absorbing 
carbon dioxide primarily from the air, converting itself to 
calcium car bonat e. Once a lime and sand mortar is 
mixed and placed in a wall, it begins the process of 
carbonation. If lime mortar is left to dry too rapidly, 
carbonation of the mortar will be reduced, resulting in 
poor adhesion and poor durability. In addition, lime 
mortar is slightly water soluble and thus is able to re-seal 
any hairline cracks that may develop during the life o f 
the mortar. Lime mortar is soft, porous, and changes 
little in volume during temperature fluctuations, thus 
making it a good choice for historic buildings. 
Because of 
these qualities, high calcium lime mortar may be considered 
for many repainting projects, not just those involving 
historic buildings. 
For repointing, lime should conform to ASTM C 207 , 
Type S, or Type SA, Hydrated Lime for Masonry 
Purposes. This machine-slaked lime is designed to 
assure high plasticity and water retention. The use of 
quicklime which must be slaked and soaked by hand 
may have advantages over hydrated lime in some 
restoration projects 
if time and mone y allow. 
Lime putty. Lime putty is slaked lime that has a putty or 
paste-like consistency . It should conform to ASTM C 5. 
Mortar can be mixed using lime putty according to 
ASTM C 270 property or proportion specification. 
Portland cement. More recent, 20th-century mortar has 
used portland cement as a primary binding material. A 
straight portland cement and sand mortar is extremel y 
hard, resists the movement of water, shrinks upon 
setting, and undergoes relatively large thermal 
movements . When mixed with water , portland cemen t 
forms a harsh, stiff paste that is quite unworkable, 
becoming hard very quickly. (Unlike lime , portland 
cement will harden regardless of weather conditions and 
does not require wetting and drying cycles .) Some 
portland cement assists the workability and plasticity of 
the mortar without adversely affecting the finished 
project; it also provides early strength to the mortar and 
speeds setting. Thus, it may be appropriate to add some 
portland cement to an essentially lime-based mortar 
even when repointing relatively soft 18th or 19th century 
brick under some circumstances when a slightl y harder 
mortar is required . The more portland cement that is 
added to a mortar formulation the harder it becomes­
and the faster the initial set. 
For repointing, portland cement 
should conform to ASTM 
C 150. White, non-staining portland cement may provide 
a better color match for some historic mortars than the 
more commonly available grey portland cement. But, it 
should not be assumed, however , that white portland 
cement is always appropriate for all historic buildings, 
since the original mortar may have been mixed with grey 
cement. The cement should not ha ve more than 0 .60 per 
cent alkali to help avoid efflore scence. 
Masonry cement. Masonry cement is a preblended 
mortar mix commonly found at hardware and home 
repair stores . It is designed to produce mortars with a 
compressive strength of 750 psi or higher when mixed 
MORTAR ANALYSIS 
Methods for analyzing mortars can be divided 
into two broad categories: wet chemical and 
instrumental. Many laboratories that analyze 
historic mortars use a simple wet-chemical 
method called acid digestion, whereby a sample of 
the mortar is crushed and then mixed with a dilute 
acid. The acid dissolves all the carbonate­
containing minerals not only in the binder, but 
also in the aggregate (such as oyster shells, coral 
sands, or other carbonate-based materials), as well 
as any other acid-soluble materials. The sand and 
fine-grained acid-insoluble material is left behind. 
There are several variations on the simple acid 
digestion test. One involves collecting the carbon 
dioxide gas given off as the carbonate is digested 
by the acid; based on the gas volume the carbonate 
content of the mortar can be accurately 
determined (Jedrzejewska, 1960). Simple acid 
digestion methods are rapid, inexpensive, and 
easy to perform, but the information they provide 
about the original composition of a mortar is 
limited to the color and texture of the sand. The 
gas collection method provides more information 
about the binder than a simple acid digestion test. 
Instrumental analysis methods that have been 
used to evaluate mortars include polarized light or 
thin-section microscopy, scanning electron 
microscopy, atomic absorption spectroscopy, X-ray 
diffraction, and differential thermal analysis. All 
instrumental methods require not only expensive, 
specialized equipment, but also highly-trained 
experienced analysts. However, instrumental 
methods can provide much more information 
about a mortar. Thin-section microscopy is 
probably the most commonly used instrumental 
method. Examination of thin slices of a mortar in 
transmitted light is often used to supplement acid 
digestion methods, particularly to look for 
carbonate-based aggregate. For example, the new 
ASTM test method, ASTM C 1324-% ''Test Method 
for Examination and Analysis of Hardened 
Mortars" which was designed specifically for the 
analysis of modern lime-cement and masonry 
cement mortars, combines a complex series of wet 
chemical analyses with thin-section microscopy. 
The drawback of most mortar analysis methods is 
that mortar samples of known composition have 
not been analyzed in order to evaluate the method. 
Historic mortars were not prepared to narrowly 
defined specifications from materials of uniform 
quality; they contain a wide array of locally 
derived materials combined at the discretion of the 
mason. While a particular method might be able 
to accurately determine the original proportions of 
a lime-cement-sand mortar prepared from modem 
materials, the usefulness of that method for 
evaluating historic mortars is questionable unless 
it has been tested against mortars prepared from 
materials more commonly used in the past. 
Lorraine Schnabel. 
5 

6 
Figure 6. Tinted mortar. (/eft)Black mortar with a beaded joint was used here 011 this late-19th century hard pressed red brick and, (c~nter) a _dark brown tinted_ mortar 
with an almost flush joint was used on this early-20th century Roman brick. (right) When constru~ted at the turn-of-the-c_entury, this buildmg was pomted with a 
dark gray mortar to blend with the color of the stone, but the light-colored mortar llsed in spot repozntmg has destroyed t/11s harmony and adversely impacts the 
building's historic character. Photos: Anne Grimmer. 
with sand and water at the job site. It may contain 
hydrated lime, but it always contains a large amount of 
portland cement, as well as ground limestone and other 
workability agents, including air-entraining agents. 
Because masonry cements are not required to contain 
hydrated lime, and generally do not contain lime, _the~ 
produce high strength mortars that can damage histonc 
masonry. For this reason, they generally are not recommended 
for use on historic masonry buildings. 
Lime mortar (pre-blended). Hydrated lime mortars, and 
pre-blended lime putty mortars with or without a 
matched sand are commercially available. Custom 
mortars are also available with color. 
In most instances, 
pre-blended lime mortars conta~g sand ~ay not 
provide an exact match; however, if the proJect calls for 
total repainting, a pre-blended lime mortar may be worth 
considering as long as the mortar is compatible in strength 
with the masonry. If the project involves only selected, 
"spot" repainting, then it may be better to carry out a 
mortar analysis which can provide a custom pre-blended 
lime mortar with a matching sand. In either case, if a 
preblended lime mortar is to be used, it should contain 
Type S or SA hydrated lime conforming to ASTM C 207. 
Water. Water should be potable-dean and free from 
acids, alkalis, or other dissolved organic materials. 
Other Components 
Historic components. In addition to the color of the . 
sand the texture of the mortar is of critical importance m 
duplicating historic mortar. Most mortars dating from 
the mid-19th century on-with some exceptions-have a 
fairly homogeneous texture and color. Some earlier . 
mortars are not as uniformly textured and may contain 
lumps of partially burned lime or "?irty lim~", shell_ 
(which often provided a source of hme, particularly m 
coastal areas), natural cements, pieces of clay, lampblack 
or other pigments, or even animal hair. The visual char­
acteristics of these mortars can be duplicated through the 
use of similar materials in the repainting mortar. 
Replicating such 
unique or individual mortars _will 
require writing new specifications f~r each p~oJect. If 
possible, suggested sources for speaal materials should 
be included. For example, crushed oyster shells can be 
obtained in a variety of sizes from poultry supply dealers. 
Pigments. Some historic mortars, particularly ~ the late 
19th century, were tinted to match or contra~t wit~ the 
brick or stone (Fig. 6). Red pigments, sometimes m the 
form of brick dust, as well as brown, and black pigments 
were commonly used. Modern pigments are available 
which can be added to the mortar at the job site, but they 
should not exceed 10 per cent by weight of the portland 
cement in the mix, and carbon black should be limited to 
2 per cent. Only synthetic mineral oxides, which are 
alkali-proof and sun-fast, should be used to prevent 
bleaching and fading. 
Modem components. Admixtures are used to create 
specific characteristics in mortar, and ~h~t~er they . 
should be used will depend upon the mdiVIdual proJect. 
Air-entraining agents, for example, help the mortar to 
resist freeze-thaw damage in northern climates. 
Accelerators are used to reduce mortar freezing prior to 
setting while retarders help to extend the mortar life in hot 
climates. Selection of admixtures should be made by the 
architect or architectural conservator as part of the specifi­
cations, not something routinely added by the masons. 
Generally, modern 
chemical additives are_~eces_sary 
and may, in fact, have detrimental effects m historic 
masonry projects. The use of antifreeze compounds is 
not recommended. They are not very effective with high 
lime mortars and may introduce salts, which may cause 
efflorescence later. A better practice is to warm the sand 
and water, and to protect the completed work from 
freezing. No definitive study has determined_ whether 
air-entraining additives should be used to resist frost 
action and enhance plasticity, but in areas of extreme 
exposure requiring high-strength mortars with lower 
permeability, air-entrainme,~t of 10-16 percent may b~ . 
desirable (see formula for severe weather exposure m 
Mortar Type and Mix). Bonding agents are not a 
substitute for proper joint preparation, and they should 
generally be avoided. If the joint is properly prepared, 
there will be a good bond between the new mortar ~nd 
the adjacent surfaces. In addition, a bonding agent i~ 
difficult to remove if smeared on a masonry surface (Fig. 7). 

Mortar Type and Mix 
Mortars for repointing projects, especially those involving 
historic buildings, typically are custom mixed in order to 
ensure the proper physical and visual qualities. These 
materials can be combined in varying proportions to 
create a mortar with the desired performance and 
durability. The actual specification of a particular mortar 
type should take into consideration all of the factors 
affecting the life of the building including: current site 
conditions, present condition of the masonry, function 
of the new mortar , degree of weather exposure, and skill 
of the mason. Thus, no two repointing projects are 
exactly the same. Modern material s specified for use in 
repointing mortar should conform to specifications of 
the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTNI) 
or comparable federal specifications, and the resulting 
mortar should conform to ASTM C 270, Mortar for 
Unit Masonry. 
Specifying the proportions for the repointing mortar for 
a specific job is not as difficult as it might seem. Five 
mortar types, each with a corresponding recommended 
mix, have been established by ASTM to distinguish high 
strength mortar from soft flexible mortars. The ASTM 
designated them in decreasing order of approximate 
general strength as Type M (2,500 psi), Type S (1,800 psi), 
Type N (750 psi), Type O (350 psi) and Type K (75 psi) . 
(The letters identifying the types are from the words 
MA20N WORK using every other letter.) Type K has 
the highest lime content of the mixes that contain 
portland cement, although it is seldom used today, 
except for some historic preservation projects. The 
designation "L" in the accompanying chart identifies a 
straight lime and sand mix. Specifying the appropriate 
ASTM mortar by proportion of ingredients, will ensure 
the desired physical properties . Unless specified 
otherwise, measurements or proportions for mortar 
mixes are always given in the following order: cement­
lime-sand . Thus , a Type K mix, for example, would be 
referred to as 1-3-10, or 1 part cement to 3 parts lime to 
10 parts sand. Other requirements to create the desired 
visual qualities should be included in the specifications. 
Figure 7. The dark stain on 
either side of the vertical 
joint on this sandstone 
water/able probably resulted 
from the use of a bonding 
agent that was not properly 
cleaned off the masonry 
after repainting. Photo: 
Anne Grimmer. 
Figure 8. Due to inadequate joint preparation, the repainting mortar has not 
adhered properly and is falling out of the joint. Photo: Robert C. Mack, FAIA. 
The strength of a mortar can vary. If mixed with higher 
amounts of portland cement, a harder mortar is 
obtained. The more lime that is added, the softer and 
more plastic the mortar becomes, increasing its 
workability. A mortar strong in compressive strength 
might be desirable for a hard stone (such as granite) pier 
holding up a bridge deck, whereas a softer, more 
permeable lime mortar would be preferable for a historic 
wall of soft brick. Masonry deterioration caused by salt 
deposition results when the mortar is less permeable that 
the masonry unit. A strong mortar is still more permeable 
than hard dense stone . However, in a wall constructed of 
soft bricks where the masonry unit itself has a relatively 
high permeability or vapor transmission rate, a soft, high 
lime mortar is necessary to retain sufficient permeability . 
Budgeting and Scheduling 
Repointing is both expensive and time consuming due to 
the extent of handwork and special materials required. 
It is preferable to repoint only those areas that require 
work rather than an entire wall, as is often specified. 
But, if 25 to 50 per cent or more of a wall needs to be 
repointed, repointing the entire wall may be more cost 
effective than spot repointing. Total repointing may also 
be more sensible when access is difficult, requiring the 
erection of expensive scaffolding (unless the majority of 
the mortar is sound and unlikely to require replacement 
in the foreseeable future) . Each project requires 
judgement based on a variety of factors. Recognizing 
this at the outset will help to prevent many jobs from 
becoming prohibitively expensive. 
In scheduling, seasonal aspects need to be considered 
first. Generally speaking, wall temperatures between 40 
and 95 degrees F (8 and 38 degrees C) will prevent 
freezing or excessive evaporation of the water in the 
mortar. Ideally, repointing should be done in shade, 
away from strong sunlight in order to slow the drying 
process, especially during hot weather. 
If necessary, 
shade can be provided for large-scale projects with 
appropriate modifications to scaffolding. 
The relationship of repointing to other work proposed on 
the building must also be recognized. For example, if 
paint removal or cleaning is anticipated, and if the 
mortar joints are basically sound and need only selective 
repointing, it is generally better to postpone repointing 
7 

8 
Figure 10. Using a hammer and masonry chisel is the least damaging and, 
thus, generally the preferred method of removing old mortar in preparation 
for repainting historic masonry. Photo: John P. Speweik. 
Test Panels. These panels are prepared by the contractor 
using the same techniques that will be used on the 
remainder of the project. Several panel locations­
preferably not on the front or other highly visible location 
of the building-may be necessary to include all types of 
masonry, joint styles, mortar colors, and other problems 
likely to be encountered on the job. If cleaning tests, for 
Execution of the Work 
The contract documents should call for unit prices as well 
as a base bid. Unit pricing forces the contractor to 
determine in advance what the cost addition or reduction 
will be for work which varies from the scope of the base 
bid. If, for example, the contractor has fifty linear feet 
less of stone repointing than indicated on the contract 
documents but thirty linear feet more of brick repointing, 
it will be easy to determine the final price for the work. 
Note that each type of work-brick repointing, stone 
repointing, or similar items-will have its own unit price. 
The unit price also should reflect quantities; one linear 
foot of pointing in five different spots will be more 
expensive than five contiguous linear feet. 
bidder, and bidders who have performed poorly on other 
projects usually can be eliminated from consideration on 
this basis, even if they have the lowest prices. 
The ideal way to select a contractor is 
to ask knowledge­
able owners of recently repointed historic buildings for 
recommendations. Qualified contractors then can 
provide lists of other repointing projects for inspection. 
More commonly, however, the contractor for a repointing 
project is selected through a competitive bidding process 
over which the client or consultant has only limited 
control. In this situation it is important to ensure that 
the specifications stipulate that masons must have a 
minimum of five years' experience with repointing 
historic masonry buildings to be eligible to bid on the 
project. Contracts are awarded to the lowest responsible 
Contractor Selection 
Building managers also must recognize the difficulties 
that a repointing project can create. The process is time 
consuming, and scaffolding may need to remain in place 
for an extended period of time. The joint preparation 
process can be quite noisy and can generate large 
quantities of dust which must be controlled, especially at 
air intakes to protect human health, and also where it 
might damage operating machinery. Entrances may be 
blocked from time to time making access difficult for 
both building tenants and visitors. Clearly, building 
managers will need to coordinate the repointing work 
with other events at the site. 
until after completion of these activities. However, if the 
mortar has eroded badly, allowing moisture to penetrate 
deeply into the wall, repointing should be accomplished 
before cleaning. Related work, such as structural or roof 
repairs, should be scheduled so that they do not interfere 
with repointing and so that all work can take maximum 
advantage of erected scaffolding. 
Figure 9. Comparison of incorrect and correct preparation of mortar joints 
for repainting. Drawing: Robert C. Mack, FAIA, and David W. Look, AJA. 

Figure 11. The damage to the edges and corners of these historic bricks was 
caused by using a mechanical grinder to rake out the joints. Note the 
overcutting of the head joint and the damage to the arises (corners) of the 
bricks. Photo: Lee H. Nelson, FAIA. 
example, are also to be undertaken , they should be 
carried out in the same location . Usually a 3 foot by 3 
foot area is sufficient for brickwork, while a somewhat 
larger area may be required for stonework. These panels 
establish an acceptable standard of work and serve as a 
benchmark for evaluating and accepting subsequent 
work on the building. 
Joint Preparation. Old mortar should be removed to a 
minimum depth of 2 to 2- ½ times the width of the joint 
to ensure an adequate bond and to prevent mortar 
"popouts" (Fig. 8). For most brick joints , this will 
require removal of the mortar to a depth of approximate­
ly ½ to 1 inch; for stone masonry with wide joints, 
mortar may need to be removed to a depth of several 
inches . Any loose or disintegrated mortar beyond thi s 
minimum depth also should be removed (Fig. 9) . 
Although 
some damage may be inevitable, careful joint 
preparation can help limit damage to masonry units . 
The traditional manner of removing old mortar is 
through the use of hand chisels and mash hammers 
(Fig. 10). Though labor-intensive , in most instances this 
method poses the least threat for damage to historic 
masonry units and produces the best final product . 
The most common method of removing mortar , 
however, is through the use of power saws or grinder s. 
The use of power tools by unskilled masons can be 
disastrous for historic masonry , particularly soft brick. 
Using power saws on walls with thin joints , such as 
most brick walls , almost always will result in damage to 
the masonry units by breaking the edges and by 
overcutting on the head, or vertical joints (Fig. 11). 
However, small pneumatically-powered chisels 
generally can be used safely and effectivel y to remove 
mortar on historic buildings as long as the masons 
maintain appropriate control o ver the equipment. 
Figure 12 .. A power grinder, operated correctly by a skilled mason may be 
used in preparation for repainting to cut wide, horizontal mortar joints, 
typical of many early-20th century brick structures without causing damage 
to the brick. Note the use of protective safety equipment. Photo: Robert C. 
Mack,FAIA . 
Under certain circumstances, thin diamond-bladed 
grinders may be used to cut out horizontal joints only on 
hard portland cement mortar common to most early-20th 
century masonry buildings (Fig. 12). Usually, automatic 
tools most successfully remove old mortar without 
damaging the masonry units when they are used in 
combination with hand tools in preparation for 
repainting. Where horizontal joints are uniform and 
fairly wide, it may be possible to use a power masonry 
saw to assist the removal of mortar, such as by cutting 
along the middle of the joint; final mortar removal from 
the sides of the joints still should be done with a hand 
chisel and hammer. Caulking cutters with diamond 
blades can sometimes be used successfully to cut out 
joints without damaging the masonry. Caulking cutters 
are slow; they do not rotate, but vibrate at very high 
speeds , thus minimizing the possibility of damage to 
masonry units (Fig. 13). Although mechanical tools may 
be used safely in limited circumstances to cut out 
horizontal joints in preparation for repainting, they 
should never be used on vertical joints because of the 
danger of slipping and cutting into the brick above or 
below the vertical joint. Using power tools to remove 
mortar without damaging the surrounding masonry 
units also necessitates highly skilled masons experienced 
in working on historic masonry buildings. Contractors 
9 

10 
Figure 13. (left) In preparation for repainting, the mortar joints on these 
granite steps are first cut out mechanically (note the vacuum attached to the 
cutting tool in foreground to cut down on dust). (right) Final removal of the 
old mortar is done by hand to avoid damage to the edges of the joints. 
Mechanical preparation of horizontal joints by an experienced mason may 
sometimes be acceptable, especially where the joints are quite wide and the 
masonry is a very hard stone. Photos: Anne Grimmer. 
Mortar should be removed cleanly from the masonry 
units, leaving square corners at the back of the cut. 
Before filling, the joints should be rinsed with a jet of 
water to remove all loose particles and dust. At the time 
of filling, the joints should be damp, but with no 
standing water present. For masonry walls-limestone, 
sandstone and common brick-that are extremely 
absorbent, it is recommended that a continual mist of 
water be applied for a few hours before repainting begins. 
Mortar Prep aration. Mortar components should be 
measured and mixed carefully to assure the uniformity 
of visual and physical characteristics. Dry ingredients 
are measured by volume and thoroughly mixed before 
the addition of any water. Sand must be added in a 
damp, loose condition to avoid over sanding. 
Repainting mortar is typically pre-hydrated by adding 
water so it will just hold together, thus allowing it to 
stand for a period of time before the final water is 
added. Half the water should be added, followed by 
mixing for approximately 5 minutes. The remaining 
water should then be added in small portions until a 
mortar of the desired consistency is reached. The total 
volume of water necessary may vary from batch to 
batch, depending on weather conditions. 
It is important 
to keep the water to a minimum for two reasons: first, a 
drier mortar is cleaner to work with, and it can be 
compacted tightly into the joints; second, with no excess 
water to evaporate, the mortar cures without shrinkage 
cracks. Mortar should be used within approximately 30 
minutes of final mixing, and "retempering," or adding 
more water, should not be permitted. 
Using Lime Putty to Make M ortar. Mortar made with 
lime putty and sand, sometimes referred to as roughage 
or course stuff, should be measured by volume, and may 
require slightly different proportions from those used 
with hydrated lime (Fig. 14). No additional water is 
usually needed to achieve a workable consistency 
because enough water is already contained in the putty. 
Sand is proportioned first, followed by the lime putty, 
then mixed for five minutes or until all the sand is 
thoroughly coated with the lime putty. But mixing, in the 
familiar sense of turning over with a hoe, sometimes may 
not be sufficient if the best possible performance is to be 
obtained from a lime putty mortar. Although the old 
practice of chopping, beating and ramming the 
mortar has largely been forgotten, recent field work has 
confirmed that lime putty and sand rammed and beaten 
with a wooden mallet or ax handle, interspersed by 
chopping with a hoe, can significantly improve 
workability and performance. The intensity of this action 
increases the overall lime/ sand contact and removes any 
surplus water by compacting the other ingredients. 
It 
may also be advantageous for larger projects to use a 
mortar pan mill for mixing. Mortar pan mills which have 
a long tradition in Europe produce a superior lime putty 
mortar not attainable with today's modern paddle and 
drum type mixers. 
For larger repainting projects the lime putty and sand can 
be mixed together ahead of time and stored indefinitely, 
on or off site, which eliminates the need for piles of sand 
on the job site. This mixture, which resembles damp 
brown sugar, must be protected from the air in sealed 
containers with a wet piece of burlap over the top or 
sealed in a large plastic bag to prevent evaporation and 
premature carbonation. The lime putty and sand mixture 
can be recombined into a workable plastic state months 
later with no additional water. 
If portland cement is specified in a lime putty and sand 
mortar-Type O (1:2:9) or Type K (1:3:11)-the portland 
cement should first be mixed into a slurry paste before 
adding it to the lime putty and sand. Not only will this 
ensure that the portland cement is evenly distributed 
throughout the mixture, but if dry portland cement is 
added to wet ingredients it tends to "ball up," jeopardiz­
ing dispersion. (Usually water must be added to the lime 
putty and sand anyway once the portland cement is 
introduced.) Any color pigments should be added at this 
stage and mixed for a full five minutes. The mortar 
should be used within 30 minutes to 1 1/2 hours and it 
should not be retempered. Once portland cement has 
been added the mortar can no longer be stored. 
Using any of these power tools may also be more 
acceptable on hard stone, such as quartzite or granite, 
than on terracotta with its glass-like glaze, or on soft 
brick or stone. The test panel should determine the 
acceptability of power tools . If power tools are to be 
permitted, the contractor should establish a quality 
control program to account for worker fatigue and 
similar variables. 
should demonstrate proficiency with power tools before 
their use is approved. 
Filling the Joint. Where existing mortar has been 
removed to a depth of greater than 1 inch, these deeper 
areas should be filled first, compacting the new mortar in 
several layers. The back of the entire joint should be 
filled successively by applying approximately 1/4 inch of 
mortar, packing it well into the back corners. This 

a b C 
Figure 14. Mixing mortar using lime putty: (a) proportioning sand; (b) proportioning lime putty; (c) placing lime putty on top of sand; (d) mixing sand over 
lime putty; (e) hand mixing mortar; and, (f) sample of mortar after mixing. Photos: John P. Speweik. 
application may extend along the wall for several 
feet. As soon as the mortar has reached thumb-print 
hardness, another 1/4 inch layer of mortar-approximately 
the same thickness-may be applied. Several layers will 
be needed to fill the joint flush with the outer surface of 
the masonry. It is important to allow each layer time to 
harden before the next layer is applied; most of the 
mortar shrinkage occurs during the hardening 
process and layering thus minimizes overall shrinkage . 
When the final layer of mortar is thumb-print hard , the 
joint should be tooled to match the historic joint (Fig. 15). 
Proper timing of the tooling is important for uniform 
color and appearance. If tooled when too soft, the color 
will be lighter than expected, and hairline cracks may 
occur; if tooled when too hard, there may be dark 
streaks called "tool burning," and good closure of the 
mortar against the masonry units will not be achieved. 
If the old bricks or stones have worn, rounded edges , it 
is best to recess the final mortar slightly from the face of 
the masonry. This treatment will help avoid a joint 
which is visually wider than the actual joint; it also will 
avoid creation of a large, thin featheredge which is easily 
damaged, thus admitting water (Fig. 16). After tooling , 
excess mortar can be removed from the edge of the joint 
by brushing with a natural bristle or nylon brush. Metal 
bristle brushes should never be used on historic masonry . 
Curing Conditions. The preliminary hardening of high­
lime content mortars-those mortars that contain more 
lime by volume than portland cement, i.e., Type O (1:2:9), 
Type K (1:3:11), and straight lime/sand, Type "L"(0:1:3) 
-takes place fairly rapidly as water in the mix is lost 
to the porous surface of the masonry and through 
evaporation. A high lime mortar (especially Type "L") 
left to dry out too rapidly can result in chalking, poor 
adhesion, and poor durability. Periodic wetting of the 
repointed area after the mortar joints are thumb-print 
hard and have been finish tooled may significantly 
accelerate the carbonation process. When feasible, 
misting using a hand sprayer with a fine nozzle can be 
simple to do for a day or two after repointing. Local 
conditions will dictate the frequency of wetting, but 
initially it may be as often as every hour and gradually 
reduced to every three or four hours. Walls should be 
covered with burlap for the first three days after 
repointing. (Plastic may be used, but it should be tented 
out and not placed directly against the wall.) This helps 
keep the walls damp and protects them from direct 
sunlight. Once carbonation of the lime has begun, it will 
continue for many years and the lime will gain strength 
as it reverts back to calcium carbonate within the wall. 
Aging the Mortar. Even with the best efforts at matching 
the existing mortar color, texture, and materials, there 
will usually be a visible difference between the old and 
11 

12 
Staining the new mortar to achieve a better color match 
is generally not recommended, but it may be appropriate 
in some instances. Although staining may provide an 
initial match, the old and new mortars may weather at 
different rates, leading to visual differences after a few 
seasons. In addition, the mixtures used to stain the mortar 
may be harmful to the masonry; for example, they may 
introduce salts into the masonry which can lead to 
efflorescence. 
Cleaning the Repointed Masonry. If repainting work is 
carefully executed, there will be little need for cleaning 
other than to remove the small amount of mortar from 
the edge of the joint following tooling. This can be done 
with a stiff natural bristle or nylon brush after the 
mortar has dried, but before it is initially set (1-2 hours). 
Mortar that has hardened can usually be removed with a 
wooden paddle or, if necessary, a chisel. 
Further cleaning is best accomplished with plain water 
and natural bristle or nylon brushes. 
If chemicals must 
Figure 15. The profile of the repainted joints on the left replicate the historic 
joints around the corner to the right on the front of this stone building in 
Leesburg, VA. The contractor's pride in the repainting work is evident by the 
signature in the vertical joint. Photo: Anne Grimmer. 
new work, partly because the new mortar has been 
matched to the unweathered portions of the historic 
mortar. Another reason for a slight mismatch may be 
that the sand is more exposed in old mortar due to the 
slight erosion of the lime or cement. Although spot 
repainting is generally preferable and some color 
difference should be acceptable, if the difference between 
old and new mortar is too extreme, it may be advisable 
in some instances to repaint an entire area of a wall, or an 
entire feature such as a bay, to minimize the difference 
between the old and the new mortar. 
If the mortars have 
been properly matched, usually the best way to deal 
with surface color differences is to let the mortars age 
naturally. Other treatments to overcome these 
differences, including cleaning the non-repainted areas 
or staining the new mortar, should be carefully tested 
prior to implementation. 
Figure 16. Comparison of visual effect of full mortar joints vs. slightly recessed 
joints. Filling joints too full hides the actual joint thickness and changes the 
character of the original brickwork. Drawing: Robert C. Mack, FAIA. 
be used, they should be selected with extreme caution. 
Improper cleaning can lead to deterioration of the 
masonry units, deterioration of the mortar, mortar smear, 
and efflorescence. New mortar joints are especially 
susceptible to damage because they do not become fully 
cured for several months. Chemical cleaners, particularly 
acids, should never be used on dry masonry. The masonry 
should always be completely soaked once with water 
before chemicals are applied. After cleaning, the walls 
should be flushed again with plain water to remove all 
traces of the chemicals. 
Several precautions should be taken if a freshly repainted 
masonry wall is to be cleaned. First, the mortar should 
be fully hardened before cleaning. Thirty days is usually 
sufficient, depending on weather and exposure; as 
mentioned previously, the mortar will continue to cure 
even after it has hardened. Test panels should be 
prepared to evaluate the effects of different cleaning 
Figure 17. This photograph shows the significant visual change to the 
character of this historic brick building that has resulted from improper 
repointing procedures and a noticeably increased thickness of the mortar 
joints. Photo: Lee H. Nelson, FAIA. 

Mortar Types 
(Measured by volume) 
Designation Cement Hydrated Lime
or 
Lime Putty 
Sand 
M 1 '/, 3 - 3 3/, 
s 1 '/, 4 - 4 1/, 
N 1 1 5-6 
0 1 2 8-9 
K 1 3 10-12 
''L" 0 1 2 '/, - 3 
methods. Generally, on newly repointed masonry walls, 
only very low pressure (100 psi) water washing supple­
mented by stiff natural bristle or nylon brushes should be 
used, except on glazed or polished surfaces, where only 
soft cloths should be used."" 
New construction ''bloom" or efflorescence occasionally 
appears within the first few months of repointing and 
usually disappears through the normal process of 
weathering. If the efflorescence is not removed by 
natural processes, the safest way to remove it is by dry 
brushing with stiff natural or nylon bristle brushes 
followed by wet brushing. Hydrochloric (muriatic) acid, 
is generally ineffective, and it should not be used to 
remove efflorescence. It may liberate additional salts, 
which, in turn, can lead to more efflorescence. 
Surface Grouting is sometimes suggested as an 
alternative to repointing brick buildings, in particular. 
This process involves the application of a thin coat of 
cement-based grout to the mortar joints and the 
mortar /brick interface. To be effective the grout must 
extend slightly onto the face of the masonry units, thus 
widening the joint visually. The change in the joint 
appearance can alter the historic character of the 
structure to an unacceptable degree. In addition, 
although masking of the bricks is intended to keep the 
grout off the remainder of the face of the bricks, some 
level of residue, called "veiling," will inevitably remain . 
Surface grouting cannot substitute for the more 
extensive work of repointing, and it is not a 
recommended treatment for historic masonry. 
••Additional information on masonry cleaning is presented in 
Preservation Briefs 1: The Cleaning and Waterproof Coating of Masonry 
Buildings, Robert C. Mack, AIA , Washington , D.C.: Technical 
Preservation Services, National Park Service, U.S. Department of th e 
Interior, 1975; and Keeping it Clean: Removing Exterior Dirt, Paint, Stains & 
Graffiti from Historic Masonry Buildings, Anne E. Grimmer, Washingt on, 
D.C.: Technical Preservation Services , National Park Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 1988. 
Masonry Material Sheltered Moderate Severe 
Very Durable: 
granite, hard-cored 
brick , etc. 0 N s 
Moderately Durable : 
limestone, durable stone, 
molded brick K 0 N 
Minimally Durable : 
soft hand-made brick "L" K 0 
Summary 
For the Owner/ Administrator. The owner or adminis­
trator of a historic building should remember that 
repointing is likely to be a lengthy and expensive 
process. First, there must be adequate time for 
evaluation of the building and investigation into the 
cause of problems. Then, there will be time needed for 
preparation of the contract documents. The work itself 
is precise, time-consuming and noisy, and scaffolding 
may cover the face of the building for some time. 
Therefore, the owner must carefully plan the work 
to avoid problems. Schedules for both repointing and 
other activities will thus require careful coordination to 
avoid unanticipated conflicts. The owner must avoid 
the tendency to rush the work or cut corners if the 
historic building is to retain its visual integrity and the 
job is to be durable. 
For the Architect/Consultant. Because the prin1ary role 
of the consultant is to ensure the life of the building, a 
knowledge of historic construction techniques and the 
special problems found in older buildings is essential. 
The consultant must assist the owner in planning for 
logistical problems relating to research and construction. 
It is the consultant's responsibility to determine the cause 
of the mortar deterioration and ensure that it is corrected 
before the masonry is repointed. The consultant must also 
be prepared to spend more time in project inspections 
than is customary in modem construction. 
For the Masons. Successful repointing depends on the 
masons themselves. Experienced masons understand 
the special requirements for work on historic buildings 
and the added time and expense they require. The 
entire masonry crew must be willing and able to perform 
the work in conformance with the specifications, even when 
the specifications may not be in conformance with standard 
practice. At the same time, the masons should not hesitate 
to question the specifications if it appears that the work 
specified would damage the building . 

14 
Visually Examining the Mortar and 
the Masonry Units 
A simple in-situ comparison will help determine the 
hardness and condition of the mortar and the masonry 
units. Begin by scraping the mortar with a screwdriver, 
and gradually tapping harder with a cold chisel and 
mason's hammer. Masonry units can be tested in the 
same way beginning, even more gently, by scraping with 
a fingernail. This relative analysis which is derived from 
the IO-point hardness scale used to describe minerals, 
provides a good starting point for selection of an 
appropriate mortar. It is described more fully in "The 
Russack System for Brick & Mortar Description" 
referenced in Selected Reading at the end of this Brief. 
Mortar samples should be chosen carefully, and picked 
from a variety of locations on the building to find 
unweathered mortar, if possible. Portions of the building 
may have been repainted in the past while other areas 
may be subject to conditions causing unusual deteriora­
tion. There may be several colors of mortar dating from 
different construction periods or sand used from different 
sources during the initial construction. Any of these 
situations can give false readings to the visual or physical 
characteristics required for the new mortar. Variations 
should be noted which may require developing more 
than one 
mix. 
1) Remove with a chisel and hammer three or four 
unweathered samples of the mortar to be matched 
from several locations on the building. (Set the 
largest sample aside-this will be used later for 
comparison with the repainting mortar). Removing 
a full representation of samples will allow selection of 
a "mean" or average mortar sample. 
2) Mash the remaining samples with a wooden 
mallet, 
or hammer if necessary, until they are separated into 
their constituent parts. There should be a good 
handful of the material . 
3) Examine the powdered portion-the lime and/ or 
cement matrix of the mortar. 
Most particularly, note 
the color. There is a tendency to think of historic 
mortars as having white binders, but grey portland 
cement was available by the last quarter of the 19th 
century, and traditional limes were also sometimes 
grey. Thus, in some instances, the natural color of the 
historic binder may be grey, rather than white. The 
mortar may also have been tinted to create a colored 
mortar, and this color should be identified at this point. 
4) Carefully blow away the powdery material (the lime 
and/ or cement matrix 
which bound the mortar together). 
5) With a low power (10 power) magnifying glass, 
examine the remaining sand and other materials such 
as lumps of lime or shell. 
6) Note and record the wide range of color as well 
as the varying sizes of the individual grains of 
sand , impurities , or other materials. 
Other Factors to Consider 
Color. Regardless of the color of the binder or colored 
additives, the sand is the primary material that gives mortar 
Figure 19. Mortar joints of 18th century brick buildings were often as much 
as 1/2 inch wide, cut flush and struck with a grapevine joint, but for window 
and door surrounds where a finer quality rubbed brick was used, mortar 
joints were very thin. Photo: National Park Service Files. 
its color. A surprising variety of colors of sand may be 
found in a single sample of historic mortar, and the 
different sizes of the grains of sand or other materials, 
such as incompletely ground lime or cement, play an 
important role in the texture of the repainting mortar. 
Therefore, when specifying sand for repainting mortar, it 
may be necessary to obtain sand from several sources and 
to combine or screen them in order to approximate the range 
of sand colors and grain sizes in the historic mortar sample. 
Pointing Style. Close examination of the historic 
masonry wall and the techniques used in the original 
construction will assist in maintaining the visual 
qualities of the building (Fig. 18). Pointing styles and 
the methods of producing them should be examined. 
It 
is important to look at both the horizontal and the 
vertical joints to determine the order in which they were 
tooled and whether they were the same style. Some 
late-19th and early-20th century buildings, for example, 
have horizontal joints that were raked back while the 
vertical joints were finished flush and stained to match 
the bricks, thus creating the illusion of horizontal bands. 
Pointing styles may also differ from one facade to 
another; front walls often received greater attention to 
mortar detailing than side and rear walls (Fig. 19). 
Tuckpointing is not true repainting but the 
Figure 20. This stone garden wall was tuckpointed to match the tuckpointing 
on the c. 1920s house on the property. Photo: Anne Grimmer. 

application of a raised joint or lime putty joint on top 
of flush mortar joints (Fig. 20). Penciling is a purely 
decorative, painted surface treatment over a mortar 
joint, often in a contrasting color. 
Masonry Units. The masonry units should also be 
examined so that any replacement units will match the 
historic masonry. Within a wall there may be a wide 
range of colors, textures, and sizes, particula~ly with 
hand-made brick or rough-cut, locally-quarried stone. 
Replacement units should blend in with the full range 
of masonry units rather than a single brick or stone. 
Matching Color and Texture of the Repointing Mortar 
New mortar should match the unweathered interior 
portions of the historic mortar. The simplest way to 
check the match is to make a small sample of the 
proposed mix and allow it to cure at a temperatu~e of 
approximately 70 degrees F for about a "."eek, ~r 1t can 
be baked in an oven to speed up the curmg; this 
sample is then broken open and the surface is compared 
Figure 18. A cross-section of mortar joint types. (a). 
Grapevine joints on a mid-18th century brick building; 
(b) flush joints on a mid-to-late 19th century brick . 
building; (c) beaded joints on a late-19th_ century brzck 
building; (d) early-20th century beaded Joints on rou~h­
cut limestone where the vertical joints were struck prior 
to the horizontal joints; (e) raked joints on 1920s wire 
brick; (f) horizontal joints on a 1934 building designed 
by Frank Lloyd Wright were raked back from the face of 
the bricks, and the vertical joints were filled with a red­
tinted mortar to emphasize the horizontality of the 
narrow bricks, and struck flush with the face of the 
bricks; (g) the joints on this 20th century glazed terra­
cotta tile building are raked slightly, emphasizing the 
glazed block face. Photos: National Park Service Files 
(a,b,e); Robert C. Mack, FAIA (c,d,f,g). 
with the surface of the largest "saved" sample of 
historic mortar. 
If a proper color match cannot be achieved through the 
use of natural sand or colored aggregates like crushed 
marble or brick dust, it may be necessary to use a 
modern mortar pigment. 
During the early stages of the project, it should be 
determined how closely the new mortar should match 
the historic mortar. Will "quite close" be sufficient, or is 
"exactly'' expected? The specifications should state this 
clearly so that the contractor has a reasonable idea how 
much time and expense will be required to develop an 
acceptable match. 
The same judgment will be necessary in matching 
replacement terra cotta, stone or brick. If there is a 
known source for replacements, this should be included 
in the specifications. If a source cannot be determined 
prior to the bidding process, the specifications sho_uld 
include an estimated price for the replacement matenals 
with the final price based on the actual cost to the contractor. 
I 
15 

16 
Conclusion 
A good repointing job is meant to last, at least 30 years, 
and preferably 50-100 years. Shortcuts and poor 
craftsmanship result not only in diminishing the historic 
character of a building, but also in a job that looks bad, 
and will require future repointing sooner than if the 
work had been done correctly (Fig. 17). The mortar 
joint in a historic masonry building has often been 
called a wall's "first line of defense." Good repointing 
practices guarantee the long life of the mortar joint, the 
wall, and the historic structure. Although careful 
maintenance will help preserve the freshly repainted 
mortar joints, it 
is important to remember that mortar joints 
are intended to be sacrificial and will probably require 
repointing some time in the future. Nevertheless, if the 
historic mortar joints proved durable for many years, then 
careful repointing should have an equally long life, ultimately 
contributing to the preservation of the entire building. 
Selected Reading 
Ashurst, John & Nicola. Practical Building Conservation. Vol. 3: 
Mortars, Plasters and Renders. New York: Halsted Press, a 
Division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1988. 
Cliver, E. Blaine. "Tests for the Analysis of Mortar Samples." 
Bulletin of the Association for Preservation Technology. Vol. 6, 
No. 1 (1974), pp. 68-73. 
Coney, William B., AIA. Masonry Repainting of Twentieth­
Century Buildings. Illinois Preservation Series. Number 10. 
Springfield, IL: Division of Preservation Services, Illinois 
Historic Preservation Agency, 1989. 
Davidson, J.l. "Masonry Mortar." Canadian Building Digest. 
CBD 163. Ottawa, ONT: Division of Building Research, 
National Research Council of Canada, 1974. 
Ferro, Maximillian 
L., AIA, RIBA. "The Russack System for 
Brick and Mortar Description: A Field Method for 
Assessing Masonry Hardness." Technology and Conservation. 
Vol. 5, No. 2 (Summer 1980), pp. 32-35. 
Hooker, Kenneth A. "Field Notes on Repainting." Aberdeen's 
Magazine of Masonry Construction. Vol. 4, No. 8 (August 
1991), pp. 326-328. 
Jedrzejewska, H. "Old Mortars in Poland: A New Method of 
Investigation." Studies in Conservation. Vol. 5, No. 4 (1960), 
pp. 132-138. 
"Lime's Role in Mortar ." Aberdeen's Magazine of Masonry 
Construction. Vol. 9, No. 8 (August 1996), pp. 364-368. 
Phillips, Morgan W. "Brief Notes on the Subjects of Analyzing 
Paints and Mortars and the Recording of Moulding Profiles: 
The Trouble with Paint and Mortar Analysis." Bulletin of the 
Association for Preservation Technology. Vol. 10, No. 2 (1978), 
pp . 77-89. 
Preparation and Use of Lime Mortars: An Introduction to the 
Principles of Using Lime Mortars. Scottish Lime Centre for 
Historic Scotland. Edinburgh: Historic Scotland, 1995. 
Schierhorn, Carolyn. "Ensuring Mortar Color Consistency." 
Aberdeen's Magazine of Masonry Construction. Vol. 9, No. 1 
(January 1996), pp. 33-35. 
"Should Air-Entrained Mortars Be Used?" Aberdeen's Magazine 
of Masonry Construction. Vol. 7, No. 9 (September 1994), 
pp. 419-422. 
Sickels-Taves, Lauren B. "Creep, Shrinkage, and Mortars in 
Historic Preservation." Journal of Testing and Evaluation, 
JTEVA. Vol. 23, No. 6 (November 1995), pp. 447-452. 
Speweik, John P. The History of Masonry Mortar in America, 
1720-1995. Arlington, VA: National Lime Association, 1995. 
Speweik, John P. "Repainting Right: Why Using Modern 
Mortar Can Damage a Historic House." Old-House Journal. 
Vol. XXV, No. 4 (July-August 1997), pp. 46-51. 
Technical Notes on Brick Construction. Brick Institute of America, 
Reston, VA. 
"Moisture Resistance 
of Brick Masonry: Maintenance." 7F. 
February 1986. 
"Mortars for Brick Masonry." 8 Revised II. November 1989. 
"Standard Specification for Portland Cement-Lime Mortar 
for Brick Masonry." BA Revised. September 1988 . 
"Mortar for Brick Masonry-Selection and Controls." 8B 
Reissued. September 1988. (July/ August 1976). 
"Guide Specifications for Brick Masonry, Part V Mortar and 
Grout."llE Revised. September 1991. 
"Bonds and Patterns in Brickwork." 30 Reissued . 
September 1988. 
Useful Addresses 
Brick Institute of America 
11490 Commerce Park Drive 
Reston, VA 22091 
Portland Cement Association 
5420 Old Orchard Road 
Skokie, IL 60077 
Acknowledgments 
National Lime Association 
200 N. Glebe Road, Suite 800 
Arlington, VA 22203 
Robert C. Mack, FAIA, is a principal in the firm of MacDonald & Mack , 
Architects, Ltd., an architectural firm that specializes in historic 
buildings in Minneapolis, Minnesota. John P. Speweik , CSI, Toledo, 
Ohio, is a 5th-generation stonemason, and principal in U.S. Heritage 
Group, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, which does custom historic mortar 
matching. Anne Grimmer, Senior Architectural Historian, Heritage 
Preservation Services Program, National Park Service, was responsible 
for developing and coordinating the revision of this Preservation Brief, 
incorporating professional comments, and the technical editing. 
The authors and the editor wish to thank the following for the 
professional and technical review they provided: Mark Macpherson and 
Ron Peterson, Masonry Restoration Contractors, Macpherson-Towne 
Company, Minneapolis, MN; Lorraine Schnabel, Architectural 
Conservator, John Milner Associates, Inc ., Philadelphia, PA; Lauren B. 
Sickels-Taves, Ph.D., Architectural Conservator, Biohistory International , 
Huntington Woods, MI; and the following National Park Service profes­
sional staff, including: E. Blaine Cliver, Chief, Historic American 
Buildings Survey /Historic American Engineering Record; Douglas C. 
Hicks, Deputy Superintendent, Historic Preservation Training Center, 
Frederick, MD; Chris McGuigan, Supervisory Exrubits Specialist, 
Historic Preservation Training Center, Frederick, MD; Charles E. Fisher, 
Sharon C. Park, FAIA, John Sandor, Technical Preservation Services 
Branch, Heritage Preservation Services, and Kay D. Weeks, Heritage 
Preservation Services. 
The original version of this brief, Repainting Mortar Joints in Historic Brick 
Buildings, was written by Robert C. Mack in 1976, and was revised and 
updated in 1980 by Robert C. Mack, de Teel Patterson Tiller, and James 
S. Askins. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the 
Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic 
properties. Comments about this publication should be directed to 
de Teel Patterson Tiller, Chief, Heritage Preservation Services Program, 
National Park Service, 1849 C Street, N. W. Suite NC200, Washington, 
D.C. 20240. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced 
without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the 
National Park Service are appreciated. 
Front Cover: Repainting a historic brick building using a lime-based mortar. 
Traditional lime mortars have a consistency that enables the mortar to cling 
to a repainting tool while in a vertical position. Photo: John P. Speweik. 
ISSN:0885-7016 October 1998 