19 PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
The Repair and Replacement of 
Historic Wooden Shingle Roofs 
Sharon C. Park, AIA 
U.S. Department of the Interior , National Park Service 
Preservation Assistance Division , Technical Preservation Services 
The Secretary of the Interior 's "Stand ards for Rehabilitation " call for the repair or replacement of missing architectural features "based on 
accurate duplication of feature s, substantiat ed by historic , physical, or pictorial evidenc e rather than on conjectural designs ." On a 
wooden shingle roof, it is impo rtant not onl y to match the size, shape, texture , and configuration of historic shingles , but also to match 
the craftsmanship and details that character ize the historic roof. Proper installation and maintenanc e will extend the life of the new roof. 
Introduction 
Wooden shingle roofs are important elements of many 
historic buildings. The special visual qualities imparted 
by both the historic shingles and the installation patterns 
should be preserved when a wooden shingle roof is 
replaced . This requires an understanding of the size, 
shape, and detailing of the historic shingle and the 
method of fabrication and installation. These combined 
to create roofs expressive of particular architectural 
styles, which were often influenced by regional craft 
practices. The use of wooden shingles from the early 
settlement days to the present illustrates an extraordi ­
nary range of styles (see illus . 1, 2, 3, 4). 
Wooden shingle roofs need periodic replacement . 
They can last from 15 to over 60 years, but the shingles 
should be replaced before there is deterioration of other 
wooden components of the building. Appropriate re­
placement shingles are available, but careful research , 
design, specifications, and the selection of a skilled 
roofer are necessary to assure a job that will both pre­
serve the appearance of the historic building and ex­
tend the useful life of the replacement roof . 
Unfortunately , the wrong shingles are often selected 
or are installed in a manner incompatible with the ap­
pearance of the historic roof. There are a number of 
reasons why the wrong shingles are selected for re­
placement roofs. They include the failure to identify 
the appearance of the original shingles; unfamiliarit y 
with available products ; an inadequate budget; or a 
confusion in terminology. In any discussion about historic 
roofing materials and practices, it is important to un­
derstand the historic definitions of terms like "shin ­
gles;' as well as the modern definitions or use of those 
terms by craftsmen and the industry. Historically, from 
the first buildings in America, these wooden roofing 
products were called shingles, regardless of whether 
they were the earliest handsplit or the later machine­
sawn type. The term shake is a relatively recent one, 
and today is used by the industry to distinguish the 
sawn products from the split products, but through 
most of our building history there has been no such 
distinction. 
Considering the confusion among architects and 
others regarding these terms as they relate to the ap­
pearance of early roofs, it should be stated that there is 
a considerable body of documentary information about 
historic roofing practices and materials in this country, 
and that many actual specimens of historic shingles 
from various periods and places have been collected 
and preserved so that their historic appearances are 
well established. Essentially, the rustic looking shake 
that we see used so much today has little in common 
with the shingles that were used on most of our early 
buildings in America. 
Throughout this Brief, the term shingle will be used 
to refer to historic wooden roofs in general, whether 
split or sawn, and the term shake will be used only 
when it refers to a commercially available product. The 
variety and complexity of terminology used for cur­
rently available products will be seen in the accom­
panying chart entitled "Shingles and Shakes." 
This Brief discusses what to look for in historic 
wooden shingle roofs and when to replace them. It 
discusses ways to select or modify modern products to 
duplicate the appearance of a historic roof, offers guid­
ance on proper installation, and provides information 
on coatings and maintenance procedures to help pre­
serve the new roof .* 
(*Preservation Brief 4: Roofing for Historic Buildings discusses 
research methods , analysis of deterioration, and the general signifi­
cance of historic roofs .) 

Wooden Shingle Roofs in America 
Because trees were plentiful from the earliest settle­
ment days, the use of wood for all aspects of construc­
tion is not surprising. Wooden shingles were 
lightweight, made with simple tools, and easily in­
stalled. Wooden shingle roofs were prevalent in the 
Colonies, while in Europe at the same time, thatch, 
slate and tile were the prevalent roofing materials. Dis­
tinctive roofing patterns exist in various regions of the 
country that were settled by the English, Dutch, Ger­
mans, and Scandinavians. These patterns and features 
include the size, shape and exposure length of shin­
gles, special treatments such as swept valleys, combed 
ridges, and decorative butt end or long side-lapped 
beveled handsplit shingles. Such features impart a 
special character to each building, and prior to any 
restoration or rehabilitation project the physical and 
photographic evidence should be carefully researched 
in order to document the historic building as much as 
1. The Rolfe-Warren House, a tidewater Virginia property, was restored to its 
18th-century appearance in 1933. The handsplit and dressed wooden shin­
gles are typical of the tidewater area with special features such as curved 
butts, projecting ridge comb and closed swept valleys at the dormer roof 
connections. Circa 1970 Photo: Association for the Preservation of Virginia 
Antiquities. 
3. Readily available and inexpensive sawn shingles were used not only for 
roofs, but also for gables and wall surfaces. The circa 1891 Chambers House, 
Eugene, Oregon used straight sawn butts for the majority of the roof an~ 
hexagonal butts for the lower portion of the corner tower. Decorative shin­
gles in the gable ends and an attractive wooden roof cresting feature were 
also used. Photo: Lane County Historical Society. 
2 
possible . Care should be taken not to assume that aged 
or deteriorated shingles in photographs represent the 
historic appearance. 
Shingle Fabrication. Historically wooden shingles were 
usually thin (3/8" -3/4"), relatively narrow (3" -8"), of 
varying length (14" -36"), and almost always smooth. 
The traditional method for making wooden shingles in 
the 17th and 18th centuries was to handsplit them from 
log sections known as bolts (see illus . SA). These bolts 
were quartered or split into wedges. A mallet and froe 
(or ax) were used to split or rive out thin planks of 
wood along the grain. If a tapered shingle was desired, 
the bolt was flipped after each successive strike with 
the froe and mallet. The wood species varied according 
to available local woods, but only the heartwood, or 
inner section, of the log was usually used. The softer 
sapwood generally was not used because it deterio­
rated quickly. Because handsplit shingles were some­
what irregular along the split surface, it was necessary 
2. Handsplit and dressed shingles were also used on less elaborate buildings 
as seen in the restoration of the circa 1840 kitchen at the Winedale Inn, 
Texas. The uneven surfaces of the handsplit shingles were generally dressed 
or smoothed with a draw-knife to keep the rainwater from collecting in the 
wood grain and to ensure that the shingles lay flat on the sub-roof. Photo: 
Thomas Taylor. 
4. With the popularity of the revival of historic styles in_ the late 19th and 
early 20th centuries, a new technique was developed to imitate English 
thatch roofs. For the Tudor Revival thatch cottages, steaming and curving of 
sawn shingles provided an undulating pattern to this picturesque roof shape. 
Photo: Courtesy of C.H. Roofing. 

to dress or plane the shingles on a shavinghorse with a 
draw-knife or draw-shave (see illus. 5B) to make them 
fit evenly on the roof. This reworking was necessary to 
provide a tight-fitting roof over typically open shingle 
lath or sheathing boards: Dressing, or smoothing of 
shingles, was almost universal, no matter what wood 
was used or in what part of the country the building 
was located, except in those cases where a temporary 
or very utilitarian roof was needed. 
Shingle fabrication was revolutionized in the early 
19th century by steam-powered saw mills (see illus . 6). 
Shingle mills made possible the production of uniform 
shingles in mass quantities . The sawn shingle of uni­
form taper and smooth surface eliminated the need to 
hand dress. The supply of wooden shingles was there­
fore no longer limited by local factors. These changes 
coincided with (and in turn increased) the popularity 
of architectural styles such as Carpenter Gothic and 
Queen Anne that used shingles to great effect. 
Handsplit shingles continued to be used in many 
places well after the introduction of machine sawn 
shingles. There were, of course, other popular roofing 
materials, and some regions rich in slate had fewer 
examples of wooden shingle roofs. Some western 
5. Custom Handsplit shingles are still made the traditional way with a mallet and froe or ax. For these cypress shingles, a "bolt" section of log (photo A) the length 
of the shingle has been sawn and is ready to be split into wedge-shaped segments. Handsplit shingles are fabricated with the ax or froe cutting the wood along the 
grain and separating, or riving, the shingle away from the remaining wedge. The rough surfaces are dressed on a shavinghorse using a draw-knife as shown above 
(photo B). Note the long wooden shingles covering the work shed in photo A. Photos: Al Honeycutt, North Carolina Division of Archives and History. 
6. Modern machine-made shingles are sawn. Shown are: (photo A) Eastern White Pine quarter split shingle block on equalizer saw being trimmed to parallel the 
ends; and (photo B) the restored 19th-century shingle mill saw cutting tapered flitches or shingles. The thickness and taper can be precisely controlled. Photo: Steve 
Ruscio, The Shingle Mill. 
3 

VEJ,ITIUJlON CHANNEL 
TYPICAL Dl!TAJL-mffALLo\TION 0,1,0NC IIAXIALU-TAPEUD fltlNCLU 
I 
• 
"boom'' towns used sheet metal because it was light 
and easily shipped. Slate, terneplate, and clay tile were 
used on ornate buildings and in cities that limited the 
use of flammable wooden shingles. Wooden shingles, 
however, were never abandoned. Even in the 20th cen­
tury, architectural styles such as the Colonial Revival 
and Tudor Revival, used wooden shingles. 
Modern wooden shingles, both sawn and split, con­
tinue to be made, but it is important to understand 
how these new products differ from the historic ones 
and to know how they can be modified for use on his­
toric buildings. Modem commercially available shakes 
are generally thicker than the historic handsplit coun­
terpart and are usually left "undressed" with a rough, 
corrugated surface. The rough surface shake, further­
more, is often promoted as suitable for historic preser­
vation projects because of its rustic appearance. It is an 
erroneous assumption that the more irregular the shin­
gle, the more authentic or "historic" it will appear. 
Historic Detailing and Installation Techniques. While 
the size, shape and finish of the shingle determine the 
roof's texture and scale, the installation patterns and 
details give the roof its unique character. Many details 
reflect the craft practices of the builders and the archi­
tectural style prevalent at the time of construction . 
Other details had specific purposes for reducing mois­
ture penetration to the structure. In addition to the 
most visible aspects of a shingle roof, the details at the 
rake boards, eaves, ridges, hips, dormers, cupolas, 
gables, and chimneys should not be overlooked . 
The way the shingles were laid was often based on 
functional and practical needs. Because a roof is the 
most vulnerable element of a building, many of the 
roofing details that have become distinctive features 
were first developed simply to keep water out. Roof 
combs on the windward side of a roof protect the ridge 
line. Wedges, or cant strips, at dormer cheeks roll the 
water away from the vertical wall. Swept valleys and 
fanned hips keep the grain of the wood in the shingle 
parallel to the angle of the building joint to aid water 
7. The reshingling of the circa 1856 Stovewood House in Decorah, Iowa, 
revealed the original open sheathing boards and pole rafters. Sawn cedar 
shingles were used as a replacement for the historic cedar shingles seen still 
in place at the ridge. A new starter course is being laid at the eaves. Photo: 
Norwegian-American Museum, Decorah, Iowa. 
4 
8. The long biaxially tapered handsplit shingles on the Ephrata Cloisters in 
Pennsylvania were overlapped both vertically and horizontally. The insert 
sketch shows channels under the shingles that provided ventilation and 
drainage of any trapped moisture. The aged appearance of these handsplit 
and dressed shingles belies their original smoothness. Replacement shingles 
should match the original, not the aged appearance. Photo: National Park 
Service; Sketch: Reed Engle. 
9. This 1927 view of the reshingling of the French Castle at Old Fort Niag­
ara, N. Y., shows the wooden sleepers being laid (see arrow) over solid 
sheathing in order to raise the shingles up slightly to allow under-shingle 
ventilation. Note that the horizontal strips are not continuous to allow 
airflow and trapped moisture to drain away. This cedar roof has lasted for 
over 60 years in a harsh moist environment. Photo: Old Fort Niagara, 
Assoc. Inc. 

10. The Historic Details and Installation Patterns Chart illustrates a number of special features found on wooden roofs. Documented examples of these features, 
different for every building and often reflecting regional variations, should be accurately reproduced when a replacement roof is installed. Chart: Sharon C. Park; 
delineation by Kaye Ellen Simonson. 
WOODEN SHINGLES-HISTORIC DETAILS AND INSTALLATION PATTERNS 
Shingle Patterns 
I I 
Long biaxially­
tapered, side1apped 
Ridges 
Traditional 
overlap 
Projecting 
L--..£2.:__.L_ ______ __J comb 
Hips 
Traditional alternating 
shingle hip 
Alternating 
closed 
ridge 
Boston capped 
hip 
Fancy butts 
(fishscales shown) 
Board 
ridge 
Rolled 
metal 
ridge 
cover 
Wooden 
crest 
Rolled metal 
hip cover 
Staggered 
overfap 
Valleys 
Steamed & bent 
"thatch" 
Closed 
swept 
valley 
Open 
valley with 
wooden 
wedge 
Fanned or swirled 
alternating shingle hip 
5 

run-off. The slight projection of the shingles at the 
eaves directs the water run-off either into a gutter or off 
the roof away from the exterior wall. These details var­
ied from region to region and from style to style. They 
can be duplicated even with the added protection of 
modern flashing. 
In order to have a weathertight roof, it was important 
to have adequate coverage, proper spacing of shingles, 
and straight grain shingles. Many roofs were laid on 
open shingle lath or open sheathing boards (see illus. 
7). Roofers typically laid three layers of shingles with 
approximately 1/3 of each shingle exposed to the 
weather. Spaces between shingles (1/8" -1/2" depend­
ing on wood type) allowed the shingles to expand 
when wet. It was important to stagger each overlap­
ping shingle by a minimum of 1-1/2" to avoid a direct 
path for moisture to penetrate a joint. Doubling or tri­
pling the starter course at the eave gave added protec­
tion to this exposed surface. In order for the roof to lay 
as flat as possible, the thickness, taper and surface of 
the shingles was relatively uniform; any unevenness on 
handsplit shingles had already been smoothed away 
with a draw knife. To keep shingles from curling or 
cupping, the shingle width was generally limited to 
less than 10". 
Not all shingles were laid in evenly spaced, overlap­
ping, horizontal rows. In various regions of the coun­
try, there were distinct installation patterns; for 
example, the biaxially-tapered long shingles occasion­
ally found in areas settled by the Germans (see illus. 
8). These long shingles were overlapped on the side as 
well as on top. This formed a ventilation channel under 
the shingles that aided drying. Because ventilation of 
the shingles can prolong their life, roofers paid atten­
tion to these details (see illus. 9). 
Early roofers believed that applied coatings would 
protect the wood and prolong the life of the roof. In 
many cases they did; but in many cases, the shingles 
were left to weather naturally and they, too, had a long 
life. Eighteenth-century coatings included a pine pitch 
coating not unlike turpentine, and boiled linseed oil or 
fish oil mixed with oxides, red lead, brick dust, or 
other minerals to produce colors such as yellow, Vene­
tian red, Spanish brown, and slate grey. In the 19th 
century, in addition to the earlier colors, shingles were 
stained or painted to complement the building colors: 
Indian red, chocolate brown, or brown-green. During 
the Greek Revival and later in the 20th century with 
other revival styles, green was also used. Untreated 
shingles age to a silver-grey or soft brown depending 
on the wood species. 
The craft traditions of the builders often played an 
important role in the final appearance of the building. 
The Historic Details and Installation Patterns Chart (see 
illus. 10) identifies many of the features found on his­
toric wooden roofs. These elements, different on each 
building, should be preserved in a re-roofing project. 
Replacing Deteriorated Roofs: 
Matching the Historic Appearance 
Historic wooden roofs using straight edgegrain heart­
wood shingles have been known to last over sixty 
years. Fifteen to thirty years, however, is a more realis­
tic lifespan for most premium modern wooden shingle 
roofs. Contributing factors to deterioration include the 
6 
11. The replacement sawn red cedar shingles matched the deteriorated shin­
gles exactly for this barn re-roofing. The old shingles, seen to the far left, 
were removed as the new shingles were installed. Even the horizontal cours­
ing matched because the exposure length for both old and new shingles was 
the same. Photo: Williamsport Preservation Training Center. 
thinness of the shingle, the durability of the wood spe­
cies used, the exposure to the sun, the slope of the 
roof, the presence of lichens or moss growing on the 
shingle, poor ventilation levels under the shingle or in 
the r9of, the presence of overhanging tree limbs, pollu­
tants in the air, the original installation method, and 
the history of the roof maintenance. Erosion of the 
softer wood within the growth rings is caused by rain­
water, wind, grit, fungus and the breakdown of cells 
by ultraviolet rays in sunlight. If the shingles cannot 
adequately dry between rains, if moss and lichens are 
allowed to grow, or if debris is not removed from the 
roof, moisture will be held in the wood and accelerate 
deterioration. Moisture trapped under the shingle, 
condensation, or poorly ventilated attics will also accel­
erate deterioration. 
In addition to the eventual deterioration of wooden 
shingles, impact from falling branches and workmen 
walking on the roof can cause localized damage. If, 
however, over 20% of the shingles on any one surface 
appear eroded, cracked, cupped or split, or if there is 
evidence of pervasive moisture damage in the attic, 
replacement should be considered. If only a few shin­
gles are missing or damaged, selective replacement 
may be possible. For limited replacement, the old shin­
gle is removed and a new shingle can be inserted and 
held in place with a thin metal tab, or "babbie." This 
reduces disturbance to the sound shingles above . In 
instances where a few shingles have been cracked or 
the joint of overlapping shingles is aligned and thus 
forms a passage for water penetration, a metal flashing 
piece slipped under the shingle can stop moisture tem­
porarily. If moisture is getting into the attic, repairs 
must be made quickly to prevent deterioration of the 
roof structural framing members. 
When damage is extensive, replacement of the shin­
gles will be necessary, but the historic sheathing or 
shingle lath under the shingles may be in satisfactory 
condition. Often, the historic sheathing or shingle 
laths, by their size, placement, location of early nail 
holes, and water stain marks, can give important infor-

::::=:=:.----w== 
p F ,...... 
12. Inappropriately selected and installed wooden shingles can drastically 
alter the historic character of a building. This tavern historically was roofed 
with handsplit and dressed shingles of a relatively smooth appearance. In 
this case, a commercially available shake was used to effect a "rustic" appear­
ance. Photo: National Park Service. 
mation regarding the early shingles used. Before speci­
fying a replacement roof, it is important to establish the 
original shingle material, configuration, detailing and instal­
lation (see illus. 11). If the historic shingles are still in 
place, it is best to remove several to determine the size, 
shape, exposure length, and special features from the 
unweathered portions. If there are already replacement 
shingles on the roof, it may be necessary to verify 
through photographic or other research whether the 
shingles currently on the roof were an accurate replace­
ment of the historic shingles. 
The following information is needed in order to de­
velop accurate specifications for a replacement shingle: 
Original wood type (White Oak, Cypress, Eastern 
White Pine, Western, Red Cedar, etc.) 
Size of shingle (length, width, butt thickness, taper) 
Exposure length and nailing pattern (amount of expo­
sure, placement and type of nails) 
Type of fabrication (sawn, handsplit, dressed, beveled, 
etc.) 
Distinctive details (hips, ridges, valleys, dormers, etc.) 
Decorative elements (trimmed butts, variety of pattern, 
applied color coatings, exposed nails) 
Type of substrate ( open shingle lath or sheathing, 
closed sheathing, insulated attics, sleepers, etc.) 
Replacement roofs must comply with local codes 
which may require, for example, the use of shingles 
treated with chemicals or pressure-impregnated salts to 
retard fire. These requirements can usually be met 
without long-term visual effects on the appearance of 
the replacement roof. 
The accurate duplication of a wooden shingle roof 
will help ensure the preservation of the building's ar­
chitectural integrity. Unfortunately, the choice of an 
inappropriate shingle or poor installation can severely 
detract from the building's historic appearance (see 
illus. 12). There are a number of commercially available
wooden roofing products as well as custom roofers 
who can supply specially-made shingles for historic 
preservation projects (see Shingle and Shake Chart, 
illus. 13). Unless restoration or reconstruction is being 
 
undertaken, shingles that nnatch the visual appearance 
of the historic roof without , replicating every aspect of 
the original shingles will normally suffice. For example, 
if the historic wood species is no longer readily availa­
ble, Western Red Cedar or Eastern White Pine may be 
acceptable. Or, if the shingles are located high on a 
roof, sawn shingles or commercially available shakes 
with the rustic faces factory•sawn off may adequately 
reproduce the appearance of an historic handsplit and 
dressed shingle. 
There will always be certaj.n features, however, that 
are so critical to the building's character that they 
should be accurately reproduced. Following is guid­
ance on matching the most important visual elements. 
Highest Priority in Replacement Shingles: 
• best quality wood with a similar surface texture 
• matching size and shape: thickness, width, length 
• matching installation pattern: exposure length, over­
lap, hips, ridges, valleys, etc. 
• matching decorative features: fancy butts, color, ex-
posed nails 
Areas of Acceptable Differences: 
• species of wood 
• method of fabrication of shingle, if visual appearance 
matches 
• use of fire-retardants, or preservative treatments, if 
visual impact is minimal 
• use of modern flashing, if sensitively installed 
• use of small sleepers for ventilation, if the visual 
impact is minimal and rake boards are sensitively 
treated 
• method of nailing, if the visual pattern matches 
Treatments and Materials to Avoid: 
• highly textured wood surfaces and irregular butt 
ends, unless documented 
• standardized details (prefab hips, ridges, panels, etc.) 
unless documented 
• too wide shingles or those with flat grain (which may 
curl), unless documented 
What is Currently Available 
Types of Wood: Western Red Cedar, Eastern White 
Pine, and White Oak are most readily available today. 
For custom orders, cypress, red oak, and a number of 
other historically used woods may still be available. 
Some experiments using non-traditional woods (such 
as yellow pine and hemlock) treated with preservative 
chemicals are being tested for the new construction 
market, but are generally too thick, curl too easily, or 
have too pronounced a grain for use on historic build­
ings. 
Method of manufacture: Commercially available mod­
ern shingles and shakes are for the most part machine­
made. While commercially available shakes are 
promoted by the industry as handsplit, most are split 
by machine (this reduces the high cost of hand labor). 
True handsplit shingles, made the traditional way with 
a froe and mallet, are substantially more expensive, but 
are more authentic in appearance than the rough, 
highly textured machine-split shakes. An experienced 
shingler can control the thickness of the handsplit 
shingle and keep the shingle surface grain relatively 
7 

AVAILABLE WOODEN SHINGLES AND SHAKES FOR RE-ROOFING 
TYPE SIZE DESCRIPTION NOTES 
Appropriate if: 
• Worked to match 
uniformly dressed 
original shingles 
Custom 
split& 
dressed 
Handsplit the traditional way with 
froe & mallet. Tapered. Surfaces 
dressed for smoothness 
Made to match historic 
shingles 
Appropriate if: 
• irregular surfaces are 
dressed 
• butt thicknesses ordered 
uniform 
• wide shingles are split 
Commercially available. Handsplit 
the traditional way with froe & 
mallet. Tapered . Bundles contain 
varying widths & butt thicknesses. 
Surfaces may be irregular along 
grain. 
Typically: 
L=15", 18", 24" 
W=4"-14" 
Butts vary 1/2" -3/4" 
Tapersplit* 
Commercially available. Hand or 
machine split without taper. 
Bundles contain varying butt 
thicknesses; often very wide 
shingles. Surface may be irregular 
along the grain. Thick shingles not 
historic. 
Typically: 
L=- 15", 18", 24" 
W=4"-14" 
Butts vary 
mediums• 3/8-3/4" 
heavies= 3/4-1 ¼" 
Not appropriate for most 
preservation projects 
• Limited use of thin, 
even straightsplits on 
some cabins, barns, etc. 
Straightsplit 
Typically: 
L • 15", 18", 24" 
W=4" - 14" 
Butts vary 
mediums• 3/8-3/4" 
heavies= 3/4-1¼" 
Commercially available. Machine 
split and sawn on the backs to 
taper. Split faces often irregular, 
even corrugated in appearance. 
Butt thickness vary and may be too 
wide. 
Not appropriate for 
preservation projects Handsplit* 
resawn 
Appropriate if: 
• butt thicknesses ordered 
uniform 
• wide shingles are split 
• pronounced saw marks 
sanded 
Commercially available. Made from 
split products with sawn surfaces. 
Tapered. Butt thicknesses vary and 
shingles may be too wide. Saw 
marks may be pronounced . 
Typically: 
L=l5", 18", 24" 
W•4"-14" 
Butts vary 1/2" -3/4" 
Tapersawn* 
Typically: 
L= 16"- .40 ( <3/8") 
18"- .45 
24" - .50 (1/2") 
W = Varies by order 
Sawn­
straight 
butt 
Appropriate to reproduce 
historic sawn shingles Custom or commercially available. 
Tapered. Sawn by circular saw. 
V 
'Ty
L
W 
u 
V 
v 
pically: 
= 16"- .40 ( <3/8") 
18" -.45 
24" -.50 (1/2") 
= Varies by order 
Sawn­
fancy 
butt 
Custom or ~ommercially available. 
Tapered. Sawn by circular saw. A 
variety of fancy butts available 
Appropriate to reproduce 
historic fancy butts 
Custom or commercially available. 
Tapered. Thin sawn shingles are 
steamed and bent into rounded 
forms . 
Appropriate to reproduce 
"thatch" shingles Varies by order to match, 
"Thatch" roofs Steam-bent 
13. This chart identifies a variety of shingles and shakes used for reroofing buildings. The * identifies product names used by the Red Cedar Shingle and Handsplit 
Shake Bureau, although shingles and shakes of the types described are available in other woods. Manufacturers define "Shakes" as split products while "shingles" 
refer to sawn products. Shingle, however, is the historic term used to describe wooden roofing products, regardless of how they were made. Whether shingles or 
shakes are specified for re-roofing, they should match the size and appearance of the historic shingles. Chart: Sharon C. Park; delineation by Kaye Ellen Simonson. 
8 

even. To have an even roof installation, it is important 
to have handsplit shingles of uniform taper and to have 
less than 118th variation across the surface of the shin­
gle. For that reason, it is important to dress the shin­
gles or to specify uniform butt thickness, taper, and 
surfaces. Commercially available shakes are shipped 
with a range of butt sizes within a bundle (e.g., 1/2" , 
5/8", 3/4" as a mix) unless otherwise specified. Com­
mercially available shakes with the irregular surfaces 
sawn off are also available . In many cases, except for 
the residual circular saw marks, these products appear 
not unlike a dressed handsplit shingle. 
Sawn shingles are still made much the same way as 
they were historically-using a circular saw. The circu­
lar saw marks are usually evident on the surface of 
most sawn shingles. There are a number of grooved, 
striated , or steamed shingles of the type used in the 
20th century to effect a rustic or thatched appearanc e. 
Custom sawn shingles with fancy butts or of a speci ­
fied thickness are still available through mill shops. In 
fact, shingles can be fabricated to the weathered thick ­
ness in order to be integrated into an existing historic 
roof. If sawn shingles are being used as a substitute for 
dressed handsplit shingles, it may be desirable to belt 
sand the surface of the sawn shing les to reduce the 
prominence of the circular saw marks. 
As seen from the Shingle and Shake chart , few of the 
commercially available shakes can be used without 
some modification or careful specification. Some, such 
as heavy shakes with a corrugated face, should be 
avoided altogether. While length, width, and butt con­
figuration can be specified, it is more difficult to ensure 
that the thickness and the texture will be correct . For 
that reason, whatever shingle or shake is desired, it is 
important to view samples, preferably an entire bun­
dle, before specifying or ordering . If shingles are to be 
trimmed at the site for special conditions , such as 
fanned hips or swept valleys, additional shingles 
should be ordered. 
Coatings and Treatments: Shingles are treated to obtain 
a fire-retardant rating; to add a fungicide preservative 
(generally toxic); to revitalize the wood with a penetrat­
ing stain (oil as well as water-based) ; and to give color. 
While shingles can be left untreated , local codes may 
require that only fire-retardant shingles be used. In 
those circumstances, there are several methods of ob­
taining rated shingles (generally class "B" or "C"). The 
most effective and longest-lasting treatment is to have 
treated salts pressure-impregnated into the wood cells 
after the shingles have been cut. Another method 
(which must be periodically renewed) is to apply chem­
icals to the surface of the shingles. If treated shingles 
need trimming at the site, it is important to check with 
the manufacturer to ensure that the fire-retardant quali­
ties will not be lost. Pressure-impregnated shingles, 
however , may usually be trimmed without loss of fire­
retardant properties . 
The life of a shingle roof can be drastically shortened 
if moss, lichens, fungi or bacterial spores grow on the 
wood. Fungicides (such as chromated copper arsena te, 
CCA) have been found to be effective in inhibiting 
such fungal growth, but most are toxic. Red cedar has 
a natural fungicide in the wood cells and unless the 
shingles are used in unusually warm, moist environ­
ments, or where certain strains of spores are found , an 
applied fungicide is usually not needed. For most 
woods, the Forest Products Laboratory of the U.S. De­
partment of Agriculture has found that fungicides do 
extend the life of the shingles by inhibiting growth on 
or in the wood. There are a variety available . Care 
should be taken in applying these chemicals and meet­
ing local code requirements for proper handling. 
Penetrating stains and water repellent sealers are 
sometimes recommended to revitalize wood shingles 
subject to damage by ultraviolet rays. Some treatments 
are oil-borne, some are water-borne, and some are 
combined with a fungicide or a water repellent . If any 
of these treatments is to be used, they should be identi­
fied as part of the specifications. Manufacturers should 
be consulted regarding the toxicity or other potential 
complications arising from the use of a product or of 
several in combination. It is also important not to coat 
the shingles with vapor-impermeable solutions that 
will trap moisture within the shingle and cause rotting 
from beneath. 
Specifications for the Replacement Roof 
Specifications and roofing details should be developed 
for each project. Standard specifications may be used 
as a basic format, but they should be modified to re­
flect the conditions of each job. Custom shingles can 
still be ordered that accurately replicate a historic roof, 
and if the roof is simple, an experienced shingler could 
install it without complicated instructions. Most reha­
bilitation projects will involve competitive bidding, and 
each contractor should be given very specific informa­
tion as to what type of shingles are required and what 
the installation details should be . For that reason, both 
written specifications and detailed drawings should be 
part of the construction documents. 
For particularly complex jobs, it may be appropriate 
to indicate that only roofing contractors with experi­
ence in historic preservation projects be considered (see 
illus. 14). By pre-qualifying the bidders, there is greater 
assurance that a proper job will be done. For smaller 
jobs, it is always recommended that the owner or ar­
chitect find a roofing contractor who has recently com­
pleted a similar project and that the roofers are 
similarly experienced. 
Specifications identify exactly what is to be received 
from the supplier, including the wooden shingles, 
nails, flashing, and applied coatings. The specifications 
also include instructions on removing the old roofing 
(sometimes two or more earlier roofs), and on prepar­
ing the surface for the new shinglea, such as repairing 
damage to the lath or sheathing boards. If there are to 
be modifications to a standard product, such as cutting 
beveled butts, planing off residual surface circular saw 
marks, or cdntrolling the mixture of acceptable widths 
(3" -8"), these too should be specified. Every instruc­
tion for modifying the shingles themselves should be 
written into the specifications or they may be over­
looked. 
The specifications and drawn details should describe 
special features important to the roof. Swept valleys, 
combed ridges, or wedged dormer cheek run-offs 
should each be detailed not only with the patterning of 
the shingles, but also with the placement of flashing or 
other unseen reinforcements. There are some modern 
products that appear to be useful. For example, paper-
9 

II 
II ~____,. 
Replacement Roofing for Appomattox Manor: City 
Point Unit of Petersburg National Battlefield, Hope­
well, Virginia 
A. The later non-historic shingles were removed from Appomattox Manor 
(circa 1840 with later additions) and roofing paper was installed for tempo­
rary protection during the re-shingling. 
B. These weathered historic 19th-century handsplit and dressed shingles 
were found in place under a later altered roof. Note the straight butt eave 
shingles under the curved butts of the historic dormer shingles. 
D. The fanned hips (seen here), swept valleys, and projecting ridge combs 
were installed as part of the re-roofing project. Special features, when docu­
mented, should be reproduced when re-shingling historic roofs. 
Excerpts from Specifications: 
Type of wood to be used: Western Red Cedar . 
Grade of wood and manufacturing process: Number 
One, Tapersplit Shakes, 100% clear, 100% edgegrain, 
100% heartwood, no excessive grain sweeps, curvatures 
not to exceed 1/2" from level plain in length of shake; 
off grade (7% tolerance) material must not be used. 
Size of the shingle: 18" long, 5/8" butt tapered to 1/4" 
head, 3" -4" wide, sawn curved butts, 5-1/2" exposure 
Surface finish and any applied coatings: relatively 
smooth natural grain, no more than 1/8" variation in 
surface texture, butt thickness to be uniform through­
out bundles . Site dipped with fire-rated chemicals 
tinted with red iron oxide for opaque color. 
Type of nails and flashing: double hot dipped galva­
nized nails sized to penetrate sheathing totally; metal 
flashing to be 20 oz. lead-coated copper, or terne­
coated stainless steel; additional flashing reinforcement 
to be aluminum foil type with fiber backing to use at 
hips, ridges, eaves, and valleys. 
Type of sheathing: uninsulated attic, any deteriorated 
3/4" sheathing boards, spaced 1/2" -3/4", to be replaced 
in kind. 
C. The replacement shingles (see specifications above), matched the historic 
shingles and were of such high quality that little hand dressing was needed 
at the site. The building paper, a temporary protection, was removed as the 
shingles were installed on the sheathing boards. 
E. In order to achieve a "Class B" fire-rating, the shingles were dipped in 
fire-retardant chemicals and allowed to dry prior to installation. Iron oxide 
was added to this chemical dip to stain the shingles to match the historic red 
color. These coatings will need periodic reapplication. 
14. Original 19th-century handsplit and dressed wooden shingles 18" long, 3" -4" wide, and 5/8" thick were found in place on the Appomattox Manor at Hopewell, 
Virginia. The butts were curved and evidence of a red stain remained. The specifications and details were researched so that the appearance of the historic shingles 
and installation patterns could be matched in the re-shingling project. Photos: John Ingle. 
10 

coated and reinforced metal-laminated flashing is easy 
to use and, in combination with other flashing, gives 
added protection over eaves and other vulnerab~e ~­
eas; adhesives give a stronger attachment at proiectmg 
roofing combs that could blow away in heavy wind 
storms. Clear or light-colored sealants may be less ob­
vious than dark mastic often used in conjunction with 
flashing or repairs. These modern treatments should 
not be overlooked if they can prolong the life of the 
roof without changing its appearance . 
Roofing Practices to Avoid 
Certain common roofing practices for modern installa­
tions should be avoided in re-roofing a historic building 
unless specifically approved in advance by the archi­
tect. These practices interfere with the proper drying of 
the shingles or result in a sloppy installation that will 
accelerate deterioration (see illus. 15). They include 
improper coverage and spacing of shingles, use of sta­
ples to hold shingles, inadequate ventilation, P.U:tic~­
larly for heavily insulated attics, use of heavy building 
felts as an underlayment, improper application of sur­
face coatings causing stress in the wood surfaces, and 
use of inferior flashing that will fail while the shingles 
are still in good condition. 
Avoid skimpy shingle coverage and heavy building 
papers. It has become a common modern practice to 
lay impregnated roofing felts under new wooden shin­
gle roofs. The practice is especially prevalent in roofs 
that do not achieve a full triple layering of shingles. 
Historically, approximately one third of each single was 
exposed, thus making a three-ply or three-layered roof . 
This assured adequate coverage. Due to the expense of 
wooden shingles today, some roofers expose more of 
the shingle if the pitch of the roof allows, and compen­
sate for less than three layers of shingles by using 
building felts interwoven at the top of each row of shin­
gles. This absorptive material can hold moisture on the 
underside of the shingles and accelerate deterioration. 
If a shingle roof has proper coverage and proper flash­
ing, such felts are unnecessary as a general rule . 
15. These commercially available roofing products with rustic split faces are 
not appropriate for historic preservation projects. In addition to the inaccu­
rate appearance, the irregular surfaces and often wide spaces between shin­
gles will allow wind-driven moisture to penetrate up and under them. The 
excessively wide boards will tend to cup, curl and crack. Moss, lichens and 
debris will have a tendency to collect on these irregular surfaces, further 
deteriorating the roofing. Photo: Sharon C. Park. 
However, the selective use of such felts or other rein­
forcements at ridges, hips and valleys does appear to 
be beneficial. 
Beware of heavily insulated attic rafters. Historically, 
the longest lasting shingle roofs were generally the 
ones with the best roof ventilation. Roofs with shin-
gling set directly on solid sheathing and where there is 
insulation packed tightly between the wooden rafters . 
without adequate ventilation run the risk of condensation­
related moisture damage to wooden roofing compo-
nents. This is particularly true for air-conditioned 
structures. For that reason, if insulation must be used, 
it is best to provide ventilation channels between the 
rafters and the roof decking, to avoid heavy felt build-
ing papers, to consider the use of vapor barriers, and 
perhaps to raise the shingles sligh!ly by using "sle~p-
ers" over the roof deck. This practice was popular m 
the 1920s in what the industry called a "Hollywood" 
installation, and examples of roofs lasting 60 years are 
partly due to this under-shingle ventilation (refer to 
illus. 9). 
Avoid staples and inferior flashing. The common 
practice of using pneumatic staple guns to affix si:un­
gles can result in shooting staples through the shin­
gles, in crushing the wood fibers, or in cracking the 
shingle. Instead, corrosion-resistant nails, generally 
with barked or deformed shanks long enough to ex­
tend about 3/4" into the roof decking, should be speci­
fied. Many good roofers have found that the pneumatic 
nail guns, fitted with the proper nails and set at the 
correct pressure with the nails just at the shingle sur­
face, have worked well and reduced the stress on shin­
gles from missed hammer blows. If red cedar is used, 
copper nails should not be specified because a c~emi­
cal reaction between the wood and the copper will 
reduce the life of the roof . Hot-dipped, zinc-coated, 
aluminum, or stainless steel nails should be used. In 
addition, copper flashing and gutters generally should 
not be used with red cedar shingles as staining will 
occur, although there are some historic examples where 
very heavy gauge copper was used which outlasted the 
roof shingles. Heavier weight flashing (20 oz.) holds up 
better than lighter flashing, which may deteriorate 
faster than the shingles. Some metals may react with 
salts or chemicals used to treat the shingles. This 
should be kept in mind when writing specifications. 
Terne-coated stainless steel and lead-coated copper are 
generally the top of the line if copper is not appr~priate. 
Avoid patching deteriorated roof lath or sheathing 
with plywood or composite materials. Full size lumber 
may have to be custom-ordered to match the size and 
configuration of the original sheathing in order to pro­
vide an even surface for the new shingles. It is best to 
avoid plywood or other modern composition boards 
that may deteriorate or delaminate in the future ~- there 
is undetected moisture or leakage. If large quantities of 
shingle lath or sheathing must be removed and re­
placed, the work should be done in sections to avoid 
possible shifting or collapse of the roof structure . 
Avoid spray painting raw shingles on a roof after 
installatian. Rapidly drying solvent in the paint will 
tend to warp the exposed surface of the shingles. In­
stead, it is best to dip new shingles prior to installation 
to keep all of the wood fibers in the same tension . 
Once the entire shingle has been treated, however, 
later coats can be limited to the exposed surface . 
11 

Maintenance 
The purpose of regular or routine maintenance is to 
extend the life of the roof. The roof must be kept clean 
and inspected for damage both to the shingles and to 
the flashing, sheathing, and gutters . If the roof is to be 
walked on, rubber soled shoes should be worn . If there 
is a simple ridge, a ladder can be hooked over the roof 
ridge to support and distribute the weight of the 
inspector. 
Keeping the roof free of debris is importan t. This 
may involve only sweeping off pine needles, leaves 
and branches as needed . It may involve trimming over­
hanging branches. Other aspects of maintenance, such 
as removal of moss and lichen build-up, are more diffi­
cult. While they may impart a certain charm to roofs, 
these moisture-trapping organisms will rot the shingles 
and shorten the life of the roof. Buildups may need 
scraping and the residue removed with diluted bleach­
ing solutions (chlorine), although caution should be 
used for surrounding materials and plants . Some roof­
ers recommend power washing the roofs periodically 
to remove the dead wood cells and accumulated debris . 
While this makes the roof look relatively new, it can 
put a lot of water under shingles, and the high pres­
sure may crack or otherwise damage them. The added 
water may also leach out applied coatings . 
If the roof has been treated with a fungicide, stain , or 
revitalizing oil, it will need to be re-coated every few 
years (usually every 4-5). The manufacturer should be 
consulted as to the effective life of the coating . With the 
expense associated with installation of wood shingles , 
it is best to extend the life of the roof as long as possi­
ble . One practical method is to order enough shingles 
in the beginning to use for periodic repairs. 
Periodic maintenance inspections of the roof may 
reveal loose or damaged shingles that can be selectively 
replaced before serious moisture damage occurs (see 
illus . 16). Keeping the wooden shingles in good condi­
tion and repairing the roof, flashing and guttering, as 
needed, can add years of life to the roof. 
16. Rnutine maintenance is necessary to extend the life of the roof. On this 
roof, the shingles have not seriously eroded, but the presence of lichens and 
moss is becoming evident and there are a few cracked and missing shingles. 
The moss spores should be removed, missing shingles replaced, and small 
pieces of metal flashing slipped under cracked shingles to keep moisture from 
penetrating. Photo: Williamsport Preservation Training Center. 
Cover Photo : 1907 view of a young couple's first home in a cedar 
stump with a shingled roof. Photo : Historical Society of Seattle and 
King County , Washington . 
Conclusion 
A combination of careful research to determine the 
historic appearance of the roof, good specifications, 
and installation details designed to match the historic 
roof, and long-term maintenance, will make it possible 
to have not only a historically authentic roof, but a 
cost-effective one. It is important that professionals be 
part of the team from the beginning. A preservation 
architect should specify materials and construction 
techniques that will best preserve the roof's historic 
appearance. The shingle supplier must ensure that the 
best product is delivered and must stand behind the 
guarantee if the shipment is not correct. The roofer 
must be knowledgeable about traditional craft prac­
tices . Once the new shingle roof is in place, it must be 
properly maintained to give years of service. 
Acknowledgements 
The author gratefully acknowledges the invaluable assistance of 
co-worker Michael Auer in preparing this brief for publication . In 
addition, the following individuals are to be thanked for their contri­
bution to this manuscript: Reed Engle, Historical Architect , NPS; 
John Ingle, Historical Architect , NPS; Martin Obando , Eastern Dis­
trict Manager , Red Cedar Shingle & Handsplit Shake Bureau ; and 
Peter Sandbeck , North Carolina Division of Archives and Histo ry. 
Appreciation is extended to : the staff of Technical Preservation Serv­
ices Branch and NPS regional offices; Michael Lynch of the Office of 
Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation in Albany, New York; and 
to Penelope H. Batcheler and William Brookover, Historical Archi­
tects, Independence National Historic Park, for their review of this 
manu script and constructive comments . Special thanks are given to 
Kaye Ellen Simonson for the illustrations in the charts. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National His­
toric Preservation Act of 1966, as amended . Preservation Brief 19 was 
developed under the technical editorship of Lee H. Nelson , FAIA, 
Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior , P. 0 . Box 37127, Washington , D. C. 20013-
7127. Comments on the usefulness of this information are welcomed 
and may be sent to Mr. Nelson at the above address . This publication 
is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty . Normal 
procedure s for credit to the author and the National Park Service are 
appreciated . 
Further Reading 
Bucher, Robert C. "The Long Shingle ." Pennsylvania Folklife, Vol. 
XVID, No. 4, Summer 1969 . 
Cox, Richard E. "Wooden Shingles from the Fortress of Louisbourg ." 
Bulletin of the Association for Preservation Technology, Vol. II, Nos . 1- 2 
1970 p.p. 65 . 
Engle, Reed . "Restoring a Roofing." CRM Bulletin, a publication of 
the National Park Service, Vol. 8, No. 6 Dec. 1985 . 
Kidder, F.E. Building Construction and Superintendence, Part II. New 
York: William T. Comstock , 1902 . 
LeVan, Susan . " Fire-Retardant Treatments for Wood Shingles. " 
Techline, Madison, Wisconsin : U.S.D.A. Forest Service, 1988. 
Niemiec , S.S. and T.D. Brown . "Care and Maintenance of Wood Shingle 
and Shake Roofs. " Oregon State University Extension Service , Septem­
ber 1988. Publication #EC 1271. 
The Old House Journal, Vol. XI, No. 3, April 1983 . Special Roof Issue . 
Peterson , Charles E. (editor). Building Early America. Radnor, Pennsyl­
vania : Chilton Book Co. 1976. 
Stevens , John. "Shingles ." Bulletin of the Association for Preservation 
Technology, Vol. II, Nos . 1- 2 1970, pp. 74. 
Sweetser , Sarah M. Preservation Briefs 4: Roofing for Historic Buildings. 
Washington, D.C. : Technical Preservation Services Division, National 
Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1978. 
Tollesten, Kristin . "Shingles and Shingled Roofs." No Future Without 
the Past. Rome, Italy: ICOMOS, 1981. pp. 347-360 . 