PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
 
The Preservation of Historic Signs 
Michael J. Auer 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Preservation Assistance 
"Signs" refers to a great number of verbal, symbolic or figural mark­
ers. Posters, billboards, graffiti and traffic signals, corporate logos, 
flags, decals and bumper stickers, insignia on baseball caps and tee 
shirts: all of these are "signs." Buildings themselves can be signs, as 
structures shaped like hot dogs, coffee pots or Chippendale highboys 
attest. The signs encountered each day are seemingly countless, for 
language itself is largely symbolic. This Brief, however, will limit its 
discussion of "signs" to lettered or symbolic messages affixed to 
historic buildings or associated with them. 
Signs are everywhere. And everywhere they play an 
important role in human activity. They identify . They 
direct and decorate . They promote, inform, and adver­
tise. Signs are essentially social. They name a human 
activity, and often identify who is doing it. Signs allow 
the owner to communicate with the reader, and the 
people inside a building to communicate with those 
outside of it. 
Signs speak of the people who run the businesses, 
shops, and firms. Signs are signatures. They reflect the 
owner's tastes and personality . They often reflect the 
ethnic makeup of a neighborhood and its character, as 
well as the social and business activities carried out 
there. By giving concrete details about daily life in a 
former era, historic signs allow the past to speak to the 
present in ways that buildings by themselves do not 
(Figs. 1 and 2). And multiple surviving historic signs 
on the same building can indicate several periods in its 
history or use . In this respect, signs are like archeologi­
cal layers that reveal different periods of human occu­
pancy and use. 
Historic signs give continuity to public spaces, be­
coming part of the community memory. They some­
times become landmarks in themselves, almost without 
regard for the building to which they are attached, or 
the property on which they stand . Furthermore, in an 
age of uniform franchise signs and generic plastic 
"box" signs, historic signs often attract by their individ­
uality: by a clever detail, a daring use of color and mo­
tion, or a reference to particular people, shops, or 
events. 
1. Detail from a busy Chicago street market, about 1905. The sign over the 
sidewalk depicts a fish. It also gives the Hebrew letters for the English words 
"Fish Market." The sign offers information about the people who patronized 
the store that is not available from looking at the buildings. They were 
European Jews who were beginning to learn English. Chicago Historical 
Society, negative number ICHi-19155. 
Yet historic signs pose problems for those who would 
save them. Buildings change uses. Businesses undergo 
change in ownership. New ownership or use normally 
brings change in signs. Signs are typically part of a 
business owner's sales strategy, and may be changed to 
reflect evolving business practices or to project a new 
image. 

-· 
2. N. Main Street, Rockford, Illinois, 1929. Signs give a wealth of information about a particular time and place. Photo: Lake County (IL) Museum, Curt Teich 
Postcard Archives. 
Signs also change to reflect trends in architecture and 
technology: witness the Art Deco and Depression 
Modern lettering popular in the 1920s and 1930s, and 
the use of neon in the 1940s and 1950s. 
The cultural significance of signs combined with their 
often transitory nature makes the preservation of his­
toric signs fraught with questions, problems, and para­
doxes. If the common practice in every period has been 
to change signs with regularity, when and how should 
historic signs be kept? If the business is changing 
hands, how can historic signs be reused? The subject is 
an important one, and offers opportunities to save 
elements that convey the texture of daily life from the 
past. 
This Brief will attempt to answer some of the preser­
vation questions raised by historic signs. It will discuss 
historic sign practices, and show examples of how his­
toric signs have been preserved even when the busi­
ness has changed hands or the building itself has been 
converted to a new use. 
Historic Sign Types and Practices 
Pre-Nineteenth Century 
American sign practices originated largely in Europe . 
The earliest commercial signs included symbols of the 
merchant's goods or tradesman's craft. Emblems were 
mounted on poles, suspended from buildings , or 
painted on hanging wooden boards. Such symboli c 
signs were necessary in a society where few could 
read , although verbal signs were not entirely un­
known . A sheep signified a tailor, a tankard a tavern . 
The red and white striped pole signifying the barber ­
shop, and the three gold balls outside the pawnshop 
are two such emblems that can occasionall y be seen 
2 
today (Fig. 3). (The barber's sign survives from an era 
when barbers were also surgeons; the emblem suggests 
bloody bandages associated with the craft. The pawn ­
broker 's sign is a sign of a sign: it derives from the coat 
of arms of the Medici banking family.) 

b 
3. (a) Once commonplace, the three balls symbolizing the pawnbroker are 
now rare. These date from the 1920s (the supports are much more recent, as 
is the storefront to which they are attached). (b) Objects associated with a 
business continue to be used as signs. Photos: Thomas C. Jester. 
Flat signs with lettering mounted flush against the 
building gradually replaced hanging, symbolic signs. 
The suspended signs posed safety hazards, and 
creaked when they swayed in the wind: "The creaking 
signs not only kept the citizens awake at night, but 
they knocked them off their horses, and occasionally 
fell on them too." The result, in England, was a law in 
1762 banning large projecting signs. In 1797 all project­
ing signs were forbidden, although some establish­
ments, notably "public houses," retained the hanging 
sign tradition. "1 
By the end of the eighteenth century, the hanging 
sign had declined in popularity. Flat or flush-mounted 
signs, on the other hand, had become standard. Like 
symbolic signs, however, the tradition of projecting 
signs has survived into the present. 
Nineteenth Century Signs and Sign Practices 
Surviving nineteenth-century photographs depict a 
great variety of signs. The list of signs discussed here is 
by no means exhaustive. 
Fascia signs, placed on the fascia or horizontal band 
between the storefront and the second floor, were 
among the most common. The fascia is often called the 
"signboard;' and as the word implies, provided a per­
fect place for a sign-then as now. The narrowness of 
the fascia imposed strict limits on the sign maker, how­
ever, and such signs usually gave little more than the 
name of the business and perhaps a street number. 
Similar to fascia signs were signs between the levels 
of windows across the upper facade. Such signs were 
mounted on horizontal boards or painted on the build-
ing. Signs of this type tended to use several "lines" of 
text, the name of business and short description, for 
example. The message, reading from top to bottom, 
sometimes covered several stories of the building. 
Other painted signs presented figures, products, or 
scenes. Such signs were typically more vertical than 
horizontal in emphasis . Whether such painted signs 
featured text or images, they became major features of 
the building, as their makers intended them to be. The 
building itself often became a backdrop for the sign. 
Signs in the form of plaques, shields, and ovals were 
used on many nineteenth-century buildings (Fig 4). 
Such signs had the advantage of being easily replaced 
as tenants came and went. They also easily incorpo­
rated images as well as lettering. 
4. This circa 1866 view of a San Francisco building shows the range of signs 
used in the nineteenth century: Symbolic signs (the spectacles over the 
entrance); fascia signs; plaques, often in the shape of shields and normally 
used by insurance companies, in part to symbolize the protective function of 
insurance; posters, wall signs, window signs, hanging signs, and rooftop 
signs. Photo: Library of Congress. 
Hanging or projecting signs, both lettered and sym­
bolic, were also common in the nineteenth century, 
although less so than previously. Projecting signs were 
often paired with another at a 45° angle for increased 
visibility. Occasionally a sign would stretch out from 
the building across the sidewalk, supported by a post 
at the street. 
Goldleaf signs, and signs painted or etched on glass in 
windows, doors and transoms were quite common. 
3 

Porcelain enamel signs were also very popular in the lat­
ter half of the nineteenth century and into the mid­
twentieth century. Signs carved from stone or wood 
also appeared frequently, especially on institutional 
buildings. Painted shutters and even window shades 
provided additional advertising space. 
Posters found their way into display windows when 
they weren't pasted onto the building . Sidewalk signs or 
"sandwich boards" offered another chance to catch the eye 
of any passerby not watching the graphics overhead. 
Nineteenth-century tenants looking for additional 
advertising space found it in unexpected places. They 
used the entrance steps to mount signs in a variety of 
ways: Handrails, risers, skirts, and balusters sported 
signs that gave businesses on upper levels a chance to 
attract notice . 
Awnings offered other opportunities for keeping a name 
before the public. The fringe or skirt of the awning, as 
well as the panel at the side were the usual places for a 
name or street number. Flags, particularly hung from the 
upper floors, and banners, sometimes stretching across 
the sidewalk, also appeared on buildings. 
Rooftop signs appeared with greater frequency in the 
second half of the nineteenth century than previously . 
Earlier rooftop signs tended to be relatively simple­
often merely larger versions of the horizontal signs 
typically found on lower levels. Late in the century the 
signs became more ornate as well as more numerous . 
These later rooftop signs were typically found on ho­
tels, theaters, banks and other large buildings . 
The sign types described here were not used in isola­
tion. Window and awning signs attracted sidewalk 
pedestrians and people in the street. Upper level signs 
reached viewers at greater distances . If signs were nu­
merous, however, they were nonetheless usuall y small 
in scale. 
As the century wore on, signs increased in size and 
scale. Wall signs several stories high were not uncom­
mon in the second half of the century (Fig 5). This 
development reflects changes in urban life as the cen­
tury headed to its close. Cities were experiencing rapid 
population growth. Buildings became bigger and taller. 
Elevated trains and electric trolleys increased the pace 
of city life. And when it comes to signs, speed alters 
scale. The faster people travel, the bigger a sign has to 
be before they can see it. 
Twentieth Century Signs and Sign Practices 
The advent of the twentieth century approximately 
coincided with the corning of electricity, which gave 
signs light and, later, movement. illuminated signs 
were not unknown before electricity. An advertisement 
printed about 1700 mentioned a nighttime sign lit by 
candles, and in 1840 the legendary showman P.T. 
Barnum built a huge sign illuminated by gas. But elec­
tricity was safer and cheaper than candles, kerosene 
and gas. Its widespread use gave signs a prominence 
they retain today: illuminated signs dominate the 
streets at night. 
2 
Electricity permitted signs to be illuminated by light 
shining onto them, but the real revolution occurred 
when lightbulbs were used to form the images and 
words on signs (Fig 6). Lightbulbs flashing on and off 
4 
5. Painted figures and lines of text cover this building in New York City, 
about 1890. The woman is distributing handbills. The painted workman on 
the ladder is putting up a poster. Altogether the signs are striking examples 
of the signmaker's art in the late nineteenth century. Photo: Courtesy of the 
New-York Historical Society, New York City. 
made new demands on the attention of passersby. 
Lightbulbs blinking in sequence could also simulate 
movement. Add this property to the mix, and a dra­
matic transformation of American streets resulted. 
Moving signs were not unknown prior to the advent 
of electricity, for wind-driven signs had made their 
appearance in the nineteenth century. But electricity 
gave signs an unparalleled range of motion. This move­
ment added yet another element to the life of the 
street. 
Neon is another great twentieth-century contribution 
to the signmaker's art. "Neon;' coined from the Greek 
word for "new," is a "new gas." It has the useful prop ­
erty of glowing when an electric charge passes through 
it. (Argon, krypton, xenon and helium share this prop ­
erty. Only neon and argon, however, are typically used 
in commercial signs.) Encased in glass tubes shaped 
into letters or symbols, neon offered signmakers an 
opportunity to mold light into an infinite variety of 
shapes, colors, and images. Combined with an electric 
timer, the neon tubing could present images moving in 
succession. 
Neon first appeared in signs in the 1920s, and 
reached its height of popularity in the 1940s. The first 
documented neon commercial sign in the United States 
was at a Packard Motor Car dealership in Los Angeles 
in 1923. After a period of decline, it underwent a ren­
aissance, beginning in the 1970s. Artists experimented 
3 

• -
with neon as a conscious art-form, and several notable 
architects further helped in its revival.  Renewed inter­
est in this colorful medium also sparked interest in 
preserving historic neon signs. 
4
Along with such developments as the coming of elec­
tricity and then neon, stylistic movements influenced 
twentieth-century signs. In particular, Art Deco and 
Streamlined Moderne affected not just buildings, but 
their signs as well. 
6. This view of Cleveland taken about 1910 shows how electricity trans­
formed American cities. These dramatic and highly visible signs no doubt 
provided excellent advertising for 'fl. & W Electric Signs." Its signs-at the 
bottom of the photograph-also proclaim the company to be the "exclusive 
agents" for a maker of "electric on enamel signs." Photo: Library of 
Congress. 
Architects working in these styles often integrated 
signs and buildings into a unified design. This was 
particularly true of storefronts built using pigmented 
structural glass, commonly known as "Carrara glass;' 
and porcelain enamel on steel panels. These materials 
allowed words and images to be etched into the glass 
or enamel, or to be constructed in different colors and 
patterns as part of an overall design for the building. 
Such storefronts were popular from the 1920s into the 
1940s (Fig. 7). 
As the century advanced, new styles took hold. The 
late 1950s brought signs with fins, star bursts, and 
other images reflecting a new fascination with outer 
space (Fig. 8). 
In the decades after World War II signs were also 
transformed by a group of materials now known gener­
ically as "plastic." Plastic had several advantages over 
wood, metal and other traditional sign materials. As 
the name indicates, "plastic" can take almost any 
shape. It can also take almost any color. Plastic is trans ­
lucent. Lit from behind, it appears to glow. It is rela­
tively durable. Above all, it is inexpensive, and can be 
mass produced. Plastic quickly became the dominant 
sign material. 
7. In the 1930s and 1940s, signs built into storefronts became popular. This 
example is from Guthrie, Oklahoma. Photo: H. Ward Jandl. 
8. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the country turned its attention to 
outer space. Wings, fins, and satellite shapes appeared, as in this example in 
Long Beach, California. Photo: Peter Phillips. 
Another profound influence on signs in this period 
stemmed from business trends rather than from tech­
nological breakthroughs or design movements: the rise 
of chain stores and franchises. National firms replaced 
many local businesses. Standard corporate signs went 
up; local trademarks came down. The rise of mass 
culture, of which the national chain is but one expres­
sion, has meant the rise of standardization, and the 
elimination of regional differences and local character . 
5 

The decline of gold-leafing and other traditional sign 
techniques contributed to these trends. Mass-produced 
signs have replaced local signs that differed from 
owner to owner and from signmaker to signmaker. The 
result is not just sameness, but impersonality as well: 
It is becoming rarer, for example, to find owners' 
names on signs. Whether the trend toward sameness 
can successfully be resisted is yet to be seen. (Some 
crafts, such as gold-leafing and porcelain enameling, 
for example, have experienced a revival of sorts.) But 
the preservation of historic signs is one way to ensure 
that at least some of these expressions of local history 
continue to enliven our streets. 
Sign Regulation 
Historic commercial areas have customarily been a riot 
of signs. Yet if clutter has ample precedent, so do ef­
forts to control it. Early attempts to regulate signs in 
this country include those of professional associations 
of advertisers, such as the International Bill Posters 
Organization of North America, founded in St. Louis 
in 1872. 
However, early efforts by municipalities to enact sign 
regulations met with disfavor in the courts, which tra­
ditionally opposed any regulatory effort based on aes­
thetic concerns. Early successes in the legal arena, such 
as the 1911 case, St. Louis Gunning Advertising Company 
v. City of St. Louis, were realized when proponents of 
sign controls argued that signs and billboards endan­
gered public health and safety. 
Yet gradually courts found merit in the regulation of 
private property for aesthetic reasons. In 1954 the U.S. 
Supreme Court handed down the landmark decision, 
Berman v. Parker, in which the court declared: "It is 
within the power of the legislature to determine that 
the community should be beautiful as well as healthy, 
spacious as well as clean, well balanced as well as care­
fully patrolled. "
With the blessing of the courts, communities across 
the nation have enacted sign controls to reduce "urban 
blight." And where historic buildings are concerned, 
the growth of local review commissions has added to 
the momentum for controls in historic districts. 
Typically, sign controls regulate the number, size and 
type of signs. In some cases, moving or projecting 
signs are prohibited. Often such ordinances also regu­
late sign placement-owners are told to line up their 
signs with others on the block, for example. Materials, 
likewise, are prescribed: wood is encouraged, plastic 
discouraged or forbidden altogether. Sign controls of­
ten specify lighting sources: indirect illumination (light 
shining onto the sign) is often required instead of neon 
tubing, bare lightbulbs, or "backlighting;' used in most 
plastic signs. Some ordinances forbid lighting com­
pletely. (Neon, especially, is still held in disfavor in 
some areas.) Finally, ordinances sometimes require 
signs to be "compatible" in color and other design 
qualities with the facade of the building and the overall 
appearance of the street. 
Existing signs frequently do not meet requirements 
set forth in sign controls. They are too big, for example, 
or project too far from the building. Typically, sign 
ordinances permit such "nonconforming" existing 
6 
signs to remain, but only for a specified period, after 
which they must be removed. If they need repair be­
fore then, or if the business changes owners, they must 
likewise be removed. 
Sign controls offer communities the chance to reduce 
visual blight. They can also assist in producing both a 
new visibility and a new viability for historic commer­
cial districts. Yet sign ordinances are not without prob­
lems. Sign controls satisfy contemporary ideas of 
"good taste." But "bad taste" has ample historic prece­
dent. And in any case, tastes change. What is tasteful 
today may be dated tomorrow. Sign controls can im­
pose a uniformity that falsifies history. Most historic 
districts contain buildings constructed over a long per­
iod of time, by different owners for different purposes; 
the buildings reflect different architectural styles and 
personal tastes. By requiring a standard sign "image" 
in such matters as size, material, typeface and other 
qualities, sign controls can mute the diversity of his­
toric districts. Such controls can also sacrifice signs of 
some age and distinction that have not yet come back 
into fashion. Neon serves as an instructive example in 
this regard: once "in," then "out," then "in'' again. 
Unfortunately, a great number of notable signs were 
lost because sign controls were drafted in many com­
munities when neon was "out." Increasingly, however, 
communities are enacting ordinances that recognize 
older and historic signs and permit them to be kept. 
The National Park Service encourages this trend. 
7 
Sign as Icon 
Signs often become so important to a community 
that they are valued long after their role as com­
mercial markers has ceased. They become land­
marks, loved because they have been visible at 
certain street corners-or from many vantage 
points across the city-for a long time (Fig. 9). 
Such signs are valued for their familiarity, their 
beauty, their humor, their size, or even their gro­
tesqueness. In these cases, signs transcend their 
conventional role as vehicles of information, as 
identifiers of something else. When signs reach 
this stage, they accumulate rich layers of mean­
ing. They no longer merely advertise, but are 
valued in and of themselves. They become icons. 
9. Signs are often popular neighborhood landmarks. This is one in Butte, 
Montana. Photo: Jet Lowe, HAER. 
5
6

a 
b 
Preserving Historic Signs 
Historic signs can contribute to the character of build­
ings and districts. They can also be valued in them­
selves, quite apart from the buildings to which they 
may be attached. However, any program to preserve 
historic signs must recognize the challenges they 
present. These challenges are not for the most part 
technical. Sign preservation is more likely to involve 
aesthetic concerns and to generate community debate. 
Added to these concerns are several community goals 
that often appear to conflict: retaining diverse elements 
from the past, encouraging artistic expression in new 
signs, zoning for aesthetic concerns, and reconciling 
business requirements with preservation. 
Preserving historic signs is not always easy. But the 
intrinsic merit of many signs, as well as their contribu­
tion to the overall character of a place, make the effort 
worthwhile. Observing the guidelines given below can 
help preserve both business and history. 
Retaining Historic Signs 
Retain historic signs whenever possible, particularly 
when they are: 
• associated with historic figures, events or places (Fig. 
10). 
• significant as evidence of the history of the product, 
business or service advertised (Fig. 11). 
• significant as reflecting the history of the building or 
10. This fading sign was painted in Baltimore in 1931 or 1932. It suruives 
from the campaign to enact the 21st Amendment to the United States Con­
stitution, which repealed Prohibition. Such fading brick wall signs are 
known as ''ghost signs." Photo: Thomas C. Jester. 
the development of the historic district. A sign may 
be the only indicator of a building's historic use (Fig. 
12). 
• characteristic of a specific historic period, such as 
gold leaf on glass, neon, or stainless steel lettering. 
• integral to the building's design or physical fabric, as 
when a sign is part of a storefront made of Carrara 
glass or enamel panels, or when the name of the 
historic firm or the date are rendered in stone, metal 
11. (a) Signs for Bull Durham Tobacco once covered walls all over the coun­
try. (b) Similarly, Simple Simon and the Pie Man appeared on Howard 
Johnson signs nationwide. This one has been moved to a shop for repair. 
Photos: (a) Jack Boucher, HABS; (b) Len Davidson. 
7 

or tile (Fig. 13). In such cases, removal can harm the 
integrity of a historic property's design, or cause sig­
nificant damage to its materials. 
• outstanding examples of the signmaker's art, whether 
because of their excellent craftsmanship, use of mate­
rials, or design (Fig. 14). 
• local landmarks, that is, signs recognized as popular 
focal points in a community (Fig. 15). 
13. Historic signs were often built into a property-and often under foot. 
Photo: Richard Wagner, National Trust for Historic Preservation. 
8 
• elements important in defining the character of a 
district, such as marquees in a theater district. 
Maintaining and Repairing Historic Signs 
Maintenance of historic signs is essential for their long­
term preservation. Sign maintenance involves periodic 
inspections for evidence of damage and deterioration. 
14. This Ogden, Utah, sign is a superb example of neon. Photo: deTeel 
Patterson Tiller. 
15. The sign for the Busy Bee Cafe is well-known throughout Dubuque, 
Iowa. Photo: National Park Service, Rocky Mountain Regional Office. 
12. The sign on this historic building gives important information about its 
past. Photo: Thomas C. Jester. 

a 
b 
C 
Lightbulbs may need replacement. Screws and bolts 
may be weakened, or missing altogether. Dirt and 
other debris may be accumulating, introduced by birds 
or insects, and should be cleaned out. Water may be 
collecting in or on sign cabinets, threatening electrical 
connections. The source of water penetration should be 
identified and sealed. Most of these minor repairs are 
routine maintenance measures, and do not call for spe­
cial expertise. All repairs, however, require caution. For 
example, electricity should be turned off when working 
around electric signs. 
More extensive repairs should be undertaken by pro­
fessionals. The sign industry is a large and active one. 
Sign designers, fabricators and skilled craftsmen are 
located throughout the country. Once in danger of 
being lost altogether, gold leaf on glass and porcelain 
enamel are undergoing revivals, and the art of bending 
neon tubes is now widely practiced. Finding help from 
qualified sources should not be difficult. Before con­
tracting for work on historic signs, however, owners 
should check references, and view other projects com­
pleted by the same company. 
Major repairs may require removal of the sign to a 
workshop. Since signs are sometimes damaged while 
the building is undergoing repair, work on the building 
should be scheduled while the sign is in the shop. (If 
the sign remains in place while work on the building is 
in progress, the sign should be protected.) 
Repair techniques for specific sign materials are dis­
cussed below (see "Repairing Historic Sign Materials" 
on page 10). The overall goal in repairs such as sup­
plying missing letters, replacing broken neon tubing, 
or splicing in new members for deteriorated sections is 
to restore a sign that is otherwise whole. Recognize, 
however, that the apparent age of historic signs is one 
of their major features; do not "over restore" signs so 
that all evidence of their age is lost, even though the 
appearance and form may be recaptured. 
Reusing Historic Signs 
If a building or business has changed hands, historic 
signs associated with former enterprises in the building 
should be reused if possible by: 
• keeping the historic sign-unaltered . This is often 
possible even when the new business is of a different 
nature from the old. Preferably, the old sign can be 
left in its historic location; sometimes, however, it 
may be necessary to move the sign elsewhere on the 
building to accommodate a new one . Conversely, it 
may be necessary to relocate new signs to avoid hid­
ing or overwhelming historic ones, or to redesign 
proposed new signs so that the old ones may remain. 
(The legitimate advertising needs of current tenants, 
however, must be recognized.) 
Keeping the old sign is often a good marketing 
strategy. It can exploit the recognition value of the old 
name and play upon the public's fondness for the old 
sign. The advertising value of an old sign can be im­
mense. This is especially true when the sign is a 
community landmark. 
• relocating the sign to the interior, such as in the 
lobby or above the bar in a restaurant. This option is 
less preferable than keeping the sign outside the 
building, but it does preserve the sign, and leaves 
open the possibility of putting it back in its historic 
location. 
• modifying the sign for use with the new business. 
This may not be possible without destroying essential 
features, but in some cases it can be done by chang­
ing details only (Fig. 16). In other respects, the sign 
may be perfectly serviceable as is. 
If none of these options is possible, the sign could be 
donated to a local museum , preservation organization 
or other group. 
16. (a) The Jayhawk Hotel in Topeka, Kansas, was built in 1926; (b) Its 
prominent and popular rooftop signs were deteriorating when the hotel 
closed; (c) The new owners converted the building to offices, but were able to 
keep the historic signs by changing "HOTEL" to "TOWER." The new, 
repaired, signs reuse three of the historic letters: T, 0, and E. Photos: (a and 
b) Kiene and Bradley; Courtesy, Kansas State Historical Society; (c) Kansas 
State Historical Society. 
9 

a 
C 
b 
e 
g 
f 
10 
Porcelain Enamel. Porcelain enamel is among the 
most durable of materials used in signs.  Made of 
glass bonded onto metal (usually steel) at high 
temperatures, it keeps both its high gloss and its 
colors for decades. Since the surface of the sign is 
essentially glass, porcelain enamel is virtually 
maintenance free; dirt can be washed off with 
soap and water and other glass cleaners. 
8
Porcelain enamel signs can be damaged by di­
rect blows from stones and other sharp objects. If 
both the enamel surface and the undercoat are 
scratched, the metal surface can rust at the impact 
site. Because the bond between glass and metal is 
so strong, however, the rust does not "travel" 
behind the glass, and the rust is normally con­
fined to localized areas. The sign edges can also 
rust if they were never enamelled. To treat the 
problem, clean the rust off carefully, and touch-up 
the area with cold enamel (a type of epoxy used 
mostly in jewelry), or with enamel paints. 
Dents in porcelain enamel signs should be left 
alone. Attempting to hammer them out risks fur­
ther damage. 
Goldleaf or gilding. Goldleaf or gilding is both ele­
gant and durable. These properties made it among 
the most popular sign materials in the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries. Surface-gilded signs 
(for example, gilded raised letters or symbols found 
on the exterior) typically last about 40 years. Dam­
age to these signs occurs from weather and abra­
sion. Damage to gilded signs on glass normally 
occurs when the protective coating applied over the 
gilding is removed by harsh cleaning chemicals or 
scratched by scrub brushes. The sign can then flake 
upon subsequent cleanings. 
Historic gilded signs can be repaired, typically 
by regilding damaged areas. An oil size is painted 
on the surface. The gold leaf is applied when the 
surface has become sufficiently "tacky." Similarly, 
historic "reverse on glass" goldleaf signs can be 
repaired-by experts. A sample of the flaking sign 
is first taken to determine its composition. Re­
verse on glass signs use goldleaf ranging from 12 
to 23 karats. The gold is alloyed with copper and 
silver in varying amounts for differences in color. 
(Surface gilding-on raised letters, picture frames 
and statehouse domes-uses 23 karat gold. Pure 
gold, 24 karat, is too soft to use in such applica­
tions.) The damaged portions of the sign are then 
regilded in the same manner as they were done 
historically: the inside surface of the glass is 
coated with a gelatin; gold leaves about three 
inches square are then spread over the area. The 
new letter or design is then drawn in reverse on 
the new leaf, and coated with a backing paint 
(normally a chrome yellow). With the new design 
thus sealed, the rest of the leaf is removed. The 
(continued next page) 
17. Glen Echo Park near Washington, D. C., is an early 20th century amusement park. (It is the home of the first bumper car ride in the world.) Its neon signs 
needed repair: (a) tubes were broken and the surrounding "metal cans" needed work also; (b) and (c) removal of the back of "Candy Comer" sign revealed debris 
from insects and birds; (d) preparing the "metal cans" from the "Pop Com" sign for remounting; (e) and (f) neon fabricators installing the new tubing in the re­
paired and remounted cans; (g) repairs finished, the relit signs enliven the park once again. Photos: (a-c) Stan Fowler; (d-f) Larry Kanter; (g) Rebecca Hammel. 
Repairing Historic Sign Materials 

sign is then sealed with a clear, water-resistant 
varnish. 
Gilded signs, both surface and reverse on glass, 
can be cleaned gently with soap and water, using 
a soft cloth. Additionally, for glass signs, the var­
nish backing should be replaced every seven years 
at the latest. 
Neon. Neon signs can last 50 years, although 
20-25 years is more typical. When a neon sign 
fails, it is not because the gas has "failed;' but 
because the system surrounding it has broken 
down. The glass tubes have been broken, for ex­
ample, thus letting the gas escape, or the elec­
trodes or transformers have failed. If the tube is 
broken, a new one must be made by a highly 
skilled "glass bender." After the hot glass tube 
has been shaped, it must undergo "purification" 
before being refilled with gas. The glass and the 
metal electrode at the end of the tube are heated 
in turns. As these elements become hot, surface 
impurities burn off into the tube. The resulting 
vapor is then removed through "evacuation'' -the 
process of creating a vacuum. Only then is the 
New Signs and Historic Buildings 
Preserving old signs is one thing. Making new ones is 
another. Closely related to the preservation of historic 
signs on historic buildings is the subject of new signs 
for historic buildings . Determining what new signs are 
appropriate for historic buildings, however, involves a 
major paradox: Historic sign practices were not always 
"sympathetic" to buildings. They were often unsympa­
thetic to the building, or frankly contemptuous of it. 
Repeating some historic practices, therefore, would 
definitely not be recommended . 
Yet many efforts to control signage lead to bland 
sameness. For this reason the National Park Service 
discourages the adoption of local guidelines that are 
too restrictive, and that effectively dictate uniform signs 
within commercial districts. Instead, it encourages 
communities to promote diversity in signs-their sizes, 
types, colors, lighting, lettering and other qualities. It 
also encourages business owners to choose signs that 
reflect their own tastes, values, and personalities . At 
the same time, tenant sign practices can be stricter than 
sign ordinances. The National Park Service therefore 
encourages businesses to fit their sign programs to the 
building. 
The following points should be considered when 
designing and constructing new signs for historic 
buildings: 
• signs should be viewed as part of an overall graphics 
system for the building. They do not have to do all 
the "work" by themselves. The building's form, 
name and outstanding features, both decorative and 
functional, also support the advertising function of a 
sign. Signs should work with the building, rather 
than against it. 
• new signs should respect the size, scale and design 
of the historic building. Often features or details of 
the building will suggest a motif for new signs. 
• sign placement is important: new signs should not 
obscure significant features of the historic building . 
(Signs above a storefront should fit within the his-
"neon'' gas (neon or mercury-argon) added. Neon 
gives red light, mercury-argon produces blue . 
Other colors are produced by using colored glass 
and any of dozens of phosphor coatings inside 
the tube. Green, for example, can be produced by 
using mercury-argon in yellow glass. Since color 
is so important in neon signs, it is vital to deter­
mine the original color or colors. A neon studio 
can accomplish this using a number of specialized 
techniques. 
A failing transformer can cause the neon sign to 
flicker intensely, and may have to be replaced. 
Flickering neon can also indicate a problem with 
the gas pressure inside the tube. The gas may be 
at too high or too low a pressure . If so, the gas 
must be repumped. 
Repairs to neon signs also include repairs to the 
surrounding components of the sign. The "metal 
cans" that often serve as backdrops to the tubing 
may need cleaning or, in case of rust, scraping 
and repainting. 
As with gilded signs, repair of neons signs is 
not a matter for amateurs (Fig. 17). 
toric signboard, for example .) 
• new signs should also respect neighboring buildings . 
They should not shadow or overpower adjacent 
structures. 
• sign materials should be compatible with those of the 
historic building. Materials characteristic of the build­
ing's period and style, used in contemporary designs, 
can form effective new signs. 
• new signs should be attached to the building care­
fully, both to prevent damage to historic fabric, and to 
ensure the safety of pedestrians. Fittings should pen­
etrate mortar joints rather than brick, for example, 
and signloads should be properly calculated and 
distributed. 
Conclusion 
Historic signs once allowed buyers and sellers to com­
municate quickly, using images that were the medium 
of daily life. Surviving historic signs have not lost their 
ability to speak. But their message has changed. By 
communicating names, addresses, prices, products, 
images and other fragments of daily life, they also 
bring the past to life (Fig. 18). 
18. Sign painters pausing from their work, 1932. Photo: Courtesy, Cumquat 
Publishing Co. and Tettaton Sign Co., St. Louis, Missouri. 
11 

With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the 
sign of "The Crossed Harpoons" -but it looked too 
expensive and jolly there. . . . Moving on, I at last 
came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks, and 
heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw 
a swinging sign over the door with a white painting 
upon it, faintly representing a tall straight jet of misty 
spray, and these words underneath- "The Spouter­
Inn:-Peter Coffin." 
The creaking wooden sign in Moby Dick identifies 
public lodging. But it also does a great deal more 
than that. It projects an image. It sets a mood and 
defines a place. The ability to convey commercial 
and symbolic messages is a property of all signs , 
not just those in novels. 
Every sign hanging outside a door, standing on a 
roof, extending over a storefront, or marching 
across a wall transmits messages from the sign 
maker to the sign reader. Mixed in with names , 
addresses, business hours and products are im­
ages, personalities, values and beliefs. 
Selected Reading List 
Dil..amme, Philip. American Streamline: A Handbook of Neon Advertising 
Design. Cincinnati : ST Publications, 1988. 
Evans, Bill and Andrew Lawson . Shopfronts. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Co., 1981. 
The Gilder's Manual. Washington, D.C.: The Society of Gilders, 1991. 
(Reprint of The Gilder's Manual; A Practical Guide to Gilding in All its 
Branches. New York: Excelsior Publishing House, 1876.) 
Liebs, Chester. Main Street to Miracle Mile: American Roadside Architec­
ture. Boston: Little, Brown and Company/ New York Graphics Soci­
ety, 1985. 
National Main Street Center. Main Street Guidelines: Signs for Main 
Street. Washington, D.C.: National Trust for Historic Preservation , 
1987. 
Phillips, Peter H . "Sign Controls for Historic Signs; ' PAS Memo. 
Chicago: American Planning Association, November 1988. 
Smith, Kent. Gold Leaf Techniques. Cincinnati: ST Publications, 1989. 
Stage, William. Ghost Signs: Brick Wall Signs in America. Cincinnati: ST 
Publications, 1989. 
Stern, Rudi. Let There Be Neon. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 
1979. (Rev. 1988). 
Cover photograph: Terra cotta wheel with Studebaker banner, 1926, Lake­
wood, Ohio. Photo: Frank Wrenick. 
NOTES 
1 Bill Evans and Andrew Lawson, Shopfronts. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinho ld Co., 1981, p. 109, 114. 
2 Char les L.H. Wagner, The Story of Signs: An Outline History of the Sign Arts 
from Earliest Recorded Times to the Present ''Atomic Age". Boston: Arthur MacGib­
bon , 1954, p. 37. 
12 
3 Rudi Stem, Let There Be Neon. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 1979, p. 19. 
See Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and S teven Izenour, Learning from 
Las Vegas. Rev. ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977. 
5 George H. Kramer, "Preserving Historic Signs in the Commerc ial Landscape: 
The Impact of Regulation." (Unpu blished Masters Thesis: University of Ore­
gon, 1989), p. 15. This section on sign regulation is heavily indebted to this 
work. See especially Chapter 2, History of Sign Regulation and Chapter 3, 
Mechanics of Sign Regulation, pp. 7-60. 
6 Berman v. Parker involved the condemna tion of an older building for an urban 
renewal project. The decision "ironical ly would prove to be a major spur to a 
new wave of local preserva tion laws .... " Chr istopher J. Duerksen, ed. A 
Handbook on Historic Preservation Law. Washington, D. C.: The Conservation 
Foundation and The National Center for Preservation Law, 1983, p. 7. 
7 A balanced approach to sign controls is offered by Peter H. Phillips, "Sign 
Controls for Historic Signs; ' PAS Memo, November 1988. (Published by Ameri­
can Planning Association , Washington, D.C.). 
• See John Tymoski, "Porcelain Enamel: The Sign Industry's Most Durable 
Material;' Signs of the Times, December 1990, pp. 66-71. For gold leaf, see Octo­
ber 1984 and November 1990 special issues of Signs of the Times. An excellent 
short "course" in neon evaluation is offered in "Neon: The Good , the Bad, and 
the Ugly," by Paul R. Davis, Identity, Spring 1991, pp. 56-59. 
Acknowledgement s 
The author gratefully acknowledges the invaluable assistance of Beth 
Savage, National Register of Historic Places . The author is also in­
debted to Rebecca Shiffer of The Society for Commercial Archeology, 
and to other colleagues in the cultural resources programs of the 
National Park Service, sign artists in private practice, and profession­
als and preservationists in a number of organizations. These include 
staff of the Technical Preservation Services Branch, directed by H. 
Ward Jandl, especially Kay Weeks, Anne Grimmer, Sharon C. Park, 
and Thomas C. Jester; staff of the National Park Service Regional 
Offices, especially Michael Crowe, Thomas Keohan, Catherine Colby 
and Christopher Jones; deTeel Patterson Tiller and Stephen Morris, 
Interagency Resources Division; Caroline Bedinger, Historic Ameri ­
can Engineering Record ; Catherine Lavoie and Sara Leach, Historic 
American Buildings Survey, and Stan Fowler of Glen Echo Park . 
Significant contributions were also made by Peter Phillips, Yuma 
County Planning Department; Pratt Cassity of the National Alliance 
of Preservation Commissions; Betsy Jackson, Doug Loescher and 
Kennedy Smith of the National Trust for Historic Preservation; Rich­
ard Longstreth, George Washington University ; Richard Wagner , 
David H. Gleason Associates, Inc.; Michael Jackson, Illinois Historic 
Preservation Agency; Vance Kelley, Kansas State Historical Society; 
William Pencek, Maryland Historical Trust; Chere Jiusto, Montana 
Historical Society, and Gerron Hite and Stan Graves, Texas State 
Historical Commission (the latter on behalf of the National Confer ­
ence of State Historic Preservation Officers). The following artists 
and professionals active in the sign industry offered publications, 
photographs, technical material, and advice: Lynn Baxter and Tod 
Swormstedt, ST Publications; Kent Smith, Kent Smith Signs; Craig 
Kraft, Kraft Studios; Larry Kanter, Neon Projects; Len Davidson, 
Davidson Neon Design; Thomas Ellis, The Enamelist Society; Tuno­
thy Pugh, the Porcelain Enamel Institute; William Adair, Gold.leaf 
Studios. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of 
the Interior to develop and make available information concerning 
historic properties. Preserva tion Brief 25 was developed under the 
editorship of H. Ward Jandl, Chief, Technical Preserva tion Services. 
Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be directed to 
Chief, Technical Preservation Services Branch, Preservation Assist­
ance Division, National Park Service, P.O. Box 37127, Washington, 
D. C. 20013-7127 . 
October 1991 