 PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
The Preservation of Historic Barns 
Michael J. Auer 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
From the days when Thomas Jefferson envisioned the 
new republic as a nation dependent on citizen-farmers 
for its stability and its freedom, the family farm has 
been a vital image in the American consciousness . As 
the main structures of farms, barns evoke a sense of 
tradition and security, of closeness to the land and 
community with the people who built them . Even to­
day the rural barn raising presents a forceful image of 
community spirit. Just as many farmers built their 
barns before they built their houses , so too many farm 
families look to their old barns as links with their past . 
Old barns, furthermore, are often community land­
marks and make the past present . Such buildings em­
body ethnic traditions and local customs; they reflect 
changing farming practices and advances in building 
technology . In the imagination they represent a whole 
way of life (Fig. 1). 
Unfortunately, historic barns are threatened by many 
factors . On farmland near cities, barns are often seen 
only in decay, as land is removed from active agricul­
tural use. In some regions, barns are disma ntled for 
lumber, their beams sold for reuse in living rooms. 
Barn raisings have given way to barn razings. Further 
threats to historic barns and other farm structures are 
posed by changes in farm technology, involving much 
larger machines and production facilities, and changes 
in the overall farm economy, including increasing farm 
size and declining rural populations .1 
Yet historic barns can be refitted for continued use in 
agriculture , often at great savings over the cost of new 
buildings. This Brief encourages the preservation of 
historic barns and other agricul tural structures by en­
couraging their maintenance and use as agricultural 
buildings, and by advancing their sensitive rehabili ta­
tion for new uses when their historic use is no longer 
feasible . 
Fig. 1. Arch roof, native limestone walls two feet thick at the base, porthole window, dormers, silos, rooftop ventilators, weathervanes, windmill, 
fences, fields, and family pride in the builder are all components of the historic character of this Iowa barn. Photo: John Walter, Successful Farming. 

2 
Historic Barn Types 
Dutch Barns 
The first great barns built in this country were tho se of 
the Dutch settlers of the Hudson, Mohawk, and Scho­
harie valleys in New York State and scattered sections 
of New Jersey. On the exterior, the most notable fea­
ture of the Dutch barn is the broad gable roof, which in 
early examples (now extremely rare), extended very 
low to the ground. On the narrow end the Dutch barn 
features center doors for wagons and a door to the 
stock aisles on one or both of the side ends. A pent 
roof (or pentice) over the center doors gave some slight 
protection from the elements. The siding is typically 
horizontal, the detailing simple . Few openings other 
than doors and traditional holes for martins puncture 
the external walls. The appearance is of massiveness 
and simplicity, with the result that Dutch barns seem 
larger than they actually are. 
3 
2 
To many observers the heavy interior structural system 
is the most distinctive aspect of the Dutch barn . Mor­
tised, tenoned and pegged beams are arranged in 
"H" -shaped units that recall church interiors, with 
columned aisles alongside a central space (here used 
for threshing) . This interior arrangement, more than 
any other characteristic, links the Dutch barn with its 
Old World forebears. The ends of cross beams project ­
ing through the columns are often rounded to form 
"tongues," a distinctive feature found only in the Dutch 
barn. 
Bank Barns 
The bank barn gets its name from a simple but clever 
construction technique: the barn is built into the side of 
a hill, thus permitting two levels to be entered from the 
ground. The lower level housed animals, the upper 
The gently sloping roadbed in this photograph shows the "bank" 
from which bank barns get their name. Massive timbers stretching 
across the full width of the barn create the overhang that also 
characterizes these barns. In barns with brick end walls, patterns 
were sometimes created by leaving spaces between bricks. The device 
furnishes ventilation as well as decoration. Photo: Jack £. Boucher, 
HABS. 
Relatively few Dutch barns survive. Most of these date 
from the late 18th century. Fewer yet survive in good 
condition , and almost none unaltered. Yet the remain­
ing examples of this barn type still impress with the 
functional simplicity of their design and the evident 
pride the builders took in their work. 
Built in the late 1700s, this New York Dutch barn survives in 
excellent condition. Gable roof, center wagon doors with pent roof, 
stock door at the corner and horizontal clapboarding are all typical 
features of the Dutch barn. Three holes for martins, traditional 
features of Dutch barns, can be seen near the top of the facade (they 
have been plugged and are lighter than the surrounding 
clapboards). Photo: Clarke Blair. 
levels served as threshing floor and storage. The hill­
side entrance gave easy access to wagons bearing 
wheat or hay. (Fodder could also be dropped through 
openings in the floor to the stabling floor below.) The 
general form of the bank barn remained the same 
whether it was built into a hillside or not. Where a hill 
was lacking, a "bank" was often created by building up 
an earthen ramp to the second level. 
Bank barns were ordinarily constructed with their long
side, or axis, parallel to the hill, and on the south side 
of it. This placement gave animals a sunny spot in 
which to gather during the winter. To take further ad­
vantage of the protection its location afforded, the sec­
ond floor was extended, or cantilevered, over the first. 
The overhang sheltered animals from inclement 
weather. The extended forebay thus created is one of 
the most characteristic features of these barns. In some
bank barns, the projecting beams were not large 
enough to bear the entire weight of the barn above. In 
these cases, columns or posts were added beneath the 
overhang for structural support. 
In the earliest examples of bank barns narrow-end side 
walls are frequently stone or brick, with openings for 
ventilation. (Since "curing" green hay can generate 
enough heat to start a fire through spontaneous com­
bustion, adequate ventilation in barns is vital.) 
 
 

Crib Barns 
This late-nineteenth century crib barn is located in eastern 
Tennessee, in what is now the Great Smoky Mountains National 
Park. The central driveway between the cribs allowed a team and 
wagon to drive through after unloading. The materials and details 
are typical of the region. They include, on the exterior: hand-hewn 
saddle notched logs on the lower, crib portion; board framing on the 
upper, loft area; wood shingle roof. The interior features wood 
hinges on the crib doors and earth floor. Photo: Robert Madden. 
Round Barns 
George Washington owned a round barn. And in 1826 
the Shaker community at Hancock, Massachusetts, 
built a round barn that attracted considerable publicity
Despite these early examples, however, round barns 
were not built in numbers until the 1880s, when agri­
cultural colleges and experiment stations taught 
progressive farming methods based on models of in­
dustrial efficiency. From this time until well into the 
1920s, round barns appeared on farms throughout the 
country, flourishing especially in the Midwest. 5 
' 
Round barns were promoted for a number of reasons . 
The circular form has a greater volume-to-surface ratio 
than the rectangular or square form. For any given size, 
therefore, a circular building will use fewer materials 
than other shapes , thus saving on material costs. Such 
barns also offer greater structural stability than rectan­
gular barns. And because they can be built with self­
supporting roofs, their interiors can remain free of 
structural supporting elements, thereby providing vast 
storage capabilities. The circular interior layout was 
also seen as more efficient, since the farmer could work 
in a continuous direction. 
In general, multi-sided barns-frequently of 12 or 16 
sides-are earlier than "true round" barns. Earlier ex­
amples also tend to be wood sided, while later ones 
tend to be brick or glazed tile. Interior layouts also un­
derwent an evolution. Early round barns placed cattle 
stanchions on the first floor, with the full volume of the 
floor above used for hay storage. In later barns , the 
central space rose from the ground floor through the 
entire building. Cattle stanchions arranged around a 
circular manger occupied the lower level; the circular 
Crib barns form another barn type significant in Ameri­
can agriculture . Found throughout the South and 
Southeast, crib barns are especially numerous in the 
Appalachian and Ozark Mountain States of North Car­
olina, Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee and Arkansas. 
Composed simply of one, two, four or sometimes six 
cribs that served as storage for fodder or pens for cattle 
or pigs, crib barns may or may not have a hayloft 
above. Crib barns were typically built of unchinked 
logs, although they were sometimes covered with verti­
cal wood siding. Unaltered examples of early crib barns 
normally have roofs of undressed wood shingles. In 
time, shingle roofs were usually replaced with tin or 
asphalt. The rustic appearance of crib barns is one of 
their most striking features . 
The cribs sometimes face a covered gallery or aisle run­
ning across the front. In another arrangement, the cribs 
are separated by a central driveway running through 
the building . This latter arrangement defines the double 
crib barn. 
In double crib barns the second story hayloft is some­
times cantilevered over the ground floor, resulting in a 
barn of striking appearance. 
wagon drive on the level above permitted hay to be 
unloaded into the central mow as the wagon drove 
around the perimeter. In the last stage of round barn 
development, a center silo was added when silos be­
came regular features on the farm (in the last decades 
of the nineteenth century). In some cases, the silo pro­
jected through the roof. 
The claims for the efficiency of the round barn were 
overstated, and it never became the standard barn, as 
its proponents had hoped. Nevertheless, a great num­
ber were built, and many remain today the most dis­
tinctive farm structures in the communities in which 
they stand. 
Circular barns are found throughout the countnJ, but are especially 
numerous in the Midwest. This 1911 Illinois round barn is 60 feet 
in diameter. The cupola atop the hipped roof is 60 feet above ground. 
Its 10 single and 5 double stalls on the ground floor were fed from a 
loft. The square windows spaced at regular intervals around the 
perimeter add a note of simple contrast to the overall circular motif. 
Photo: Keith A. Sculle, Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. 
3 

4 
Prairie Barns 
A peak roof projecting above a hayloft opening is one 
of the most familiar images associated with barns. The 
feature belongs to the prairie barn, also known as the 
Western barn. The larger herds associated with agricul­
ture in the West and Southwest required great storage 
space for hay and feed. Accordingly, prairie barns are 
on average much larger than the other barns discussed 
in this brief. Long, sweeping roofs, sometimes coming 
near the ground, mark the prairie barn; the extended 
roof created great storage space. (Late in the nineteenth 
century, the adoption of the gambrel roof enlarged the 
storage capacity of the haymow even more.) 
6 
Affinities of this barn type with the Dutch barn are 
striking: the long, low roof lines, the door in the gable 
end, and the internal arrangement of stalls in aisles on 
either side of the central space are all in the tradition of 
the Dutch barn. 
Others 
The barn types discussed here are only some of the 
barns that have figured in the history of American agri­
culture. As with Dutch barns, some reflect the tradi­
tions of the people who built them: Finnish log barns 
in Idaho, Czech and German-Russian house barns in 
South Dakota, and "three-bay" English barns in the 
northeast. Some, like the New England connected 
barn, stem from regional or local building traditions . 
Others reflect the availability of local building materi­
als: lava rock (basalt) in south-central Idaho, logs in the 
southeast, adobe in California and the southwest. Oth­
ers are best characterized by the specialized uses to 
which they were put: dairy barns in the upper mid­
west, tobacco barns in the east and southeast, hop­
drying barns in the northwest, and rice barns in South 
Carolina. Other historic barns were built to patterns 
developed and popularized by land-grant universities, 
or sold by Sears, Roebuck and Company and other 
mail-order firms. And others fit no category at all: 
these barns attest to the owner's tastes, wealth, or un­
orthodox ideas about agriculture. All of these barns are 
also part of the heritage of historic barns found 
throughout the country. 
Panels on this 1900 Kentucky tobacco barn open to aid in the 
curing process. Photo: Christine Amos, Kentucky Heritage Council. 
The long, sweeping roof is a characteristic of the Prairie or Western 
barn. The projecting peak over the hayloft is another. This Iowa 
barn was built about 1910. Photo: Mary Humstone. 
/11 the early 20th century barn patterns were developed by 
agricultural schools and prefabricated units were sold by 
mail-order firms. This Maryland barn was bought about 1920 
from a Sears catalogue. Photo: Robert]. Hughes 
The two ventilati11g towers are the character-defining aspect of 
this Oregon hop-drying barn. Photo: Allan Nelson. 

Preservation of Historic Barns 
Understanding Barns and Their History 
Historic barns are preserved for a number of reasons. 
Some are so well built that they remain useful even 
after a hundred years or more. Many others are inti­
mately connected with the families who built them and 
the surrounding communities. Others reflect develop­
ments in agricultural science or regional building types . 
Before restoring a historic barn or rehabilitating it for a 
new use , an owner should study the building thor­
oughly. This process involves finding out when the 
barn was built, who built it, and why. It means under ­
standing how the building was changed through the 
years. It means assessing the condition of the barn , 
and understanding its components. This process has as 
its end an appreciation of the building's historic charac­
ter, that is, the sense of time and place associated with 
it. It is this physical presence of the past that gives 
historic buildings their significance. 
To assess the historic character of a barn, an owner 
should study old photographs, family records, deeds, 
insurance papers, and other documents that might 
reveal the building's appearance and history. Neighbors 
and former owners are often important sources of in­
formation. Local libraries, historical societies and pres­
ervation organizations are additional sources of help . 
As part of this overall evaluation, the following ele­
ments should be assessed for their contributions to the 
property. They are the principal tangible aspects of a 
barn's historic character, and should be respected in 
any work done on it. 
Setting. Setting is one of the primary factors contribut­
ing to the historic character of a barn (see Fig. 2). 
Farmers built barns in order to help them work the 
land; barns belong on farms, where they can be seen in 
relation to the surrounding fields and other structures 
Fig. 2. Mountains, fields, fences, sheds, trees: The setting of this 
enormous Montana barn is an important element of its character. 
The barn was built in 1887-1889 after disastrous livestock losses in 
the winter of 1886-1887. It could hold 500 cattle and store a 
quarter-million cubic feet of hay. Photo: John N. DeHaas, Jr. , 
Montana Historical Society. 
in the farm complex . A barn crowded by suburbs is not 
a barn in the same sense as is a barn clustered with 
other farm buildings, or standing alone against a back­
drop of cornfields . Hence, the preservation of barns 
should not be divorced from the preservation of the 
setting: farms and farmland, ranches and range, or­
chards, ponds, fields , streams and country roads. 
Other important elements of setting include fences, 
stone walls, roads, paths, barnyards, corrals, and ancil­
lary structures such as windmills and silos. (Silos, in­
deed , have become so closely associated with barns as 
nearly to have lost their "separate" identities.) These 
features help place the building in the larger agricul­
tural context, relating it to its purpose in the overall 
rural setting. 
Form. The shape of barns, as with other buildings, is of 
great importance in conveying their character. (For 
round barns, the shape is the defining feature of the 
type.) Often the form of a barn is visible from a dis­
tance. Often, too, more than one side can be seen at 
the same time, and from several different approaches. 
As a general rule, the rear and sides of a barn are not 
as differentiated from the front, or as subordinated to 
it, as in other buildings . 
The roof is among the most important elements of 
building form. Barns are no exception. The gable roof 
on Dutch and Prairie barns, the cone-shaped, dome­
shaped, eight- or twelve-sided roof of round barns, and 
the gambrel roof of the "typical" barn are among the 
most prominent features on these buildings. A barn 
roof can often be seen from a distance, and for this 
reason must be considered a major feature . 
Materials. Among the major impressions given by well­
maintained historic barns are those of strength, solidity 
and permanence (see Fig. 3). These impressions largely 
result from the durability and ruggedness of the mate­
rials used in them. Weathered wood siding, irregularly 
shaped stones, or roughhewn logs on the exterior; 
dressed beams, posts scarred by years of use, and 
plank flooring on the interior all contribute to the spe­
cial character of barns . 
Fig. 3. The stone walls of this Delaware barn are its most notable 
feature. Built about 1810, the barn is a bank barn. Photo: Valerie 
Cesna, Delaware Bureau of Archeology and Historic Preservation. 
5 

Openings. Unlike historic residential, industrial and 
commercial buildings, barns generally have few open­
ings for windows and doors. Yet the openings found in 
barns are important both to their functioning and to 
their appearance. Typically, large wagon doorways and 
openings to the hayloft are among the most striking 
features on barns . Not as prominent as these large 
openings, but important from a functional perspective, 
are the ventilator slits found on many barns. With im­
portant exceptions (dairy barns, for example), windows 
are few, and are normally small. The relative absence of 
openings for windows and doors adds to the overall 
impression of massiveness and solidity conveyed by 
many historic barns , and is one of the reasons why 
they often appear to be larger than they are. 
Interior Spaces. The impression received upon stepping 
into many historic barns is that of space (see Fig. 4). Not 
infrequently, the entire building appears as a single 
large space. To enter these buildings is sometimes to 
experience the entire expanse of the building at once . 
Even when haylofts and animal stalls "consume" part 
of the building, they often do not keep the full expanse 
of the interior from being seen. In large barns, this can 
be an imposing sight. More commonly, the barn is a 
combination of confined spaces on the lower floor and 
a large open space above; in this case, the contrast 
between the confined and open spaces is also striking. 
The openness of the interior, furthermore, often con­
trasts with the "blankness" typical of many barn exteri­
ors, with their relatively few openings. 
Fig. 4. Nowhere is the sense of space associated with barn interiors
more evident than in a round barn. The storage capacity of thzs 1930 
barn is immense. Just visible midway up the wall is a circular track 
and pulley system used to move hay from the wagon entrance on the 
lower level and to distribute it around the loft. When needed, hay 
was dropped to the stalls below through an opening in the loft floor. 
Photo: Keith A. Sculle, Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. 
6 
Structural Framework. The exposed structural framework 
is a major component of the character of most historic 
barns (see Fig. 5). Typically, barns were built for strictly 
utilitarian purposes. Accordingly, barn builders made 
no effort to conceal the structural system. Yet for that 
very reason, barns achieve an authenticity that ac­
counts for much of their appeal. 
Fig. 5. The exposed structural framework of this large 1890 Illinois 
barn is impressive. In a recent rehabilitation a portion of the 
haymow floor (see arrow) was raised to provide clearance for large 
machinery. Photo: Dale Humphrey, Galesburg Register Mail. 
In some barns, the load-bearing members are of enor­
mous dimensions, and the complex system of beams, 
braces, posts, rafters and other elements of the re­
vealed framework create an imposing sight. Yet even in 
small barns, the structural system can be an important 
feature, helping to determine the historic character of 
the building. 
Decorative Features. Historic barns, like modern ones, 
are structures built for use. Nevertheless, decorative 
elements are not lacking on barns. Foremost among 
these is color (red being most common) . Dutch barns 
traditionally sported distinctively shaped martin holes 
in the upper reaches of the building. Traditional hex 
signs on Pennsylvania barns are so well known as to 
have entered the mainstream of popular culture and 
taken on a life of their own (see Fig. 6). Decorative 
paint schemes, including contrasting colors to "pick 
out" cross members of the external framework, are 
common (these most frequently take the form of dia­
monds or "X's" on the main doors). Sign painters often 
took advantage of the size and visibility of barns in an 
age before billboards. "Mail Pouch Tobaccd' signs were 
nearly as numerous in the first quarter of the 20th cen­
tury as patent medicine ads were in the last quarter of 
the 19th. Another decorative motif on historic barns is 
the arrangement of spacings between bricks to form 
decorative patterns (as well as to ventilate the barn) . 

Fig. 6. Hex signs are among the wide range of decorative elements 
found on American barns. Photo: Lee H. Nelson. 
In addition to these elements, arched window hoods, 
patterned slate roofs, fanciful cupolas, weathervanes , 
lightning rods and ornamented metal ventilator hoods 
can be found on historic barns. Finally, individual 
farmers and barn builders sometimes added personal 
touches, as when they carved or painted their names 
on anchor beams, or painted their names and the date 
over the entrance. 
The elements discussed here are major components of 
historic barns. Yet no list can convey the full historic 
character of an individual building. It is very impor­
tant, therefore, to study each structure carefully before 
undertaking any project to restore it or to adapt it to 
new uses. 
Maintenance 
If a building is to be kept in good repair, periodic main­
tenance is essential. Barns should be routinely in­
spected for signs of damage and decay, and problems 
corrected as soon as possible. Water is the single great­
est cause of building materials deterioration. The repair 
of roof leaks is therefore of foremost importance . Bro­
ken or missing panes of glass in windows or cupolas 
are also sources of moisture penetration, and should be 
replaced, as should broken ventilation louvers. Gutters 
and downspouts should be cleaned once or twice a 
year. Proper drainage and grading should be ensured, 
particularly in low spots around the foundation where 
water can collect. 
Moisture is one major threat to historic buildings . In­
sects, especially termites, carpenter ants and powder 
post beetles, are another. Regular examinations for 
infestations are essential. 
Additional periodic maintenance measures include 
repair or replacement of loose or missing clapboards, 
and inspections of foundations for cracks and settle­
ments. Vegetation growing on the barn should be re­
moved, and shrubs or trees near it should be cleared if 
they obstruct access, or, more serious, if roots and 
other growths threaten the foundation. Soil and ma­
nure build-ups against the foundation should be re­
moved. Such build-ups hold water and snow against 
wooden elements, and promote rot. They also promote 
insect infestations. Door hardware should be checked 
for proper fitting and lubricated yearly. Lightning rods 
should be kept in proper working order, or added, if 
missing. 
Repair 
Many historic barns require more serious repairs than 
those normally classed as "routine maintenance " (see 
Fig. 7). Damaged or deteriorated features should be 
repaired rather than replaced wherever possible . If 
replacement is necessary, the new material should 
match the historic material in design, color, texture, 
and other visual qualities and, where possible, mate­
rial. The design of replacements for missing features 
(for example, cupolas and dormers) should be based on 
historic, physical, or pictorial evidence. 
Many barn owners have substantial experience in the 
care of farm structures. Where expertise is lacking , it 
will be necessary to consult structural engineers, ma­
sons, carpenters, and architects, as appropriate. In 
addition, for many repairs, a knowledge of historic 
building techniques may be necessary. 
Structural Repairs. Ensuring the structural soundness of 
a historic barn is vital both to its continued usefulness 
and to the safety of its occupants. The following signs 
of structural settlements may require the services of a 
structural engineer to evaluate: major cracks in ma­
sonry walls, visible bowing, leaning and misalignment 
of walls, sagging windows and doors, separation of 
cladding from structural frames, trusses pulling away 
from seating points at support walls, sagging joists and 
rafters, and noticeable dips in the roof between rafters . 
To correct these problems, masonry foundations may 
have to be reset or partially rebuilt. Sills and plates may 
need to be repaired or replaced. Walls may have to be 
straightened and tied into the structural system more 
securely. Individual structural members may need brac­
ing or splicing. 
Roofing. Moisture can damage historic materials se­
verely, and, in extreme cases, jeopardize the structural 
integrity of a building. Every effort must be made to 
secure a weathertight roof. This may require merely 
patching a few missing shingles on a roof that is other­
wise sound. In more severe cases, it may require re­
pairing or replacing failing rafters and damaged 
sheat hing. Such extreme intervention, however , is not 
usual. More typical is the need to furnish "a new roof," 
that is, to replace the wooden shingles, asphalt shin­
gles, slate shingles or metal covering the roof. Replac­
ing one type of roofing with another can produce a 
drastic change in the appearance of historic buildings. 
Great care should be taken, therefore , to assess the 
7 

a b C 
d e f 
g 
Fig. 7. Now part of Antietam National Battlefield, this bank barn (built in the 1820s and enlarged in 1898 and 1914) looks out over fields and hills 
where Union and Confederate armies fought on the bloodiest day in American history. Owned by the National Park Service, the barn underwent 
major repairs: (a) the foundation was regraded for better drainage; (b) the deteriorated metal roof was removed; (c) removal of the metal roof disclosed 
the rotten wall plate and roof rafters; (d) these elements were replaced, and collars to hold a new gutter system were added; (e) new downspouts and 
drain pipes were installed to carry water off the roof and away from the foundation; (f) damaged structural members were strengthened with new 
sections; (g) new roof and other work finished, the barn remains a working farm structure. Photos: (a-f), Courtesy, Williamsport Preservation 
Training Center, NPS; (g), Jack E. Boucher, HABS. 
8 

contribution of the roof to the appearance and charac­
ter of the barn before replacing one type of roofing 
material with another. While some substitute materials 
(such as synthetic slate shingles) can be considered, the 
highest priority should be to replace in-kind, and to 
match the visual qualities of the historic roof. Gutters 
and downspouts should be replaced if damaged or 
missing. Finally, dormers , cupolas, metal ventilators 
and other rooftop "ornaments " provide needed ventila­
tion, and should be repaired if necessary . 
Exterior. In addition to the roof and the foundation, 
other exterior elements may need repair, including 
siding, brick and stonework, dormers and cupolas, 
windows and doors. Shutters may be falling off, doors 
may need to be rehung, and missing louvers replaced. 
The exterior may need repainting. (Unpainted brick or 
stone barns, however, should never be painted.) In the 
case of masonry barns , repointing may be necessary. If 
so, mortar that is compatible in appearance and com­
position with the historic mortar must be used. Using 
mortar high in portland cement can damage historic 
brick or stone . Masonry cleaning should be undertaken 
only when necessary to halt deterioration or to remove 
heavy dirt, and using the gentlest means possible. 
Sandblasting and other physical or chemical treatments 
that damage historic materials should not be used. 
Likewise, power washing under high pressure can also 
damage building material. 
Interior. Typical interior repairs may include removing 
and replacing rotten floorboards, and repair or replace­
ment of partitions, storage bins, gutters and stalls. 
Concrete floors may be cracked and in need of repair. 
Wiring and plumbing may need major overhaul. 
Rehabilitation 
Some barns have served the same uses for generations, 
and need only periodic repairs and routine mainte­
nance. Others have become obsolete and need exten­
sive updating for modern farming methods. (To house 
livestock, for example , a barn may need new feeding, 
watering, waste removal, electrical, plumbing and ven­
tilation systems .) Similarly, barns that can no longer be 
used for agriculture at all normally require changes to 
adapt them for commercial, office, or residential use. 
In such cases barns need more extensive work than the 
maintenance and r.epair treatments outlined above. 
However, when rehabilitiating a historic barn for a new 
farming operation or a new use entirely, care must be 
taken to preserve its historic character while making 
needed changes (see Figs. 8, 9 and 10). 
A successful rehabilitation project is best guaranteed 
when a work plan is drawn up by someone familiar 
with the evaluation of historic structures, and when it 
is carried out by contractors and workmen experienced 
with the building type and committed to the goal of 
retaining the historic character of the property . Help in 
formulating rehabilitation plans and in locating experi­
enced professionals is normally available from the State 
Historic Preservation Office and local preservation 
groups. 
The following approaches should be observed when 
carrying out rehabilitation projects on historic barns: 
1. Preserve the historic setting of the barn as much as 
possible. Modern farming practices do not require the 
great number of outbuildings, lots, fences, hedges, 
Fig. 8. Built in the Gothic Revival style in the 1890s, this four-story Indiana barn had fallen into disuse, and was deteriorating. In the process of 
returning it to use, the owner installed a new roof that matches the wooden shingles found beneath the deteriorating asphalt shingle roof; removed 
the modern asbestos shingle siding; repaired the windows, and reconstructed the cupola (including its lightning rod and weathervane). (Before and 
after views are of opposite sides of barn.) Photos: Before, Courtesy, Gary Post-Tribune; After, Courtesy, Kankakee Valley News. 
9 

walls and other elements typical of historic farms. Yet 
such features, together with fields, woods, ponds, and 
other aspects of the farm setting can be important to 
the character of historic barns. The functional relation­
ship between the barn and silo is particularly signifi­
cant and should also be maintained. 
2. Repair and repaint historic siding rather than cover 
barns with artificial siding. Siding applied over the 
entire surface of a building can give it an entirely differ­
ent appearance, obscure craft details, and mask ongo­
ing deterioration of historic materials underneath . The 
resurfacing of historic farm buildings with any new 
material that does not duplicate the historic material is 
never a recommended treatment. 
Fig. 9. This enormous Ohio barn (285 feet by 125) was built between 1909 and 1912. It was one of 102 structures on "America's Finest Farm. " 
(Other buildings included the world's largest greenhouse and the world's largest barn-nearly 800 feet long). The barn seen here was rehabilitated for 
use as headquarters for an international agricultural firm. Although the use has changed, comparison of the interior photographs shows that the barn 
has retained its historic character. (After view, interior, is taken from a cross axis; distortion is from fish-eye lens.) Photos: Exterior and interior, after: 
Ron Kuntz, UPI; Interior, before: Courtesy, Barberton (Ohio) Historical Society. 
10 

11 
Fig. 10. This 1910 Vennont round barn is 80 feet in diameter. Disused and decaying, the building was converted to a community center, with artists' 
studios and spaces for weddings, parties and conferences. The barn underwent extensive structural repair a and other work. Careful selectwn of new use 
pennitted the building to be rehabilitated while retaining its principal spaces and features-and ,ts h1stonc character- 111tact. Photos: Jay White. 
3. Repair rather than replace historic windows when ­
ever possible, and avoid "blocking them down " or 
covering them up. Avoid the insertion of numerous 
new window openings. They can give a building a 
domestic appearance , radically altering a barn 's chara c­
ter. However, if additional light is needed , add new 
windows carefully, respecting the size and scale of 
existing window openings. 
4. Avoid changing the size of door openings wheneve r 
possible. Increasing the height of door openings to 
accommodate new farm machinery can dramatically 
alter the historic character of a barn . If larger doors are 
needed, minimize the visual chang e. Use new track­
hung doors rather than oversized rolled steel doors, 
which give an industrial appearanc e incompatible with 
most historic barns . If the barn has wood siding, the 
new doors should match it. If historic doors are no 
longer needed, fix them shut inst ead of removing them 
and filling in the openings. 
5. Consider a new exterior addition onl y if it is essen ­
tial to the continued use of a historic barn . A new addi­
tion can damage or destro y historic feature s and 
materials and alter the overall form of the historic 
building. If an addition is required , it should be built in 
a way that minimizes damage to external walls and 
internal plan. It should also be compatible with the 
historic barn, but sufficiently differentiated from it so 
that the new work is not confused with what is genu­
inely part of the past. 
6. Retain interior spaces and features as much as pos si­
ble. The internal volume of a barn is often a major 
character-defining feature, and the insertion of new 
floors , partitions, and structures within the barn can 
drastically impair the overall character of the space . 
Similarly, interior features should also be retained to 
the extent possible . 
7. Retain as much of the historic internal structural sys­
tem as possible. Even in cases where it is impractical to 
keep all of the exposed structural system, it may be 
possible to keep sufficiently extensive portions of it to 
convey a strong sense of the interior character. Whole­
sale replacement of the historic structural system with a 
different system should be avoided. 
Housing: A Special Concern 
The conversion of barns to housing is not new, 
but has become increasingly popular in recent 
years. Yet the changes involved in converting 
most barns to housing are so great that such con­
versions rarely preserve the historic character of 
the resource . Ordinarily, numerous windows are 
inserted , walls are heavily insulated and refin­
ished , the interior volume is greatly reduced, 
chimneys and other fixtures normally lacking in 
barns are added, and site changes, such as close­
in parking and residential landscaping are made, 
giving the building a greatly altered site. Many 
other barns are "converted" to houses by disman­
tling them, discarding the exterior, and reusing 
the internal structural system in a new building. 
The beams are saved, but the barn is lost. 
In cases where the conversion from barns to 
houses has been successful, the positive outcome 
results in large measure from the careful choice of 
the barn: A modest-sized barn with a sufficient 
number of existing residential-scale windows , in 
which nearly the whole internal volume can be 
used as is, without building numerous new parti­
tions or extending a new floor across the open 
space (haylofts in such cases serving as loft-space 
for "second story" bedrooms). 

Summary 
Historic barns form a vital part of our Nation's heritage . 
Not every historic barn can be saved from encroaching 
development, or easily brought back into productive 
use. Yet thousands of such structures can be repaired 
or rehabilitated for continued agricultural use or for 
new functions without destroying the very qualities 
that make them worth saving. By carefully examining 
the historic significance of each structure, owners of 
historic barns can draw up plans that preserve and 
reuse these historic structures while maintaining their 
historic character. 
Selected Reading 
Arthur , Eric and Dudley Witney. The Barn: A Vanishing Landmark i11 
North America. Gree nwich, CT: New York Graphic Society Ltd., 
1972. 
Fitchen, John. The New World Dutch Barn: A Study of Its Characteristics, 
Its Structural System, and Its Probable Erectional Procedures. Syracuse , 
NY: Syracuse University Press , 1968. 
Halsted, Byron D., ed. Barns, Sheds and Outbuildings. New York: 0. 
Judd Co., 1881. Rpt.: Brattleboro, VT: Stephen Greene Press , 1977. 
Humstone, Mary. Barn Again! A Guide to Rehabilitation of Older Farm 
Buildings. Des Moines , IA: Meredith Corporation and the National 
Trust for Historic Preservation , 1988. 
Klamkin, Charles. Barns: Their History, Preservation and Restoration. 
New York: Hawthorn, 1973. 
Schuler, Stanley. American Barns: In a Class by Themselves, Exton, PA: 
Schiffer Publishing Ltd., 1984. 
Schultz, LeRoy G., comp. Barns, Stables and Outbuildings: A World 
Bibliography in English, 1700-1983. Jefferson , NC, and London: 
McFarland & Co., 1986. 
Stokes , Samuel N., et al. Saving America's Countryside: A Guide to 
Rural Conservation. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1989. 
Cover photograph: Prairie barn with monitor roof, North Dakota. 
Photo: Mary Humstone . 
12 
NOTES 
1 Nore V. Winter, " Design on the Farm: A Rural Preservation Forum," Unpublished 
proceedings from a Conference sponsored by the National Trust for Historic Preservation , 
Denver, Colorad o, January 13- 14, 1986. 
2 Descriptions of the primary barn types featured in this sect ion are heav ily indebted to Eric 
Arthur and Dudley Witney, The Barn:A Vanishing Landmark in North America. Greenwich, 
CT: New York Graphic Society, Ltd., 1972. 
3 John Fitchen, The New World Dutch Barn: A Study of Its Characteristics, Its Structural System, 
and !ts Probable Erectional Procedures. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press , 1968, p. 136, 
4 Washington's "round " barn, actually a 16-sided barn, is shown in Lowell J. Soike , Without
Right Angles: The Round Bams of Iowa. Des Moines: lowa State Historical Department , 1983 
Round, octagonal and other polygonal barns are normally all classed as "round barns." 
When it is necessary to be more precise, the term "true round" is used to distinguish round 
barns from hexagonal , octagonal, or other polygonal barns. The Shaker Round Barn is a true 
round barn. Gutted by fire in 1864, the barn was rebuilt shortly thereafter. See Polly 
Matherly and John D. McDermott , Han cock Shaker Village National Historic landmark 
study, History Division, National Park Service, Washington, D.C. 
5 In addition to the sources mentioned above, the following studi es were important sources 
for this section: Mark L. Peckham, "Ce ntral Plan Dairy Barns of New York Themati c 
Resources," Albany: New York State Division for Histori c Preservation , 1984; and James E. 
Jacobsen and Cheryl Peterson, " Iowa Round Barns: The Sixty Year Experiment Thematic 
Resources," Des Moines: Iowa State Historical Departm ent, 1986. These themati c studies 
document barns listed in the National Register of Historic Places. 
6 Charles Klamkin, Barns: Their History, Preseruatio11, and Restoration. New York: Hawthorn, 
1973, p. 57. 
Acknowledgements 
The author gratefully acknowledges the invaluable assistance of Mary 
Humstone, National Trust for Historic Preservation , Mountains /Plains Regional 
Office, and Sharon C. Park, Kay D. Weeks, and Robert Powers of the National 
Park Service. Significant contributions were also made by Stan Graves , Texas 
Historical Commission, on behalf of the National Conference of State Histori c 
Preservation Officers; Shirley Dunn, Dutch Barn Preservation Society, 
Rensselaer, NY; Janis King, Knoxville, IL; Marilyn Fedelchak , National Trust for 
Historic Preservation; Fred Swader, U.S. Department of Agriculture , and Linda 
McClelland, National Register of Historic Places. In addition, useful comments 
and technical assistance were provided by the staff of the Technical 
Preservation Services Branch, directed by H. Ward Jandl , by the cultural 
resources staff of National Park Service Regional Offices, by Jack Boucher, 
Catherine Lavoie and Ellen Minnich of the Historic American Buildings Survey, 
and by Alicia Weber of the Park Historic Architecture Division. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interi or to 
develop and make availab le information concerning historic propertie s. 
Preservation Brief 20 has been developed under the direction of Lee H. Nelson , 
FAIA, Chief, Preservation Assistance Division , National Park Service, P.O. Box 
37127, Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. 
October 1989 