U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
5PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Preservation of Historic 
Adobe Buildings 
Whether built in the 17th century or in the 20th century, 
adobe buildings share common problems of maintenance and 
deterioration. This brief discusses the traditional materials 
and construction of adobe buildings and the causes of adobe 
deterioration. It also makes recommendation s for preserving 
historic adobe buildings. By its composition, adobe construc­
tion is inclined to deteriorate; however, the buildings can be 
made durable and renewable when properly maintained . 
What is Adobe? 
The adobe, or sun-dried brick, is one of the oldest and most 
common building materials known to man . Traditionally, 
adobe bricks were never kiln fired . Unbaked adobe bricks 
consisted of sand, sometimes gravel, clay, water, and often 
straw or grass mixed together by hand , formed in wooden 
molds, and dried by the sun. Today so me commercially 
available adobe-like bricks are fired. The se are similar in size 
to unbaked bricks, but have a different texture , color, and 
strength. Similarly some adobe bricks have been stabilized, 
containing cement, asphalt, and/or bituminous materials , but 
these also differ from traditional adobe in their appearance 
and strength. 
Traditional adobe construction techniques in North Amer­
ica have not varied widely for over 3 1/2 centuries. Adobe 
SAN XAVIER DEL BAC , TUCSON VICINITY, ARIZONA. Built 
entire ly of adobe constru ction I 1783-/797). this is one of the finest 
Spanish Colonial churches in th e United States, ha ving an 
elabora te frontispiece of molded , carved, and painted brick imitat­
inx stone. (National Park. Service) 
building methods employed in the Southwest in the 16th 
century are still used today . Because adobe bricks are not 
fired in a kiln as are clay bricks, they do not permanently 
harden, but remain unstable-they shrink and swell con­
stantly with their changing water content. Their strength also 
fluctuates with their water content: the higher the water 
content, the lower the strength. 
Adobe will not permanently bond with metal, wood, or 
stone because it exhibits much greater movement than these 
other materials, either separating, cracking, or twisting 
where they interface. Yet, many of these more table 
building materials such as fired brick, wood, and lime and 
cement mortars are nonetheless used in adobe construction. 
For example, stone may be used for a building's foundation, 
and wood may be used for its roof or its lintels and 
doorways. In the adobe building, these materials are gener­
ally held in place by their own weight or by the compressive 
weight of the wall above them. Adobe construction possibil­
ities and variations in design have therefore been somewhat 
limited by the physical constraints of the material. 
Preserving and rehabilitating a deteriorated adobe building 
is most success/ ul when the techniques and methods used for 
restoration and repairs are as similar as possible to the 
techniques used in the original construction. 
Adobe Construction Techniques 
The Brick: The adobe brick is molded from sand and clay 
mixed with water to a plastic consistency. Commonly, straw 
or grass is included as a binder. Although they do not help 
reinforce the bricks or give them added long-term strength, 
straw and grass do help the bricks shrink more uniformly 
while they dry. More important for durability, however, is 
the inherent clay-to-sand ratio found in native soil. The 
prepared mud is placed in wooden forms, tamped, and 
leveled by hand . The bricks are then "turned-out" of the 
mold to dry on a level surface covered with straw or grass 
so that the bricks will not stick. After several days of drying, 
the adobe bricks are ready for air-curing. This consists of 
standing the bricks on end for a period of 4 weeks or longer. 
Mortar: Historically, most adobe walls were composed of 
adobe bricks laid with mud mortar. Such mortar exhibited 
the same properties as the bricks : relatively weak and 
susceptible to the same rate of hygroscopic (moisture absorp­
tive) swelling and shrinking, thermal expansion and contrac-
For aale by the Super 1nteodent ot Documents , U.S. Government Prtntlol' omce 
Wuhlngton , D.C. 20402 

flat roof, small openings 
brick coping, wood porch 
hip roof, wood trim 
tion, and deterioration. Consequently, no other material has 
been as succes sful in bonding adobe bricks. Today, cement 
and lime mortars are commonly used with stabilized adobe 
bricks, but cement mortars are incompatible with unstabil­
ized adobe because the two have different thermal expa~sion 
and contraction rates. Cement mortars thereby accelerate 
the deterioration of adobe bricks since the mortar s are 
stronger than the adobe. 
Building Foundations: Early adobe building foundations 
varied because of the difference in local building practices 
and availability of materials . Many foundations were large 
and substantially constructed, but others were almost non­
existent. Most often, adobe building foundations were con­
st ructed of bricks, fieldstones, or cavity walls (do1.1ble) 
infilled with rubble stone, tile fragments, or seashells. Adobe 
buildings were rarely constructed over basements or crawl­
spaces. 
Walls: Since adobe construction was load-bearing with low 
structural stre ngth , adobe walls tended to be massive , and 
seldom rose over 2 stories. In fact, the maximum hejght of 
adobe mission churches in the Southwest was approximately 
35 feet. Often buttresses braced exterior walls for added 
stability. 
In some parts of the Southwest, it was common to place a 
long wooden timber within the last courses of adobe bricks. 
This timber provided a long horizontal bearing plate for the 
roof thereby distributing the weight of the roof along the 
wall. 
Roofs: Early Southwest adobe roofs ( 17th-mid-I 9th centu ­
ries) tended to be flat with low parapet walls. These roofs 
consisted of logs which supported wooden poles, and which 
in tum supported wooden lathing or layers of twigs covered 
with packed adobe earth. The wood was aspen, mesquite, 
cedar, or whatever was avai lable . Roughly dressed logs 
(called "vi1<as") or shaped squared timbers were spaced on 
close (2-3 feet or less) centers resting either on the horizontal 
wooden member which topped the adobe wall, or on 
decorated cantilevered blocks , called "corbels," which were 
set into the adobe wall. Traditionally, these vigas often 
projected through the wall facades creating the typical adobe 
Roof Bearing. A roof bellri11x timber placed withi11 the adobe walls 
provides even support for the weixht of the roof. ( Farm Security 
Admi11istration Collection, Librury 0JC011x,ess) 
2 
Evolution of Roof Forms. The roofs of early adobe buildin{ls were 
jlllt, made with mud , with low parapets. Lllter , brick copinxs were 
placed on top of parapets /Ind chim11eys to prote ct them from 
eros ion , and shed roof por ches were lidded to shelter doors and 
wi11dows. After the railroad reached the Southwest, hip roofs and 
wooden trim bexan to appear as sawn lumber, shinxles, tile, and 
sheet metal became available. (Drawinx by Albert N. Hopper) 
Roof Framing . Vixa loxs and sa1•i11os are seen in the interior of the 
lldobe buildinx. Often the wooden mllterials that compose the 
traditional .flat adobe roof crea te inter estinx and p/easinx pal/ems 
on the ceilinxs of the interior rooms. (Photo by Russell Lee, Farm 
Security Administration Collection, Library of Congress) 

construction detail copied in the 20th-century revival styles. 
Wooden poles about 2 inches in diameter (called "latias") 
were then laid across the top of the vigas. Handsplit planks 
(called "cedros" if cedar and "savinos" if cypress) instead 
of poles were used when available. In some areas, these 
were laid in a herringbone pattern. In the west Texas and 
Tucson areas, saguaro (cactus) ribs were used to span 
between vigas. After railroad transportation arrived in most 
areas, sawn boards and planks , much like roof sheathing, 
became available and was often used in late-19th- and early-
20th-century buildings or for repairs to earlier ones. 
Next cedar twigs, plant fibers , or fabric were placed on 
top of the poles or planks. These served as a lathing on 
which the 6 or more inches of adobe earth was compacted. 
If planks were used , twigs were not necessary. A coating of 
adobe mud was then applied overall. The flat roofs were 
sloped somewhat toward drains of hollowed logs (called 
"ca nales ," or "gargolas "), tile, or sheet metal that proj­
ected through the parapet walls . 
Gable and hipped roofs became increasingly popular in 
adobe buildings in the 19th and 20th centuries. "Territorial" 
styles and preferences for certain materials developed. For 
example, roof tiles were widely used in southern California. 
Although the railroad brought in some wooden shingles and 
some terra-cotta, sheet metal roofing was the prevalent 
material for roofs in New Mexico . 
Floors: Historically, flooring materials were placed directly 
on the ground with little or no subflooring preparation. 
Flooring materials in adobe buildings have varied from earth 
to adobe brick, fired brick, tile, or flagstone (called "/ajas"), 
to conventional wooden floors . 
Traditional Surface Coatings 
Adobe surfaces are notoriously fragile and need frequent 
maintenance. To protect the exterior and interior surfaces of 
new adobe walls, surface coatings such as mud plaster, lime 
plaster, whitewash, and stucco have been used. Such coat­
ings app lied to the exterior of adobe construction have 
retarded surface deterioration by offering a renewable sur­
face to the adobe wall. In the past, these methods have been 
inexpensive and readily available to the adobe owner as a 
solution to periodic maintenance and visual improvement. 
However, recent increases in labor costs and changes in 
cultural and socio-economic values have caused many adobe 
building owners to seek more lasting materials as alternatives 
to these traditional and once-inexpensive surface coatings. 
Mud Plaster: Mud plaster has long been used as a urface 
coating. Like adobe, mud plaster is composed of clay, sand, 
water, a nd straw or grass, and therefore exhibits sympathetic 
properties to those of the original adobe. The mud plaster 
bonds to the adobe because the two are made of the same 
materials. Although applying mud plaster requires little skill, 
it is a time-consuming and laborious process. Once in place, 
the mud plaster must be smoothed. This is done by hand; 
sometimes deerskins, sheepskins, and small, slightly rounded 
stones are used to smooth the plaster to create a "polished" 
surface. In some areas, pink or ochre pigments are mixed 
into the final layer and "polished ." 
Whitewash: Whitewash has been used on earthen buildings 
since before recorded history. Consisting of ground gypsum 
rock, water, and clay, whitewash acts as a sealer, which can 
be either brushed on the adobe wall or applied with large 
pieces of coarse fabric such as burlap . 
Initially, whitewash was considered inexpensive and easy 
to apply. But its impermanence and the cost of annually 
3 
renewing it has made it less popular as a surface coating in 
recent years. 
Lime Plaster: Lime plaster , widely used in the 19th century 
as both an exterior and interior coating, is much harder than 
mud plaster. It is, however , less flexible and cracks easily. It 
consists of lime, sand, and water and is applied in heavy 
coats with trowels or brushes. To make the lime plaster 
adhere to adobe, walls are often scored diagonally with 
hatchets, making grooves about 11/2 inches deep. The 
grooves are filled with a mixture of lime mortar and small 
chips of stone or broken roof tiles. The wall is then covered 
heavily with the lime plaster. 
Cement Stucco: In the United States, cement stucco came 
into use as an adobe surface coating in the early 20th century 
for the revival styles of Southwest adobe architecture. 
Cement stucco consists of cement, sand, and water and it is 
applied with a trowel in from I to 3 coats over a wire mesh 
nailed to the adobe surface. This material has been very 
popular because it requires little maintenance when applied 
over fired or stabilized adobe brick, and because it can be 
easily painted. 
It should be noted however , that the cement stucco does 
not create a bond with unfired or unstabilized adobe; it relies 
on the wire mesh and nails to hold it in place . Since nails 
cannot bond with the adobe, a firm surface cannot be 
guaranteed. Even when very long nails are used , moisture 
within the adobe may cause the nails and the wire to rust, 
thus, losing contact with the adobe. 
Other Traditional Surface Coatings: These have included 
items such as paints (oil base, resin, or emulsion), portland 
cement washes, coatings of plant extracts, and even coatings 
of fresh animal blood (mainly for adobe floors). Some of 
these coatings are inexpensive and easy to apply, provide 
temporary surface protection, and are still available to the 
adobe owner. 
Adobe Deterioration 
When preservation or rehabilitation is contemplated for a 
historic adobe building, it is generally because the walls or 
roof of the building have deteriorated in some fashion-walls 
may be cracked, eroded, pitted, bulging, or the roof may be 
sagging. In planning the stabilization and repair of an adobe 
building, it is necessary: 
• To determine the nature of the deterioration 
• To identify and correct the source of the problem causing 
the deterioration 
• To 
develop rehabilitation and restoration plans that are 
sensitive to the integrity of the historic adobe building 
• To develop a maintenance program once the rehabilitation 
or restoration is completed . 
General Advice: There are several principles that when 
followed generally result in a relatively stable and permanent 
adobe resource. 
I. Whenever possible, sec ure the services or advice of a 
professional architect or other preservationist proficient 
in adobe preservation and stabi lization . Although this 
may be more costly than to "do-it-yourself," it will 
probably be less expensive in the long run . Working with 
a deteriorated adobe building is a complex and difficult 
process . lrreversiWe damage may be done by well-mean­
ing but inexperienced ·' restorationists. ·' Moreover, 
professional assistance may be required to interpret local 
code requirements. 
2. Never begin restoration or repairs until the problems that 

Deteriorated Adobe Building. By virtue of it., fraKile nature , the 
udohe huildinK must he restored hy thorouKh, systematic, and 
professional measures that will insure its future survivul . (Techni­
cal Preservation Service ., Division) 
have been causing the deterioration of the adobe have 
been found, analyzed, and solved. For instance, sagging 
or bulging walls may be the result of a problem called 
"rising damp" and/or excessive roof loads. Because 
adobe deterioration is almost always the end product of a 
combination of problems, it takes a trained professional 
to analyze the deterioration, identify the source or sources 
of deterioration, and halt the deterioration before full 
restoration begins. 
3. Repair or replace adobe building materials with the same 
types of materials used originally and use the same 
construction techniques. Usually the best and the safest 
procedure is to use traditional building materials. Repair 
or replace deteriorated adobe bricks with similar adobe 
bricks. Repair or replace rotted wooden ·lintels with 
similar wooden lintels. The problems created by introduc­
ing dissimilar replacement matetials may cause problems 
far exceeding those which deteriorated the adobe in the 
first place. 
Sources of Deterioration 
The following are some common signs and sources of adobe 
deterioration and some common solutions. It should be 
cautioned again, however, that adobe deterioration is often 
the end-product of more than one of these problems . The 
remedying of only one of these will not necessarily arrest 
deterioration if others are left untreated. 
Structural Damage: There are several common structural 
problems in adobe buildings, and while the results of these 
problems are easy to see, their causes are not. Many of 
these problems originate from improper design or construc­
tion, insufficient foundations, weak or inadequate materials, 
or the effects of external forces such as wind, water, snow, 
or earthquakes. In any case the services of a soils engineer 
and/or structural engineer knowledgeable in adobe construc­
tion may be necessary to evaluate these problems . Solutions 
may involve repairing foundations, realigning leaning and 
bulging walls, buttressing walls, inserting new window and 
door lintels, and repairing or replacing badly deteriorated 
roof structures. 
There are many tell-tale signs of structural problems in 
adobe buildings, the most common being cracks in walls , 
foundations, and roofs. In adobe, cracks are generally quite 
visible, but their causes may be difficult to diagnose. Some 
cracking is normal, such as the short hairline cracks that are 
caused as the adobe shrinks and continues to dry out. More 
4 
Structural Damage and Cracking. SaKKillK, hulKinK, and crackinK 
of wall ., and roof, are .,iKns of .,eriou ., problem ., in the adobe 
huildinK , It i., alwa y., udvi.rnhle to se cure professional services in 
the repair of such problems. (National Park Service) 
extensive cracking, however, usually indicates serious struc­
tural problems. In any case, cracks, like all structural 
problems, should be examined by a professional who can 
make recommendations for their repair. 
Water Related Problems: Generally, adobe buildings deteri­
orate because of moisture, either excessive rainwater or 
ground water. Successful stabilization, restoration, and the 
ultimate survival of an adobe building depends 
upon how 
effectively a structure sheds water. The importance in 
keeping an adobe building free from excessive moisture 
cannot be overestimated. The erosive action of rainwater 
and the subsequent drying out of adobe roofs, parapet walls , 
and wall surfaces can cause furrows, cracks, deep fissures, 
and pitted surfaces to form. Rain saturated adobe loses its 
cohesive strength and sloughs off forming rounded corners 
and parapets. If left unattended, rainwater damage can 
eventually destroy adobe walls and roofs, causing their 
continued deterioration and ultimate collapse. Standing rain­
water that accumulates at foundation level and rain splash 
may cause "coving" (the hollowing-out of the wall just 
above grade level). 
Ground water (water below ground level) might be present 
because of a spring, a high water table, improper drainage, 
seasonal water fluctuations, excessive plant watering, or 
changes in grade on either side of the wall. Ground water 
rises through capillary action into the wall and causes the 
adobe to erode, bulge, and cove. Coving is also caused by 
spalling during the freeze-thaw cycles. As water rises from 
the ground into the wall, the bond between the clay particles 
in the adobe brick breaks down. In addition, dissolved 
minerals or salts brought up from the soil by the water can 
be deposited on or near the surface of the wal I as the 
moisture evaporates. If these deposits become heavily con­
centrated, they too can deteriorate the adobe fabric. As the 
adobe dries out, shrinkage cracks usually appear; loose 
sections of adobe bricks and mud plaster may crumble. 
A water-tight roof with proper drainage is the best 
protection against rainfall erosion. Adobe wall and roof 
surfaces properly maintained with traditional tiles or surface 
coatings generally resist the destructive effects of rainwater. 
Roof drains should be in good repair and sufficient to carry 
rainwater run-off from the roof . In an effort to halt the 
destructive effects of rainwater, 19th-century builders often 
capped parapet walls with fired bricks. These bricks were 
harder and better suited to weather the erosive action of 
rainwater; however, the addition of a brick cap to an existing 
parapet wall creates a drastic change in a structure's 
appearance and fabric. The use of traditional lime mortar 

with the fired brick is advised because it is more water-tight 
and compatible with the harder brick. 
Rainwater that has accumulated at adobe foundations 
should be diverted away from the building. This may be 
done by regrading, by building gravel-filled trenches or 
brick, tile, or stone drip gutters, or by any technique that 
will effectively remove the ~landing rainwater. Regrading is 
perhaps the best solution because defective gutters and 
trenches may in effect collect and hold water at the base of 
the wall or foundation . 
In repairing "co ving, " the damage caused by rain splash, 
adobe bricks stabilized with soil cement might be considered. 
On the other hand, concrete patches , cement stucco, and 
curb-like buttresses against the coving usually have a nega­
tive effect because moisture may be attracted and trapped 
behind the concrete. 
Cement stucco and cement patche s have the poten tial for 
specific kinds of water related adobe deterioration. The 
thermal expansion coefficient 
of cement stucco is 3 to 10 
times greater than that of adobe resulting in cracking of the 
stucco. Cracks allow both liquid water and vapor to pene ­
trate the adobe beneath, and the stucco prevent s the wall 
from drying. 
As the moisture content of the adobe increases, there is a 
point at which the adobe will become soft like putty . When 
the wall becomes totally saturated, the adobe mud will flow 
as a liquid . This varies with the ~and. clay, and si lt conte nt 
of the adobe. 
If the adobe becomes so wet that the clay reaches its 
plastic limit, or if the adobe is exposed to a freeze-thaw 
action, serious damage can result. Under the weight of the 
roof, the wet adobe may deform or bulge. Since the 
deterioration is hidden from view by the cement ~tucco, 
damage may go undetected for some time. Traditional adobe 
construction techniques and materiab should therefore , be 
used to repair or rebuild part s of the walb . 
The destructive effects of moi sture on adobe buildings 
may be substantially halted by several remedie s. 
I. Shrubs, trees , and other foundation plantings may be 
causing physical damage . Their roots may be 
growing 
into the adobe, and/or they may be trapping excessive 
moisture in their roots and conducting it into walls . Their 
removal might be considered to halt this proces s. 
2. Level ground immediately adjacent to the walls may be 
causing poor drainage . Regrading coµld be considered so 
that the ground slopes away from the building, eliminating 
rainwater pools. 
3. The installation of footing drain s may be considered. 
Trenches about 2 to 2Vi feet wide and \everal feet deep 
are dug around the adobe building at the base of the walls 
or at the foundation if there is any. If the soil is weak, it 
may be necessary to slope the sides of the trench to 
prevent cave-in of the trench and subsequent damage to 
the wall. The walls and bottom of the trench ~hould be 
lined with a polyethylene vapor barrier to prev ent the 
collected water from saturating the surrounding soil and 
adobe wall. Clay tile. or plastic pipe. which drain to a 
sump or to an open gutter , are then laid in the bottom of 
the trench . The trench is filled with gravel to within 6 
inches of grade. The remaining excavation is then filled to 
grade with porous soil. 
A Word of Caution: Plant removal, reKradinK , or trenchinK 
may be potentiall y de .1tructive to archeoloKical remain .1 
a.1.rnciated with hi.1toric adobe buildinK .1ite.1. Any di .1turb­
ance of the xround should, therefore , be undertaken with 
prudence and caref ul planninK. 
Once any one or all of these so lution s ha s effectively 
minimized the problem s of rising ground water. the covi ng 
and deterioration of the walls can be corrected by patching 
the area with new adobe mud and by applying traditional 
surface coatings . It should be remembered, however , that 
unless the capillary action is stopped effectively, thi\ ero~ive 
condition will certainly continue. Mo~t important. surface 
coatings and patching only repair the effects of ground water 
and wind erosion, they cannot cure the cause. 
Coving. Sal11 dep<J.1iled hy ri.1ini: i:round water cun eva porat e und 
cuu .1e .1pullini: of !he udohe hrick .1 al !he hu .1e of !he wall, u 
.1eriou .1 cond ilion culled "covini:." Covini: cun also he cu u.1ed 
and /or exacerha 1ed hy the ero .1ion of rain splash. !National Park 
Service) 
Water, Wind, Animal, Insect , and Vegetation Damage. Mo .11 dete­
rioration of adohe huildini:1 can he direuly corre lat ed wi1h 1he 
pre1e11ce of either exce.1.1ive rainll'ater, i:ro undwat er, or both. 
Succe .11f11I adohe .11ahiliwtion and re .11oration depend .1 upon 
keepini: the adohe huildini: moi .1ture free, repaired , and well 
muinluined. !Drall' ini: by David W. Look, A/A , hll.led on .1ke1che.1· 
hyAlh ert N. H oppe r) 
5 

Wind Erosion: Wind-blown sand has often been cited as a 
factor in adobe fabric erosion. Evidence of wind erosion is 
often difficult to isolate because the results are similar to 
water erosion; however, furrowing caused by wind is usually 
more obvious at the upper half of the wall and at the 
corners, while coving from rainsplash and ground water is 
usually at the lower third of the wall. 
Maintenance is the key to mitigating the destructive effects 
of 
wind erosion. Wind damage on adobe walls and roof 
surfaces should be repaired with new adobe mud . Any 
traditional surface coating may be applied to protect against 
any possible future destructive effects. If high wind is a 
continuing problem, a wind screen or breaker might be built, 
using fencing or trees . Care sho uld be taken to plant trees 
far enough away from the structure so that the roots will not 
destroy the foundation or trap moisture. 
Vegetation, Insects, and Vermin: Vegetation and pests are 
natural phenomena that can accelerate adobe deterioration. 
Seeds deposited by the wind or by animals may germinate in 
adobe walls or roofs as they would in any soil. The action of 
roots may break down adobe bricks or cause moisture 
retention which will harm the struct ure. Animals , birds , and 
insects often live in adobe structures, burrowing and nesting 
in walls or in foundations. These pests undermine and 
destroy the structural soundness of the adobe building. The 
possibility of termite infestation should not be overlooked 
since termites can travel through adobe walls as they do 
through natural soil. Wood members (lintels, floors, window 
and door shutter s, and roof members) are all vulnerable to 
termite attack and destruction . 
It is important to rid adobe structures immediately of all 
plant , animal, and insect pests and to take preventive 
measures against their return. Seedlings should be removed 
from the adobe as soon as they are discovered . Large plants 
sho uld be removed carefully so that their root systems will 
not dislodge adobe material. Pest control involving the use 
of c hemicals should be examined carefully in order to assess 
the immediate and longlasting effects of the chemicals on the 
adobe building. Professional advice in this area is important 
not only because chemicals may be transported into the 
walls by capillary action and have a damaging effect on the 
adobe fabric, but also for reasons of human and environmen­
tal safety. 
Material Incompatibilities: As adobe buildings are contin­
ually swelling and shrinking, it is likely that repair work has 
already been carried out sometime during the life of the 
building. Philosophies regarding adobe presei:.vation have 
changed , and so have restoration and rehabilitatiOJ1 tech­
niques . Tec hnique s acceptable only 10 years ago are no 
longer considered appropriate. Until recently, adobe bricks 
have been repointed with portland cement; deteriorated 
wooden lintels and doors have been replaced with steel ones; 
and adobe walls have been sprayed with plastic or latex 
surface coatings. The hygroscopic nature of adobe has 
rendered these techniques ineffective and, most important, 
destructive. The high strength of portland cement mortar 
and stucco ha s caused the weaker adobe brick to crack and 
crumble during the differential expansion of these incompat­
ible materials. Steel lintels are much more rigid than adobe. 
When the building expands, the adobe walls twist because 
they are more flexible than the steel. Plastic and latex wall 
coatings have been used to seal the surface, keeping it from 
expanding with the rest of the brick . Portions of the wall 
have consequently broken off. In some instances , incompat­
ible materials can be removed from the building without 
subsequently damaging the structure. Other times, this is not 
possible. Professional advice is therefore recommended. 
6 
Repairing and Maintaining the Historic Adobe Building 
Once the adobe deterioration and any resulting structural 
damage is repaired, the restoration of the adobe building can 
proceed. Careful attention should be given to replace, repair , 
and/or reproduce all damaged materials with traditional or 
original materials. 
Patching and Repairing Adobe Brick: In patching and 
replacing adobe brick , every reasonable effort should be 
made to find clay with a texture and color similar to the 
original fabric. When an individual adobe brick has partially 
disintegrated, it may be patched in place. The deteriorated 
material may be scraped out and replaced with appropriate 
adobe mud. Often fragments of the original adobe brick have 
been ground up, mixed with water, and reused to patch the 
eroded area. However , some professionals advise against the 
reuse of material which has spalled off because it frequently 
contains a high concentration of salts. 
If a substantial amount of the b1ick has been d~stroyed or 
spalled, commercially made adobe bricks and half-bricks can 
be obtained, or they may be made at the site or nearby. 
Generally these are 3 or 4 inches thick , and ideally they are 
composed of unstabilized adobe (that is, without any chemi­
cal additives). The deteriorated adobe bricks should be 
scraped out to insert the new bricks . If most of the brick i s 
not deteriorated, then the deteriorated portion may be 
replaced with a half-brick . It may be necessary to cut back 
into undeteriorated portions of the brick to achieve a flush 
fit of the new or half -bricks . Spray (do not soak) the new 
brick and surrounding area lightly with water to facilitate a 
better bond. Too much moisture can cause swelling. Always 
use traditional adobe mud mortar. 
When entire bricks or sections of the brick walls have to 
be replaced, caution should be exercised when buying ready­
made bricks. Many are now manufactured using stabilizing 
agents (portland cement, lime , or emulsified asphalt) in their 
composition. While the inclusion of these agents in new 
adobe bricks is a technical advancement in their durability , 
they will prove incompatible with the fabric of the historic 
Cement Mortar Incompatibility. The .\'tronxer and less flexible 
cemen t mortar has caused th e softer adobe bricks t o crumble thus 
leav inx a " honeycomb" of ceme nt mortar joints . (National Park 
Service) 

adobe building. Concrete blocks and cinderblocks are like­
wise tempting solutions to extensive adobe brick replace­
ment; but, like commercially stabilized adobe bricks . they 
are not compatible with older and more unstable adobe 
bricks. However, concrete blocks have been used for interior 
partitions successfully. 
Patching and Replacing Mortar: In repamng loose and 
deteriorated adobe mortar, care should also be taken to 
match the original material, color, and texture . Most impor­
tant, never replace adobe mud mortar with lime mortar or 
portland cement mortar. It is a common error to assume that 
mortar hardness or strength is a measure of its suitability in 
adobe repair or reconstruction. Mortars composed of port­
land cement or lime do not have the same thermal expansion 
rate as adobe brick. With the continual thermal expansion 
and contraction of adobe bricks, portland cement or lime 
mortars will cause the bricks-the weaker materi al-to 
crack, crumble, and eventually disintegrate . 
It is recognized, however, that some late historic adobe 
buildings have always had portland cement or lime mortars 
used in their initial construction . The removal and replace­
ment of these mortars with mud mortar is not advised 
because their removal is usually destructive to the adobe 
bricks. 
In repairing adobe cracks, a procedure similar to repoint­
ing 
masonry joints may be used. It is necessary to rake out 
the cracks to a depth of 2 or 3 times the width of a mortar 
joint to obtain a good "key " (mechanical bond) of the 
mortar to the adobe bricks. The bricks should be sprayed 
lightly with water to increase the cohesive bond. A trowel or 
a large grout gun with new adobe mud mortar may then be 
used to fill the cracks . 
Repairing and Replacing Wooden Members: Rotted or ter ­
mite infested wood members such as viKas . . 1·avinos , lintels, 
wall braces, or flooring should be repaired or replaced . 
Wood should always be replaced with wood. For carved 
corbels, however, specially formuJated low-strength epoxy 
consolidants and patching compounds may be used to make 
repairs, thus saving original craftsmanship. Tests , however , 
should be made prior to repairs to check on desired results 
since they usually are not reversible . This is an area of 
building repair that ought not be attempted by the amateur. 
For further information, see Epoxies for Wood Repairs in 
Historic BuildinKs, cited in the reading list of thi s brief. 
Patching and Replacing Surface Coatings: Historically , al­
most every adobe building surface was coated. When these 
coatings deteriorate, they need to be replaced . Every effort 
should be made to recoat the surface with the same material 
that originally coated the surface . 
When the coating has been mud plaster , the process 
requires that the deteriorated mud plaster be scraped off and 
replaced with like materials and similar techniques , attempt­
ing in all cases to match the repair work as close ly as 
possible to the original. It is always better to cover adobe 
with mud plaster even though the mud plaster mu st be 
renewed more frequently. 
The process is not so simple where lime plaster and 
portland cement stuccos are involved . As much of the 
deteriorated surface coating as possible should be removed 
without damaging the adobe brick fabric underneath. Never 
put another coat of lime plaster or portland cement stucco 
over a deteriorated surface coating . If serious deterioration 
does exist on the surface, then it is likely that far greater 
deterioration exists below . Generally this problem is related 
to water, in which case it is advisable to consult a profes­
sional. 
7 
If extensive recoatings in lime plaster or portland cement 
stucco are necessary, the owner of an adobe building might 
consider furring out the walls with lathing, then plastering 
over, thus creating a moisture barrier. Always patch with 
the same material that is being replaced. Although lime 
plaster and portland cement stucco are less satisfactory as a 
surface coating, many adobe buildings have always had them 
as a surface coating. Their complete removal is inadvisable 
as the process may prove to be more damaging than the 
natural deterioration. 
Roofs: Flat adobe roofs should be restored and maintained 
with their original form and materials; however, it may not 
be feasible or prudent to restore or reconstruct a flat adobe 
roof on a building if the roof has previously been modified to 
a gable roof with sheet metal, tiles, or wood shingles. 
If an existing flat adobe roof is restored with a (resh layer 
of adobe mud over an existing mud roof, care should be 
taken to temporarily support the roof during the work 
because adobe mud is heavier wet than after it has cured. If 
not supported, the roof may collapse or deflect. If the 
wooden roof supports are allowed to sag during such work, 
the wood may take a permanent deflection, resulting in 
inadequate drainage and/or "ponding" at low points. Pond­
ing is especially damaging to adobe roofs since standing 
water will eventually soak through the mud and cause the 
wooden roof members to rot. 
On an adobe building, it is not advisable to construct a 
new roof that is heavier than the roof it is replacing. If the 
walls below have uncorrected moisture problems, the added 
weight of a new roof may cause the walls to bulge (a 
deformation caused while the adobe mud is in a plastic 
state). If the walls are dry but severely deteriorated, the 
added weight may cause the walls to crack or crumble 
(compression failure) . 
Floors, Windows, Doors, Etc.: Windows, doors, floors, and 
other original details of the older adobe building should be 
retained whenever feasible. It is, however, understandable 
when the demands of modern living make it necessary to 
change some of these features: thermal windows and doors, 
easily maintained floors, etc. But every reasonable effort 
should be made to retain original interior and exterior details. 
Maintenance 
Cyclical maintenance has always been the key to successful 
adobe building survival. As soon as rehabilitation or resto­
ration has been completed, some program of continuing 
maintenance should be initiated. Changes in the building 
should particularly be noted. The early stages of cracking, 
sagging, or bulging in adobe walls should be monitored 
regularly . All water damage should be noted and remedied 
at its earliest possible stages . Plant, animal, and insect 
damage should be halted before it becomes substantial. The 
roof should be inspected periodically . Surface coatings must 
be inspected frequently and repaired or replaced as the need 
indicates. 
Mechanical systems should be monitored for break-down. 
For instance, leaking water pipes and condensation can be 
potentially more damaging to the adobe building than to a 
brick, stone, or frame structure . Observing adobe buildings 
for subtle changes and performing maintenance on a regular 
basis is a policy which cannot be over emphasized. It is the 
nature of adobe buildings to deteriorate, but cyclical mainte­
nance can substantially deter this process, thus producing a 
relatively stable historic adobe building. 

Summary 
In conclusion, to attempt the preservation of an adobe 
building is almost a contradiction. Adobe is a formed-earth 
material. a little stronger perhaps than the soil it elf, but a 
material whose nature is to deteriorate. The preservation of 
historic adobe buildings, then, is a broader and more 
complex problem than most people realize. The propensity 
of adobe to deteriorate is a natural, on-going process . While 
it would be desirable to arrest that process in order to 
safeguard the building, no satisfactory method ha yet been 
developed. Competent preservation and maintenance of 
historic adobe buildings in the American Southwest mu t ( 1)
accept the adobe material and its natural deterioration, (2) 
understand the building as a system, and (3) understand the 
forces of nature which seek to return the building to its 
original state. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
,Books: 
Baer , Kurt; and Rudinger, Huge. Architectur e of the California 
Mi .1.1io11.1. Lo, Angele, : Univer;ity of California Pre,s . 1958. 
Boundreau, E. H. Makini: the Adobe Briel... Berkeley, Calif .: Fifth 
Street Press, 1971. 
Bunting, Bainbridge . EMly Architecture in New M exico . Albu­
querque: University of New Mexico Press, 1976. 
Of Earth and Timbers Made : New Mexico Architectur e . 
Albuquerque: Univer~ity of New Mexico Pre;s. 1974. 
Clifton, James R . Pre .1ervation of Hi .1wric Adobe Structure ., : A 
Statu .1 Report. Washington, D .C. : National Bureau of Stand ­
ards Technical Note 934, US Government Printing Office. 
Stock No . 003-003-01740-0, Feb. 1977 . 
McHenry, Paul Graham, Jr. Adobe-Build it Your.1elf . Tucson , 
Ariz .: University of Arizona Press. 1973 . 
Phillip,, Morgan W.; and Selwyn, Judith E. Epoxie ., jiJ1· Wood 
Repair ., in Historic Buildini: .1. Washington. D.C .: Heritage 
Conservation and Recreation Service, 1978 . 
Articles, Periodicals, and Bibliographies: 
"Adobe , Past and Present." Reprinted from El Palaci<,. Vol. 77, 
no. 4 (1971). 
" An Architectural Guide to Northern New Mexico." New Mexico 
Architecture . Vol. 12 , nos. 9and IO(Sept.-Oct. 1970). 
Adob e New ., . Lo, Lunas New Mexico . Published bimonthly. 
Barnes, Mark R. "Adobe Bibliography ." The Association for 
Preservation Technology Bulletin . Vol. 7, no. I ( 1975). 
Eyre. T . A. " The Physical Properties of Adobe Used as a Building 
Material." The U11iver .1ity of Nell' Mexico Bulletin . Engineer­
ing Series . Vol. I , no. 3 ( 1935). 
George. Eugene . ··Adobe Bibliography.· · The Association for 
Preservation Technology Bulletin. Vol. 5, no. 4 (1974). 
Haapala , K. V . "Stabilizing and Restoring Old Adobe Structures 
in California ." New .1le11er of the National Anociation of 
Restoration Speciali .11.1. Murphy, Calif., June 1972. 
Hooker , Van Dorn. "To Hand Plaster or Not?" New Mexico 
Architecture . Vol. 19, no . 5 (Sept.-Oct. 1977). 
Many individuals have contributed to the direction. the content and the final 
form of this Preservation Brief . The text and illustration materials were 
prepared by de Teel Patterson Tiller, Architectural Historian, and 
David W. Look, AJA, Technical Preservation Services Division. Much 
of the technical information was based upon an unpublished report 
prepared under contract for this office by Ralph H. Corney, Robert C. 
Giebner . and Albert N . Hopper. College of Architecture , University of 
Arizona, Tucson . Valuable suggestions and comments were made by 
architects Eugene George , Austin, Texas; John P. Conron, Santa Fe; 
and David G. Battle, Santa Fe . Other staff members who provided 
editorial assistance include H . Ward Jandl. and Kay D. Weeks. 
This publication was prepared pursuant to Executive Order 11593, "Protec­
tion and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment," which directs the 
Secretary of the Interior to "develop and make available to Federal agencies 
and State and local governments information concerning professional methods 
and techniques for preserving, improving, restoring and maintaining historic 
properties." The Brief has been developed under the technical editorship of 
Lee H. Nelson, AIA, Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park 
Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C. 20240 . Comments 
on the usefulness of this information are welcome and can be sent to Mr. 
Nelson at the above address. This publication is not copyrighted and can be 
reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and 
the National Park Service are appreciated. August 1978. 
Renewing the Surface Coating. Trnditimwlly. udobe .1Urface co<11i11g1 that prorected the frni:ile adobe buildi11/./ fabr1c were renewed r very 
few year .1. Recently holl'ever, hi/,/h labor costs have made rhi .1 a relati1 •ely expen .,ive proce .1.1. Wome11 are .1ee11 here recoatinx l/11 adobe ll'llll 
with mud plaster mixed ll'ith straw Ill Cl111mi.rnl, Nell' Metico . (Phoro bv Russell Lee , Farm Securitv Administration Collection, 
Libmry ofC011xress) · · 
8 