 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
Historic Decorative Metal Ceilings 
and Walls: Use, Repair, and Replacement 
Kaaren R. Staveteig 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Technical Preservation Services 
It looks like a decorative-plaster ceiling, yet it is not 
susceptible to cracking. “Durable, handsome and 
ﬁreproof,” it was touted as being cheaper and quicker to 
install than decorative plaster.  It could even be used to 
cover deteriorated plaster.  For owners of commercial, 
manufacturing, and institutional buildings, these 
attributes made pressed- or stamped-metal ceilings 
quite appealing in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. 
Commonly known today as “tin ceilings,” decorative 
metal ceilings were widely used during this era in 
such diverse structures as Main Street shops, oﬃces, 
restaurants, and manufacturing buildings, as well as in 
churches, homes, stables, and even passenger ships. 
The term “tin ceilings” is actually a misnomer, perhaps 
stemming from the tradition that anyone who worked 
with sheet metal was called a tinsmith.  The sheet steel 
commonly used for ceilings and walls was neither tin-
plated nor galvanized.  While the derivation of “tin 
ceilings” is subject to debate, manufacturers and suppliers 
of the period did not use the term. A product of the late 
Industrial Revolution, decorative metal ceilings and walls 
Interior of the Sig Sautelle Circus Training House, South Main Street 
(State Route 11), Homer, Cortland County, NY (HABS NY-5599) 
were mass-marketed through trade catalogs, home-
improvement journals, and builders’ magazines, and 
even by Sears, Roebuck and Company.  The product 
became available in many patterns, both plain and 
elaborate, and emulated the popular architectural 
styles of the period.  It was used to repair and upgrade 
existing spaces as well as in new construction.  A 
common substitute for decorative plaster and decorative 
woodwork, pressed metal was most widely installed as 
ceilings and cornices, and to a lesser extent as wainscots 
and wall ﬁnishes. 
To anyone window shopping along Main Street in the 
1920s, its popularity was readily evident.  Stop inside 
these same buildings today and one often ﬁnds that this 
decorative, practical material still is in place.  Though 
mass-produced and inexpensive, it turned out to be very 
durable. 
Today there is a resurgence of interest in this 
product, both as a historic ﬁnish material and for new 
applications. This Brief provides a short history of 
decorative metal for ceiling and wall applications; 
outlines information on appropriate maintenance and 
repair work; describes methods for paint removal; and 
includes guidance on replacement. While focusing on 
“pressed” or “stamped” steel, which was and still is the 
most common form of decorative metal ceilings, much 
of the same information applies to the lesser-used zinc 
and copper. The early use of decorative iron ceilings is 
discussed, but, because they are far less frequently found 
today, special treatments are not covered in detail.  
History 
Commercially available decorative metal ceilings 
appeared in the United States by the early 1870s, and 
initially were made of corrugated iron sheets—a product 
already in use in the rooﬁng industry. Corrugation 
added stiﬀness to sheet iron, allowing the sheets to span 
longer distances and eliminating the need for sheathing 
1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An illustration from the 
Philadelphia Architectural 
Iron Company trade catalog 
of 1872 showing a corrugated 
iron ceiling, paneled and 
ornamented with applied 
decoration. 
or closely spaced framing. As a ceiling treatment, it was 
marketed as a ﬁre separation between ﬂoors. 
An early patented system for corrugated iron ceilings 
appeared in the Philadelphia Architectural Iron 
Company trade catalog of 1872. One style consisted 
of arched panels arranged in a series of alternating 
convex and concave arches, with the panels supported 
on an iron frame. The metal ceiling could also be 
installed ﬂat, extending from beam to beam, and was 
available  with ornamental applied moldings and center 
pieces. Their advertised projects included the Howell & 
Brothers Wallpaper Warehouse, Philadelphia; Chicago 
Tribune Printing House, Chicago; and Macoupin County 
Courthouse, Carlinsville, Illinois—all uses where ﬁre 
protection was vitally important. 
The installation method that the Northrop Company 
of Pittsburgh patented in 1884 (#303,438) more closely 
resembled what would become the industry standard. 
Consisting of small panels of ﬁnely corrugated iron, the 
system was designed to be attached to furring strips 
laid across ceiling joists. The panels could even be laid 
in varying directions to create a decorative pattern. To 
cover the seams, special metal molding strips could be 
applied. 
In response to critics who disliked the “unﬁnished” 
nature of these early ceilings, companies oﬀered 
more decorative elements that could be bolted to 
the corrugated iron panels and used to cover seams.  
These elements were commonly made of machine-
pressed sheets of zinc. A malleable metal, zinc could 
be easily and deeply embossed. Some companies 
oﬀered decorative borders of tin plate as well.  Applied 
decoration, however, increased the cost and slowed the 
installation, both contrary to the main selling points of 
metal versus ornamental plaster and wood ceilings.  Few 
examples of these ceilings remain today. 
In the 1890s, signiﬁcant advances in sheet steel 
production that reduced costs and increased availability 
revolutionized the metal ceiling business. Stronger 
and able to be produced in larger and thinner panels 
than iron, sheet steel became the industry standard. 
Even more signiﬁcant, sheet steel could be die-pressed 
or stamped to create ornamentation as part of the 
panel, eliminating the need to attach separate pieces of 
ornamentation. Sheet steel also held-up better in the 
stamping process. 
In 1888, the W. E. Kinnear Company of Columbus, Ohio, 
purportedly became the ﬁrst company to patent and 
oﬀer pressed decorative steel panels instead of relying 
on sheet iron with applied decoration. Other similar 
patented systems soon appeared. 
Sheet metal and rooﬁng companies already in business 
making sheet metal roof cornices, storefronts, and 
rooﬁng soon saw a market opportunity for decorative 
steel as an interior ﬁnish in a wide range of buildings. 
The most common size of the decorative panels was 
24” wide with a length of 24”, 30”, 48” or 96”. While 
longer panels were readily available, the 24” and 48” 
lengths remained predominant for ceilings, while 
wainscots utilized 30” and cornices the longer lengths. 
According to some longtime manufacturers, panel 
size was a function of the press and die size.  Most 
panels were intended to be painted to imitate plaster 
or wood. Besides factory-primed paint coatings, a few 
manufacturers oﬀ ered factory-applied ﬁnish coats and 
baked-on ﬁnishes. 
By 1911, the Edwards Manufacturing Company of 
Cincinnati was producing 28-29 gauge mild-steel 
decorative panels, formed between dies with a powerful 
hammer blow, a process said to produce a crisper 
repoussé than the slower hydraulic pressure method.  
By using large trip hammers, higher reliefs could be 
achieved, enabling more elaborate patterns as well as 
additional variety in moldings and other pieces. After 
die-stamping, the panels were trimmed over a template 
to ensure a perfect ﬁt. 
Depending upon the manufacturer or supplier and the 
complexity of the job, a contractor or building owner 
could measure the rooms where metal ceilings and 
walls were to be used, specify either the overall pattern 
or the speciﬁc components from the manufacturer’s 
trade catalog, and, along with the room measurements, 
telegram the order directly to the manufacturer or 
supplier. In addition to providing detailed instructions 
on how to measure a room, many manufacturers and 
suppliers oﬀered design services and even provided 
installation. 
Orders were shipped with a parts list and assembly or 
“working” plans for the installer. Some oﬀ ered furring 
strips, nails, wood blocking for high-relief cornices, 
and even a special line of paint for pressed metal to 
complete the order. Once installed in a building in 
town, the product helped to sell itself. It was new; it was 
appealing; and it could serve a broad range of purposes 
and applications. 
Decorative metal ceilings and walls enriched the most 
humble of buildings. The wide range of available 
decoration and patterns meant that the desired look 
of ﬁne plasterwork or elegant woodwork could be 
achieved at much lower costs with less skilled labor and 
2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Early catalogs provide how-to instructions for "ﬁre-prooﬁng" 
beams of both metal and wood, incorporating them into decorative 
ceiling patterns. 
installation time. While complex patterns in commercial 
applications required skilled installers, a handy 
homeowner could measure a room, choose a pattern, 
and order a ceiling by mail, and, upon delivery, read the 
enclosed installation instructions and then install a new 
decorative ceiling in his house, or so it was advertised. 
The early 1900s witnessed an unparalleled appetite 
for decorative metal ceilings.  From small towns to big 
cities, from manufacturing lofts to department stores, 
pressed-steel ceilings became commonplace. By the late 
1920s, the popularity of metal ceilings and walls began 
to wane as ”contemporary” design styles preferred less 
decoration and as new building products created greater 
competition. Trying to keep abreast of market changes, 
manufacturers introduced “modern” designs that were 
far less ornate and reﬂected the architectural trends of 
the time. The Great Depression led to the collapse or 
consolidation of numerous plants, and World War II 
accelerated the demise of the industry. During the war, 
non-essential new construction nearly came to a halt, 
and sheet metal was diverted for military use.  Most of 
the remaining pressed-metal molds for ceilings and trim 
were melted down for the war eﬀort. 
By the early 1950s, the taste for simpler interior 
treatments continued, and the market for this product 
largely disappeared, despite the eﬀorts of the few 
remaining companies to adapt and revive the business. 
Soon, production essentially ceased. The increasing 
popularity of historic preservation beginning in the 
1970s and a renewed interest in decorative steel ceilings 
enabled a small but viable market to re-emerge. Several 
manufacturers responded and, with designers helping 
to rekindle an interest in decorative sheet metal, found a 
market in the rehabilitation of older buildings. 
Manufacturing 
While early decorative metal ceilings were made of 
iron or iron dipped in molten tin, steel overtook iron by 
the 1890s due to its lower cost, greater strength, and its 
ability to be die-pressed into thinner, larger sheets with 
greater decorative relief.  Most decorative metal ceilings 
and walls that we see today are steel.  Though zinc 
and copper ceilings were available, typically by special 
order, they were most often used in elaborate public, 
commercial, or residential spaces. 
While custom-designed decorative pieces could be 
ordered, this was a costly process, due to the need to 
create molds and then dies for individual parts. More 
often, manufacturers would rely on existing dies to 
create a stock line of pieces that could be mixed and 
matched into a series of diﬀerent designs. They would 
advertise the diﬀerent overall designs as well as the 
availability of individual pieces so that a purchaser 
could create his or her own room pattern using stock 
components. Since manufacturers usually published 
their unit costs for each piece that comprised the overall 
pattern, pricing was easy to understand.  Stock room 
patterns were also advertised with cost per square (100 
square feet). The larger the room, the cheaper the cost 
would be per square. Some manufacturers advertised a 
discount to the trade. 
The production process began with ﬂat sheets of steel 
that large manufacturers made themselves and that 
smaller companies purchased from suppliers. Presses 
or stamping machines formed the decorative metal 
components, after which shearsmen trimmed the pieces 
to size. Each piece was then checked for “squareness.” 
Rope drop hammers at the turn-of-the century factory in Nevada, 
Missouri, that W. F. Norman Corporation still uses to stamp 
individual panels, resulting in high quality pressed metal sheets. 
(Photo: W. F. Norman Corporation) 
3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stamping molds used in drop-hammer presses began on 
the artist’s design table. Once a design was approved, it 
was transferred from a full-sized paper drawing to a slab of 
molding clay and sculpted into a 3-dimensional model. The 
artist then cast it into plaster, ﬁrst in a shell cast making a 
negative, and from that a positive, replicating the original clay 
model. This last mold was carefully leveled and smoothed and 
coated with shellac. Molten iron was next poured over the 
positive plaster mold to create a negative metal die.  After the 
iron die was cooled, milled, and smoothed, workmen poured 
liquid zinc over the bottom die to make a separate positive 
metal mold. When cooled, the 2-part die was fastened to the 
hammer heads of the press with the strong iron die on the 
bottom and the more malleable zinc die on the top. (Photo: 
W. F. Norman Corporation) 
Since nearly all pressed-metal ceilings and walls were 
to be painted, the individual pieces were factory primed 
with a base coat of white lead paint, although at least 
one manufacturer by 1942 was using an aluminum 
primer. Some manufacturers o ﬀered ﬁ nished-coat colors 
as varied as colors of plaster ceilings.  Factory-applied 
powder coatings were introduced in the late 1940s and 
Field 
Frieze 
Moulding 
Cornice 
Filler 
Anatomy of a decorative metal ceiling and upper wall. 
early 1950s, just as decorative metal walls and ceiling 
were disappearing from the marketplace.   
The Ceiling Design and Its Parts 
Pressed-metal ceilings generally consisted of four 
principal parts—a ﬁeld, molding around the ﬁ eld, ﬁller, 
and cornice. A number of manufacturers o ﬀered ﬁllers 
that included the molding, thereby creating a three-
part ceiling. Some ceilings, such as those emulating an 
overall beaded board or a Spanish-stucco ﬁ nish, could 
avoid the ﬁller and molding, and instead terminate 
the ﬁeld with a suitable cornice. The ceiling design 
was often supplemented by decorative center pieces, 
special corner pieces, and even pieces to accommodate 
ventilation and lighting.  The ﬁeld was made of square 
or rectangular metal tiles, typically stamped with a ﬂoral 
or geometric pattern and cut to modular sizes. 
The metal tiles were commonly referred to as plates 
and panels, with individual plates typically measuring 
24” x 24” and panels being 24” x 48”. Plates also came 
in larger sizes in multiples of two feet. Fields diﬀ ered 
in complexity, with some tiles representing complete 
motifs in themselves and others presenting only part 
of a larger design. Whether complex or simple, the 
motif was repeated throughout the ﬁeld and could be 
expressed in the border around the ﬁeld and the cornice. 
The depth of the repoussé of the ﬁ eld patt erns typically 
ranged from 3/8” to 3/4”. 
Moldings, ﬁllers, and combination moldings and ﬁllers 
formed the perimeter around the ﬁeld, and typically 
complimented the pattern of the ﬁeld. The ﬁ llers, and 
at times even moldings, came in a variety of widths 
and completed the overall design while compensating 
for irregular room sizes. This avoided cu tt ing the ﬁeld 
tiles, which would compromise the decorative pattern. 
Moldings, ﬁllers, and molding/ﬁller combinations came 
in relatively long lengths, with 48” and 96” being the 
most common. 
Many ceilings included a cornice, which could have a 
wide range of elaboration. While most cornices were 
stamped from a single strip of sheet metal, cornices 
could extend a considerable length down the wall by 
adding additional moldings and borders. Cornices 
helped dress any protruding structural beams and 
reinforced the sense of depth. Coﬀered elements could 
also be incorporated into the design of the ceiling that 
likewise could incorporate the cornice. 
The overall design and individual pieces comprising the 
ceiling and walls were commonly classiﬁed as Classical, 
Rococo, Colonial, Greek, Gothic, and Mission. By the 
l930s simpler Modern patterns were marketed. While 
many ceilings were chosen from room patt erns shown 
in catalogs, Americans also freely combined a panoply 
of styles and patterns to create new designs. Patterns 
would have repeats as small as 3” but those with repeats 
of 12” or 24” were more common.  
4 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
As the industry grew, wall treatments, including special 
pieces for partially enclosed stairs, were also marketed. 
Usually referred to as “side walls” or “sidewalls” to 
diﬀerentiate them from ceiling components, they were 
commonly based on the traditional tripartite wall design 
of frieze, ﬁeld, and wainscot.  Walls could incorporate 
a chair rail, and even a metal baseboard, though more 
often a wood baseboard was used for practical reasons.  
Decorative metal walls were mostly used in tandem with 
metal ceilings. While never matching the popularity 
of metal ceilings, metal sidewalls did enjoy varied 
applications, from homes to factories to even churches.  
Certain pressed-metal wall patt erns, particularly 
beaded boards, ceramic tiles, and stucco ﬁ nishes, were 
successfully marketed for use in bathrooms, kitchens, 
and similar applications where there were special 
sanitary concerns. Wall pieces tended to be larger than 
those commonly used in ceilings. A simple grid pa ttern 
that emulated the concave grout lines of square ceramic 
tile was available in sheets as large as 24” x 96” for ease 
of installation and to minimize seams. 
Installation 
Understanding how historic decorative metal ceilings 
and walls were installed is crucial to maintaining, 
repairing, and replacing them today. First, it is 
important to identify the metal used. Early ceilings 
of iron panels or tiles usually were not overlapped, 
but rather butt-jointed end to end, thereby creating 
noticeable seams. Where a more ﬁ nished appearance 
was desired, special molded strips were applied over the 
seams. With steel and even copper ceilings, individual 
pieces were usually overlapped, thereby minimizing 
seams. Another di ﬀerence between early iron ceilings 
and later steel ceilings is the manner of the decoration. 
Unlike steel where decoration is embossed through 
machine stamping or pressing, in iron the decoration 
principally was applied separately and made from 
malleable materials such as zinc. The decoration was 
bolted rather than nailed to the iron. 
Ceilings 
Decorative pressed-steel ceilings were mostly laid over 
lathing strips that were nailed to joists and beams.  
The lathing was nailed in grids that matched the 
locations of the panel seams. Steel ceilings could be 
laid directly over existing wood ceilings and even over 
plaster that was attached to lathing. If the plaster was 
deteriorated, lathing strips for the metal ceiling could 
be applied directly over the plaster.  For small rooms, 
manufacturers recommended applying 1/2” wood 
sheathing over the whole ceiling for ease of installation. 
Common lathing sizes included 7/8” x 7/8”and 7/8” x 1 
1/4”, though in fact they typically ranged from 5/8” to 1 
3/4” in thickness and from 1-1/4” to 1-7/8” in width. 
Installing the lathing correctly was critical both for 
optimum appearance as well as for sound attachment. 
A 1928 Berger Manufacturing Company catalog shows the 
recommended ceiling and sidewall support structure beyond the 
pressed metal tiles. 
In part, probably mainly to avoid open butt seams, 
panels were designed to overlap their neighbors so that 
nails were driven through the perimeters of two or more 
adjacent panels. Depending on the size of the tiles, some 
were secured just at the corners, while large or heavier 
tiles required additional edge nailing. Panels usually 
came with holes set every 6” along the edges.  Oﬀ­
sized panels and specialty pieces, such as factory-made 
cornice corners, had nail holes located where needed. 
This type of attachment required that the lathing be 
accurately installed and consistently level.  Lath strips 
ran perpendicular to the joists to which they were 
attached, while shorter headers and cross strips (needed 
to complete the nailing grid) ran parallel to the joists and 
were attached to the lath. If the joists were 24 inches on 
center, the wood headers for 24” tiles could be attached 
directly to the joists, which is one reason 24” tiles were 
so popular. For 12” tiles, lathing was usually spaced 
every 12 inches.  Lathing for larger or more deeply 
ornamented tiles was handled somewhat diﬀerently. To 
ensure that the lathing grid was level, low spots were 
ﬁlled in with wood shims and high spots were smoothed 
out. 
The ﬁeld usually was installed ﬁrst, starting at one 
corner of the room, making an eﬀort to keep the lapping 
edges running from the light source in the room. There 
were special considerations where rooms were of 
irregular dimensions that could not be compensated 
simply by the use of the ﬁller around the ﬁeld. 
As the industry matured, ﬁ eld patterns evolved that 
featured re-pressed beads along the edges of each plate 
and die-cut nail holes located within raised buttons. 
This detail within an overlapping seam provided for 
ease of installation and a clean, tight-ﬁtt ing connection 
that was also touted as dust-proof.  Once painted, the 
overlaps and nail heads became less apparent from the 
ﬂoor view. 
5 

 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There were other types of installation methods used 
with steel ceilings. In an eﬀort to hide seams and 
simplify installation, some manufacturers oﬀered 
interlocking ﬁ eld patterns whereby each piece was 
nailed only on two sides and used an interlocking edge 
to connect to tiles on the other two sides, thus covering 
the nails. Irrespective of how the pieces in the ﬁ eld were 
ﬁtted, the perimeter ﬁllers were usually designed to ﬁt 
under both the molding, if used, and the cornice. Thus 
the ﬁller could be installed after the ﬁeld was in place.  
The ﬁller, molding, and cornice pieces usually ran in 
longer lengths than ceiling tiles and, therefore, had 
fewer seams.  The cornice usually was the last major 
portion to be installed, and, since installed at an angle, it 
often required additional wood blocking. Special corner 
pieces were available for cornices and, if used, avoided 
the need to purchase mitered corners or to hand-miter in 
the ﬁeld. 
Nails for lathing or sheathing varied in size depending 
on conditions, such as the thickness of the lathing and 
whether the new ceiling was being installed over an 
existing one. When nailing the metal directly to the 
furring, 1” oval- or ﬂat-head nails were commonly used. 
When installing a new ceiling in a room that would 
have hanging ceiling lights, buyers could note the 
approximate location for the lights so that the supplier 
could, depending upon the pattern of the ceiling, 
provide a layout with special center pieces where the 
drops were to be installed.  Otherwise, the centers of 
individual ﬁeld pieces could often be cut out so that 
eletrical wires needed only be moved a short distance to 
align the ﬁxture on the center of the tile. 
Walls 
The support system for decorative steel walls varied 
from that used on ceilings. Manufacturers generally 
recommended 1/2” sheathing for walls, which provided 
a more rigid substrate than lathing. Alternatively, 
sheathing could be used along the lower wall that was 
more subject to wear.  Wall lath was usually 2 inches in 
width, wider than that of the ceiling grid, and installed 
every 6 or 12 inches.  Walls were installed from the 
bottom up. Where wainscoting was used, a wood or 
decorative-metal chair rail was applied last and covered 
the seam between the metal wainscoting and the 
sidewall above.  
If there was no separate wainscot, the sidewall extended 
from the baseboard to either a frieze at the top or 
directly to the cornice. For rooms with 8- or 9-foot 
ceilings, tall sidewall panels were available that avoided 
horizontal seams. Even these panels often included 
in their design a high dado decorating the lower half, 
creating the appearance of a wainscoting.  For taller 
ceilings or patterns that required horizontal rows, 
skilled contractors installed wall tiles with lapping edges 
upward, above eye-level, and downward at or below 
eye-level to avoid small shadows at the seams.  There 
were special techniques in laying out the sidewalls 
around windows and doors to avoid, where possible, 
awkward breaks in the pattern. For rooms with 
numerous windows and doors, a simple wall pattern 
worked best. For inside and outside corners of walls, 
many of the wall tiles could even be shaped, usually 
with a bending brake, to ﬁt the corners. 
Condition Assessment 
Decorative metal ceilings are highly durable in 
most interior applications. Typically, damage and 
deterioration occur because of water inﬁ ltration either 
from exterior sources or leaking pipes overhead.  Such 
damage usually is easily observed and for metal ceilings 
takes the form of water and rust stains, peeling paint, 
and metal ﬂ aking, pitting, and holes—either in small 
areas or more widespread—from corrosive action. 
Similar damage can occur from high humidity and 
condensation. It is important to eliminate sources of 
water inﬁltration, improve air circulation, and reduce 
levels of humidity, depending upon the conditions. 
Ceilings need to be checked to see if 
they are ﬁrmly secured. Lathing can 
deteriorate from prolonged water 
damage and termites, and the nails 
that secure the metal to the lath can 
corrode. While loose metal pieces, 
sagging, and actual failure of one or 
more portions of the ceiling are often 
readily evident, close-up inspection of 
the ceiling is recommended. 
The structural integrity of ceilings 
can be negatively aﬀected by other 
conditions. When metal ceilings were 
applied directly over older plaster 
ceilings in poor condition, installers 
were instructed to use a diﬀerent 
installation technique. By installing 
Some seams were easily disguised with interlocking patterns, whereas others, like butt joints, 
remained quite visible. Historic decorative metal ceiling at the LaSalle/Van Buren (CTA) station, 
Chicago, IL. (Photo: Kaaren Staveteig, NPS) 
6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prior to repair, a section of the pressed metal was removed to expose 
the condition of the plaster and lath and to document the earlier 
ﬁnish. (Photo: Kaaren Staveteig, NPS) 
wider and more narrowly spaced lath over the existing 
ceiling, and anchoring it with nails long enough to grab 
the joists, the wood grid would also help secure the 
existing plaster ceiling. Where this was not done, and the 
metal was placed directly on the plaster, the weight of the 
deﬁcient plaster ceiling can place pressure on the metal 
ceiling, causing sagging and other problems. 
Metal ceilings can be damaged by later penetrations from 
piping and conduit, resulting in loose and deﬂ ecting tiles. 
Where dissimilar metals are in direct contact with the 
metal ceiling, galvanic corrosion can occur in localized 
areas. Plumbing pipes, electrical ﬁxtures, and other 
apertures over time cannot only aﬀect the structural 
soundness of the ceiling, but also destroy the visual 
continuity of the ceiling pattern. 
By their location, decorative metal sidewalls and their 
enclosed stairs are particularly subject to wear and abuse, 
resulting in unsightly dents, compressed areas, and 
penetrations, especially where the metal was secured 
directly to lathing rather than continuous sheathing. 
These conditions tend to occur at the lower sections.  
Deferred maintenance, poor workmanship, lack of heat 
in formerly conditioned spaces, high moisture, and water 
penetration can result in peeling paint. Where the paint 
is peeling in isolated areas, simple tests can determine 
whether the paint on the rest of the ceiling is sound. Care 
must be taken because of the likely presence of lead-
based paints (see sidebar).  When in doubt, a test for lead 
paint is recommended and may be required. 
Cleaning and Maintenance 
Properly caring for historic decorative metal ceilings and 
walls is important to their preservation.  While ceilings 
are likely to receive less periodic repainting than walls, 
unlike walls, dirty ceilings tend to be repainted rather 
than cleaned. Excessive paint buildup can obscure the 
decorative detail in the pressed metal.  Where dust 
and dirt buildup is evident, cleaning may be all that is 
Working with Lead-Based Paint 
Because of the hazards of lead poisoning, special 
care must be taken when working with metal ceil­
ings and walls containing lead-based paint.  Lead-
based paints commonly were used as primers for 
historic pressed metal and in general use for onsite 
ﬁnish work. It is a safe assumption that pressed-
metal walls and ceilings with old paint contain one 
or more layers of lead-based paint. 
There are safety requirements that apply to con­
tractors and their employees undertaking work 
involving lead-based paint. Since young children, 
pregnant women, and the elderly with certain 
medical conditions are particularly at risk from 
lead poisoning, the Environmental Protection 
Agency issued the Lead Renovation, Repair and 
Painting Program (RRP) rule, which applies to both 
rental and owner-occupied housing, and child-
occupied facilities, such as day care centers, where 
lead paint is present. Where a paid contractor is 
being used in these buildings and more than six 
square-feet of lead-based paint is being disturbed 
in a room, RRP requirements apply. For example, 
the rule applies where loose lead-based paint is 
being removed by a contractor throughout a metal 
ceiling but would not apply when repainting the 
ceiling involves less than six square feet of loose 
paint in one room. While RRP does not apply to 
most commercial buildings and to houses where 
homeowners do the work themselves, it is gener­
ally good practice to follow the RRP rule. Other 
federal, state or local requirements may apply 
where lead paint is present. 
In general the RRP rule provides, among other 
requirements, that: 
(a) The work area must be contained during the
job to control the dust and debris prior to removal
and that the dust and debris must be disposed of
in a safe and prescribed manner.
(b) Certain high-risk paint removal methods are
prohibited and certain others strictly controlled.
(c) Workers must be trained in dealing with lead-
based paint and use appropriate clean-up proce­
dures, and contractors must be trained and certi­
ﬁed to work with lead-based paint.
(d) Building occupants must be informed of the
hazards of lead-based paint and safety measures
required during the work by the contractor.
(e) Follow-up testing must take place upon work
completion.
For more information -- htt ps://www.epa.gov/lead/renovation­
repair-and-painting-program 
7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Maintenance and 
Repair Precautions 
Electrical power to the room should be turned 
oﬀ before inspecting ceilings and walls.  As part 
of the inspection, adjacent wiring, outlets, and 
ﬁxtures should be examined for exposed wiring 
and signs of electrical shorts and should later 
be tested with the power on.  This is important 
because steel and copper decorative metal are 
also good electrical conductors. 
Appropriate gloves and protective eyewear 
should be worn when working with metal ceil­
ings and walls, especially when cutt ing metal 
or making repairs, which can produce sharp 
edges. 
The backsides of old ceilings may have col­
lected rodent or bird droppings over the years.  
Where ceiling components are being disturbed, 
appropriate protective measures should be em­
ployed and steps taken to minimize air-borne 
particles to avoid potential illness. 
Care should be taken when working with lead-
based paint. (See sidebar on page 7) 
Most chemical paint-removal products are 
hazardous, and their use may be restricted by 
federal, state, or municipal regulations. Where 
required, appropriate respirators and other 
safety precautions should be used. 
necessary. If the paint is sound, yet the surface is sticky 
and dirty, a solution of mild dishwashing soap and 
warm water applied with a wet rag and then wiped 
dry usually is eﬀective.  Cleaning methods should ﬁrst 
be tried in a small, less prominent area, to ascertain 
whether or not they aﬀ ect the ﬁnish or if several 
applications may be necessary, especially for areas 
involving deep grease spots. 
Cleaning provides an opportune time to examine 
whether any of the exposed nails securing individual 
metal pieces have worked loose.  Deﬁcient and missing 
nails should be replaced. Touchup metal paint should 
be used on the nail heads, as needed. With small areas 
of old water stains, apply a stain-blocking primer prior 
to repainting. Mild staining from light rust may merit 
removing the paint back to the metal surface and then 
removing the surface rust with ﬁne steel wool or crocus 
cloth. Surrounding paint edges should be feathered by 
using a ﬁne sandpaper or wet sanding into the paint so 
as to taper it into a ﬁne edge. A rust-inhibiting metal 
primer should then be applied to the exposed surface 
before applying ﬁ nish coats. 
Metal ceilings can be greatly impacted by later penetrations from 
piping, electrical, and other such work, resulting in loose tiles and 
deﬂections in the ceiling. (Photo: Kaaren Staveteig, NPS) 
Repair 
Little has been written about repairing decorative metal 
ceilings and walls, and there are fewer prescribed 
techniques. The most common type of repairs involve 
holes and dents, such as those from light ﬁxtures, 
mechanical pipes and ducts, and plumbing and 
sprinkler pipes. While the location of these features and 
ﬁxtures may change over time, the holes in the ceiling 
remain. 
Methods for repairing and patching holes are similar to 
those used in certain architectural sheet-metal work and 
in automotive body repair.  Nail holes can be soldered 
or ﬁ lled with ﬁberglass-based patching products. Holes 
that are less than 1/2” can be ﬁlled using automotive 
body ﬁller, then sanded to match the adjacent surface. 
Where holes are larger than 1/2”, several methods can 
be used. One method is to cut a piece of sheet metal to 
a shape that will cover the hole and at the same time 
can be inserted in through the hole to the backside and 
adhered to the back of the metal panel. The new patch 
should cover the full extent of the hole and be sealed 
along the inside edges before priming and painting. 
This method eliminates the hole, though still reads as a 
patch. Another method is to insert a backing material 
into the hole and secure it in place. Then spread and 
smooth ﬁller material edge to edge. Whether working 
with pressed-metal or older iron ceilings, sheet metal 
used in patching should be of a similar metal to avoid 
galvanic corrosion. 
Dents in embossed zinc and steel elements are more 
problematic because they are diﬃcult to draw out 
and, when working with a ceiling in place, there is no 
access from behind. With early installations involving 
decorative zinc elements bolted to an iron ceiling, it 
may be possible to detach the decorative element and 
work out the dents. For embossed steel ceilings whose 
patterns are still available or if a matching piece can be 
salvaged elsewhere from the building, a patch can be 
cut large enough to overlap the dent and then glued in 
place with an adhesive.  After the adhesive has dried, 
continued page 12 
8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Paint Removal 
Removing paint from historic pressed-metal walls and 
ceilings is not a simple task. While multiple layers of 
paint applied over time may obscure some of the metal 
detail, generally such a condition does not merit in 
itself removing the paint. Even with softened lines and 
some loss of detail due to paint build-up, most historic 
metal ceilings and walls retain their overall historic 
design and character. 
The need to remove old paint usually depends upon 
metal condition and paint adhesion, applicable govern­
ment requirements regarding building use and lead-
based paint, and whether the ceiling is being temporar­
ily disassembled to facilitate other on-site work. Since 
lead-based paint was widely used on pressed-metal 
walls and ceilings prior to 1978, paint removal should 
follow applicable government requirements concerning 
worker safety, containment, and proper disposal. (See 
page 7) 
Before considering appropriate methods for remov­
ing paint, it is important to identify the type of wall 
or ceiling metal, as this may inﬂuence the choice of 
the paint-removal technique.  While steel is by far the 
most common material in historic ornamental walls 
and ceilings, other metals and metal combinations can 
be encountered, including iron with zinc ornamenta­
tion, zinc, steel with zinc decoration, and even copper.  
Besides the metal itself, it is worth considering the 
sheet-metal thickness or gauge, since this varied some­
what by manufacturer and by material, and the metal's 
current condition. A thick build-up of paint can hide 
rusting from behind that has thinned the metal or cre­
ated small pin holes. 
Paint removal methods also vary depending on whether 
the work is to be done in-situ or under shop conditions 
where the pieces are removed and then paint stripped. 
Paint removal typically involves a combination of 
hand scraping and wiping, wire brushing, and use of 
a chemical release agent. Some methods, such as that 
described as a freeze/ﬂex method, are alternatives to the 
use of chemicals. 
Once the nature and condition of the metal are identi­
ﬁed, the need for paint removal established, and the 
decision made whether to temporarily disassemble the 
ceiling, the next steps are to document the historic 
paint coatings (where there is possible interest in re­
painting to match the historic ﬁnish), and then choose 
the best means of removing the paint. 
In-situ methods of paint removal 
using chemical strippers 
Prior to undertaking full-scale paint removal, several 
chemical strippers should be tested for comparison in an 
inconspicuous area typical of the overall surface condi­
tion. This test will help establish which chemical strip­
per performs best without damaging the metal, and help 
determine the necessary application thickness of the 
solvent-based paste and the length of time it should be left 
to work. Also the test will help establish whether several 
applications will be needed. Proper safety equipment 
should be used, including eye protection, breathing mask, 
and gloves.  Containment and other safety procedures 
when dealing with lead-based paint need to be followed as 
well. 
One of the most common chemical removal processes is 
a chemical peel. This method typically requires applica­
tion of a 1/8"- to 1/4"- thick solvent based paste with 
either a trowel or specialized spray equipment. The 
paste is then covered with a ﬁbrous laminated cloth, 
polyethylene side facing out.  This material is left in 
place up to 24 hours, as determined from the sample 
test ﬁndings. Remove the paint layers by sliding a 
taping knife along the edges of the dried paste, easing 
the paint, paste, and cloth away from the surface.  The 
remaining chemicals should be removed with a sponge 
and clean water before applying a neutralizing agent 
on the surface to return it to a neutral pH condition for 
best paint results. As with the chemical paint remover 
itself, it is important to select a neutralizer safe to use 
on the speciﬁ c metal. 
An alternative approach relies on multiple applications 
of chemical stripper, using a nylon brush (4” typical) 
After applying a solvent-based paint to the metal, a laminated 
cloth/paper is applied during the chemical-peel process. (Photo: 
NPS) 
9 

  
 
 
 
 
 
or specialized spray equipment. The paste is left on from 
four to 24 hours, depending on the required activation 
time. To remove, scrape the softened paint and chemicals 
from the surface. Repeat this process until the metal sur­
face is exposed. Scrub clean with water and a stiﬀ nylon 
brush; thoroughly wipe dry; neutralize, if needed; and 
then coat with a rust inhibitor such as a zinc-rich primer. 
(NOTE: Using an oven cleaner to remove paint from 
decorative metal ceilings is a technique that appears in 
social media. While oven cleaners are supposed to be safe 
on metal, they are designed for ovens that are porcelain-
coated. When used on old pressed metal and left for more 
than a few hours, irreversible pock marks may appear.  If 
used only on a small area, proper safety procedures and 
protective gear for working with lead paint and harsh 
chemicals need to be followed.  When working overhead, 
eye protection is critically important.) 
“Eco-friendly” paint strippers 
In recent years a number of biodegradable paint remov­
ers have appeared on the market that are characterized 
as “eco-friendly.” Even with these strippers, some of 
which may include solvents, protective clothing should be 
used and appropriate safety procedures taken. Whether 
marketed as citric or soy-based, or simply as biodegrad­
able, these products are applied as coatings or gels similar 
to traditional chemical strippers. The time required before 
removing the coating varies according to product and the 
number and types of paint coatings. Like most chemical 
strippers, they require considerable handwork to remove 
paint build-up and to prepare the surface for repainting. 
Several require a separate application of a cleaning agent, 
such as mineral spirits, to remove residue prior to repaint­
ing. At the time of this publication, li tt le information 
was available on their use speciﬁcally on pressed metal, 
manufacturers' product data and related information 
should be carefully researched well in advance of testing. 
It is important to both test the removal of the paint as well 
as the preparation of the surface for repainting. Testing 
can include actual repainting, allowing ample time for 
the paint to cure prior to performing a paint adhesion test 
(see ASTM for applicable paint adhesion test on metal 
surfaces). 
Water-based blasting 
High-pressure water-based paint removal systems should 
not be used on pressed metal. Some water-based paint 
removal systems use very low-pressure water (25-35 psi at 
the surface) along with a mild abrasive element.  Gener­
ally, even these are not recommended for widespread 
use on in-place decorative metal ceilings.  Such methods 
may have limited applications, such as on walls where the 
individual panels are large and there are fewer overlapping 
joints. Even so, there are risks involved.  Potential dam­
age to pressed metal where a water-based abrasive paint 
removal method is used includes the appearance of pock­
marks, pin holes, or worse. Also, water seepage from behind 
can occur, leading to ﬂash rusting. 
Dry abrasives (sandblasting, walnut shell blast­
ing, soda blasting, and other dry abrasives) 
Sandblasting, walnut shell blasting, and most other dry 
abrasives applied under air pressure will most likely 
damage the historic metal and should not be used. Since 
lead paint will be present, government regulations may 
prohibit the use of speciﬁc techniques such as sandblasting 
to remove paint from ceilings and walls in schools, rental 
residential properties, and other building-speciﬁ c uses, 
and by contractors working in owner-occupied residential 
buildings. Both soda and sponge media with mild oxide 
grit may be used in a limited capacity under very controled 
conditions to remove paint from pressed metal.  Careful 
testing is essential, and, if selected, quality control at the 
site is paramount. 
Dry-ice blasting 
There is limited experience with the use of dry-ice blasting 
to remove paint from pressed-metal ceilings. Dry-ice pellets 
are sprayed under pressure against the painted surface, 
causing the paint to lose adhesion and drop to the ground 
for collection and disposal. The advantage over some other 
techniques is that the dry ice changes to a vapor, leaving 
only the paint debris to be cleaned up. Due to its limited 
track record on historic pressed metal, it should be care­
fully tested by removing several panels for testing oﬀsite. 
As part of the testing, varying air pressures and distances 
from the spray nozzle to the metal panel should be used to 
help ascertain if the surface of the metal is being damaged. 
If selected, it should be tested in an approved area that will 
be used as the control for the rest of the project. Since this 
method requires a trained contractor with special equip­
ment, its use on small-size projects is not cost eﬀ ective. 
Heat 
Propane torches should not be used on metal ceilings and 
walls, in part because of the considerable risk that they may 
ignite any hidden combustible materials, as well as vapor­
ize the lead and other paint chemicals. Heat (hot air) guns 
are generally not recommended because of the same rea­
sons. When used on the lowest se tting and at a controlled 
distance, there are limited instances where heat guns might 
10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Restoring a metal ceiling or wall surface often requires several 
diﬀerent techniques. Using a chemical release agent typically 
requires additional hand scraping, wire brushing, and sanding to 
completely remove the paint. (Photo: NPS) 
be used with considerable caution to remove paint.  Ample 
monitoring time must be scheduled at the end of the day 
in case of smoldering debris, wood lath, or other materials 
behind the metal. If a heat gun is used, it is recommended 
that a monitored ﬁre alarm sensor/s be placed at the end of 
each day in the immediate area of the work as a precaution. 
Heat guns can be more safely used under shop conditions 
since risks of adjacent material being ignited can be care­
fully controlled. Heat guns should be used on their lowest 
settings to minimize the vaporization of paint chemicals, 
including lead. Heat guns tend to work best on heavy 
paint build-up. 
Hand scraping, wire brushing, and sanding 
Careful hand scraping with a chisel and/or wire brush can 
be eﬀective for removing stubborn paint in the crevices of 
the repoussé, especially when used in combination with 
other paint removal methods.  To capture lead and paint 
debris, only wet hand sanding and/or an electric sander 
equipped with a HEPA-ﬁltered vacuum att achment should 
be used. 
Methods for removing coatings under shop 
conditions 
The temporary de-installation of historic metal ceilings 
and walls to allow for other rehabilitation work presents a 
perfect opportunity to remove paint oﬀ-site or in a con­
trolled on-site space. Such shop conditions provide an op­
portunity for better control of the work and are easier than 
overhead ceiling work. 
Once the installation pattern has been recorded and disas­
sembled, each piece should be inspected for any damage that 
may preclude its reuse. If the method for appropriate paint 
removal has not been established by this time, damaged 
pieces can be used for testing. 
Chemical removal 
Appropriate chemical methods to remove paint from walls 
and ceilings in place can also be used in the shop, usually 
with much better control. In addition, some chemicals may 
be used in a bath solution (“dip stripping”) to soften the 
paint so that it can be scraped oﬀ by hand. Through proper 
testing, steps can be taken to guard against ﬂ ash rusting, 
on the steel surfaces. 
Thermal contraction—freeze/ﬂ  ex method 
Freezing techniques have been successful in removing 
paint from pressed metal (see Fort Baker case study). The 
demounted pressed-metal panels are frozen in commercial-
sized freezers. The metal contracts at a greater rate than 
the paint, which breaks the adhesion bond between the 
paint and the metal. When suﬃciently frozen, the panels 
are removed and gently ﬂexed by hand and tapped with 
brushes to ﬂ ake oﬀ the paint. Hand picks, small scrap­
ers, and other small tools then are used to remove paint 
remaining in deep crevices. On any project, this process 
must be tested on one or more panels to determine eﬃcacy. 
As with any paint removal method, once the pressed metal 
has been cleaned and the surface prepared for painting, a 
metal primer should be applied as soon as possible, even 
though the ﬁnish coatings might not be applied for some 
time. 
Once the metal panels are clean of previous layers of paint, it is 
easy to see their original decorative design. (Photo: NPS) 
11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the patch can then be primed, the edges caulked, and the 
piece painted. 
For larger holes and dents, it may be possible to re­
create the decorative appearance out of metal ﬁ ller or 
ﬁberglass. Base materials should be tested beforehand 
for ease of workability and ﬁnishing. The surface 
appearance can be recreated by carving and sanding, 
which, depending upon the pattern, can be quite 
tedious. Fortunately, since ceilings are viewed from 
a distance, an exact match is not necessarily essential. 
Where the required ﬁller is relatively thick, a mold 
technique could be used. Using a section of an existing 
undamaged piece or a rubber impression of the pattern, 
which then is stiﬀened on the outside, the “mold” can be 
pressed into the ﬁller, backside up. A release agent may 
need to be applied to the mold before pressing onto the 
ﬁller. 
Where the decorative metal pieces are still manufactured 
or can be salvaged from elsewhere in the building, 
a damaged piece can be cut out and a new piece 
installed. Since the old pieces to be replaced will usually 
overlap with adjacent pieces, close examination and 
understanding of how they were installed will help in 
devising the most suitable means of replacement. It 
may not be possible to overlap or slip in behind all of the 
outside edges adjacent to the historic tiles. Therefore, 
some trimming along the outside edges of new or 
salvaged tiles may be required before nailing in place.  
The use of caulk and paint will help compensate for the 
exposed connection. 
Where a relatively large section of the steel ceiling or 
wall is damaged or beyond repair, pieces salvaged 
from other places in the building or new ones that 
are a close match can be used. In inserting the new 
panels or pieces, it is again important to understand 
how the existing pieces overlap and were installed in 
order to determine the best way to integrate and attach 
the replacement pieces. Where replacement pieces 
that match cannot be obtained, it may be possible to 
introduce similar but non-matching new ones. 
Another option for the replacement 
of individual tiles that may be 
irreparable in a ﬁeld of otherwise 
salvageable material is digital 
replication. Through the careful 
removal of the tile, a skilled artisan 
can measure the exact dimensions 
and create a digital copy. Once an 
acceptable model has been created, the 
design can be replicated on a suitable 
substrate as shown. (Photo: Lonnie 
Coulter, La Bastille) 
As an alternative to wholesale removal or borrowing 
tiles from other parts of the project, several digital 
technologies can be utilized so that full panels can 
be replaced. Through a method of image capture, a 
height ﬁeld image can be manipulated through digital 
modeling that mimics the pattern of the panel. This 
technique only works when an image can be taken 
from directly below a panel in relatively good shape. 
Alternatively, a single tile can be carefully removed so 
that a skilled worker can create a digital copy. Once 
a digital model is obtained, the ﬁle can be replicated 
through rapid prototyping technology, such as 3D 
printing or CNC routing, on a suitable substrate, such as 
high-density urethane tooling board. Once installed and 
painted, the new pieces will closely match the adjacent 
historic pieces. 
Fire Protection 
In general, pressed-metal ceilings fail to meet current 
ﬁre resistance requirements, determined in part by the 
construction and use of the building, its size, and the 
locality. The most commonly-used codes applied to 
historic buildings are published by the International 
Code Council (ICC). Its International Existing Building 
Code (IEBC) has a speciﬁc chapter applicable to 
historic buildings, with a classiﬁcation system that 
deﬁ nes diﬀerent levels of renovation work and relates 
construction requirements to them. Localities that 
have not adopted the IEBC likely use the International 
Building Code (IBC) to determine code requirements. 
Where the IEBC has been adopted, the IBC and other 
codes published by the ICC may still contain provisions 
and requirements applicable to historic buildings by 
reference. Before proceeding with a project, check 
with the local code oﬃ  cial or ﬁre marshall as to what 
is required to meet the speciﬁcs of the building and 
regulations regarding metal ceilings. 
Simple repair projects and those limited to building 
systems do not typically trigger an evaluation of 
the ﬁre separation between ﬂoors. Neither does 
12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
rehabilitation work involving owner-occupied single-
family residences. Buildings that undergo substantial 
renovations, especially where upper ﬂoors above a 
ﬁrst-ﬂoor commercial area are converted to residential 
use, will likely trigger a change in the ﬁre-separation 
requirements. 
Fire separations between diﬀerent occupancies, or 
separating occupancies from an egress stair or route, are 
typically required at ceilings or walls in order to prevent 
or retard the passage of excessive heat, hot gases, or 
ﬂ ames (ﬁre resistance). A two-hour ﬁre separation is 
typically required between residential and commercial 
occupancies, and a greater separation may be required 
where at least one occupancy is considered high hazard. 
Although pressed-metal ceilings installed with dead air 
space between ceilings and joists are noncombustible, 
they do not achieve the required rating.   A pressed-
metal ceiling installed directly on furring strips on 
wood joists is rated at 30 minutes. If the ceiling was 
installed over a plaster ceiling, a one-hour rating may be 
achieved, depending on the integrity of the plaster. 
The Historic Buildings chapter of the IEBC provides 
numerous approaches for historic pressed-metal ceilings 
to be retained, even without full or partial improvement 
of the assembly’s ﬁre-resistance rating. The code 
explicitly provides ﬂexibility to small museums where 
automatic ﬁre-extinguishing systems are provided and 
where the existing wall and ceiling ﬁnish are constructed 
with wood or metal lath and plaster. A report 
documenting the investigation and evaluation of code 
requirements may be required by the code oﬃcial. 
Increasing Fire Resistance 
As required or desirable, methods exist to achieve at 
least a one-hour rating with a historic pressed-metal 
ceiling. Metal panels can be removed and reinstalled 
over one or more layers of 5/8” Type X gypsum board.  
Adding noncombustible insulation in the ﬂ oor joist 
cavity to slow down the heat transfer may also be 
accepted by the local oﬃcial: the IBC rates the addition 
of noncombustible insulation, two to three times the 
thickness of a typical stud wall, as a 30-45 minutes gain. 
Intumescent paints and coatings slow down the rate 
of heat transfer and are sometimes used on existing 
pressed-metal to help achieve a higher ﬁre rating. 
Because such paints and coatings tend to be thick when 
applied, they usually obscure the decorative pressed-
metal pattern and should be used only where necessary. 
Fire Suppression 
New or existing ﬁre-suppression systems in buildings 
most typically use water-based sprinklers.  New systems 
may provide safety advantages, permit ﬂ exibility in 
applying code requirements, and reduce insurance 
costs. New and retroﬁtted systems must be carefully 
considered to minimize adverse aesthetic impact.  For 
example, sprinklers may be retroﬁtted by removing (and 
reinstalling) only limited ceiling sections, or by access 
from above, if substantial building-wide improvements 
are planned. Sidewall mount sprinklers are an excellent 
solution that can require no removal of the pressed-
metal ceiling. Depending on the building and the scope 
of rehabilitation, these can be installed on multiple walls, 
although they must meet sprinkler standards (NFPA 13: 
Standard for the Installation of Sprinklers Systems). 
Pressed-Metal on Walls 
As with pressed-metal ceilings, diﬀerent levels of 
interior work or change in occupancy may trigger 
additional ﬁre separation requirements between adjacent 
uses and at egress corridors. A sprinkler system, 
installation of appropriately-rated gypsum board on 
walls (either the corridor or room side), or a combination 
of these approaches, may be acceptable. 
Replacement 
Early iron ceilings with zinc decorations are quite rare 
today and every eﬀort should be made to preserve 
them. Where serious deterioration has occurred and 
replacement is being considered, an architectural metals 
conservator should survey and recommend the best 
way, if possible, to preserve the ceiling or, if necessary, 
how to replicate its appearance. 
Historic pressed-steel walls and ceilings are much more 
common and cannot always be saved.  Decisions as to 
when to repair and when to replace are inﬂ uenced by 
a number of factors. Besides condition and cost, other 
considerations include the signiﬁcance of the building 
and the space in which the pressed metal exists; the 
ornateness and complexity of the ceiling or wall pattern; 
and the availability of replacement units that match or 
retain the historic character of the wall or ceiling.   
Common reasons for replacing pressed steel are 
widespread rusting and/or damage from high interior 
humidity or serious neglect. Where these conditions 
exist, replacement is often the appropriate option. As 
discussed in previous sections, the presence of lead-
based paint or higher ﬁre resistance requirements 
usually should not be considered suﬃ  cient justiﬁcation 
for replacement of historic pressed metal that is 
otherwise in repairable condition. This is especially true 
when the wall or ceiling is located in a historic building 
or considered a distinctive feature in its own right, 
contributing to the building’s historic character. 
When the decision is to replace the pressed metal or 
install a new metal ceiling where one previously existed, 
a number of considerations come into play, including 
how closely the historic ceiling or wall can be matched 
and how the new decorative pressed metal will be 
attached. 
Prior to removal, the pressed metal should be 
photographed, its components measured, and its overall 
continued page 16 
13 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Historic Finishes 
Contrary to a popular recent trend of leaving new 
pressed-metal ceilings unpainted or coated with 
clear polyurethane, historically, metal ceilings were 
intended to be painted. Since most were made of 
steel, and not tin-plated or galvanized, the paint not 
only served as a desired ﬁnish but also as a protec­
tive coating to deter oxidation and rust.  Paint coat­
ings also have the distinct advantage over modern 
clear-coat ﬁnishes in that ﬁllers or caulk can be used 
prior to painting to ﬁll in any gaps between parts, 
while the paint helps close small gaps as well as con­
ceals the use of ﬁllers or caulk. 
Many pressed-metal ceilings were manufactured 
with a prime coat of paint, on one or both sides. 
Primer was cheaper than tin-plating or galvanizing, 
and, through experience, various manufacturers 
learned that a protective coating of paint on steel 
meant fewer complaints from customers.  Primer col­
ors varied among manufacturers, but were usually 
white or grey. Even when not factory primed, manu­
facturers’ instructions emphasized that oil-based, 
rather than water-based, paints should be used. 
Marketers and designers embraced early on the 
decorative aspect of pressed metal, including how it 
was ﬁnished. In 1891, The Decorator and Furnisher, a 
monthly art-trades journal published in New York 
City, stated it “need hardly be mentioned that the 
metal plates after being embossed can be decorated 
in any tint of color required and wonderful eﬀects 
have been produced by the use of lacquer tints 
which, applied to the ﬁne modeling of the plates, 
produces most artistic and charming eﬀects.” 
Since pressed-metal ceiling marketing stressed that 
the appearance was designed to emulate ornamental 
plaster and wood, painting helped to convey that 
intent. While some decorators and manufacturers 
promoted decorative ﬁnishes with multiple colors 
and highlights, most ceilings were painted either a 
single color or two colors, where the second color 
was used on the cornice to match the wall paint.  It 
was good marketing to promote a simple paint treat­
ment, lauding that the pressed metal was ornamental 
enough without an elaborately applied paint scheme. 
Most typically, a professional painter brush-applied 
a ﬁnish coat after the ceiling was installed.  Still, 
manufacturers often provided tips on painting. 
While gloss paint was widely used early on, the in­
troduction and popularity of pre-mixed ﬂat paint in 
the l920s was embraced by marketers for use on ceil­
ings. Flat paint was described as warm, non-glaring, 
and "radiating light." White gloss paint remained 
the preferred ﬁnish in rooms where sanitation was a 
concern, such as kitchens and baths. 
By the 1920s and 1930s, some manufacturers marketed 
their own lines of paint speciﬁcally for pressed metal, 
often oﬀering a range of colors in varying shades of 
white. The 1930 trade catalog of the St. Paul Corrugat­
ing Company (MN) included these fashionable color 
samples for metal ceilings: white, light green, pink, tan, 
and sky blue. 
Some period literature suggested how to use color in 
room decoration. The Berger Company ( St. Louis) 1927 
catalog advised that for ceilings too high in proportion 
to the room, “the ceiling color should be brought down 
to the bottom of the cornice.” For low ceilings, “the 
sidewall color should be carried onto the cornice and 
blend into the ceiling color.” It cautioned to “avoid the 
bold striping of moldings, cornice or parts of members; 
also eliminate, as much as possible, gaudy colors and 
the use of gold or silver bronze as these have a tendency 
to detract from the digniﬁed appearance of the ceiling.” 
Other manufacturers also provided useful painting 
suggestions: “ A very prett y eﬀect can be obtained by 
a careful stippling with a dry brush before the paint is 
thoroughly dry, thus giving the whole surface a slightly 
granular or plaster-like appearance and completely 
obliterating all brush marks . . . For a ceiling in a large, 
well-lighted room, where a greater degree of brightness 
is desired, a judicious touching up with gilt paint of the 
higher surfaces of embossed patterns, gives a very rich 
and pleasing eﬀect.” 
Where the desired eﬀect of the ceiling or wall was to 
convey an imitation-wood appearance, ﬁnishes could be 
applied to the metal in a manner that conveyed the look 
of natural or stained wood. 
Polychrome treatments 
While manufacturers tended to discourage agressive 
polychrome painting, some included color prints of 
polychrome painting in their literature. Examples of 
intact historic polychrome painting schemes have been 
found in buildings across the country, including the 
Nugget Building, a bank in Telluride, Colorado, and the 
Trumbull County Courthouse in Warren, Ohio. 
In an eﬀort to oﬀer a distinctive line of ceilings and 
sidewalls, the Wheeling Corrugating Company (WV) 
oﬀered, as early as 1906, encaustic metal ceilings with a 
baked-on enamel coating to hold its color and porcelain-
like ﬁnish for years.  The ﬁeld, cornice, moldings, and 
ﬁllers could each be ordered in a range of colors. For 
a more striking appearance, the raised and ﬂ at areas 
of each component could have complementary colors. 
Once installed, the result would be a richly decorated 
polychrome scheme combined with a pressed relief 
that would rival the appearance of ornate, decoratively 
painted plasterwork. 
14 

 
 
 
 
 
Page from a 1920s brochure published by The Edwards Manufacturing Company of Cincinnati, Ohio, promoting polychrome treatments. 
Paint investigation 
Whether repainting historic pressed metal, stripping 
the paint prior to repainting, or replacing the metal, 
a simple paint color investigation could provide 
interesting results. Areas to check include a section 
of the cornice, molding, ﬁller, and the centerpiece, if 
present, as well as several representative areas of the 
ﬁeld. If there appears to be multiple colors used at 
the same time in any of these areas or signs of gold 
or similar highlights, it may merit closer examina­
tion by a historic paint specialist. Hidden beneath 
layers of later paint on a ceiling may even be a rare 
baked-on polychrome ﬁnish just waiting to be un­
covered. 
Tips on ﬁ nishing today 
Pressed-metal steel walls and ceilings historically 
were painted and not left with their natural metallic 
surface exposed. While white was the most common 
color used for ceilings, numerous historic colors can 
be are found on historic pressed-metal walls and 
ceilings. At times, cornices were painted a color dif­
ferent than the ceiling, whether the same color as the 
wall or a separate color complimenting the wall and 
ceilings. Some ceilings were even more elaborately 
painted. While a considerable range of compatible 
color treatments exist today, a raw metallic appear­
ance should be avoided. 
Black as a single or predominant color was almost 
never used.  Regardless of its location, historic 
pressed-metal ceilings, with their plays of light on a 
bas relief surface, were meant to be seen.  Black as a 
dominant color masks any shadows, ﬂattening the re­
lief, and is not appropriate for historic pressed metal 
nor for an intended replacement. 
Pattern page for color arrangement No. 4 encaustic metal ceiling 
design from the 1906 Wheeling Corrugating Company, WV. 
15 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
When carefully removing the historic pressed metal from the original 
ceiling above, the pieces were numbered and later arranged on the 
ﬂoor in the same was they appeared on the ceiling to aide in their 
reinstallation. (Photo: NPS ﬁle, 423 N Market St., Wilmington, DE) 
pattern documented. Individual pieces should be saved 
for reference when selecting appropriate replacement 
units. 
Design considerations 
The ﬁeld, molding around the ﬁeld, ﬁller, and cornice 
are important parts of the design that should be 
replicated, thus maintaining the original design. If 
the pieces are not replicated but chosen to coordinate, 
then the architectural style should be maintained when 
choosing the non-matching pieces. Simplifying the 
pattern by eliminating the wall cornice, ceiling ﬁller, 
or encasement of ceiling beams not only changes 
the historic appearance in a manner that does not 
meet preservation standards, but also can make new 
installation less seamless. 
Where one or more components of a historic ceiling may 
not be readily available today without creating custom 
dies, alternate replacement pieces may be substituted. 
In substituting for individual pieces, it is important 
to choose from the same architectural style, such as 
Classical or Mission, and, whenever possible, match the 
width and length. Replacing 24” x 24” metal tiles with 
units measuring 24” x 48” in the ﬁeld will be a noticeable 
change that usually alters the overall pattern of the 
historic ceiling. On the other hand, variation in the 
running length of individual cornice pieces rarely can be 
discernible. 
It is also important to retain the depth or repoussé of the 
pressed metal, as it can be as character-deﬁning as the 
overall pattern. Where the historic pressed metal has 
deep relief, similar replacement units tend to be more 
costly than low-relief patterns. Also the presence of 
deep reliefs tends to limit replacement options to steel. 
Materials 
Today's reproduction pressed-metal usually is made 
out of tin-plated steel, which is less prone to rust than 
the basic sheet steel used historically. Although much 
less commonly used, components are also available 
in copper, brass, and other metals. Zinc is still used, 
especially for discrete decorative elements. When 
reproducing missing or deteriorated historic metal walls 
or ceilings, these are recommended choices of materials. 
In recent years, aluminum has been marketed as a 
less expensive and rust-proof alternative to steel. It 
is available in a wide range of patterns and a variety 
of factory ﬁnishes. However, it is generally not a 
material that lends itself to high relief and may not 
be available in some of the complex historic patterns. 
Thus, it has a more limited application when replicating 
ornate historic ceilings. Aluminum can be a suitable 
replacement for historic metal patterns of low-to­
moderate relief and design complexity. This depends on 
how closely the manufactured pieces match an existing 
historic ceiling or wall. 
Plastic (PVC) and mineral ﬁber are contemporary 
materials used in making ceilings panels and are 
less expensive than tin-plated steel or aluminum. 
They are available in faux ceiling systems, including 
ones that attempt to simulate pressed metal. PVC is 
available in only low-reliefs and, depending on the 
manner of installation, has limited application when 
matching historic ceilings. Mineral ﬁber rarely matches 
the important qualities of a historic pressed-metal 
ceiling and, thus, should not be considered a suitable 
replacement. Neither is usually a good match for an 
ornate historic ceiling in a signiﬁcant historic space or 
where the existing ceiling is a distinctive feature of a 
historic building. 
Installation 
There are a variety of ways to install new pressed-metal 
walls and ceilings.  In applications where there is a 
required ﬁre separation, a ﬁre-rated dry-wall ceiling 
is ﬁrst installed and over it nailing strips are placed for 
securing the pressed metal ceiling. In rooms where ﬁre 
separation is not needed, nailing strips, can be used in 
the traditional manner. Often in small to moderately-
sized spaces, a sheet of plywood nailed to the studs 
or to the underside of the ceiling structure is the most 
expedient substrate for pressed-metal panels. 
Where mechanical or plumbing systems require that a 
ceiling be lowered, grids for nailing can be fabricated to 
hang at the desired height. This is the same technique as 
used even in some original installations. 
Irregularities in the ceiling must be adjusted and 
shimmed as needed for the nailing strips or plywood to 
provide a level surface for the metal ceiling.  For cornices 
and also certain ceiling panel designs or decorative 
elements, additional wood blocking may be required. 
Proper support preparation is essential. 
Most modern manufacturers provide installation 
instructions, just as their past counterparts did. Laying 
continued page 18 
16 

  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Case Study: 
Fort Baker 
Golden Gate National Recreation Area, 
Sausalito, CA 
Fort Baker is a 335-acre former U.S. Army post lo­
cated immediately north of the Golden Gate Bridge. 
The former military post dates back to 1897and 
includes over 20 historic army buildings, mostly  
clustered around the horseshoe-shaped main parade 
ground. In 1972, Fort Baker was listed on the Na­
tional Register of Historic Places. In 1995, the U.S. 
Army transferred Fort Baker to the National Park 
Service, and the property oﬃcially became part of 
the Golden Gate National Recreation Area. 
Under a lease agreement with the National Park 
Service, Cavallo Point—the Lodge at Golden Gate 
opened in 2008 as a ﬁrst-class lodge and retreat, 
following the rehabilitation of most of the historic 
buildings. Thirteen buildings were rehabilitated for 
overnight accommodations and six buildings were 
adapted for new public functions, including two 
restaurants, a large conference space, a retail store, a 
cooking school, and various meeting spaces. 
Pressed-metal steel ceilings were extant in a vari­
ety of building types around the fort including the 
barracks, oﬃcers’ housing, post headquarters, and 
even in the historic jail cells of the post guardhouse.  
The ceilings were over 100 years old at the time of 
the rehabilitation, and all were covered with numer­
ous layers of paint (mostly lead-based), obscuring 
the details of the embossed designs. Many of the 
buildings were to be rehabilitated to accommodate 
new, public uses, which required the addition of 
sound-prooﬁng insulation to decrease the buildings’ 
ambient noise. As a result, park architects decided 
that the ceilings would be temporarily removed, at 
which time each piece individually could be cleaned 
and stripped of paint. 
The ceilings were comprised of a variety of diﬀerent, 
intricate design elements, including 20 ﬁ eld tiles, 
eight medallions, eight cornice moldings, six ﬁller 
panels, six molding strips, two beam caps, and ﬁve 
diﬀerent ﬁ ll patterns. The patterns had a range of 
parts that oﬀered a consistent appearance within the 
central ﬁeld or main area of the ceiling with special 
transition pieces to accommodate the irregularities 
of each space. 
Medallion pieces often highlighted the placement of 
ceiling lights, and cornice pieces were used to ﬁnish 
the ceilings at the walls.  When combined with the 
various ﬁ eld tiles, ﬁller panels, and molding strips, 
these pieces created diﬀerent design schemes for 
Figure a. Removal began with documenting the pieces within 
each room, numbering and noting their precise location on a 
drawing. It was important that the pieces were marked in such 
a way that the numbers would remain legible throughout the 
cleaning and reinstallation process. 
Figure b. On pieces where paint remained after the freezing/ﬂex 
process, workers carefully hand scraped with chisels to ﬁ nish the 
clean-up. Because lead paint was present, workers were required 
to wear NIOSH approved-respirators. 
Figure c. Once the metal was cleaned of over 100 years of paint, 
it was easy to see the detail of the original design. 
17 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
each room. The underlying construction system, 
however, was the same for each room.  All panels 
were nailed to a grid of wood strips (7/8” x 2”).  The 
panels overlapped each other with indentations 
(or buttons) at the corners to conceal the nail heads 
within the patterns. 
Removal began by assigning each metal component 
a number and noting its precise location on a draw­
ing. It was important that the pieces were marked in 
such a way so that the numbers would remain legible 
throughout the cleaning and reinstallation process. 
Using a blasting system of Silver Aero-Alox 320 
sponge media with 320-grit aluminum oxide, paint at 
the perimeter and edges of all metal ceiling compo­
nents was removed to expose the nail heads. 
The corners were then carefully lifted to loosen the 
nails enough to remove them from the ceiling.  Since 
the cornice and medallions were installed last, it was 
easiest to remove them ﬁrst. 
As the pieces were disassembled, they were placed 
into wooden boxes for protection. To clean and 
remove the multiple layers of paint, the project team 
experimented with various removal techniques before 
selecting a method involving freezing the metal 
pieces. Each box of pressed-metal pieces was placed 
into commercial freezers. When su ﬃ  ciently cold, the 
boxes were removed and each metal piece then was 
carefully ﬂexed by hand to remove most of the paint. 
Where the paint-to-metal bond continued to hold, the 
pieces were returned to the freezer and the process 
repeated. Where additional freeze-time still was not 
suﬃ  ciently eﬀective, brushes and chisels were used 
to loosen and remove any remaining paint.  During 
the process, all lead paint was contained and secured, 
then stored in containers for appropriate disposal 
later. 
Temporarily removing the metal ceilings to facilitate 
the addition of insulation and any needed ﬁ re separa­
tion, as well as, updating of plumbing and electrical 
systems, allowed the paint removal to be undertaken 
in a shop, rather than working in-situ. The freeze/ ﬂex 
method proved an eﬀective paint-removal method 
that resulted in little damage to the pattern and 
repoussé on each metal piece. 
Following the installation of the sound-prooﬁ ng ma­
terials and drywall, the pressed-metal pieces were re­
installed using brads and a pneumatic gun. Matching 
out all of the pieces on the ﬂoor the same as they will 
appear on the ceiling, determining which direction 
overlaps should run, and establishing where to attach 
the ﬁrst pieces are all essential steps that should be 
the numbered pieces to the placement diagrams made 
the reinstallation an easy process. New replace­
ment pieces matching the historic Fort Baker design 
elements were purchased to replace any damaged 
or missing pieces. Once installed, the room ceilings 
were painted, completing the successful preservation 
and renewal of the historic pressed metal. 
Figure d. Following the installation of the sound-prooﬁng 
materials and drywall, the pressed-metal pieces were reinstalled 
using brads and a pneumatic gun. Matching the numbered pieces 
to the placement diagrams made the reinstallation easy. 
Figure e. The ceilings were ﬁnished with a fresh coat of paint. 
(Photos a-d courtesy of Kristin Baron, NPS; Photo e: Kaaren 
Staveteig, NPS) 
undertaken prior to installation. On larger or custom 
installations or ceilings with complex designs, 
deep cornices, or encased beams, the services of an 
experienced contractor is advisable. 
18 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Modern suspended ceiling systems with exposed T-bars 
oﬀer drop-in panels of various materials intended to 
evoke historic pressed-metal ceilings. These are not 
suited for historic applications because the T-bars 
create an overriding visual intrusion in the overall 
pattern. Furthermore, moldings and ﬁllers, which 
traditionally tend to be in continuous runs, are design 
features that cannot be easily achieved in an exposed-
grid system. Certain drop-in systems with snap or 
interlocking features that cover the T-bar may be 
suitable, in limited cases. Their application depends on 
the historic appearance of the ceiling being replaced 
and the visual qualities of the replacement panels; how 
well the new panels collectively appear in an overall 
pattern, including the treatment of the ﬁ ller, molding, 
and cornice; and other factors, such as the height of the 
ceiling and the room lighting. 
Where metal ceiling battens are used with aluminum 
replacements, a combination of rivets and adhesive 
can be used. Aluminum can also be installed with 
special adhesives, such as contact cement, RTV 
silicone, and acrylics, particularly when plywood is the 
underlayment. Care must be taken to prevent bulges in 
the panels from too much adhesive, and usually nails 
help secure the panels in place while the adhesive cures. 
Modern Finishes 
Even with today's tin-plated steel, back-priming is a 
good practice, whether done at the factory or the job 
site. While routinely recommended for areas of high 
humidity and condensation, back priming of tin-plated 
steel should be routinely considered, since pipe leakage 
and other unforeseen moisture events are more likely to 
occur from the backside. Water-based primers generally 
should not be used, particularly for tin-plated steel, steel, 
galvanized steel, copper, and zinc. 
As noted when replacing a 
deteriorated or missing pressed-
metal ceiling, the predominant 
use of black as a ﬁ nish coating 
or a "natural" unpainted metal 
appearance is usually not in 
keeping with the historic character. 
One exception is copper ceilings 
which, though they will oxidize, 
will not rust. Historic pressed-
copper ceilings were more costly 
and prestigious, and usually meant 
to be seen unpainted. 
Upper-ﬂoor ballroom of the Bringham 
Academy, Bringham City, UT, following 
a 2016 restoration campaign of the 
building. Standing vacant since 1980, the 
deteriorated condition of the historic pressed 
metal required custom replication and 
replacement of all panels and moldings. 
(Photo: W. F. Norman Corporation) 
The historic polychrome appearance is being recreated and enhances 
the depth and complexity of the decorative metal ceiling.  (Photo: The 
Madison Courier) 
Today's powder-coat factory ﬁ nishes oﬀered by a 
number of manufacturers provide a durable and even 
ﬁnish coat. For ceilings, factory-applied ﬁ nishes are 
considered desirable compared to overhead on-site 
painting, whether by spray or brush. Additional care, 
however, must be taken during installation to avoid 
scratching or otherwise scuﬃng. Considering that some 
ﬁ eld cutting is usually required, such as for electrical 
hookups for lights and fans, it is inevitable that some 
touch-up painting will be necessary after installation. 
Adhesive caulk or other suitable materials should be 
used where open joints remain after installation. This is 
usually done prior to applying ﬁnish coats to the room 
side of the wall or ceiling.  Prior to painting, the surface 
should be cleaned of any residue, dirt, and grime. Two 
ﬁnish coats are recommended. 
19 

 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Summary 
Pressed-metal ceilings and walls are important, 
character-deﬁ ning interior ﬁnishes that can be found 
in almost all types of historic buildings, from stores to 
oﬃces and churches to factories. Unlike their immediate 
predecessor, corrugated-iron ceilings, pressed-metal 
ceilings and walls of sheet steel were widely marketed, 
enjoyed a boom period of use, and now have a 
resurgence of interest. 
Distinctive in appearance, historic pressed metal turned 
out to be a reasonably durable material that, with 
appropriate care, can usually be maintained or repaired 
today, even when rehanging is required.  When beyond 
repair or missing altogether, pressed metal currently is 
available in suﬃ  cient patterns and materials that it is 
usually possible to replicate or closely approximate the 
original appearance. 
Acknowledgements 
Understanding and copying the distinctive qualities 
of individual design patterns, utilizing appropriate 
installation techniques, and creating compatible 
ﬁnishes are important components of good 
replacement work. While maintenance and repair are 
always the preferred treatment, available products 
today enable many historic patterns to be closely 
matched in cases of badly deteriorated metal walls 
and ceilings or where missing altogether. Principally 
used historically in the United States, with smaller 
markets in Canada and Australia, pressed-metal walls 
and ceilings are an important part of our architectural 
heritage. 
Kaaren R. Staveteig is an architectural historian in the Technical Preservation Services oﬃce of the National Park Service, 
Washington, DC. 
The author wishes to thank Kristin Baron, NPS; Chris Plummer; Marilyn E. Kaplan; Kim Lovejoy, Evergreene Studios; 
Frank S. Welsh;  Sheldon Gruber, A. A. Abington Aﬃliates, Inc.; and Mark Quitno, W. F. Norman Corporation. for the 
information they provided and Gordon H. Bock; Lonnie Coulter, La Bastille; Anthony Rubano, IHPA; Kristin Baron, 
NPS; and Mark Quitno, W. F. Norman Corporation for their insightful comments in reviewing the brief.  Thanks also 
go to Charles Fisher, Technical Preservation Services, and Brian Goeken, Chief, Technical Preservation Services, for their 
review and assistance. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, which directs 
the Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties.  Additional 
information oﬀered by Technical Preservation Services is available on our website at www.nps.gov/tps. Comments 
about this publication should be made to: Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, 1849 C Street NW, 
Washington, DC 20240.  
This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the 
author and the National Park Service are appreciated.  Excepting for the photographs by the author, the photographs 
used in this publication may not be used to illustrate other print or electronic media without permission of the owners. 
Photographs by the author should be credited with author’s name, National Park Service.  
April 2017 