PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
 
The Preservation and Repair of 
Histori c Stucco 
Anne Grimmer 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Preservation Assistance Division 
The term "stuccd' is used here to describe a type of 
exterior plaster applied as a two-or-three part coating 
directly onto masonry, or applied over wood or metal 
lath to a log or wood frame structure. Stucco is found 
in many forms on historic structures throughout the 
United States. It is so common, in fact, that it fre­
quently goes unnoticed, and is often disguised or used 
to imitate another material. Historic stucco is also 
sometimes incorrectly viewed as a sacrificial coating, 
and consequently removed to reveal stone, brick or 
logs that historically were never intended to be ex­
posed. Age and lack of maintenance hasten the deterio­
ration of many historic stucco buildings. Like most 
historic building materials, stucco is at the mercy of the 
elements, and even though it is a protective coating, it 
is particularly susceptible to water damage. 
Stucco is a material of deceptive simplicity: in most 
cases its repair should not be undertaken by a property 
owner unfamiliar with the art of plastering. Successful 
stµcco repair requires the skill and experience of a pro­
fessional plasterer. Therefore, this Brief has been pre­
pared to provide background information on the nature 
and components of traditional stucco, as well as offer 
guidance on proper maintenance and repairs . The Brief 
will outline the requirements for stucco repair, and, 
when necessary, replacement. Although several stucco 
mixes representative of different periods are provided 
here for reference, this Brief does not include specifica­
tions for carrying out repair projects. Each project is 
unique, with its own set of problems that require indi­
vidual solutions. 
Historical Background 
Stucco has been used since ancient times. Still widely 
used throughout the world, it is one of the most com­
mon of traditional building materials (Fig. 1). Up until 
Fig. l. These two houses in a residential section of Winchester, Virginia, illustrate the continuing popularity of stucco (a) from this 
early 19th century, Federal style house on the left, (b) to the English Cotswold style cottage that was built across the street in the 
l930's. Photos: Anne Grimmer. 

the late 1800's, stucco, like mortar, was primarily lime­
based , but the popularization of portland cement 
changed the composition of stucco, as well as mortar, 
to a harder material. Historically, the term "plaster" has 
often been interchangeable with "stucco"; the term is 
still favored by many , particularly when referring to the 
traditional lime-based coating. By the nineteenth cen­
tury "stucco ," although originally denoting fine interior 
ornamental plasterwork , had gained wide acceptance 
in the United States to describe exterior plastering. 
" Render" and "rendering" are also terms used to de­
scribe stucco, especially in Great Britain. Other historic 
treatments and coatings related to stucco in that they 
consist at least in part of a similarly plastic or malleable 
material include: parging and pargeting, wattle and 
daub , "cob" or chalk mud, pise de terre, rammed 
earth, briquete entre poteaux or bousillage, half­
timbering, and adobe. All of these are regional varia­
tions on traditional mixtures of mud, clay, lime, chalk , 
cement, gravel or straw. Many are still used today. 
The Stucco Tradition in the United States 
Stucco is primarily used on residential buildings and 
relatively small-scale commercial structures. Some of 
the earliest stucco buildings in the United States in­
clude examples of the Federal, Greek and Gothic Re­
vival styles of the eighteenth and the nineteenth 
centuries that emulated European architectural fash­
ions. Benjamin Henry Latrobe, appointed by Thomas 
Jefferson as Surveyor of Public Buildings of the United 
States in 1803, was responsible for the design of a num­
ber of important stucco buildings, including St. John's 
Church (1816), in Washington, D.C. (Fig. 2). Nearly 
half a century later Andrew Jackson Downing also ad­
vocated the use of stucco in his influential book The 
Arc/1itecture of Country Houses, published in 1850. In 
Downing's opinion, stucco was superior in many re­
spects to plain brick or stone because it was cheaper, 
warmer and dryer, and could be "agreeably" tinted. As 
a result of his advice, stuccoed Italianate style urban 
and suburban villas proliferated in many parts of the 
country during the third quarter of the nineteenth 
century. 
Revival Styles Promote Use of Stucco 
The introduction of the many revival styles of architec­
ture around the turn of the twentieth century, com­
bined with the improvement and increased availability 
of portland cement resulted in a "craze" for stucco as a 
building material in the United States . Beginning about 
1890 and gaining momentum into the 1930's and 1940's, 
stucco was associated with certain historic architectural 
styles, including: Prairie; Art Deco, and Art Moderne ; 
Spanish Colonial, Mission, Pueblo, Mediterranean, 
English Cotswold Cottage, and Tudor Revival styles; as 
well as the ubiquitous bungalow and "four-square" 
house (Fig. 3). The fad for Spanish Colonial Revival, 
and other variations on this theme, was especially im­
portant in furthering stucco as a building material in 
the United States during this period, since stucco 
clearly looked like adobe (Fig. 4). 
2 
Fig. 2. St. John's Church, Washington, D. C., constructed of 
brick and stuccoed immediately upon completion in 1816, 
reflects the influence of European, and specifically English, 
architectural styles. Photo: Russell Jones, HABS Collection. 
Fig. 3. The William Gray and Edna 5. Purcell House, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, was designed in 1913 by the 
architects Purcell and Elmslie in the Prairie style. Stuccoed 
in a salmon-pink, sand (float) finish, it is unusual in that it 
featured a 3-color geometric frieze stencilled below the eaves of 
the 2nd story. The Minneapolis Institute of Art has removed 
the cream-colored paint added at a later date, and restored the 
original color and texture of the stucco. Photo: Courtesy 
MacDonald and Mack Partnership. 

Although stucco buildings were especially prevalent in 
California, the Southwest and Florida, ostensibly be­
cause of their Spanish heritage, this period also 
spawned stucco-coated, revival-style buildings all over 
the United States and Canada. The popularity of stucco 
as a cheap, and readily available material meant that by 
the 1920's, it was used for an increasing variety of 
building types. Resort hotels, apartment buildings, 
private mansions and movie theaters, railroad stations, 
and even gas stations and tourist courts took advantage 
Fig. 4. The elaborate Spanish Colonial Revival style of this 
building designed by Bertram Goodhue for the 1915 Panama 
California Exposition held in San Diego's Balboa Park 
emphasizes the sculptural possibilities of stucco. Photo: C. W 
Snell, National Historic Landmark Files. 
of the "romance" of period styles, and adopted the 
stucco construction that had become synonymous with 
these styles (Fig. 5). 
A Practical Building Material 
Stucco has traditionally been popular for a variety of 
reasons. It was an inexpensive material that could sim­
ulate finely dressed stonework, especially when 
"scored" or "lined" in the European tradition. A stucco 
coating over a less finished and less costly substrate 
such as rubblestone, fieldstone, brick, log or wood 
frame, gave the building the appearance of being a 
more expensive and important structure. As a weather­
repellent coating, stucco protected the building from 
wind and rain penetration, and also offered a certain 
amount of fire protection. While stucco was usually 
applied during construction as part of the building 
design, particularly over rubblestone or fieldstone, in 
some instances it was added later to protect the struc­
ture, or when a rise in the owner's social status de­
manded a comparable rise in his standard of living. 
Composition of Historic Stucco 
Before the mid-to-late nineteenth century, stucco con­
sisted primarily of hydrated or slaked lime, water and 
sand, with straw or animal hair included as a binder. 
Natural cements were frequently used in stucco mixes 
after their discovery in the United States during the 
1820's. Portland cement was first manufactured in the 
United States in 1871, and it gradually replaced natural 
cement. After about 1900, most stucco was composed 
primarily of portland cement, mixed with some lime. 
With the addition of portland cement, stucco became 
even more versatile and durable. No longer used just 
as a coating for a substantial material like masonry or 
log, stucco could now be applied over wood or metal 
lath attached to a light wood frame. With this increased 
strength, stucco ceased to be just a veneer and became 
a more integral part of the building structure. 
Fig. 5. During the 19th and 20th centuries stucco has been a popular material not only for residential, but also for commercial 
buildings in the Spanish style. Two such examples are (a) the 1851 Ernest Hemingway House, Key West, Florida, built of stuccoed 
limestone in a Spanish Caribbean style; and (b) the Santa Fe Depot (Union Station), San Diego, California, designed by the 
architects Bakewell and Brown in 1914 in a Spanish Colonial Revival style, and constructed of stucco over brick and hollow tile. 
Photos: (a) J. F. Brooks, HABS Collection, (b) Marvin Rand, HABS Collection. 
3 

Today, gypsum, which is hydrated calcium sulfate or 
sulfate of lime, has to a great extent replaced lime . 
Gypsum is preferred because it hardens faster and has 
less shrinkage than lime. Lime is generally used only 
in the finish coat in contemporary stucco work. 
The composition of stucco depended on local custom 
and available materials. Stucco often contained sub­
stantial amounts of mud or clay, marble or brick dust, 
or even sawdust, and an array of additives ranging 
from animal blood or urine, to eggs, keratin or gluesize 
(animal hooves and horns), varnish, wheat paste, 
sugar, salt, sodium silicate, alum, tallow, linseed oil, 
beeswax, and wine, beer, or rye whiskey. Waxes, fats 
and oils were included to introduce water-repellent 
properties, sugary materials reduced the amount of 
water needed and slowed down the setting time, and 
alcohol acted as an air entrainer. All of these additives 
contributed to the strength and durability of the stucco. 
The appearance of much stucco was determined by the 
color of the sand-or sometimes burnt clay, used in the 
mix, but often stucco was also tinted with natural pig­
ments, or the surface whitewashed or colorwashed 
after stuccoing was completed. Brick dust could pro­
vide color, and other coloring materials that were not 
affected by lime, mostly mineral pigments, could be 
added to the mix for the final finish coat. Stucco was 
also marbled or marbleized-stained to look like stone 
by diluting oil of vitriol (sulfuric acid) with water, and 
mixing this with a yellow ochre, or another color (Fig. 
6). As the twentieth century progressed, manufactured 
or synthetic pigments were added at the factory to 
some prepared stucco mixes. 
Methods of Application 
Stucco is applied directly, without lath, to masonry 
substrates such as brick, stone, concrete or hollow tile 
(Fig. 7). But on wood structures, stucco, like its interior 
counterpart plaster, must be applied over lath in order 
to obtain an adequate key to hold the stucco. Thus, 
when applied over a log structure, stucco is laid on 
horizontal wood lath that has been nailed on vertical 
wood furring strips attached to the logs (Fig. 8). If it is 
applied over a wood frame structure, stucco may be 
applied to wood or metal lath nailed directly to the 
wood frame; it may also be placed on lath that has 
been attached to furring strips. The furring strips are 
themselves laid over building paper covering the wood 
sheathing (Fig. 9). Wood lath was gradually super­
seded by expanded metal lath introduced in the 
late-nineteenth and early-twentieth century. When 
stuccoing over a stone or brick substrate, it was cus­
tomary to cut back or rake out the mortar joints if they 
were not already recessed by natural weathering or 
Fig. 6. Arlington House, Arlington, Virginia, was built between 1802-1818 of brick covered with stucco. It was designed by George 
Hadfield for George Washington Parke Custis, grandson of Martha Washington, and was later the home of Robert E. Lee. This 
photograph taken on June 28, 1864, by Captain Andrew]. Russell, a U.S. Signal Corps photographer, shows the stucco after it had 
been marbleized during the 1850's. Yellow ochre and burnt umber pigments were combined to imitate Sienna marble, and the stucco, 
with the exception of the roughcast foundation, was scored to heighten the illusion of stone. Photo: National Archives, Arlington 
House Collection, National Park Service. 
4 

Fig. 7. Patches of stucco have fallen off this derelict 19th 
century structure exposing the rough-cut local stone 
substrate. The missing wood entablature on the side and the 
rough wood lintel now exposed above a second-floor window, 
offer clues that the building was stuccoed originally. Photo: 
National Park Service Files. 
Fig. 8. Removal of deteriorated stucco in preparation for 
stucco repair on this late-18th century log house in 
Middleway, West Virginia, reveals that the stucco was 
applied to hand-riven wood lath nailed over vertical wood 
strips attached to the logs. Photo: Anne Grimmer. 
Fig. 9. This cutaway drawing shows the method of 
attachment for stucco commonly used on wood frame or 
balloon frame structures from the late-19th to the 20th 
century. Drawing: Brian Conway, "Illinois Preservation 
Series Number 2: Stucco." 
Like interior wall plaster, stucco has traditionally been 
applied as a multiple-layer process, sometimes con­
sisting of two coats, but more commonly as three. 
Whether applied directly to a masonry substrate or 
onto wood or metal lath, this consists of a first 
"scratch" or "pricking-up" coat, followed by a second 
scratch coat, sometimes referred to as a "floating" or 
"brown" coat, followed finally by the "finishing" coat. 
Up until the late-nineteenth centur y, the first and the 
second coats were of much the same compositio n, gen­
erally consisting of lime, or natural cement, sand, per­
haps clay, and one or more of the additives previously 
mentioned. Straw or animal hair was usually added to 
the first coat as a binder. The third, or finishing coat, 
consisted primarily of a very fine mesh grade of lime 
and sand, and sometimes pigment. As already noted, 
after the 1820's, natural cement was also a common 
ingredient in stucco until it was replaced by portland 
cement. 
5 
erosion, and sometimes the bricks themselves were 
gouged to provide a key for the stucco. This helped 
provide the necessary bond for the stucco to remain 
attached to the masonry, much like the key provided 
by wood or metal lath on frame buildings. 

A 8 
-
C D 
Fig. 10. (a) Tudor Place, Washington, D. C. (1805-1816), was designed by Dr. William Thornton. Like its contemporary, Arlington 
House, it is stuccoed and scored, with a roughcast base, but here the stucco is a monochromatic sandstone color tinted by sand and 
mineral pigments (b). Although the original stucco was replaced in the early-20th century with a port/and cement-based stucco, the 
family, who retained ownership until 1984 when the house was opened to the public, left explicit instructions for future stucco 
repairs. The mix recommended for repairing hairline cracks (c), consists of sharp sand, cement and lime, burnt umber, burnt sienna, 
and a small amount of raw sienna. Preparation of numerous test samples, the size of "a thick griddle cake," will be necessary to 
match the stucco color, and when the exact color has been achieved, the mixture is to be diluted to the "consistency of cream," 
brushed on the wall and rubbed into the cracks with a rubber sponge or float. Note the dark color visible under the eaves intended to 
replicate the stronger color of the original limewashed stucco (d). Photos: Anne Grimmer. 
6 

Both masonry and wood lath must be kept wet or 
damp to ensure a good bond with the stucco. Wetting 
these materials helps to prevent them from pulling 
moisture out of the stucco too rapidly, which results in 
cracking, loss of bond, and generally poor quality 
stucco work. 
Traditional Stucco Finishes 
Until the early-twentieth century when a variety of 
novelty finishes or textures were introduced, the last 
coat of stucco was commonly given a smooth, troweled 
finish, and then scored or lined in imitation of ashlar. 
The illusion of masonry joints was sometimes en­
hanced by a thin line of white lime putty, graphite, or 
some other pigment. Some nineteenth century build­
ings feature a water table or raised foundation of 
rough-cast stucco that differentiates it from the stucco 
surface above, which is smooth and scored (Fig. 10). 
Other novelty or textured finishes associated with the 
"period" or revival styles of the early-twentieth century 
include: the English cottage finish, adobe and Spanish, 
pebble-dashed or dry-dash surface, fan and sponge 
texture, reticu lated and vermiculated, roughcast (or wet 
dash), and sgraffito (Fig. 11). 
Repairing Deteriorated Stucco 
Regular Maintenance 
Although A. J. Downing alluded to stuccoed houses in 
Pennsylvania that had survived for over a century in 
relatively good condition, historic stucco is inherently 
not a particularly permanent or long-lasting building 
material. Regular maintenance is required to keep it in 
good condition. Unfortunately, many older or historic 
buildings are not always accorded this kind of care . 
Because building owners knew stucco to be a protect­
ive, but also somewhat fragile coating, they employed a 
variety of means to prolong its usefulness. The most 
common treatment was to whitewash stucco, often 
annually. The lime in the whitewash offered protection 
and stability and helped to harden the stucco. Most 
importantly, it filled hairline cracks before they could 
develop into larger cracks and let in moisture. To im­
prove water repellency, stucco buildings were also 
sometimes coated with paraffin, another type of wax, 
or other stucco-like coatings, such as oil mastics. 
Assessing Damage 
Most stucco deterioration is the result of water infiltra­
tion into the building structure, either through the 
roof, around chimneys, window and door openings, or 
excessive ground water or moisture penetrating 
through, or splashing up from the foundation. Poten­
tial causes of deterioration include: ground settlement, 
lintel and door frame settlement, inadequate or leaking 
gutters and downspouts, intrusive vegetation, moisture 
migration within walls due to interior condensation 
and humidity, vapor drive problems caused by furnace, 
bathroom and kitchen vents, and rising damp resulting 
from excessive ground water and poor drainage around 
the foundation. Water infiltration will cause wood lath 
to rot, and metal lath and nails to rust, which eventu-
Fig. 11. The Hotel Washington, Washington, D.C. 
(1916- 1917), is notable for its decorative sgraffito surfaces. 
Stucco panels under the cornice and around the windows 
feature classical designs created by artists who incised the 
patterns in the outer layer of red-colored stucco while still 
soft, thereby exposing a stucco undercoat of a contrasting 
color. Photo: Kaye Ellen Simonson. 
ally will cause stucco to lose its bond and pull away 
from its substrate. 
After the cause of deterioration has been identified, 
any necessary repairs to the building should be made 
first before repairing the stucco. Such work is likely to 
include repairs designed to keep excessive water away 
from the stucco, such as roof, gutter, downspout and 
flashing repairs, improving drainage, and redirecting 
rainwater runoff and splash-back away from the build­
ing. Horizontal areas such as the tops of parapet walls 
or chimneys are particularly vulnerable to water infil­
tration, and may require modifications to their original 
design , such as the addition of flashing to correct the 
problem. 
Previous repairs inexpertly carried out may have 
caused additional deterioration, particularly if executed 
in portland cement , which tends to be very rigid, and 
therefore incompatible with early, mostly soft lime­
based stucco that is more "flexible." Incompatible 
7 

repairs, external vibration caused by traffic or con­
struction, or building settlement can also result in 
cracks which permit the entrance of water and cause 
the stucco to fail (Fig. 12). 
Before beginning any stucco repair, an assessment of 
the stucco should be undertaken to determine the ex­
tent of the damage, and how much must be replaced 
or repaired. Testing should be carried out systemati­
cally on all elevations of the building to determine the 
overall condition of the stucco. Some areas in need of 
repair will be clearly evidenced by missing sections of 
stucco or stucco layers. Bulging or cracked areas are 
obvious places to begin. Unsound, punky or soft areas 
that have lost their key will echo with a hollow sound 
when tapped gently with a wooden or acrylic hammer 
or mallet. 
Identifying the Stucco Type 
Analysis of the historic stucco will provide useful infor­
mation on its primary ingredients and their propor­
tions , and will help to ensure that the new replacement 
stucco will duplicate the old in strength, composition , 
color and texture as closely as possible. However, un­
less authentic, period restoration is required, it may not 
be worthwhile, nor in many instances possible , to at­
tempt to duplicate all of the ingredients (particularly 
some of the additives), in creating the new stucco mor-
tar. Some items are no longer available , and others , 
notably sand and lime-the major components of tradi­
tional stucco-have changed radically over time. For 
example , most sand used in contemporary masonry 
work is manufactured sand, because river sand , which 
was used historically, is difficult to obtain today in 
many parts of the country. The physical and visual 
qualities of manufactured sand versus river sand, are 
quite different, and this affects the way stucco works, 
as well as the way it looks . The same is true of lime, 
which is frequently replaced by gypsum in modern 
stucco mixes. And even if identification of all the items 
in the historic stucco mix were possible, the analysis 
would still not reveal how the original stucco was 
mixed and applied. 
There are, however, simple tests that can be carried out 
on a small piece of stucco to determine its basic make­
up. A dilute solution of hydrochloric (muriatic) acid 
will dissolve lime-based stucco, but not portland ce­
ment. Although the use of portland cement became 
common after 1900, there are no precise cut-off dates, 
·as stuccoing practices varied among individual plaster­
ers, and from region to region. Some plasterers began 
using portland cement in the 1880's, but others may 
have continued to favor lime stucco well into the early­
twentieth century. While it is safe to assume that a 
late-eighteenth or early-nineteenth century stucco is 
lime-based, late-nineteenth or early-twentieth century 
Fig. 12. (a) Water intrusion caused by rusting metal, or (b) plant growth left unattended will gradually enlarge these cracks, 
resulting in spa/ling, and eventually requiring extensive repair of the stucco. Photos: National Park Service Files. 
8 

Fig. 13. (a) In preparation for repainting, hairline cracks on this Mediterranean style stucco apartment building were filled with a 
commercial caulking compound; (b) dirt is attracted and adheres to the texture of the caulked areas, and a year after painting, these 
inappropriate repairs are highly obvious. Photos: Anne Grimmer. 
stucco may be based on either lime or portland cement. 
Another important factor to take into consideration is 
that an early lime-stucco building is likely to have been 
repaired many times over the ensuing years, and it is 
probable that at least some of these patches consist of 
portland cement. 
Planning the Repair 
Once the extent of damage has been determined, a 
number of repair options may be considered. Small 
hairline cracks usually are not serious and may be 
sealed with a thin slurry coat consisting of the finish 
coat ingredients, or even with a coat of paint or white­
wash. Commercially available caulking compounds are 
not suitable materials for patching hairline cracks. Be­
cause their consistency and texture is unlike that of 
stucco, they tend to weather differently, and attract 
more dirt; as a result, repairs made with caulking com­
pounds may be highly visible, and unsightly (Fig. 13). 
Larger cracks will have to be cut out in preparation for 
more extensive repair. Most stucco repairs will require 
the skill and expertise of a professional plasterer (Fig. 
14). 
In the interest of saving or preserving as much as pos­
sible of the historic stucco, patching rather than whole­
sale replacement is preferable. When repairing heavily 
textured surfaces, it is not usually necessary to replace 
an entire wall section, as the textured finish, if well­
executed, tends to conceal patches, and helps them to 
blend in with the existing stucco. However, because of 
the nature of smooth-finished stucco, patching a num­
ber of small areas scattered over one elevation may not 
be a successful repair approach unless the stucco has 
been previously painted, or is to be painted following 
the repair work. On unpainted stucco such patches are 
hard to conceal, because they may not match exactly or 
blend in with the rest of the historic stucco surface. For 
Fig. 14. This poorly executed patch is not the work of a 
professional plasterer. While it may serve to keep out water, it 
does not match the original surface, and is not an appropriate 
repair for historic stucco. Photo: Betsy Chittenden. 
this reason it is recommended, if possible, that stucco 
repair be carried out in a contained or well-defined 
area, or if the stucco is scored, the repair patch should 
be "squared-off" in such a way as to follow existing 
scoring. In some cases, especially in a highly visible 
location, it may be preferable to restucco an entire wall 
section or feature. In this way, any differences between 
the patched area and the historic surface will not be so 
readily apparent. 
Repair of historic stucco generally follows most of the 
same principles used in plaster repair. First, all deterio­
rated, severely cracked and loose stucco should be re­
moved down to the lath (assuming that the lath is 
securely attached to the substrate), or down to the ma­
sonry if the stucco is directly applied to a masonry 
substrate. A clean surface is necessary to obtain a good 
9 

, .. 
. · 
bond between the stucco and substrate. The areas tu be 
patched should be cleaned of all debris with a bristle 
brush , and all plant growth, dirt, loose paint , oil or 
grease should be removed (Fig. 15). If necessary, brick 
or stone mortar joints should then be raked out to a 
depth of approximately 5/8" to ensure a good bond 
between the substrate and the new stucco. 
To obtain a neat repair, the area to be patched should 
be squared-off with a butt joint , using a cold chisel, a 
hatchet , a diamond blade saw, or a masonry bit. Some­
times it may be preferable to leave the area to be 
patched in an irregular shape which may result in a 
less conspicuous patch. Proper preparation of the area 
to be patched requires very sharp tools, and extreme 
caution on the part of the plasterer not to break keys of 
surrounding good stucco by "over-sounding" when 
removing deteriorated stucco. To ensure a firm bond, 
the new, patch must not overlap the old stucco. If the 
stucco has lost its bond or key from wood lath, or the 
lath has deteriorated or come loose from the substrate, 
a decision must be made whether to try to reattach the 
old lath, to replace deteriorated lath with new wood 
lath, or to leave the historic wood lath in place and 
supp lement it with modern expanded metal lath. Un­
less authent icity is important, it is generally preferable 
(and easier) to nail new metal lath over the old wood 
lath to support the patch. Metal lath that is no longer 
securely fastened to the substrate may be removed and 
replaced in kind, or left in place, and supplemented 
with new wire lath . 
When repairing lime-based stucco applied directly to 
masonry, the new stucco should be applied in the same 
manner, directly onto the stone or brick. The stucco 
will bond onto the masonry itself without the addition 
of lath because of the irregularities in the masonry or 
those of its mortar joints , or because its surface has 
been scratched, scored or otherwise roughened to pro­
vide an additional key. Cutting out the old stucco at a 
diagonal angle may also help secure the bond between 
the new and the old stucco. For the most part it is not 
advisable to insert metal lath when restuccoing historic 
masonry in sound condition, as it can hasten deteriora­
tion of the repair work. Not only will attaching the lath 
damage the masonry, but the slightest moisture pene­
tration can cause metal lath to rust. This will cause 
metal to expand, eventually resulting in spalling of the 
stucco, and possibly the masonry substrate too. 
If the area to be patched is properly cleaned and pre ­
pared, a bonding agent is usually not necessary. How­
ever, a bonding agent may be useful when repairing 
hairline cracks, or when dealing with substrates that do 
not offer a good bonding surface. These may include 
dense stone or brick, previously painted or stuccoed 
Fig. 15. (a) After reattaching any loose wood lath to the furring_strips underneath, the area to be patched has been cleaned, the lath 
thoroughly wetted, and (b) the first coat of stucco has been applied and scratched to provide a key to hold the second layer of stucco. 
Photos: Betsy Chittenden. 
10 

masonry, or spalling brick substrates . A good mechani ­
cal bond is always preferable to reliance on bonding 
agents. Bonding agents should not be used on a wall 
that is likely to remain damp or where large amounts 
of salts are present. Many bonding agents do not sur­
vive well under such conditions, and their use could 
jeopardize the longevity of the stucco repair. 
A stucco mix compatible with the historic stucco 
should be selected after analyzing the existing stucco . It 
can be adapted from a standard traditional mix of the 
period, or based on one of the mixes included here. 
Stucco consisting mostly of portland cement generally 
will not be physically compatible with the softer, more 
flexible lime-rich historic stuccos used throughout the 
eighteenth and much of the nineteenth centuries. The 
differing expansion and contraction rates of lime stucco 
and portland cement stucco will normally cause the 
stucco to crack. Choosing a stucco mix that is durable 
and compatible with the historic stucco on the building 
is likely to involve considerable trial and error, and 
probably will require a number of test samples, and 
even more if it is necessary to match the color. It is 
best to let the stucco test samples weather as long as 
possible-ideally one year, or at least through a change 
of seasons, in order to study the durability of the mix 
and its compatibility with the existing stucco, as well as 
the weathering of the tint if the building will not be 
painted and 'cblor match is an important factor. If the 
test samples are not executed on the building , they 
should be placed next to the stucco remaining on the 
building to compare the color, texture and composition 
of the samples with the original. The number and 
thickness of stucco coats used in the repair should also 
match the original. 
After thoroughly dampening the masonry or wood 
lath, the first, scratch coat should be applied to the 
masonry substrate, or wood or metal lath, in a thick­
ness that corresponds to the original if extant, or gener­
ally about 1/4" to 3/8". The scratch coat should be 
scratched or cross-hatched with a comb to provide a 
key to hold the second coat. It usually takes 24-72 
hours , and longer in cold weather, for each coat to dry 
before the next coat can be applied. The second coat 
should be about the same thickness as the first, and 
the total thickness of the first two coats should gener­
ally not exceed about 5/8". This second or leveling coat 
should be roughened using a wood float with a nail 
protruding to provide a key for the final or finish coat. 
The finish coat, about 1/4" thick, is applied after the 
previous coat has initially set . If this is not feasible , the 
base coat should be thoroughly dampened when the 
finish coat is applied later. The finish coat should be 
worked to match the texture of the original stucco (Fig. 
16). 
Colors and Tints for Historic Stucco Repair 
The color of most early stucco was supplied by the 
aggregate included in the mix-usually the sand. 
Sometimes natural pigments were added to the mix, 
and eighteenth and nineteenth-century scored stucco 
was often marbleized or painted in imitation of marble 
or granite . Stucco was also frequently coated with 
whitewash or a colorwash. This tradition later evolved 
into the use of paint, its popularity depending on the 
vagaries of fashion as much as a means of concealing 
repairs . Because most of the early colors were derived 
from nature, the resultant stucco tints tended to be 
mostly earth-toned. This was true until the advent of 
brightly colored stucco in the early decades of the 
twentieth century . This was the so-called "Jazz Plaster " 
developed by O.A. Malone, the "man who put color 
into California," and who founded the California 
Stucco Products Corporation in 1927. California Stucco 
was revolutionary for its time as the first stucco /plaster 
to contain colored pigment in its pre-packaged factory 
mix. 
When patching or repairing a historic stucco surface 
known to have been tinted , it may be possible to deter­
mine through visual or microscopic analysis whether 
the source of the coloring is sand, cement or pigment. 
Although some pigments or aggregates used tradition­
ally may no longer be available , a sufficiently close 
color-match can generally be approximated using sand, 
natural or mineral pigments, or a combination of these. 
Obtaining such a match will require testing and com­
paring the color of dried test samples with the original. 
Successfully combining pigments in the dry stucco mix 
prepared for the finish coat requires considerable skill. 
The amount of pigment must be carefully measured for 
each batch of stucco. Overworking the mix can make 
the pigment separate from the lime . Changing the 
amount of water added to the mix, or using water to 
apply the tinted finish coat, will also affect the color of 
the stucco when it dries . 
Generally, the color obtained by hand-mixing these 
ingredients will provide a sufficiently close match to 
cover an entire wall or an area distinct enough from the 
rest of the structure that the color differences will not 
be obvious . However , it may not work for small 
patches conspicuously located on a primary elevation, 
where color differences will be especially noticeable. In 
these instances, it may be necessary to conceal the 
repairs by painting the entire patched elevation , or 
even the whole building. 
Many stucco buildings have been painted over the 
years and will require repainting after the stucco re­
pairs have been made. Lirnewash or cement-based 
paint, latex paint , or oil-based paint are appropriate 
coatings for stucco buildings . The most important fac­
tor to consider when repainting a previously painted or 
coated surface is that the new paint be compatible with 
any coating already on the surface. In preparation for 
repainting, all loose or peeling paint or other coating 
material not firmly adhered to the stucco must be re­
moved by hand-scraping or natural bristle brushes . The 
surface should then be cleaned. 
Cement-based paints, most of which today contain 
some portland cement and are really a type of lime­
wash, have traditionally been used on stucco building s. 
The ingredients were easily obtainable. Furthermore, 
the lime in such paints actually bonded or joined with 
the stucco and provided a very durable coating. In 
many regions, whitewash was applied annually during 
spring cleaning. Modern , commercially available pre­
mixed masonry and mineral-based paints may also be 
used on historic stucco buildings . 
11 

Fig. A Fig. B 
Fig. C Fig. D 
12 
Fig. 16. (a) In preparation for stucco repair, this plasterer is mixing the dry materials in a mortar box with a mortar hoe (note the 2 
holes in the blade), pulling it through the box using short choppy strokes. After the dry materials are thoroughly combined, water 
is added and mixed with them using the same choppy, but gradually lengthening stokes, making sure that the hoe cuts completely 
th rough the mix to the bottom of the box. (b) The deteriorated stucco has been cut away, and new metal lath has been nailed to the 
clapboarding in the area to be patched. (Although originally clapboarded when built in the 19th century, the house was stuccoed 
around the turn-of-the-century on metal lath nailed over the clapboard.) (c) The first, scratch coat and the second coat have been 
applied here, and await the spatterdash or rough-cast finish of the final coat (d) which was accomplished by the plasterer using a 
whisk broom to throw the stucco mortar against the wall surface. This well-executed patch is barely discernable, and lacks only a 
coat of paint to make it blend completely with the rest of the painted wall surface. Photos: Anne Grimmer. 

If the structure must be painted for the first time to 
conceal repairs, almost any of these coatings may be 
acceptable depending on the situation. Latex paint, for 
example, may be applied to slightly damp walls or 
where there is an excess of moisture, but latex paint 
will not stick to chalky or powdery areas. Oil-based, or 
alkyd paints must be applied only to dry walls; new 
stucco must cure up to a year before it can be painted 
with oil-based paint. 
Contemp orary Stucco Products 
There are many contemporary stucco products on the 
market today. Many of them are not compatible, either 
physically or visually, with historic stucco buildings. 
Such products should be considered for use only after 
consulting with a historic masonry specialist. However, 
some of these prepackaged tinted stucco coatings may 
be suitable for use on stucco buildings dating from the 
late-nineteenth or early-twentieth century, as long as 
the color and texture are appropriate for the period and 
style of the building. While some masonry contractors 
may, as a matter of course, suggest that a water­
repellent coating be applied after repairing old stucco, 
in most cases this should not be necessary, since color­
washes and paints serve the same purpose, and stucco 
itself is a protective coating. 
Cleaning Historic Stucco Surfaces 
Historic stucco buildings often exhibit multiple layers of 
paint or limewash. Although some stucco surfaces may 
be cleaned by water washing, the relative success of 
this procedure depends on two factors: the surface 
texture of the stucco, and the type of dirt to be re­
moved. If simply removing airborne dirt, smooth un­
painted stucco, and heavily-textured painted stucco 
may sometimes be cleaned using a low-pressure water 
wash, supplemented by scrubbing with soft natural 
bristle brushes, and possibly non-ionic detergents. 
Organic plant material, such as algae and mold, and 
metallic stains may be removed from stucco using poul­
tices and appropriate solvents. Although these same 
methods may be employed to clean unpain ted rough­
cast, pebble-dash , or any stucco surface featuring ex­
posed aggregate, due to the surface irregularities, it 
may be difficult to remove dirt, without also removing 
portions of the decorative textured surface. Difficulty in 
cleaning these surfaces may explain why so many of 
these textured surfaces have been painted. 
When Total Replacement is Necessary 
Complete replacement of the historic stucco with new 
stucco of either a traditional or modern mix will proba­
bly be necessary only in cases of extreme deterioration­
that is, a loss of bond on over 40-50 per cent of the 
stucco surface. Another reason for total removal might 
be that the physical and visual integrity of the historic 
stucco has been so compromised by prior incompatible 
and ill-conceived repairs that patching would not be 
successful. 
When stucco no longer exists on a building there is 
more flexibility in choosing a suitable mix for the re­
placement. Since compatibility of old and new stucco 
will not be an issue, the most important factors to con-
sider are durability , color, texture and finish. Depend­
ing on the construction and substrate of the building , 
in some instances it may be acceptable to use a rela­
tively strong cement-based stucco mortar. This is cer­
tainly true for many late-nineteenth and early-twentieth 
century buildings, and may even be appropriate to use 
on some stone substrates even if the original mortar 
would have been weaker, as long as the historic visual 
qualities noted above have been replicated. Generally , 
the best principle to follow for a masonry building is 
that the stucco mix, whether for repair or replacement 
of historic stucco, should be somewhat weaker than the 
masonry to which it is to be applied in order not to 
damage the substrate. 
General Guidance for Historic Stucco Repair 
A skilled professional plasterer will be familiar 
with the properties of materials involved in stucco 
repair and will be able to avoid some of the pit­
falls that would hinder someone less experienced. 
General suggestions for successful stucco repair 
parallel those involving restoration and repair of 
historic mortar or plaster. In addition, the follow­
ing principles are important to remember: 
• Mix only as much stucco as can be used in one 
and one-half to two hours. This will depend on 
the weather (mortar will harden faster under hot 
and dry, or sunny conditions); and experience is 
likely to be the best guidance. Any remaining 
mortar should be discarded; it should not be 
retempered. 
• Stucco mortar should not be over-mixed. (Hand 
mix for 10-15 minutes after adding water, or ma­
chine mix for 3-4 minutes after all ingredients are 
in mixer.) Over-mixing can cause crazing and 
discoloration, especially in tinted mortars. Over­
mixing will also tend to make the mortar set too 
fast, which will result in cracking and poor bond­
ing or keying to the lath or masonry substrate. 
• Wood lath or a masonry substrate, but not metal 
lath, must be thoroughly wetted before applying 
stucco patches so that it does not draw moisture 
out of the stucco too rapidly. To a certain extent, 
bonding agents also serve this same purpose. 
Wetting the substrate helps retard drying . 
• To prevent cracking, it is imperative that stucco 
not dry too fast. Therefore, the area to be stuc­
coed should be shaded, or even covered if possi­
ble, particularly in hot weather. It is also a good 
idea in hot weather to keep the newly stuccoed 
area damp, at approximately 90 per cent humidity, 
for a period of 48 to 72 hours. 
• Stucco repairs, like most other exterior masonry 
work, should not be undertaken in cold weather 
(below 40 degrees fahrenheit, and preferably 
warmer), or if there is danger of frost. 
13 

Fig. A Fig. B 
Fig. D Fig. E 
Fig. C 
Fig. F 
14 
Most of th e oldest stucco in the U.S. dating prior to 
the late-nineteenth century, will generally have a 
smooth, troweled finish (sometimes called a sand or 
float finish) , poss ibly scored to resemble ashlar ma­
sonry units. Scoring may be incised to simulate ma­
sonry joints , the scored lines may be emphasized by 
black or white penciling, or the lines may simply be 
drawn or painted on the surface of the stucco. In 
some regions, at least as early as the first decades of 
the nineteenth century, it was not uncommon to use 
a roughcast finish on the foundation or base of an 
otherwise smooth-surfaced building (Fig. a). Rough­
cast was also used as an overall stucco finish for 
some outbuildings, and other less important types 
of structures. 
A wide variety of decorative surface textures may be 
found on revival style stucco buildings , particularl y 
residential architecture. These styles evolved in the 
late-nineteenth century and peaked in popularity in 
the early decades of the twentieth century. Frank 
Lloyd Wright favored a smooth finish stucco, which 
was imitated on much of the Prairie style architec­
ture inspired by his work. Some of the more pictur­
esque surface textures include: English Cottage or 
English Cotswold finish ; sponge finish (Fig. b); fan 
texture; adobe finish (Fig. c), and Spanish or Italian 
finish. Many of these finishes and countless other 
regional and personalized variations on them are 
still in use. 
The most common early-twentieth century stucco 
finishes are often found on bungalow-style houses , 
and include: spatter or spatterdash (sometimes 
called roughcast, hading, or wetdash), and pebble­
dash or drydash. The spatterdash finish is applied 
by throwing the stucco mortar against the wall using 
a whisk broom or a stiff fiber brush, and it requires 
considerable skill on the part of the plasterer to 
achieve a consistently rough wall surface. The mor­
tar used to obtain this texture is usually composed 
simp ly of a regular sand, lime, and cement mortar, 
although it may sometimes contain small pebbles or 
crushed stone aggregate, which replaces one-half 
the normal sand content. The pebbledash or dry­
dash finish is accomplished manually by the plas­
terer throwing or "dashing" dry pebbles (about 1/8" 
to 1/4" in size), onto a coat of stucco freshly applied 
by another plasterer. The pebbles must be thrown at 
the wall with a scoop with sufficient force and skill 
that they will stick to the stuccoed wall. A more 
even or uniform surface can be achieved by patting 
the stones down with a wooden float. This finish 
may also be created using a texturing machine (Figs . 
d-£ illustrate 3 versions of this finish. Photos : 
National Park Service Files). 
Historic Stucco Textures 

Summary 
Stucco on historic buildings is especially vulnerable not 
only to the wear of time and exposure to the elements, 
but also at the hands of well-intentioned "restorers," 
who may want to remove stucco from eighteenth and 
nineteenth century structures, to expose what they 
believe to be the original or more "historic" brick, 
stone or log underneath . Historic stucco is a character­
defining feature and should be considered an impor­
tant historic building material, significant in its own 
right. While many eighteenth and nineteenth century 
buildings were stuccoed at the time of construction, 
others were stuccoed later for reasons of fashion or 
practicality. As such, it is likely that this stucco has 
acquired significance over time, as part of the history 
and evolution of a building. Thus, even later, non­
historic stucco should be retained in most instances; 
and similar logic dictates that new stucco should not be 
applied to a historic building that was not stuccoed 
previously. When repairing historic stucco, the new 
stucco shou ld duplicate the old as closely as possible in 
strength, composition, color and texture. 
Mixes for Repair of Historic Stucco 
Historic stucco mixes varied a great deal region­
ally, depending as they did on the availability of 
local materials. There are probably almost as 
many mixes that can be used for repair of historic 
stucco as there are historic stucco buildings. For 
this reason it is recommended that at least a rudi­
mentary analysis of the existing historic stucco be 
carried out in order to determine its general pro­
portions and primary ingredients. However, if 
this is not possible, or if test results are inconclu­
sive, the following mixes are provided as refer­
ence. Many of the publications listed under 
"Selecte d Reading" include a variety of stucco 
mixes and should also be consulted for additional 
guidance. 
Materials Specifications should conform to those 
contained in Preservation Briefs 2: Repainting Mortar 
Joints in Historic Brick Buildings, and are as follows: 
• Lime should conform to ASTM C-207, Type S, 
Hydrated Lime for Masonry Purposes.
• Sand should conform to ASTM C-144 to assure 
proper gradation and freedom from impurities. 
Sand, or other type of aggregate, should match 
the original as closely as possible. 
• Cement should conform to ASTM C-150, Type 
II (white, non-staining) , portland cement. 
• Water should be fresh, clean and potable. 
• If hair or fiber is used, it should be goat or cattle 
hair, or pure manilla fiber of good quality, 1/2" 
to 2" in length, clean, and free of dust, dirt, oil, 
grease or other impurities. 
• Rules to remember: More lime will make the 
mixture more plastic, but stucco mortar with a 
very large proportion of lime to sand is more 
likely to crack because of greater shrinkage; it is 
also weaker and slower to set. More sand or 
aggregate, will minimize shrinkage, but make 
the mixture harder to trowel smooth, and will 
weaken the mortar. 
Soft Lime Stucco (suitable for application to 
buildings dating from 1700-1850) 
A.J. Downing's Recipe for Soft Lime Stucco 
1 part lime 
2 parts sand 
(A.J. Downing, "The Architecture of Country Houses;' 1850) 
Vieux Carre Masonry Maintenance Guidelines 
Base Coa ts (2): 
1 part by volume hydrat ed lime 
3 parts by volume aggregate [sand]-size to match original 
6 pounds /cubic yards hair or fiber 
Water to form a workable mix. 
Finish Coat: 
1 part by volume hydrated lime 
3 parts aggregate [sandJ-size to match original 
Water to form a workable mix. 
Note: No portland cement is recommended in this mix, but if 
it is needed to increase the workability of the mix and to de­
crease the set ting time, the amount of portland cement added 
should never exceed 1 part to 12 parts lime a nd sa nd . 
("Vieux Carre Masonry Maintenance Guidelines," June , 1980.) 
"Materials for Soft Brick Mortar and for Soft Stucco" 
5 gallons hydrated lime 
10 gallons sand 
1 quart white, non -stai nin g portland cement (1 cup only for 
pointing) 
Water to form a workable mix. 
(Koch and Wilson, Architects , New Orleans , Louisiana, Febru­
ary, 1980) 
Mix for Repairof Traditional Natural Cement or Hy­
draulic Lime Stucco 
part by volume hydrat ed lime 
2 parts by volume white portland cement 
3 parts by volume fine mason's sa nd 
If hydraulic lime is available, it may be used instead of lime­
cement blends. 
("Conservation Techniques for the Repair of Histori cal Orna­
mental Exterior Stucco, January, 1990) 
Early-twentieth century Portland Cement Stucco 
1 part portland cement 
2 1/2 parts sand 
Hydrated lime = to not more than 15% of the cement 's vol­
ume 
Water to form a workable mix. 
The same basic mix was used for all coats, but the finish coat 
generally conta ined more lime than the undercoats. ("Illinois 
Preservation Series No. 2: Stucco," January, 1980) 
American Portland Cement Stucco Specifications 
(c. 1929) 
Base Coats: 
5 pounds, dry, hydrated lime 
1 bag portland cement (94 lbs.) 
Not less than 3 cubic feet (3 bags) sand (passed through a #8
screen) 
Water to make a workable mix. 
Finish Coat: 
Use WHITE portland cement in the mix in the same propor ­
tions as above. 
To color the stucco add not more than 10 pounds pigment for 
each bag of cement con tained in the mix. 
15

Selected Reading 
Ashurst, John , and Nicola Ashurst. Practical Building Conservation,
English heritage Technical Handbook, Volume 3. Mortars, Plasters and 
Renders. New York: Halsted Press, 1988. 
Co nway, Brian D. ll/i11ois Preseroation Series Number 2: Stucco. 
Sp ringfield , IL: Illinois Department of Conservation, Division of 
Historic Sites, 1980. 
Grimm er, Anne E. Keeping it Clean: Removing Exterior Dirt, Paint, 
Stni11s a11d Graffiti from Historic Masonry Buildings. Washington , 
D.C.: National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior , 1988. 
Hodg so n, Frederick T. Plaster and Plastering. Mortars and Cements, How 
to Make, and How to Use ... with An Illustrated Glossary of Terms. 
New York: The Industrial Publication Company, 1901. 
John so n, LeRoy, Jr. (editor) . Handbook of Maintenance Techniques for 
Building Conservation in the Strand Historic District, Galveston, Texas. 
(Revised edition originally published in 1980 as Preseroation 
Maintenance Ha11dbook, prepared by Michael Emrick, AJA, for the 
Galveston Historical Foundation.) Austin, TX: Texas Historical 
Co mmission, 1984. 
Jower s, Walter. "Bungalow Building Materials: How to Repair 
Stucco." The Old-House Journal. Vol. Xlll, No. 4 (May 1985), pp. 
80-83 . 
MacDonald , Marylee. Preseroation Briefs 21: Repairing Historic Flat 
Plaster-Walls and Ceilings. Washington , D.C.: National Park Service , 
U.S. Department of the Interior , 1989. 
Mack, Robert C., AIA, de Teel Patterson Tiller, and James S. Askins . 
Preseroatio11 Briefs 2: Repainting Mortar Joints in Historic Brick 
Buildings. Washington , D.C.: National Park Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 1980. 
McKee, Harley J., FAIA. Introduction to Early American Masonry-Stone, 
Brick, Mortar and Plaster. Washington, D.C.: National Trust for 
Historic Preservation and Columbia University, 1973. 
Matero, Frank G., Mary Hardy , Antonio Rava and Joel Snodgrass . 
Conseroalio11 Techniques for the Repair of Historical Ornamental Exterior 
St11cco. (With a Case Study for the Repair of the Cabildo Pedimental 
Sculpture). Report prepared for the Division of Historic 
Preservation, Office of Cultural Development, Louisiana 
Department of Culture, Recreation and Development by The 
Center for Preservation Research, Columbia University, New York. 
January 1990. 
16 
Portland Cement Plaster (Stucco) Manual. Skokie, IL: Portland Cement 
Association, 1980. 
Van Den Branden, F. , and Thomas L. Hartsell . Plastering Skills. 
Second edition . Homewood , IL: American Technical Publishers, 
Inc., 1984. 
Vieux Carre Masonry Maintenance Guidelines. Revised from the initial 
report prepared by Mary L. Oehrlein in 1977. New Orleans, LA: 
Vieux Carre Commission, 1980. 
Whitewash & Coldwater Paints. Bulletin No. 304-G. Washington , D.C.: 
National Lime Association , 1955. 
Worsham , Gibson. "Exterior Plaster Restoration at the Lord Morton 
House , Lexington , Kentucky ." Association for Preseroation Technology 
Bulletin. Vol. Xlll, No. 4 (1981), pp. 27-33 . 
Acknowledgements 
The auth or gratefully acknowledges the technical expertise contributed to the 
preparation of this publication by Gilbert Wolf, National Plastering Industries ; 
Walter Jowers; Brian Conway, Michigan Bureau of History; and master 
plasterer, Lawrence Ring, Sr. In addition, invaluable comments were provided 
by Michael Auer, Charles Fisher, Lauren Meier, Sharon Park, and Kay Weeks, 
professional staff of the Technical Preservation Services Branch, National Park 
Service; professional staff of the Cultural Resources program , Mid-Atlantic 
Regional Office, National Park Service; and S. Elizabeth Sasser of the 
Williamsport Preservation Training Center, National Park Service . 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the 
Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic 
properties . Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be directed to 
H. Ward Jandl, Chief, Technical Preservation Services Branch , Preservation 
Assistance Division , National Park Service , P.O. Box 37127, Washington , D.C. 
20013-7127. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced with out 
penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National Park 
Service are appreciated . 
October 1990 
Cover Photograph: St. James Church, Goose Creek, Berkeley 
County, South Carolina (1713-1719), is constructed of brick 
covered with stucco. Although much restored, it is notable 
for its ornamental stucco detailing, including rusticated 
quoins, cherub head "keystones" above the windows, flaming 
hearts, and a pelican in piety-symbol of the sacrament, in 
the pediment over the front door. Photo: Gary Hume. 