U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
31 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Mothballing Historic Buildings 
Sharon C. Park, AlA 
When all means of finding a productive use for a historic 
building have been exhausted or when funds are not 
currently available to put a deteriorating structure into a 
useable condition, it may be necessary to close up the 
building temporarily to protect it from the weather as well 
as to secure it from vandalism . This process, known as 
mothballing, can be a necessary and effective means of 
protecting the building while planning the property's future , 
or raising money for a preservation, rehabilitation or 
restoration project. If a vacant property has been declared 
unsafe by building officials, stabilization and mothballing 
may be the only way to protect it from demolition . 
This Preservation Brief focuses on the steps needed to "de­
activate" a property for an extended period of time. The 
project team will usually consist of an architect , historian, 
preservation specialist, sometimes a structural engineer, and 
a contractor. Mothballing should not be done without 
careful planning to ensure that needed physical repairs are 
made prior to securing the building. The steps discussed in 
this Brief can protect buildings for periods of up to ten years; 
long-term success will also depend on continued, although 
somewhat limited, monitoring and maintenance. For all but 
the simplest projects, hiring a team of preservation 
specialists is recommended to assess the specific needs of the 
structure and to develop an effective mothballing program. 
A vacant historic building cannot survive indefinitely in a 
boarded-up condition, and so even marginal interim uses 
where there is regular activity and monitoring, such as a 
caretaker residence or non-flammable storage, are generally 
preferable to mothballing. In a few limited cases when the 
vacant building is in good condition and in a location where 
it can be watched and checked regularly, closing and locking 
the door, setting heat levels at just 
above freezing, and securing the 
windows may provide sufficient 
protection for a period of a few years. 
But if long-term mothballing is the 
only remaining option, it must be 
done properly (see fig. 1 & 2). This 
will require stabilization of the 
exterior, properly designed security 
protection, generally some form of 
interior ventilation - either through 
mechanical or natural air exchange 
systems - and continued maintenance 
and surveillance monitoring. 
Figure 1. Proper mothballing treatment: This building has been successfully mothballed for 10 years 
because the roof and walls were repaired and structurally stabilized, ventilation louvers were added, and 
the property is maintained. Photo: Charles E. Fisher, NPS. 
Comprehensive mothballing 
programs are generally expensive and 
may cost 10% or more of a modest 
rehabilitation budget. However, the 
money spent on well-planned 
protective measures will seem small 
when amortized over the life of the 
resource. Regardless of the location 
and condition of the property or the 
funding available, the following 9 
steps are involved in properly 
mothballing a building: 
1 

2 
to be structurally unsound until the 
condition of the structure can be fully 
assessed (see fig. 3). If pigeon or bat 
droppings , friable asbestos or other 
health hazards are present, precautions 
must be taken to wear the appropriate 
safety equipment when first inspecting 
the building. Consideration should be 
given to hiring a firm specializing in 
hazardous waste removal if these 
highly toxic elements are found in the 
building. 
Figure 2. Improper treatment: Boarding up without adequate ventilation, lack of maintenance, and 
neglect of this property have accelerated deterioration. Photo; NPS file. 
Documenting and recording the 
building. Documenting a building's 
history is important because evidence 
of its true age and architectural 
significance may not be readily 
evident. The owner should check with 
the State Historic Preservation Office 
or local preservation commission for 
assistance in researching the building . 
If the building has never been 
researched for listing in the National 
Register of Historic Places or other 
historic registers, then, at a minimum , 
the following should be determined : 
Documentation 
1. Document the architectural and historical significance of 
the building. 
2. Prepare a condition assessment of the building . 
Stabilization 
3. Structurally stabilize the building, based on a 
professional condition assessment. 
4. Exterminate or control pests, including termites and 
rodents. 
5. Protect the exterior from moisture penetration . 
Mothballing 
6. Secure the building and its component features to 
reduce vandalism or break-ins . 
7. Provide adequate ventilation to the interior . 
8. Secure or modify utilities and mechanical systems. 
9. Develop and implement a maintenance and 
monitoring plan for protection . 
These steps will be discussed in sequence below. 
Documentation and stabilization are critical components 
of the process and should not be skipped over. 
Mothballing measures should not result in permanent 
damage, and so each treatment should be weighed in 
terms of its reversibility and its overall benefit. 
Documentation 
Documenting the historical significance and physical 
condition of the property will provide information 
necessary for setting priorities and allocating funds . 
The project team should be cautious when first entering 
the structure if it has been vacant or is deteriorated . It 
may be advisable to shore temporarily areas appearing 
• The overall historical significance of 
the property and dates of construction; 
• the chronology of alterations or additions and their 
approximate dates; and, 
• types of building materials, construction techniques , and 
any unusual detailing or regional variations of 
craftsmanship . 
Old photographs can be helpful in identifying early or 
original features that might be hidden under modern 
materials. On a walk-through, the architect, historian , or 
preservation specialist should identify the architecturally 
significant elements of the building, both inside and out 
(see fig.4). 
Figure 3. Buildings seriously damaged by storms or deterioration may need to be 
braced before architectural evaluations can be made. Jethro Coffin House. Photo: 
John Milner Architects. 

Figure 4. Documenting the bUl1ding's history, preparing schematic 
plans, and assessing the condition of the building wl1/ provide necessary 
information on which to set priorities for stabilization and repair prior to 
securing the building. Photo: Frederick Lindstrom, HABS. 
By understanding the history of the resource, significant 
elements, even though deteriorated, may be spared the 
trash pile. For that reason alone, any materials removed 
from the building or site as part of the stabilization effort 
should be carefully scrutinized and, if appearing historic , 
should be photographed, tagged with a number, 
inventioried, and safely stored, preferably in the building, 
for later retrieval (see fig. 5). 
A site plan and schematic building floor plans can be used 
to note important information for use when the building is 
eventually preserved, restored, or rehabilitated. Each room 
should be given a number and notations added to the plans 
regarding the removal of important features to storage or 
recording physical treatments undertaken as part of the 
stabilization or repair . 
Because a mothballing project may extend over a long 
period of time, with many different people involved, clear 
records should be kept and a building file established. 
Copies of all important data, plans, photographs, and lists 
of consultants or contractors who have worked on the 
property should be added to the file as the job progresses . 
Figure 5. Loose or detached elements should be identified, tagged and 
stored, preferably on site. Photo: NPS files. 
Recording all actions taken on the building will be helpful 
in the future. 
The project coordinator should keep the building file 
updated and give duplicate copies to the owner. A list of 
emergency numbers, including the number of the key 
holder, should be kept at the entrance to the building or on 
a security gate, in a transparent vinyl sleeve. 
Preparing a condition assessment of the building. A 
condition assessment can provide the owner with an 
accurate overview of the current condition of the property. 
If the building is deteriorated or if there are Significant 
interior architectural elements that will need special 
protection during the mothballing years, undertaking a 
condition assessment is highly recommended, but it need 
not be exhaustive. 
A modified condition assessment, prepared by an architect 
or preservation specialist, and in some case a structural 
engineer, will help set priorities for repairs necessary to 
stabilize the property for both the short and long-term. It 
will evaluate the age and condition of the following major 
elements: foundations; structural systems; exterior 
materials; roofs and gutters; exterior porches and steps; 
interior finishes; staircases; plumbing, electrical, mechanical 
systems; special features such as chimneys; and site 
drainage. 
To record existing conditions of the building and site, it 
will be necessary to clean debris from the building and to 
remove unwanted or overgrown vegetation to expose 
foundations . The interior should be emptied of its 
furnishing (unless provisions are made for mothballing 
these as well), all debris removed, and the interior swept 
with a broom. Building materials too deteriorated to repair, 
or which have come detached, such as moldings, balusters, 
and decorative plaster, and which can be used to guide later 
preservation work, should be tagged, labeled and saved. 
Photographs or a videotape of the exterior and all interior 
spaces of the resource will provide an invaluable record of 
lias is" conditions. If a Videotape is made, oral commentary 
can be provided on the significance of each space and 
architectural feature. If 35mm photographic prints or slides 
are made, they should be numbered, dated, and 
appropriately identified. Photographs should be cross­
referenced with the room numbers on the schematic plans. 
A systematic method for photographing should be 
developed; for example, photograph each wall in a room 
and then take a corner shot to get floor and ceiling portions 
in the picture. Photograph any unusual details as well as 
examples of each window and door type . 
For historic buildings, the great advantage of a condition 
assessment is that architectural features, both on the 
exterior as well as the interior, can be rated on a scale of 
their importance to the integrity and significance of the 
building. Those features of the highest priority should 
receive preference when repairs or protection measures are 
outlined as part of the mothballing process. Potential 
problems with protecting these features should be 
identified so that appropriate interim solutions can be 
selected. For example, if a building has always been heated 
and if murals, decorative plaster walls, or examples of 
patterned wall paper are identified as highly significant, 
then special care should be taken to regulate the interior 
climate and to monitor it adequately during the 
3 

4 
mothballing years. This might require retaining electrical 
service to provide minimal heat in winter, fan exhaust in 
summer, and humidity controls for the interior. 
Stabilization 
Stabilization as part of a mothballing project involves 
correcting deficiencies to slow down the deterioration of the 
building while it is vacant. Weakened structural members 
that might fail altogether in the forthcoming years must be 
braced or reinforced; insects and other pests removed and 
discouraged from returning; and the building protected 
from moisture damage both by weatherizing the exterior 
envelope and by handling water run-off on the site. Even if 
a modified use or caretaker services can eventually be 
found for the building, the following steps should be 
addressed. 
Structurally stabilizing the building. While bracing may 
have been required to make the building temporarily safe 
for inspection, the condition assessment may reveal areas of 
hidden structural damage. Roofs, foundations, walls, 
interior framing, porches and dormers all have structural 
components that may need added reinforcement. 
Structural stabilization by a qualified contractor should be 
done under the direction of a structural engineer or a 
preservation specialist to ensure that the added weight of 
the reinforcement can be sustained by the building and that 
the new members do not harm historic finishes (see fig. 6). 
Any major vertical post added during the stabilization 
should be properly supported and, if necessary, taken to the 
ground and underpinned. 
Fi$,ure 6. Interior bracing which will last the duration of the mothballing 
WIll protect weakened structural members. Jethro Coffin House. Photo: 
John Milner Architects. 
If the building is in a northern climate, then the roof 
framing must be able to hold substantial snow loads. 
Bracing the roof at the ridge and mid-points should be 
considered if sagging is apparent. Likewise, interior 
framing around stair openings or under long ceiling spans 
should be investigated. Underpinning or bracing structural 
piers weakened by poor drainage patterns may be a good 
precaution as well. Damage caused by insects, moisture, or 
from other causes should be repaired or reinforced and, if 
possible, the source of the damage removed . If features 
such as porches and dormers are so severely deteriorated 
that they must be removed, they should be documented, 
photographed, and portions salvaged for storage prior to 
removal. 
If the building is in a southern or humid climate and 
termites or other insects are a particular problem, the 
foundation and floor framing should be inspected to ensure 
that there are no major structural weaknesses. This can 
usually be done by observation from the crawl space or 
basement. For those structures where this is not possible, it 
may be advisable to lift selective floor boards to expose the 
floor framing. If there is evidence of pest damage, 
particularly termites, active colonies should be treated and 
the structural members reinforced or replaced, if necessary . 
Controlling pests. Pests can be numerous and include 
squirrels, raccoons, bats, mice, rats, snakes, termites, moths, 
beetles, ants, bees and wasps, pigeons, and other birds. 
Termites, beetles, and carpenter ants destroy wood. Mice, 
too, gnaw wood as well as plaster, insulation, and electrical 
wires. Pigeon and bat droppings not only damage wood 
finishes but create a serious and sometimes deadly health 
hazard. 
If the property is infested with animals or insects, it is 
important to get them out and to seal off their access to the 
building. If necessary, exterminate and remove any nests or 
hatching colonies. Chimney flues may be closed off with 
exterior grade plywood caps, properly ventilated, or 
protected with framed wire screens. Existing vents, grills, 
and louvers in attics and crawl spaces should be screened 
with bug mesh or heavy duty wire, depending on the type 
of pest being controlled. It may be advantageous to have 
damp or infected wood treated with insecticides (as 
permitted by each state) or preservatives, such as borate, to 
slow the rate of deterioration during the time that the 
building is not in use. 
Securing the exterior envelope from moisture penetration. 
It is important to protect the exterior envelope from 
moisture penetration before securing the building. Leaks 
from deteriorated or damaged roofing, from around 
windows and doors, or through deteriorated materials, as 
well as ground moisture from improper site run-off or 
rising damp at foundations, can cause long-term damage to 
interior finishes and structural systems. Any serious 
deficiencies on the exterior, identified in the condition 
assessment, should be addressed. 
To the greatest extent possible, these weatherization efforts 
should not harm historic materials. The project budget may 
not allow deteriorated features to be fully repaired or 
replaced in-kind . Non-historic or modem materials may be 
used to cover historic surfaces temporarily, but these 
treatments should not destroy valuable evidence necessary 
for future preservation work. Temporary modifications 
should be as visually compatible as possible with the 
historic building. 
Roofs are often the most vulnerable elements on the 
building exterior and yet in some ways they are the easiest 
element to stabilize for the long term, if done correctly. 
"Quick fix" solutions, such as tar patches on slate roofs, 
should be avoided as they will generally fail within a year 
or so and may accelerate damage by trapping moisture. 
They are difficult to undo later when more permanent 
repairs are undertaken. Use of a tarpaulin over a leaking 
roof should be thought of only as a very temporary 

Figure 7. Non-historic materials are appropriate for mothballing projects when they are used to protect 
historic evidence remaining for future preservation. This lightweight aluminum channel frame and 
roofing covers the historic wooden shingle roof. Galvanized mesh panels secure the window openings 
from intrusion by raccoons and other unwanted guests. Photo: Williamsport Preservation Training 
Center, NPS. 
Figure 8. Appropriate mortar mixes should be 
used when masonry repairs are undertaken. In 
this case, a soft lime based moriar is used as an 
infill between the brick and wooden elements. 
When full repairs are made during the 
restoration phase, this soft moriar can easily be 
removed and missing bricks replaced. 
emergency repair because it is often blown off by the wind 
in a subsequent storm. 
If the existing historic roof needs moderate repairs to make 
it last an additional ten years, then these repairs should be 
undertaken as a first priority. Replacing cracked or missing 
shingles and tiles, securing loose flashing, and reanchoring 
gutters and downspouts can often be done by a local 
roofing contractor. If the roof is in poor condition, but the 
historic materials and configuration are important , a new 
temporary roof, such as a lightweight aluminum channel 
system over the eXisting, might be considered (see fig. 7). If 
the roofing is so deteriorated that it must be replaced and a 
lightweight aluminum system is not affordable , various 
inexpensive options might be considered . These include 
covering the existing deteriorated roof with galvanized 
corrugated metal roofing panels, or 90 lb. rolled roofing, or 
a rubberized membrane (refer back to cover photo). These 
alternatives should leave as much of the historic sheathing 
and roofing in place as evidence for later preservation 
treatments. 
For masonry repairs, appropriate preservation approaches 
are essential. For example, if repointing deteriorated brick 
chimneys or walls is necessary to prevent serious moisture 
penetration while the building is mothballed , the mortar 
should match the historic mortar in composition , color, and 
tooling . The use of hard portland cement mortars or vapor­
impermeable waterproof coatings are not appropriate 
solutions as they can cause extensive damage and are not 
reversible treatments (see fig. 8). 
For wood siding that is deteriorated, repairs necessary to 
keep out moisture should be made; repainting is generally 
w arranted . Cracks around windows and doors can be 
beneficial in prOViding ventilation to the interior and so 
should only be caulked if needed to keep out bugs and 
moisture. For very deteriorated wall surfaces on wooden 
frame structures, it may be necessary to sheathe in plywood 
panels, but care should be taken to minimize installation 
damage by planning the location of the nailing or screw 
patterns or by installing panels over a frame of battens (see 
fig. 9). Generally, however, it is better to repair deteriorated 
features than to cover them over . 
Foundation damage may occur if water does not drain 
away from the building. Run-off from gutters and down­
spouts should be directed far away from the foundation 
wall by using long flexible extender pipes equal in length to 
twice the depth of the basement or crawl space . If under­
ground drains are susceptible to clogging, it is recommen­
ded that the downspouts be disconnected from the drain 
boot and attached to flexible piping. If gutters and down­
spouts are in bad condition, replace them with inexpensive 
aluminum units. 
Figure 9. Severely deteriorated wooden siding on a farm building has been 
covered over with painted plywood panels as a temporary measure to 
eliminate moisture penetration to the interior. Foundation vents and loose 
floor boards allow air to circulate inside. 
5 

6 
If there are no significant landscape or exposed archeo­
logical elements around the foundation, consideration 
should be given to regrading the site if there is a docu­
mented drainage problem (see fig. 10). If building up the 
grade, use a fiber mesh membrane to separate the new soil 
from the old and slope the new soil 6 to 8 feet (200 cm-266 
cm) away from the foundation making sure not to cover up 
the dampcourse layer or come into contact with skirting 
boards. To keep vegetation under control, put down a layer 
of 6 mil black polyethylene sheeting or fiber mesh matting 
covered with a 2"-4" (5-10 cm.) of washed gravel. If the 
building suffers a serious rising damp problem, it may be 
advisable to eliminate the plastic sheeting to avoid trapping 
ground moisture against foundations. 
Figure 10. Regrading around the Booker Tenement at Colonial Williams­
burg has protected the masonary foundation wall from excessive damp. 
This building has been successfully mothballed for over 10 years. Note the 
attic and basement vents, the temporary stairs, and the informative sign 
interpreting the history of this building. 
Mothballing 
The actual mothballing effort involves controlling the long­
term deterioration of the building while it is unoccupied as 
well as finding methods to protect it from sudden loss by 
fire or vandalism. This requires securing the building from 
unwanted entry, prOViding adequate ventilation to the 
interior, and shutting down or modifying existing utilities. 
Once the building is de-activated or secured, the long-term 
success will depend on periodic maintenance and 
surveillance monitoring. 
Securing the building from vandals, break-ins, and 
natural disasters. Securing the building from sudden loss 
is a critical aspect of mothballing. Because historic 
buildings are irreplaceable, it is vital that vulnerable entry 
points are sealed. If the building is located where fire and 
security service is available then it is highly recommeded 
that some form of monitoring or alarm devices be used. 
To protect decorative features, such as mantels, lighting 
fixtures, copper downspouts, iron roof cresting, or stained 
glass windows from theft or vandalism, it may be advisable 
to temporarily remove them to a more secure location if 
they cannot be adequately protected within the structure. 
Mothballed buildings are usually boarded up, particularly 
on the first floor and basement, to protect fragile glass 
windows from breaking and to reinforce entry points (see 
fig. 11). Infill materials for closing door and window 
openings include plywood, corrugated panels, metal grates, 
chain fencing, metal grills, and cinder or cement blocks (see 
fig. 12). The method of installation should not result in the 
destruction of the opening and all associated sash, doors, 
and frames should be protected or stored for future reuse. 
Figure 11. Urban buildin.$.s often need additional protection from 
unwanted entry and graffiti. This commercial building uses painted 
plywood panels to cover expansive glass storefronts and chain link fencing 
is applied on top of the panels. The upper windows on the street sides have 
been covered and painted to resemble 19th century sash. Photo: Thomas 
Jester, NPS. 
Generally exterior doors are reinforced and provided with 
strong locks, but if weak historic doors would be damaged 
or disfigured by adding reinforcement or new locks, they 
may be removed temporarily and replaced with secure 
modem doors (see fig. 13). Alternatively, security gates in a 
new metal frame can be installed within existing door 
openings, much like a storm door, leaving the historic door 
in place. If plywood panels are installed over door 
openings, they should be screwed in place, as opposed to 
nailed, to avoid crowbar damage each time the panel is 
removed. This also reduces pounding vibrations from 
hammers and eliminates new nail holes each time the panel 
is replaced. 
For windows, the most common security feature is the 
closure of the openings; this may be achieved with wooden 
or pre-formed panels or, as needed, with metal sheets or 
concrete blocks. Plywood panels, properly installed to 
protect wooden frames and properly ventilated, are the 
preferred treatment from a preservation standpoint. 
There are a number of ways to set insert plywood panels 
into windows openings to avoid damage to frame and sash 
(see fig. 14). One common method is to bring the upper 
and lower sash of a double hung unit to the mid-point of 
the opening and then to install pre-cut plywood panels 
using long carriage bolts anchored into horizontal wooden 
bracing, or strong backs, on the inside face of the window . 
Another means is to build new wooden blocking frames set 
into deeply recessed openings, for example in an industrial 
mill or warehouse, and then to affix the plywood panel to 

the blocking frame . If sash must be removed prior to 
installing panels, they should be labeled and stored safely 
within the building . 
Plywood panels are usually 1/2"-3/4" (1.25-1.875 cm.) 
thick and made of exterior grade stock, such as COX, or 
Figure 12. First floor openings have been filled with cinderblocks and 
doors, window sash and frames have been removed for safe keeping. Note 
the security light over the windows and the use of a security metal door 
with heavy duty locks. Photo: H. Ward Jandl, NPS . 
Figure 13. Ifhistoric doors would be damaged by adding extra locks, they 
should be removed and stored and new security doors added. At this 
lighthouse, the historic door has been replaced with a new door (seen both 
inside and outside) with an inset vent and new deadbolt locks. The heavy 
historic hinges have not been damaged. Photo: Williamsport Preservation 
Training Center, NPS. 
marine grade plywood. They should be painted to protect 
them from delamination and to provide a neater 
appearance. These panels may be painted to resemble . 
operable windows or treated decoratively (see fig. 15). With 
extra attention to detail, the plywood panels can be 
Figure 14. A: Plan detail showing plywood security panel anchored with 
carriage bolts through to the inside horizontal bracing, or strong backs. 
B: Plan detail showing section of plywood window panel attached to a 
new pressure treated wood frame set within the masonry opening. 
Ventilation should be included whenever possible or necessary. 
Figure 15. Painting trompe l'oeil scenes on plywood panels is a 
neighborhood friendly device. In addition, the small sign at the bottom left 
comer gives information for contacting the organization responsible for 
the care of the mothballed building. Photo: Lee H. Nelson, F AlA. 
7 

---,,.- ·------rr~'t-·----,I-,I-­u __ 
--
ftxed into 
,-II Lo.., .. ah 
----
In MCU" fr8me 
InterkM' 
trimmed out with muntin strips to give a shadow line 
simulating multi-lite windows. This level of detail is a good 
indication that the building is protected and valued by the 
owner and the community. 
If the building has shutters, simply close the shutters and 
secure them from the interior (see fig. 16). If the building 
had shutters historically, but they are missing, it may be 
appropriate to install new shutters, even in a modem 
material, and secure them in the closed position . Louvered 
shutters will help with interior ventilation if the sash are 
propped open behind the shutters. 
Figure 16. Historic louvered shutters make excellent security closures 
with passive ventilation. 
There is some benefit from keeping windows unboarded if 
security is not a problem. The building will appear to be 
occupied, and the natural air leakage around the windows 
will assist in ventilating the interior. The presence of 
natural light will also help when periodic inspections are 
made. Rigid polycarbonate clear storm glazing panels may 
be placed on the window exterior to protect against glass 
breakage . Because the sun's ultraviolet rays can cause 
fading of floor finishes and wall surfaces, filtering pull 
shades or inexpensive curtains may be options for reducing 
this type of deterioration for significant interiors. Some 
acrylic sheeting comes with built-in ultraviolet filters. 
Securing the building from catastrophic destruction from 
fire, lightning, or arson will require additional security 
devices. Lightning rods properly grounded should be a 
first consideration if the building is in an area susceptible to 
lightning storms. A high security fence should also be 
installed if the property cannot be monitored closely. These 
interventions do not require a power source for operation. 
Since many buildings will not maintain electrical power, 
there are some devices available using battery packs, such 
as intrusion alarms, security lighting, and smoke detectors 
which through audible hom alarms can alert nearby 
neighbors. These battery packs must be replaced every 3 
months to 2 years, depending on type and usage. In 
combination with a cellular phone, they can also provide 
some level of direct communication with police and fire 
departments. 
If at all possible, new temporary electric service should be 
provided to the building (see fig. 17). Generally a telephone 
Figure 17. Security systems are very important for mothballed buildings 
if they are located where fire and security services are available. A 
temporary electric service with battery back-up has been installed in this 
bul1ding. Intrusion alarms and ionization smoke/fire detectors are wired 
directly to the nearby security service. 
line is needed as well . A hard wired security system for 
intrusion and a combination rate-of-rise and smoke detector 
can send an immediate signal for help directly to the fire 
department and security service. Depending on whether or 
not heat will be maintained in the building, the security 
system should be designed accordingly . Some systems 
cannot work below 32°P (OOe). Exterior lighting set on a 
timer, photo electric sensor, or a motion/infra-red detection 
device provides additional security. 
Providing adequate ventilation to the interior . Once the 
exterior has been made weathertight and secure, it is 
essential to provide adequate air exchange throughout the 
building . Without adequate air exchange, humidity may 
rise to unsafe levels, and mold, rot, and insect infestation 
are likely to thrive (see fig. 18). The needs of each historic 
resource must be individually evaluated because there are 
so many variables that affect the performance of each 
interior space once the building has been secured. A 
Figure 18. Heavy duty wooden slated louvers were custom fabricated to 
replace the deteriomted lower sash. The upper sash were rebuilt to retain 
the historic appearance and to allow light into this vacant historic 
building. Refer back to Fig. 1 for a view of the building. Photo: Charles E. 
Fisher, NPS. Drawing by Thomas Vitanza. 

mechanical engineer or a specialist in interior climates 
should be consulted, particularly for buildings with intact 
and significant interiors. In some circumstances, providing 
heat during the winter, even at a minimal 45° F (7°C), and 
utilizing forced-fan ventilation in summer will be 
recommended and will require retaining electrical service. 
For masonry buildings it is often helpful to keep the 
interior temperature above the spring dew point to avoid 
damaging condensation. In most buildings it is the need 
for summer ventilation that outweighs the winter 
requirements. 
Many old buildings are inherently leaky due to loose-fitting 
windows and floorboards and the lack of insulation . The 
level of air exchange needed for each building, however, 
will vary according to geographic location, the building's 
construction, and its general size and configuration. 
There are four critical climate zones when looking at the 
type and amount of interior ventilation needed for a closed 
up building: hot and dry (southwestern states); cold and 
damp (Pacific northwest and northeastern states); 
temperate and humid (Mid-Atlantic states, coastal areas); 
and hot and humid (southern states and the tropics). (See 
fig. 19 for a chart outlining guidance on ventilation .) 
Once closed up, a building interior will still be affected by 
the temperature and humidity of the exterior . Without 
proper ventilation, moisture from condensation may occur 
and cause damage by wetting plaster, peeling paint, 
staining woodwork, warping floors, and in some cases even 
causing freeze thaw damage to plaster. If moist conditions 
persist in a property, structural damage can result from rot 
or returning insects attracted to moist conditions. Poorly 
mothballed masonry buildings, particularly in damp and 
humid zones have been so damaged on the interior with 
just one year of unventilated closure that none of the 
interior finishes were salvageable when the buildings were 
rehabilitated. 
The absolute minimum air exchange for most mothballed 
buildings consists of one to four air exchanges every hour; 
one or two air exchanges per hour in winter and often twice 
that amount in summer. Even this minimal exchange may 
foster mold and mildew in damp climates, and so 
monitoring the property during the stabilization period and 
after the building has been secured will provide useful 
information on the effectiveness of the ventilation solution. 
There is no exact science for how much ventilation should 
be provided for each building. There are, however, some 
general rules of thumb. Buildings, such as adobe 
structures, located in hot and arid climates may need no 
additional ventilation if they have been well weatherized 
and no moisture is penetrating the interior. Also frame 
buildings with natural cracks and fissures for air infiltration 
may have a natural air exchange rate of 3 or 4 per hour, and 
so in arid as well as temperate climates may need no 
additional ventilation once secured. The most difficult 
VENTILATION GUIDANCE CHART 
CLIMATE AIR EXCHANGES VENTILA nON 
Temperature 
and 
Humidity 
Winter air 
exchange 
per hour 
Summer air 
exchange 
per hour 
Frame Buildings 
passive louvering 
Masonry Buildings 
passive louvering 
% of openings 
louvered 
% of openings 
louvered 
winter summer winter summer 
hot and dry 
Southwestern 
areas 
less than 1 less than 1 N/A N/A N/A N/A 
cold and damp 
Northeastern & 
Pacific northwestern 
areas 
1 2-3 5% 10% 10% 30% 
temperate/humid 
id-Atlantic & 
coastal areas 
2 3-4 10% 20% 20% 40% 
hot and humid 
Southern states & 
tropical areas 
3 4 
or more 
20% 30% 40% 
or more 
80% 
Masonry Buildings 
fan combination 
one fan + 
% louvered 
summer 
N/A 
20% 
30%
40% 
or more 
Figure 19. This is a general guide for the amount of louvering which might be expected for a medium size residential structure with an average amount of 
windows, attic, and crawl space ventilation . There is currently research being done on effective air exchanges, but each project should be evaluated 
individually . It will be noticed from the chart that summer louvering requirements can be reduced with the use of an exhaust fan. Masonry buildings need 
more ventilation than frame buidings. Chart prepared by Sharon C. Park, AlA and Ernest A. Conrad, PE. 
9 

10 
buildings to adequately ventilate without resorting to 
extensive louvering and/ or mechanical exhaust fan systems 
are masonry buildings in humid climates. Even with 
basement and attic vent grills, a masonry building many 
not have more than one air exchange an hour. This is 
generally unacceptable for summer conditions. For these 
buildings, almost every window opening will need to be 
fitted out with some type of passive, louvered ventilation . 
Depending on the size, plan configuration, and ceiling 
heights of a building, it is often necessary to have louvered 
opening equivalent to 5%-10% of the square footage of each 
floor. For example, in a humid climate, a typicaI20'x30' 
(6.1m x 9.1m) brick residence with 600 sq. ft.(55.5 sq.m) of 
floor space and a typical number of windows, may need 30-
60 sq. ft.(2.75sq.m-5.5 sq. m) of louvered openings per floor. 
With each window measuring 3'x5'(.9m x 1.5 m) or 15 sq. ft. 
(1.3 sq.m), the equivalent of 2 to 4 windows per floor may 
need full window louvers. 
Small pre-formed louvers set into a plywood panel or small 
slit-type registers at the base of inset panels generally 
cannot provide enough ventilation in most moist climates to 
offset condensation, but this approach is certainly better 
than no louvers at all. Louvers should be located to give 
cross ventilation, interior doors should be fixed ajar at least 
4" (IOcm) to allow air to circulate, and hatches to the attic 
should be left open . 
Monitoring devices which can record internal temperature 
and humidity levels can be invaluable in determining if the 
internal climate is remaining stable . These units can be 
powered by portable battery packs or can be wired into 
electric service with data downloaded into laptop 
computers periodically (see fig. 20). This can also give long­
term information throughout the mothballing years . If it is 
determined that there are inadequate air exchanges to keep 
interior moisture levels under control, additional passive 
ventilation can be increased, or, if there is electric service, 
mechanical exhaust fans can be installed . One fan in a 
small to medium sized building can reduce the amount of 
louvering substantially. 
Figure 20. Portable monitors used to record temperature and humidity 
conditions in historic buildings during mothballing can help identify 
ventilation needs. This data can be downloaded directly into a lap top 
computer on site. These monitors are especially helpful over the long term 
for buildings with significant historic interiors or which are remaining 
furnished. If interiors are remaining damp or humid, additional 
ventilation should be added or the source of moisture controlled. 
If electric fans are used, study the environmental conditions 
of each property and determine if the fans should be 
controlled by thermostats or automatic timers . 
Humidistats, designed for enclosed climate control systems, 
generally are difficult to adapt for open mothballing 
conditions . How the system will draw in or exhaust air is 
also important. It may be determined that it is best to bring 
dry air in from the attic or upper levels and force it out 
through lower basement windows (see fig. 21). If the 
basement is damp, it may be best to zone it from the rest of 
the building and exhaust its air separately . Additionally, 
less humid day air is preferred over damper night air, and 
this can be controlled with a timer switch mounted to the 
fan. 
The type of ventilation should not undermine the security 
of the building. The most secure installations use custom­
made grills well anchored to the window frame, often set in 
plywood security panels . Some vents are formed using 
heavy millwork louvers set into existing window openings 
(refer back to fig.18). For buildings where security is not a 
primary issue, where the interior is modest, and where 
there has been no heat for a long time, it may be possible to 
use lightweight galvanized metal grills in the window 
openings (refer back to fig.7). A cost effective grill can be 
made from the expanded metal mesh lath used by 
plasterers and installed so that the mesh fins shed rainwater 
to the exterior . 
Securing mechanical systems and utilities. At the outset, 
it is important to determine which utilities and services, 
such as electrical or telephone lines, are kept and which are 
cut off. As long as these services will not constitute a fire 
Figure 21. This electric thermostat/humidistat mounted in the attic vent 
controls a modified ducted air/fan system. The unit uses temporary 
exposed sheet metal ducts to pull air through the building and exhaust it 
out of the basement. For over ten years this fan system in combination 
with 18" x 18" preformed louvers in selective windows has kept the 
interior dry and With good air exchanges. 

hazard, it is advisable to retain those which will help 
protect the property. Since the electrical needs will be 
limited in a vacant building, it is best to install a new 
temporary electric line and panel (100 amp) so that all the 
wiring is new and exposed. This will be much safer for the 
building, and allows easy access for reading the meter (see 
fig. 22). 
Most heating systems are shut down in long term 
mothballing . For furnaces fueled by oil, there are two 
choices for dealing with the tank. Either it must be filled to 
the top with oil to eliminate condensation or it should be 
drained. If it remains empty for more than a year, it will 
likely rust and not be reusable. Most tanks are drained if a 
newer type of system is envisioned when the building is 
put back into service. Gas systems with open flames should 
be turned off unless there is regular maintenance and 
frequent surveillance of the property. Gas line,s are shut off 
by the utility company_ 
If a hot water radiator system is retained for low levels of 
heat, it generally must be modified to be a self-contained 
system and the water supply is capped at the meter. This 
Figure 22. All systems except temporary electric have been shut off at this 
residence which has been mothballed over 20 years. An electric meter and 
100 amp panel box have been set on a plywood panel at the front of the 
building. It is used for interior lightinS and various alarm systems. The 
building, however, is showing signs ot moisture problems with effIou­
rescent stains on the masonry indicating the need for gutter maintenance 
and additional ventz1ation for the interior. The vegetation on the walls, 
although picturesque, traps moisture and is damaging to the masonry. 
Photo: H. Ward Jandl, NPS. 
recirculating system protects the property from extensive 
damage from burst pipes. Water is replaced with a 
water / glycol mix and the reserve tank must also be filled 
with this mixture. This keeps the modified system from 
freezing, if there is a power failure. If water service is cut 
off, pipes should be drained. Sewerage systems will require 
special care as sewer gas is explosive. Either the traps must 
be filled with glycol or the sewer line should be capped off 
at the building line. 
Developing a maintenance and monitoring plan. While 
every effort may have been made to stabilize the property 
and to slow the deterioration of materials, natural disasters, 
storms, undetected leaks, and unwanted intrusion can still 
occur. A regular schedule for surveillance, maintenance, 
and monitoring should be established: (See fig. 23 for 
maintenance chart). 
MAINTENANCE CHART 
~iodic 
U regular drive by surveillance 
o check attic during stonns if possible 
monthly walk arounds 
o check entrances 
o o o 
check window panes for breakage 
mowing as required 
check for graffiti or vandalism 
enter every 3 months to air out 
o check for musty air
o check for moisture damage 
o check battery packs and monitoring 
equipment 
o check light bulbs 
o check for evidence of pest intrusion 
every 6 months; spring and fall 
o site clean-up; pruning and trimming 
o gutter and downspout check 
o check crawlspace for pests 
o clean out storm drains
every 12 months 
o maintenance contract inspections 
for equipment/utilities 
o check roof for loose or missing shingles 
o termite and pest inspection/treatment 
o exterior materials spot repair and touch up 
painting 
o remove bird droppings or other stains from 
exterior 
o check and update building file 
Figure 23. Maintenance Chart. Many of the tasks on the maintenance 
chart can be done by volunteer help or service contracts. Regular visits to 
the site wm help detect intrusion, storm damage, or poor water drainage. 
11 
The fire and police departments should be notified that the 
property will be vacant. A walk-through visit to familiarize 
these officials with the building's location, construction 
materials, and overall plan may be invaluable if they are 
called on in the future. 
The optimum schedule for surveillance 
visits to the property will depend on the 
location of the property and the number 
of people who can assist with these 
activities. The more frequent the visits 
to check the property, the sooner that 
water leaks or break-ins will be noticed. 
Also, the more frequently the building is 
entered, the better the air exchange. By 
keeping the site clear and the building in 
good repair, the community will know 
that the building has not been aband­
oned (see fig. 24) . The involvement of 
neighbors and community groups in 
caring for the property can ensure its 
protection from a variety of catastrophic 
circumstances. 
Service companies on a maintenance contract can provide 
yard, maintenance, and inspection services, and their 
reports or itemized bills reflecting work undertaken should 
be added to update the building file. 
The owner may utilize volunteers and 
service companies to undertake the 
work outlined in the maintenance chart. Figure 24. mothballed, a property must still be monitored and maintained. openings in this 
historic barn has been modified with a combination of wood louvers and metal mesh panels which require 
little maintenance. are regularly mowed, even inside the chain link security fence. 
Williamsport Preservation Training Center, 
Components of a Mothballing 
Document: Brearley House, New Jersey; story center 
hall plan house contains a high degree of integrity of 
circa 1761 materials and significant early 19th century 
additions. Deterioration was attributable to leaking roof, 
unstable masonry at gables and chimneys, deteriorating 
attic windows, poor site drainage, and partially detached 
gutters . Mothballing efforts are required for approxi­
mately years. 
Stabilize: Remove bat droppings from attic using great 
caution. Secure historic chimneys and gable ends with 
plywood panels. Do not take historic chimneys down . 
Reroof with asphalt shingles and reattach or add new 
gutters and downspouts. Add extenders to downspouts. 
Add bug screens to any ventilation areas. Add soil 
around foundation and slope to gain positive drain; do 
not excavate as this will disturb archeological evidence. 
Mothball: Install security fence around the property. 
Secure doors and windows with plywood panels 
exterior grade). Install preformed metal grills in 
basement and attic openings. Add surface mounted 
wiring for ionization smoke and fire detection with direct 
wire to police and fire departments. Shut off heat and 
drain pipes . Add window exhaust fan set on a 
tnermostatic control. Provide for periodic mOnitoring 
and maintenance of the property. 
Figure 25. Above is a summary of the tasks that were necessary in 
order to protect this significant property while restoration funds are 
raised. Photographs: Michael Mills; Ford Farewell Mills Gatsch 
Architects. 
a. A view showing the exterior of the house in its mothballed condition. 
b. panels stabilize the 
chimneys. Note the gable vents. 
c. exhaust fan has 
proof housing. 
12 

hazard, it is advisable to retain those which will help 
protect the property. Since the electrical needs will be 
limited in a vacant building, it is best to install a new 
temporary electric line and panel (100 amp) so that all the 
wiring is new and exposed. This will be much safer for the 
building, and allows easy access for reading the meter (see 
fig. 22). 
Most heating systems are shut down in long term 
mothballing . For furnaces fueled by oil, there are two 
choices for dealing with the tank. Either it must be filled to 
the top with oil to eliminate condensation or it should be 
drained. If it remains empty for more than a year, it will 
likely rust and not be reusable. Most tanks are drained if a 
newer type of system is envisioned when the building is 
put back into service. Gas systems with open flames should 
be turned off unless there is regular maintenance and 
frequent surveillance of the property. Gas are shut off 
by the utility 
If a hot water radiator system is retained for low levels of 
heat, it generally must be modified to be a self-contained 
system and the water supply is capped at the meter. This 
Figure 22. All systems except temporary electric have been shut off at this 
residence which has been mothballed over years. An electric meter and 
amp panel box have been set on a plywood panel at the front of the 
building. It is used for interior and various alarm systems. 
building, however, is showing signs ot moisture problems with 
regular drive by surveillance 
o check attic during 
The fire and police departments should be notified that the 
property will be vacant. A walk-through visit to familiarize 
these officials with the building's location, construction 
materials, and overall plan may be invaluable if they are 
called on in the future. 
The optimum schedule for surveillance 
visits to the property will depend on the 
location of the property and the number 
of people who can assist with these 
activities. The more frequent the visits 
to check the property, the sooner that 
water leaks or break-ins will be noticed. 
Also, the more frequently the building is 
entered, the better the air exchange. By 
keeping the site clear and the building in 
good repair, the community will know 
that the building has not been aband­
oned (see fig. 24) . The involvement of 
neighbors and community groups in 
caring for the property can ensure its 
protection from a variety of catastrophic 
circumstances. 
Service companies on a maintenance contract can provide 
yard, maintenance, and inspection services, and their 
reports or itemized bills reflecting work undertaken should 
be added to update the building file. 
The owner may utilize volunteers and 
service companies to undertake the 
work outlined in the maintenance chart. Figure 24. Once mothballed, a property must still be monitored and maintained. The openings in this 
historic barn has been modified with a combination of wood louvers and metal mesh panels which require 
little maintenance. The $rounds are regularly mowed, even inside the chain link security fence. Photo: 
Williamsport Preservation Training Center, NPS. 
Components of a Mothballing Project 
Document: Brearley House, New Jersey; 2~ story center 
hall plan house contains a high degree of integrity of 
circa 1761 materials and significant early 19th century 
additions. Deterioration was attributable to leaking roof, 
unstable masonry at gables and chimneys, deteriorating 
attic windows, poor site drainage, and partially detached 
gutters . Mothballing efforts are required for approxi­
mately 7-10 years. 
Stabilize: Remove bat droppings from attic using great 
caution. Secure historic chimneys and gable ends with 
plywood panels. Do not take historic chimneys down . 
Reroof with asphalt shingles and reattach or add new 
gutters and downspouts. Add extenders to downspouts. 
Add bug screens to any ventilation areas. Add soil 
around foundation and slope to gain positive drain; do 
not excavate as this will disturb archeological evidence. 
Mothball: Install security fence around the property. 
Secure doors and windows with plywood panels (~" 
exterior grade). Install preformed metal grills in 
basement and attic openings. Add surface mounted 
wiring for ionization smoke and fire detection with direct
wire to police and fire departments. Shut off heat and 
drain pipes . Add window exhaust fan set on a 
tnermostatic control. Provide for periodic mOnitoring 
and maintenance of the property. 
Figure 25. Above is a summary of the tasks that were necessary in 
order to protect this significant property while restoration funds are 
raised. Photographs: Michael Mills; Ford Farewell Mills Gatsch 
Architects. 
a. A view showing the exterior of the house in its mothballed condition. 
b. panels stabilize the 
chimneys. Note the gable vents. 
c. exhaust fan has 
proof housing. 
12 

Mothballing Checklist 
In reviewing mothballing plans, the following checklist may help to 
ensure that work items are not inadvertently omitted. 
Moisture 
• Is the roof watertight? 
• Do the gutters retain their proper pitch and are they clean? 
• Are downspout joints intact? 
• Are drains unobstructed? 
• Are windows and doors and their frames in good condition? 
• Are masonry walls in good condition to seal out moisture? 
• Is wood siding in good condition? 
• Is site properly graded for water run-off? 
• Is vegetation cleared from around the building foundation to avoid 
trapping moisture? 
Pests 
• Have nests/pests been removed from the building's interior and 
eaves? 
• Are adequate screens in place to guard against pests? 
• Has the building been inspected and treated for termites, carpenter 
ants, and rodents? 
• If toxic droppings from bats and pigeons are present , has a special 
company been brought in for its disposal? 
Housekeeping 
• Have the following been removed from the interior : trash, hazardous 
materials such as inflammable liquids , poisons , and paints and 
canned goods that could freeze and burst? 
• Is the interior broom-clean? 
• Have furnishings been removed to a safe location ? 
• If furnishings are remain ing in the building, are they properly 
protected from dust , pests, ultraviolet light , and other potentially 
harmful problems? 
• Have significant architectural elements that have become detached 
from the building been labeled and stored in a safe place? 
• Is there a building file? 
Security 
• Have fire and police departments been notified that the building will 
be mothballed? 
• Are smoke and fire detectors in working order? 
• Are the exterior doors and windows securely fastened? 
• Are plans in place to monitor the building on a regular basis? 
• Are the keys to the building in a secure but accessible location? 
• Are the grounds being kept from becoming overgrown? 
Utilities 
• Have utility companies disconnected/shut off or fully inspected 
water, gas, and electric lines? 
• If the building will not remain heated, have water pipes been drained 
and glycol added? 
• If the electricity is to be left on, is the wiring in safe condition? 
Ventilation 
• Have steps been taken to ensure proper ventilation of the building? 
• Have interior doors been left open for ventilation purposes? 
• Has the secured building been checked within the last 3 months for 
interior dampness or excessive humidity? 
Yes No Date of action or comment . 
Figure 26 .. MOTHBALL CHECKLIST. This checklist will give the building owner or manager a handy reference guide to items that should be addressed when 
mothballing a historic building. Prepared by H. Ward Jandl, NPS. 

Conclusion 
Providing temporary protection and stabilization for vacant 
historic buildings can arrest deterioration and buy the 
owner valuable time to raise money for preservation or to 
find a compatible use for the property. A well planned 
mothballing project involves documenting the history and 
condition of the building, stabilizing the structure to slow 
down its deterioration, and finally mothballing the 
structure to secure it (See fig. 25). The three highest 
priorities for the building while it is mothballed are 1) to 
protect the building from sudden loss, 2) to weatherize and 
maintain the property to stop moisture penetration, and 3) 
to control the humidity levels inside once the building has 
been secured. See Mothballing Checklist Figure 26. 
While issues regarding mothballing may seem simple, the 
variables and intricacies of possible solutions make the 
decision-making process very important. Each building 
must be individually evaluated prior to mothballing. In 
addition, a variety of professional services as well as 
volunteer assistance are needed for careful planning and 
repair, sensitively designed protection measures, follow-up 
security surveillance, and cyclical maintenance (see fig. 27). 
In planning for the future of the building, complete and 
systematic records must be kept and generous funds 
allocated for mothballing . This will ensure that the historic 
property will be in stable condition for its eventual 
preservation, rehabilitation, or restoration. 
Acknowledgements 
TItis publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interior 
to develop and make available information concerning historic properties . 
Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be <lirected to H . Ward 
Jandl, Deputy Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, 
P.O. Box 37127, Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. TItis publication is not 
copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty . Normal procedures for 
credit to the author and the National Park Service are appreciated . 
The author, Sharon C. Park, Senior Historical Architect, Preservation Assistance 
Division , National Park Service, would like to acknowledge the assistance of the 
following individuals in the preparation and review of this publication. H. Ward 
Jandl served as the technical editor and assisted with producing this 
Preservation Brief. In addition the following persons have provided invaluable 
information and Illustrations: Ernest A. Conrad, PE; Doug Hicks, NPS 
Williamsport Preservation Training Center; Thomas C. Taylor, Colonial 
Williamsburg; Karen Gordon, Seattle UIban Conservation Office; Kevin B. 
Stoops, Seattle Department of Parks and Recreation; Mkhael Mills, AIA; 
Christine Henry, architect, Mary Beth Hirsch, Ohio Historical Society . Thanks 
also to Preservation Assistance Division staff members MichaelJ. Auer, Anne E. 
Grimmer, Kay D. Weeks, Tunothy A. Buehner, and Jean Travers, and to the 
numerous staff members of the NPS Regional offices who submitted comments. 
All photographs and drawings are by the author unless otherwise noted . 
Cover photograph: Mothballing of this historic house involved a new 
membrane roof covering over the historic roof and slatted window covers 
for security and ventilation. Photo: Williamsporl Preservation Training 
Center, NPS. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 
September 1993 
13 14 
Figure 27. This residential building blends into its neighborhood even 
thou$h all the windows have been covered over and the front steps are 
misSing. The grounds are maintained and the special attention to 
decoratively paintin$ the window panels shows that the property is being 
well cared for until It can be rehabJ1itated. Photo: Ohio Historical 
Society. 
Further Reading 
Cotton, J. Randall. "Mothballing Buildings." The Old House 
Journal. July/August, 1993. 
Fisher, Charles E. and Thomas A. Vitanza. "Temporary Window 
Vents in Unoccupied Historic Buildings." Preservation Tech Note 
(Windows, No. 10). Washington, DC: National Park Service, 1985. 
Frazier Associates. "Mothballing Historic Buildings." Preserving 
Prince William, 2. County of Prince William, VA, 1990. 
Michell, Eleanor. Emergency Repairs for Historic Buildings. London: 
Butterworth Architecture, 1988. 
"Mothballing Vacant Buildings," An Anti-Arson Kit for Preservation 
and Neighborhood Action. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, 1982. 
Nelson, Lee H. Preservation Briefs 17. Architectural character­
Identifying the Visual Aspects of Historic BUl7dings as an Aid to 
Preserving Their Character. Washington, DC: Government Printing 
Office, 1988. 
Solon, Thomas E. "Security Panels for the Foster-Armstrong 
House." Association for Preservation Technology Bulletin. Vol XVI 
no. 3 & 4, 1984. (note the design of the panels, but be aware that 
additionallouvering may be needed on other projects). 