U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resource s 
Heritage Preservation Services 
Preservation 
Briefs: 9 
The Repair of 
Historic Wooden Windows 
JohnH. ~yers------------------------------------------------------------------
The windows on many historic buildings are an important 
aspect of the architectural character of those buildings. 
Their design, craftsmanship, or other qualities may make 
them worthy of preservation . This is self-evident for or­
namental windows, but it can be equally true for 
warehouses or factories where the windows may be the 
most dominant visual element of an otherwise plain 
building (see figure 1).  Evaluating the significance of 
these windows and planning for their repair or replace­
ment can be a complex process involving both objective 
and subjective considerations . The Secretary of the In­
terior's Standards for Rehabilitation, and the accompany­
ing guidelines, call for respecting the significance of 
original materials and features , repairing and retaining 
them wherever possible, and when necessary, replacing 
them in kind. This Brief is based on the issues of 
significance and repair which are implicit in the standards, 
but the primary emphasis is on the technical issues of 
planning for the repair of windows including evaluation 
of their physical condition , techniques of repair, and 
design considerations when replacement is necessary. 
Figure 1. Windows are frequently important visual focal points, especial­
lyon simple facades such as this mill building. Replacement of the multi­
pane windows here with larger panes could dramatically change the ap­
pearance of the building. The areas of missing windows convey the im­
pression of such a change . Photo: John T. Lowe 
Much of the technical section presents repair techniques as 
an instructional guide for the do-it-yourselfer. The infor­
mation will be useful, however, for the architect, contrac­
tor , or developer on large-scale projects. It presents a 
methodology for approaching the evaluation and repair of 
existing windows, and considerations for replacement, 
from which the professional can develop alternatives and 
specify appropriate materials and procedures. 
Architectural or Historical Significance 
Evaluating the architectural or historical significance of 
windows is the first step in planning for window treat­
ments, and a general understanding of the function and 
history of windows is vital to making a proper evalua­
tion. As a part of this evaluation, one must consider four 
basic window functions: admitting light to the interior 
spaces, providing fresh air and ventilation to the in­
terior, providing a visual link to the outside world, and 
enhancing the appearance of a building . No single factor 
can be disregarded when planning window treatments; for 
example, attempting to conserve energy by closing up or 
reducing the size of window openings may result in the 
use of more energy by increasing electric lighting loads 
and decreasing passive solar heat gains. 
Historically, the first windows in early American houses 
were casement windows; that is, they were hinged at the 
side and opened outward. In the beginning of the eigh­
teenth century single- and double-hung windows were in­
troduced. Subsequently many styles of these vertical 
sliding sash windows have come to be associated with 
specific building periods or architectural styles, and this is 
an important consideration in determining the significance 
of windows, especially on a local or regional basis. Site­
specific, regionally oriented architectural comparisons 
should be made to determine the significance of windows 
in question. Although such comparisons may focus on 
specific window types and their details, the ultimate deter­
mination of significance should be made within the con­
text of the whole building, wherein the windows are one 
architectural element (see figure 2). 
After all of the factors have been evaluated, windows 
should be considered significant to a building if they; 1) 
are original, 2) reflect the original design intent for the 
building, 3) reflect period or regional styles or building 
practices , 4) reflect changes to the building resulting 
from major periods or events, or 5) are examples of ex­
ceptional craftsmanship or design . Once this evaluation 
of significance has been completed, it is possible to pro-
For sale by the Superintendent 01 Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402 

lintel 
I Head I 
, u 
a I' n" , I I' i 
'-ll .j-r \ \ \ \ I \ II 
-J!1. JI r 
_J! J I - IOJ . _ r-e " --
. ~ 
J~, - ~ 
:::C~-=' 
top rail --4-f:'1_ 
putty 1oI-+--:~ parting bead 
-QglaZin g 
rabbet 
~ ! ~ 
Ir 
~ 
., 
':'1 
., mu 
rT:'~(Jr l[ - ][ : I me 1 11 
1. ~ sash ! It ltl JJ[ JL- I i i pa nes 
ntin 
eting rail ~~~~+- weights 
weight pocket 
I III 
I ~ V 
][ 
[ LLJL 
parting bead I Jamb I 
r --::J[ I stile --__ -+--+-J interior stop 1 .1 I I 
][ ~ I. - . 
,~,; , Pl ~ 
putty'.;- ~;;:::;<~~~ 
T bottom rail---+++--+H 
.:; :; 1 Ji t .t~J..~ 
~[ J' H 1 ~~; o rl rj Inten r I 
-r J~ 1. 11 ~ 1 
J[ lL.l II 1 I 
l!l[J I I' 
Window Elevation 
sill--l-.l...l--_ \ C_--;: ~"------- stool 
Window Sections 
Muntin Profiles 
These are only three examples 
of many possible profiles. Mun­
tins can contribute substantially 
to window significance. 
ceed with planning appropriate treatments, beginning 
with an investigation of the physical condition of the 
windows. 
Figure 2. These drawings of window details identify major components, terminology , and installation details for a wooden double-hung window. 
Physical Evaluation 
The key to successful planning for window treatments is 
a careful evaluation of existing physical conditions on a 
unit-by-unit basis. A graphic or photographic system may 
be devised to record existing conditions and illustrate the 
scope of any necessary repairs. Another effective tool is a 
window schedule which lists all of the parts of each win­
dow unit. Spaces by each part allow notes on existing 
conditions and repair instructions. When such a schedule 
is completed, it indicates the precise tasks to be performed 
in the repair of each unit and becomes a part of the 
specifications. In any evaluation, one should note at a 
minimum, 1) window location, 2) condition of the paint, 
3) condition of the frame and sill, 4) condition of the sash 
(rails, stiles and muntins), 5) glazing problems, 6) hard­
ware, and 7) the overall condition of the window (ex­
cellent, fair, poor, and so forth). 
Many factors such as poor design, moisture, vandalism, 
insect attack, and lack of maintenance can contribute to 
window deterioration , but moisture is the primary con­
tributing factor in wooden window decay. All window 
units should be inspected to see if water is entering around 
the edges of the frame and, if so, the joints or seams 
should be caulked to eliminate this danger. The glazing 
putty should be checked for cracked, loose, or missing 
sections which allow water to saturate the wood, especial­
ly at the joints. The back putty on the interior side of the 
pane should also be inspected, because it creates a seal 
which prevents condensation from running down into the 
joinery. The sill should be examined to insure that it 
slopes downward away from the building and Cl-llows 
water to drain off. In addition, it may be advisable to cut 
a dripline along the underside of the sill. This almost in­
visible treatment will insure proper water run-off, particu-
larly if the bottom of the sill is flat. Any conditions, in­
cluding poor original design, which permit water to come 
in contact with the wood or to puddle on the sill must be 
corrected as they contribute to deterioration of the win­
dow. 
One clue to the location of areas of excessive moisture 
is the condition of the paint; therefore, each window 
should be examined for areas of paint failure. Since ex­
cessive moisture is detrimental to the paint bond, areas of 
paint blistering, cracking, flaking, and peeling usually 
identify points of water penetration, moisture saturation , 
and potential deterioration. Failure of the paint should 
not, however, be mistakenly interpreted as a sign that the 
wood is in poor condition and hence, irreparable. Wood 
is frequently in sound physical condition beneath unsight­
ly paint. After noting areas of paint failure, the next step 
is to inspect the condition of the wood, particularly at the 
points identified during the paint examination. 
Each window should be examined for operational 
soundness beginning with the lower portions of the frame 
and sash. Exterior rainwater and interior condensation can 
flow downward along the window, entering and collecting 
at points where the flow is blocked. The sill, joints be­
tween the sill and jamb, corners of the bottom rails and 
muntin joints are typical points where water collects and 
deterioration begins (see figure 3). The operation of the 
window (continuous opening and closing over the years 
and seasonal temperature changes) weakens the joints, 
causing movement and slight separation. This process 
makes the joints more vulnerable to water which is readi­
ly absorbed into the end-grain of the wood. If severe 
deterioration exists in these areas, it will usually be ap­
parent on visual inspection, but other less severely deteri­
orated areas of the wood may be tested by two traditional 
methods using a small ice pick. 
An ice pick or an awl may be used to test wood for 
soundness. The technique is simply to jab the pick into a 
wetted wood surface at an angle and pry up a small sec-
2 

Figure 3. Deterioration of poorly maintained windows usually begins on 
horizontal surfaces and at joints where water can collect and saturate the 
wood. The problem areas are clearly indicated by paint failure due to 
moisture. Photo: Baird M. Smith, AlA 
tion of the wood . Sound wood will separate in long 
fibrous splinters , but decayed wood will lift up in short ir­
regular pieces due to the breakdown of fiber strength. 
Another method of testing for soundness consists of 
pushing a sharp object into the wood, perpendicular to 
the surface. If deterioration has begun from the hidden 
side of a member and the core is badly decayed, the visi­
ble surface may appear to be sound wood. Pressure on 
the probe can force it through an apparently sound skin 
to penetrate deeply into decayed wood. This technique is 
especially useful for checking sills where visual access to 
the underside is restricted. 
Following the inspection and analysis of the results, the 
scope of the necessary repairs will be evident and a plan 
for the rehabilitation can be formulated. Generally the ac­
tions necessary to return a window to "like new" condi­
tion will fall into three broad categories: 1) routine main­
tenance procedures , 2) structural stabilization, and 3) 
parts replacement. These categories will be discussed in 
the following sections and will be referred to respectively 
as Repair Class I, Repair Class II, and Repair Class III. 
Each successive repair class represents an increasing level 
of difficulty, expense , and work time. Note that most of 
the points mentioned in Repair Class I are routine main­
tenance items and should be prov ided in a regular main­
tenance program for any building . The neglect of these 
routine items can contribute to many common window 
problems. 
Before undertaking any of the repairs mentioned in the 
followi ng sections all sources of moisture penetration 
should be identified and eliminated , and all existing decay 
fungi destroyed in order to arrest the deterioration pro­
cess. Many commercially available fungicides and wood 
preservatives are toxic, so it is extremely important to 
follow the manufacturer's recommendat ions for applica­
tion, and store all chemical materials away from children 
and animals. After fungicidal and preservative treatment 
the windows may be stabilized , retained, and restored 
with every expectation for a long service life. 
Repair Class I: Routine Maintenance 
Repairs to wooden windows are usually labor intensive 
and relatively uncomplicated . On small scale projects this 
allows the do-it-yourselfer to save money by repairing 
all or part of the windows. On larger projects it presents 
the opportunity for time and money which might other­
wise be spent on the removal and replacement of existing 
windows , to be spent on repairs, subsequently saving all 
or part of the material cost of new window units. Regard­
less of the actual costs , or who performs the work , the 
evaluation process described earlier will provide the 
knowledge from which to specify an appropriate work 
program , establish the work element priorities, and iden­
tify the level of skill needed by the labor force. 
The routine maintenance required to upgrade a window 
to "like new " condition normally includes the following 
steps: 1) some degree of interior and exterior paint 
removal, 2) removal and repair of sash (inCluding reglaz­
ing where necessary) , 3) repairs to the frame , 4) weather­
stripping and reinstallation of the sash, and 5) repainting. 
These operations are illustrated for a typical double-hung 
wooden window (see figures 4a-f) , but they may be 
adapted to other window types and styles as applicable. 
Historic windows have usually acquired many layers of 
paint over time. Removal of excess layers or peeling and 
flaking paint will facilitate operation of the window and 
restore the clarity of the original detailing. Some degree of 
paint removal is also necessary as a first step in the prop­
er surface preparation for subsequent refinishing (if paint 
color analysis is desired , it should be conducted prior to 
the onset of the paint removal). There are several safe and 
effective techniques for removing paint from wood, 
depending on the amount of paint to be removed . Several 
techniques such as scraping, chemical stripping, and the 
use of a hot air gun are discussed in "Preservation Briefs: 
10 Paint Removal from Historic Woodwork" (see Addi­
tional Reading section at end) . 
Paint removal should begin on the interior frames , be­
ing careful to remove the paint from the interior stop and 
the parting bead, particularly along the seam where these 
stops meet the jamb . This can be accomplished by run­
ning a utility knife along the length of the seam , breaking 
the paint bond . It will then be much easier to remove the 
stop, the parting bead and the sash. The interior stop may 
be initiall y loosened from the sash side to avoid visible 
scarring of the wood and then gradually pried loose using 
a pair of putty knives, working up and down the stop in 
small increments (see figure 4b) . With the stop removed, 
the lower or interior sash may be withdrawn . The sash 
cords should be detached from the sides of the sash and 
their ends may be pinned with a nail or tied in a knot to 
prevent them from falling into the weight pocket. 
Removal of the upper sash on double-hung units is 
similar but the parting bead which holds it in place is set 
into a groove in the center of the stile and is thinner and 
more delicate than the interior stop. After removing any 
paint along the seam , the parting bead should be carefully 
pried out and worked free in the same manner as the in­
terior stop. The upper sash can be removed in the same 
manner as the lower one and both sash taken to a conve­
nient work area (in order to remove the sash the interior 
stop and parting bead need only be removed from one 
side of the window). Window openings can be covered 
with polyethylene sheets or plywood sheathing while the 
sash are out for repair. 
The sash can be stripped of paint using appropriate 
techniques, but if any heat treatment is used (see figure 
4c), the glass should be removed or protected from the 
sudden temperature change which can cause breakage . An 
3 

( ( 1 
Figure 4a. The following series of photographs of 
the repair of a historic double-hung window use a 
unit which is structurally sound but has many 
layers of paint, some cracked and missing putty, 
slight separation at the joints, broken sash cords, 
and one cracked pane. Photo: John H. Myers 
Figure 4b. After removing paint from the seam 
between the interior stop and the jamb, the stop 
can be pried out and gradually worked loose using 
a pair of putty knives as shown. To avoid visible 
scarring of the wood, the sash can be raised and 
the stop pried loose initially from the outer side. 
Photo: John H. Myers 
Figure 4c. Sash can be removed and repaired in a 
convenient work area. Paint is being removed from 
this sash with a hot air gun while an asbestos 
sheet protects the glass from sudden temperature 
change. Photo: John H. Myers 
Figure 4d. Reglazing or replacement of the putty 
requires that the existing putty be removed 
manually, the glazing points be extracted, the 
glass removed, and the back putty scraped out. To 
reglaze, a bed of putty is laid around the perimeter 
of the rabbet, the pane is pressed into place, 
glazing points are inserted to hold the pane 
(shown), and a final seal of putty is beveled 
around the edge of the glass. Photo: John H. 
Myers 
Figure 4e. A common repair is the replacement of 
broken sash cords with new cords (shown) or with 
chains. The weight pocket is often accessible 
through a removable plate in the jamb, or by 
removing the interior trim. Photo: John H. Myers 
Figure 4£. Following the relatively simple repairs, 
the window is weathertight, like new in 
appearance, and serviceable for many years to 
come. Both the historic material and the detailing 
and craftsmanship of this original window have 
been preserved. Photo: John H. Myers 
4 

overlay of aluminum foil on gypsum board or asbestos 
can protect the glass from such rapid temperature 
change. It is important to protect the glass because it 
may be historic and often adds character to the window. 
Deteriorated putty should be removed manually, taking 
care not to damage the wood along the rabbet . If the 
glass is to be removed, the glazing points which hold the 
glass in place can be extracted and the panes numbered 
and removed for cleaning and reuse in the same open­
ings. With the glass panes out, the remaining putty can be 
removed and the sash can be sanded, patched, and 
primed with a preservative primer. Hardened putty in 
the rabbets may be softened by heating with a soldering 
iron at the point of removal. Putty remaining on the 
glass may be softened by soaking the panes in linseed 
oil, and then removed with less risk of breaking the 
glass. Before reinstalling the glass, a bead of glazing 
compound or linseed oil putty shou ld be laid around the 
rabbet to cushion and seal the glass . Glazing compound 
should only be used on wood which has been brushed 
with linseed oil and primed with an oil based primer or 
paint. The pane is then pressed into place and the glaz­
ing points are pushed into the wood around the perim ­
eter of the pane (see figure 4d). The final glazing com­
pound or putty is applied and beveled to complete the 
seal. The sash can be refinished as desired on the inside 
and painted on the outside as soon as a "skin " has formed 
on the putty , usually in 2 or 3 days . Exterior paint should 
cover the beveled glazing compound or putty and lap 
over onto the glass slightly to complete a weathertight 
seal. After the proper curing times have elapsed for paint 
and putty, the sash will be ready for reinstallation. 
While the sash are out of the frame, the condition of 
the wood in the jamb and sill can be evaluated. Repair 
and refinishing of the frame may proceed concurrently 
with repairs to the sash, taking advantage of the curin g 
times for the paints and putty used on the sash. One of 
the most common work items is the replacement of the 
sash cords with new rope cords or with chains (see figure 
4e). The weight pocket is frequently accessible through a 
door on the face of the frame near the sill, but if no door 
exists , the trim on the interior face may be removed for 
access . Sash weights may be increased for easier window 
operation by elderly or handicapped persons . Additional 
repairs to the frame and sash may include consolidation 
or replacement of deteriorated wood. Techniques for these 
repairs are discussed in the following sections . 
The operations just discussed summarize the efforts 
necessary to restore a window with minor deterioratio n to 
"like new " condition (see figure 4f). The techniques can be 
applied by an unskilled person with minimal training and 
experience. To demonstrate the practicality of this ap­
proach, and photograph it, a Technical Preservation Ser­
vices staff member repaired a wooden double-hung, two 
over two window which had been in service over nine ty 
years. The wood was structurally sound but the window 
had one broken pane, many layers of paint , broken sash 
cords and inadequate, worn-out weatherstripping. The 
staff member found that the frame could be stripped of 
paint and the sash removed quite easily . Paint , putty and 
glass removal required about one hour for each sash, and 
the reglazing of both sash was accomplished in about one 
hour. Weatherstripping of the sash and frame , replace ­
ment of the sash cords and reinstallation of the sash, part­
ing bead, and stop required an hour and a half. These 
times refer only to individual operations ; the entire proc-
ess took several days due to the drying and curing times 
for putty, primer, and paint, however, work on other win­
dow units could have been in progress during these lag 
times . 
Repair Class II: Stabilization 
The preceding description of a window repair job focused 
on a unit which was operationally sound. Many windows 
will show some additional degree of physical deteriora­
tion, especially in the vulnerable areas mentioned earlier, 
but even badly damaged windows can be repaired using 
simple processes. Partially decayed wood can be water­
proofed, patched, built-up, or consolidated and then 
painted to achieve a sound condition, good appearance, 
and greatly extended life. Three techniques for repairing 
partially decayed or weathered wood are discussed in this 
section, and all three can be accomplished using products 
available at most hardware stores. 
One established technique for repairing wood which is 
split, checked or shows signs of rot, is to: 1) dry the 
wood, 2) treat decayed areas with a fungicide, 3) water­
proof with two or three applications of boiled linseed oil 
(applications every 24 hours), 4) fill cracks and holes with 
putty, and 5) after a "skin" forms on the putty, paint the 
surface. Care should be taken with the use of fungicide 
which is toxic. Follow the manufacturers' directions and 
use only on areas which will be painted. When using any 
technique of building up or patching a flat surface, the 
finished surface should be sloped slightly to carry water 
away from the window and not allow it to puddle . Caulk­
ing of the joints between the sill and the jamb will help 
reduce further water penetration. 
When sills or other members exhibit surface weathering 
they may also be built-up using wood putties or home­
made mixtures such as sawdust and resorcinol glue, or 
whiting and varnish. These mixtures can be built up in 
successive layers, then sanded, primed, and painted. The 
same caution about proper slope for flat surfaces applies 
to this technique. 
Wood may also be strengthened and stabilized by con­
solidation, using semi-rigid epoxies which saturate the 
porous decayed wood and then harden. The surface of the 
consolidated wood can then be filled with a semi-rigid 
epoxy patching compound, sanded and painted (see figure 
5). Epoxy patching compounds can be used to build up 
Figure 5. This illustrates a two-part epoxy patching compound used to fill 
the surface of a weathered sill and rebuild the missing edge. When the epoxy 
cures, it can be sanded smooth and painted to achieve a durable and 
waterproof repair. Photo: John H. Myers 
5 

missing sections or decayed ends of members. Profiles can 
be duplicated using hand molds, which are created by 
pressing a ball of patching compound over a sound sec­
tion of the profile which has been rubbed with butcher 's 
wax . This can be a very efficient technique where there 
are many typical repairs to be done. Technical Preserva­
tion Services has published Epoxies for Wood Repairs 
in Historic Buildings (see Additional Reading section at 
end), which discusses the theory and techniques of epoxy 
repairs. The process has been widely used and proven in 
marine applications; and proprietary products are avail­
able at hardware and marine supply stores. Although 
epoxy materials may be comparatively expensive, they 
hold the promise of being among the most durable and 
long lasting materials available for wood repair. 
Any of the three techniques discussed can stabilize and 
restore the appearance of the window unit. There are 
times, however, when the degree of deterioration is so ad­
vanced that stabilization is impractical, and the only way 
to retain some of the original fabric is to replace damaged 
parts. 
Repair Class III: Splices and Parts Replacement 
When parts of the frame or sash are so badly deteriorated 
that they cannot be stabilized there are methods which 
permit the retention of some of the existing or original 
fabric. These methods involve replacing the deteriorated 
parts with new matching pieces, or splicing new wood in­
to existing members. The techniques require more skill 
and are more expensive than any of the previously dis­
cussed alternatives. It is necessary to remove the sash 
and / or the affected parts of the frame and have a 
carpenter or woodworking mill reproduce the damaged or 
missing parts. Most millwork firms can duplicate parts , 
such as muntins, bottom rails, or sills, which can then be 
incorporated into the existing window , but it may be 
necessary to shop around because there are several factor s 
controlling the practicality of this approach. Some wood­
working mills do not like to repair old sash because nails 
or other foreign objects in the sash can damage expensive 
knives (which cost far more than their profits on small 
repair jobs); others do not have cutting knives to 
duplicate muntin profiles. Some firms prefer to concen­
trate on larger jobs with more profit potential, and some 
may not have a craftsman who can duplicate the parts. A 
little searching should locate a firm which will do 
the job , and at a reasonable price. If such a firm does not 
exist locally , there are firms which undertake this kind of 
repair and ship nationwide. It is possible , however, for 
the advanced do-it-yourselfer or craftsman with a table 
saw to duplicate moulding profiles using techniques 
discussed by Gordie Whittington in "Simplified Methods 
for Reproducing Wood Mouldings," Bulletin of the 
Association for Preservation Technology, Vol. III, No . 4, 
1971, or illustrated more recently in The Old House , 
Time-Life Books, Alexandria, Virginia, 1979 . 
The repairs discussed in this section involve window 
frames which may be in very deteriorated condition , 
possibly requiring removal; therefore, caution is in 
order. The actual construction of wooden window frames 
and sash is not complicated. Pegged mortise and tenon 
units can be disassembled easily , if the units are out of the 
building. The installation or connection of some frames to 
the surrounding structure, especially masonry walls, can 
complicate the work immeasurably, and may even require 
dismantling of the wall. It may be useful , therefore , to 
take the following approach to frame repair: 1) conduct 
regular maintenance of sound frames to achieve the 
longest life possible , 2) make necessary repairs in place 
wherever possible, using stabilization and splicing tech­
niques , and 3) if removal is necessary, thoroughly in­
vestigate the structural detailing and seek appropriate pro­
fessional consultation. 
Another alternative may be considered if parts replace­
ment is required, and that is sash replacement. If extensive 
replacement of parts is necessary and the job becomes 
prohibitively expensive it may be more practical to pur­
chase new sash which can be installed into the existing 
frames . Such sash are available as exact custom reproduc­
tions, reasonable facsimiles (custom windows with similar 
profiles ), and contemporary wooden sash which are 
similar in appearance . There are companies which still 
manufacture high quality wooden sash which would 
duplicate most historic sash. A few calls to local build-
ing suppliers may provide a source of appropriate replace­
ment sash, but if not, check with local historical 
associations, the state historic preservation office , 
or preservation related magazines and supply catalogs for 
information. 
If a rehabilitation project has a large number of win­
dows such as a commercial building or an industrial com­
plex , there may be less of a problem arriving at a solu­
tion . Once the evaluation of the windows is completed 
and the scope of the work is known, there may be a 
potential economy of scale. Woodworking mills may be 
interested in the work from a large project; new sash in 
volume may be considerably less expensive per unit ; 
crews can be assembled and trained on site to perform all 
of the window repairs ; and a few extensive repairs can be 
absorbed (without undue burden) into the total budget 
for a large number of sound windows. While it may be 
expensive for the average historic home owner to pay 
seventy dollars or more for a mill to grind a custom knife 
to duplicate four or five bad muntins , that cost becomes 
negligible on large commercial projects which may have 
several hundred windows. 
Most windows should not require the extensive repairs 
discussed in this section . The ones which do are usually in 
buildings which have been abandoned for long periods or 
have totally lacked maintenance for years. It is necessary 
to thoroughly investigate the alternatives for windows 
which do require extensive repairs to arrive at a solution 
which retains historic significance and is also economically 
feasible . Even for projects requiring repairs identified in 
this section , if the percentage of parts replacement per 
window is low, or the number of windows requiring 
repair is small, repair can still be a cost effective solution. 
Weatherization 
A window which is repaired should be made as energy ef­
ficient as possible by the use of appropriate weather­
stripping to reduce air infiltration. A wide variety of 
products are available to assist in this task . Felt may be 
fastened to the top , bottom, and meeting rails, but may 
have the disadvantage of absorbing and holding moisture, 
particularly at the bottom rail. Rolled vinyl strips may 
also be tacked into place in appropriate locations to 
reduce infiltration. Metal strips or new plastic spring 
strips may be used on the rails and , if space permits, in 
6 

the channels between the sash and jamb. Weatherstripping 
is a historic treatment, but old weatherstripping (felt) is 
not likely to perform very satisfactorily. Appropriate con­
temporary weatherstripping should be considered an in­
tegral part of the repair process for windows. The use of 
sash locks installed on the meeting rail will insure that the 
sash are kept tightly closed so that the weatherstripping 
will function more effectively to reduce infiltration. 
Although such locks will not always be historically accu­
rate, they will usually be viewed as an acceptable contem­
porary modification in the interest of improved thermal 
performance. 
Many styles of storm windows are available to improve 
the thermal performance of existing windows. The use of 
exterior storm windows should be investigated whenever 
feasible because they are thermally efficient, cost-effective, 
reversible, and allow the retention of original windows 
(see "Preservation Briefs: 3"). Storm window frames may 
be made of wood , aluminum , vinyl, or plastic; however, 
the use of unfinished aluminum storms should be 
avoided. The visual impact of storms may be minimized 
by selecting colors which match existing trim color. 
Arched top storms are available for windows with special 
shapes. Although interior storm windows appear to offer 
an attractive option for achieving double glazing with 
minimal visual impact, the potential for damaging con­
densation problems must be addressed. Moisture which 
becomes trapped between the layers of glazing can con­
dense on the colder , outer prime window, potentially 
leading to deterioration. The correct approach to using in­
terior storms is to create a seal on the interior storm while 
allowing some ventilation around the prime window. In 
actual practice, the creation of such a durable, airtight 
seal is difficult. 
Window Replacement 
Although the retention of original or existing windows is 
always desirable and this Brief is intended to encourage 
that goal, there is a point when the condition of a win­
dow may clearly indicate replacement. The decision proc­
ess for selecting replacement windows should not begin 
with a survey of contemporary window products which 
are available as replacements, but should begin with a 
look at the windows which are being replaced. Attempt to 
understand the contribution of the window(s) to the ap­
pearance of the facade including: 1) the pattern of the 
openings and their size; 2) proportions of the frame and 
sash; 3) configuration of window panes; 4) muntin pro­
files; 5) type of wood; 6) paint color; 7) characteristics of 
the glass; and 8) associated details such as arched tops, 
hoods, or other decorative elements. Develop an under­
standing of how the window reflects the period, style, or 
regional characteristics of the building, or represents tech­
nological development. 
Armed with an awareness of the significance of the ex­
isting window, begin to search for a replacement which 
retains as much of the character of the historic window as 
possible. There are many sources of suitable new win­
dows. Continue looking until an acceptable replacement 
can be found. Check building supply firms, local wood­
working mills, carpenters, preservation oriented maga­
zines, or catalogs or sUl'pliers of old building materials, 
for product information. Local historical associations and 
state historic preservation offices may be good sources of 
information on products which have been used success­
fully in preservation projects. 
Consider energy efficiency as one of the factors for 
replacements, but do not let it dominate the issue. Energy 
conservation is no excuse for the wholesale destruction of 
historic windows which can be made thermally efficient 
by historically and aesthetically acceptable means. In fact , 
a historic wooden window with a high quality storm win­
dow added should thermally outperform a new double­
glazed metal window which does not have thermal 
breaks (insulation between the inner and outer frames in­
tended to break the path of heat flow) . This occurs 
because the wood has far better insulating value than the 
metal, and in addition many historic windows have high 
ratios of wood to glass, thus reducing the area of highest 
heat transfer. One measure of heat transfer is the U-value , 
the number of Btu's per hour transferred through a square 
foot of material. When comparing thermal performance , 
the lower the U-value the better the performance. Accord­
ing to ASHRAf 1977 Fundamentals, the U-values for 
single glazed wooden windows range from 0.88 to 0.99. 
The addition of a storm window should reduce these 
figures to a range of 0.44 to 0.49. A non-thermal break, 
double-glazed metal window has a U-value of about 0.6. 
Conclusion 
Technical Preservation Services recommends the retention 
and repair of original windows whenever possible . We 
believe that the repair and weatherization of existing 
wooden windows is more practical than most people 
realize, and that many windows are unfortunately re­
placed because of a lack of awareness of techniques for 
evaluation, repair, and weatherization. Wooden windows 
which are repaired and properly maintained will have 
greatly extended service lives while contributing to the 
historic character of the building. Thus , an important ele­
ment of a building's significance will have been preserved 
for the future. 
Additional Reading 
ASHRAE Handbook-1977 Fundamentals. New York: American Society 
of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-conditioning Engineers , 1978 
(chapter 26). 
Ferro, Maximillian. Preservation: Present Pathway to Fall River 's Future. 
Fall River, Massachusetts: City of Fall River, 1979 (chapter 7). 
"Fixing Double-Hung Windows." Old House Journal (no. 12, 1979): 135. 
Look, David W. "Preservation Briefs: 10 Paint Removal from Historic 
Woodwork." Washington, DC: Technical Preservation Services, 
U.S. Department of the Interior , forthcoming. 
Morrison , Hugh. Early American Architecture. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1952. 
Phillips, Morgan, and Selwyn, Judith, Epoxies for Wood Repairs in 
Historic Buildings. Washington, DC : Technical Preservation Ser­
vices, U.S. Department of the Interior (Government Printing Office, 
Stock No. 024-016-00095-1), 1978. 
Rehab Right. Oakland, California: City of Oakland Planning Depart­
ment, 1978 (pp. 78-83). 
"Sealing Leaky Windows." Old House Journal (no. 1, 1973): 5. 
Smith, Baird M, "Preserv ation Briefs: 3 Conserving Energy in Historic 
Buildings," Washington, DC: Technical Preservation Services, U.S. 
Department of the Interior , 1978. 
1981 
7 