Fig. 1. Ornamental plaster studios employed the following personnel: Draftsmen to interpret architectural details in shop drawings; sculptors who 
modelled in clay; mode/makers who assembled sculpted, plain-run and pre-cast elements into an ornamental unit; moldmakers who made rigid or 
flexible negative tooling; casters who made production units; finishers (often the caster's wives) who cleaned the casts; and laborers who assisted 
skilled personnel in operating efficiently. This studio was in Philadelphia, c. 1915. Photo: Courtesy, M. Earle Felber. 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Preserving Historic Ornamental Plaster 
David Flaharty 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
From the time America struggled for a new identity as 
a constitutional republic-and well into the 20th 
century-its architecture and its decorative detailing 
remained firmly rooted in the European classicism of 
Palladio, Wren, and Mansart. 
Together with skilled masons and carpenters, orna­
mental plasterers saw their inherited trade flourish 
from the mid-18th century until the Depression years of 
the 1930s. During this two hundred year period, as the 
Georgian and Federal styles yielded to the revivals­
Greek, Rococo, Gothic, Renaissance, and Spanish­
decorative plaster reflected each style, resulting in the 
wide variety of ornamentation that survives. The tradi­
tional methods of producing and installing interior 
decorative plaster were brough t from Europe to this 
country intact and its practice remains virtually un­
changed to this day. 

a 
b. 
C 
2 
d 
e 
Styles of Decorative Plaster in America, 
18th-20th Centuries 
(a) Kenmore, Fredericksburg, Virginia. c. 1752. Georgian in style with orna­
mental ceilings based on Batty Langley's 1739 English style book, the plaster­
work was executed by a Frenchman in the mid-1770s. This house was built by 
Col. Fielding Lewis and has the most elaborate ornamentation of any in the 
period. Photo: Historic American Buildings Survey Collection. 
(b) Old West Church, Boston, Massachusetts. c. 1806. Designed by Asher 
Benjamin, this church in the Federal-Adamesque style became the prototype 
for many other New England churches through publication of plans in Ben­
jamin's American Builder's Companion. Photo: Courtesy, Stanley P. Mixon (copy). 
(c) Lyndhurst, Tarrytown, New York, c. 1838. This Gothic Revival villa on the 
Hudson River was built for financier Jay Gould by Alexander Jackson Davis. A 
versatile architect, Davis was simultaneously at work on Greek Revival build­
ings in New York City. Both styles called for elaborate ornamental plasterwork. 
Photo: Jack E. Boucher, Historic American Buildings Survey. 
(d) Gaineswood, Demopolis, Alabama, c. 1842--60. These Greek Revival 
columns were drawn from Minard Lafever's The Beauties of Modern Architec­
ture of 1835. This bold new style began in New York City and quickly spread 
sout h and west. Pl,oto: Historic American Buildings Survey Collection. 
(e) Ohio Theater, Columbus Ohio, c. 1928. An example of the "Go lden Age" of 
movie palaces, Thomas Lamb's "Spanish" style interior is a typical example of 
the plasterwork executed just prior to the Depression years. Ornament was site 
cast, often on the stage, while the orchestra was scaffolded for installation . 
Photo: National Park Service files. 

Like flat walls and ceilings, historic ornamental plaster is 
made of gypsum and lime which are stable and dura­
ble materials. An extremely versatile material, plaster 
can be modelled, cast, incised, colored, stamped, or 
stencilled. However, as an integral part of the building 
system it is subject to the typical problems of water 
intrusion, structural movement, vibration and insensi­
tive alterations, both incrementally and from adaptive 
use projects. This Preservation Brief has been prepared 
to assist property owners, architects, contractors, and 
Federal agency managers in identifying the causes of 
ornamental plaster failure, specifying repair and re­
placement techniques and engaging qualified profes­
sionals to do the work. The scope of this Brief is 
limited to the repair and restoration of existing orna­
mental plaster; certain forms of decorative plaster such 
as scagliola, composition ornament, and artificial Caen 
Stone are not addressed, nor is the design and installa­
tion of ornamental plasterwork in new construction. 
Finally, guidance on using substitute materials to 
match the historic appearance of ornamental plaster­
work-a legitimate option within the Secretary of Interi­
or's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects-is not 
discussed here, but will be the subject of another Brief 
on interiors. 
The Ornamental Plaster Trade 
Shop Personnel. As builders and architects were hired 
by an increasingly affluent clientele, ornamental plaster 
shops developed from the single artisan operations of 
the 18th century into the complex establishments of the 
early 20th century. American plaster studios employed 
immigrant and, later, native craftsmen (see Fig. 1). 
Plasterers' guilds were in existence in Philadelphia in 
the 1790s. In 1864, a plasterers' union was organized in 
the United States with members from the British Isles 
whose work there had been limited to palaces and 
churches. English and European craftsmen came to 
America where the demand for their skills had in­
creased by the decade, offering them the unparalleled 
opportunity to open their own shops. Over the years, 
plaster elements became so popular in decorating inte­
rior spaces that a major industry was established. By 
the 1880s, catalogs were available from which property 
owners could select ornamentation for their splendid 
new buildings (see Fig. 2). 
Methods of Production. Historically, ornamental plas­
terwork has been produced in two ways: it would be 
run in place (or on a bench) at the site; or cast in molds in 
a workshop. Plain plaster molding without surface 
ornamentation was usually created directly on the wall, 
or run on a flat surface such as a plasterer's workbench 
and attached to the wall after it set. Ornament such as 
coffering for ceilings, centers for light fixtures (medal­
lions), brackets, <lentils, or columns were cast in hide 
glue (gelatin) or plaster molds in an offsite shop, often 
in more than one piece, then assembled and installed 
in the building. 
Decorative Plaster Forms-Cornices, Medallions, 
Coffers. Three decorative plaster forms in particular­
the cornice, the ceiling medallion, and the coffered 
ceiling-historically comprised much of the ornamental 
Fig. 2. This parlor medallion and pendant drops shown in a mid-
19th century row house in Annapolis, Maryland were originally 
ordered from a catalog. A local plasterer ran the plain cornice and 
band ribbon, the curved corners of which were bench run, set with a 
plaster adhesive and pointed at the joints. Photo: M. E. Warren. 
plasterers' business. These forms appear individually 
or in combination from the 18th to 20th century, irre­
spective of stylistic changes. 
For example, an elaborate parlor cornice consisted of 
plain moldings made of gypsum and lime run atop 
temporary lattice strips around the room. Tooling for 
plain-run moldings called for a sheet metal template of 
the molding profile mounted on a wooden "horse" (see 
Figs. 3 and 4). Mitering was accomplished using a plas­
ter and lime putty gauge (mix) tooled with miter rods 
at the joints (see Fig. 5). Decorative "enrichments" 
such as leaves, egg and dart moldings, and bead and 
reel units were cast in the shop and applied to the 
plain runs using plaster as an adhesive (see Fig. 6). 
Painting, glazing, and even gilding followed. Large 
houses often had plain- run cornices on the upper floors 
which were not used for entertaining; modest houses also 
boasted cornice work without cast enrichment. 
Among the most dramatic of ornamental plaster forms 
is the parlor ceiling medallion. Vernacular houses of­
ten used plain-run concentric circles from which light­
ing fixtures descended, usually hung from a wrought 
iron hook embedded in the central ceiling joist. More 
3 

Tools of the Trade 
Running Molds 
Fig. 3. A running mold consists of a sheet metal profile blade nailed 
to a stock and slipper. A triangular brace also acts as a handle. Such 
a mold produces a clean plain plaster molding if it travels in the 
same place each pass as a gypsum and lime putty gauge is troweled 
ahead of the moving blade. (A) is a typical mold for a cornice; (B) 
produces a diminished run as the hinges close together; and (C) is a 
pin mold that is used to surround elliptical forms such as arches. In 
addition, running molds may revolve around pivot points, tram­
mels, and mandrels. 
Fig. 4. Running a Cornice. The historic method of producing a 
cornice is unchanged today. A running mold or template is pushed 
along a lattice strip nailed to the wall. Base coat plaster is gypsum 
and sand; finishing plaster is added with small tools and stuffed 
wearing rubber gloves because lime burns the skin. As many as 20 
passes are required to complete a smooth run; this particular cornice 
was formed in two stages, top and bottom, because it was so large. 
Cornices this size also have to be blocked and lathed to minimize the 
amount of applied material. Photo: Old-House Journal. 
4 
Fig. 5. Mitering a Plain-Run Cornice. Mitering requires great 
dexterity using the miter rod. In this case, a return at a chimney 
breast is tooled using an infill of gypsum and lime. Internal and 
external miters are required with the internal being the most diffi­
cult. Another method is to run a length of cornice (using the same 
blade) on a bench and set it in place, later to point the joints. Photo: 
Old-House Journal. 
Fig. 6. Enriching a Plain-Run Cornice. After a cornice is run and 
mitered, cast enrichments are stuck in recessed sinkages planned to 
receive the casts. Ornamental models are made to engage with one 
another, resulting in unbroken lines or courses. A shop-cast orna­
ment is soaked in water until saturated and pressed into its sinkage 
using wet plaster as an adhesive. Once the casts have been installed, 
they are carefully pointed at the joints and at the miters so that they 
appear as a continuous, repetitive design. Photo: Old-House Journal. 
elaborate medallions were composed of shop-cast 
pieces, such as acanthus foliage often alternating with 
anthemia or other decorative designs. Medallions usu­
ally related stylistically to the cornice ornament found 
in the room and could be created with or without a 
plain-run surround (see Fig. 7). Of particular impor­
tance to the art of ornamental plaster was the mid-19th 
century double parlor plan. Architects often specified 
matching medallions of robust proportions and orna­
mentation. Later, in 20th century American Colonial 
Revival architecture, architects called for Federal style 
ceiling medallions. Some of the more successful were 
graceful one-piece units, utilizing classical motifs such 
as garlands and swags, and in their simplicity, reminis­
cent of Adamesque designs of the 1760s. 

ti 
Fig. 7. Running and Enriching a Ceiling Medallion. The method of 
running and enriching a ceiling medallion remains the same today. 
(a) First, a plain-run surround is spun from a pivot point centered 
in the ceiling field. (b) Ornament layout is determined using plane 
geometric principles; segmented locations are deeply scratched to 
provide a rough surface for adequate bonding using plaster as an 
adhesive. Historically, cast enrichments could be bought from local 
suppliers and set individually, allowing architects to compose 
medallions to suit room dimensions and period motifs. 
Photos: Peter Sanders. 
Yet another significant decorative form is the coffered 
ceiling. Coffering units were cast in the shop or onsite, 
then installed with hanging wires to form the ceiling 
(see Fig 8). Ceiling design varied from period to period 
as to depth, panel shape, and ornamental complexity. 
Not always flat, coffering is seen inside domes, within 
barrel vaults and groin ceilings, along overhead ribs 
and soffits. Rosettes are usually centered in the panels 
and often enrich the intersections of elaborate stiles 
bordering the panels. Flat ceiling coffers are generally 
Fig. 8. Casting a Coffering Unit. Ceiling coffers are made the same 
way today except, historically, a hide glue mold was poured over an 
ornamental model whereas today urethane molding rubber is used. 
Now, as then, the plaster casts are made with steel channel irons 
embedded on the back of each panel. The coffers are hung from 
carn;ing irons fixed to the ceiling above by means of twisting wires to 
level each coffer to its neighbor. Afterward, the panels are fastened 
together and the joints pointed with plaster. Photo: David Flaharty. 
Fig. 9. The elaborate coffered ceiling was designed for the Willard 
Hotel in Washington, D.C. (1902-04) by Henry Janeway Harden­
bergh. The coffered ceiling was restored as part of a rehabilitation 
project in the 1980s. Photo: Carol M. Highsmith. 
identical in reflected plan; on domed or barrel ceilings, 
coffers differ from course to course so as to appear 
identical from various sight lines. The finish treatment 
of a coffered ceiling frequently exhibits the height of 
the painter's craft. Foremost examples of ceiling coffer­
ing include the United States Capitol, and Washington 
D. C.'s Union Station. As a popular decorative form 
with inherent acoustical benefits, the coffered ceiling is 
seen across the United States in many large public 
spaces such as theaters, courthouses, railroad stations, 
and hotels (see Fig. 9). 
5 

I 
Unfortunately, these supposedly enduring decorative 
forms created by ornamental plaster tradesmen are 
subjected to the ravages of both nature and man and, 
consequently, seldom remain as originally designed. 
Minor changes of taste are perhaps the least injurious 
to plasterwork. Considerably greater damage and dete­
rioration are caused by radical changes in building use 
and poor maintenance practices. Fortunately, in most 
cases, the form, detailing, and finish of historic orna­
mental plaster can be recaptured through careful repair 
and restoration. 
Causes of Ornamental Plaster Damage 
Ornamental Plaster Substrate. For flat plaster walls and 
ceilings, as well as decorative forms, the system to at­
tach interior plaster to walls and ceilings primarily con­
sisted of 1/4" x 1-1/4" wooden lathing strips nailed 3/8" 
apart against studs and joists. First a scratch coat con­
sisting of sand, lime, and cattle hair was troweled on 
the lath and pressed through the slots so as to slump 
over and form "keys ." Next, a brown coat was applied 
to establish flat and plumb surfaces. The earliest plas­
terwork consisted of two coats of lime and sand plas­
ter; later in the 19th century, a third or finish coat was 
applied that consisted of both lime and gypsum. Decora­
tive units were generally attached to the substrate using 
plaster as an adhesive. 
Signs of Failure. Failure of the substrate is more typical 
than failure of the plaster ornament itself. Among the 
reasons for deterioration, structural movement (see Fig. 
10) and water intrusion (see Fig. 11) are the most dele­
terious. Buildings move and settle, causing deflection 
and delamination which result in stress cracking. These
cracks often begin at the corners of windows and doors
and extend upward at acute angles (see Fig. 12). Roof 
or plumbing leaks make finishes discolor and peel and 
cause efflorescence, especially on plain-run or enriched
cornices. Unheated buildings with water intrusion are 
subject to freeze-thaw cycles which ultimately result in 
base coat and ornamental plaster failure (see Fig. 13). 
 
 
 
Fig. 10. Structural settling has caused this ceiling to deflect. Prior 
to restoring the damaged plaster and final repainting, a structural 
engineer experienced in historic preseroation will be engaged to 
shore-up the ceiling from below and reattach the sagging ceiling 
plaster with the joists above (see also Fig. 17 under Immediate 
Action.) Photo: National Park Service files. 
6 
Fig. 11. The cornice of an Iowa courthouse has been seuerely dam­
aged from a roof leak. In order to repair the ornamental plaster, a 
thixotropic rubber impression will be taken (with the paint build-up 
undisturbed). The efflorescence will be remaved and fresh plaster 
casts installed so that egg and dart, dentil and leaf molding are 
perfectly aligned. Photo: National Park Service files. 
Fig. 12. Settlement caused stress cracking through both fl.at wall 
and ornamental plaster. Repairs to the cornice molding involve 
chamfering the stress cracks to a "V groove"and patching with a 
mixture of gypsum and lime. The cornice can be countersunk­
screwed to its substrate to preuent further mavement. Screw heads 
are then plastered aver. The crack running through the painting will 
need to be filled carefully, and the painting restored by a trained 
conseroator. Photo: Jack E. Boucher, Historic American Buildings 
Survey.

Fig. 13. Water intrusion and freeze/thaw cycles caused extensive 
efflorescence and ornamental plaster failure. The plaster needed 
almost total replacement within the rehabilitation project. Photo: 
Commercial Photographies. 
Fig. 14. A mitered portion of this impost capital abacus has fallen, 
revealing the plaster adhesive material. Repairs are made by obtain­
ing a section through the abacus, making a bench-run length, cut­
ting, fitting, and readhering the missing piece. Finally, the joints 
are pointed. Photo: Lee H. Nelson, FA/A. 
In addition, keying and adhesive properties may be 
further jeopardized by weak original mixes (see Fig. 
14) that were improperly applied. Substrate failure typi­
cally results from faulty lathing or rusty lath nails, 
causing ceilings to fall. In the 20th century, vibration 
from heavy vehicular traffic, nearby blasting, and even 
repeated sonic booms may contribute to damaging 
ornamental plaster. Inadequate support in an original 
design may also be to blame when particularly heavy 
units have simply broken off over time (Fig. 15). Fi­
nally, new mechanical systems, suspended ceilings and 
partition walls insensitively installed in adaptive use 
projects, show little regard for the inspired decorations 
of earlier periods (see Fig. 16). 
Repairing and Replacing. Plaster failure is a matter of 
degree. For example, top coat failure can be repaired by 
Fig. 15. U. S. Treasury Cash Room, Washington, D.C. c. 1830. 
Designed by Robert Mills in the Greek Revival style, the unrein­
forced shell fl-utes most likely broke as a result of their weight. As 
part of an overall restoration of the room, the broken parts were 
molded on site, recast, then re-attached using wooden strips to pin 
them in place. Photo: Laurie R. Hammel. 
Fig. 16. The Auditorium Building, Chicago, Illinois, 1889, by Louis 
Sullivan. Earlier insensitive alterations were removed prior to resto­
ration of the room. In the photo, a partition wall has already been 
removed; the electrical conduit and a ventilation grille followed. 
Plaster patching and painting were the final steps of restoration 
work. Photo: National Park Service files. 
7 

b 
applying a new finish coat over a sound early sub­
strate. Also, if cracking or loss of all three coats has 
occurred and is not combined with major structural 
failure, it can be repaired much like flat wall plaster. 
For ornamental plaster, however, repair beyond patch­
ing is often equivalent to targeted replacement of entire 
lengths or portions of run-in-place and cast ornamenta­
tion. Pieces that are deteriorated or damaged beyond 
plain patching must be removed and replaced with 
new pieces that exactly match the existing historic plas­
ter. For this reason, partial restoration is often a more 
accurate term than repair. But whichever term is used, 
it is not recommended that repair of ornamental plaster 
be undertaken at any level by property owners; it is a 
craft requiring years of training and experience. A qual ­
ified professional should always be called in to make an 
inventory of ornamental plaster enrichments and to 
identify those details which are repairable onsite and 
which should be removed for repair or remanufacture 
in the shop. 
Immediate Action 
Once the cause and extent of damage have been deter ­
mined, treatments such as shoring, stabilization, and 
limited demolition can begin, preparatory to repairing 
or restoring historic ornamental plaster. 
First, roof or plumbing leaks must be repaired to elimi­
nate the problem of water intrusion. General structural 
repairs should be undertaken to arrest building move­
ment, which weakens the base coat plasters to which 
the ornamental enrichments are attached. Ornamental 
plaster deflection should be corrected by shoring from 
below followed by re-anchoring (see Fig. 17). 
Testing for poor adhesion of base coat to lath or orna­
ment to base coat, should be conducted to reduce fur­
ther loss of enrichment. Adaptive use intrusions 
should be carefully removed to protect the existing 
decorative plasterwork. 
Code-required fire suppression systems should be eval­
uated at this time. Modern building codes may require 
heat/smoke/flame detectors and automatic sprinkler 
systems of various types and applications. Fire sup­
pression systems as well as all mechanical systems 
(HVAC, plumbing and electrical) systems should be 
designed so that they accomplish their purpose with 
minimal impact on the decorative plaster. Plumbing for 
an automatic sprinkler system, for example, can be run 
above new and existing coffering so that the sprinkler 
heads barely protrude from the rosette centers in the 
coffered design. Access should be provided for future 
system maintenance or repair. 
A 20th Century Shop Tour-Personnel, 
Materials, and Processes 
Before discussing how decorative forms such as cor­
nices, medallions, and ceiling coffers are repaired on­
site and in the shop by ornamental plasterers, the 
"shop tour" explains traditional casting processes used 
in conjunction with updated materials. A shop tour can 
be exciting, but confusing to the layman without some 
explanation of modeling, molding, and casting activi­
ties. For a prospective client, a visit to the plaster stu­
dio or site can be of value in choosing a qualified 
plastering contractor. 
Shop and Personnel. Generally, a highly functional 
shop should look well organized-that is, not in disar­
ray with remnants of past projects lying about to im­
pede current production. Old molds may be in 
abundance, but hanging from the wall or otherwise 
"on file." Machinery (saws and drill presses) and hand 
tools should appear well maintained. In short, one 
might evaluate such a studio as one does an auto me­
chanic's shop: does it inspire confidence? This is the 
time to look around and ask questions. What is the 
shop's past project work experience? Is the firm mostly 
in valved in new ccnstruction work or total reconstruc­
tion? More important than the way the shop looks, is 
the personnel sufficiently experienced in making re­
pairs to historic decorative plaster? What about training 
and apprenticeships? How did the staff learn the 
trade? The more that is known about the total opera­
tion the better . 
Fig. 17 (a) Where this ceiling was suffering from structural failure, the first step was to shore it up from below. (b) Toggle bolts were used to reat­
tach the plaster molding to the ceiling joists. The ceiling was then patched with gypsum and lime, prior to restoring the significant paint finishes. 
Photos: National Park Service files. 
8 

Molding Rubber. Familiarity with contemporary mold­
ing rubbers is desirable . There are several formulations 
currently on the market. In the past, flexible molds 
were made with hide glue melted in a double boiler 
and poured over plaster originals which had been pre­
pared with an appropriate parting agent. Of the newer 
rubbers, latex (painted on the model coat by coat) is 
time consuming and has little dimensional accuracy; 
polysulfide distorts under pressure; and silicone is 
needlessly expensive. Urethane rubber, with a 30-
durometer hardness, is the current choice. Urethanes 
are manufactured as pourable liquids and as thixotro­
pic pastes so that they can be used on vertical or over­
head surfaces. The paste is especially useful for onsite 
impressions of existing ornament; the liquid is best 
used in the shop much as hide glue or gelatin was 
historically. Urethane rubber has the ability to repro­
duce detail as fine as a fingerprint and does not de­
grade during most ornamental plaster projects. No 
flexible molding material lasts forever, so spare casts 
should be maintained for future remolding. 
Molding Plaster. Molding plaster will also be in evi­
dence; it is the product most similar to that used his­
torically. This plaster is finely ground to accept the 
detail of the rubber molds, not so hard as to prohibit 
tooling, and combines readily with finish lime. High­
strength plaster is available in varying densities, some 
with added components for specific purposes. Most 
shops maintain these varieties, but use molding plaster 
for typical work. 
Sheet Metal Templates. The contractor's familiarity with 
sheet metal is critical. Accurate template blades are 
required to reproduce both straight and curved sections 
of moldings (see Fig. 3, above). The blades must be 
carefully cut, filed, and sanded in order to form exact 
reproductive units . A tour of a sizeable shop will in­
clude observation of running techniques and the 
results of this activity should be much in evidence. 
Regardless of size, these runs should be smooth and 
true when made by qualified craftsmen. 
Models. Models, whether of capitals, cornices, medal­
lions or cartouches, are made as whole units or in parts 
depending on project demands. Completeness, accu­
rate dimensions, and attention to historic styles are 
essential ingredients of successful models. Each part of 
a model has a name, i.e., <lentil, guilloche, rinceau or 
bolection molding, modillion, egg and dart, and the 
designers and restorers of these ornaments should 
know their names. Failure to identify these parts cor­
rectly should be of concern to a prospective client. 
Molds. Molds are "negative forms" produced from 
completed models. Simple flood molds require a sepa­
rator or barrier coat over the original and a surround­
ing fence to prevent the liquid rubber from leaking out. 
Larger or more complicated molds are made in pieces 
or with a layer of rubber supported by a plaster shell or 
mother mold attached to a wooden or metal frame. 
Following completion of a successful mold, the original 
model is discarded because it is now possible for it to 
be accurately reproduced. 
Casting the Molds. Casting operations should appear 
clean and efficient. A skillful caster's output can be 
voluminous and often looks effortless as it is being 
produced. Raw materials are close at hand, molds are 
rarely without curing plaster in them, production is 
stored so as not to warp while it is still wet and each 
cycle, from mixing to pouring, setting, and demolding 
is accomplished so as not to waste time or break plaster 
casts. A good caster generally obviates the need for a 
finishing department. 
Two other aspects should be noted . Shipping facilities 
are critical to move the product to the restoration site 
safely. Drawing and design space should be separate 
from the production floor. In summary, the modern 
ornamental plaster shop inevitably looks quite different 
from that pictured earlier in this Preservation Brief (see 
Fig. 1, above), but, with the exception of contemporary 
tools and materials, the operations are the same. The 
following sections discuss how repairs are made by 
today's plaster tradesmen . 
Repairing Historic Ornamental Plaster 
Cornice. A plain run or ornamented plaster cornice 
which has undergone damage or severe deterioration 
can often be repaired. Footage which is beyond repair 
should be identified and be carefully demolished to 
expose the underlying structure beneath to which the 
molding was secured. To replace the missing lengths, 
the first step is to obtain a cross-section, or profile, 
through the cornice from finish ceiling to finish wall 
lines. This is best accomplished using one of these 
methods: 
1. A section through the cornice may be determined 
by sawing through the molding, inserting a sheet 
metal blank in the slot and tracing the profile di­
rectly on the template . This is considerably more 
accurate than the profile gauge, but will require re­
pointing the saw kerf; alternatively, the cut may be 
made on one of the deteriorated pieces, provided it 
was removed as an intact unit. 
2. The section may be obtained by making a thixo­
tropic rubber impression of the molding, casting the 
result in fresh plaster and sawing through the cast to 
transfer the cross-section to a sheet metal template. 
With the section determined, it is drawn onto 22-gauge 
galvanized sheet metal, cut with tin snips and carefully 
filed to the hne. The template is checked periodically 
against the original profile to assure a perfect match. 
With the template blade finally complete, it is nailed to 
stock and slipper (see Fig. 3, above), ready for running 
the replacement footage. 
Short lengths of new cornice are best run on a bench 
using gypsum and lime; the reproduction molding 
should be somewhat longer than the required length 
(see Fig 18). The new footage is cut and fit in place to 
match the existing cornice, then securely countersunk­
screwed to studs, joists and/or blocking. The resulting 
JOmts are pomted with flat mitering rods, flush with 
adjacent members (see Fig. 5, above). 
9 

C 
Longer lengths of cornice may be run in place, much as 
they were historically. Care should be taken that the 
position of the running mold engages with the existing 
work at either end of the run. Yet another method is to 
bench run the cornice to five or six feet, make a rubber 
mold of the model, and pre-cast the replacement parts 
either at the site or in the shop. 
10 
Fig. 18. Repairing a Cornice. (a) In the restoration of the Henry 
Hirshfeld House, a 19th century residence in Austin, Texas, removal
of a tin ceiling revealed a damaged plain-run cornice. Photo: John 
Volz, AJA. (b) A sectior through the molding was taken, a template 
blade cut, horsed-up, and run on a bench using gypsum and lime. 
Photo: Charles E. Fisher. (c) The new cornice was then cut, fitted, 
and applied to new blocking between wall and ceiling. The external 
miter and returns were pointed using the miter rod. After the ceiling 
restoration was complete, other finishes, such as wallpaper, 
were applied. Photo: Candace Volz. 
als have "fingerprint detail" capability . Modern casts 
are then applied to the new or original runs, again 
using plaster as an adhesive. 
Ceiling Medallion. Ceiling medallions are often in 
greater jeopardy than cornices because the joist-lath­
basecoat support system is susceptible to deflection 
and the force of gravity. The problems of ceiling failure 
are more frequent in the centers of parlors because 
circular-run and shop-cast ornament is often quite 
heavy and was not historically attached with any addi­
tional mechanical fasteners such as bolts and screws. 
If the lath or keys have failed, plaster ceiling ornament 
may be saved, in whole or in part, by removing floor 
boards above, then drilling and injecting each lath with 
an elastic acrylic or epoxy material to reattach plaster to 
lath, and lath to the joists. This is a recently developed 
procedure which should only be undertaken by experi­
enced professionals . The consolidation and reattach­
ment process has been used successfully in period 
structures with dramatic results when important plaster 
and painted surfaces would otherwise have been lost. 
If the damaged cornice is ornamented, samples of the 
enrichment should be removed, making sure that 
whole original units are obtained . This is a difficult 
process, since these units were stuck into plain-run 
recesses called "sinkages" using plaster as an adhesive. 
In order to insert a flat chisel behind the ornament to 
break the bond, some units may have to be sacrificed. 
Sacrifice should be minimal . The excised enrichment 
should then be removed to the shop for rubber mold­
ing and casting either with or without the paint 
buildup, depending on the demands of the project. 
Whereas molding with several layers of paint make it 
hard to discern new casts from originals, paint-stripped 
molding reveals the remarkable talents of the period 
modelmakers. As noted, contemporary rubber materi-

Fig. 19. Ceiling medallions may need repair or replacement. The ornamental plasterer takes impressions of the existing plaster, then casts new 
plaster elements. Adhesive plaster is used to reattach the new pieces. Left:Damaged elliptical medallion from Rockland, Fairmount Park, Philadel­
phia, Pennsylvania. Photo: David Flaharty. Right: Fragments of a medallion from the Bennett House, Charleston, South Carolina. The fragments 
serve as documentation for the replacement medallion. Photo: Peter Sanders . 
Fig. 20. Repairing a Medallion. Left: The plaster models shown are first lathered with a parting agent (liquid soap). To make a flood mold, 
urethane rubber is poured between wood fences clamped together and dammed with clay. Right: Casting plaster is then spooned into the two-part 
urethane mold. The mold showing six ornaments in the process of being cast is called a "gang mold." The others are simply single molds. Photos: 
David Flaharty. 
Historic lighting fixtures often hung from elaborate 
ceiling medallions . When these fixtures were later con­
verted to gas and electrical service , the central orna­
mental plaster canopies were sometimes damaged by 
insensitive tradesmen. More recent adaptive use pro­
jects may have caused additional damage . 
Damaged ceiling medallions (see Fig. 19a) can be re­
paired by carefully removing representative plaster 
ornamentation, molding and recasting in the shop (see 
Fig. 20) and replacing the new enrichments so that 
they align perfectly with the original pattern. Polyvinyl 
acetate bonding agents are applied to the background 
and ornament so that the adhesive plaster grips tightly. 
Alternatively, a severely damaged medallion (see 19b) 
can be replaced using the fragments as physical docu­
mentation to cast a visually accurate replacement. 
Sections of plain -run circular molding may also be re­
paired by determining a section through the run and 
the radius from molding to pivot point . As with cor­
nices, the run should be made on a bench to a length 
greater than required, then cut and fit in place. Circu­
lar run sections are installed using plaster adhesives on 
bonded surfaces or modern construction adhesives 
after referring to manufacturers' instructions as to 
whether the adhesive is recommended for use on wet 
or dry materials . Coarse-threaded, galvanized screws 
are often countersunk to aid the bond; if possible, the 
screws should be inserted at points that will ultimately 
be covered with cast enrichments. 
Ceiling medallions frequently appear in matching dou­
ble parlors. It is not unusual for one ceiling to fail while 
its mate remains undamaged. The flat plastered ceiling 
over the location of the missing medallion often has a 
"ghost;' confirming that a ceiling medallion once orna­
mented the parlor. The missing medallion may be re­
manufactured by securing a section, dimensions, and 
samples of cast enrichments from the surviving orna­
ment and accurately following the original procedure 
(see Fig. 7, above). The ceiling on which the new work 
is to be set should be examined for its soundness and, 
if necessary, relathed (with self-furring metal lath) and 
11 

plastered. The pivot point for a circular run is screwed 
into a wooden block, force-fit into the center electrical 
box, and removed after the run is completed. 
After 1850, particularly in the South, ceiling medallions 
were often designed with cast ornament only; no plain­
run surround was used. Repair of such medallions 
proceeds as described above but without bordering 
molding. 
An important point needs to be made about adding 
ceiling medallions ( or any other kind of ornamental 
plaster element) when there is a lack of historical evi­
dence. If there is no ghost mark or other documenta­
tion, indicating a medallion once existed, then the 
room should remain unornamented as it was historically. 
Adding conjectural ornamentation of any type or mate­
rial (i.e., shop-cast or glass fiber reinforced plaster or 
polystyrene foam substitutes) can create a false sense of 
historical development contrary to the preservation 
principles stated in The Secretary of the Interior's Stand­
ards for Historic Preservation Projects. However, if there is 
clear indication that a ceiling medallion once existed, 
but there is inadequate documentation for its replace­
ment, a medallion compatible with the room's historic 
character may be considered. Professional advice 
should be sought. 
Coffered Ceiling. Like cornices and medallions, coffered 
ceilings suffer from poor maintenance practices and 
structural problems; however, these individually cast 
ceiling units are particularly vulnerable when a build­
ing is being rehabilitated and great care is not taken in 
executing the work. In the most serious of cases, por­
tions of a roof can collapse, dropping heavy debris 
through the hanging coffering panels, and demolishing 
large portions of the ornamentation (see Fig. 21). 
But even this level of damage can usually be remedied 
by restoration professionals. Immediate action calls for 
shoring the areas adjacent to the damage, and inspect­
ing the hanging apparatus for unforeseen detachment 
Fig. 21. The Yiddish Arts Theater, New York City, c. 1920s. The 
concrete roof of this building collapsed, damaging portions of the 
existing Moorish style coffered ceiling. The square coffer unit was 
easily identifiable and was removed to a casting shop for reproduc­
tion. Photo: David Flaharty. 
12 
and deflection. New channel iron is used to stabilize 
the existing coffers and ties reinforced, as necessary. 
An intact coffering unit is then identified and carefully 
removed to a casting shop for molding and casting (see 
Fig. 22). When re-hung, the units are painted to match 
the historic coffering (see Fig. 23). 
Coffered ceilings appear with plain run or enriched 
cornices . In most cases it is recommended that the 
cornice be repaired first in order to achieve straight and 
level moldings. Then the damaged coffers should be 
replaced with the matching new coffers and the joints 
between pointed. Access from above is critical. 
Finding and Evaluating a Contractor 
When ornamental plaster damage or deterioration has 
been identified, the historic property owner, architect, 
Fig. 22. Repairing a Coffered Ceiling. As part of the theater rehabil­
itation, the coffered ceiling panels are being reproduced in urethane 
rubber molds and reinforced with open weave burlap and wood fiber. 
Steel channel irons can be seen, attached to the backs of the casts. 
Later, these irons are used to hang the panels from a superstructure 
at the site. Photo: David Flaharty. 
Fig. 23. A pre-cast coffer is lifted into place to abut adjacent panels. 
Tie wire will be fastened to the channel irons and the superstructure 
above, twisted to level, and finally wadded with wood fiber soaked in 
plaster to prevent the wire from stretching. Photo: David Flaharty. 

or developer should secure the services of a reputable 
restoration contractor before proceeding further. It is 
clear as more and more projects are undertaken, that 
there is a wide disparity of skills within the trade to­
day. This is partly due to the introduction of gypsum 
board as a substitute for traditional plastering. As gyp­
sum board became popular after World War II, plaster­
ers saw the demand for their skills decline. Plastering 
techniques were forgotten because they were often not 
passed down within shops and families. However, 
ornamental plaster studios have seen a resurgence in 
demand for their services in the last decade, particu­
larly as more historic buildings are rehabilitated (see 
Fig. 24). 
Locating an experienced contractor who is suitable for 
your particular project is the goal. First, many profes­
sional preservation organizations can provide refer­
ences for suitable restoration contractors. Local 
plasterers' unions should also be able to identify con­
tractors with experience in ornamental plaster restora­
tion projects. Architects with preservation and 
restoration project experience may recommend contrac­
tors they feel have done a good job for them in the 
past. Museums with period rooms have engaged crafts­
men to assemble the backgrounds for display of an­
tique furniture and decorative arts. Finally, historical 
societies, either national, state, or municipally organ­
ized, may have funded projects which repaired and 
restored ornamental plaster. 
Once several contractors have been identified, their 
specific abilities need to be evaluated. Prospective con­
tractors should be invited to visit the job site to see and 
define the scope of work; written proposals, including 
prices, from all bidders, are essential for comparison. 
References should be provided and investigated. An 
outside consultant may be engaged or an informal ad­
viser designated to aid in evaluating the experience and 
proposals of the bidders. To get a total picture, a com­
pleted project should ideally be visited by the prospec­
tive client with the contractor present to answer 
questions which often arise. 
Finally, although this may not always be achievable, 
the bidder's studio may be visited, preferably on a nor­
mal working day (see A 20th Century Shop Tour, 
above.) Alternatively, the bidder may be visited while 
working onsite. Some ornamental plasterers simply do 
not have shops. They prefer to cast onsite, adhering 
the casts while the plaster is wet, and coordinating the 
job closely with the architect, who inspects each unit as 
it is cast and before it is installed . 
Conclusion 
Decorative plasterwork is usually a component of the 
historic character of interiors and, consequently, The 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation
Projects call for its protection, maintenance, and repair. 
Where decorative plasterwork has deteriorated beyond 
repair, it should be replaced to match the old. Based on 
physical documentation, both repair and replacement 
can be accomplished using traditional molding plaster 
Fig. 24. This plaster studio is well organized, with ample work 
space. Note the plaster casts hanging neatly on the wall. Photo: 
Berry and Homer, Philadelphia. 
and casting procedures, together with the best of the 
modern molding materials available. Once a "lost art" 
after the Depression years, the skills of today's orna­
mental plasterers are increasingly in demand as part of 
historic preservation project teams. The ingenious and 
inspired decorative work created by our earlier archi­
tects and artisans can now be assured an extended life. 
13 

14 
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 
Bibliography 
Bankart, George. The Art of the Plasterer. London: B. T. Batsford, 1908. 
Dalton , Byron William. Practical Plastering and Cement Finishing and 
Related Subjects. Chicago, Illinois: Byron William Dalton, 1949. 
Flaharty, David. "Ornamental Plaster Restoration." Fine Homebuilding. 
No. 57, December, 1989/January 1990, pp. 38-42. 
Garrison, John Mark. "Decorative Plaster: Running Cornices." The 
Old-House Journal. Vol. XII., No. 101, December, 1984, pp. 214-219. 
----- · "Casting Decorative Plaster." The Old-House Journal. 
Vol. XIII, No. 9, November, 1985, pp. 186-189. 
Gypsum Construction Handbook. Chicago, Illinois : United States 
Gypsum Co., 1986. 
Harris, Cyril M., editor. Illustrated Dictionary of Historic Architecture. 
New York: Dover Publications , 1983. 
Millar, William. Plastering, Plain and Decorative. London: B. T. 
Batsford, 1897. 
Phillips, Morgan. "Adhesives for the Reattachment of Loose Plaster;' 
Association for Preservation Technology Bulletin, Vol. XII, No. 2, 1980, 
pp. 37-63. 
Van den Branden, F. and Hartsell, Thomas L. Plastering Skills. 
Homewood, Illinois : American Technical Publishers, Inc., 1984. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks go to the technical experts in the field who reviewed and commented 
upon the draft manuscript: M . Earle Felber, Andrew Ladygo Oefferson Poplar 
Forest), Lee H. Nelson , FAIA, Gilbert Wolf (National Plastering Industries) , and 
Stephen Zychal (Ornamental Plastering, Inc.). Insightful comments were 
offered Gary L. Hume, Acting Chief, Preservation Assistance Division , Karen 
Kummer , Small Homes Council-Building Research Council , University of 
Illinois, NPS cultural resources program regional offices, and the staff of 
Technical Preservation Services Branch, H. Ward Jandl, Chief. Old-House Journal 
and Fine Homebuilding were most generous to grant permission to use photo­
graphs from their publications. Kay D. Weeks is credited with coordinating 
this cooperative publication project and general editorship. 
This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for
credit to the author and the National Park Service are appreciated. October, 1990. 