PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Heating, Ventilating, and Cooling 
Historic Buildings: 
Problems and Recommended Approaches 
Sharon C. Park, AJA 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
The need for modern mechanical systems is one of the 
most common reasons to undertake work on historic 
buildings. Such work includes upgrading older me­
chanical systems, improving the energy efficiency of 
existing buildings, installing new heating, ventilation or 
air conditioning (HVAC) systems , or- particularly for 
museums-installing a climate control system with 
humidification and dehumidification capabilities . Deci­
sions to install new HVAC or climate control systems 
often result from concern for occupant health and com­
fort, the desire to make older buildings marketable , or 
the need to provide specialized environments for oper ­
ating computers, storing artifacts, or displaying mu­
seum collections . Unfortunately, occupant comfort and 
concerns for the objects within the building are some ­
times given greater consideration than the building 
itself. In too many cases, applying modern standards 
of interior climate comfort to historic buildings has 
proven detrimental to historic materials and decorative 
finishes. 
This Preservation Brief underscores the importance of 
careful planning in order to balance the preservation 
objectives with interior climate needs of the building . It 
is not intended as a technical guide to calculate ton­
nage or to size piping or ductwork. Rather, this Brief 
identifies some of the problems associated with install­
ing mechanical systems in historic buildings and rec­
ommends approaches to minimizing the physical and 
visual damage associated with installing and maintain ­
ing these new or upgraded systems. 
Historic buildings are not easily adapted to house 
modern precision mechanical systems. Careful plan­
ning must be provided early on to ensure that deci­
sions made during the design and installation phases 
of a new system are appropriate . Since new mechanical 
and other related systems, such as electrical and fire 
suppression, can use up to 10% of a building's square 
footage and 30%-40% of an overall rehabilitation 
budget , decisions must be made in a systematic and 
coordinated manner. The installation of inappropriate 
mechanical systems may result in any or all of the 
following: 
• large sections of historic materials are removed to 
install or house new systems. 
• historic structural systems are weakened by carrying 
the weight of, and sustaining vibrations from, large 
equipment. 
• moisture introduced into the building as part of a 
new system migrates into historic materials and 
causes damage, including biodegradation, freeze/ 
thaw action, and surface staining . 
• exterior cladding or interior finishes are stripped to 
install new vapor barriers and insula tion. 
• historic finishes, features, and spaces are altered by 
dropped ceilings and boxedchases or by poorly lo­
cated grilles, registers, and equipment. 
• systems that are too large or too small are installed 
before there is a clearly planned use or a new tenant. 
For historic properties it is critical to understand what 
spaces, features, and finishes are historic in the build­
ing, what should be retained, and what the realistic 
heating, ventilating, and cooling needs are for the 
building, its occupants , and its contents. A systematic 
approach, involving preservation planning, preserva­
tion design, and a follow-up program of monitoring 
and maintenance, can ensure that new systems are 
successfully added-or existing systems are suitably 
upgraded-while preserving the historic integrity of the
building. 
No set formula exists for determining what type of 
mechanical system is best for a specific building. Each 
building and its needs must be evaluated separately. 
Some buildings will be so significant that every effort 
must be made to protect the historic materials and sys­
tems in place with minimal intrusion from new sys­
tems. Some buildings will have museum collections 
that need special climate control. In such cases, cura­
torial needs must be considered-but not to the ulti­
mate detriment of the historic building resource. Other 

buildings will be rehabilitated for commercial use. For 
them, a variety of systems might be acceptable, as long 
as significant spaces, features, and finishes are retained. 
Most mechanical systems require upgrading or re­
placement within 15-30 years due to wear and tear or 
the availability of improved technology. Therefore, his­
toric buildings should not be greatly altered or other ­
wise sacrificed in an effort to meet short-term system s 
objectives . 
History of Mechanical Systems 
The history of mechanical systems in buildings involves 
a study of inventions and ingenuity as building own­
ers, architects, and engineers devised ways to improve 
the interior climate of their buildings. Following are 
highlights in the evolution of heating, ventilating, and 
cooling systems in historic buildings. 
Eighteenth Century. Early heating and ventilation in 
America relied upon common sense methods of manag­
ing the environment (see figure 1). Builders purpo sely 
sited houses to capture winter sun and prevailing sum­
mer cross breezes; they chose materials that could help 
protect the inhabitants from the elements , and took 
precautions against precipitation and damaging drain ­
age patterns. The location and sizes of window s, 
doors, porches, and the floor plan itself often evolved 
to maximize ventilation . Heating was primarily from 
fireplaces or stoves and, therefore, was at the source of 
delivery . In 1744, Benjamin Franklin designed his 
"Pennsylvania stove" with a fresh air intake in order to 
maximize the heat radiated into the room and to mini­
mize annoying smoke. 
Thermal insulation was rudimentary-often wattle 
and daub, brick and wood nogging. The comfort level 
for occupants was low, but the relatively small differ­
ence between internal and external temperatures and 
relative humidity allowed building materials to expand 
and contract with the seasons. 
Regional styles and architectural features reflected 
regional climates. In warm , dry and sunny climates, 
thick adobe walls offered shelter from the sun and kept 
the inside temperatures cool. Verandas , courtyards , 
porches, and high ceilings also reduced the impact of 
the sun. Hot and humid climates called for elevated 
living floors , louvered grilles and shutters, balconies , 
and interior courtyards to help circulate air. 
Nineteenth Century. The industrial revolution pro­
vided the technological means for controlling the envi­
ronment for the first time (see figure 2). The dual 
developments of steam energy from coal and industrial 
mass production made possible early central heating 
systems with distribution of heated air or steam using 
metal ducts or pipes. Improvements were made to 
early wrought iron boilers and by late century , steam 
and low pressure hot water radiator systems were in 
common use, both in offices and residences . Some 
large institutional buildings heated air in furnaces and 
distributed it throughout the building in brick flues 
with a network of metal pipes delivering heated air to 
individual rooms . Residential designs of the period 
often used gravity hot air systems utilizing decorative 
floor and ceiling grilles. 
Ventilation became more scientific and the introdu c-
2 
1. Eighteenth century and later vernacular architecture depended on the 
siting of the building, deciduous trees, cross ventilation, and the placement 
of windows and chimneys to maximize winter heating and natural summer 
cooling. Regional details, as seen in this Virginia house, include external 
chimneys and a separate summer kitchen to reduce fire risk and isolate heat 
in the summer. Photo: NPS Files. 
2. Nineteenth century buildings continued to use architectural features such 
as porches, cupolas, and awnings to make the buildings more comfortable in 
summer, but heating was greatly improved by hot water or steam radiators. 
Photo: NPS Files 

tion of fresh air into buildings became an important 
component of heating and cooling. Improved forced air 
ventilation became possible in mid-century with the 
introduction of power-driven fans. Architectural fea­
tures such as porches, awnings, window and door 
transoms, large open-work iron roof trusses, roof mon­
itors, cupolas, skylights and clerestory windows helped 
to dissipate heat and provide healthy ventilation. 
Cavity wall construction, popular in masonry struc­
tures, improved the insulating qualities of a building 
and also provided a natural cavity for the dissipation of 
moisture produced on the interior of the building. In 
some buildings, cinder chips and broken masonry filler 
between structural iron beams and jack arch floor 
vaults provided thermal insulation as well as fire­
proofing. Mineral wool and cork were new sources of 
lightweight insulation and were forerunners of contem­
porary batt and blanket insulation. 
The technology of the age, however, was not suffic­
ient to produce "tight" buildings. There was still only a 
moderate difference between internal and external tem­
peratures. This was due, in part, to the limitations of 
early insulation, the almost exclusive use of single 
glazed windows, and the absence of air-tight construc­
tion. The presence of ventilating fans and the reliance 
on architectural features, such as operable windows, 
cupolas and transoms, allowed sufficient air movement 
to keep buildings well ventilated. Building materials 
could behave in a fairly traditional way, expanding and 
contracting with the seasons. 
Twentieth Century. The twentieth century saw inten­
sive development of new technologies and the notion 
of fully integrating mechanical systems (see figure 3). Oil 
and gas furnaces developed in the nineteenth century 
were improved and made more efficient, with electric­
ity becoming the critical source of power for building 
systems in the latter half of the century. Forced air heat­
ing systems with ducts and registers became popular 
for all types of buildings and allowed architects to ex­
periment with architectural forms free from mechanical 
encumbrances. In the 1920s large-scale theaters and 
auditoriums introduced central air conditioning, and by 
mid-century forced air systems which combined heat­
ing and air conditioning in the same ductwork set a 
new standard for comfort and convenience. The combi­
nation and coordination of a variety of systems came 
together in the post-World War II highrise buildings; 
complex heating and air conditioning plants, electric 
elevators, mechanical towers, ventilation fans, and full 
service electric lighting were integrated into the build­
ing's design. 
The insulating qualities of building materials im­
proved. Synthetic materials, such as spun fiberglass 
batt insulation, were fully developed by mid-century. 
Prototypes of insulated thermal glazing and integral 
storm window systems were promoted in construction 
journals. Caulking to seal out perimeter air around 
window and door openings became a standard con­
struction detail. 
The last quarter of the twentieth century has seen 
making HVAC systems more energy efficient and better 
integrated. The use of vapor barriers to control mois­
ture migration, thermally efficient windows, caulking 
and gaskets, compressed thin wall insulation, has be­
come standard practice. New integrated systems now 
combine interior climate control with fire suppression, 
lighting, air filtration, temperature and humidity con­
trol, and security detection. Computers regulate the 
performance of these integrated systems based on the 
time of day, day of the week, occupancy, and outside 
ambient temperature. 
3. The circa 1928 Fox Theater in Detroit, designed by C. Howard Crane, 
was one of the earliest twentieth century buildings to provide air condition­
ing to its patrons. The early water-cooled system was recently restored. 
Commercial and high rise buildings of the twentieth century were able, 
mostly th rough electrical power, to provide sophisticated systems that inte­
grated many building services. Photo: William Kessler and Associates, 
Architects. 
Climate Control and Preservation 
Although twentieth century mechanical systems tech­
nology has had a tremendous impact on making his­
toric buildings comfortable, the introduction of these 
new systems in older buildings is not without prob­
lems. The attempt to meet and maintain modern cli­
mate control standards may in fact be damaging to historic 
resources. Modern systems are often over-designed to 
compensate for inherent inefficiencies of some historic 
buildings materials and plan layouts. Energy retrofit 
measures, such as installing exterior wall insulation 
and vapor barriers or the sealing of operable window 
and vents, ultimately affect the performance and can 
reduce the life of aging historic materials. 
3 

0 
70 
60 
50 
E 
30 
20 
outside inside 
II 
0 
II 
> 
II 
0 
II 
> 
outside inside 
95 
90 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
outside inside 
sealant 
outlet 
condensation 
b. Hot, Humid Climate Condition 
32°F. 
c. Moisture Condensation in Walls 
In general, the greater the differential between the 
interior and exterior temperature and humidity levels, 
the greater the potential for damage. As natural vapor 
pressure moves moisture from a warm area to a colder, 
dryer area, condensation will occur on or in building 
materials in the colder area (see figure 4). Too little 
humidity in winter, for example, can dry and crack 
historic wooden or painted surfaces. Too much humid­
ity in winter causes moisture to collect on cold sur­
faces, such as windows, or to migrate into walls. As a 
result, this condensation deteriorates wooden or metal 
windows and causes rotting of walls and wooden 
structural elements, dampening insulation and holding 
moisture against exterior surfaces. Moisture migration 
through walls can cause the corrosion of metal an­
chors, angles, nails or wire lath, can blister and peel 
exterior paint, or can leave efflorescence and salt de­
posits on exterior masonry. In cold climates, freeze­
thaw damage can result from excessive moisture in 
external walls. 
To avoid these types of damage to a historic building, 
it is important to understand how building components 
work together as a system. Methods for controlling 
interior temperature and humidity and improving ven­
tilation must be considered in any new or upgraded 
HVAC or climate control system. While certain energy 
retrofit measures will have a positive effect on the over­
all building, installing effective vapor barriers in his­
toric walls is difficult and often results in destruction of 
significant historic materials (see figure 5). 
5. The installation of vapor retarders in walls of historic buildings in an 
effort to contain interior moisture can cause serious damage to historic 
finishes as shown here. In this example, all the wall plaster and lath have 
been stripped in preparation for a vapor barrier prior to replastering. Con­
trolling interior temperature and relative humidity can be more effective than 
adding insulation and vapor barriers to historic perimeter walls. Photo: 
Ernest A. Conrad, P.E. 
4. Mechanical heating and cooling systems change the interior climate of a building. Moisture in the air will dissipate from the warmer area of a building to 
the colder area and can cause serious deterioration of historic materials. Condensation can form if the dew point occurs within the building wall, particularly 
one that has been insulated (see a and b). Even when vapor retarders are installed (c), any non-continuous areas will provide spaces for moisture to pass. Wall 
Section Drawings: NPS files 
4 

Planning the New System 
Climate control systems are generally classified accord­
ing to the medium used to condition the tem~erature: 
air, water, or a combination of both ( see overview on 
page 6 ) . The complexity of choices facing a building
owner or manager means that a systematicapproach is 
critical in determining the most suitable system for a 
building, its contents, and its occupants. No matter
which system is installed, a change in the mtenor ch­
mate will result. This physical change will in turn affect 
how the building materials perform. New registers, 
grilles, cabinets, or other accessories associated with 
the new mechanical system will also visually change 
the interior (and sometimes the exterior) appearance of 
the building. Regardless of the type or extent of a me­
chanical system, the owner of a historic building 
should know before a system is installed what it will 
look like and what problems can be anticipated during
the life of that system. The potential harm to a building
and costs to an owner of selecting the wrong mechani-
cal system are very great. 
The use of a building and its contents will largely 
determine the best type of mechanical system. The 
historic building materials and construction technology 
as well as the size and availability of secondary spaces 
within the historic structure will affect the choice of a 
system. It may be necessary to investigate a combina­
tion of systems. In each case, the needs of the user the 
needs of the building, and the needs of a collection or 
equipment must be considered. It may not be neces-
sary to have a comprehensive climate control sy_stem if 
climate-sensitive objects can be accommodated in spe­
cial areas or climate-controlled display cases . It may not 
be necessary to have central air conditioning_ in a mild 
climate if natural ventilation systems can be improved 
through the use of operable windows, awnings, ex­
haust fans, and other "low-tech" means. Modern 
standards for climate control developed for new con­
struction may not be achievable or desirable for historic
buildings. In each case, the lowest level of mterventwn 
needed to successfully accomplish the job should be selected. 
Before a system is chosen, the following planning 
steps are recommended: 
1. Determine the use of the building. The proposed 
use of the building (museum, commercial, residential, 
retail) will influence the type of system that should be 
installed. The number of people and functions to be 
housed in a building will establish the level of comfort 
and service that must be provided. Avoid uses that 
require major modifications to significant architectural
spaces. What is the intensity of use of the building:
intermittent or constant use, special events or seasonal 
events? Will the use of the building require major new 
services such as restaurants, laundries, kitchens, locker 
rooms, or other areas that generate moisture that may 
exacerbate climate control within the historic space? In 
the context of historic preservation, uses that require 
radical reconfigurations of historic spaces are inappro­
priate for the building. 
2. Assemble a qualified team. This team ideally 
should consist of a preservation architect, mechanical 
engineer, electrical engineer, structural engineer and 
preservation consultants, each knowledgeable in codes 
and local requirements. If a special use (church, mu-
seum, art studio) or a collection is involved, a specialist 
familiar with the mechanical requirements of that 
building type or collection should also be hired. 
Team members should be familiar with the needs of 
historic buildings and be able to balance complex fac­
tors: the preservation of the historic architecture (aes­
thetics and conservation), requirements imposed by 
mechanical systems ( quantified heating and cooling 
loads), building codes (health and safety), ten_ant re­
quirements (quality of comfort, ease of operation), ac­
cess (maintenance and future replacement), and the 
overall cost to the owner. 
3. Undertake a condition assessment of the existing 
building and its systems. What are the existing con­
struction materials and mechanical systems? What con­
dition are they in and are they reusable (see figure 6)? 
Where are existing chillers, boilers, air handlers, or 
cooling towers located? Look at the condition of all 
other services that may benefit from being integrated 
into a new system, such as electrical and fire suppres­
sion systems. Where can energy efficiency be improved 
to help downsize any new equipment added, and
which of the historic features, e.g. shutters, awnings,
skylights, can be reused (see figure 7)? Evaluate air 
infiltration through the exterior envelope; monitor the 
interior for temperature and humidity levels with hy­
grothermographs for at least a year. Identify building, 
site or equipment deficiencies or the presence of as­
bestos that must be corrected prior to the installation or 
upgrading of mechanical systems. 
6. A condition assessment during the planning stage would identify this 
round radiator in a small oval-shaped vestibule as a significant element of the 
historic heating system. In upgrading the mechanical system, the radiator 
should be retained. Photo: Michael C. Henry P.E., ALA. 
5 

cast iron radiator 
Cooling cycle 
compressor refrigerant flow 
heat in evaporator condenser heat out
expansion valve 
Overview of HVAC Systems 
WATER SYSTEMS: Hydronic radiators, Fan coil, or 
radiant pipes 
Water systems are generally called hydronic and use a network 
of pipes to deliver water to hot water radiators, radiant pipes set 
in floors or fan coil cabinets which can give both heating and 
cooling. Boilers produce hot water or steam; chillers produce 
chilled water for use with fan coil units. Thermostats control the 
temperature by zone for radiators and radiant floors. Fan coil 
units have individual controls. Radiant floors provide quiet, 
even heat, but are not common. 
Advantages: Piped systems are generally easier to install in 
historic buildings because the pipes are smaller than ductwork. 
Disadvantages: There is the risk, however, of hidden leaks in 
the wall or burst pipes in winter if boilers fail. Fan coil conden­
sate pans can overflow if not properly maintained. Fan coils 
may be noisy. 
Hydronic Radiators: Radiators or baseboard radiators are 
looped together and are usually set under windows or along 
perimeter walls. New boilers and circulating pumps can up­
grade older systems. Most piping was cast iron although cop­
per systems can be used if separately zoned. Modern cast iron 
baseboards and copper fin-tubes are available. Historic radia­
tors can be reconditioned. 
cast iron baseboard 
return piping Fan coil unit 
6 
CENTRAL AIR SYSTEMS 
The basic heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) sys­
tem is all-air, single zone fan driven designed for low, medium 
or high pressure distribution . The system is composed of com­
pressor drives, chillers, condensers, and furnace depending 
on whether the air is heated, chilled or both. Condensers, gen­
erally air cooled, are located outside. The ducts are sheet metal 
or flexible plastic and can be insulated. Fresh air can be circu­
lated. Registers can be designed for ceilings , floors and walls. 
The system is controlled by thermostats; one per zone. 
Advantages: Ducted systems offer a high level of control of 
interior temperature, humidity, and filtration . Zoned units can 
be relatively small and well concealed. 
Disadvantages: The damage from installing a ducted system 
without adequate space can be serious for a historic building. 
Systems need constant balancing and can be noisy. 
Basic HVAC: Most residential or small commercial systems will 
consist of a basic furnace with a cooling coil set in the unit and 
a refrigerant compressor or condenser located outside the 
building. Heating and cooling ductwork is usually shared. If 
sophisticated humidification and dehumidification is added to 
the basic HVAC system, a full climate control system results. 
This can often double the size of the equipment. 
Heating furnace with cooling coil 
Basic Heat Pump/Air System: The heat pump is a basic HVAC 
system as described above except for the method of generating 
hot and cold air. The system operates on the basic refrigeration 
cycle where latent heat is extracted from the ambient air and is 
used to evaporate refrigerant vapor under pressure. Functions 
of the condenser and evaporator switch when heating is 
needed. Heat pumps, somewhat less efficient in cold climates, 
can be fitted with electric resistance coil. 
cycle reverses for heating 
Fan Coil Units: Fan coil systems use terminal cabinets in each 
room serviced by 2, 3, or 4 pipes approximately 1-1/2" each in 
diameter. A fan blows air over the coils which are serviced by 
hot or chilled water. Each fan coil cabinet can be individually 
controlled. Four-pipe fan coils can provide both heating and 
cooling all year long. Most piping is steel. Non-cabinet units 
may be concealed in closets or custom cabinetry, such as ben­
ches, can be built. 

return air 
Boiler Chiller 
heating coil 
cooling coil 
humidifier
supply air 
rn'TT Conditioned 
Air handler space 
fan
return air 
Ill 
Fresh air intake 
exhaust fan 
portable heater 
electric baseboard 
exhaustair 
(Air conditioner) 
COMBINED AIR AND WATER SYSTEMS 
These systems are popular for restoration work because they 
combine the ease of installation for the piped system with the 
performance and control of the ducted system. Smaller air han­
dling units, not unlike fan coils, may be located throughout a 
building with service from a central boiler and chiller. In many 
cases the water is delivered from a central plant which services 
a complex of buildings. 
This system overcomes the disadvantages of a central ducted 1 
system where there is not adequate horizontal or vertical runs 1 
for the ductwork . The equipment, being smaller, may also be 
quieter and cause less vibration. If only one air handler is being 
utilized for the building, it is possible to house all the equip­
ment in a vault outside the building and send only conditioned 
air into the structure . 
Advantages: flexibility for installation using greater piping runs 
with shorter ducted runs; Air handlers can fit into small spaces . 
Disadvantages: piping areas may have undetected leaks; air 
handlers may be noisy. 
Water-serviced Air Handlers: 
Typical Systems Layout: 
OTHER SYSTEM COMPONENTS 
Non-systems components should not be overlooked if they can 
make a building more comfortable without causing damage to 
the historic resource or its collection. 
Advantages: components may provide acceptable levels of 
comfort without the need for an entire system. 
Disadvantages: Spot heating, cooling and fluxuations in hu­
midity may harm sensitive collections or furnishings. If an inte­
grated system is desirable, components may provide only a 
temporary solution . 
Portable Air Conditioning: 
Most individual air conditioners are set in windows or through 
exterior walls which can be visually as well as physically dam­
aging to historic buildings. Newer portable air conditioners are 
available which sit in a room and exhaust directly to the exterior 
through a small slot created by a raised window sash. 
Fans: Fans should be considered in most properties to improve 
ventilation. Fans can be located in attics, at the top of stairs, or 
in individual rooms. In moderate climates, fans may eliminate 
the need to install central air systems. 
Dehumidifiers: For houses without central air handling sys­
tems, a dehumidifier can resolve problems in humid climates. 
Seasonal use of dehumidifiers can remove moisture from damp 
basements and reduce fungal growth. 
portable unit 
(dehumidifier)
Heaters: Portable radiant heaters, such as those with water 
and glycol, may provide temporary heat in buildings used infre­
quently or during systems breakdowns. Care should be taken 
not to create a fire hazard with improperly wired units. 
Compiled by Sharon C. Park. Sketches adapted from Architectural Graphic Standards with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
7 

4. Prioritize architecturally significant spaces, fin­
ishes, and features to be preserved. Significant archi­
tectural spaces, finishes and features should be 
identified and evaluated at the outset to ensure their 
preservation. This includes significant existing mechan­
ical systems or elements such as hot water radiators, 
decorative grilles, elaborate switchplates, and non­
mechanical architectural features such as cupolas, tran­
soms, or porches. Identify non-significant spaces 
where mechanical equipment can be placed and sec­
ondary spaces where equipment and distribution runs 
on both a horizontal and vertical basis can be located. 
Appropriate secondary spaces for housing equipment 
might include attics, basements, penthouses, mezza­
nines, false ceiling or floor cavities, vertical chases, 
stair towers, closets, or exterior below-grade vaults (see 
figure 8). 
5. Become familiar with local building and fire 
codes. Owners or their representatives should meet 
early and often with local officials. Legal requirements 
should be checked; for example, can existing ductwork 
be reused or modified with dampers? Is asbestos abate­
ment required? What are the energy, fire, and safety 
codes and standards in place, and how can they be met 
while maintaining the historic character of the build­
ing? How are fire separation walls and rated mechani­
cal systems to be handled between multiple tenants? Is 
there a requirement for fresh air intake for stair towers 
that will affect the exterior appearance of the building? 
Many of the health, energy, and safety code require­
ments will influence decisions made for mechanical 
equipment for climate control. It is importance to know 
what they are before the design phase begins. 
6. Evaluate options for the type and size of systems. 
A matrix or feasibility studies should be developed to 
balance the benefits and drawbacks of various systems. 
Factors to consider include heating and/or cooling, fuel 
type, distribution system, control devices, generating 
equipment and accessories such as filtration, and hu­
midification. What are the initial installation costs, pro­
jected fuel costs, long-term maintenance, and life-cycle 
7. Operable skylights and grilles that can be adapted for return air should be 
identified as part of the planning phase for new or upgraded mechanical 
systems. Photo: Dianne Pierce, NPS files. 
8 
costs of these components and systems? Are parts of 
an existing system being reused and upgraded? The 
benefits of added ventilation should not be overlooked 
(see figure 9). What are the trade-offs between one 
large central system and multiple smaller systems? 
Should there be a forced air ducted system, a 2-pipe 
fan coil system, or a combined water and air system? 
What space is available for the equipment and distribu­
tion system? Assess the fire-risk levels of various fuels. 
Understand the advantages and disadvantages of the 
various types of mechanical systems available. Then 
evaluate each of these systems in light of the preservation 
objectives established during the design phase of planning. 
8. In considering options for new systems, existing spaces should be evalu­
ated for their ability to house new equipment. This sketch shows several 
areas where new mechanical equipment could be located to avoid damaging 
significant spaces. Sketch: NPS files 
9. Improving ventilation through traditional means should not be overlooked 
in planning new or upgraded HVAC systems. In mild climates, good exhaust 
fans can often eliminate the need for air conditioning or can reduce equip­
ment size by reducing cooling loads. Photo: Ernest A. Conrad, P. E. 

Designing the new system 
In designing a system, it is important to anticipate how 
it will be installed, how damage to historic materials 
can be minimized, and how visible the new mechanical 
system will be within the restored or rehabilitated 
spaces (see figure 10 a-f). Mechanical equipment space 
needs are often overwhelming; in some cases, it may 
be advantageous to look for locations outside of the 
building, including ground vaults, to house some of 
the equipment but only if it there is no adverse impact 
to the historic landscape or adjacent archeological re­
sources . Various means for reducing the heating and 
cooling loads (and thereby the size of the equipment) 
should be investigated. This might mean reducing 
slightly the comfort levels of the interior, increasing the 
number of climate control zones, or improving the 
energy efficiency of the building. 
The following activities are suggested during the 
design phase of the new system: 
1. Establish specific criteria for the new or upgraded 
mechanical system. New systems should be installed 
with a minimum of damage to the resource and should be 
visually compatible with the architecture of the building. 
They should be installed in a way that is easy to service, 
maintain, and upgrade in the future. There should be 
safety and back-up monitors in place if buildings have col­
lections, computer rooms, storage vaults or special 
conditions that need monitoring . The new systems 
should work within the structural limits of the historic 
building. They should produce no undue vibration, no 
undue noise, no dust or mold, and no excess moisture that 
could damage the historic building materials. If any 
equipment is to be located outside of the building, 
there should be no impact to the historic appearance of 
building or site, and there should be no impact on archeo­
logical resources. 
2. Prioritize the requirements for the new climate 
control system. The use of the building will determine 
the level of interior comfort and climate control. Some­
times, various temperature zones may safely be created 
within a historic building. This zoned approach may be 
appropriate for buildings with specialized collections 
storage, for buildings with mixed uses, or for large 
buildings with different external exposures, occupancy 
patterns, and delivery schedules for controlled air. Spe­
cial archives, storage vaults or computer rooms may 
need a completely different climate control from the 
rest of the building. Determine temperature and hu­
midity levels for occupants and collections and ventila­
tion requirements between differing zones . Establish if 
the system is to run 24 hours a day or only during op­
erating or business hours . Determine what controls are 
optimum (manual, computer, preset automatic, or 
other). The size and location of the equipment to han­
dle these different situations will ultimately affect the 
design of the overall system as well. 
3. Minimize the impact of the new HVAC on the 
existing architecture. Design criteria for the new sys­
tem should be based on the type of architecture of the 
historic resource . Consideration should be given as to 
whether or not the delivery system is visible or hidden. 
Utilitarian and industrial spaces may be capable of 
accepting a more visible and functional system. More 
formal, ornate spaces which may be part of an interpre­
tive program may require a less visible or disguised 
system. A ducted system should be installed without 
ripping into or boxing out large sections of floors, 
walls, or ceilings. A wet pipe system should be in­
stalled so that hidden leaks will not damage important 
decorative finishes . In each case, not only the type of 
system (air, water, combination), but its distribution 
(duct, pipe) and delivery appearance (grilles, cabinets, 
or registers) must be evaluated. It may be necessary to 
use a combination of different systems in order to pre­
serve the historic building. Existing chases should be 
reused whenever possible. 
4. Balance quantitative requirements and preserva­
tion objectives. The ideal system may not be achievable 
for each historic resource due to cost, space limitations, 
code requirements, or other factors beyond the owner's 
control. However, significant historic spaces, finishes, 
and features can be preserved in almost every case, 
even given these limitations. For example, if some ceil­
ing areas must be slightly lowered to accommodate 
ductwork or piping, these should be in secondary ar­
eas away from decorative ceilings or tall windows. If 
modern fan coil terminal units are to be visible in his­
toric spaces, consideration should be given to custom 
designing the cabinets or to using smaller units in more 
locations to diminish their impact. If grilles and regis­
ters are to be located in significant spaces, they should 
be designed to work within the geometry or placement 
of decorative elements. All new elements, such as 
ducts, registers, pipe-runs, and mechanical equipment 
should be installed in a reversible manner to be re­
moved in the future without further damage to the 
building (see fig 11). 
Systems Performance and Maintenance 
Once the system is installed, it will require routine 
maintenance and balancing to ensure that the proper 
performance levels are achieved. In some cases, ex­
tremely sophisticated, computerized systems have been 
developed to control interior climates, but these still 
need monitoring by trained staff. If collection exhibits 
and archival storage are important to the resource, the 
climate control system will require constant monitoring 
and tuning. Back-up systems are also needed to pre­
vent damage when the main system is not working: 
The owner, manager, or chief of maintenance should 
be aware of all aspects of the new climate control sys­
tem and have a plan of action before it is installed. 
Regular training sessions on operating, monitoring, 
and maintaining the new system should be held for 
both curatorial and building maintenance staff. If there 
are curatorial reasons to maintain constant temperature 
or humidity levels, only individuals thoroughly trained 
in how the HVAC systems operates should be able to 
adjust thermostats. Ill-informed and haphazard at­
tempts to adjust comfort levels, or to save energy over 
weekends and holidays, can cause great damage. 
9 

before after 
historic after 
10. The following photographs illustrate recent preservation projects where careful planning and design retained the historic character of the 
resources. 
a. Before and after of a circa 1900 school entrance. The radiators have been replaced with a two-pipe fan coil system built into bench seats. The 
ceiling was preserved and no exposed elements were required to add air conditioning . Piping runs are under the benches and there was no 
damage to the masonry walls. Photos: Notter Finegold + Alexander lnc . and Lautman Photography, Washington. 
d. Auditors Buildings, Washington, D.C. This upper floor workspace had been modified over the years with dropped ceilings and partitions. ln 
the recent restoration, the open plan workspace was restored, the false ceiling was removed, and the fireproof construction was exposed. A vari­
able air volume (VA V) system using round double shell exposed ductwork is in keeping with the industrial character of the architectural space. 
Photo: Kenneth Wyner Photography, courtesy of Notter Finegold + Alexander lnc. Before view provided by Notter Finegold + Alexander /Mariani. 
10 

b. Central air conditioning was installed in the corridors of this circa 1900 
school building by adding an air handler over the entrance from a vestibule. 
The custom-designed slot registers provide linear diffusers without detracting 
from the architecture of the space. Photo: Lautman Photography courtesy of 
Notter Finegold + Alexander Inc. 
e. Town Hall, Andover, MA. The upstairs auditorium was restored and new 
mechanical systems were installed. Perimeter baseboard radiation provides 
heat and air handlers, located in the attic space provide air conditioning. The 
cast iron ceiling grille was adapted for return air and the supply registers 
were installed in a symmetrical and regular manner to minimize impact on 
the historic ceiling. Photo: David Hewitt/Anne Garrison for Ann Beha 
Associates. 
f. Homewood, Baltimore, MD. This elegant circa 1806 residence is now a 
house museum. The registers for the forced air ducted system seen behind the 
table legs, are grained to blend with the historic baseboards. The HVAC 
system uses a water/air system where chilled water and steam heat are 
converted to conditioned air. Photo: Courtesy Homewood Museum, Johns 
Hopkins University. 
11 
c. Conference room, Auditors Building, Washington, D.C. The historic 
steam radiators were retained for heating. The cast iron ceiling register was 
retained as a decorative element, but made inoperable to meet fire codes. 
Photo: Kenneth Wyner Photography courtesy of Notter Finegold + Alexan­
der Inc. 

HVAC Do's and Don'ts 
DO's: 
• Use shutters, operable windows, porches, curtains, 
awnings, shade trees and other historically appro­
priate non-mechanical features of historic buildings 
to reduce the heating and cooling loads. Consider 
adding sensitively designed storm windows to 
existing historic windows. 
• Retain or upgrade existing mechanical systems 
whenever possible: for example, reuse radiator 
systems with new boilers, upgrade ventilation 
within the building, install proper thermostats or 
humidistats. 
• Improve energy efficiency of existing buildings by 
installing insulation in attics and basements. Add 
insulation and vapor barriers to exterior walls only 
when it can be done without further damage to the 
resource. 
• In major spaces, retain decorative elements of the 
historic system whenever possible. This includes 
switchplates, grilles and radiators. Be creative in 
adapting these features to work within the new or 
upgraded system. 
• 
• Design climate control systems that are compatible 
with the architecture of the building: hidden sys­
tem for formal spaces, more exposed systems possi­
ble in industrial or secondary spaces. In formal 
areas, avoid standard commercial registers and use 
custom slot registers or other less intrusive grilles. 
12 
• Size the system to work within the physical con­
straints of the building. Use multi-zoned smaller 
units in conjunction with existing vertical shafts, 
such as stacked closets, or consider locating equip­
ment in vaults underground, if possible. 
• Provide adequate ventilation to the mechanical 
rooms as well as to the entire building. Selectively 
install air intake grilles in less visible basement, 
attic, or rear areas. 
• Maintain appropriate temperature and humidity 
levels to meet requirements without accelerating 
the deterioration of the historic building materials. 
Set up regular monitoring schedules. 
• Design the system for maintenance access and for 
future systems replacement. 
• For highly significant buildings, install safety moni­
tors and backup features, such as double pans, 
moisture detectors, lined chases, and battery packs 
to avoid or detect leaks and other damage from 
system failures. 
• Have a regular maintenance program to extend 
equipment life and to ensure proper performance. 
• Train staff to monitor the operation of equipment and 
to act knowledgeably in emergencies or breakdowns. 
• Have an emergency plan for both the building and 
any curatorial collections in case of serious mal­
functions or breakdowns. 
DON'TS: 
• Don't install a new system if you don't need it. 
• Don't switch to a new type of system (e.g. forced 
air) unless there is sufficient space for the new sys­
tem or an appropriate place to put it. 
• Don't over-design a new system. Don't add air con­
ditioning or climate control if they are not abso­
lutely necessary. 
• Don't cut exterior historic building walls to add 
through-wall heating and air conditioning units. 
These are visually disfiguring, they destroy historic 
fabric, and condensation runoff from such units 
can further damage historic materials. 
• Don't damage historic finishes, mask historic fea­
tures, or alter historic spaces when installing new 
systems. 
• Don't drop ceilings or bulkheads across window 
openings. 
• Don't remove repairable historic windows or re­
place them with inappropriately designed thermal 
windows. 
• Don't seal operable windows, unless part of a mu­
seum where air pollutants and dust are being 
controlled. 
• Don't place condensers, solar panels, chimney 
stacks, vents or other equipment on visible por­
tions of roofs or at significant locations on the site. 
• Don't overload the building structure with the 
weight of new equipment, particularly in the attic. 
• Don't place stress on historic building materials 
through the vibrations of the new equipment. 
• Don't allow condensation on windows or within 
walls to rot or spall adjacent historic building 
materials. 
Use space in existing chases, closets or shafts for 
new distribution systems. 

a 
Maintenance staff should learn how to operate, mon­
itor, and maintain the mechanical equipment. They 
must know where the maintenance manuals are kept. 
Routine maintenance schedules must be developed for 
changing and cleaning filters, vents, and condensate 
pans to control fungus, mold, and other organisms that 
are dangerous to health. Such growths can harm both 
inhabitants and equipment. (In piped systems, for ex­
ample, molds in condensate pans can block drainage 
Imes and cause an overflow to leak onto finished sur­
faces). Maintenance staff should also be able to monitor 
the appropriate gauges, dials, and thermographs. Staff 
must be trained to intervene in emergencies, to know 
where the master controls are, and whom to call in an 
emergency. As new personnel are hired, they will also 
require maintenance training. 
In addition to regular cyclical maintenance, thorough 
mspechons should be undertaken from time to time to 
evaluate the continued performance of the climate con­
trol system As the system ages, parts are likely to fail, 
and signs of trouble may appear. Inadequately venti­
lated areas may smell musty. Wall surfaces may show 
staining, wet patches , bubbling or other signs of mois­
ture damage. Routine tests for air quality, humidity, 
and temperature should indicate if the system is per­
forming properly. If there is damage as a result of the 
new system, it should be repaired immediately and 
then closely monitored to ensure complete repair. 
Equipment must be accessible for maintenance and 
should be visible for easy inspection. Moreover, since 
mechanical systems last only 15-30 years, the system 
itself must be "reversible." That is, the system must be 
installed in such a way that later removal will not dam­
age the building. In addition to servicing, the back-up 
monitors that signal malfunctioning equipment must 
be routinely checked, adjusted, and maintained. 
Checklists should be developed to ensure that all as­
pects_ of routine maintenance are completed and that 
data is reported to the building manager. 
Conclusion 
The successful integration of new systems in historic 
buildings can be challenging. Meeting modern HVAC 
requrrem_ents for human comfort or installing con­
trolled climates for museum collections or for the oper­
ation of complex computer equipment can result in 
both visual and physical damage to historic resources. 
Owners of historic buildings must be aware that the 
final result will involve balancing multiple needs; no 
perfect_ heating, ventilating, and air conditioning sys­
tem exists. In undertaking changes to historic build­
ings, it is best to have the advice and input of trained 
professionals who can: 
assess the condition of the historic building, 
evaluate the significant elements that should be 
preserved or reused 
prioritize the preservation objectives, 
understand the impact of new interior climate condi­
tions on historic materials, 
integrate preservation with mechanical and code 
requirements, 
maximize the advantages of various new or upgraded 
mechanical systems, 
understand the visual and physical impact of various 
installations, 
identify maintenance and monitoring requirements 
for new or upgraded systems, and 
plan for the future removal or replacement of the 
system. 
Too often the presumed climate needs of the occu­
pants or collections can be detrimental to the long-term 
preservation of the building. With a careful balance 
between the preservation needs of the building and the 
interior temperature and humidity needs of the occu­
pants, a successful project can result. 
b 
13 
11. During the restoration of this 1806 National Historic Landmark (photo a), a new climate control system was installed. The architects removed all the earli­
er mechanical from the house and installed new equipment in a 30' by40' concrete vault located underground 150 feet from the house itself (photo 
· n Y con i tionedair zs own into the house reusing much of the circa 1930s ductwork. Photos: Thomas C. Jester. 

Bibliography 
Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment. 
London: The Architectural Press, 1969. 
Burns , John A., AIA. Energy Conserving Features Inherent in Older 
Homes. Washington: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Devel­
opment and U.S. Department of the Interior, 1982. 
Cowan, Henry J. Science and Building; Structural and Environmental 
Design in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1978. 
Ferguson, Eugene S. "An Historical Sketch of Central Heating: 1800-
1860," in Building Early America (Charles Peterson, editor) Philadel­
phia: Chilton Book Co., 1976. 
Fitch, James Marston. American Building; The Environmental Forces That 
Shape It. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1972. 
Giedion, Siegfried. Mechanization Takes Command; a Contribution lo 
Anonymous History. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948. 
Merritt, Frederick S. Building Engineering and Systems Design. New 
York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Co, 1979. 
Smith, Baird M. Preservation Briefs 3: Conserving Energy in Historic 
Buildings. Washington , DC: U.S. Department of the Interior , 1978. 
Turberg, Edward . A History of American Building Technology. Durham : 
Durham Technical Institute , 1981. 
cover photo: This historic coal boiler continues in use after its conversion to 
an oil-fired boiler. Photo: NPS files 
14 
Acknowledgements 
The author gratefully acknowledges the invaluable assistance of 
Michael C. Henry, P.E., AIA, in the development and technical 
editing of this Preservation Brief. Technical review was also provided 
by Ernest A. Conrad, P.E. Thanks is also given to staff members of 
the National Park Service Cultural Resources Programs, including 
Tom Keohan and Catherine Colby, Rocky Mountain Region; Michael 
Crowe, Western Region; Mark Chavez , Midwest Region; Randall J. 
Biallas, AIA, Chief , Park Historic Architecture Division, and George 
A. Thorsen, Historical Architect, Denver Service Center. Special 
thanks is also given to Michael J. Auer of Technical Preservation 
Services tor his editorial assistance in preparing this paper and Tim 
Buehner for his assistance with the illustrations . 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of 
the Interior to develop and make available information concerning 
historic properties. Preservation Brief 24 was developed under the 
editorship of H. Ward Jandl, Chief, Technical Preservation Services. 
Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be directed to 
Chief, Technical Preservation Services Branch, Preservation Assist­
ance Division, National Park Service, P.O. Box 37127, Washington, 
D.C. 20013-7127. This publication is not copyrighted and can be 
reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the 
author and the National Park Service are apprecia ted. 
Washington, DC 1991 