32 PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Making Historic Properties Accessible 
Thomas C. Jester and Sharon C. Park, AIA 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
Historically, most buildings and landscapes were not de­
signed to be readily accessible for people with disabilities. 
In recent years, however, emphasis has been placed on 
preserving historically significant properties, and on making 
these properties-and the activities within them-more 
accessible to people with disabilities. With the passage of 
the Americans with Disabilities Act in 1990, access to 
properties open to the public is now a civil right. 
This Preservation Brief introduces the complex issue of 
providing accessibility at historic properties, and 
underscores the need to balance accessibility and historic 
preservation. It provides guidance on making historic 
properties accessible while preserving their historic 
character; the Brief also provides examples to show that 
independent physical accessibility at historic properties can 
be achieved with careful planning, consultation, and 
sensitive design. While the Brief focuses primarily on 
making buildings and their sites accessible, it also includes a 
section on historic landscapes. The Brief will assist historic 
property owners, design professionals, and administrators 
in evaluating their historic properties so that the highest 
level of accessibility can be provided while minimizing 
changes to historic materials and features. Because many 
projects encompassing accessibility work are complex, it is 
advisable to consult with experts in the fields of historic 
preservation and accessibility before proceeding with 
permanent physical changes to historic properties. 
Modifications to historic properties to increase accessibility 
may be as simple as a small, inexpensive ramp to overcome 
one entrance step, or may involve changes to exterior and 
interior features. The Brief does not provide a detailed 
explanatio n of local or State accessibility laws as they vary 
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. A concise explanation of 
several federal accessibility laws is included on page 13. 
Planning Accessibility Modifications 
Historic properties are distinguished by features, materials, 
spaces, and spatial relationships that contribute to their 
historic character. Often these elements, such as steep 
terrain, monumental steps, narrow or heavy doors, 
decorative ornamental hardware, and narrow pathways and 
corridors, pose barriers to persons with disabilities, 
particularly to wheelchair users (See Figure 1). 
A three-step approach is recommended to identify and 
implement accessibility modifications that will protect the 
integrity and historic character of historic properties: 
1) Review the historical significance of the property and 
identify character-defining features; 
2) Assess the property's existing and required level of 
accessibility; and 
3) Evaluate accessibility options within a preservation 
context. 
1) Review the Historical Significance of the Property 
If the property has been designated as historic (properties 
that are listed in, or eligible for listing in the National 
Register of Historic Places, or designated under State or local 
law), the property's nomination file should be reviewed to 
learn about its significance. Local preservation commissions 
and State Historic Preservation Offices can usually provide 
Figure l. It is important to identify the materials,Jeatures, and spaces 
that should be preserved when planning accessibility modifications. These 
may include stairs, railings, doors, and door surrounds. Photo: National 
Park Service files. 
1 

2 
For most historic properties, the construction materials, the 
form and style of the property, the principal elevations, the 
major architectural or landscape features, and the principal 
public spaces constitute some of the elements that should 
be preserved. Every effort should be made to minimize 
damage to the materials and features that conve y a 
property's historical significance when making 
modifications for accessibility. Very small or highly 
significant properties that have never been altered may be 
extremely difficult to modify . 
Secondary spaces and finishes and features that may be less 
important to the historic character should also be 
identified; these may generally be altered without 
jeopardizing the historical significance of a property. Non ­
significant spaces, secondary pathways, later additions, 
previously altered areas, utilitarian spaces, and service 
areas can usually be modified without threatening or 
destroying a property's historical significance . 
2) Assess the Property's Existing and Required Level 
of Accessibility 
A building survey or assessment will provide a thorough 
evaluation of a property's accessibility. Most surveys 
identify accessibility barriers in the following areas : 
building and site entrances; surface textures, widths and 
slopes of walkways; parking; grade changes; size, weight 
and configuration of doorways ; interior corridors and path 
of travel restrictions; elevators; and public toilets and 
amenities (See Figure 2). Simple audits can be completed 
by property owners using readily available checklists (See 
Further Reading) . Accessibility specialists can be hired to 
assess barriers in more complex properties, especially those 
with multiple buildings, steep terrain, or interpretive 
programs. Persons with disabilities can be particularly 
helpful in assessing specific barriers. 
Figure 2. Surveys of historic properties can identify accessibility barriers. 
Persons with disabilities and accessibility consultants should participate 
whenever possible. Photo: Thomas Jester. 
All applicable accessibility requirements-local codes, State 
codes and federal laws- should be reviewed carefully 
before undertaking any accessibility modification. Since 
many States and localities have their own accessibility 
regulations and codes (each with their own requirements 
for dimensions and technical requirements), owners should 
use the most stringent accessibility requirements when 
implementing modifications. The Americans with 
Disability Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) is the 
document that should be consulted when complying with 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements . 
3) Identify and Evaluate Accessibility Options within a 
Preservation Context 
Once a property's significant materials and features have 
been identified, and existing and required levels of 
accessibility have been established, solutions can be 
developed (See Figure 3). Solutions should provide the 
greatest amount of accessibility without threatening or 
destroying those materials and features that make a 
property significant. Modifications may usually be phased 
over time as funds are available, and interim solutions can 
be considered until more permanent solutions are 
implemented . A team comprised of persons with 
disabilities, accessibility and historic preservation 
professionals, and building inspectors should be consulted 
as accessibility solutions are developed. 
Modifications to improve accessibility should generally be 
based on the following priorities: 
1) Making the main or a prominent public entrance 
and primary public spaces accessible, including a 
path to the entrance; 
2) Providing access to goods, services, and programs; 
3) Providing accessible restroom facilities; and, 
4) Creating access to amenities and secondary spaces. 
All proposed changes should be evaluated for conformance 
with the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for the 
Treatment of Historic Properties," which were created for 
property owners to guide preservation work. These 
Standards stress the importance of retaining and protecting 
the materials and features that convey a property's 
historical significance . Thus, when new features are 
incorporated for accessibility, historic materials and 
features should be retained whenever possible. 
Accessibility modifications should be in scale with the 
historic property, visually compatible, and, whenever 
possible, reversible. Reversible means that if the new 
feature were removed at a later date, the essential form and 
integrity of the property would be unimpaired. The design 
of new features should also be differentiated from the 
design of the historic property so that the evolution of the 
property is evident. See Making Historic Buildings 
Accessible on page 9. 
In general, when historic properties are altered, they should 
be made as accessible as possible. However, if an owner or 
a project team believes that certain modifications would 
threaten or destroy the significance of the property, the 
State Historic Preservation Officer should be consulted to 
determine whether or not any special accessibility 
provisions may be used. Special accessibility provisions for 
historic properties will vary depending on the applicable 
accessibility requirements . 
copies of the nomination file and are also resources for 
additional information and assistance. Review of the 
written documentation should always be supplemented 
with a physical investigation to identify which character­
defining features and spaces must be protected whenever 
any changes are anticipated . If the level of documentation 
for a property's significance is limited, it may be necessary 
to have a preservation professional identify specific historic 
features, materials, and spaces that should be protected. 

A. 
B. 
C. 
Figure 3. Before implementing accessibility modifications, owners should 
consider the potential effect on their historic property. At the Derby 
House in Salem, Massachusetts, several solutions to make the entrance 
accessible were considered, including regrading (a); a lift (b); and a ramp 
(c). The solution, an entrance on a secondary elevation, preserves the 
building's architectural significance and is convenient to designated 
parking. Drawings: National Park Service Files .. 
In some cases, programmatic access may be the only option 
for extremely small or unaltered historic properties, such as 
a two-story house museum with no internal elevator. 
Programmatic access for historic properties refers to 
alternative methods of providing services, information, and 
experiences when physical access cannot be provided. It 
may mean offering an audio-visual program showing an 
inaccessible upper floor of a historic house museum, 
providing interpretive panels from a vista at an inaccessible 
terraced garden, or creating a tactile model of a historic 
monument for people with visual impairments . 
Accessibility Solutions 
The goal in selecting appropriate solutions for specific 
historic properties is to provide a high level of accessibility 
without compromising significant features or the overall 
character of the property . The following sections describe 
accessibility solutions and offer guidance on specific 
historic property components, namely the building site, 
entrances, interiors, landscapes, amenities, and new 
additions. Several solutions are discussed in each section, 
referencing dimensions and technical requirements from 
the ADA's accessibility guidelines, ADAAG. State and local 
requirements, however, may differ from the ADA 
requirements . Before making any modification owners 
should be aware of all applicable accessibility requirements. 
The Building Site 
An accessible route from a parking lot, sidewalk, and public 
street to the entrance of a historic building or facility is 
essential. An accessible route, to the maximum extent 
possible, should be the circulation route used by the general 
public. Critical elements of accessible routes are their 
widths, slopes, cross slopes, and surface texture. Each of 
these route elements must be appropriately designed so that 
the route can be used by everyone, including people with 
disabilities. The distance between the arrival and destination 
points should also be as short as possible. Sites containing 
designed landscapes should be carefully evaluated before 
making accessibility modifications . Historic landscapes are 
described in greater detail on pages 10 and 11. 
Providing Convenient Parking. If parking is provided, it 
should be as convenient as possible for people with 
disabilities. Specially designated parking can often be 
created to improve accessibility (See Figure 4). Modifica­
tions to parking configurations and pathways should not 
alter significant landscape features. 
Creating an Accessible Route. The route or path through a 
site to a historic building's entrance should be wide enough, 
generally at least 3 feet (91 cm), to accommodate visitors 
Figure 4. Parking designated for people with disabilities is provided nea
an accessible entrance to the Springfield Library in Springfield, 
Massachusetts. Photo: William Smith. 
r 
3 

4 
with disabilities and must be appropriately graded with a 
stable, firm, and slip-resistant surface. Existing paths 
should be modified to meet these requirements whenever 
possible as long as doing so would not threaten or destroy 
significant materials and features . 
Existing surfaces can often be stabilized by providing a new 
base and resetting the paving materials, or by modifying 
the path surface. In some situations it may be appropriate 
to create a new path through an inaccessible area. At large 
properties, it may be possible to regrade a slope to less than 
1:20 (5%), or to introduce one or more carefully planned 
ramps. Clear directional signs should mark the path from 
arrival to destination. 
Entrances 
Whenever possible, access to historic buildings should be 
through a primary public entrance. In historic buildings, if 
this cannot be achieved without permanent damage to 
character-defining features, at least one entrance used by 
the public should be made accessible. If the accessible 
entrance is not the primary public entrance, directional 
signs should direct visitors to the accessible entrance (See 
Figure 5). A rear or service entrance should be avoided as 
the only mean of entering a building . 
Figure 5. A universal access symbol clearly marks the Arts and 
Industries Building in Washington, D.C., and a push plate (right) 
engages the automatic door-opener. Photo: Thomas Jester. 
Creating an accessible entrance usually involves 
overcoming a change in elevation. Steps, landings, doors, 
and thresholds, all part of the entrance, often pose barriers 
for persons with disabilities . To preserve the integrity of 
these features, a number of solutions are available to 
increase accessibility. Typical solutions include regrading, 
incorporating ramps, installing wheelchair lifts, creating 
new entrances, and modifying doors, hardware, and 
thresholds. 
Regrading an Entrance. In some cases, when the entrance 
steps and landscape features are not highly significant, it 
may be possible to regrade to provide a smooth entrance 
into a building. If the existing steps are historic masonry, 
they should be buried, whenever possible, and not removed 
(See Figure 6). 
Incorporating Ramps. Permanent ramps are perhaps the 
most common means to make an entrance accessible. As a 
new feature, ramps should be carefully designed and 
appropriately located to preserve a property's historic 
character (See Figure 7). Ramps should be located at public 
Figure 6. Entrances can be regraded to make a building accessible as long 
as no significant landscape features will be destroyed and as long as the 
building's historic character is preserved. The Houghton Chapel (a) in 
Wellesley, Massachusetts, was made accessible by regrading over the 
historic steps (b). Photos: Carol R. Johnson & Associates. 
Figure 7. This ramp is convenient for visitors with disabilities and 
preserves the building's historic character. The design is also compatible 
in scale with the building. Photo: William Smith. 
entrances used by everyone whenever possible, preferably 
where there is minimal change in grade. Ramps should 
also be located to minimize the loss of historic features at 
the connection points-porch railings, steps, and win­
dows-and should preserve the overall historic setting and 
character of the property. Larger buildings may have 
below grade areas that can accommodate a ramp down to 
an entrance (See Figure 8). Below grade entrances can be 
considered if the ramp leads to a publicly used interior, 
such as an auditorium, or if the building is serviced by a 
public elevator. Ramps can often be incorporated behind 

Figure 8. A new below-grade ramp provides access to Lake MacDonald 
Lodge in Glacier National Park. Photo: Thomas Jester 
historic features, such as cheek-walls or railings, to mini­
mize the visual effect (See Figure 9). 
The steepest allowable slope for a ramp is usually 1:12 (8%), 
but gentler slopes should be used whenever possible to 
accommodate people with limited strength. Greater 
changes in elevation require larger and longer ramps to 
meet accessibility scoping provisions and may require an 
intermediate landing. Most codes allow a slightly steeper 
ramp for historic buildings to overcome one step . 
Ramps can be faced with a variety of materials, including 
wood, brick, and stone. Often the type and quality of the 
materials determines how compatible a ramp design will be 
with a historic property (See Figure 10). Unpainted 
pressure-treated wood should not be used to construct 
ramps because it usually appears temporary and is not 
visually compatible with most historic properties . Railings 
Figure 9. This ramp was created by infilling the window-well and 
slightly modifying the historic railing. The ramp preserves this building's 
historic character. Photo: Thomas Jester. 
Figure 10. This brick ramp provides access to St. Anne's Episcopal 
Church in Annapolis, Maryland. Its design is compatible with the 
historic building. Photo: Charity V. Davidson. 
should be simple in design, distinguishable from other 
historic features, and should extend one foot beyond the 
sloped area (See Figure 11). 
Ramp landings must be large enough for wheelchair users, 
usually at least 5 feet by 5 feet (152.5 cm by 152.5 cm), and 
the top landing must be at the level of the door threshold. 
It may be possible to reset steps by creating a ramp to 
accommodate minor level changes and to meet the 
threshold without significantly altering a property's 
historic character. If a building's existing landing is not 
wide or deep enough to accommodate a ramp, it may be 
Figure 11. Simple, contemporary railings that extend beyond the ramp 
slope make this ramp compatible with the industrial character of this 
building. Photo: Thomas Jester. 
necessary to modify the entry to create a wider landing. 
Long ramps, such as switchbacks, require intermediate 
landings, and all ramps should be detailed with an 
appropriate edge and railing for wheelchair users and 
visually impaired individuals. 
Temporary or portable ramps are usually constructed of 
light-weight materials and, thus, are rarely safe or visually 
compatible with historic properties. Moreover, portable 
ramps are often stored until needed and, therefore, do not 
meet accessibility requirements for independent access. 
Temporary and portable ramps, however, may be an 
acceptable interim solution to improve accessibility until a 
permanent solution.can be implemented (See Figure 12). 
5 

6 
Installing Wheelchair 
Lifts. Platforms lifts 
and inclined stair lifts, 
both of which 
accommodate only one 
person, can be used to 
overcome changes of 
elevation ranging from 
three to 10 feet (.9 m-3 
m) in height. However, 
many States have 
restrictions on the use 
of wheelchair lifts, so all 
applicable codes should 
be reviewed carefully 
before installing one. 
Inclined stair lifts, 
which carry a wheel­
chair on a platform up a 
flight of stairs, may be 
employed selectively . 
They tend to be visually intrusive, although they are 
relatively reversible. Platform lifts can be used when there 
is inadequate space for a ramp. However, such lifts should 
be installed in unobtrusive locations and under cover to 
minimize maintenance if at all possible (See Figure 13). A 
similar, but more expensive platform lift has a retracting 
railing that lowers into the ground, minimizing the visual 
effect to historic properties (See Figure 14). Mechanical lifts 
have drawbacks at historic properties with high public 
visitation because their capacity is limited, they sometimes 
cannot be operated independently, and they require 
frequent maintenance. 
Considering a New Entrance. When it is not possible to 
modify an existing entrance, it may be possible to develop a 
new entrance by creating an entirely new opening in an ap­
propriate location, or by using a secondary window for an 
opening. This solution should only be considered after ex­
hausting all possibilities for modifying existing entrances 
(See Figure 15). 
Retrofitting Doors. Historic doors generally should not be 
replaced, nor should door frames on the primary elevation 
be widened, as this may 
alter an important 
feature of a historic 
design. However, if a 
building's historic doors 
have been removed, 
there may be greater 
latitude in designing a 
compatible new en­
trance. Most accessi­
bility standards require 
at least a 32" (82 cm) 
clear opening with man­
ageable door opening 
pressures. The most 
desirable preservation 
solution to improve 
accessibility is retaining 
historic doors and 
upgrading the door 
pressure with one of 
several devices. Auto­
matic door openers 
Figure 13. Platform lifts like the one 
used on this building require minimal 
space and can be removed without 
damaging historic materials. Shielded 
with lattice work, this lift is also 
protected by the roof eaves. Approach 
path should be stable,firm, and slip 
resistant. Photo: Sharon Park. 
Readily Achievable Accessibility 
Modifications 
Many accessibility solutions can be implemented easily 
and inexpensively without destroying the significance 
of historic properties. While it may not be possible to 
undertake all of the modifications listed below, each 
change will improve accessibility. 
Sites and Entrances 
• Creating a designated parking space. 
• Installing ramps. 
• Making curb cuts. 
Interiors 
• Repositioning shelves. 
• Rearranging tables, displays, and furniture. 
• Repositioning telephones. 
• Adding raised markings on elevator control buttons. 
• Installing flashing alarm lights. 
• Installing offset hinges to widen doorways. 
• Installing or adding accessible door hardware. 
• Adding an accessible water fountain, or providing a 
paper cup dispenser at an inaccessible water fountain. 
Restrooms 
• Installing grab bars in toilet stalls. 
• Rearranging toilet partitions to increase maneuvering 
space. 
• Insulating lavatory pipes under sinks to prevent 
burns . 
• Installing a higher toilet seat. 
• Installing a full-length bathroom mirror. 
• Repositioning the paper towel dispenser. 
Figure 12. The Smithsonian lnstitution 
installed a temporary ramp on its 
visitor's center to allow adequate time to 
design an appropriate permanent ramp. 
Photo: Thomas Jester. 

Figure 14. At the 
Lieutenant Governor's 
Mansion in Frankfort, 
Kentucky, a retracting lift 
(b) was installed to 
minimize the visual effect 
on this historic building 
when not in use (a). 
Photos: Aging Technology 
Incorporated. 
Figure 15. A new 
entrance to the 
elevator lobby re­
places a window at 
Faneuil Hall in 
Boston, Massa­
chusetts. The new 
entrance is appro­
priately differen­
tiated from the 
historic design. 
Photo: Paul Holtz. 
(operated by push buttons, mats, or electronic eyes) and 
power-assisted door openers can eliminate or reduce door 
pressures that are accessibility barriers, and make single or 
double-leaf doors fully operational (See Figure 16). 
Adapting Door Hardware. If a door opening is within an 
inch or two of meeting the 32" (81 cm) clear opening 
requirement, it may be possible to replace the standard 
hinges with off-set hinges to increase the size of the door 
opening as much as 11/2" (3.8 cm). Historic hardware can 
be retained in place, or adapted with the addition of an 
automatic opener, of which there are several types . Door 
hardware can also be retrofitted to reduce door pressures. 
For example, friction hinges can be retrofitted with ball­
bearing inserts, and door closers can be rethreaded to 
reduce the door pressure . 
Altering Door Thresholds. A door threshold that exceeds 
the allowable height, generally 1/2" (1.3 cm), can be altered 
or removed with one that meets applicable accessibility 
Figure 16. During the rehabilitation of the Rookery in Chicago, the 
original entrance was modified to create an accessible entrance. Two 
revolving doors were replaced with a new one flanked by new doors, one 
of which is operated with a push-plate door opener. Photo: Thomas Jester. 
requirements. If the threshold is deemed to be significant, a 
bevel can be added on each side to reduce its height (See 
Figure 17). Another solution is to replace the threshold 
with one that meets applicable accessibility requirements 
and is visually compatible with the historic entrance . 
Moving Through Historic Interiors 
Persons with disabilities should have independent access to 
all public areas and facilities inside historic buildings. The 
extent to which a historic interior can be modified depends 
on the significance of its materials, plan, spaces, features, and 
finishes. Primary spaces are often more difficult to modify 
without changing their character. Secondary spaces may 
generally be changed without compromising a building's 
historic character. Signs should clearly mark the route to 
accessible restrooms, telephones, and other accessible areas. 
Installing Ramps and Wheelchair Lifts. If space permits, 
ramps and wheelchair lifts can also be used to increase 
accessibility inside buildings (See Figures 18 & 19). 
However, some States and localities restrict interior uses of 
wheelchair lifts for life-safety reasons. Care should be taken 
to install these new features where they can be readily 
accessed. Ramps and wheelchair lifts are described in detail 
on pages 4-6.
Upgrading Elevators. Elevators are an efficient means of 
providing accessibility between floors. Some buildings 
have existing historic elevators that are not adequately 
accessible for persons with disabilities because of their size, 
location, or detailing, but they may also contribute to the 
historical significance of a building. Significant historic 
elevators can usually be upgraded to improve accessibility. 
Control panels can be modified with a "wand" on a cord to 
make the control panel accessible, and timing devices can 
usually be adjusted. 
Retrofitting Door Knobs. Historic door knobs and other 
hardware may be difficult to grip and tum. In recent years, 
lever-handles have been developed to replace door knobs. 
Other lever-handle devices can be added to existing 
hardware. If it is not possible or appropriate to retrofit 
existing door knobs, doors can be left open during 
operating hours (unless doing so would violate life safety 
codes), and power-assisted door openers can be installed. It 
may only be necessary to retrofit specific doorknobs to 
create an accessible path of travel and accessible restrooms. 
7 

8 
Threshold Modifications 
be retained in the process of making 
modifications. For example, larger restrooms 
can sometimes be reconfigured by relocating 
or combining partitions to create an 
accessible toilet stall. Other changes to 
consider are adding grab bars around toilets, 
covering hot water pipes under sinks with 
insulation to prevent burns, and providing a 
sink, mirror, and paper dispenser at a height 
suitable for wheelchair users . A unisex 
restroom may be created if it is technically 
infeasible to create two fully accessible 
restrooms, or if doing so would threaten or 
destroy the significance of the building. It is 
important to remember that restroom 
fixtures, such as sinks, urinals, and partitions, 
may be historic, and therefore, should be 
preserved whenever possible. 
new stone 
threshold 
Modifying Other Amenities. Other 
amenities inside historic buildings may 
require modification. Seating in a theater, for 
example, can be made accessible by 
removing some seats in several areas (See 
Figure 21). New seating that is accessible can 
also be added at the end of existing rows, 
either with or without a level floor surface. 
Readily removable seats may be installed in 
wheelchair spaces when the spaces are not 
required to accommodate wheelchair users. 
Historic water fountains can be retained and 
new, two-tiered fountains installed if space 
permits. If public telephones are provided, it 
may be necessary to install at least a Text 
Telephone (TT), also known as a 
Telecommunication Device for the Deaf 
(TDD) (See Figure 22). Historic service 
counters commonly found in banks, theaters, 
and hotels generally should not be altered. 
It is preferable to add an accessible counter 
on the end of a historic counter if feasible. 
Modified or new counters should not exceed 
36" (91.5 cm) in height. 
modify/raise platform or floor 
to create level threshold existing threshold 
existing 
p latform 
or floor 
Figure 17. Thresholds that exceed allowable heights can be modified several ways to increase 
accessibility. Source: Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard (UFAS) Retrofit Manual. 
Building Amenities 
Some amenities in historic buildings, such as restrooms, 
seating, telephones, drinking fountains, counters, may 
contribute to a building's historic character. They will often 
require modification to improve their use by persons with 
disabilities. In many cases, supplementing existing amenities, 
rather than changing or removing them, will increase access 
and minimize changes to historic features and materials. 
Upgrading Restrooms. Restrooms may have historic 
fixtures such as sinks, urinals, or marble partitions that can 
Figure 18. Symmetrical ramps at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, 
D.C., provide access to the hotel's lower level. The design for the ramps 
respects the historic character of this landmark building. Photo: Thomas 
Jester. 
Modifying Interior Stairs. Stairs are the primary barriers 
for many people with disabilities. However, there are some 
ways to modify stairs to assist people who are able to 
navigate them. It may be appropriate to add hand railings 
if none exist. Railings should be 1 1 / 4" (3.8 cm) in diameter 
and return to the wall so straps and bags do not catch. 
Color-contrasting, slip-resistant strips will help people with 
visual impairments. Finally, beveled or closed risers are 
recommended unless the stairs are highly significant, 
because open risers catch feet (See Figure 20). 

MAKING A HISTORIC BUILDING ACCESSIBLE 
b 
9 
The Orange County Courthouse (a), located in Santa Ana, California, was rehabilitated in the late 1980s as a county museum. As part of the rehabilitation, 
the architect sensitively integrated numerous modifications to increase accessibility. To preserve the building's primary elevation, a new public entrance was 
created on the rear elevation where parking spaces are located. A ramp (b) leads to the accessible entrance that can be opened with a push-plate automatic 
door-opener (c). Modifications to interior features also increased accessibility. To create an accessible path of travel, offset hinges (d) were installed on doors 
that were narrower than 32 inches (81 .3 cm). Other doors were rethreaded to reduce the door pressure. Beveling the 1" high thresholds (e) reduced their 
height to approximately 1/4 inch (.64 cm). The project architect also converted a storeroom into an accessible restroom (f). The original stairway, which has 
open grillwork, was made more accessible by applying slip-resistant pressure tape to the marble steps (g). And the original elevator was upgraded with 
raised markings, alarm lights, and voice floor indicators. Photos: Milford Wayne Donaldson, F AJA. 

10 
To successfully incorporate access into historic landscapes, 
the planning process is similar to that of other historic 
properties. Careful research and inventory should be 
undertaken to determine which materials and features 
convey the landscape's historical significance. As part of 
this evaluation, those features that are character-defining 
(topographical variation, vegetation, circulation, 
structures, furnishings, objects) should be identified. 
Historic finishes, details, and materials that also contribute 
to a landscape's significance should also be documented 
and evaluated prior to determining an approach to 
landscape accessibility. For example, aspects of the 
pedestrian circulation system that need to be understood 
include walk width, aggregate size, pavement pattern, 
texture, relief, and joint details. The context of the walk 
should be understood including its edges and surrounding 
area. Modifications to surface textures or widths of 
pathways can often be made with minimal effect on 
significant landscape features (a) and (b). 
Additionally, areas of secondary importance such as 
altered paths should be identified -- especially those where 
the accessibility modifications will not destroy a 
landscape's significance. By identifying those features that 
are contributing or non-contributing, a sympathetic 
circulation experience can then be developed. 
After assessing a landscape's integrity, accessibility 
solutions can be considered. Full access throughout a 
historic landscape may not always be possible. Generally, 
it is easier to provide accessibility to larger, more open 
(a.) To improve accessibility in Boston's Emerald Necklace Parks, 
standard asphalt paving was replaced in selected areas with an imbedded 
aggregate surface that is more in keeping with the landscape's historic 
appearance. Photo: Charles Birnbaum. 
(b.) The Friendly Garden at 
Ranchos Los Alamitos, a 
historic estate with 
designed gardens in 
southern California, was 
made accessible with 
limited widening of its 
existing approach path. 
Photo: Ranchos Los 
Alamitos Foundation. 
sites where there is a greater variety of public experiences. 
However, when a landscape is uniformly steep, it may only 
be possible to make discrete portions of a historic landscape 
accessible, and viewers may only be able to experience the 
landscape from selected vantage points along a prescribed 
pedestrian or vehicular access route. When defining such a 
route, the interpretive value of the user experience should 
be considered; in other words, does the route provide 
physical or visual access to those areas that are critical to 
understand the meaning of the landscape? 
· The following accessibility solutions address three 
common landscape situations: 1) structures with low 
integrity landscapes; 2) structures and landscapes of equal 
significance; and, 3) landscapes of primary significance 
with inaccessible terrain. 
l. The Hunnewell Visitors Center at the Arnold 
Arboretum in Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, was con­
structed in 1892. Its immediate setting has changed 
considerably over time (c). Since the existing landscape 
immediately surrounding this structure has little re­
maining integrity, the new accessibility solution has the 
latitude to integrate a broad program including site 
orientation, circulation, interpretation, and 
maintenance. 
The new design, which has few ornamental plants, 
references the original planting design principles, with 
a strong emphasis on form, color, and texture. In 
contrast with the earlier designs, the new plantings 
were set away from the facade of this historic building, 
(c.) Hunnewell Visitor's Center before rehabilitation, revealing the 
altered landscapes. Photo: Jennifer Jones, Carol R. Johnson and associates. 
(d.) Hunnewell Visitors Center's entrance following rehabilitation, 
integrating an accessible path (left), platform, and new steps. Photo: 
Charles Birnbaum. 
MAKING HISTORIC LANDSCAPES ACCESSIBLE 

allowing the visitor to enjoy its architectural detail. A 
new walk winds up the gentle earthen berm and is 
vegetated with plantings that enhance the interpretive 
experience from the point of orientation (d). The new 
curvilinear walks also provide a connection to the 
larger arboretum landscape for everyone. 
2. The Eugene O'Neill National Historic Site overlooks 
the San Ramon Valley, twenty-seven miles east of San 
Francisco, California. The thirteen-acre site includes a 
walled courtyard garden on the southeast side of the 
Tao House, which served as the O'Neill residence from 
1937-44 (e). Within this courtyard are character­
defining walks that are too narrow by today's 
accessibility standards, yet are a character-defining 
element of the historic design. To preserve the 
garden's integrity, the scale and the characteristics of 
the original circulation were maintained by creating a 
wheelchair route which, in part, utilizes reinforced 
turf. This route allows visitors with disabilities to 
experience the main courtyard as well. 
3. Morningside Park in New York City, New York, 
designed by Frederick Olmstead, Sr., and Calvert Vaux 
in 1879, is sited on generally steep, rocky terrain (f). 
Respecting these dramatic grade changes, which are 
only accessible by extensive flights of stone stairs, 
physical access cannot be provided without destroying 
the park's integrity. In order to provide some 
accessibility, scenic overlooks were created that 
provide broad visual access to the park. 
(e.) This view shows the new reinforced turf path at the Eugene O'Neill 
National Historic Site that preserved the narrow Historic Path. Photo: 
Patricia M. O'Donnell. 
(f.) Steep terrain at Morningside Park in New York City cannot be made 
accessible without threating or destroying this landscape's integrity. 
Photo: Quennell Rothschild Associates. 
Considering a New Addition as an Accessibility 
Solution 
Many new additions are constructed specifically to 
incorporate modem amenities such as elevators, restrooms, 
fire stairs, and new mechanical equipment. These new 
additions often create opportunities to incorporate access 
for people with disabilities. It may be possible, for 
example, to create an accessible entrance, path to public 
levels via a ramp, lift, or elevator (See Figure 23). However, 
a new addition has the potential to change a historic 
property's appearance and destroy significant building and 
landscape features. Thus, all new additions should be 
compatible with the size, scale, and proportions of historic 
features and materials that characterize a property (See 
Figure 24). 
New additions should be carefully located to minimize 
connection points with the historic building, such that if the 
addition were to be removed in the future, the essential 
form and integrity of the building would remain intact. On 
the other hand, new additions should also be conveniently 
located near parking that is connected to an accessible route 
for people with disabilities. As new additions are 
incorporated, care should be taken to protect significant 
landscape features and archeological resources. Finally, the 
design for any new addition should be differentiated from 
the historic design so that the property's evolution over 
time is clear. New additions frequently make it possible to 
increase accessibility, while simultaneously reducing the 
level of change to historic features, materials, and spaces. 
11 
Figure 19. Inclined lifts can sometimes overcome interior changes of 
elevation where space is limited. This lift in Boston's Faneuil Hall 
created access to the floor and stage level of the State Room. Photo: Paul 
Holtz. 

Nosing Modifications
smooth transition
Add Filler Under Nosing 
angled wedge 
securely fastened
Fill Open Risers 
Wheelchair Seating Dispersed Throughout Seating Area 
33" x 48" space for
single wheelchair I I I I I I I 
I I I I I I 
I I I I I 
I I I I I 
I I I I I 
60' x 66" midpoint I I I I I 
position for two 
wheelchairs; omit 
six chairs or install 
movable chairs 
66' X 48' ____ 
I I I I I 
I I I I 
I I I I 
I I I I 
I I I I 
I I I l ) 
I I I 
' I I I I 
I I I I 
I I I 
' 
I I I 
' I I I 
' I I I I 
I I I I 
I I I I 
I 
l I 
I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
It 11 
I I 
11 
11 
I I 
11 
additional sing1e/ 
double wheelchair 
spaces may be 
provided using 
removable seats 
66" x 48" back or 
front row position 
for two wheel­
chairs ; omit three 
chairs (parked 
wheelchairs should 
not obstruct other 
pedestrian traffic) 
aisle width must allow 
passage of wheelchair 
users; fire codes should 
be consulted to deter­
mine required width 
Theater Style Seating 
12 
0 
E 
to highest 
operable part 
volume control 
to lower edge of 
shelf or partition 
Figure 22. Amenities such as telephones should be at height that 
wheelchair users can reach. Changes to many amenities can be adapted 
with minimal effect on historic materials, features, and spaces. Source: 
UFAS Retrofit Manual. 
Figure 21. Seating in historic theaters and auditoriums can be changed to accommodate wheelchair users. Accessible seating areas should be connected to an 
accessible route from the building entrance. Source: UFAS Retrofit Manual. 
Figure 20. In certain situations it may be appropriate to modify stair 
nosings for persons with mobility impairments. Whenever possible, 
stairs should be modified by adding new materials rather than removing 
historic materials. Source: UFAS Retrofit Manual. 

Federal Accessibility Laws 
Today, few building owners are exempt from providing 
accessibility for people with disabilities. Before making any 
accessibility modification, it is imperative to determine which 
laws and codes are applicable . In addition to local and State 
accessibility codes, the following federal accessibility laws are 
currently in effect: 
Architectural Barriers Act (1968) 
The Architectural Barriers Act stipulates that all buildings 
designed, constructed, and altered by the Federal Government , 
or with federal assistance, must be accessible. Changes made to 
federal buildings must meet the Uniform Federal Accessibility 
Standards (UFAS). Special provisions are included in UFAS for 
historic buildings that would be threatened or destroyed by 
Figmeeting full accessibility requirements . 
Rehabilitation Act (1973) 
The Rehabilitation Act requires recipients of federal financial 
assistance to make their programs and activities accessible to 
everyone. Recipients are allowed to make their properties 
accessible by altering their building, by moving programs an
activities to accessible spaces, or by making other 
accommodations. 
d 
Americans with Disabilities Act (1990) 
Historic properties are not exempt from the Americans with 
disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. To the greatest extent 
possible, historic buildings must be as accessible as non-historic 
buildings. However, it may not be possible for some historic 
properties to meet the general accessibility requirements. 
Under Title II of the ADA, State and local governments must 
remove accessibility barriers either by shifting services and 
programs to accessible buildings, or by making alterations to 
existing buildings. For instance, a licensing office may be moved 
from a second floor to an accessible first floor space, or if this is 
not feasible, a mail service might be provided. However, State 
and local government facilities that have historic preservation as 
their main purpose-State-owned historic museums, historic 
State capitols that offer tours-must give priority to physical 
accessibility. 
Under Title Ill of the ADA, owners of "public accommodations" 
(theaters, restaurants, retail shops, private museums) must make 
"readily achievable" changes; that is, changes that can be easily 
accomplished without much expense . This might mean installing 
a ramp, creating accessible parking, adding grab bars in 
bathrooms, or modifying door hardware. The requirement to 
remove barriers when it is "readily achievable " is an ongoing 
responsibility. When alterations, including restoration and 
rehabilitation work, are made, specific accessibility requirements 
are triggered. 
Recognizing the national interest in preserving historic 
properties, Congress established alternative requirements for 
properties that cannot be made accessible without "threatening 
or destroying" their significance. A consultation process is 
outlined in the ADA's Accessibility Guidelines for owners of 
historic properties who believe that making specific accessibility 
modifications would "threaten or destroy" the significance of 
their property. In these situations, after consulting with person s 
with disabilities and disability organizations , building owners 
should contact the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) to 
determine if the special accessibility provisions for historic 
properties may be used . Further, if it is determined in 
consultation with the SHPO that compliance with the minimum 
requirements would also "threaten or destroy" the significance of 
the property, alternative methods of access, such as home 
delivery and audio-visual programs, may be used . 
Figure 24. Creating an accessible entrance with a new elevator tower 
requires a compatible design. This elevator addition blends in with the 
historic building's materials and provides access to all public levels. 
Photo: Sharon Park. 
13 
ure 23. New additions to historic buildings can be designed to increase 
accessibility. A new addition links two adjacent buildings used for the 
Albany, New York, Visitor's Center, and incorporates an accessible 
entrance, restrooms, and signage. Photo: Clare Adams. 

Photo: Massachusetts Historical Commission. 
Conclusion 
Historic properties are irreplaceable and require special care 
to ensure their preservation for future generations. With 
the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act, access to 
historic properties open to the public is a now civil right, 
and owners of historic properties must evaluate existing 
buildings and determine how they can be made more 
accessible. It is a challenge to evaluate properties 
thoroughly, to identify the applicable accessibility 
requirements, to explore alternatives and to implement 
solutions that provide independent access and are 
consistent with accepted historic preservation standards. 
Solutions for accessibility should not destroy a property's 
significant materials , features and spaces, but should 
increase accessibility as much as possible. Most historic 
buildings are not exempt from providing accessibility, and 
with careful planning, historic properties can be made more 
accessible, so that all citizens can enjoy our Nation's diverse 
heritage . 
Acknowledgements 
Thomas C. Jester is an Architectural Historian with the Preservation Assistance 
Division of the National Park Service. Sharon C. Park, AlA, is the Senior 
Historical Architect with the Preservation Assistance Division, National Park 
Service. 
The authors wish to thank Charles A. Birnbaum, ASLA, Historical Landscape 
Architect with the Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, for 
contributing the section on historic landscapes. The authors gratefully 
acknowledge the invaluable comments made by the following individuals who 
reviewed the draft manuscript: William Smith, Massachusetts Historical 
Commission; Kay Weeks, H. Ward Jandl , Michael Auer , and Charles A. 
Birnbaum, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service; Clare 
Adams, New York Department of Parks , Recreation and Historic Preservation; 
Lauren Bowlin, Maryland Historical Trust ; Tom Mayes, National Trust for 
Historic Preservation ; Elizabeth lgleheart, Maine Historic Preservation 
14 
Additional Reading 
Ballantyne, Duncan S. and Harold Russell Associates, Inc. 
Accommodation of Disabled Visitors at Historic Sites in the 
National Park System. Washington, D.C.: Park Historic 
Architecture Division, National Park Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 1983. 
Goldman, Nancy. Ed. Readily Achievable Checklist: A Survey 
for Accessibility. Boston: Adaptive Environments Center, 
1993. 
Hayward, Judith L. and Thomas C. Jester, compilers. 
Accessibility and Historic Preservation Resource Guide. 
Windsor, Vermont: Historic Windsor, Inc., 1992, revised 
1993. 
Jester, Thomas C. Preserving the Past and Making it Accessible 
for People with Disabilities. Washington, D.C.: 
Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, 
U.S. Department of the Interior, 1992. 
Parrott, Charles. Access to Historic Buildings for the Disabled. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1980. 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of 
Historic Properties. Washington, D.C.: Preservation 
Assistance Division, National Park Service, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 1993. 
Smith, William D. and Tara Goodwin Frier. Access to 
History: A Guide to Providing Access to Historic Buildings 
for People with Disabilities. Boston: Massachusetts 
Historical Commission, 1989. 
Standards for Accessible Design: ADA Accessibility Guidelines 
(ADAAG). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
1991. 
Commission; Milford Wayne Donaldson, FAlA; Paul Beatty, U.S. Architectural 
and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board; Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, 
National Park Service; Western Regional Office, National Park Service. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to th ational Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which direct s the Secretary of the Interior 
to develop and make available information concerning historic properties . 
Comments about this publication should be directed to H. Ward Jandl, Deputy 
Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, P.O. Box 37127, 
Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. This publication is not copyrighted and can be 
reprod uced without penalty . Normal procedures for credit to the authors and 
the National Park Service are appreciated. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 September 1993 