 
 
e 
 
4 PRESERVATIONBRIEFS 
Roofing for Historic Buildings 
Sarah M. Sweetser 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resourc es 
Heritage Preservation Service s 
Significance of the Roof 
A weather-tight roof is basic in the preservation of a stru c­
ture, regardless of its age, size, or design. In the system that 
allows a building to work as a shelter, the roof sheds the rain,
shades from the sun, and buffer s the weather. 
During some periods in the history of architecture, the roof
imparts much of the architectural character. It define s the 
style and contributes to the building's aesthetics . The hipped 
roofs of Georgian architecture, the turrets of Queen Anne, th
Mansard roofs, and the graceful slopes of the Shingle Style 
and Bungalow designs are examples of the use of roofing as a
major design feature. 
But no matter how decorative the patterning or how com­
pelling the form, the roof is a highly vulnerable element of a 
shelter that will inevitable fail. A poor roof will permit the 
accelerated deterioration of historic building materials­
masonry, wood, plaster, paint-and will cause general dis­
integration of the basic structure. Furthermore , there is an 
urgency involved in repairing a leaky roof since such repair 
costs will quickly become prohibitive. Although such action is 
desirable as soon as a failure is discovered, temporary patch­
ing methods should be carefully chosen to prevent inadvertent 
damage to sound or historic roofing materials and related 
features . Before any repair work is performed , the histor ic 
value of the materials used on the roof should be under stood . 
Then a complete internal and external inspection of the roof 
should be planned to determine all the cause s of failure and to 
identify the alternatives for repair or replacement of the 
roofing . 
Historic Roofing Materials in America 
Clay Tile: European settlers used clay tile for roofing as earl y 
as the mid-17th century; many pantile s (S-curved tiles), as well 
as flat roofing tiles, were used in Jamestown , Virginia . In 
some cities such as New York and Boston, clay was popularly 
used as a precaution against such fire as those that engulfed 
London in 1666 and scorched Boston in 1679. 
Tiles roofs found in the mid-18th century Moravian sett le­
ments in Pennsylvania closely resembled those found in Ger­
many . Typically, the tiles were 14- 15" long, 6-7" wide with a 
curved butt. A lug on the back allowed the tiles to hang on the 
lathing without nails or pegs. The tile surface was usually 
scored with finger marks to promote drainage , In the South ­
west, the tile roofs of the Spanish missionaries (mission tiles) 
were first manufactured ( ca. 1780) at the Mission San An­
tonio de Padua in California. These semicircular tiles were 
Repairs on this pantile roof were made with new tiles held in place 
with metal hangers. (Main Building, Ellis Island, New York) 
made by molding clay over sections of logs, and they were 
generally 22" long and tapered in width . 
The plain or flat rectangular tiles most commonly used fro m 
the 17th through the beginning of the 19th century measured 
about 10" by 6" by½", and had two holes at one end for a 
nail or peg fastener. Sometimes mortar was applied between 
the courses to secure the tiles in a heavy wind . 
In the mid-19th century, tile roofs were often replaced by 
sheet-metal roofs, which were lighter and easier to install and 
maintain . However, by the turn of the century, the Romanes­
que Revival and Mission style buildings created a new demand 
and popularity for this picturesque roofing material. 
HABS 
Slate: Another practice settlers brought to the New World was 
slate roofing. Evidence of roofing slates have been found also 
among the ruins of mid-I 7th-century Jamestown. But because 
of the cost and the time required to obtain the materia l, which 
was mostly imported from Wales , the use of slate was initially 
limited. Even in Philadelphia (the second largest city in the 
English-speaking world at the time of the Revolution) slates 
were so rare that "The Slate Roof House" distinctly referred 
to William Penn's home built late in the 1600s. Sources of 
native slate were known to exist along the eastern seaboard 
from Maine to Virginia, but difficulties in inland transporta­
tion limited its availability to the cities, and contributed to its 
expen se. Welsh slate continued to be imported until the 
development of canals and railroads in the mid-19th century 
made American slate more accessible and economical. 
Slate was popular for its durability, fireproof qualities , and 

I 
The Viclorians loved 10 used different colored slates to create 
decoralive pallerns on their roofs, an effect which cannot be easily 
duplicated by substilute materials. Before any repair work on a roof 
such as this, !he slate sizes, colors, and position of the pallerning 
should be carefully recorded to assure proper replacement. (Ebenezer 
Maxwell Mansion, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, photo courtesy of 
William D. Hershey) 
aesthetic potential. Because slate was available in different 
colors (red, green, purple, and blue-gray), it was an effective 
material for decorative patterns on many I 9th-century roofs 
(Gothic and Mansard styles). Slate continued to be used well 
into the 20th century, notably on many Tudor revival style 
buildings of the 1920s. 
Shingles: Wood shingles were popular throughout the country 
in all periods of building history. The size and shape of the 
shingles as well as the detailing of the shingle roof differed ac­
cording to regional craft practices. People within particular 
regions developed preferences for the local species of wood 
that most suited their purposes. In New England and the Del­
aware Valley, white pine was frequently used: in the South, 
cypress and oak; in the far west, red cedar or redwood. Some­
times a protective coating was applied to increase the durabil­
ity of the shingle such as a mixture of brick dust and fish oil, 
or a paint made of red iron oxide and linseed oil. 
Commonly in urban areas, wooden roofs were replaced 
with more fire resistant materials, but in rural areas this was 
not a major concern. On many Victorian country houses, the 
practice of wood shingling survived the technological ad­
vances of metal roofing in the I 9th century, and near the turn 
of the century enjoyed a full revival in its namesake, the 
Shingle Style. Colonial revival and the Bungalow styles in the 
20th century assured wood shingles a place as one of the most 
fashionable, domestic roofing materials. 
Metal: Metal roofing in America is principally a 19th­
century phenomenon . Before then the only metals commonly 
2 
Replacement of particular historic details is important to the indi­
vidual hisloric characler of a roof, such as the treatment at the eaves 
of this rounded butt wood shingle roof Also note that the surface of 
the roof was carefully sloped to drain water away from the side of the 
dormer. In the restoration, thisfunclion was augmented with the ad­
dition of carefully concealed modern meta/flashing. (Mount Vernon, 
Vir2inia) 
Galvanized sheet-metal shingles imilating the appearance of pantiles 
remained popular from !he second half of the /9/h century into the 
20th century. (Episcopal Church, now the Jerome Historical Society 
Building, Jerome, Arizona, 1927) 
used were lead and copper. For example, a lead roof covered 
''Rosewell," one of the grandest mansions in I 8th-century 
Virginia. But more often, lead was used for protective 
flashing. Lead, as well as copper, covered roof surfaces where 
wood, tile, or slate shingles were inappropriate because of the 
roof's pitch or shape. 
Copper with standing seams covered some of the more 
notable early American roofs including that of Christ Church 
(1727-1744) in Philadelphia. Flat-seamed copper was used on 
many domes and cupolas. The copper sheets were imported 
from England until the end of the 18th century when facilities 
for rolling sheet metal were developed in America. 
Sheet iron was first known to have been manufactured here 
by the Revolutionary War financier, Robert Morris, who had 
a ro lling mill near Trenton, New Jersey. At his mill Morris 
produced the roof of his own Philadelphia mansion, which he 
started in 1794. The architect Benjamin H. Latrobe used sheet 
iron to replace the roof on Princeton's "Nassau Hall," which 
had been gutted by fire in 1802. 
The method for corrugating iron was originally patented in 
England in 1829. Corrugating stiffened the sheets, and 
allowed greater span over a lighter framework, as well as 
reduced installation time and labor. In 1834 the American 
architect William Strickland proposed corrugated iron to 
cover his design for the market place in Philadelphia. 
Galvanizing with zinc to protect the base metal from rust 
was developed in France in 1837. By the 1850s the material 
was used on post offices and customhouses, as well as on train 
sheds and factories. In 1857 one of the first metal roofs in the 

Repeated repair with asphalt, which cracks as it hardens, has created a 
blistered surface on this sheet-metal roof and built-in gutter, which 
will retain water. Repairs could be made by carefully heating and 
scraping the surface clean, repairing the holes in the metal with a flexi­
ble mastic compound or a metal patch, and coating the surface with a 
fibre paint. (Roane County Courthouse, Kingston, Tennessee, photo 
courtesy of Building Conservation Technology, Inc.) 
South was installed on the U.S. Mint in New Orleans. The 
Mint was thereby "fireproofed" with a 20-gauge galvanized, 
corrugated iron roof on iron trusses. 
Tin-plate iron, commonly called "tin roofing," was used 
extensively in Canada in the 18th century, but it was not as 
common in the United States until later. Thomas Jefferson 
was an early advocate of tin roofing, and he installed a 
standi ng-seam tin roof on "Monticello" (ca. 1770-1802). The 
Arch Street Meetinghouse (1804) in Philadelphia had tin 
shingles laid in a herringbone pattern on a "piazza" roof. 
However, once rolling mills were established in this country, 
the low cost, light weight, and low maintenance of tin plate 
made it the most common roofing material. Embossed tin 
shingles, whose surfaces created interesting patterns, were 
popular throughout the country in the late 19th century. Tin 
roofs were kept well-painted, usually red; or, as the architect 
A. J. Davis suggested, in a color to imitate the green patina of 
copper. 
Terne plate differed from tin plate in that the iron was 
dipped in an alloy of lead and tin, giving it a duller finish. 
Historic, as well as modern, documentation often confuses 
the two, so much that it is difficult to determine how often 
actual "terne" was used. 
Zinc came into use in the 1820s, at the same time tin plate 
was becoming popular. Although a less expensive substitute 
for lead, its advantages were controversial, and it was never 
widely used in this country. 
A Chicago firm's catalog dated 1896 illustrates a method of unrolling, 
turning the edges, and finishing the standing seam on a metal roof 
Tin shingles, commonly embossed to imitate wood or tile, or with a 
decorative design, were popular as an inexpensive, textured roofing 
material. These shingles 8.325inch by 12 .5 inch on the exposed surface) 
were designed with interlocking edges, but they have been repaired by 
surface nailing, which may cause future leakage. (Ballard House, 
Yorktown, Virgina, photo by Gordie Whittington, National Park 
Service) 
Other Materials: Asphalt shingles and roll roofing were used 
in the 1890s. Many roofs of asbestos, aluminum, stainless 
steel, galvinized steel, and lead-coated copper may soon have 
historic values as well. Awareness · of these and other tradi­
tions of roofing materials and their detailing will contribute to 
more sensitive preservation treatments. 
Locating the Problem 
Failures of Surface Materials 
When trouble occurs, it is important to contact a profes­
sional, either an architect, a reputable roofing contractor, or a 
craftsman familiar with the inherent characteristics of the 
particular historic roofing system involved . These profes­
sionals may be able to advise on immediate patching pro­
cedures and help plan more permanent repairs. A thorough 
examination of the roof should start with an appraisal of the 
existing condition and quality of the roofing material itself. 
Particular attention should be given to any southern slope 
because year-round exposure to direct sun may cause it to 
break down first. 
Wood: Some historic roofing materials have limited life 
expectancies because of normal organic decay and "wear." 
For example, the flat surfaces of wood shingles erode from 
exposure to rain and ultraviolet rays. Some species are more
hardy than others, and heartwood, for example, is stronger 
and more durable than sapwood. 
Ideally, shingles are split with the grain perpendicular to 
 
3 

the surface. This is because if shingles are sawn across the 
grain, moisture may enter the grain and cause the wood to 
deteriorate. Prolonged moisture on or in the wood allows 
moss or fungi to grow, which will further hold the moisture 
and cause rot. 
Metal: Of the inorganic roofing materials used on historic 
buildings, the most common are perhaps the sheet metals: 
lead, copper, zinc, tin plate, terne plate, and galvanized iron. 
In varying degrees each of these sheet metals are likely to 
deteriorate from chemical action by pitting or streaking . This 
can be caused by airborn pollutants; acid rainwater; acids from 
lichen or moss; alkalis found in lime mortars or portland 
cement, which might be on adjoining features and washes 
down on the roof surface; or tannic acids from adjacent wood 
sheathings or shingles made of red cedar or oak . 
Corrosion from" galvanic action" occurs when dissimilar 
metals, such as copper and iron, are used in direct contact. 
Corrosion may also occur even though the metals are physi­
cally separated; one of the metals will react chemically 
against the other in the presence of an electrolyte such as rain­
water. In roofing, this situation might occur when either a 
copper roof is decorated with iron cresting, or when steel nails 
are used in copper sheets. In some instances the corrosion can 
be prevented by inserting a plastic insulator between the 
dissimilar materials. Ideally, the fasteners should be a metal 
sympathetic to those involved. 
Iron rusts unless it is well-painted or plated . Historically 
this problem was avoided by use of tin plating or galvinizing. 
But this method is durable only as long as the coating remains 
intact. Once the plating is worn or damaged, the exposed iron 
will rust. Therefore, any iron-based roofing material needs to 
be undercoated, and its surface needs to be kept well-painted 
to prevent corrosion. 
One cause of sheet metal deterioration is fatigue. Depending 
upon the size and the gauge of the metal sheets, wear and 
metal failure can occur at the joints or at any protrusions in 
the sheathing as a result from the metal's alternating move­
ment to thermal changes. Lead will tear because of" creep," 
or the gravitational stress that causes the material to move 
down the roof slope. 
Slate: Perhaps the most durable roofing materials are slate 
and tile. Seemingly indestructable, both vary in quality. Some 
slates are hard and tough without being brittle. Soft slates are 
more subject to erosion and to attack by airborne and rain-
This detail shows slate delamination caused by a combination of 
weathering and pollution . In addition, the slates have eroded around 
the repair nails, incorrectly placed in the exposed surface of the slates. 
(Lower Pontalba Building, New Orleans, photo courtesy of Building 
Conservation Technology, Inc.) 
4 
water chemicals, which cause the slates to wear at nail holes, 
to delaminate, or to break. In winter, slate is very susceptible 
to breakage by ice, or ice dams. 
Tile: Tiles will weather well, but tend to crack or break if hit, 
as by tree branches, or if they are walked on improperly. Like 
slates, tiles cannot support much weight. Low quality tiles 
that have been insufficiently fired during manufacture, will 
craze and spall under the effects of freeze and thaw cycles on 
their porous surfaces. 
Failures of Support Systems 
Once the condition of the roofing material has been deter­
mined, the related features and support systems should be 
examined on the exterior and on the interior of the roof. 
The gutters and downspouts need periodic cleaning and 
maintenance since a variety of debris fill them, causing water 
to back up and seep under roofing units. Water will eventually 
cause fasteners, sheathing, and roofing structure to deteri­
orate . During winter, the daily freeze-thaw cycles can cause 
ice floes to develop under the roof surface. The pressure from 
these ice floes will dislodge the roofing material, especially 
slates, shingles, or tiles. Moreover, the buildup of ice dams 
above the gutters can trap enough moisture to rot the 
sheathing or the structural members. 
Many large public buildings have built-in gutters set within 
the perimeter of the roof. The downspouts for these gutters 
may run within the walls of the building, or drainage may be 
through the roof surface or through a parapet to exterior 
downspouts. These systems can be effective if properly main­
tained; however, if the roof slope is inadequate for good 
runoff, or if the traps are allowed to clog, rainwater will form 
pools on the roof surface . Interior downspouts can collect 
debris and thus back up, perhaps leaking water into the sur­
rounding walls. Exterior downspouts may fill with water, 
which in cold weather may freeze and crack the pipes. Con­
duits from the built-in gutter to the exterior downspout may 
also leak water into the surrounding roof structure or walls. 
Failure of the flashing system is usually a major cause of 
roof deterioration. Flashing should be carefully inspected for 
failure caused by either poor workmanship, thermal stress, or 
metal deterioration ( both of flashing material itself and of the 
fasteners) . With many roofing materials, the replacement of 
flashing on an existing roof is a major operation, which may 
require taking up large sections of the roof surface. 
Therefore, the installation of top quality flashing material on 
Temporary stabilization or "mothballing" with materials such as 
plywood and building paper can protect the roof of a project until it 
can be properly repaired or replaced. (Narbonne House, Salem, 
Massachusetts) 

These two views of the same house demonstrate how the use of a substitute material can drastically affect the overall character of a structure. The 
textural interest of the original tile roof was lost with the use of asphalt shingles. Recent preservation efforts are replacing the tile roof (Frank 
House, Kearney, Nebraska , photo courtesy of the Nebraska Stat e Historical Society, Lincoln, Nebraska) 
a new or replaced roof should be a primary consideration. 
Remember, some roofing and flashing materials are not 
compatible. 
Roof fasteners and clips should also be made of a mate rial 
compatible with all other materials used, or coated to prevent 
rust. For example, the tannic acid in oak will corrode iron 
nails. Some roofs such as slate and sheet metals may fail if 
nailed too rigidly. 
If the roof structure appears sound and nothing indicates 
recent movement, the area to be examined most closely is the 
roof substrate-the sheathing or the battens . The danger spots 
would be near the roof plates, under any exterior patches, at 
the intersections of the roof planes, or at vertical surfaces 
such as dormers. Water penetration, indicating a breach in the 
roofing surface or flashing, should be readily apparent, usual­
ly as a damp spot or stain. Probing with a small pen knife may 
reveal any rot which may indicate previously undetected 
damage to the roofing membrane. Insect infestation evident 
by small exit holes and frass (a sawdust-like debris) should 
also be noted. Condensation on the underside of the roofing is 
undesirable and indicates improper ventilation. Moisture will 
have an adverse effect on any roofing material; a good roof 
stays dry inside and out. 
Repair or Replace 
Understanding potential weaknesses of roofing material also 
requires knowledge of repair difficulties. Individual slates can 
be replaced normally without major disruption to the rest of 
the roof, but replacing flashing on a slate roof can require 
substantial removal of surrounding slates . If it is the substrate 
or a support material that has deteriorated, many surface 
materials such as slate or tile can be reused if handled care­
fully during the repair . Such problems should be evaluated at 
the outset of any project to determine if the roof can be effec­
tively patched, or if it should be completely replaced. 
Will the repairs be effective? Maintenance costs tend to 
multiply once trouble starts. As the cost of labor escalates , 
repeated repairs could soon equal the cost of a new roof. 
The more durable the surface is initially, the easier it will be 
to maintain. Some roofing materials such as slate are expen­
sive to install, but if top quality slate and flashing are used, it 
will last 40-60 years with minimal maintenance. Although the 
installation cost of the roof will be high, low maintenance 
needs will make the lifetime cost of the roof less expensive . 
Historical Research 
In a restoration project, research of documents and physical 
investigation of the building usually will establish the roof's 
history. Documentary research should include any original 
plans or building specifications, early insurance surveys, 
newspaper descriptions, or the personal papers and files of 
people who owned or were involved in the history of the 
building. Old photographs of the building might provide 
evidence of missing details. 
Along with a thorough understanding of any written history 
of the building, a physical investigation of the roofing and its 
structure may reveal information about the roof's construc­
tion history. Starting with an overall impression of the struc­
ture, are there any changes in the roof slope, its configura­
tion, or roofing materials? Perhaps there are obvious patches 
or changes in patterning of exterior brickwork where a gable 
roof was changed to a gambrel, or where a whole upper story 
was added. Perhaps there are obvious stylistic changes in the 
roof line, dormers, or ornamentation. These observations 
could help one understand any important alteration, and 
could help establish the direction of further investigation. 
Because most roofs are physically out of the range of 
careful scrutiny, the "principle of least effort" has probably 
limited the extent and quality of previous patching or replac­
ing, and usually considerable evidence of an earlier roof sur­
face remains . Sometimes the older roof will be found as an 
underlayment of the current exposed roof . Original roofing 
may still be intact in awkward places under later features on a 
roof . Often if there is any unfinished attic space, remnants of 
roofing may have been dropped and left when the roof was 
being built or repaired . If the configuration of the roof has 
been changed, some of the original material might still be in 
place under the existing roof. Sometimes whole sections of the 
roof and roof framing will have been left intact under the 
higher roof. The profile and / or flashing of the earlier roof 
may be apparent on the interior of the walls at the level of the 
alteration. If the sheathing or lathing appears to have survived 
changes in the roofing surface, they may contain evidence of 
the roofing systems. These may appear either as dirt marks, 
which provide "shadows" of a roofing material, or as nails 
broken or driven down into the wood, rather than pulled out 
during previous alterations or repairs . Wooden headers in the 
roof framing may indicate that earlier chimneys or skylights 
have been removed. Any metal ornamentation that might 
have existed may be indicated by anchors or unusual markings 
along the ridge or at other edges of the roof. This primary 
5 

evidence is essential for a full understanding of the 
roofs history. 
Caution should be taken in dating early'' fabric'' on the 
evidence of a single item, as recycling of materials is not a 
mid-20th-century innovation. Carpenters have been reusing 
materials, sheathing, and framing members in the interest of 
economy for centuries. Therefore, any analysis of the mate­
rials found, such as nails or sawmarks on the wood, requires 
an accurate knowledge of the history of local building prac­
tices before any final conclusion can be accurately reached. It 
is helpful to establish a sequence of construction history for 
the roof and roofing materials; any historic fabric or pertinent 
evidence in the roof should be photographed, measured, and 
recorded for future reference. 
During the repair work, useful evidence might unexpectedly 
appear. It is essential that records be kept of any type of work 
on a historic building, before, during, and after the project. 
Photographs are generally the easiest and fastest method, and 
should include overall views and details at the gutters, flash­
ing, dormers, chimneys, valleys, ridges, and eaves. All 
photographs should be immediately labeled to insure accurate 
identification at a later date. Any patterning or design on the 
roofing deserves particular attention. For example, slate roofs 
are often decorative and have subtle changes in size, color, 
and texture, such as a gradually decreasing coursing length 
from the eave to the peak. If not carefully noted before a 
project begins, there may be problems in replacing the sur­
face. The standard reference for this phase of the work is 
Recording Historic Buildings, compiled by Harley J. McKee 
for the Historic American Buildings Survey, National Park 
Service, Washington, D.C., I 970. 
Replacing the Historic Roofing Material 
Professional advice will be needed to assess the various 
aspects of replacing a historic roof. With some exceptions, 
most historic roofing materials are available today . If not, an 
architect or preservation group who has previously worked 
with the same type material may be able to recommend sup­
pliers. Special roofing materials, such as tile or embossed 
metal shingles, can be produced by manufacturers of related 
products that are commonly used elsewhere, either on the ex­
terior or interior of a structure . With some creative thinking 
and research, the historic materials usually can be found. 
Because of the roof's visibility, the slate detailing around the dormers 
is important to the character of this structure. Note how the slates 
swirl from a horizontal pattern on the main roof to a diamond pattern 
on the dormer roofs and side walls. ( 18th and Que Streets, NW, 
Washington, D.C.) 
6 
Craft Practices: Determining the craft practices used in the in­
stallation of a historic roof is another major concern in roof 
restoration. Early builders took great pride in their work, and 
experience has shown that the" rustic" or irregular designs 
commercially labled "Early American" are a 20th-century in­
vention. For example, historically, wood shingles underwent 
several distinct operations in their manufacture including 
splitting by hand, and smoothing the surface with a draw 
knife . In modern nomenclature, the same item would be a 
"tapersplit" shingle which has been dressed. Unfortunately, 
the rustic appearance of today's commercially available 
''hhandsplit'' and re-sawn shingle bears no resemblance to the 
hand-made roofing materials used on early American 
buildings . 
Good design and quality materials for the roof surface, fastenings, 
and flashing minimize roofing failures. This is essential on roofs such 
as on the National Cathedral where a thorough maintenance inspec­
tion and minor repairs cannot be done easily without special scaf­
folding. However, the success of the roof on any structure depends on 
frequent cleaning and repair of the gutter system. (Washington, D. C., 
photo courtesy of John Burns, A .I.A.) 
Early craftsmen worked with a great deal of common sense; 
they understood their materials. For example they knew that 
wood shingles should be relatively narrow; shingles much 
wider than about 6" would split when walked on, or they may 
curl or crack from varying temperature and moisture. It is im­
portant to understand these aspects of craftsmanship, re­
membering that people wanted their roofs to be weather-tight 
and to last a long time. The recent use of'' mother-goose'' 
shingles on historic structures is a gross underestimation of 
the early craftsman's skills. 
Supervision: Finding a modern craftsman to reproduce his­
toric details may take some effort. It may even involve 
some special instruction to raise his understanding of cer­
tain historic craft practices. At the same time, it may be 
pointless ( and expensive) to follow historic craft practices 
in any construction that will not be visible on the finished 
product. But if the roofing details are readily visible, their 
appearance should be based on architectural evidence or 
on historic prototypes. For instance, the spacing of the 
seams on a standing-seam metal roof will affect the 
building's overall scale and should therefore match the 
original dimensions of the seams . 

Many older roofing practices are no longer performed 
because of modern improvements . Research and review of 
specific detailing in the roof with the contractor before begin­
ning the project is highly recommended. For example, one 
early craft practice was to finish the ridge of a wood shingle 
roof with a roof "comb"-that is, the top course of one slope 
of the roof was extended uniformly beyond the peak to shield 
the ridge, and to provide some weather protection for the raw 
horizontal edges of the shingles on the other slope. If the 
' 'comb'' is known to have been the correct detail, it should be 
used. Though this method leaves the top course vulnerable to 
the weather, a disguised strip of fflashing will strengthen this 
weak point. 
Detail drawings or a sample mock-up will help ensure that 
the contractor or craftsman understands the scope and special 
requirements of the project. It should never be assumed that 
the modern carpenter, slater, sheet metal worker, or roofer 
will know all the historic details. Supervision is as important 
as any other stage of the process. 
Special problems inherent in the design of an elaborate historic roof 
can be controlled through the use of good materials and regular 
maintenance . The shape and detailing are essential elements of the 
building's historic character, and should not be modified, despite the 
use of alternative surface materials. (Garn well House, Bellingham , 
Washington) 
Alternative Materials 
The use of the historic roofing material on a structure may be 
restricted by building codes or by the availability of the 
materials, in which case an appropriate alternative will have 
to be found. 
Some municipal building codes allow variances for roofing 
materials in historic districts. In other instances, individual 
variances may be obtained. Most modern heating and cooking 
is fueled by gas, electricity, or oil-none of which emit the hot 
embers that historically have been the cause of roof fires. 
Where wood burning fireplaces or stoves are used, spark ar­
restor screens at the top of the chimneys help to prevent flam­
ing material from escaping, thus reducing the number of fires 
that start at the roof. In most states, insurance rates have been 
equalized to reflect revised considerations for the risks in­
volved with various roofing materials . 
In a rehabilitation project, there may be valid reasons for 
replacing the roof with a material other than the original. The 
historic roofing may no longer be available, or the cost of ob­
taining specially fabricated materials may be prohibitive . But 
the decision to use an alternative material should be weighed 
carefully against the primary concern to keep the historic 
character of the building. If the roof is flat and is not visible 
from any elevation of the building, and if there are advan­
tages to substituting a modern built-up composition roof for 
what might have been a flat metal roof, then it may make bet­
ter economic and construction sense to use a modern roofing 
method. But if the roof is readily visible, the alternative 
material should match as closely as possible the scale, texture, 
and coloration of the historic roofing material. 
Asphalt shingles or ceramic tiles are common substitute ma­
terials intended to duplicate the appearance of wood shingles, 
slates, or tiles. Fire-retardant, treated wood shingles are cur­
rently available. The treated wood tends, however, to be brit­
tle, and may require extra care ( and expense) to install. In 
some instances, shingles laid with an interlay of fire-retardent 
building paper may be an acceptable alternative. 
Lead-coated copper, terne-coated steel, and aluminum/ 
zinc-coated steel can successfully replace tin, terne plate, zinc, 
or lead. Copper-coated steel is a less expensive ( and less 
durable) substitute for sheet copper. 
The search for alt(;,rnative roofing materials is not new. As 
early as the 18th century, fear of fire cause many wood shingle 
or board roofs to be replaced by sheet metal or clay tile. Some 
historic roofs were failures from the start, based on over­
ambitious and naive use of materials as they were first devel­
oped . Research on a structure may reveal that an inadequately 
designed or a highly combustible roof was replaced early in its 
history , and therefore restoration of a later roof material 
would have a valid precedent. In some cities, the substitution 
of sheet metal on early row houses occurred as soon as the 
rolled material became available. 
Cost and ease of maintenance may dictate the substitution 
of a material wholly different in appearance from the 
original. The practical problems (wind, weather, and roof 
pitch) should be weighed against the historical consideration 
of scale, texture, and color . Sometimes the effect of the alter­
native material will be minimal. But on roofs with a high 
degree of visibility and patterning or texture, the substitution 
may seriously alter the architectural character of the building. 
Temporary Stabilization 
It may be necessary to carry out an immediate and temporary 
stabilization to prevent further deterioration until research 
can determine how the roof should be restored or rehabili­
tated, or until funding can be provided to do a proper job. A 
simple covering of exterior plywood or roll roofing might pro­
vide adequate protection, but any temporary covering should 
be applied with caution. One should be careful not to 
overload the roof structure, or to damage or destroy historic 
evidence or fabric that might be incorporated into a new roof 
at a later date. In this sense, repairs with caulking or 
bituminous patching compounds should be recognized as po­
tentially harmful, since they are difficult to remove, and at 
their best, are very temporary. 
Precautions 
The architect or contractor should warn the owner of any 
precautions to be taken against the specific hazards in install­
ing the roofing material. Soldering of sheet metals, for in­
stance, can be a fire hazard, either from the open flame or 
from overheating and undected smoldering of the wooden 
substrate materials. 
Thought should be given to the design and placement of any 
modern roof appurtenances such as plumbing stacks, air 
vents, or TV antennas. Consideration should begin with the 
placement of modern plumbing on the interior of the build­
ing, otherwise a series of vent stacks may pierce the roof mem­
brane at various spots creating maintenance problems as well 
as aesthetic ones . Air handling units placed in the attic space 
will require vents which, in turn, require sensitive design. In­
corporating these in unused chimneys has been very successful 
7 

in the past. 
Whenever gutters and downspouts are needed that were not 
on the building historically, the additions should be made as 
unobtrusively as possible, perhaps by painting them out with 
a color compatible with the nearby wall or trim. 
Maintenance 
Although a new roof can be an object of beauty, it will not be 
protective for long without proper maintenance. At least 
twice a year, the roof should be inspected against a checklist. 
All changes should be recorded and reported. Guidelines 
should be established for any foot traffic that may be required 
for the maintenance of the roof. Many roofing materials 
should not be walked on at all. For some-slate, asbestos, and 
clay tile-a self-supporting ladder might be hung over the 
ridge of the roof, or planks might be spanned across the roof 
surface. Such items should be specifically designed and kept 
in a storage space accessible to the roof. If exterior work ever 
requires hanging scaffolding, use caution to insure that the 
anchors do not penetrate, break, or wear the roofing surface, 
gutters, or flashing. 
Any roofing system should be recognized as a membrane 
that is designed to be self-sustaining, but that can be easily 
damaged by intrusions such as pedestrian traffic or fallen tree 
branches. Certain items should be checked at specific times. 
For example, gutters tend to accumulate leaves and debris 
during the spring and fall and after heavy rain. Hidden gutter 
screening both at downspouts and over the full length of the 
gutter could help keep them clean. The surface material would 
require checking after a storm as well. Periodic checking of 
the underside of the roof from the attic after a storm or winter 
freezing may give early warning of any leaks. Generally, 
damage from water or ice is less likely on a roof that has good 
flashing on the outside and is well ventilated and insulated on 
the inside . Specific instructions for the maintenance of the 
different roof materials should be available from the architect 
or contractor. 
Summary 
The essential ingredients for replacing and maintaining a 
historic roof are: 
• Understanding the historic character of the building and 
being sympathetic to it. 
• Careful examination and recording of the existing roof 
and any evidence of earlier roofs. 
• Consideration of the historic craftsmanship and detail­
ing and implementing them in the renewal wherever 
visible. 
• Supervision of the roofers or maintenance personnel to 
assure preservation of historic fabric and proper under­
standing of the scope and detailing of the project. 
• Consideration of alternative materials where the origi­
nal cannot be used . 
• Cyclical maintenance program to assure that the staff 
understands how to take care of the roof and of the par­
ticular trouble spots to safeguard. 
With these points in mind, it will be possible to preserve the 
architectural character and maintain the physical integrity of 
the roofing on a historic building. 
This Preservation Brief was written by Sarah M. Sweetser, Architec­
tural Historian, Technical Preservation Services Division. Much of 
the technical information was based upon an unpublished report pre­
pared under contract for this office by John G. and Diana S. Waite. 
Some of the historical information was from Charles E. Peterson, 
FAIA, "American Notes," Journal of the Society of Archi1ec1ural 
Hislorians . 
The illustrations for this brief not specifically credited are from the 
files of the Technical Preservation Services Division. 
This publication was prepared pursuant to Executive Order 11593, "Protection 
and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment ," which directs the Secretary 
of the Interior to "develop and make available to Federal agencies and State 
and local governments information concerning professional methods and tech-
8 
Decorative features such as cupolas require extra maintenance. The 
flashing is carefully detailed to promote run-off, and the wooden ribb­
ing must be kept well-painted. This roof surface, which was originally 
tin plate, has been replaced with lead-coated copper for maintenance 
purposes. ( Lyndhurst, Tarrytown, New York, photo courtesy of the 
National Trust for Historic Preservation) 
niques tor preserving, improving, restoring and maintaining historic proper­
ties." The Brief has been developed under the technical editorship of Lee H. 
Nelson, AIA, Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, 
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C. 20240. Comments on the 
usefulness of this information are welcome and can be sent to Mr. Nelson at 
the above address. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced 
without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National 
Park Service are appreciated. February 1978. 
Additional readings on the subject of roofing are listed below. 
Boaz, Joseph N., ed. Archilec/Ural Graphic S1andards. New York: 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1970. (Modern roofing types and detail­
ing) 
Briggs, Martin S. A Sharl Hislory of the Buildin g Crafts. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1925. (Descriptions of historic roofing 
materials) 
Bui/el in of the Association for Preservation Technology. Vol. 2 (nos. 
1-2) 1970. (Entirely on roofing) 
Holstrom, Ingmar; and Sandstrom, Christina. Maintenance of Old 
Buildings: Preservation from the Technical and Antiquarian Stand­
point. Stockholm: National Swedish Building Research, 1972. 
(Conta ins a section on roof maintenance problems) 
Insall, Donald. The Care of Old Buildings Today. London: The 
Architectural Press, 1972. (Excellent guide to some problems and 
solutions for historic roofs) 
Labine, R.A. Clem. " Repairing Slate Roofs." The Old HouseJour­
nal3 (no. 12, Dec . 1975): 6-7. 
Lefer, Henry." A Birds-eye View." Progressive Architecture. (Mar. 
1977), pp. 88-92. (Article on contemporary sheet metal) 
National Slate Association. Slate Roofs. Reprint of 1926 edition, now 
available from the Vermont Structural Slate Co., Inc ., Fairhaven, 
VT 05743. (An excellent reference for the many designs and details 
of slate roofs) 
Peterson, Charles E. "Iron in Early American Roofs." The Smith­
sonian Journal of History 3 (no. 3). Edited by Peter C. Welsh . 
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1968, pp. 41-76. 
Waite, Diana S. Nineteen1h Century Tin Roofing and its Use at Hyde 
Hall. Albany: New York State Historic Trust, 1971. 
. "Roofing for Early America." Building Early America. Edited 
by Charles E. Peterson. Radnor, Penn .: Chilton Book Co., 1976. 