48 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS
 
    
Preserving Grave Markers in                 
Historic Cemeteries
      
Mary F. Striegel, Frances Gale, Jason Church, &            
Debbie Dietrich-Smith
National Park Service                            
U.S. Department of the Interior
Technical Preservation Services
Cemeteries found across the country are not only 
places of burial, but they also provide a vivid record 
of community history. Whether large or small, well 
maintained or neglected, historic cemeteries are an 
important part of our cultural landscape. The vast 
richness of expression through form, decoration and 
materials informs our understanding of the individuals 
buried in historic cemeteries and their cultural 
significance. 
While cemeteries are often considered to be perpetual, 
their most prominent feature—the grave markers—
are not. They weather, naturally decay, often are 
poorly maintained and repaired and, on occasion, 
are vandalized (Fig. 1). Grave markers are usually 
noteworthy not only for their inscriptions but also for 
their craftsmanship.  Exceptional markers are considered 
works of art.  
This Preservation Brief focuses on a single aspect of 
historic cemetery preservation—providing guidance 
for owners, property managers, administrators, in-
house maintenance staff, volunteers, and others who 
Figure 1.   Sandstone and slate grave markers in the Ancient 
Burying Ground in New London, CT, display a variety of weathering 
conditions.  Markers in the cemetery date from the mid-17th to the 
early 19th centuries.   Photo: Jason Church.
are responsible for or are interested in preserving and 
protecting grave markers. Besides describing grave 
marker materials and the risk factors that contribute to 
their decay, the Brief provides guidance for assessing 
their conditions and discusses maintenance programs 
and various preservation treatments. 
Also identified are a number of excellent references that 
address materials used in all grave markers, including 
several other Preservation Briefs (listed in Additional 
Reading). This Brief highlights particular issues that 
should be considered with historic grave markers. 
Types of Traditional Grave Markers
The great variety in the types of grave markers is a 
fascinating aspect of the study and appreciation of 
historic cemeteries. Three broad categories can be used 
to describe grave markers—(1) single-element, (2) 
multiple-element, and (3) structures.  Single-element 
grave markers are stone, cast iron, or wood elements 
that are set in a vertical position or placed as a horizontal 
slab on the ground (Fig. 2). Early examples of this 
simplest type of grave markers are field stone and basic 
wooden or wrought iron crosses, with the name of the 
deceased person scratched into or engraved on the 
marker. Often, these rudimentary grave markers are 
overlooked, significantly deteriorated, or lost. Vertical 
stone slabs and large stone ledgers laid horizontally over 
the gravesite are more sophisticated examples of this 
type. 
Multiple-element grave markers are found in a number 
of different forms. In the most typical form, a grave 
marker would consist of two stones—an upper 
headstone placed on top of a base stone. The upper 
headstone may be secured in a number of different ways 
to the base. In the simplest of forms, the upper stone was 
placed on the base, set in a bed of mortar on top of the 
base, or joined with pins and mortar. With a “tab-and-
1

slot” grave marker, the tabbed upper stone was set in a 
slotted base (Fig. 3). More common today, the upper 
headstone is secured with a technique that uses small 
spacers set on the base and a setting compound. This 
technique or one that uses an epoxy adhesive may be 
found on older markers where the stones have been 
reset.
Figure 2. These mid-19th century, single-element stone grave markers 
in the Grove Cemetery in Bath, NY, are set in a vertical position.  
Photo: Jason Church.
Figure 3. A multi-element grave marker 
from the early 19th century in the St. 
Michael’s Cemetery, Pensacola, FL, 
consists of a vertical element with tabs 
(left image) into a slotted base (right 
image).  Photo: Fran Gale.
Stacked-base grave markers use multiple bases to 
increase the height of the monument and provide a 
stable foundation for upper elements. Tall, four-sided 
tapered monuments, known as obelisks, are typically 
placed on stacked bases. Columns or upright pillars 
have three main parts – a base, shaft, and capital. 
Multiple-element grave markers may also include 
figurative or sculptural components. Traditionally, 
stacked base grave markers were set on lead shims with 
mortar joints or with lead ribbon along the outer edges. 
Grave markers can also be engineered structures. 
Examples of grave marker structures include masonry 
arches, box tombs, table tombs, grave shelters, and 
mausoleums (Fig. 4). The box tomb is a rectangular 
structure built over the gravesite. The human remains 
are not located in the box itself as some believe, but 
Figure 4. This sandstone table tomb, located in Cedar Grove 
Cemetery, New London, CT, is an engineered grave marker structure 
consisting of a horizontal stone tablet supported by four vertical table 
“legs” with and a central column,.  Photo: Jason Church.
rather in the ground beneath the box structure. The 
table tomb is constructed of a horizontal stone tablet 
supported by small corner supports or columns. 
Grave shelters, also called grave houses, can be 
simple or elaborate wooden structures built over the 
gravesite. Mausoleums are above-ground buildings 
with compartments for multiple burials. Engineered 
structures also include hillside and underground tombs. 
Guidelines for Evaluating and Registering Cemeteries 
and Burial Places, National Register Bulletin 41, provides 
a concise review of grave marker types. 
Materials
Stone, brick, concrete, metal, and wood are the most 
common materials used for grave markers and for fences 
and gravesite enclosures in historic cemeteries. This 
section briefly describes the composition and properties 
of these diverse materials
Masonry materials 
There is a wide variety of masonry materials used 
in historic cemeteries; some are naturally occurring 
and others man-made. Although there are notable 
exceptions, most masonry materials are durable, 
have high compressive strength, and are resistant to 
weathering. As grave markers, they typically represent 
the work of masons and stone carvers.
Stone is a naturally occurring material with a wide 
range of properties and is available in a variety of colors 
(Fig. 5). Geologists classify stone according to the way 
in which it was formed with the three categories being 
igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rock. Stone 
found in cemeteries is predominantly quarried, though 
the use of field stones is not uncommon. The mineralogy 
and chemical composition of stones vary. Some are 
composed primarily of silicate minerals; granites, 
sandstones, slate, and schist are examples. Other stones 
contain calcium carbonate with marble and limestone 
in this group. Mineralogy, chemical composition, and 
2

3
rather in the ground beneath the box structure. The 
table tomb is constructed of a horizontal stone tablet 
supported by small corner supports or columns. 
Grave shelters, also called grave houses, can be 
simple or elaborate wooden structures built over the 
gravesite. Mausoleums are above-ground buildings 
with compartments for multiple burials. Engineered 
structures also include hillside and underground tombs. 
Guidelines for Evaluating and Registering Cemeteries 
and Burial Places, National Register Bulletin 41, provides 
a concise review of grave marker types. 
Materials
Stone, brick, concrete, metal, and wood are the most 
common materials used for grave markers and for fences 
and gravesite enclosures in historic cemeteries. This 
section briefly describes the composition and properties 
of these diverse materials
Masonry materials 
There is a wide variety of masonry materials used 
in historic cemeteries; some are naturally occurring 
and others man-made. Although there are notable 
exceptions, most masonry materials are durable, 
have high compressive strength, and are resistant to 
weathering. As grave markers, they typically represent 
the work of masons and stone carvers.
Stone is a naturally occurring material with a wide 
range of properties and is available in a variety of colors 
(Fig. 5). Geologists classify stone according to the way 
in which it was formed with the three categories being 
igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rock. Stone 
found in cemeteries is predominantly quarried, though 
the use of field stones is not uncommon. The mineralogy 
and chemical composition of stones vary. Some are 
composed primarily of silicate minerals; granites, 
sandstones, slate, and schist are examples. Other stones 
contain calcium carbonate with marble and limestone 
in this group. Mineralogy, chemical composition, and 
Figure 5. A variety of colors of natural stone are found in historic 
cemeteries, such as this pink granite marker in the Cedar Grove 
Cemetery, New London, CT.  Photo: Jason Church.
physical structure of the stone influence weathering and 
the selection of materials and procedures for its cleaning 
and protection. 
Man-made masonry materials are manufactured from 
naturally occurring raw materials. For example, the raw 
materials used to make brick include clay, sand, and 
shale. During firing, clay minerals and sand melt and 
come together forming silicates, aluminates, and metallic 
oxides. The resulting brick material has a hard-fired 
outer surface with a softer interior. 
Concrete is a man-made material composed of cement, 
sand, gravel, and water. Most concrete produced after 
1870 contains Portland cement, another manufactured 
product. In its plastic or wet state, concrete can be cast 
or poured. It hardens by hydration, a chemical-curing 
process. The resulting product has excellent compressive 
strength, but much lower tensile strength. Reinforcing 
concrete with steel helps compensate for this limitation. 
All masonry materials are porous with an interior 
network of pores. The porosity of sedimentary rocks 
such as limestone and sandstone can be as high as 20 
percent while the pore volume of granite is very low. 
Because moisture is a key factor in many deterioration 
processes, porous masonry materials are more 
vulnerable to weathering. 
Metals 
Metals are solid materials that are typically hard, 
malleable, fusible, ductile, and often shiny when new 
(Fig. 6). A metal alloy is a mixture or solid solution 
of two or more metals. Metals are easily worked and 
can be melted or fused, hammered into thin sheets, or 
Figure 6. Decorative cast-iron grave markers like this late-19th 
century one in Oakland Cemetery in Shreveport, LA, are produced 
by heating the iron alloy and casting the liquid metal into a mold.  
Photo: Jason Church.
drawn into wires. Different metals have varying physical 
and mechanical properties, aesthetics, and weathering 
characteristics. 
Ferrous metals and alloys, including cast iron, wrought 
iron, and steel, all contain iron. Cast iron also contains 
carbon and silicon and has a relatively low melting 
point. When heated to a liquid state, it can be molded 
into a variety of shapes. Wrought iron is an alloy with 
low carbon content. Its fibrous inclusions (called slag) 
are sometimes visible to the naked eye. Unlike cast iron, 
wrought iron is heated to the point where it becomes 
soft and then is hammered or “worked” into desired 
shapes. Most of the wrought and cast iron in historic 
cemeteries is ornamental rather than structural. While 
cast iron, steel, and wrought iron all contain iron, steel 
and wrought iron are more resistant to corrosion. Paint 
was often applied to ferrous metals to help protect them 
from corrosion and for decorative purposes. Metal 
elements were painted in a variety of colors including 
black, white, and green, among others. 
Nonferrous metals and alloys, such as bronze, zinc, and 
lead, do not contain iron. Bronze contains about 85% 
copper, 10-15% tin, and sometimes lead. Historic bronze 
cemetery markers were created by casting processes 
that involves pouring liquid bronze into a mold. The 
completed casting is hollow. Bronze work may comprise 
a single molded component, such as a plaque, or 
multiple molded components welded or fitted together 
as with large statuary.  Chemical patinas were applied 
to enhance color, and clear coatings for protection. 
Cast zinc monuments were popular from 1870 through 
the early 20th century. Most cast zinc is bluish-gray in 
color. Although cast zinc is resistant to corrosion, it is a 
brittle material with a tendency to “creep” or deform, 
especially when exposed to high outdoor temperatures. 
Wood 
Wood is a porous organic material composed of 
tubular cells in a parallel arrangement. The structure 

4
Figure 7. As shown by this 1877 marker in Silver Terrace Cemetery, 
Virginia City, NV, exposure to sunlight can damage wood grave 
markers, making the wood more susceptible to water damage and 
cracking. Photo: Jason Church.
and characteristics of these cells determine the wood’s 
appearance and influence wood properties. Wood-
cell walls and cavities contain moisture. Oven drying 
reduces the moisture content of wood. After the drying 
process, the wood continues to expand and contract with 
changes in moisture content. The loss of water from cell 
walls causes wood to shrink, sometimes distorting its 
original shape (Fig. 7).
Hardwoods come from deciduous trees such as oak, 
maple, and walnut; softwoods from conifers such as 
pine, cedar, and fir. In general, hardwoods have higher 
density than softwoods, which makes them more 
durable materials, and are darker in color. Wood cut at 
different orientations affects its strength and weathering. 
As an organic material, wood is also particularly 
vulnerable to termites, carpenter ants, and other wood-
destroying insects and fungi. Paints, coatings, and 
fungicides such as borates are used to help protect wood 
from various insect damage and fungal rot.  
Other materials 
Old cemeteries often include a wide variety of other 
materials not normally associated with contemporary 
grave markers, such as ceramics, stained glass, shells, 
and plastics (Fig. 8). As with masonry, metals, and 
wood, each has its own chemical and physical properties 
Figure 8. A fired ceramic, this cameo is set in a marble grave marker, 
located in Elmwood Cemetery, Memphis, TN. Different materials 
may require different conservation approaches. Photo: Mary Striegel.
which affect durability and weathering. These materials 
present unique challenges and their properties must be 
understood before establishing appropriate maintenance 
and repair. Documentation of unusual materials is 
critical when repair is not possible.   
Weathering
All grave marker materials deteriorate when they are 
exposed to weathering such as sunlight, wind, rain, high 
and low temperatures, and atmospheric pollutants (Fig. 
9). If a marker is composed of several materials, each 
may have a different weathering rate. Some weathering 
processes occur very quickly, and others gradually 
affect the condition of materials. Weathering results in 
deterioration in a variety of ways. For example, when 
exposed to rainwater some stones lose surface material 
while others form harder outer crusts that may detach 
from the surface.  
Figure 9. The limestone and sandstone grave markers in this 
historic cemetery have different weathering processes. On the left, 
the limestone shows surface loss in areas exposed to rainwater and 
gypsum crust formation below. The sandstone marker on the right 
displays uniform soiling, but surface hardening may be occurring. 
Photo: Fran Gale. 

5
Granite is a durable grave marker material considered 
resistant to w
eathering. It is a compact, hard rock 
with low porosity, and granite deterioration can 
be imperceptible for many years. Slate also has 
low porosity, but its layered structure can result in 
delamination. Some stones used to make grave markers, 
like sandstone, limestone and marble, are softer than 
granite and more porous. These materials are more 
vulnerable to weathering with deterioration noticeable 
during the initial years of exposure. With slate and other 
stones with layered structures, weathering sometimes 
results in delamination, defined as the separation 
of layers along bedding planes.  Different rates of 
weathering are related to the chemical composition and 
physical structure of the material. 
Deterioration affects other grave marker materials 
in different ways. With brick, durability is related to 
its firing temperature, which influences the brick’s 
compressive strength and absorption. Brick fired at high 
temperatures has a protective fire skin. The weathering 
of concrete also is variable, and largely depends on 
the materials used in its manufacture. For example, 
Portland cement concrete is generally more resistant 
to weathering than lime concrete. With wood, grave 
markers fashioned from heartwood (the dead inner 
wood) are more durable than those of sapwood (the 
living exterior wood), and some wood species such as 
cedar, Osage orange and black locust contain extractives 
that provide decay resistance.  
The term “inherent vice” is used to describe a material 
with a naturally occurring problem that leads to 
premature deterioration (Fig. 10). An example of this 
problem is marble that has cracked due to natural 
locked-in stresses. Inherent vice also describes grave 
markers that are composed of incompatible materials, 
where decay is accelerated in one or both materials 
because of chemical interactions caused by their close 
proximity. An example is the galvanic corrosion that 
occurs when dissimilar metals, such as copper and iron, 
are in contact and exposed to moisture. 
Figure 10. The sandstone cross (carved to look like wood) in this 
grave marker in St. Michael’s Cemetery in Pensacola, FL, provides 
an example of inherent vice – the severe delamination affecting 
the sandstone has occurred along its natural bedding planes.                
Photo: Fran Gale.
Risk Factors
There are two major categories of risk factors that can 
impact historic grave markers. The first comprises 
naturally-occurring deterioration phenomena known 
as the forces of nature, including weathering. The 
list of natural risk factors includes climate, biological 
issues, and natural hazards such as fire and floods.  
The other category includes the many degradation 
phenomena that are related to human activities. The 
results of humans and their actions include pollution, 
lack of maintenance, inappropriate repairs, arson, 
and vandalism. While some of the factors related to 
human activities, such as improper repair, may not be 
intentional, the results can be just as damaging to grave 
markers. 
Often, it is not possible to separate natural risk factors 
from those related to human activities. For example, 
pollution is deposited on grave markers by rain and 
other forms of precipitation, resulting in discoloration 
and often material degradation.  Whether due to natural 
risk factors, human activities or both, “synergism” 
occurs when the result of two or more risk factors 
is greater than the sum of the individual effects. An 
example is the damage that occurs to salt-laden masonry 
materials during freeze/thaw cycles. The combined effect 
of these two deterioration factors is severe.
Natural Risk Factors 
Climate plays an important role in weathering processes. 
Depending upon the climate, cemetery grave markers 
are exposed to rain, snow, sleet, ultraviolet (UV) light, 
humidity, high and low temperatures, and wind. All of 
these forces can damage masonry, metals, and wood. 
For example, with wood, the UV rays present in sunlight 
accelerate the weathering process.
Exposure to repeated changes in temperature can 
have an adverse effect on materials such as stone and 
other porous masonry. High temperatures deteriorate 
and weaken many materials while low temperatures 
cause materials to become brittle. In some climates 
there are rapid changes during spring and fall that 

6
Figure A. Cemeteries are cultural landscapes made up of a variety 
of features. Grave markers are but one component of cemeteries 
that also include walkways, drives, fences, coping, trees, shrubs, 
and other vegetation. Each component adds to the understanding 
of the cemetery landscape. Photo: Debbie Dietrich Smith.
many riding mowers have a hand-control adjustment 
to temporarily raise and lower the blade height.  
Improper use of a string-trimmer is also potentially 
destructive, especially when it comes into contact 
with soft materials such as marble, limestone, and 
wood.  Using the lightest trim line and angling the 
trimmer head towards the ground will help reduce 
damage if the trimmer hits unintended targets.  
Consider hand trimming around the most significant, 
fragile features. 
As a time-saving measure, herbicides are sometimes 
used around the base of features to remove unwanted 
grass and weeds.  In most cases, use of herbicides 
for this purpose is not recommended, as salts within 
the herbicide can wick into the stone (especially soft 
stones) and cause spalling and deterioration. The 
removal of vegetation also exposes soil around the base 
of the grave marker, which, in a heavy rain, can cause 
soil splashing that may result in staining.
If fertilizer is applied, choose a natural organic fertilizer 
to minimize salt content for the reasons stated above.  
For any chemical application, be sure to rinse away 
residue from grave markers, etc., with water using a 
low pressure hose or spray bottle, to minimize contin-
ued contact.
Ongoing maintenance of cemetery vegetation is essen-
tial to conserve grave markers and fencing.  Periodic 
inspections may warrant removing trees; trimming 
tree limbs, shrubs, and vines; and removing volunteer 
vegetation.  All trees should be inspected at least every 
five years. Annual inspections are necessary to as-
sess the condition of shrubs and vines, and to identify 
volunteer growth for removal. Mowing and trimming 
around the hundreds of stone, brick, iron, and wood 
features found in many cemeteries is a weekly or bi-
weekly chore.  Lawn care is the most time-consuming, 
and, if not done carefully, potentially destructive 
maintenance ac-
tivity in historic 
cemeteries. 
Figure B. A pool 
‘noodle’ can be 
fitted to the deck 
of a lawnmower 
to prevent damage 
to grave markers. 
Photo: Debbie 
Dietrich Smith.
Vegetation Management
Carefully monitoring and managing of trees and other 
vegetation is an integral part of a cemetery preventive 
conservation program.  Mature trees and ornamental 
shrubs can add character, shade, and seasonal color to 
historic cemeteries (Fig. A). However, if not properly 
maintained, they can damage grave markers, fencing, 
and other historic features. Mature trees may fall 
during storms and drop large limbs that topple grave 
markers and mangle fencing.  Overgrown vegetation 
creates wet, shaded areas and fosters biological growth 
than can accelerate deterioration of stone, iron, and 
wood objects.
A treatment plan for cemetery vegetation should ad-
dress trees, shrubs, vines, and “volunteer” growth.  For 
the assessment and treatment of trees that pose haz-
ards, consult an International Society of Arboriculture 
(ISA) certified arborist. Prune trees and shrubs adjacent 
to grave markers to allow air circulation and light 
penetration.  Certified arborists and master gardeners 
should carry out this work or direct others in pruning 
trees and shrubs, as many may be historic features inte-
gral to the cultural landscape and worthy of preserva-
tion. 
 
Regarding lawn care, historic cemeteries w
ere not 
designed for today’s large riding lawnmowers, yet this 
is the mower of choice for many cemeteries, as mowing 
is one of the most time-consuming and costly mainte-
nance tasks generally undertaken.   Mowing between 
tight spots with a large riding mower deck is destined 
to cause damage.  Best practices include using a 
smaller, push mower between particularly sensitive 
features, and outfitting riding mower decks with 
protective bumpers.  Low-cost options include using 
fire hose padding or a foam swimming ‘noodle’ (Fig. 
B). Additional damage is caused by riding over low 
stones or coping, especially when the blade height is 
set low.  If rolling over these features is unavoidable, 

7
cause damaging cycles of expansion and contraction. 
Adjacent dissimilar materials may respond differently to 
temperature changes, resulting in distortion. High winds 
can carry water and abrasive particles causing abrasion 
and erosion, especially to soft materials. W
ind may also 
drive rain water into masonry joints and permeable 
elements and materials. 
Water, in liquid, solid or vapor form, plays a critical 
role in the deterioration process. Most grave marker 
materials are porous, and moisture from precipitation, 
ground w
ater, or frequent landscape watering can enter 
the pore system. If temperatures drop below the freezing 
point, water in interior pores, joints and cracks freezes, 
and its increased volume often applies internal pressure, 
resulting in damage to the grave marker such as cracks 
or spalling. 
Ferrous metals are particularly vulnerable to water-
related deterioration. Iron increases in size when it 
corrodes, sometimes as much as 20 percent. 
As the 
corrosion process proceeds, the ferrous metal eventually 
weakens. When embedded within concrete or masonry 
materials, the corroding iron often causes cracks and 
spalls in the masonry. 
Woody vegetation can damage grave markers in a 
variety of ways (Fig. 11). Trees, bushes, and vines 
can shade grave markers, extending the time that the 
markers are exposed to moisture. Tendrils and roots 
may burrow into mortar joints and openings, causing 
mechanical damage and large plants may lift up or shift 
markers. Even leaves and twigs, when allowed to collect 
on the ground near grave markers, can affect water 
drainage and evaporation (Fig. 12).
Microorganisms such as algae, fungi, and lichens 
may affect grave markers. Microorganisms hold in 
moisture and some produce acids. With acid-sensitive 
materials such as limestone and marble, the result 
is surface erosion. Sometimes the organisms use the 
material as a food source, dissolving minerals in the 
stone and attacking the cellular structure of wood. 
Wood is especially vulnerable to fungi, algae, and other 
microorganisms when its moisture content is above 25%.
Infestation by termites, carpenter bees and ants, and 
other insects can affect the appearance and structural 
integrity of wood. Unsightly bird droppings can also 
affect paint and other surface finishes.
Human Activities 
Aside from vandalism and purposeful neglect, most risk 
factors attributable to human activity are unintentional.  
Sometimes damage to grave markers is the result of 
cleaning or repair done with the best of intentions. These 
unfortunate mistakes can be the result of insufficient 
training and funding, misuse of tools and equipment, 
and poor planning. With proper training and 
supervision, human risk factors can be lessened.
Figure 11. Woody vegetation can damage grave markers and 
pose a risk to visitors unless well managed and maintained.                  
Photo: Jason Church.
Deferred maintenance usually accelerates the 
deterioration of grave markers and can be a safety 
hazard. All materials have a service life with mortar, 
paints, and other coatings requiring periodic upkeep 
to be effective. For example, unless ferrous metal has a 
sound protective coating, exposure to weathering can 
result in corrosion. Loose, misaligned or detached grave 
markers may lead to further damage or deterioration if 
not corrected in a timely manner.  When nearby trees 
and shrubs are overgrown and invasive vegetation is 
present, needless risks to historic grave markers may 
also occur. 
Inappropriate maintenance activities can be devastating. 
One of the most common threats stems from improper 
lawn care, particularly the misuse of mowing equipment 
and string trimmers (weed whackers). The use of large 
mowers or mishandling them can lead to displacement 
of markers. Scrapes, gouges and even breakage also 
can occur. Improper use of string trimmers in areas 
immediately adjacent to grave markers can result in 
Figure 12. A cemetery professional undertakes a tree inventory in 
American Cemetery, Natchitoches, LA, to determine the health of 
trees in the cemetery. Management decisions for trimming or removal 
are based on the inventory. Photo: Debbie Dietrich Smith.

8
scratching and even cutting into softer stone and wood. 
Generally, the use of chemical weed killers at the base of 
grav
e markers should be avoided, especially if there is a 
risk that the marker would absorb the chemicals.
Repointing masonry grave markers using Portland 
cement mortars that are harder than historic mortars 
often results in accelerated deterioration of the masonry 
material. Mortar should be softer than the adjacent 
masonry, enabling trapped moisture to migrate out, and 
serv
e as the sacrificial material when cracking occurs to 
relieve excessive stress. Problems also result when using 
impervious “protective” coatings that can trap moisture 
within the masonry, resulting in damage during wet/dry 
and freeze/thaw cycles (Fig. 13). 
Figure 13. The impervious 
coating used to “protect” 
this sandstone grave 
marker trapped moisture 
within the stone, 
eventually resulting in 
deterioration and surface 
loss. Photo: Fran Gale.
Figure 14. High-
pressure water washing 
can damage grave 
markers. The photograph 
shows “wand marks” on 
the headstones produced 
by inappropriate 
pressure washing. 
Photo: Jason Church.
Harsh cleaning products and techniques can have a 
detrimental effect on grave markers. Acidic cleaners such 
as muriatic acid can dissolve minerals in many masonry 
materials and can attack metals. Alkaline cleaners, such 
as bleach, are notorious for leaving residual salts that are 
deposited on the surface (a process called efflorescence). 
Both acidic and alkaline cleaning can result in staining, 
especially if rinsing is inadequate. Using high-pressure 
water, above 500 to 1,000 psi, can needlessly damage 
materials as well, increasing their vulnerability to 
weathering (Fig. 14). If the marker is fragile, even low 
pressure water can be damaging. Techniques to avoid 
include aggregate blasting with sand or other harsh 
media and the use of power tools with abrasive wire or 
NyloxTM brushes. 
Pollution
Grave markers can be both visually and materially 
affected by pollution. Most readily apparent is the 
discoloration that takes place when airborne pollutants 
are deposited on markers. Depending on the exposure, 
how water is shed, and the marker material and 
intricacies, discoloration on markers will usually appear 
uneven and in streaks.
Avoiding 10 Common
Maintenance Mistakes
1. Maintain records on conditions and treatments of 
historic markers
2. Seek advice from persons experienced with 
preserving historic markers when initiating a major 
maintenance or repair program.
3. Discourage visitor use of chalk, shaving cream, 
and other materials to highlight carvings and letter-
ing.
4. Train grounds crews in methods to avoid dam-
age to historic markers, including flat grave markers 
which can be easily damaged by machinery, fertilizers 
and weed killers.
5. Remove graffiti as quickly as possible, using 
appropriate methods, so as not to encourage further 
marker disfiguration and vandalism.
6. Maintain ground cover around cemetery markers 
to avoid surrounding dirt from splashing back and 
staining grave markers.
7. Never use rotary grinders to resurface or “clean” 
historic markers.
8. Avoid the use of coatings on masonry without 
proper investigation.
9. Avoid high pressure water washing to clean 
historic markers.
10. Repair rather than replace damaged and deterio-
rated grave markers. For markers encased in cement, 
leave any repair work to trained conservators. 

9
While the visual effect of pollution is often discoloration, 
less apparent is the potential damage caused by 
pollution to the grave marker materials themselv
es. 
Most rain is slightly acidic, and its pH (a measurement 
of acidity) becomes more acidic when pollutant gases, 
such as sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxides, are present. 
Acid rain damages materials containing calcium 
carbonate, such as limestone and marble, resulting in 
surface loss or erosion. When erosion is severe, the grave 
marker inscription, carvings and sculptural elements 
may become discernable. Recarving the inscription 
is not recommended. Instead, a small stand-alone 
interpretative sign could be placed nearby. 
Acid rain also damages bronze grave markers. Pollutant 
gases alter the composition of exposed bronze, often 
producing water-soluble minerals. These minerals are 
washed away during subsequent rains, resulting in 
surface erosion.  If the bronze element is positioned 
on a masonry pedestal or plinth, the minerals are 
deposited on the masonry below. These effects of acid 
rain are disfiguring to the bronze element and associated 
masonry. 
Condition Assessments
Condition assessments help identify potential safety 
hazards, required preservation work, and any additional 
conservation that is needed for stabilization and 
protection of grave markers. Assessments also provide 
important baseline information about deterioration 
affecting grave markers. The collected information is 
helpful in determining and prioritizing maintenance 
tasks, identifying unstable conditions that pose an 
immediate threat, and for developing a plan for any 
needed repair or conservation work. Assessments 
should be recurring, preferably every spring. Condition 
assessments also help determine the extent and severity 
of damage following a disaster. 
Depending upon the size of the cemetery and funding 
available, the initial assessment may be carried out 
by a team consisting of cemetery staff, a materials 
conservator, and, where necessary, an architect or 
structural engineer for cases involving large monuments 
and mausoleums (Figs. 15a and 15b).  For smaller 
cemeteries without large monuments and mausoleums, 
and where funding is problematic, volunteers can be 
trained to prepare a condition assessment under the 
guidance of an experienced individual. 
The first step in any condition assessment is to gather 
background information, including cemetery records 
and documents, historical photographs, records of 
previous repair and maintenance work, and current 
practices. The next step is to conduct an on-site survey. 
Following the survey, recommended maintenance 
procedures should be provided. If the team or individual 
conducting the survey is experienced in repairing 
historic grave markers, their assessment should include 
information about appropriate materials and techniques 
for restoration and stabilization. 
Survey forms facilitate both recording of field conditions 
and needed maintenance or repair work. Most forms 
include sections for marker type (headstone, obelisk, 
etc.), construction materials, orientation, dimensions, 
soil type, and grave marker deterioration. There 
are a number of excellent examples of survey forms 
available for download, including the National Park 
Service Condition Survey Form at www.ncptt.nps.gov  
However, because each cemetery is unique, it may be 
necessary to modify an existing form. 
A tool kit for the condition assessment may include 
binoculars, digital camera, magnifying glass, measuring 
tape, clipboard, carpenter’s rule, level, magnet, and 
flashlight. For large monuments, a ladder or aerial lift 
may be required. Photographs of each marker, including 
overall shots and close-up details, are an essential part 
of the documentation process. Photo logs are helpful for 
Figure 15a. Condition surveys are undertaken to document current 
conditions, determine safety issues, and plan both emergency 
stabilization and future treatment plans. There are a variety of 
survey forms available that can be tailored to the specific cemetery.       
Photo: Mary Striegel.
 
 Figure 15b. Photographs are used to document the condition of the grave 
marker as part of a condition assessment. Photo: Fran Gale.

10
recording the date, direction, and photographer. Digital 
photographs should be captured in a standardized size 
and format (.tif, .jpg, .raw).
Defining conditions can be challenging, especially 
for cemetery staff and volunteers who are new to the 
process. There are a number of illustrated glossaries 
that can assist with determining accurate terminology 
for describing conditions. The ICOMOS Illustrated 
Glossary on Stone Deterioration P
atterns http://www.
international.icomos.org/ and the NACE International 
Resource Center Corrosion 101 http://nace.org/ are 
excellent resources.
 Where deterioration is apparent, the assessment should 
address questions such as: 
• What are the physical characteristics of the defects? 
Has deterioration obscured ornamental work or made 
the inscription difficult to read?
• What is the extent of the affected area? Are all areas 
of the marker affected by deterioration or is there a 
pattern? 
• Do the conditions appear to be stable or getting 
worse.
• Are the defects affecting other materials or 
impacting the safety of visitors?
• Is deterioration contributing to loss or theft? 
• Is further investigation required?
Maintenance 
The old axiom that an ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure certainly applies to the preservation 
of historic cemeteries. Maintenance is essential to the 
long-term preservation of historic grave markers. The 
principal components of a maintenance program include 
regular inspections, cyclical and prioritized maintenance 
work, and annual reports and budgeting.  An important 
first step is the development of a support team, 
including staff, conservators, engineers, skilled masons, 
and other professionals. In most cases, the cemetery 
manager should initiate this process.
The cemetery manager can use the information from the 
condition assessment report to develop a maintenance 
plan with a list of cyclical maintenance work. Many 
tasks can be carried out by in-house staff. For example, 
maintenance cleaning of metal and stonework can 
often be accomplished by rinsing with a garden hose. 
Applications of wax coatings can be used to protect 
bronze elements. Trained staff can undertake these 
tasks. Teaching graffiti removal techniques to cemetery 
staff may also be necessary if vandalism is an on-going 
problem. Staff should have access to written procedures 
that include lists of appropriate materials and forms for 
recording the work completed. 
Some work is best done by specialists (Fig. 16). For 
example, unless there is a trained mason on staff, 
replacing deteriorated or missing mortar will require a 
skilled masonry contractor. Services of a conservator or 
trained cemetery specialist should be used for removing 
severe soiling and staining from grave markers and for 
carrying out adhesive repair work such as selectively 
replacing a piece of stone when a marker is damaged by 
mechanical equipment. Care should be taken to clearly 
define the scope of work when hiring a contractor. 
It is useful to reference guidelines and preservation 
standards, such as those provided by the Secretary of 
the Interior or the American Institute for Conservation, 
whenever possible. 
Figure 16. A professional mason works to insert a new piece of stone. 
Often referred to as a “dutchman”, this repair technique requires 
replacing the deteriorated stone section with a new finished piece of 
the same size and material. Photo: Jason Church. 
Treatments
In historic cemeteries, preservation treatments are used 
to preserve grave markers and protect them from future 
deterioration. Tasks such as cleaning, where appropriate, 
painting, or lime washing may be undertaken both as 
an initial treatment and on a cyclical basis as part of the 
maintenance program for the site. Other treatments, 
including repointing, patching and filling, and resetting, 
should be undertaken on an as-needed basis. 
It is important to note that the Secretary of the Interior’s 
Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties provide 
concepts and guidelines for maintaining, repairing, and 
replacing historic materials. The Standards promote 
best practices that will help to protect grave markers 
in historic cemeteries and other irreplaceable cultural 
resources. If replacement is required, the new material 
should match the old in composition, design, color, 
and texture. With chemical and physical treatments, 
the Standards recommend using the gentlest means 
possible.

11
Selecting A Conservator                          
or Preservation Professional
       
A conservator or preservation professional can 
provide valuable assistance in preserving his-
toric cemeteries by documenting and surveying 
cemetery conditions, assisting with work plans 
and prioritizing work, and recommending specific 
maintenance and repair procedures. More com-
monly, they recommend more specialized preser-
vation treatments for historic markers and carry 
out the actual work. 
Specialized skills are required for undertaking 
certain treatments on historic grave markers or 
where markers are highly significant or are in 
more advanced states of disrepair. When contract-
ing for grave marker conservation, it is important 
to interview conservators who have worked in 
cemeteries. They should be experienced with the 
historic materials and nature of the conditions 
where the work is to be undertaken. Prior to 
selecting a conservator, details about their previ-
ous work and training should be obtained and 
confirmed. Most conservators will provide sample 
reports and photographs of previous work. 
The American Institute for Conservation of 
Historic and Artistic Works (AIC) offers informa-
tion about selecting a conservator and what to 
expect once you have contracted with a conserva-
tor.   Searching the “Find a Conservator” database 
provides a list of local and regional AIC members 
who have attained Professional Associate or Fel-
low status in the organization. More information 
can be found on the AIC website at http://www.
conservation-us.org/
A conservator will inspect grave markers before 
designing appropriate treatments and submit 
a written plan for their proposed conservation 
work that includes materials to be used, a cost 
estimate, and a schedule for the project. As part of 
the contract, the conservator should be required 
to submit a written completion report that clearly 
describes their treatment of the marker/s and in-
cludes maintenance and care recommendations.
Cleaning
Cleaning is carried out to remove soiling, staining, and 
contamination from grave markers (Fig. 17). Cleaning 
improves the visual appearance of the marker and 
sometimes reveals existing problems such as erosion 
and cracks. For various protective treatments, cleaning 
may be a necessary step in surface preparation. 
Although cleaning often is desirable and beneficial, the 
use of improper materials and techniques can cause 
great damage; when cleaning historic grave markers 
is undertaken, one should keep in mind the principle, 
“first do no harm.” 
To avoid a heavy build-up of soiling that might require 
aggressive cleaning procedures, regularly scheduled 
cleaning should be carried out by cemetery staff. The 
frequency of cleaning depends on a number of factors, 
including climate, location and vegetation. Before 
cleaning, an on-site inspection should be conducted 
to identify monument materials, including those not 
designated for cleaning since they may inadvertently 
come in contact with cleaning products and could 
be harmed. Temporary protective measure may be 
needed to safeguard nearby grave markers. Identifying 
the types of soiling present, including pollutants and 
contaminants, is important in deciding what cleaning 
procedures to use. 
For some monuments, existing conditions may preclude 
cleaning. Even gentle cleaning may not be recommended 
for conditions such as severe erosion, advanced 
deterioration, or fragile areas. Additionally, open joints, 
unstable repairs, and large cracks may require alternate 
cleaning procedures. 
General maintenance may involve low-pressure water 
washing. In most cases, surface soiling can be removed 
with a garden hose using municipal water or domestic 
Figure 17. Volunteers can undertake cleaning of grave markers once 
they have received initial training. Cleaning methods may include 
wetting the stone, using a mild chemical cleaner, gently agitating the 
surface with a soft bristle brush, and thoroughly rinsing the marker 
with clean water. Photo: Jason Church.
water supply from a well. To avoid risks due to freezing, 
air temperature above 40° F is recommended for the time 
of treatment and subsequent 24 hours. To help remove 
stubborn soiling and dirt, soft, natural bristle scrub 
brushes are best. Avoid metal bristle brushes or firm 
nylon brushes and wrap metal elements with masking 
tape to avoid scratching grave markers. 

12
Soaking and/or spraying water in a fine mist are effective 
methods to remov
e natural growth. Water also has a 
“swelling action” for some soiling, making it easier to 
remove with gentle scrubbing. With cyclic spraying, a 
fine mist of water is directed at the targeted area for a 
short time (e.g., 20 minutes or less), followed by a short 
“off” period. This on/off process is repeated several 
times. Because high-pressure water can abrade the 
surface, this treatment is not recommended for masonry 
monuments.
For stains that are not water soluble or where organic 
solvents are ineffective, it is sometimes necessary to 
use chemical cleaning. Chemical cleaners include 
acids, alkalis, detergents and organic solvents. Each 
has advantages and disadvantages. Acids dissolve the 
interface between the stain and substrate while alkalis 
allow for longer dwell periods but must be neutralized. 
Some detergents are near-neutral in pH (neither acidic 
nor alkaline) and easier to rinse. 
Before selecting or using a chemical cleaning agent, the 
manufacturer’s Safety Data Sheet (SDS), available with 
the product and online, should be reviewed. The SDS 
provides information about the product’s composition, 
including identified hazards, proper handling and 
storage, disposal, and required personal protective 
equipment. Once a chemical cleaning product has 
been selected, the manufacturer’s instructions should 
be followed. Before undertaking large-scale cleaning, 
it is always advisable to undertake small-scale tests 
(approximately 6" x 6"areas in discrete locations), and 
then waiting several days before assessing the results. 
Chemical cleaning is used to remove metallic stains and 
other contaminants such as old coatings and graffiti. For 
severe staining, poultice cleaning is useful as it extends 
contact time with the cleaner. A poultice is a mixture of 
clay or other inert material, such as paper pulp, and a 
cleaning agent. The mixture is applied to the surface and 
allowed an extended dwell period. The chemical cleaner 
dissolves the stain and the clay draws the stain out to the 
surface. When using a poultice, it should be applied just 
beyond the stained area and covered with polyethylene. 
The best practice is to leave the treatment on the surface 
for 24 hours and then remove the polyethylene cover 
and allow the poultice to continue drying. Once the 
poultice is dry, the mixture is then collected and the 
surface is thoroughly rinsed. For some stubborn stains, 
the application may need to be repeated. 
Chemical cleaning also may be required if biological 
growth (algae, fungi and lichen) is severe. A study 
conducted by the National Park Service provides 
guidelines for cleaning government-issued marble 
headstones and recommends biocidal cleaners that 
contain quaternary ammonium compounds. Like all 
cleaning methods, chemical cleaning can accelerate 
deterioration. Adverse effects include efflorescence, 
stains, and etching.   
 
Graffiti Removal 
Markers with graffiti tend to be targets for further 
vandalism (Fig. 18). Timely removal helps deter future 
vandalism and improves the marker’s appearance. 
If the graffiti is water soluble, it can be removed using 
water and a soft cloth or towel. Rinsing the cloth 
frequently helps to avoid smearing graffiti on unaffected 
areas. If the graffiti is not water soluble, organic solvents 
or commercial graffiti removal products suitable for 
the grave marker material are recommended.  Products 
should be tested prior to use. General cleaning of the 
entire marker is a good follow-up for a more even 
appearance. For deep-seated graffiti, poultice cleaning 
(previously described) may be required to extract 
staining materials. 
Repointing 
Missing and deteriorated mortar in old cemetery 
grave markers is a common condition, and the mortar 
should be replaced to prevent water intrusion and 
potential damage (Fig. 19). Several questions should 
be considered when selecting materials for repointing. 
Most importantly, what is the masonry substrate that 
Figure 18. Graffiti is carefully removed using a low-pressure dry-ice 
misting instrument. Photo: Jason Church.

13
Repointing 
Missing and deteriorated mortar in old cemetery 
grave markers is a common condition, and the mortar 
should be replaced to prevent water intrusion and 
potential damage (Fig. 19). Several questions should 
be considered when selecting materials for repointing. 
Most importantly, what is the masonry substrate that 
Figure 19. Masonry markers like this box tomb may require the 
repointing of mortar joints. It is important to use a mortar that is 
softer than the historic brick. In this case a conservator uses a lime 
putty-based mortar to repoint. Photo: Jason Church.
requires repointing? What mortar mix is suitable for 
the historic masonry? How quickly will mortar need 
to cure? Soft mortars contain traditional lime putty or 
modern hydrated lime. Harder mortars contain natural 
or Portland cement. If necessary, mortars can be tinted 
with alkali-stable pigments to match historic mortar 
colors. The selection of the mortar to be used is critically 
important to the success of the project. An inappropriate 
mortar can result in unattractive work and accelerate 
the deterioration of the historic grave marker. Always 
avoid the use of bathtub caulk and silicone sealants for 
repointing mortar joints. 
Prior to repointing, any loose and deteriorated mortar 
needs to be removed from the joint, preferably using 
hand tools. Following joint preparation, the mortar 
materials (lime, cement, and sand) are mixed, and then 
water added to form a stiff paste. The repointing mortar 
is applied using a tuck pointing trowel, typically with a 
narrow 1/8"- 1/2" flat blade. Mortar is compacted into the 
joint, and then excess mortar is removed and the original 
joint profile replicated. Good repointing requires skill. 
Generally, a mason or person with masonry training 
should repoint mortar joints. 
Resetting
Resetting is recommended for grave markers when their 
foundations are unstable or out of plumb (Figs. 20a 
through 20c). This often complex activity involves lifting 
the grave marker, leveling its foundation, and returning 
the marker to its original upright position. Workers can 
be injured and the grave marker damaged if resetting is 
not carried out properly and safely. 
Inexperienced staff or volunteers should not attempt 
resetting without training from a conservator, engineer, 
or other preservation professional. When dealing with 
fragile or significant grave markers, or those with large 
Figure 20a. This slate grave marker in the Ancient Burying 
Ground in Hartford, CT, is a ground-support stone. Resetting 
requires digging a hole that will hold the base of the stone and 
then compacting the soil at the bottom of the hole by hand.                 
Photo: Fran Gale.
Figure 20b. To facilitate drainage, crushed stone, gravel, and sharp 
sand line the hole and are hand-tamped around the stone after 
placement.  Photo: Fran Gale.
Figure 20c. The reset ground-supported grave marker should be level 
and plumb. Photo: Fran Gale.

14
Safety
Encouraging the public to visit and explore public 
burial grounds and cemeteries increases awareness 
of the value of these sacred sites. If visitation is 
promoted, owners and property managers must 
be responsible for ensuring that their sites are safe 
for staff and visitors. This responsibility includes 
monitoring the condition of grave markers. 
Historic cemeteries can be hazardous workplaces 
for staff members, consultants, contractors, and 
volunteers. Awareness of potential hazards in a 
historic cemetery and careful planning are essential 
to avoiding injury. Maintain an appropriate first aid 
kit on site for minor injuries and have an emergency 
plan in place that includes contact information for 
medical assistance. 
Creating a safe work environment in historic 
cemeteries requires appropriate planning for each 
project, starting with personal protective equipment. 
Suitable clothing and personal protective equipment 
should be fundamental safety requirements. 
Supportive shoes such as steel toe work boots or 
sturdy lace-up shoes help protect ankles and feet 
from injury, just as good work gloves help protect 
hands from cuts, scrapes, and splinters. Whether 
using a chipper, drill and other power tools or 
equipment, safety glasses or goggles are essential. 
A back brace often is recommended for heavier 
lifting tasks. Do not work alone or, if you must, tell 
someone where you are and when you expect to 
return. 
During hot weather, heat stress is a present risk. 
Besides knowing the signs of heat stress, preventive 
measures should be taken by each worker: 
• Wear light, loose-fitting, breathable clothing and a 
broad-brimmed hat.
• Use sunscreen, reapplying as needed.
• Take frequent breaks in the shade.
• Make sure fresh water is available and drink to 
stay hydrated. 
• Eat small meals before and during work. 
• Avoid caffeine, alcohol, and large amounts of 
sugar.
Trip and falling hazards include uneven ground, 
holes, open graves, toppled grave markers, fallen 
tree limbs, and other debris (Fig. C). Sitting, 
climbing, or standing on a grave marker should 
be avoided since the additional weight may cause 
Figure C. Gophers and other burrowing animals produce uneven 
ground and holes that are trip and falling hazards to visitors and 
staff of historic cemeteries. Photo: Jason Church.
deteriorated and structurally unstable monuments 
to break or collapse with serious injury potentially 
occurring to the worker and damage to the marker. 
To help prevent injuries that can result from 
unstable grave markers, it is important to routinely 
identify and flag severely damaged and unstable 
grave markers for corrective work and to rope off 
any marker considered to be in immediate danger 
of collapse. Prior to beginning work, the immediate 
area around the job site should be rechecked for 
safety hazards.
Snakes, wasps, and burrowing animals inhabit 
historic cemeteries (Fig. D). Snakes sun on 
warm stones and hide in holes and ledges, 
so it is important to be able to identify local 
venomous snakes.  An appropriate venomous 
snake management plan should be in place, and 
Figure D. Yellow jackets that are nesting below the projecting 
molding of this grave marker pose a hazard to visitors and 
staff because, if disturbed, they will vigorously defend their 
nest. Yellow jacket, paper wasp and hornet nests should be 
removed from grave markers by trained staff or specialists.                
Photo: Jason Church.

15
all workers should be familiar with it. Workers 
and volunteers should be instructed as to safety 
measures to be taken in regards to snakes, including 
proper clothing where there is an identified risk. 
The imported red fire ant is an invasive pest, 
prevalent in the southern United States. They attack 
en masse, resulting in painful bites that can be 
potentially life threatening to people with allergic 
reactions. It is important to be able to identify the 
presence of red imported fire ants; be informed as 
to safety measures to take when working in areas 
known to be infested with them; and take steps to 
control them as necessary. A rescue medicine is 
available for those with serious allergic reactions.
Paper wasps, yellow jackets, and hornets are another 
concern, building nests around and on ledges and 
lips of box tombs, mausoleums, and other grave 
markers. They are very territorial around their nests 
and will vigorously defend them. There are non-
toxic sprays that can be used in and around the work 
area. Nests should be safely removed.  
Burrowing animals like armadillos, groundhogs, 
gophers, and moles disrupt the ground with their 
digging and tunnels and can create tripping hazards 
or undermine grave markers. Prairie dogs have 
been known to dig up bones and destroy gravesites. 
Sinkholes created by these animals can also be 
perfect places for other creatures like snakes to 
inhabit.
Proper work practices and lifting techniques need to 
be used whenever lifting or resetting grave markers. 
Many markers are surprisingly heavy. For example, 
a common upright marble headstone measuring 
42" long, 13" wide, and 4" deep weighs over 200 
pounds. Volunteers and workers should work in 
pairs, be able bodied, and have training in safe 
Figure E1. The simple wooden clamp system allows two people 
to safety lift a marble grave marker.  Photo: Sarah Jackson.
Figure E2. The clamp system is constructed from off-the-shelf 
wooden boards.  Photo: Sarah Jackson.
lifting techniques. Lift equipment and ergonomically 
correct tools should be routinely used to lift heavy 
markers (for most people this includes markers that 
weight more than 50 pounds). For smaller grave 
markers, a simple wooden clamp system can be 
constructed for a two-person lift (Figs. E1 and E2). 
stacked bases, a specialist should be contracted for 
resetting. 
small gravel or small stones are commonly used when 
resetting. 
It is important to check state and local regulations to 
make sure that digging around the grav
e marker is 
authorized before starting any resetting effort. Also, 
grave markers should be documented and cleaned 
before resetting. It is also a good time to measure and 
record the overall size of the marker and note any stone 
carver’s marks or inscription of the company that made 
the marker. The company name is often found on buried 
portions of the base and revealed during the resetting 
process. 
Prior to resetting, it is important to establish the type 
of base. Most grave markers have one of three main 
base types: (1) ground supported, (2) slotted base, or (3) 
stacked base. Similar tasks are undertaken for each base 
type. 
Ground-supported stones are a common type of historic 
grave marker. This type includes the traditional New 
England slate and brownstone markers and government-
issued marble headstones. The primary goal with any 
ground-supported marker is to have it level and plumb. 
To reset the marker, a few inches or more of soil is 
first removed from around the stone. This is usually 
sufficient to enable a stone marker to be straightened. 
Typical materials required for resetting include a hoist, 
shovels, plumb lines, levels, tamping devices, wooden 
stakes, and boards. To improve drainage, sand and 

16
The enlarged hole is then filled and compacted around 
the marker.
If a grave marker has fallen ov
er and has been covered 
with soil or turf, it must first be inspected for attached 
concrete or other anchoring system. If this system is still 
attached, the grave marker may break during lifting. 
After removing the stone, it can be cleaned and then 
temporarily set on wood supports. 
The hole left from removal of the marker will need to 
be enlarged to hold the base of the stone. Soil at the 
bottom of the hole should be compacted by hand, not 
with a power tamper. In most cemeteries, crushed stone 
or sharp pea-size gravel mixed with angular sand can 
be used to line the hole and then hand-tamped around 
the stone after it is placed in the hole. The gravel helps 
facilitate drainage and keeps the stone from settling. 
A bubble level can be used to ensure that the stone is 
plumb. Markers should not be set in concrete. 
 The second type of monument base is the slotted base 
where the upright element is secured to the base using 
mortise-and-tenon style construction. The upright 
element in the slotted base may be leaning or loose. In 
any case, the upright element should be removed from 
the base, the base leveled, then the element returned to 
the base. It is important to keep in mind the depth that 
the base was intended to be set into the ground. This 
may be indicated by the style of the base or the observed 
soil- line staining. Many bases were intended to sit 
flush on grade while some were set a few inches below 
ground. 
Prior to resetting, the upright element should be 
disengaged from the base and carefully set aside. In 
most cases, the base will need to be removed to properly 
prepare the hole before resetting the grave marker. After 
doing so, four to six inches of soil should be removed 
from the hole and the soil then tamped by hand to make 
a proper bed or foundation. The foundation area can be 
filled with crushed stone or sharp pea-sized gravel and 
sand, checking to make sure that the base is plumb and 
level as resetting proceeds.  Clean the headstone prior 
to resetting. Old mortar, concrete or epoxy should be 
removed from the slot and the bottom of the upright 
element using a hammer and small chisel. Once the 
stone elements are cleaned and the base is level and 
plumb, the next step is placing the upright element into 
the slot. A lime mortar can be used to fill any gaps in 
the slot. This prevents water intrusion that may cause 
marker movement related to freeze-thaw cycles. 
A third common base type is the stacked base. This 
sty
le includes at least one element placed on a base or a 
series of bases of varying sizes. Resetting a stacked-base 
grave marker usually requires special skills and lifting 
equipment. Depending upon the complexity of the 
marker, a conservator, experienced masonry contractor, 
or preservation professional with engineering skills is 
usually needed. 
The sections of a stacked-base grave marker often are 
pinned together for support. If deteriorated, the pins 
should be replaced. Using a hammer and chisel, a 
conservator or person experienced in working with 
historic grave markers should remove any corroded 
iron, copper, or bronze pins, as well as the old mortar 
or adhesive adhered to each section. Replacement 
pins should be stainless steel all-thread, and sized 
slightly shorter and smaller than the existing hole. 
The replacement pins then can be set with epoxy, lime 
mortar, or packed in lead. Once the pins are in place, 
the sections of the stacked base can be individually 
reset using traditional or contemporary materials. These 
include lead, shims, mortars, and setting compounds. 
Finally, each gap or seam between sections should be 
pointed with a setting compound or appropriate mortar 
to prevent water intrusion.
Filling and Patching 
Hairline masonry cracks may be the result of natural 
weathering and require no immediate treatment except 
to be photographed and recorded. However, larger 
cracks often merit further attention. Repairing masonry 
cracks involves several steps and typically a skilled 
hand (Fig. 21). The repair begins with the removal of 
loose material and cleaning. Materials that are used for 
crack repair include grouts for small cracks and epoxy 
for large cracks affecting the structural integrity of the 
monument. Gravity or pressure injection is used to 
apply grout or epoxy. Crack repair can be messy, so 
careful planning and experience are helpful. If the crack 
is active, a change in size of the crack will be noted 
over time. Active cracks require further investigation to 
ascertain the cause of the changes, such as differential 
settlement, and to correct, if possible, the cause prior to 
repairing the crack. 
Figure 21. Cracks in a stone marker should be filled to keep water and 
debris out and prevent the crack from becoming larger. A patching 
mortar is designed to be used, in this case, with historic marble. 
Photo: Mary Striegel.

17
Repairing masonry markers with severely damaged or 
missing pieces requires a skilled mason or conserv
ator. 
The materials used for patching are similar to those 
used for repointing mortar joints. With patching, it is 
critical that the physical and mechanical properties of 
the patching material be appropriate for the masonry 
material. Work includes designing a durable patch 
compatible with the substrate. Proper curing is 
especially critical for large patches and often involves 
procedures to protect the patch from premature drying. 
Repairs to stucco-covered surface should be carried 
out by a skilled plasterer using a stucco mix that is 
compatible with the original material.
Repairing delaminated slate and brownstone grave 
markers also requires a skilled mason or conservator. 
With this condition, there are openings along bedding 
planes which expose the stone grave marker to moisture 
intrusion.  Treatments are design to eliminate or reduce 
moisture intrusion that would accelerate deterioration. 
The selection of appropriate repair materials and 
procedures depends on the severity of the condition. 
Traditionally, delaminated slate or brownstone grave 
markers were “capped” with a strip of lead or other 
metal. Today, this repair technique is seldom used, in 
part because the drilling procedure used to attach the 
cap can be damaging, if the stone is brittle. Also, there 
are toxicity issues associated with the use of lead. An 
alternative approach is to fill the openings exposed 
by delamination with grout or patching material that 
is compatible with the stone. Adhesion of the repair 
material to the delaminated surfaces is particularly 
important.             
The decision whether to use patching material 
or undertake a dutchman repair with matching 
materialdepends on the grave marker material, 
location of the damaged area, size, and other factors. 
A successfully executed dutchman usually results in a 
repair that has long durability and maintains a similar 
weathering pattern to the adjacent historic material.  
When working with stone grave markers, repairs using 
dutchman techniques are best done by a skilled stone 
craftsman. 
Detached fragments should be collected, documented 
and stored in a suitable facility. Reattachment of these 
fragments should be undertaken by a conservator or 
mason. This work often requires pins to reinforce the 
joints and patching to compensate for losses. 
Protective treatments 
Protective treatments for metal, stone, and wood grave 
markers stabilize corrosion and protect the monument 
from rainwater, pollutants, and other contaminants. 
Treatments may vary not only due to material 
differences, but also to specific site conditions.
Wax coatings are often used for bronze markers (Fig. 
22). Wax provides a protective barrier against moisture, 
soiling, and graffiti. There are several steps in the wax 
application process. Where there is little corrosion, 
gentle cleaning of the marker is undertaken prior to 
applying the wax coating. Apply a thin layer of wax 
to the marker using a stencil brush or chip brush. 
Figure 22. A protective coating must be maintained on metal 
elements.  Wax or lacquer coatings help preserve the bronze patina 
and slow corrosion. Conservators apply a microcrystalline wax to this 
bust at St. Mark's Church in-the-Bowery, New York, NY. 
Photo: John Scott.
Mineral spirits can be added to the wax to facilitate 
brush application. A soft, clean cloth is used to remove 
excess wax and buff the surface. A second coat of wax is 
sometimes needed. 
In most climates, iron objects require coatings to protect 
them from corrosion. Clear coatings are sometimes 
used to protect wrought iron objects. A corrosion 
inhibitive primer and topcoat are used for cast iron and 
steel objects. Direct-to-Metal (DTM) coatings combine 
the two. Because of their durability, acrylic enamels, 
urethane, and fluoropolymer coatings are preferred. 
Proper surface preparation is important, including 
the removal of surface soiling, flaking paint, and 
loose rust. This can be accomplished with compressed 
air, wire brushing, solvent rinsing, or other cleaning 
method. Next the surface is cleaned with a damp 
cloth, repeatedly rinsing the cloth as needed. While the 
surface needs to be thoroughly dried before painting, 
it is important to repaint as soon as possible since even 
overnight condensation deposits are not desirable. 

18
Another approach for iron objects is using a rust 
conv
erter to stabilize corrosion that involves less surface 
preparation. Commercially available rust converters 
contain tannin or phosphoric acid and react with rust 
to form more stable iron compounds. The surface must 
be painted following surface preparation with the rust 
converter. 
Limewash is a traditional coating that brightens stucco-
covered grave markers (Fig. 23). Like paint coatings, it 
needs to be periodically applied. Limewash is prepared 
with lime putty or hydrated lime and water. Curing 
begins following application. The lime putty or hydrated 
lime reacts with carbon dioxide in the air in a process 
called carbonation. This reaction eventually forms 
calcium carbonate, a stable hard coating. Limewash is 
a “green” coating with no volatile organic compound 
content and is “breathable,” i.e., it allows for water vapor 
transmission. Although commonly white, limewash can 
be colored or tinted with alkali-stable pigments such as 
iron oxide. 
Figure 23. Limewash is a breathable coating sometimes used to 
protect the surface of the grave marker and provide a decorative 
finish. Limewash is applied by brush in five to eight thin coats (with 
each coat about the consistency of skim milk). The surface is allowed 
to slowly dry between coats. Sometimes the surface is covered by 
damp burlap to slow the drying process. Photo: Sarah Jackson.
Before applying the limewash, the masonry surfaces 
should be inspected for coating residues that need to 
be removed and any required repair work undertaken. 
Stucco-covered surfaces should be repaired and allowed 
to fully cure before applying limewash.  If the original 
color has been determined, the renewal coating can be 
formulated to match. In preparing the wash, enough 
water is added to lime putty or hydrated lime to produce 
slurry with the consistency of skim milk. A mixture of 
four parts water and one part lime usually works well. 
A Zahn or Ford cup can be found at a hardware store 
and used to measure the thickness of the limewash and 
ensure consistency with each batch. Although many 
traditional recipes include additives, a simple mixture 
of lime and water performs best. Using a power drill 
with a paddle attachment to stir the limewash will help 
ensure that the lime particles are fully suspended in the 
mixture. Any pigment for coloration is added during the 
final mixing. 
The surface must be cleaned of old coating residues, 
soiling, and other contaminants. After dampening 
the surface, the limewash is applied in 5-8 thin coats, 
allowing each coat to dry between applications. 
Limewash is translucent immediately after application 
and then becomes opaque when dry. 
Proper curing of limewash is critical to its durability. To 
prevent premature drying, the treated surface may need 
to be covered with damp burlap. Limewash must not be 
applied when frost or freeze conditions are predicted or 
in temperatures above 90° F. Ideally, limewash should 
be applied during spring or fall when temperatures are 
around 70° F, avoiding direct sunlight where possible.  
Clear water repellents and consolidation treatments 
are sometimes considered for severely deteriorated 
grave markers, including unpainted wood markers and 
masonry. For wood markers, epoxy consolidants are 
used to patch and repair. For masonry materials, it is 
important to remember that they are porous, and water 
vapor and liquid water can travel through their internal 
network. Protective treatments must allow for water 
vapor transmission to prevent trapping moisture inside 
the marker. Although a wide variety of water repellents 
have been employed on masonry (wax, acrylic, epoxy 
resins, etc.), silane and siloxane treatments have been 
the most successful. These organosilicon compounds 
are “breathable,” penetrate below the surface, and form 
chemical bonds with silicate minerals.
When erosion is severe, consolidation treatments (e.g., 
ethyl silicate) have been used to replace mineral binders 
lost to weathering (Fig. 24). Because these treatments 
are not reversible, laboratory and on-site testing 
are essential. Application by a conservator or other 
experienced preservation professional is advised. 
Figure 24. A severely deteriorating monument or grave marker can 
be treated with a stone consolidant. The treatment is usually applied 
using a spray system. The consolidant soaks into the stone and 
replaces mineral binders that hold the stone together.  On-site and 
laboratory testing and evaluation are performed prior to using this 
non-reversible type of treatment. Photo: Lucas Flickinger.

19
Conclusion
Maintenance is the key to extending the life of historic 
cemetery grave markers. From ensuring that markers 
are not damaged by mowing equipment and excessive 
lawn watering, to proper cleaning and resetting, good 
cemetery maintenance is the key to extending the life of 
grave markers. Whether rescuing a long-neglected small 
cemetery using volunteers or operating a large active 
cemetery with paid staff, the cemetery’s documentation, 
maintenance and treatment plans should include 
periodic inspections. Only appropriate repair materials 
and techniques that do not damage historic markers 
should be used and records should be kept on specific 
repair materials used on individual grave markers. A 
well-maintained cemetery provides an attractive setting 
that can be appreciated by visitors, serves as a deterrent 
to vandalism, and provides a respectful place for the 
dead. A community history recorded in stone, wood and 
metal markers, cemeteries are an important part of our 
heritage, and are deserving of preservation efforts (Fig. 
25). 
Figure 25. Involving the community in activities helps to develop an 
appreciation for the cemetery and serves to deter vandalism. Events 
may include children through school or scouting organizations and 
can help teach across the curriculum.  Photo: Debbie Dietrich Smith.
Additional Reading
Stragstad, Lynette. A Gravey
ard Preservation Primer. 
Altamira Press; Second Edition (August 28, 2013)
Jackson, Sarah Marie, Tye Botting and Mary Striegel, 
“Durability of Traditional and Modified Limewashes,” APT 
Bulletin, Vol. 38, No. 2/3, 2007.
Matero, Frank G. and Judy Peters. “Survey Methodology for 
the Preservation of Historic Burial Grounds and Cemeteries.” 
In APT Bulletin, Vol. 34, No. 2/3 (2003), pp. 37-45.
Grissom, Carol A. and Ronald S. Harvey. “The Conservation 
of American War Memorials Made of Zinc.” In Journal of 
the American Institute for Conservation. Vol. 42, No. 1, 
Architecture Issue (Spring, 2003), pp. 21-38 
National Park Service publications, NCPTT:
Best Practice Recommendations for Cleaning Government-
Issued Headstones. Mary F. Striegel, 2011.  
Wooden Artifacts in Cemeteries: A Reference Manual. Ronald 
W. Anthony and Kimberly Dugan. 2007
Identification of Unmarked Graves. Rinita A. Dalan, Steven L. 
DeVore and Earl Clay. 2008
National P
ark Service publications, Technical Preservation 
Services:
A Glossary of Historic Masonry Deterioration Problems and 
Preservation Treatments. Anne E. Grimmer. 1984, reprinted.
Keeping It Clean. Anne E. Grimmer. 1988. 
Preservation Brief 1: Cleaning and Water-Repellent 
Treatments for Historic Masonry Buildings. Robert C. Mack, 
FAIA, and Anne E. Grimmer. 2000.
Preservation Brief 2: Repointing Mortar Joints in Historic 
Masonry Buildings. Robert C. Mack, FAIA, and John P. 
Speweik. 1998.
Preservation Brief 15: Preservation of Historic Concrete. Paul 
Gaudette and Deborah Slaton. 2007.
Preservation Brief 22: The Preservation and Repair of Historic 
Stucco. Anne Grimmer. 1990.
Preservation Brief 38: Removing Graffiti from Historic 
Masonry. Martin E. Weaver. 1995.
Preservation Brief 42: The Maintenance, Repair and 
Replacement of Historic Cast Stone. Richard Pieper. 2001.
Preservation Tech Note 1: Conserving Outdoor Bronze 
Sculpture. Dennis Montagna. 1989.
National Park Service , National Register Bulletins:
Guidelines for Evaluating and Registering Cemeteries and 
Burial Places. Elisabeth Walton Potter and Beth M. Boland. 
1992.
National Park Service publications, Museum Management 
Program: 
Conserve O Gram, 10/4 Caring for Outdoor Bronze Plaques, 
Part I: Documentation and Inspection. 2005
Conserve O Gram, 10/5 Caring for Outdoor Bronze Plaques, 
Part II: Cleaning and Waxing. 2005.  

20
About the Authors
Dr. Mary Striegel directs the Material Conservation 
Program at the National Park Service’s National Center 
for Technology and Training (NCPTT) in Natchitoches, 
Louisiana. Frances Gale is the former Training Chief 
(NCPTT) and currently is a Senior Lecturer and Director 
of the Architectural Conservation Laboratory, University 
of Texas at Austin. Jason Church is a Materials 
Conservator with NCPTT. Debbie Dietrich-Smith is the 
Chief, Historic Landscape Program, NCPTT.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Francis Miller, Conservator, 
ConserArt LLC; Mark Wolfe, Executive Director and 
Jennifer McWilliams, Cemetery Preservation Program 
Coordinator, Texas Historical Commission; Gus Fraser, 
Vice President of Preservation and Facilities, Mount 
Auburn Cemetery; Sara Amy Leach, Senior Historian 
and Jennifer Perunko, Historian, National Cemetery 
Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs; and 
Jenny Parker Technical Preservation Services, National 
Park Service for their insightful comments in reviewing 
the brief. Thanks also go to Kirk Cordell, Executive 
Director, NCPTT, and Brian Goeken, Chief, Technical 
Preservation Services.  Charles Fisher, Technical 
Preservation Services provided invaluable assistance in 
the editing and preparation of this brief. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the 
National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, 
which directs the Secretary of the Interior to develop 
and make available information concerning historic 
Whether large or small, well maintained or neglected, historic 
cemeteries are an important part of our cultural landscape. This 
historic cemetery at Cape Lookout National Seashore, NC, provides 
a record of the families who lived in Portsmouth Village during the 
19th and early 20th centuries.  Photo: Fran Gale.
properties.  Additional information offered by Technical 
Preservation Services is available on our website at 
www.nps.gov/tps.  Further information on the programs 
and resources of the National Center for Preservation 
Technology and Training can be found at www.ncptt.
nps.gov. Comments about this publication should be 
made to: Technical Preservation Services, National Park 
Service, 1849 C Street NW, Washington, DC 20240.  
This publication is not copyrighted and can be 
reproduced without penalty.  Normal procedures for 
credit to the authors and the National Park Service are 
appreciated.  Excepting for the photographs by the 
authors, the photographs used in this publication may 
not be used to illustrate other print or electronic media 
without permission of the owners.  Photographs by the 
authors should be credited with author’s name, NCPTT.  
September 2016