U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
6 
PRESERV ATION
BRIEFS 
Dangers of Abrasive Cleaning 
to Historic Buildings 
Anne E. Grimmer 
" The surface cleaning of structures shall be und ertaken with the gentlest means possible . Sandblasting and other 
cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken ."-The Secretary of the 
Interior 's "S tandards for Historic Preserv ation Projects ." 
Abrasive cleaning methods are responsible for ca using a great 
deal of damage to historic building material s. To prevent 
indiscriminate use of these potentially harmful techniques. 
this brief has been prepared to ex plain abrasive cleaning 
methods, how they can be physically and aesthetically de­
structive to historic building materials , and why they generally 
are not acceptable preservation treatments for historic struc­
tures. There are alternative, less harsh means of cleaning and 
removing paint and stains from historic buildings. However . 
careful testing should preceed general cleaning to assure that 
the method selected will not have an adverse effect on th e 
building materials. A historic building is irreplaceable. and 
should be cleaned using only the "gen tle st me ans pos sible" 
to best preserve it. 
What is Abrasive Cleaning? 
Abrasive cleaning methods include all technique s that phys­
ically abrade the building surface to remove soils, discolor­
ations or coatings . Such techniques involve the use of certain 
materials which impact or abrade the surface under pressure , 
or abrasive tools and equipment. Sand, because it is readily 
available, is probably the most commonly used type of grit 
material. However , any of the following materials may be 
substituted for sand, and all can be classified as abrasive 
substances: ground slag or volcanic ash, crushed (pulverized) 
walnut or almond shells. rice husks , gwund corncobs, ground 
coconut shells, crushed eggshells, silica flour , synthetic par­
ticles, glass beads and micro-balloons. Even water under pres­
sure can be an abrasive substance. Tools and equipment that 
are abrasive to historic building materials include wire 
brushes , rotary wheels, power sand ing disks and belt sanders. 
The use of water in combinatio n with grit may also be 
classified as an abrasive cleaning method. Depending on the 
manner in which it is applied, water may soften the impact 
of the grit, but water that is too highly pressurized can be 
very abrasive . There are basically two different methods 
which can be referred to as " wet grit," and it is impor ta nt to 
differentiate between the two. One technique involves the 
addition of a stream of water to a regular sandb lasting nozzle. 
This is done primarily to cut down dust. and has very little, 
if any , effect on reducing the aggress iveness, or cutting action 
of the grit particles. With the seco nd technique, a very small 
amount of grit is added to a pressurized water stream. This 
method may be controlled by regulating the amount of grit 
fed into the water stream, as well as the pressure of the water. 
Why Are Abrasive Cleaning Methods Used? 
Usually, an abrasive cleaning method is selected as an ex­
peditious means of quickly removing years of dirt accumu­
lation, unsightly stains, or deteriorating building fabric or 
finishes , such as stucco or paint. The fact that sandblasting 
is one of the best known and most readily available building 
cleaning treatments is probably the major reason for its fre­
quent use . 
Many mid-19th century brick buildings were painted im­
mediately or soon after completion to protect poor quality 
brick or to imitate another material. such as stone. Sometimes 
brick buildings were painted in an effort to produce what was 
considered a more harmonious relationship between a build­
ing and its natural surroundings. By the 1870s, brick buildings 
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 

Abrasively Cleaned vs. Untouched Brick. Two brick rowhouses with 
a common far;ade provide an excellent point of comparison when only 
one of the houses has been sandblasted. It is clear that abrasive blasting. 
by removing the outer surface. has left the brickwork on the left rough 
and pitted. while that on the right still exhibits an undamaged and 
relatively smooth surface. Note that the abrasive cleaning has also 
removed a considerable portion of the mortar from the joints of the 
brick on the left side. which will require repointing. 
were often left unpainted as mechanization in the brick in­
dustry brought a cheaper pressed brick and fashion decreed 
a sudden preference for dark colors. However . it was still 
customary to paint brick of poorer quality for the additional 
protection the paint afforded. 
It is a common 20th-century misconception that all historic 
masonry buildings were initially unpainted. If the intent of 
a modern restoration is to return a building to its original 
appearance. removal of the paint not only may be historically 
inaccurate, but also harmful. Many older buildings were 
painted or stuccoed at some point to correct recurring main­
tenance problems caused by faulty construction techniques. 
to hide alterations, or in an attempt to solve moisture prob­
lems. If this is the case. removal of paint or stucco may cause 
these problems to reoccur. 
Another reason for paint removal. particularly in rehabil­
itation projects . is to give the building a " new image" in 
response to contemporary design trends and to attract inves­
tors or tenants. Thus. it is necessary to consider the purpose 
of the intended cleaning. While it is clearly important to 
remove unsightly stains. heavy encrustations of dirt. peeling 
paint or other surface coatings. it may not be equally desirable 
to remove paint from a building which originally was painted. 
Many historic buildings which show only a slight amount of 
soil or discoloration are much better left as they are. A thin 
layer of soil is more often protective of the building fabric 
than it is harmful. and seldom detracts from the building's 
2 
Abrading the Surface without Removing the Paint. Even though the 
entire outer surface layer of the brick has been sandblasted off. spots 
of paint still cling to the masonry. Sandblasting or other similarly 
abrasive methods are not always a successful means of removing paint. 
architectural and/or historic character. Too thorough cleaning 
of a historic building may not only sacrifice some of the build­
ing 's character, but also. misguided cleaning efforts can cause 
a great deal of damage to historic building fabric. Unless 
there are stains, graffiti or dirt and pollution deposits which 
are destroying the building fabric. it is generally preferable 
to do as little cleaning as possible. or to repaint where nec­
essary. It is important to remember that a historic building 
does not have to look as if it were newly constructed to be 
an attractive or successful restoration or rehabilitation proj­
ect. For a more thorough explanation of the philosophy of 
cleaning historic buildings see Preservation Briefs : No. I 
"The Cleaning and Waterproof Coating of Masonry Build­
ings," by Robert C. Mack . AlA. 
Problems of Abrasive Cleaning 
The crux of the problem is that abrasive cleaning is just that ­
abrasive. An abrasively cleaned historic structure may be 
physically as well as aesthetically damaged. Abrasive methods 
"clea n" by eroding dirt or paint, but at the same time they 
also tend to erode the surface of the building material. In this 
way, abrasive cleaning is destructive and causes irreversible 
harm to the historic building fabric. If the fabric is brick, 
abras ive methods remove the hard, outer protective surface, 
and therefore make the brick more susceptible to rapid weath­
ering and deterioration . Grit blasting may also increase the 
water permeability of a brick wall. The impact of the grit 
particles tends to erode the bond beiween the mortar and the 
brick, leaving cracks or enlarging existing cracks where water 
can enter. Some types of stone develop a protective patina 
or " quarry crust" parallel to the worked surface (created by 
the movement of moisture towards the outer edge). which 
also may be damaged by abrasive cleaning. The rate at which 
the material subsequently weathers depends on the quality 
of the inner surface that is exposed. 
Abrasive cleaning can destroy . or substantially diminish. 
decorative detailing on buildings such as a molded brickwork 
or architectural terra-cotta. ornamental carving on wood or 
stone. and evidence of historic craft techniques . such as tool 
marks and other surface textures. In addition. perfectly sound 
and/or "tooled" mortar joints can be worn away by abrasive 
tec hniques . This not only results in the loss of historic craft 
detailing but also requires repointing. a step involving con-

slderable time, skill and expense, and which might not have 
been necessary had a gentler method been chosen. Erosion 
and pitting of the building material by abrasive cleaning cre­
ates a greater surface area on which dirt and pollutants col­
lect. In this sense, the building fabric "attracts" more dirt, 
and will require more frequent cleaning in the future. 
In addition to causing physical and aesthetic harm to the 
historic fabric, there are several adverse environmental ef­
fects of dry abrasive cleaning methods. Because of the friction 
caused by the abrasive medium hitting the building fabric, 
these techniques usually create a considerable amount of 
dust, which is unhealthy, particularly to the operators of the 
abras ive equipment. It further pollutes the environment 
around the job site, and deposits dust on neighboring build­
ings, parked vehicles and nearby trees and shrubbery. Some 
adjacent materials not intended for abrasive treatment suc h 
as wood or glass, may also be damaged because the equipment 
may be difficult to regulate. 
Wet grit methods, while eliminating dust, deposit a messy 
slurry on the ground or other objects surrounding the base 
of the building. In colder climates where there is the threat 
of frost , any wet cleaning process applied to historic masonry 
structures must be done in warm weather, allowing ample 
time for the wall to dry out thoroughly before cold weather 
sets in. Water which remains and freezes in cracks and open­
ings of the masonry surface eventually may lead to spalling. 
High-pressure wet cleaning may force an inordinate amount 
of water into the walls, affecting interior materials such as 
plaster or joist ends, as well as metal building components 
within the walls. 
Variable Factors 
The greatest problem in developing practical guidelines for 
cleaning any historic building is the large number of variable 
and unpredictable factors involved. Because these variables 
make each cleaning project unique, it is difficult to establish 
specific standards at this time. This is particularly true of 
abrasive cleaning methods because their inherent potential 
for causing damage is multiplied by the following factors : 
- the type and condition of the material being cleaned; 
- the size and sharpness of the grit particles or the mechan-
ical equipment; 
- the pressure with which the abrasive grit or equipment is 
applied to the building surface; 
- the skill and care of the operator; and 
- the constancy of the pressure on all surfaces during the 
cleaning process. 
Micro-Abrasive Cleaning. This small. pencil-sized micro-abrasive unit 
is used by some museum conservators to clean small objects. This 
particular micro-abrasive unit is operated within the confines of a box 
(approx imately 2 cubic feet of space) . but a similar and slightly larger 
unit may be used for cleaning larger pieces of sculpture. or areas of 
architectural detailing on a building. Even a pressure cleaning unit this 
small is capable of eroding a surface. and must be carefully controlled. 
"Line Drop." Even though the ope rator afthe sandblasting equipment 
is standing on a ladder to reach the higher sections of the wall. it is still 
almost impossible to have total control over the pressure. The pressure 
of the sand hitting the lower portion of the wall will still be greater 
than that above. because of the "line drop" in the distance from the 
pressure source to the nozzle. (Hugh Miller) 
Pressure: The damaging effects of most of the variable factors 
involved in abrasive cleaning are self evident. However, the 
matter of pressure requires further explanation. In cleaning 
specifications, pressure is generally abbreviated as " psi" 
(pounds per square inch), which technically refers to the "tip" 
pressure, or the amount of pressure at the nozzle of the blast­
ing apparatus. Sometimes "psig," or pressure at the gauge 
(which may be many feet away, at the other end of the hose), 
is used in place of "psi." These terms are often incorrectly 
used interchangeably. 
Despite the apparent care taken by most architects and 
building cleaning contractors to prepare specifications for 
pressure cleaning which will not cause harm to the delicate 
fabric of a historic building, it is very difficult to ensure that 
the same amount of pressure is applied to all parts of the 
building. For example, if the operator of the pressure equip­
ment stands on the ground while cleaning a two-story struc­
ture, the amount of force reaching the first story will be 
greater than that hitting the second story, even if the operator 
stands on scaffolding or in a cherry picker, because of the 
"line drop" in the distance from the pressure source to the 
nozzle. Although technically it may be possible to prepare 
cleaning specifications with tight controls that would elimi­
nate all but a small margin of error, it may not be easy to 
find professional cleaning firms willing to work under such 
restrictive conditions. The fact is that many professional 
building cleaning firms do not really understand the extreme 
delicacy of historic building fabric, and how it differs from 
modern construction materials. Consequently, they mily ac-
3 

cept building cleaning projects for which they have no ex­
perience. 
The amount of pressure used in any kind of cleaning treat­
ment which involves pressure, whether it is dry or wet grit, 
chemicals or just plain water, is crucial to the outcome of the 
cleaning project. Unfortunately, no standards have been es­
tablished for determining the correct pressure for cleaning 
each of the many historic building materials which would not 
cause harm. The considerable discrepancy between the way 
the building cleaning industry and architectural conservators 
define " high" and "lo w" pressure cleaning plays a significant 
role in the difficulty of creating standards. 
Nonhistoricllndustria/: A representative of the building clean­
ing industry might consider " high" pressure water cleaning 
to he anything over 5,000 psi, or even as high as 10,000 to 
15 ,000 psi' Water under this much pressure may be necessary 
to clean industrial structures or machinery, but would destroy 
most historic building materials. Industrial chemical cleaning 
commonly utilizes pressures between I ,000 and 2,500 psi. 
Spalling Brick, This soft. earlv 19th-cell/llry hrick was sandblasted ill 
the 1960s; consequentlv. ~el'ere spallillg has resulted. Some hricks hal'l' 
almo .1'I towlly disintegrated. and will el'enll/allv hUl'e to he replaced. 
(Rohert S. Gamhle) 
Historic: By contrast. conscientious dry or wet abrasive clean­
ing of a historic structure wo uld be conducted within the 
range of 20 to 100 psi at a range of 3 to 12 inches. Cleaning 
al this low pressure requires the use of a very fine 00 or 0 
mesh grit forced through a nozzle with a Y4 inch opening. A 
similar. even more delicate method being adopted by archi­
tectural conservators uses a micro-abrasive grit on small, 
hard-to-clean areas of carved, cut or molded ornament on a 
building fac;ade. Originally developed by museum conserva­
tors for cleaning sculpture, this technique may employ glass 
beads, micro-balloons , or another type of micro-abrasive 
gently powered at approximately 40 psi by a very small, al­
most pencil-like pressure instrument. Although a slightly 
larger pressure instrument may be used on historic buildings, 
this technique still has limited practical applicability on a large 
scale building cleaning project because of the cost and the 
relatively few technicians competent to handle the task. In 
general. architectural conservators have determined that only 
through very com rolled conditions can most historic building 
material be abrasivl:ly cleaned of soil or paint without meas­
urable damage to the surface or profile of the substrate. 
Yet some professional cleaning companies which sepcialize 
in cleaning historic masonry buildings use chemicals and water 
at a pressure of approximately 1,500 psi, while other cleaning 
firms recommend lower pressures ranging from 200 to 800 psi 
for a similar project. An architectural conservator might de­
cide, after testing. that some historic structures could be 
cleaned properly using a moderate pressure (200-600 psi), or 
even a high pressure (600-1800 psi) water rinse . However, 
4 
cleaning historic buildings under such high pressure should 
be considered an exception rather than the rule, and would 
require very careful testing and supervision to assure that the 
historic surface materials could withstand the pressure with­
out gouging, pitting or loosening. 
These differences in the amount of pressure used by com­
mercial or industrial building cleaners and architectural con­
servators point to one of the main problems in using abrasive 
means to clean historic buildings: misunderstanding of the 
potentially fragile nature of historic building materials . There 
is no one cleaning formula or pressure suitable for all situa­
tions . Decisions regarding the proper cleaning process for 
historic structures can be made only after careful analysis of 
the building fabric, and testing. 
How Building Materials React to Abrasive Cleaning 
Methods 
Brick and Architectural Terra-Cotta: Abrasive blasting does 
not affect all building materials to the same degrec. Such 
techniques quite logically cause greater damage to softer and 
more porous materials, such as brick or architectural terra­
cotta. When these materials are cleaned abrasively, the hard , 
outer layer (closest to the heat of the kiln) is eroded, leaving 
the soft. inner core exposed and susceptible to accelerated 
weathering. Glazed architectural terra-cotta and ceramic ve­
neer have a baked-on glaze which is also easily damaged by 
abrasive cleaning. Glazed architectual terra-cotta was de­
signed for easy maintenance, and generally can be cleaned 
using detergent and water ; but chemicals or steam may be 
needed to remove more persistent stains. Large areas of brick 
or architectural terra-cotta which have been painted are best 
left painted. or repainted if necessary . 
Plaster and Stucco: Plaster and stucco are types of masonry 
finish materials that are softer than brick or terra-cotta: if 
treated abrasively these materials will simply disintegrate. 
Indeed. when plaster or stucco is treated abrasively it is usu­
ally with the intention of removing the plaster or stucco from 
whatever base material or substrate it is covering. Obviously. 
such abrasive techniques should not be applied to clean sound 
plaster or stuccoed walls, or decorative plaster wall surfaces. 
Building Stones: Building stones are cut from the three main 
categories of natural rock: dense, igneous rock such as gran­
ite; sandy. sedimentary rock such as limestone or sandstone: 
and crystalline, metamorphic rock such as marble. As op-
Abrasive Cleaning of Tooled Granite, Even this carefully colllrolled 
"we t grit" blasting has erased verticallOoling marks in the CIII granite 
blocks on the left. Not only has the lOoling been destroyed, bill the 
damaged stone surface is now more susceptible 10 accelerated weath­
ering. 

posed to kiln-dried masonry materials such as brick and ar­
chitectural terra-cotta , building stones are generally 
homogeneous in character at the time of a bui ldin g's con­
struct ion. However , as the stone is exposed to weatheri ng 
and environm ental pollutants , the surface may become fria­
ble, or ma y develop a protective skin or patina. These outer 
surfaces are very susceptible to damage by abrasive or im­
proper chemical cleaning. 
Build ing stones are frequently cut into ashlar blocks or 
"dressed" with tool marks that give the building surface a 
specific texture and contribute to its historic character as 
much as ornately carved decorative stonework. Such det ailing 
is easi ly damaged by abrasive cleaning techniques: the pattern 
of tooling o r cutting is erased, and the crisp lines of moldings 
or carving are worn or pitted . 
Occasionally, it may be possible to clean small areas of 
rough-c ut granite , limestone or sandstone having a heav y dirt 
encr ustation by using the " wet grit" method . whereby a small 
amount of abrasive material is injected into a controlled. 
pressurized water stream. However, this techn iqu e requires 
very ca reful supervision in order to prevent damage to the 
stone. Polished or honed marble or granite shou ld nev er be 
treated abrasively, as the abrasion would remove the finish 
in much the way glass would be etched or "frosted" by suc h 
a process. It is genera lly preferable to underclean . as too 
strong a cleaning procedure will erode the stone, exposing 
a new and incr eased surface area to collect atmospher ic mois­
ture and dirt. Removing paint, stains or graffiti from most 
types of sto ne may be accomplished by a chemical treatment 
carefully selected to best handle the removal of the particular 
type of paint or stain without damaging the stone. (See section 
on the "Ge ntl est Means Possible") 
Abrasive Cleaning of Wood. This wooden windowsill. molding and 
paneling have been sandblasted to remove layers oj paint in the re­
habilitation oj this commercial building . Not only is some paint still 
embedded in cracks and crevices oj the woodwork. but more impor­
tantly. grit blasting has actually eroded the summer wood. in eJJect 
raising the grain. and resulting in a rough surJace. 
Wood: Most types of wood used for buildings are soft. fibrous 
and porous, and are particularly susceptible to damage by 
abrasive cleaning. Because the summer wood between the 
lines of the grain is softer than the grain itself , it will be worn 
away by abrasive blasting or power tools, leaving an uneven 
surface with the grain raised and often frayed or "fuzzy," 
Once this has occurred, it is almost impossible to achieve a 
smooth surface again except by extensive hand sanding , which 
is expensive and will quickly negate any costs saved earlier 
by sandblasting. Such harsh cleaning treatment also obliter­
ates historic tool marks , fine carving and detailing, which 
precludes its use on any interior or exterior woodwork which 
has been hand planed , milled or carved. 
Metals: Like stone, metals are another group of building 
materials which vary considerably in hardness and durability. 
Softer metals which are used architecturally. such as tin, zinc , 
lead , copper or aluminum, generally should not be cleaned 
abrasively as the process deforms and destroys the original 
surface texture and appearance, as well as the acquired pa­
tina . Much applied architectural metal work used on historic 
buildings-tin , zinc , lead and copper-is often quite thin and 
soft, and therefore susceptible to denting and pitting . Gal­
vanized sheet metal is especially vulnerable, as abrasive treat­
ment would wear away the protective galvanized layer. 
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , these metal s were 
often cut, pre ssed or otherwise shaped from sheets of metal 
into a wide variety of practic al uses such as roofs, gutters and 
flashing , and fac;ade ornamentation such as cornices. friezes . 
dormers, panels , cupolas . oriel windows. etc. The architec­
ture of the 1920s and 1930s made use of metals such as 
chrome, nickel alloys, aluminum and stainless steel in dec­
orative exterior panels , window frames. and doorways. Harsh 
ab rasive blasting would destroy the original surface finish of 
most of these metals , and would increase the possiblity of 
corrosion. 
However , conservation specialists are now employing a 
sensitive technique of glass bead peening to clean some of 
the harder metals, in particular large bronze outdoor sculp­
ture . Very fine (75-125 micron) glass beads are used at a low 
pressure of 60 to 80 psi. Because these glass beads are com­
pletely spherical, ther are no sharp edges to cut the surface 
of the metal. After cleaning , these statues undergo a lengthy 
process of polishing. Coatings are applied which protect the 
surface from corrosion. but they must be renewed every 3 to 
5 years. A similarly delicate cleaning technique employing 
glass beads has been used in Europe to clean historic masonry 
structures without causing damage. But at this time the proc­
ess has not been tested sufficiently in the United States to 
recommend it as a building conservation measure. 
Sometimes a very fine smooth sand is used at a low pressure 
to clean or remove paint and corrosion from copper flashing 
and other metal building components. Restoration architects 
recently found that a mixture of crushed walnut shells and 
copper slag at a pressure of approximately 200 psi was the 
only way to remove corrosion successfully from a mid-19th 
century terne-coated iron roof. Metal cleaned in this manner 
must be painted immediately to prevent rapid recurrence of 
corrosion. It is thought that these methods "work harden " 
the surface by compressing the outer layer. and actually may 
be good for the surface of the metal. But the extremely com­
plex nature and the time required by such processes make it 
very expensive and impractical for large-scale use at this time. 
Cast and wrought iron architectural elements may be gently 
sandblasted or abrasively cleaned using a wire brush to re­
move layers of paint, rust and corrosion. Sandblasting was. 
in fact , developed originally as an efficient maintenance pro­
cedure for engineering and industrial structures and heavy 
machinery-iron and steel bridges, machine tool frames . en­
gine frames, and railroad rolling stock-in order to clean and 
prepare them for repainting . Because iron is hard , its surface. 
5 

which is naturally somewhat uneven, will not be noticeably 
damaged by controlled abrasion. Such treatment will. how'­
ever, re~ult in a small amount of pitting. But this slight abra­
sion creates a good surface for paint, since the iron must bc 
repainted immediately to prevent corrosion. Any abrasive 
cleaning of metal building components will also remove the 
caulking from joints and around other openings. Such areas 
must be recaulked quickly to prevent moisture from entering 
and rusting the metal, or causing deterioration of other build­
ing fabric inside the structure. 
When is Abrasive Cleaning Permissible? 
For the most part, abrasive cleaning is destructive to historic 
building materials. A limited number of special cases have 
been explained when it may be appropriate, if supervised by 
a skilled conservator, to use a delicate abrasive technique on 
some historic building materials. The type of "wet grit" clean­
ing which involves a small amount of grit injected into a 
stream of low pressure water may be used on small areas of 
stone masonry (i.e., rough cut limestone, sandstone or un­
polished granite), where milder cleaning methods have not 
been totally successful in removing harmful deposits of dirt 
and pollutants. Such areas may include stone window sills, 
the wps of cornices or column capitals, or other detailed areas 
of the fa<;ade. 
This is still an abrasive technique, and without proper cau­
tion in handling, it can be jus I as harmful 10 Ihe building 
surface as any olher abrasive cleaning method. Thus, the de­
cision to use this type of "wet grit" process should be made 
only after consultation with an experienced building con­
servator. Remember that il is very lime consuming and ex­
pensive to use any abrasive technique on a historic building 
in such a manner that it does not cause harm to the often fragile 
and friable building materials. 
At this time , and only under certain circumstances, abrasive 
cleaning methods may be used in the rehabilitation of interior 
spaces of warehouse or industrial buildings for contemporary 
uses. 
Interior spaces of factories or warehouse structures in which 
the masonry or plaster surfaces do not have significant design, 
detailing, tooling or finish, and in which wooden architectural 
features are not finished, molded, beaded or worked by hand, 
may be cleaned abrasively in order to remove layers of paint 
and industrial discolorations such as smoke, soot, etc. It is 
expected after such treatment that brick surfaces will be rough 
and pitted, and wood will be somewhat frayed or "fuzzy" 
Permissible Abrasive Cleaning, In accordance with the Secretary of 
the Interior's Guidelines for Rehabilitation Projects, it may be ac­
ceptab le to use abrasive techniques to clean an industrial interior space 
such as that il/ustraled here, because the masonry surfaces do not have 
significant design, detailing, tooling or finish, and the wooden archi­
tectural features are not finished, molded, beaded or worked by hand. 
6 
with raised wood grain. These nonsignificant surfaces will be 
damaged and have a roughened texture, but because they are 
interior elements, they will not be subject to further deteri­
oration caused by weathering. 
Historic Interiors that Should Not Be Cleaned Abrasively 
Those instances (generally industrial and some commercial prop­
erties), when it may be acceptab le to use an abrasive treatment 
on the interior of historic structures have been described. But for 
the majority of historic buildings, the Secretary of the Interior 's 
Guidelines for Rehabilitation do not recommend "changing the 
texture of exposed wooden architectural features (induding struc­
tural members) and masonry surfaces through sandblasting or use 
of other abrasive techniques to remove paint, discolorations and 
plaster. ... " 
Thus, it is not acceptable to clean abrasively interiors of 
historic residential and commercial properties which have fin­
ished interior spaces featuring milled woodwork such as 
doors, window and door moldings, wainscoting, stair balus­
trades and mantelpieces. Even the most modest historic house 
interior, although it may not feature elaborate detailing, con­
tains plaster and woodwork that is architecturally significant 
to the original design and function of the house. Abrasive 
cleaning of such an interior would be destructive to the his­
toric integrity of the building. 
Abrasive cleaning is also impractical. Rough surfaces of 
abrasively cleaned wooden elements are hard to keep clean. 
It is also difficult to seaL paint or maintain these surfaces 
which can be splintery and a problem to the building's oc­
cupants. The force of abrasive blasting may cause grit par­
ticles to lodge in cracks of wooden elements, which will be 
a nuisance as the grit is loosened by vibrations and gradually 
sifts out. Removal of plaster will reduce the thermal and 
insulating value of the walls. Interior brick is usually softer 
than exterior brick, and generally of a poorer quality. Re­
moving surface plaster from such brick by abrasive means 
often exposes gaping mortar joints and mismatched or re­
paired brickwork which was never intended to show . The 
resulting bare brick wall may require repointing, often dif­
ficult to match. It also may be necessary to apply a transparent 
surface coating (or sealer) in order to prevent the mortar and 
brick from "dusting." However, a sealer may not only change 
the color of the brick, but may also compound any existing 
moisture problems by restricting the normal evaporation of 
water vapor from the masonry surface. 
"Gentlest Means Possible" 
There are alternative means of removing dirt, stains and paint 
from historic building surfaces that can be recommended as 
more efficient and less destructive than abrasive techniques. 
The "gentlest means possible" of removing dirt from a build­
ing surface can be achieved by using a low-pressure water 
wash, scrubbing areas of more persistent grime with a natural 
bristle (never metal) brush. Steam cleaning can also be used 
effectively to clean some historic building fabric. Low-pres­
sure water or steam will soften the dirt and cause the deposits 
to rise to the su rface , where they can be washed away. 
A third cleaning technique which may be recommended to 
remove dirt, as well as stains, graffiti or paint, involves the 
use of commerically avai lable chemical cleaners or paint re­
movers, which, when applied to masonry, loosen or dissolve 
the dirt or stains. These cleaning agents may be used in com­
bination with water or steam, followed by a clear water wash 
to remove the residue of dirt and the chemical cleaners from 
the masonry. A natural bristle brush may also facilitate this 
type of chemically assisted cleaning, particularly in areas of 
heavy dirt deposits or stains, and a wooden scraper can be 

Do not Abrasively Clean these Interiors. Most historic residential and 
some commercial interior spaces contain finished plaster and wooden 
elements such as this stair balustrade and paneling which cOlltribwe 
to the historic and architectural character of the structure. Such interiors 
should not be subjected to abrasive techniques for the purpose of 
removing paint, dirt, discoloration or plaster . 
useful in removing thick encrustations of soot. A limewash 
or absorbent talc, whiting or clay poultice with a solvent can 
be used effectively to draw out salts or stai ns from the surface 
of the selected areas of a building fa<;ade. It is almost im­
possible to remove paint from masonry surfaces without caus­
ing some damage to the masonry, and it is best to leave the 
surfaces as they are or repaint them if necessary. 
Some physicists are experimenting with the use of pulsed 
laser beams and xenon flash lamps for cleaning historic ma­
sonry surfaces. At this time it is a slow, expensive cleaning 
method, but its initial succe ss indicates that it may have an 
increasingly important role in the future. 
There are many chemical paint removers which. when ap­
plied to painted wood, soften and dissolve the paint so that 
it can be scraped off by hand . Peeling paint can be removed 
from wood by hand scraping and sa ndin g. Particularly thick 
layers of paint may be softened with a heat gun or heat plate. 
providing appropriate precautions are taken. and the paint 
film scraped off by hand . Too much heat applied to the same 
spot can burn the wood, and the fumes caused by burning 
pa int are dangerous to inhale, and can be explosive. Fur­
thermore. the hot air from heat guns can start fires in the 
building cavity. Thus. adequate venti lat ion is important when 
using a heat gun or heat plate. as well as when using a chem­
ical stripper. A torch or open flame should never be used . 
Preparations for Cleaning: It cannot be overe mph asized that 
all of these cleaning method s must be approached with cau-
tion . When using any of these procedures which involve water 
or other liquid cleaning agents on masonry , it is imperative 
that all openings be tightly covered. and all cracks or joints 
be well pointed in order to avoid the danger of water pen­
etrating the building's facade, a circumstance which might 
result in serious moisture related problems such as efflores­
cence and/or subflorescence. Any time water is used on ma­
sonry as a cleaning agent, either in its pure state or in 
combination with chemical cleaners. it is very important that 
the work be done in warm weather when there is no danger 
of frost for several months . Otherwise water which has pen­
etrated the masonry may freeze, eventually causing the sur­
face of the building to crack and spall, which may create 
another conservation problem more serious to the health of 
the building than dirt. 
Each kind of masonry has a unique composition and reacts 
differently with various chemical cleaning substances. Water 
and/or chemicals may interact with minerals in stone and 
cause new types of stains to leach out to the surface imme­
diately, or more gradually in a delayed reaction. What may 
be a safe and effective cleaner for certain stain on one type 
of stone, may leave unattractive discolorations on another 
stone, or totally dissolve a third type. 
Testing: Cleaning historic building materials. particularly 
masonry , is a technically complex subject. and thus. should 
never be done without expert consultation and testing. No 
cleaning project should be undertaken without first applying 
the intended cleaning agent to a representative test patch 
area in an inconspicuous location on the building surface. 
The test patch or patches should be allowed to weather for 
a period of time , preferably through a complete seasonal 
cycle, in order to determine that the cleaned area will not be 
adversely affected by wet or freez ing weather or any by-prod­
ucts of the cleaning process. 
Mitigating the Effects of Abrasive Cleaning 
There are certain restoration measures which can be adopted 
to help preserve a historic building exterior which has been 
damaged by abrasive methods. Wood that has been sand­
blasted will exhibit a frayed or " fuzzed" surface, or a harder 
wood will have an exaggerated raised grain. The only way to 
remove this rough surface or to smooth the grain is by la­
borious sanding. Sandblasted wood, unless it has been ex­
tensively sanded, serves as a dustcatcher , will weather faster , 
and will present a continuing and ever worsening maintenance 
problem. Such wood, after sanding. should be painted or 
given a clear surface coating to protect the wood , and allow 
for somewhat easier maintenance. 
There are few successful preservative treatments that may 
be applied to grit-blasted exterior masonry . Harder , denser 
stone may have suffered only a loss of crisp edges or tool 
marks, or other indications of craft technique. If the stone 
has a compact and uniform composition, it should continue 
to weather with little additional deterioration. But some types 
of sandstone, marble and limestone will weather at an ac­
celerated rate once their protective "quarry crust" or patina 
has been removed. 
Softer types of masonry , particularly brick and architectural 
terra-cotta, are the most likely to require some remedial treat­
ment if they have been abrasively cleaned . Old brick. being 
essentially a soft, baked clay product. is greatly susceptible 
to Increas ed deterioration when its hard . outer skin is re­
moved through abrasive techniques. This problem can be 
minimized by painting the brick. An alternative is to treat it 
with a clear sealer or surface coating but this will give the 
masonry a glossy or shiny look. It is usuafly preferable to 
paint the brick rather than to apply a transparent sealer since 
7 

Hazar ds of Sandblasting and Surface Coating. In order to "protect" 
this heavily sandblasted brick, a clear surface coating or sealer was 
applied. Because the air temperature was too cold at the time of ap· 
plication, the sealer failed to dry properly, dripping in places. and 
giving the brick surface a cloudy appearance. 
sealers reduce the transpiration of moisture, allowing salts to 
crystallize as subflorescence that eventually spalls the brick. 
If a brick surface has been so extensively damaged by abrasive 
cleaning and weathering that spalling has already begun. it 
may be necessary to cover the walls with stucco. if it will 
adhere. 
Of course. the application of paint. a clear surface coating 
(sealer). or stucco to deteriorating masonry means that the 
historical appearance will be sacrificed in an attempt to con­
serve the historic building materials. However, the original 
color and texture will have been changed already by the ab­
rasive treatment . At this point it is more important to try to 
preserve the brick. and there is little choice but to protect it 
from "dusting" or spalling too rapidly. As a last resort. in 
the case of severely spalling brick. there may be no option 
but to replace the brick-a difficult. expensive (particularly 
if custom-made reproduction brick is used) , and lengthy proc­
ess. As described earlier. sandblasted interior brick work. 
while not subject to change of weather. may require the ap­
plication of a transparent surface coating or painting as a 
maintenance procedure to contain loose mortar and brick 
dust. (See Preservation Briefs: No. 1 for a more thorough 
discussion of coatings.) 
Metals, other than cast or wrought iron, that have been 
pitted and dented by harsh abrasive blasting usually cannot 
be smoothed out. Although fillers may be satisfactory for 
smoothing a painted surface, exposed metal that has been 
damaged usually will have to be replaced . 
Selected Reading List 
Ashurst. John. Cleaning Stone and Brick . Technical Pamphlet 4. 
London: Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. IY77. 
Asmus. John F. "Light Cleaning: Laser Technology for Surface Prep­
aration in the Arts." Technology and Conservation. 3: 3 (Fall 
1978). pp. 14-18. 
"The Bare-Brick Mistake. " The Old House Journal. I: 2 (November 
1973). p. 2 
Brick Institute of America. Colorless Coatings for Brick Masonrl'. 
Technical Notes on Brick Construction. Number 7E (September / 
October 1976). 
Gilder. Cornelia Brooke . Property OWller's Guide to the Maintenance 
and Repair of Stone Buildings. Technical Series / Nn. 5. Albany. 
New York: The Preservation League of New York State. 1977. 
Prudon . Theodore H.M . "The Case Against Removing Paint from 
Brick Masonry ." The Old HouseJournal. III : 2 (February 1975). 
pp . fr-7 
--- "Removing Stains from Masonry. " The Old House Journal. 
V: 5 (May 1977). pp. 58-59. 
Stambolov . T.. and J.R.J. Van Asperen de Boer. The Deterioration 
and Conservation of Porous Building Materials in Monumellts: 
A Review of the Literature . Second enlarged edition. Rom e: 
International Centre for Conservation. 1976. 
8 
Summary 
Sandblasting or other abrasive methods of cleaning or paint 
removal are by their nature destructive to historic building 
materials and should not be used on historic buildings except 
in a few well-monitored instances. There are exceptions when 
certain types of abrasive cleaning may be permissible. but 
only if conducted by a trained conservator, and if cleaning 
is necessary for the preservation of the historic structure. 
There is no one formula that will be suitable for cleaning 
all historic building surfaces. Although there are many com­
merical cleaning products and methods available. it is im­
possible to state definitively which of these will be the most 
effective without causing harm to the building fabric . It is 
ofte n difficult to identify ingredients or their proportions con­
tained in cleaning products; consequently it is hard to predict 
how a product will react to the building materials to be 
cleaned. Similar uncertanities affect the outcome of other 
cleaning methods as they are applied to historic building 
materials. Further advances in understanding the complex 
nature of the many variables of the cleaning techniques may 
someday provide a better and simpler solution to the prob­
lems. But until that time. the process of cleaning historic 
buildings must be approached with caution through trial and 
error. 
It is important to remember that historic building materials 
are neither indestructible. nor are they renewable. They must 
be treated in a responsible manner . which may mean little 
or no cleaning at all if they are to be preserved for future 
generations to enjoy. If it is in the best interest of the building 
to clean it , then it should be done "using the gentlest means 
possible." 
Weiss. Norman R. "C leani ng of Building Exteriors: Problems anu 
Procedures of Dirt Removal." Technolo?.\' and COllSen'atioll. 
2176 (Fall 1976). pp. 8- 13. 
--- Exterior Cleaning of Historic Masollr.\' Buildings. Draft. Wash­
ington. D.C.: Office of Archeology and Historic Preservation. 
Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service. U.S. Depart· 
ment of the Interior. 1976. 
Th is Preservation Brief was writlen hy Anne E. Grimmer. Architectura l Hi,· 
torian. Technical Preservation Services Division. Valuahle sugges tions and 
comments were made hy Hugh C. Miller. AlA. Washington. D.C.: Marlin E. 
Weaver. Otlawa. Ontario. Canada: Terry Bryant. Downers Grove. IIlinoi" 
Daniel C. Cammer. McLean. Virginia: and the professional staff of Technical 
Preservation Services Division. Dehorah Cooney edited the final manuscript. 
The illustrations for this brief not sRf'cifically credited are from the fi les of the 
Technical Preservation Services Division. 
This publication was prepared pursuant to Executive Order 11593. "Protection 
and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment." which directs the Secretary 
of the Interior to "develop and make available to Federal agencies and State 
and local governme nts information concerning professional methods and tech­
niques for preserving, improving, restoring and maintaining historic proper­
ties." The Brief has been developed under the technical editorship of Lee H. 
Nelson, AlA, Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, 
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C. 20240. Comments on the 
usefulness of this information are welcome and can be sent to Mr . Nelson at 
the above address. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced 
without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National 
Park Service are appreciated. June 1979. 