The Moore House 
l'IH· Sill- of th,· S111-r,·1ukr- \ orklo\\ 11 
43PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
The Preparation and Use of 
Historic Structure Reports 
Deborah Slaton 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
A historic structure report provides documentary, 
graphic, and physical information about a property's 
history and existing condition. Broadly recognized as 
an effective part of preservation planning, a historic 
structure report also addresses management or owner 
goals for the use or re-use of the property. It provides 
a thoughtfully considered argument for selecting 
the most appropriate approach to treatment, prior to 
the commencement of work, and outlines a scope of 
recommended work. The report serves as an important 
guide for all changes made to a historic property during 
a project-repair, rehabilitation, or restoration-and can 
also provide information for maintenance procedures . 
Finally, it records the findings of research and 
investigation, as well as the processes of physical work, 
for future researchers. 
A historical "first." The first historic structure report 
prepared in the United States, The Moore House: The Site 
of the Surrender- Yorktown, was written by Charles E. 
Peterson of the National Park Service in the early 1930s 
(Fig. 1). In the decades since the Moore House report 
was completed, preservation specialists commissioned 
by owners and managers of historic properties have 
prepared thousands of reports of this type. Similar 
studies have also been used for many years as planning 
tools in France, Canada, Australia, and other countries, 
as well as in the United States. Although historic 
structure reports may differ in format depending upon 
the client, the producer of the report, the significance of 
the structure, treatment requirements, and budgetary 
and time restrictions, the essential historic preservation 
goal is the same. 
Figure 1. In the 
introduction to the 
first historic structure 
report in this country, 
Charles E. Peterson 
of the National Park 
Service wrote in 
1935 "any architect 
who undertakes the 
responsibility of work­
ing over a fine old 
building should feel 
obligated to prepare 
a detailed report of 
his findings for the 
information of those 
who will come to 
study the structure in 
future years." Since 
then, thousands of his­
toric structure reports 
(HSRs) have been 
prepared to help guide 
work on historic prop­
erties. Photo: National 
Parks and Conserva­
tion Association. 
Just as an art conservator would not intervene 
in the life of an artistic artifact before 
obtaining a thorough knowledge of its history, 
significance, and composition, so those engaged 
in the preservation of buildings .. . should 
proceed only from a basis of knowledge. Too 
often in the past, the cultural integrity of 
countless buildings . .. has been compromised 
by approaches to restorations grounded on 
personal whim, willful romanticism, and 
expedient notions of repair .... The preparation 
of a historic structure report is the first step in 
adopting a disciplined approach to the care of a 
historic building.1 
In response to the many inquires received on the 
subject, this Preservation Brief will explain the purpose 
of historic structure reports, describe their value to the 
preservation of significant historic properties, outline 
how reports are commissioned and prepared, and 
recommend an organizational format. The National Park 
Service acknowledges the variations that exist in historic 
1 

structure reports and in how these reports address the 
specific needs of the properties for which they have 
been commissioned. Thus, this Brief is written primarily 
for owners and administrators of historic properties, 
as well as architects, architectural historians, and other 
practitioners in the field, who have limited experience 
with historic structure reports. 
It also responds to the 
requests of practitioners and owners to help define the 
scope of a historic structure report study. 
Guiding the Treatment of 
Significant Historic Properties 
A historic structure report is generally commissioned by 
a property owner for an individual building and its site 
that has been designated as historically or architecturally 
significant, particularly buildings open to the public, 
such as state capitols, city halls, courthouses, libraries, 
hotels, theaters, churches, and house museums (Fig. 2). 
It is certainly possible, but is less common, to prepare a 
historic structure report for a privately owned residence. 
Figure 2. Historic structure reports are prepared for many types of structures with various intended uses. Examples include courthouses and state 
capitols still serving their historic function (upper left, Wisconsin State Capitol, Madison); significant properties that are to be rehabilitated and 
adaptively reused (center left, New York Merchants' Exhange, from former bank headquarters to hotel); and properties that are to be restored as house 
museums (lower left, Willa Cather Childhood Home, Red Cloud, Nebraska). The scope of such studies includes the interior as well as exterior of the 
historic structure (lower right, Stanley Field Hall, Field Museum, Chicago). Photos: upper and lower left, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.; 
center left, Jan Hird Pokorny Associates, Inc.; lower right, McGuire Igleski & Associates, Inc. 
Besides the building itself, a historic structure report 
may address immediate site or landscape features, as 
well as items that are attached to the building, such 
as murals, bas reliefs, decorative metalwork, wood 
paneling, and attached floor coverings. Non-attached 
items, including furniture or artwork, may be discussed 
in the historic structure report, but usually receive in­
depth coverage in a separate report or inventory. One 
significant property may include multiple buildings, for 
example, a house, barn, and outbuildings; thus, a single 
historic structure report may be prepared for several 
related buildings and their site. 
Historic structure reports can be prepared for other 
historic resource types as well, including bridges, 
canals, ships, mines, and locomotives, which are 
categorized as structures by the National Register 
of Historic Places; sculpture and monuments, which 
are categorized as objects; and college campuses and 
industrial complexes, which are categorized as districts 
(Fig. 3). For battlefields, gardens, designed landscapes, 
and cemeteries, which are categorized as sites, parallel 
evaluation and investigation is usually undertaken 
through a separate document called a cultural landscape 
report. 
2 

Figure 3. The University of Vermont has more than thirty contribut­
ing buildings in four historic districts listed in the National Register 
of Historic Places. The Campus Master Plan recognizes a commit­
ment to respect and maintain the historic integrity of these facilities. 
Historic structure reports are available for many of the University's 
historic structures. Photo: University of Vermont Historic Preserva­
tion Program. 
Figure 4. For small or simple projects, the project team may include 
only one or two specialists while complex projects may involve a large 
number of investigators and specialists. For example, evaluation 
of this barn may primarily involve a historian, an architectural 
conservator, and a structural engineer. Photo: Wiss, Janney, Elstner 
Associates, Inc. 
A team approach. With such an array of subject 
matter, it is not surprising that preparation of a historic 
structure report is almost always a multi-disciplinary 
task. For a small or simple project, the project team 
may include only one or two specialists. For a complex 
project, a team may involve historians, architectural 
historians, archeologists, architects, structural engineers,
mechanical engineers, electrical engineers, landscape 
architects, conservators, curators, materials scientists, 
building code consultants, photographers, and other 
specialis ts. The disciplines involved in a specific 
historic structure report reflect the key areas or issues 
to be addressed for the particular property. The 
project leader or designated principal author for the 
report is responsible for coordinating and integrating 
the information generated by the various disciplines. 
Designation of a principal author may depend on the 
goals of the historic structure report and on which 
disciplines are emphasized in the study. 
Value of the Historic Structure Report 
The completed historic structure report is of value in 
many ways. It provides: 
■ A primary planning document for decision­
making about preservation, rehabilitation, 
restoration, or reconstruction treatments 
■ Documentation to help establish significant 
dates or periods of construction 
■ A guide for budget and schedule planning for 
work on the historic structure 
■ A basis for design of recommended work 
■ A compilation of key information on the history, 
significance, and existing condition of the 
historic structure 
■ A summary of information known and 
conditions observed at the time of the survey 
■ A readily accessible reference document for 
owners, managers, staff, committees, and 
professionals working on or using the historic 
structure 
■ A tool for use in interpretation of the structure 
based on historical and physical evidence 
■ A bibliography of archival documentation 
relevant to the structure 
■ A resource for further research and investigation 
■ A record of completed work 
Benefits for large-scale and long-term projects. In the 
development of any historic structure report, the scope 
of work and level of detail are necessarily adjusted to 
meet the requirements of a particular project, taking into 
account the property's significance, condition, intended 
use, and available funding. This does not mean 
that every significant historic property requires-or 
receives-a comprehensive investigation and detailed 
report. Some historic structure reports are of very 
limited scope . It may be necessary for a project to 
proceed without a historic structure report, either 
because of the cost of the report or a perceived need to 
expedite the work. 
Most large-scale or long-term work projects would 
benefit greatly from the preparation of such a 
report-and not only from the value of the report as 
an efficient planning tool. (See box above.) If work 
proceeds without a historic structure report to guide 
it, it is possible that physical evidence important to 
understanding the history and construction of the 
structure may be destroyed or that inappropriate 
changes may be made. The preparation of a report 
prior to initiation of work preserves such information 
for future researchers. Even more importantly, prior 
3 

prepara tion of a repor t helps ensure that the history, 
significance, and condition of the property are 
thoroughly understood and taken in to consideration in 
the selection of a treatment approach and development 
of work recommendations. One of the goals of a historic 
structure report is to reduce the loss of historic fabric or 
significance and to ensure the preservation of the historic 
character of the resource. 
When to P repare the Re port 
Optimal firs t phase. The historic structure report is an 
opti mal first phase of his toric preservation efforts for 
a significant b uilding or structure, preceding design 
and im plementation of preservation, rehabilitation, 
restora tion, or recons truction work. Information 
contained in the repor t documen ts existing conditions 
and serves as a basis for proposing physical changes. 
As additional information is learned relevant to the 
history of the building, and as work on the historic 
struc ture is implemented, the report can be amended 
and supplemented. 
The length of time required to prepare a historic 
structure report and the budget established for its 
development will vary, depending on the complexity 
of the project, the extent and availability of archival 
documentation, and to what extent work has already 
been perfor med on the building. 
If the scope of a 
historic st ru cture report for a simple building is limited 
to a brief overview of historic significance, a walk­
through co ndition assessment, and general treatment, 
the stu dy and report may be completed within a few 
mon ths' time by an experienced investigator. On 
the ot her hand, a his toric structure report for a larger 
building wi th numerous pas t alterations and substantive 
problems will require extensive research and on-site 
study by a multidiscip linary team . This type of report 
can often take up to two years to complete. 
4 
Determining the Scope of Work 
The following questions should be answered to 
determine the scope of work required for the study : 
■ Is the building's history well understood? 
■ Has the period of significance been established? 
■ Does the building represent a variety of periods 
of construction, additions, and modifications, 
not all of which may be significant? 
■ What archival documentation is available? 
■ Does the building have physical problems that 
require repair? What construction materials 
and systems are known to exhibit distress or 
deterioration? 
■ Does the building have code or functional 
problems that interfere with its use? 
■ Is the building in use? Is a new or more 
intensive use planned? 
■ Is funding available to commission the report 
needed to address these requirements? If not, 
can the scope of the report be reduced to answer 
critical questions in a limited report? 
■ Has the time frame for the overall project been 
established? 
Incremental pr eparation. If budgetary constraints 
preclude completing the historic structure report as 
one project, it can be prepared incrementally (Fig . 5). 
The work recommendations should not be developed 
or implemented prior to completion of research and 
investigation, except for emergency stabilization to 
prevent immediate failure or damage, or temporary 
measures to address critical health and safety issues. 
A partial historic structure report can be completed in 
preparation for anticipated work that must be initiated 
to preserve or protect the building. This type of report 
includes analysis of only those building elemen ts and 
systems that may be affected by the proposed work, 
and involves only the specialis ts needed to address the 
types of investigation and work planned. For example, 
research and documentation of existing interior finishes 
may be required before under taking localized s tructural 
stabilization that will require removal of interior 
materials . 
Figure 5. At the Hudson Opera House, a multi-arts center in 
Hudson, New York, the historic structure report was prepared 
incrementally. The first phase of the report focused on assessment and 
recommendations for repair of the roofing, the most critical issue in 
preservation of the building. Photo: Gary Schiro. 
In undertaking such work prior to the com pletion of a 
historic structure report, caution sho uld be taken not to 
alter or unnecessarily remove changes to the buil ding 
that had occurred over time . The comple ted report may 
conclude that such changes to the building may have 
acquired significance in their own right and therefore 
merit preservation. 
Documenti ng p ast w ork. Sometimes a historic structure 
report is initiated when repair or restoration work 
on the historic building has already been completed. 
Although it is always recommended that the study be 
done prior to new work, in this case, the report needs 

to document-as fully as possible-the condition 
and appearance of materials, elements, and spaces as 
they existed prior to the work performed. The extent 
to which this can be achieved depends on the quality 
of archival documentation available and physical 
recording undertaken prior to the completed work. 
The report should describe the nature and extent of the 
past repair or restoration work, and, if possible, should 
also document research performed, reasons for design 
decisions made, and the construction process for the 
work already completed on the structures. 
Commissioning a Report 
Commissioning a historic structure report requires 
answering a series of questions to establish the scope of 
work. (See sidebar.) The goals of the report need to be 
defined and the report should be designed to support 
planning for the future of the historic structure. This 
effort may involve gathering information to answer 
questions about what is significant about the building 
and site; what uses are appropriate for the building, or 
whether existing uses need to be modified; what known 
conditions require repair and whether those repairs are 
urgent; and what short-term and long-term goals need 
to be addressed. Finally the available budget for the 
historic structure report project should be established 
before a request for proposals is issued. 
The procedures for preparing a historic structure report 
and the outline of report content and organization can 
serve as the basis to develop a scope of work for the 
study and also to solicit proposals for a report that 
reflects the requirements of the specific structure, and, of 
course, the available budget. Although the request for 
proposals should always establish such a scope of work, 
firms may be invited to suggest adjustments to the scope 
of work based on their past experience. The request 
for proposals should require a qualifications submittal 
from each proposer. This submittal should include 
resumes for the principal investigators and a description 
of experience in preparing historic structure reports or 
similar studies, as well as experience with buildings 
of similar type, age, and construction to the subject of 
the study. References and samples of work may be 
requested from the proposer as part of this submittal. 
An interview with one or more candidates is highly 
recommended, both so that the proposers can present 
their project approach and qualifications, and so that 
the client can ask questions in response to the submitted 
proposal. 
How Much Will It Cost? 
Figure 6. Historical photographs are an invaluable aid and time saver in establishing a building's original construction and evolution; in guiding 
the replication of missing features; and even in understanding existing material deterioration. The availability of information, such as archival 
photographs, surviving original architectural drawings, or HABS documentation, has a direct bearing on the cost of preparing a historic structure 
report. In this circa 1890 photo of the Rancho San Andres Castro Adobe, the "lumbering up" on the south end is a character-defining feature of 
adobe construction, rarely seen today. Photo: Historic photograph from the Historic Structure Report for Rancho San Andres Adobe by Edna 
Kimbro, State Historian, California State Parks, Monterey District. 
The cost of undertaking a historic structure report is 
determined by numerous factors, some of which may 
be unique to a particular property. Common to most 
projects, however, are seven factors that help determine 
the cost of a report: 
1. The level of significance of the property will certainly 
influence the cost. That is, a property that is nationally 
significant would likely require a greater effort than a 
property that is only locally significant. 
5 

2. The treatment and use for which the historic structure 
report information provides a basis is an important cost 
consideration. If the decision is reached to maintain a 
building in its current form, the level of effort required 
in preparing a historic structure report would be less 
than where the intended treatment is a comprehensive 
restoration . 
A change in building use likewise may 
increase the level of effort; for example, the additional 
work involved in addressing different building code 
provisions. 
3. The availability of information about the historic 
resource has a direct bearing on costs. Some historic 
structures are well researched, and drawings may have 
been prepared to exacting standards, while others may 
require considerable original research and investigation 
to establish the evolution of the structure (Fig. 
6). 
On occasion, a property owner's in-house staff or 
volunteers may undertake further research in advance 
of a contracted study as a way to reduce the cost of the 
report. 
4. The location of and access to a historic building is a 
cost factor for some studies. A property in a remote 
mountain location can involve high travel costs relative 
to properties in or near an urban area . 
A structure 
requiring special techniques for exterior physical 
inspection would involve higher access costs than a 
small residential structure (Fig. 
7). 
Figure 7. Numerous factors influence the cost of preparing a 
historic structure report including the level of significance, size, 
and complexity of the property; required treatment and us~; ex~sting 
condition; and the location and access to the structure. Historic 
structure reports were prepared for several small lighthouses along 
the Oregon coast, including the Coquille River Lighthouse, shown 
here. Photo: Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
6 
Collecting Information for the Report 
A typical study involves: 
■ Preliminary walk through 
■ Research and review of archival 
documentation 
■ Oral histories 
■ An existing condition survey (including 
exterior and interior architectural elements , 
structural systems, mechanical and electrical 
systems, etc.) 
■ Measured drawings following the Secretary of 
the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for 
Architectural and Engineering Documentation 
■ Record photography 
■ Selected materials studies (e.g., mortar 
analy sis, finishes analysis, etc.) 
■ Evaluation o f significance 
■ Discussion with the owner and users about 
current and future intended uses for the 
structure 
■ Selection and rationale for the most approp riate 
treatment approach (preservation, 
rehabilitation, restoration , or reconstruction) 
■ Development of specific work 
recommendations 
5. The size and architectural character of a property 
affect the time required to prepare a historic structure 
report. A simple four-room vernacular structure would 
usually involve less effort than a complicated high-style 
courthouse with many significant spaces. 
6. The physical condition of the structure and also the 
extent of physical fabric that is accessible for study will be 
cost determinants as well. Obviously, a property in 
good condition is usually less problematic than one in a 
deteriorated state. For a structure that was continuously 
occupied and where alterations cover earlier fabric, the 
opportunity to extract information from physical fabric 
dating to early periods may be limited without extensive 
removals that are usually beyond the scope of the 
historic structure report study. Even where buildings 
are vacant, there are instances where certain physical 
investigations may need to be limited because of the 
destructive impact that will occur to historic fabric. 
7. The type of final report that is required can 
significantly affect the cost of the project, but is an area 
where costs can readily be controlled. Historic structure 
reports do not necessarily need to be professionally 
bound and printed. In-house desktop publishing has 
become commonplace, and a formai work product 
can often be obtained without excessive costs. Overly 
sophisticated printing and binding efforts represent 
a misplaced funding allocation for most historic 

properties. There are distinct advantages to having a 
report prepared in an appropriate electronic form, thus 
reducing the number of hard copies and facilitating 
future updates and additions to the report. For most 
properties where historic structure reports are prepared, 
ten or so hard copies should suffice. Providing one 
copy of the report in a three-ring binder is a helpful and 
inexpensive way to furnish the owner with a "working" 
copy of the document. 
Suggested steps for collecting information prior to 
configuring the data into the 
actual report are as follows: 
Preliminary walk through. A preliminary walk 
through of the building and its site with the owner or 
site manager, appropriate building staff representatives, 
and key members of the historic structure report team is 
important to review the project scope of work. During 
the walk through, a brief review of existing conditions 
can be performed to highlight user concerns and gather 
information about distress and deterioration observed. 
Building staff may also be able to provide information 
on recent repairs, current maintenance procedures, and 
specific areas of active deterioration. A brief review of 
existing documentation available on site is also useful. 
Site personnel may be able to recommend additional 
archival resources. 
Historical research. Archival research should be 
directed toward gathering information on the building's 
history, original construction and later modifications, 
occupancies, and uses over time (Fig. 8). Research 
for the report is not intended to produce a large 
compen dium of historical and genealogical material, 
but rather selected information necessary to understand 
the evolution of the structure, its significance, and 
justificatio n for the treatment selected. For significant 
sites where other types of studies such as archeological 
investigations or a cultural landscape report have been 
completed or are underway, coordination is required to 
ensure that research information is shared and that the 
research effort is not duplicated. 
Figure 8. Historical research is directed toward gathering information 
on a structure's history, original construction and later modifications, 
occupancies, and uses over time. Research may range from national 
repositories such as the Library of Congress to local collections or 
private family records. Old newspapers, architectural journals, and 
even manufacturing trade catalogs can be surprising sources of 
historical accounts and illustrations. This circa 1902 photograph of 
New York's Flatiron Building is of the construction in progress; such 
photographs are useful in understanding building chronology as well 
as concealed conditions of as-built construction such as building 
framing. Photo: Library of Congress, LC-D401-14278. The interior 
photograph of the former Bemir Drug Store in Rochester, New York, 
showcases a rubber tile floor as illustrated in a 1925 publication by 
the United States Rubber Company. 
If a National Register nomination or other inventory has 
already been completed for the building and its site, the 
bibliography -of that document may suggest possible 
sources for further research. In addition, a completed 
National Register nomination can serve as a starting 
point for development of the historic structure report 
sections on history and significance, and can be included 
in the appendix of the report. 
Public and university libraries, and state and local 
historical societies, are likely sources of relevant 
materials. Municipal records collections often contain 
deed and building permit information that is useful in 
developing a chronology of ownership and construction . 
Architectural, engineering, and construction documents, 
shop drawings, repair documents, and maintenance 
records are valuable sources of information. The original 
7 

drawings and specifications, if extant, may be kept at 
the archives of the historic building but may also have 
been retained by the firm that designed the building or 
successor firms. Building records and other archival 
documentation may have remained with the structure or 
site, with previous owners, or with related properties . 
Historic photographs are invaluable in developing a 
chronology of building changes and in determining 
the character and detailing of missing elements (Fig 
9). Photographs in private collections, not intended 
as formal documentation, can often be useful. For 
example, family photographs taken outdoors can 
document a building that appears in the background. 
Renderings and paintings can also be useful, but these 
images must be carefully analyzed and compared with 
other information to ensure accurate interpretation. 
Correspondence and oral histories can be important 
additions to the overall information, but may be 
unreliable and should be confirmed, when possible, 
by comparison with photographic documentation and 
physical evidence . 
Figure 9. A CADD perspective analysis facilitated study of the location of a long removed interior bulkhead wall. The bulkhead appears in a 
historic exterior photograph of a man seated in the door entrance to a mid-nineteenth century plantation dependency. Drawing: John Volz & 
Associates, Inc.; historic photo: National Park Service files. 
Fire insurance maps, such as Sanborn maps, can provide 
information on type of construction materials. When 
maps from different years are available, these can be 
useful in developing a chronology of additions and other 
changes to the structure. 
Existing condition survey. A survey is performed to 
document 
physical spaces and elements, and to assess 
the current condition of building materials and systems. 
In conjunction with historical research, the condition 
survey helps determine the historic integrity of a 
structure. The survey and inspection should address the 
building's exterior and interior materials, features and 
finishes; structural systems; interior spaces; mechanical, 
electrical, and plumbing systems; and fire detection and 
security 
systems. Further study may be required such 
as non-intrusive or intrusive investigation, field testing, 
sample removal, and laboratory testing and analysis of 
materials. 
\ 
{ I 
Figure 10. Archeological studies may be valuable in uncovering 
important evidence of changes to a historic structure. Following 
historical research and after several archeological soil probes, a 
decision was made to excavate an area in front of a mid-nineteenth 
century fireplace, revealing the original dirt floor and hearth 
undetected by earlier restoration efforts. Photo: Kaaren Staveteig, 
National Park Service. 
UNCLE JOE PHOTO SHOWING LOCATION Of BEAM IN PLAN ANO ELE\IATK)N 
8 

Archeological investigations can provide information 
on the locations of building foundations and other 
sub-gra de building elements, and can also assist in 
developing information on the function of adjacent site 
areas, building elements, and previously unfinished 
floor spaces (Fig. 10). The survey may also address 
the immediate site landscape, if this is not covered in a 
separate cultural landscape report. 
Information gathered during the survey can be 
documented 
with field notes on baseline drawings 
consisting of field sketches or measured drawings. In 
addition, documentation can include photographs 
(35-mm, large format, digital, perspective-corrected, 
and scale-rectified photographs ; photogrammetry; and 
laser techniques), sketches and measured drawings, 
computer-aided design and drafting (CADD), video 
records, and written notes and field measurements. 
Depending upon project requirements, documentation 
may need to be prepared to archival standards regarding 
paper, photographs and negatives, electronic records, 
and backup data. 
Measured drawings and record photography. The 
collection of the Historic American Building Survey/ 
Historic American Engineering Record (HABS / HAER) 
archive at the Library of Congress should be searched 
in case the property has been previously documented 
through drawings and photographs. While many 
historic properties have been documented since the start 
of this invaluable collection in the 1930s, it is still more 
likely that this type of documentation does not exist 
for a property for which a historic structure report is 
being undertaken. Preparation of such documentation 
to portray the current condition of a property can 
be an invaluable addition to the historic structure 
report. Besides serving as a documentary record of a 
structure, the recording documents can serve another 
purpose such as an easement document, information 
for catastrophic loss protection, interpretive drawings, 
or baseline drawings for proposed work. If undertaken 
as part of the current building study, the measured 
drawings and record photography should follow the 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for 
Architectural and Engineering Documentation. 
Materials investigation and testing. Field examination 
and testing of building material may include non­
destructive (non-intrusive) or, where necessary, 
destructive (intrusive) examination and/ or testing of 
materials, components, and systems (Fig. 11). Examples 
of non-destructive methods of field examination and 
testing include field microscopy, the use of a metal 
detector to locate concealed metal elements, and X-
ray techniques to assess concealed conditions. Some 
examples of destructive methods of field examination 
and testing include structural testing, strain relief 
testing, and inspection openings (probes). Instruments 
such as a borescope, through which concealed 
conditions can be viewed through a small hole, permit 
enhanced examination while limiting damage to the 
existing building fabric. 
Figure 11. The use of special access methods may be n~cessar_y for 
close-up investigation of building elements. At the Wisconsin State 
Capitol, project architects and engineers used rappel/mg techniques. 
Photo: Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
Depending upon existing conditions and the results of 
the site inspection, field monitoring may be required. 
Field monitoring can include humidity and temperature 
monitoring, documentation of structural movement 
and vibrations, light level monitoring, and other 
environmental monitoring. 
In addition, materials samples may be removed for 
laboratory studies. A wide range of laboratory testing 
may be appropriate to establish the composition of 
various construction materials, determine causes of 
deterioration, and identify and assess appropriate 
conservation and repair measures (Fig. 12). Materials 
analysis may also be helpful in dating changes to the 
9 

structure and in developing a chronology of construction 
(Fig. 13). For example, mortar analysis may be 
performed to determine the composition of original and 
repainting mortars and to provide information for use 
in designing a mortar mix for repainting. As another 
example, paint and other coatings may be analyzed to 
determine finish types and composition, and original 
and subsequent color schemes, using special analysis 
techniques and comparison with color standard systems. 
Samples should generally be returned to the owner 
and retained in case future testing is required. In some 
cases, it may be appropriate to reinstall the samples after 
materials studies have been completed. 
Figure 12. Field and laboratory studies of construction materials 
may be performed as part of a historic structure report. Laboraton; 
studies of samples removed from the building may include a range of 
chemical and physical testing and evaluation. Here, a petrographer 
uses a stereomicroscope to examine concrete specimens. Photo: Wiss, 
Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
Figure 13. Paint studies may not only help establish the chronology 
of paints and paint colors used on a building but also may aid in the 
dating of existing architectural features. Examination of the paint 
layers on these modillions utilizing a hand-held microscope enabled 
an investigating team to confirm in the field which modillions were 
original and which were later replacements. Photo: Charles Fisher, 
National Park Service. 
Sample removal and analysis may also be required 
to identify hazardous materials, which are present in 
many historic buildings. For example, lead and other 
heavy metals are components of many older paints and 
coatings, and asbestos is a constituent of some roofing 
materials, claddings, sealants, and insulation. Mold and 
mildew may be present and require special treatment; 
in this case a consulting industrial hygienist may need 
to be included in the project team. Analysis may be 
performed to confirm the materials present, determine 
the nature of the hazard, and help identify methods of 
remediation or management. 
As buildings constructed during recent decades become 
"historic," newer materials require study and analysis 
as part of historic structure reports. For example, 
curtain wall components and joint sealants may require 
analysis to determine their composition, identify causes 
10 
of deterioration, and select appropriate replacement 
sealants. Composite materials and plastics, present in 
post-World War II buildings, may also require special 
effort to determine repair techniques or appropriate 
materials for replacement. 
All of the information gathered during the physical 
investigation, and through field testing and laboratory 
analysis, should be documented in field notes, sketches, 
photographs, and test reports. This information 
is incorporated in the historic structure report and 
provides a basis for the development of treatment 
recommendations. 
Evaluation of significance. The process of evaluation 
occurs throughout the study of the historic structure 
as information is gathered, compared, and reviewed. 
Historical data and physical evidence are reviewed to 
help evaluate the historical, architectural, engineering, 
and cultural significance of the property, its construction 
and use, and occupants or other persons associated with 
its history and development. This evaluation includes 
determination of the period(s) of primary significance. 
An overview of the building's history and an assessment 
of its significance are included in the report. 
Depending on the historical significance of the property, 
and whether a detailed history has already been written, 

a brief or more detailed history may be appropriate. A 
chronology of construction and changes to the building, 
developed through historic and physical research, is 
an effective approach to identifying original building 
elements, as well as modifications that have occurred 
over time. If a comprehensive National Register 
nomination or other inventory has been prepared, the 
significance may already be defined. In other cases, the 
significance of a building and even its treatment may 
have been established through authorizing legislation 
or through the charter of an organization or foundation 
that owns the historic property. Where appropriate, 
however, the building's significance should be re­
evaluated in light of research performed for the historic 
structure report. 
The results of the research, investigation, and field 
and laboratory testing are reviewed as a basis for 
developing specific work recommendations. The 
history and significance of the building and its site are 
evaluated to understand what spaces, elements, and 
finishes are of architectural or historical importance, 
and to confirm the overall project goals and treatment 
direction. The physical condition of the building 
and its systems is evaluated with regard to existing 
deterioration and distress, and needed repairs, as well 
as changes required to meet treatment goals. Attention 
is given to identification of life safety issues and code 
considerations. Conditions are also identified that could 
lead to future safety risks, loss of historic fabric, or loss 
of performance. 
The Secretary of the Interior provides four 
distinct but interrelated approaches to the 
treatment of historic properties. 
Preservation focuses on the maintenance and 
repair of existing historic materials and retention of 
a property's form as it has evolved over time. 
Rehabilitation acknowledges the need to alter 
or add to a historic property to meet continuing 
or changing uses while retaining the property's 
historic character. 
Restoration is undertaken to depict a property 
at a particular period of time in its history, while 
removing evidence of other periods. 
Reconstruction re-creates vanished or non­
surviving portions of a property for interpretive 
purposes. 
Selection of a treatment approach. Once the building's 
history, significance, and physical condition have been 
researched and investigated, an appropriate treatment is 
usually selected (Fig. 14). Depending upon the intended 
use of a property, funding prospects, and the findings 
of the investigation, it may be necessary in some cases to 
identify and discuss an alternate treatment as well. For 
example, a building currently occupied by caretakers 
that is a candidate for restoration and use as a museum 
may require such ambitious funding support that, for 
the foreseeable future, a more practical treatment could 
be to preserve the building and retain the caretakers. In 
this case, the treatment recommendation would be to 
restore the property and project work relevant to the 
restoration would be described. 
However, the alternate treatment 
(in this instance an interim one) 
of preserving the building in 
its current form would also be 
described, including discussion of 
work appropriate to preservation 
such as repairing the existing roof 
and installing a monitored fire 
detection system. 
Figure 14. The treatment approach selected for a building usually is determined by the intended use of 
a property, funding prospects, and the findings of an investigation. The Wolf Creek Inn, operated by the 
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department, is among the most intact and oldest active travelers' inns 
in Oregon. The historic structure report outlined a rehabilitation treatment which included such work 
recommendations as repairs to specific historic fabric, landscape restoration and site improvements,. 
and upgrading of the building's mechanical and electrical systems. Photo: Historic American Building 
Survey, 1934. 
In selecting an appropriate 
treatment, the Secretary of the 
Interior's Standards for the 
Treatment of Historic Properties 
can be particularly helpful. (See 
sidebar.) In use for more than 
twenty-five years, the Standards 
are a widely accepted means of 
planning for and undertaking 
project work in a manner that 
preserves historic materials 
and elements. The Secretary's 
Standards have been adopted 
by many state and local review 
11 

entities for review of work proposals on historic 
structures. 
The Standards and their accompanying Guidelines 
describe four different options for treatment and 
list recommended techniques for exterior and 
interior work consistent with each option. One 
treatment (preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, 
or reconstruction) is usually selected and followed 
throughout the course of a project involving a particular 
building. Application of a single treatment approach 
helps to avoid inappropriate combinations of work, 
such as restoring a building's appearance to an earlier 
time in history while simultaneously constructing a new 
addition. 
Development of work recommendations. The 
work recommendations are a central feature of the 
report. They are developed only after the research 
and investigation has been completed and the overall 
project goal established as to whether a particular 
building should be preserved, rehabilitated, restored, 
or reconstructed. The specific work recommendations 
need to be consistent with the selected treatment. If 
analysis performed during the study suggests that the 
approach or use initially proposed would adversely 
affect the materials, character, and significance of the 
historic building, then an alternate approach with 
a different scope of work or different use may need 
to be developed. The process of developing work 
recommendations also needs to take into account 
applicable laws, regulations, codes, and functional 
requirements with specific attention to life safety, fire 
protection, energy conservation, abatement of hazardous 
materials, and accessibility for persons with disabilities. 
In addition to project goals, the proposed work is 
also guided by the building's condition. The scope of 
recommended work may range from minor repairs 
to structural stabilization to extensive restoration. In 
addition, the scope of work may be very narrow (e.g., 
priming and painting of woodwork and repair of 
deteriorated roof flashings), or very extensive (e.g., 
stabilization of timber framing or major repair and 
repointing of exterior masonry walls). The result of 
implementing (or not implementing) the recommended 
work needs to be considered as the recommendations 
are developed. 
Of course, the available project budget is also a factor 
in determining the extent of recommended work and 
whether it must be accomplished in several phases or 
projects. Whether or not available budget is the primary 
factor in determining the extent of work that can be 
performed, it is often useful to prioritize recommended 
work items. The recommended tasks can be examined 
in terms of relative importance and the time required 
for implementation. Prioritizing repairs can be critical 
where immediate or short-term work is needed to 
stabilize a building or structure, eliminate safety 
hazards, make the building weather tight, and protect it 
against further deterioration (Fig. 15). 
Figure 15. The historic structure report for the Hotel Florence, shown 
here in 1886 (upper), 1963 (center), and 2004 (lower) views, provided 
a basis for stabilization and repair work which has been completed. 
Initial phases of work addressed preservation of the building 
envelope, structural repairs, and limited mechanical and electrical 
improvements. The report also provided recommendations for future 
rehabilitation work that will be implemented in phases as funding 
becomes available. Photos: upper and center, Historic American 
Building Survey; lower, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
12 
Appropriate procedures for undertaking the 
recommended work items are described in the historic 
structure report and are intended to serve as a basis for 
planning the repair, rehabilitation, or restoration design. 
The level of detail to which the work items are defined 
should be limited in the historic structure report, as these 

recommendations serve as the foundation for, rather 
than in place of, design and construction documents 
for the work. For example, baseline drawings 
annotated with existing condition notes can later serve 
as a starting place for development of construction 
drawings. Outline procedures provided in the report for 
recommended work items can be used later to develop 
specifications for the work. Finally, a general opinion of 
probable costs associated with the recommended work 
is often prepared. A cost estimate is useful to building 
owners and managers in budget planning and also 
assists in prioritizing the work. For large or complex 
projects, the services of a professional cost estimator may 
be helpful in this effort. 
Report Preparation. Upon completion of the 
research, physical investigation, evaluation, and work 
recommendations, the historic structure report is 
compiled. The principal investigator may submit an 
outline of the report for owner review at the beginning 
of the report preparation. A draft report may also 
be submitted for review when the report is partially 
complete, especially if there are many new research 
findings, significant physical distress conditions to 
be addressed, or complicated choices to be made in 
determining the treatment. 
The report should be prepared in a style and format 
that is readily accessible and user-friendly; however, it 
is not essential that a standardized method or format be 
followed for all historic structure reports. The report can 
be primarily narrative or graphic, but is most typically 
a combination of these formats. Ease and economy of 
report preparation should be considered but should 
not take precedence over clarity and thoroughness of 
documentation. 
Meetings and presentations. In addition to meetings 
with site personnel early in the study process, it is 
helpful for the project team to meet at key points during 
the research, investigation, and development of the 
historic structure report. For example, it is useful for 
the project team members performing archival research 
to meet with site personnel to review documents 
and findings, and to help ensure that important 
archival sources have not been overlooked. Project 
team members may also walk through the building 
with site personnel during the investigation phase to 
review and discuss existing conditions and possible 
recommendation approaches. When the report is in 
draft form, a meeting of the project team with those 
personnel who will be reviewing and using the report 
is useful to discuss overall goals, treatments, and 
recommendations as these are being developed. Finally, 
when the study is complete, a presentation of the 
completed study by the project team helps to familiarize 
the owner and building personnel with the report, 
highlight key issues, answer questions, and provide a 
transition to the use of the report as a working document 
by the building's caretakers. 
Report Organization 
The scope of the study-historical research, condition 
survey, investigation and testing, evaluation, selection 
of appropriate treatment, and development of specific 
work recommendations-generates a wealth of 
information about the history and condition of the 
building and the specific work needed to preserve, 
rehabilitate, restore, or reconstruct it. This information is 
typically a combination of historical and technical data 
obtained by different members of the project team and 
presented as an integrated report in text, photographs, 
drawings, and tables (Fig.16). The project leader or 
principal author must guide the development of the 
report so that key issues are addressed, information is 
Figure 16. The historic structure report for the Noland House in 
Independence, Missouri, a vernacular house that is significant 
as part of the context of Harry S Truman's life and family in 
Independence, Missouri, includes photographs and measured 
drawings to record existing features and conditions of the building. 
The measured drawings will also provide a basis for construction 
documents for future preservation work. This photograph and 
drawing illustrate the front elevation of the house. Photo and 
drawing: Bahr Vermeer Haecker Architects. 
13 

documented and assimilated in the report findings and 
discussion, recommendations are clearly presented , 
and no information is lost or misinterpreted in the 
compilation process. 
In order to integrate the many pieces of information 
into a 
coherent and comprehensive whole, the historic 
structure report is generally organized into two 
principal sections preceded by a brief introduction that 
summarizes overall findings and recommendations and 
provides project administrative data . The main sections 
of the report consist of (1) a narrative that documents 
the evolution of the building, its physical description, 
existing condition, and an evaluation of significance; 
and (2) a discussion of historic preservation objectives, 
together with recommendations for an overall treatment 
approach and for specific work. The report is usually 
supplemented with footnotes or endnotes, bibliography , 
and appendices of historical documentation and 
technical data. 
It is highly recommended that a post project record of 
all work performed later be added as a supplement to 
the historic structure report. This record may consist 
of annotated drawings, photographs, and other 
documentation of the work performed. Site personnel 
may help coordinate this supplement or record if the 
principal author of the report is not involved in the 
later construction phase . Some organizations and 
government agencies consider the post project record to 
be a third part of a historic structure report and not just a 
supplement. 
When physical evidence is discovered during the cour se 
of the construction work or when new documentary 
evidence is discovered as research continues after 
completion of the report, this also should be recorded 
and incorporated into the historic structure report or 
in an appendix to the report . An important goal of the 
historic structure report process is to maintain the report 
as an active and working document, both to facilitate the 
use of information compiled in the report and to permit 
the report to accommodate new information readily as it 
becomes available. 
Report Production and Availability 
The historic structure report is most often prepared 
in the form of a printed, illustrated manuscript. In 
recent years, attention has been given to creating or 
transforming the historic structure report into an 
electronic document as well. In electronic format, the 
report can easily be shared with interested parties and is 
readily updated. 
However, because historic structure reports are still 
mostly produced in printed format (although sometimes 
concurrently with an electronic document), it is important 
that, after production, one or more copies be provided to the 
property owner and also made available to the project team. 
As the basis for design and construction documents, the 
historic structure report needs to be readily available and 
extensively used during implementation of the work. 
At least one site copy should be maintained in a physical 
format that can be readily updated, such as a three-ring 
notebook to which additional documentation can easily 
be added. Field documentation materials, including 
photographs and negatives, measured field drawings, 
condition reports and surveys, materials test reports, 
and other information gathered during the study can 
be stored in an archive by the building owner for future 
reference. 
14 
An archival copy should also be provided to the 
owner, and a minimum of one archival copy kept at 
the project site and at an appropriate local or regional 
archive , such as a state historical library. Copies of 
the historic structure report may also be provided to a 
local historical organization or university and the state 
historic preservation agency or historical society. In 
addition, a copy may be given to the National Trust 
for Historic Preservation Library at the University of 
Maryland at College Park, which has established a 
reference collection of historic structure reports. 
Summary 
Variou s agencies and organizations have employed 
historic structure reports as planning tools for many 
years, for example, the National Park Service, General 
Services Administration, New York State Office of Parks, 
Recreation and Historic Preservation, and the Society 
for the Preservation of New England Antiquities. These 
and other agencies and organizations may have specific 
requirements and procedures for reports prepared for 
properties under their stewardship that differ from 
those described in this Preservation Brief. All historic 
structure reports, however, share a common goal-the 
careful documentation and appropriate treatment of 
significant historic structures . 
The historic structure report is an optimal first phase 
of historic preservation efforts for a significant 
building, preceding design and implementation 
of its preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or 
reconstruction . 
If work proceeds without a historic 
structure report as a guide, physical evidence important 
to understanding the history and construction of the 
building may be destroyed. The preparation of a report 
prior to initiation of work provides documentation 
for future researchers . Even more importantly, prior 
preparation of a report helps ensure that the history, 
significance, and condition of the property are 
thoroughly understood and taken into consideration 
in the selection of an appropriate treatment and in 
the development of work recommendations. A well 
prepared historic structure report is an invaluable 
preservation guide. 

Content and Organization of Report 
Cover Page 
Table of Contents 
Introduction 
Study Summary 
Project Data 
Part 1 - Developmental History 
Historical Background and Context 
Chronology of Development and Use 
Physical Description 
Evaluation of Significance 
Condition Assessment 
Part 2 - Treatment and Work Recommendations 
Historic Preservation Objectives 
Requirements for Work 
Work Recommendations and Alternatives 
Bibliography 
Appendices 
Supplemental Record of Work Performed 
(section often added later) 
Completion Report 
Technical Data (on work completed) 
Introduction. This section includes a concise account of 
research and investigation findings and recommendations for 
treatment and use, and a record of project administrative data. 
■ Study Sum man; - a brief statement of the purpose, findings, 
and recommendations of the study, including major 
research findings, key issues addressed by the study, and a 
summary of recommendations for treatment and use . 
■ Project Data - a summary of project administrative 
data (e.g., location, ownership, and landmark status of 
property) and the methodology and project participants . 
Part 1 Developmental History. This section consists of a 
narrative report based on historical research and physical 
examination documenting the evolution of the building, 
its current condition and causes of deterioration, and its 
significance. 
■ Historical Background and Context - a brief history of the 
building and its context, its designers and builders, and 
persons associated with its history and development. 
■ Chronology of Development and Use - a description 
of original construction, modifications, and uses, based on 
historical documentation and physical evidence. 
■ Physical Description - a description of elements, materials, 
and spaces of the building, including significant and non­
significant features of the building . 
■ Evaluation of Significance - a discussion of significant 
features, original and non-original materials and elements, 
and identification of the period(s) of significance (if 
appropriate). 
■ Condition Assessment - a description of the condition of
building materials, elements, and systems and causes 
of deterioration, and discussion of materials testing and 
analysis (if performed as part of this study). 
Part 2 Treatment and Work Recommendations. This section 
presents the historic preservation objective and selected 
treatment (preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or 
reconstruction), requirements for work, and recommended 
work that corresponds with the defined treatment goal. 
■ Historic Preservation Objectives - a description and rationale 
for the recommended treatment and how it meets the 
project goals for use of the building, e.g., rehabilitation for 
a new use, restoration for interpretive purposes, etc. 
■ Requirements for Work - an outline of the laws, regulations, 
and functional requirements that are applicable to the 
recommended work areas (e.g., life safety, fire protection, 
energy conservation, hazardous materials abatement, and 
handicapped accessibility). 
■ Work Recommendations and Alternatives - a presentation 
of tasks recommended to realize the proposed treatment 
approach; evaluation of proposed solutions; and 
description of specific recommendations for work, 
including alternate solutions, if appropriate. 
Notes, Bibliography and Appendices 
■ Footnotes or endnotes 
■ Bibliography, annotated if possible 
■ List of sources of information (e.g., archives, photograph 
collections) 
■ Appendices (e.g., figures, tables, drawings, historic and 
current photographs, reference documents, materials 
analysis reports, etc.) 
■ Index (if the report is particularly long or complex) 
Supplemental Record of Work Performed. This section 
documents work performed, which may include planning 
studies, technical studies such as laboratory testing or 
structural analysis, or other investigation work that was not 
part of the scope of the original historic structure report, 
and records physical work on the building (construction 
documents, annotated drawings, photographs). The section 
is usually added later to update the report, as most historic 
structure reports are issued prior to implementation of the 
recommended treatment approach and specific work. It is 
sometimes referred to as Part 3 of the report. 
■ Completion Report - a record of the work accomplished, 
physical evidence discovered during construction, and 
how findings affect interpretation of the building. 
■ Technical Data - a collection of field reports, material 
data sheets, field notes, correspondence, and construction 
documents. 
15 

Bibliography 
Burns, John, editor, with the staff of HABS/HAER, National 
Park Service, U.S. Deparbnent of the Interior. Recording 
Historic Structures. Washington, D .C.: The American 
Institute of Architects Press, 1989. 
Jandl, H . Ward. Preservation Brief 18. "Rehabilitating 
Interiors in Historic Buildings: Identifying and Preserving 
Character-Defining Elements." Washington, D.C.: National 
Park Service, 1988. 
McDonald, Jr., Travis C. Preservation Brief 35. 
"Understanding Old Buildings: The Process of Architectural 
Investigation." Washington, D.C.: National Park Service, 
1994. 
Nelson, Lee H., FAIA. Preservation Brief 17. "Architectural 
Character: Identifying the Visual Aspects of Historic 
Buildings as an Aid to Preserving Their Character ." 
Washington, D.C.: National Park Service , 1988. 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation & 
Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
Washington, D .C.: U.S. Deparbnent of the Interior, National 
Park Service, Preservation Assistance Division, 1992. 
1 From the introduction to the University of Virginia, Pavilion 1, 
Historic Structure Report, Mesick Cohen Waite Hall Architects , 
1988. 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for 
Architectural and Engineering Documentation. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, 
Historic American Buildings Survey/ Historic American 
Engineering Record, 1983. 
Slaton, Deborah, and Alan W. O'Bright, guest editors . 
Association for Preservation Technology International (APT) 
Bulletin XXVII, no. 1 (1997). Special issue on historic 
structure reports. 
Weeks, Kay D., and Anne E. Grimmer. The Secretary of the 
Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties 
with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring 
& Reconstructing Historic Buildings. Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, 
Cultural Resource Stewardship and Partnerships, Heritage 
Preservation Services, 1995. 
Acknowledgements 
Deborah Slaton is an Architectural Conservator with Wiss, Janney , Elstner Associates, Inc., in Northbrook, Illinois. 
The author gratefully acknowledges the following individuals for their assistance in the preparation and review of this brief: 
Alan W. O'Bright, National Park Service; John Volz, Volz & Associates; Philip D. Hamp, Vinci-Hamp Architects, Inc.; William 
G. Foulks; and Travis C. MacDonald, Jr., Thomas Jefferson's Poplar Forest. Additional thanks go to Jeffrey P. Koerber, Clark 
University, and Harry J. Hunderman, Joshua D. Freedland, and Kenneth M . Itle, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. The 
following staff of the Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, offered valuable comments during its development: 
Sharon Park, FAIA, Anne Grimmer, Michael Auer, and Chad Randl. Charles E. Fisher and Kay D. Weeks of the National Park 
Service's Heritage Preservation Services were the technical editors for this publication project. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, which directs the Secretary 
of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. Comments about this publication 
should be directed to: Charles Fisher, Technical Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services, National Park 
Service, 1849 C Street, NW, 2255, Washington, DC 20240. <www .cr.nps.gov/ hps / tps> This publication is not copyrighted and can 
be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park Service are appreciated. The 
photographs used in this publication may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 
U.S. Government Printing Office 2004 024-005-01191-9 April 2005 
16 