42 PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
 
The Maintenance, Repair and 
Replacement of Historic Cast Stone 
Richard Pieper 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
An Imitative Building Material with Many Names 
The practice of using cheaper and more common materials 
on building exteriors in imitation of more expensive natural 
materials is by no means a new one . In the eighteenth cen­
tury, sand impregnated paint was applied to wood to look 
like quarried stone. Stucco scored to simulate stone ashlar 
could fool the eye as well . In the 19th centur y, cast iron 
was also often detailed to appear like stone. Another such 
imitative building material was "cast stone " or, more pre­
cisely, precast concrete building units (Figs. 1, 2 and 3). 
Cast stone was just one name given to various concrete 
mixtures that employed molded shapes , decorative aggre­
gates, and masonry pigments to simulate natural stone. 
The basic mixtures included water, sand, coarse aggregate, 
and cementing agents . Natural cements , portland cements , 
oxychloride cements, and sodium silicate based cements 
were all used as binding agents. The differences in the 
resulting products reflected the different stone aggregates, 
binding agents, methods of manufacture and curing, and 
systems of surface finishing that were used to produce 
them . Versatile in representing both intricately carved 
ornament and plain blocks of wall ashlar, cast stone could 
be tooled with a variety of finishes. 
During a century and a half of use in the United States, cast 
stone has been given various names. While the term "artifi­
cial stone" was commonly used in the 19th century, "con­
crete stone," "cast stone," and "cut cast stone" replaced it in 
the early 20th century. In addition, Coignet Stone, Frear 
Stone, and Ransome Stone were all names of proprietary 
systems for precast concrete building units, which experi­
enced periods of popularity in different areas of the United 
Figure 1. In the early 20th century, elaborate custom building ornament was frequently produced in cast stone. Here, at the Benedict Stone Company's plant in 
Chicago, cartouches, balustrade panels, railings, and balusters await finishing and shipment. Photo: Courtesy, National Building Museum. 

Figure 2. The prominent Delaware and Hudson Building in Albany, New 
York (1916) made extensive use of cast stone as trim combined with a random 
ashlar facing of natural granite. The elaborate gothic trim was produced by 
the Onondaga Litholite Company of Syracuse, New York. 
States in the 19th century. These systems may be contrast­
ed with "Artistic Concrete," decorative molded concrete 
construction, both precast and cast-in-place, which made 
little effort to simulate natural stone (Fig. 4). 
Having gained popularity in the United States in the 1860s, 
cast stone had become widely accepted as an economical 
substitute for natural stone by the early decades of the 20th 
century. Now, it is considered an important historic mate­
rial in its own right with unique deterioration problems 
that require traditional, as well as innovative solutions. 
This Preservation Brief discusses in detail the maintenance 
and repair of historic cast stone--precast concrete building 
units that simulate natural stone. It also covers the condi­
tions that warrant replacement of historic cast stone with 
appropriate contemporary concrete products and provides 
guidance on their replication. Many of the issues and tech­
niques discussed here are relevant to the repair and 
replacement of other precast concrete products, as well. 
2 
Figure 3. Sculptural omament was frequently produced in cast stone. 
Repetitive detail, such as these banding course panels 011 the Level Club in 
New York City (1926), were produced much more economically than they 
could be in natural stone. 
1•1111 
Figure 4. As shown in this Sears, Roebuck and Co. concrete machinery cata­
log, artistic concrete used standard concrete mixes to produce precast and 
cast-in-place concrete in molded forms, but made little effort to simulate nat­
ural stone. 

History o f Use and Manufacture 
Early Patented Systems 
While some use of cast stone may be dated to the Middle 
Ages, more recent efforts to replicate stone with cementi­
tious materials began in England and France at the end of 
the 18th century. Coade Stone, one of the best known of 
the early English manufactures, was used for architectural 
ornament and trim, and saw limited use for interior decora­
tion in the United States as early as 1800. Significant 
advances in the artificial stone industry in the United States 
were tied to the production of natural cement or hydraulic 
lime, which began about 1820. 
A large number of patented American , English, and French 
systems were marketed immediately after the Civil War. 
One of the earliest American patents for cast stone was 
awarded to George A. Frear of Chicago in 1868. Frear 
Stone was a mixture of natural cement and sand, to which a 
solution of shellac was added to provide initial curing 
strength. Frear's system was widely licensed around the 
country, and the resultant variation in materials and manu­
facturing methods apparently resulted in some significant 
failures. 
Another product which utilized natural cement as its 
cementing agent was Beton Coignet (literally, "Coignet con­
crete," also known as "Coignet Stone"). Francois Coignet 
was a pioneer of concrete construction in France . He 
received United States patents in 1869 and 1870 for his sys­
tem of precast concrete construction, which consisted of 
portland cement, hydraulic lime, and sand. In the United 
States the formula was modified to a mix of sand with 
Rosendale Cement ( a high quality natural cement manu­
factured in Rosendale, Ulster County, New York). In 1870 
Coignet's U.S. patent rights were sold to an American, 
John C. Goodrich, Jr., who formed the New York and Long 
Island Coignet Stone Company . This company fabricated 
the cast stone for one of the earliest extant cast stone struc­
tures in the United States, the Cleft Ridge Span in Prospect 
Park, Brooklyn, New York (Fig. 5). 
Some proprietary systems substituted other cements for the 
portland cement or hydraulic lime. The British patent pro­
cess of Frederick Ransome utilized a mixture of sand and 
sodium silicate, combined with calcium chloride, to form 
blocks of calcium silicate. The sodium chloride by-product 
was intended to be removed with water washes during the 
curing process. The Sorel cement process, developed in 
1853 and later applied to the manufacture of grindstones, 
tiles, and cast stone for buildings, combined zinc oxide 
with zinc chloride, or magnesium oxide and magnesium 
chloride, to form a hydrated oxychloride cement mixture 
that bound together sand or crushed stone. The Union 
Stone Company in Boston manufactured cast stone using 
the Sorel process. Ultimately, however, alternate cementing 
systems were abandoned in favor of portland cement, 
which proved to be more dependable and less expensive. 
Figure 5. Constructed in 1868 
of Belon Coignet, the Cleft 
Ridge Span in New York City's 
Prospect Park is one of the earli­
est extant cast stone structures 
in the United States. 
Late 19th and 20th Century Devel opment 
The use of cast stone grew rapidly with the extraordinary 
development of the portland cement and concrete indus­
tries at the end of the 19th century. In the early decades of 
the 20th century, cast stone became widely accepted as an 
economical substitute for natural stone. It was sometimes 
used as the only exterior facing material for a building, but 
was more often used as trim on a rock-faced natural stone 
or brick wall (Fig. 6). In most early 20th century installa­
tions, cast stone was used for exterior window and door 
surrounds or lintels, copings, parapets and balustrades, 
banding courses, cornices and friezes, and sculptural orna­
ment. On occasion, decorative interiors were also finished 
with cast stone, although elaborate interior cornices and 
ornaments were more frequently fabricated of plaster. 
3 

Manufacture 
Manufacturers of cast stone used graded 
mixes of crushed marble, limestone, gran­
ite, and smelting slag to produce a variety
of stone effects. A light cement matrix 
with an aggregate of crushed marble 
could replicate limestone, while a mix of 
marble and small amounts of smelting 
slag would give the effect of white gran­
ite (Fig. 7). Some manufacturers added 
masonry pigments and varied colors on 
the faces of the stone to give a somewhat 
stylized effect of variegated sandstone. 
Each manufacturer prepared a variety of 
stock mixes as well. Not surprisingly, 
aggregates varied in different localities. 
In New York State, for example, crushed 
Gouverneur and Tuckahoe marbles were 
popular facing aggregates; in other areas, 
crushed feldspar or granite and even 
silica sand were commonly used. 
 
The two basic cast stone production sys­
tems were "dry tamp" and "wet cast." 
The dry tamp process employed a stiff, 
low-slump concrete mix that was pressed 
and compacted into the molds. The deco­
rative aggregate mix was frequently dis­
tributed only on the exterior facing of the 
cast units (typically 3 / 4" to 1 ½" thick), 
while the cores of the units were common 
concrete. Because of the stiff mix, dry 
tamp units required a relatively short 
period of time in the molds, which could 
then be used several times a day. After 
removal from the molds, the dry tamp 
units were often cured in steam rooms to 
assure proper hydration of the cement. 
The wet cast process, on the other hand, 
used a much more plastic concrete mix 
that could be poured and vibrated into 
the molds. This system used significantly 
more water in the mix, assuring proper 
hydration of the cement mix without 
elaborate curing, but requiring that the 
units be left in the molds for at least a 
day. Because of this method of fabrica­
tion, wet cast products necessarily dis­
tributed their decorative aggregate mix 
through the entire unit, rather than sim­
ply an outer facing. 
Concrete was cast in molds of wood, 
plaster, sand and, early in the 20th centu­
ry, even hide glue or gelatin, depending 
upon the production method, the intrica­
cy of the piece to be cast, and the number 
of units to be manufactured. Metal 
molds were sometimes used for stock 
ornamental items, less frequently for cus­
tom architectural work. When the units 
4 
Figure 7. A combination of crushed white 
marble and black smelting slag was frequently 
used to give the appearance of a "white gran­
ite". The hammered finish on this early twen­
tieth century cast stone would have been pro­
duced with a pneumatic chisel. 
were adequately hard, finish surfaces 
were worked to expose the decorative 
stone aggregate. When removed from 
the mold, wet cast units exhibit a surface 
film of cement paste, which must be 
removed to expose the aggregate. 
Partially cured units could be sprayed 
with water, rubbed with natural bristle 
brushes, etched with acid, or sandblasted 
to remove the cement layer. The surface 
of dry tamp products required less finish­
ing. 
High quality cast stone was frequently 
"cut" or tooled with pneumatic chisels 
and hammers similar to those used to cut 
natural stone (Fig. 9). In some cases, 
rows of small masonry blades were used 
to create shallow parallel grooves similar 
to lineal chisel marks. The results were 
often strikingly similar in appearance to 
natural stone. Machine and hand tooling 
was expensive, however, and simple 
molded cut cast stone was sometimes 
only slightly less costly than similar work 
in limestone. Significant savings could 
be achieved over the cost of natural stone 
when repetitive units of ornate carved 
trim were required. 
Finally, cast stone is sometimes used 
today to replace natural stone when the 
original historic stone is no longer avail­
able, or the greater strength of reinforced 
concrete is desired. Reinforced cast stone 
columns, for instance, are frequently 
used to replace natural stone columns in 
seismic retrofits of historic structures. 
Fine-grained stones, such as sandstones, 
may be very successfully replicated with 
cast stone. Coarse-grained granites and 
marbles with pronounced patterns or 
banding are, for obvious reasons, not so 
successfully matched with cast stone. 
The replacement of natural stone with 
cast stone requires careful attention to 
selection of fine aggregates and the pig­
mentation of the cementing matrix (Fig. 
8). Coarse aggregate, which is generally 
used in cast stone to control shrinkage 
and assure adequate compressive 
strength, can present an aesthetic prob­
lem if it is visible at the surface of cast 
stone elements which simulate sand­
stone. Careful control of aggregate sizes 
in the mix formulation can reduce this 
problem. 
Figure 8. For this column, the appearance of a "pink 
granite" was simulated by using a pinkish matrix 
with white and black aggregate. Erosion of a tinted 
matrix results in a significant lightening of the cast 
stone surface. 
Figure 6. Cast stone was commonly used for 
molded trim in conjunction with brick or natu­
ral stone. This brick building in Rochester, 
New York, uses cast stone for the entry sur­
round, and natural stone for unornamented 
window sills, thresholds, and water table units. 

Mechanisms and Modes of Deterioration 
The best historic cast stone can rival natural stone in longevity. Many quality cast stone installations from the first decades of 
the twentieth century are still in excellent condition, and require little repair. Like any other building material, however, cast 
stone is subject to deterioration, which may occur in several ways: 
• Separation of the facing and core layers 
• Deterioration of the aggregate 
• Deterioration or erosion of the cementing matrix 
• Deterioration of the iron or steel reinforcement 
• Deterioration of cramps and anchors used in its installation 
Separation of the Facing and Core Layers 
Separation of the facing and core layers of dry tamp units is not uncommon, and often reflects fabrication defects such as poor 
compactio n, lengthy fabrication time, or improper curing. Where separation of facing and core layers is suspected, cast stone 
units may be "sounded" to establish the extent of delamination. 
5 
Figure 9. Onondaga Litholite Company Catalog: (a) Section of Hand-Finishing Department. (b) Tooling 
machines are set up with a series of carborundum wheels that grind grooves into the surface of the stone (c) 
Pneumatic hammers are used to produce six or eight cut finish (d) Point Finish is put on with a single pointed 
chisel. Courtesy, collection of Michael F. Lynch

Figure 10. Scaling of cast stone units signals problems with the cementing 
mix and method of manufacture. Serious deterioration of cast stone, such as 
this, warrants replacement. 
Deterioration of the Aggregate 
Cast stone failure caused by deterioration of the aggregate 
is uncommon. Granites, marbles, and silica sand are gener­
ally durable, although limestone and marble aggregate are 
subject to the same dissolution problems that affect quar­
ried units of these stones. In rare instances, a reaction 
between the alkalis in the cement matrix and the stone 
aggregate may also cause deterioration. 
Figure 11. Erosion of the cementing 
matrix on the surface of cast stone is 
common in areas exposed to water 
runoff, such as window sills and cop­
ings. If no other deterioration is present, 
this condition does not warrant repair or 
replacement, but should be considered 
normal weathering. The unweathered 
surface at the left of this photograph 
shows the appearance of the original 
hammer-dressed finish. At right, the 
matrix has eroded, and the aggregate is 
much more prominent than on the 
unweathered surface. 
6 
Deterioration or Erosion of the Cementing Matrix 
While it is relatively uncommon in twentieth century cast 
stone, serious deterioration of the cementing matrix can 
cause extensive damage to cast stone units (Fig. 10 ). A 
properly prepared cementing mix will be durable in most 
exterior applications, and any flaking of exterior surfaces 
signals problems in the cementing mix and in the method 
of manufacture. The use of poor quality or improperly 
stored cement, impure water, or set accelerators can cause 
cement problems to occur years after a structure is complet­
ed. Improper mixing and compaction can also result in a 
porous concrete that is susceptible to frost damage and 
scaling. Severe cement matrix problems may be impossible 
to repair properly and often necessitate replacement of the 
deteriorating cast stone units. 
More common and less serious than flaking or scaling 
caused by deterioration of the cementing matrix is the ero­
sion of the matrix surface (Fig. 11). This usually occurs on 
surfaces of projecting features exposed to water runoff, 
such as sills, water tables, and window hoods. In these 
areas, the matrix may erode, leaving small grains of aggre­
gate projecting from the surface. The resultant rough sur­
face is not at all the intended original appearance. In some 
historic cast stone installations, the thin layer of cement and 
fine sand at the surface of the cast stone units was not origi­
nally tooled from the molded surface, but was finished 
with patterns of masonry pigments in a stylized imitation 
of highly figured sandstones or limestones (Fig. 12). 
Erosion of the pigmented surface layer on this type of cast 
stone results in an even more dramatic change in appear­
ance. 

Figure 12. Elaborate pigmentation of the cementing matrix sometimes gave a rather stylized or unnatural appearance to the finished cast stone (left). Texts state that 
effects like this were sometimes produced by drawing strings dipped in masonry pigments across the surface of the uncured units. Cast stone, such as this, has its col­
oration only at the outer surface of the stone, and was not intended to be brushed or tooled to expose the aggregate. Erosion of the cementing matrix of this type of 
cast stone, as seen on the base of the wall (right), will result in a significant alteration of appearance. 
Deterioration of the Iron or Steel Reinforcement 
During their original manufacture , unusuall y long and thin 
cast stone units , such as window sills or balustrade railings , 
and units requiring structural capacity, such as lintels, were 
generally reinforced with mild steel reinforcing bars. Large 
pieces sometimes had cable loops or hook s cast into them 
to facilitate handling and attachment. On occasion, this 
reinforcement and wire may be too close (less than 2") to 
the surface of the piece and rusting will cause spalling of 
the surface (Fig. 13). This frequentl y happen s to sills, cop­
ings, and water tables where repeated hea vy wetting lead s 
to loss of alkalinity in the concrete, allowing the reinforc e­
ment to rust. If damage from the deteriorating reinforce­
ment is extensive , as for instance , the splitting of a balu ster 
from the rusting of a central reinforcin g rod, the cast stone 
unit may require replacement. 
Deterioration of Cramps and Anchors 
Even when reinforcement has not been added to individual 
cast stone units, mild steel cramps may have been used to 
anchor a cast stone veneer to backup masonry. Where 
spalls have occurred primarily at the tops of ashlar or frieze 
units, this is generally the cause. 
Maintenance of Cast Stone Installations 
Cleaning 
Cast stone installations with marble or limestone aggre­
gates may sometimes be cleaned with the same alkaline 
pre-wash/ acid afterwash chemical cleaning systems used 
to clean limestone and other calcareous natural stones. If 
no marble or limestone aggregates are present, acidic clean­
ers, such as those used for natural granites and sandstones , 
may be used . In either case, dark particulate staining in 
protected areas may be persistent, however , and require 
experimentation with other cleaning methods. Some 
micro-abrasive cleaning techniques used under very con­
trolled circumstances by skilled cleaning personnel can be 
appropriate for removing tenacious soiling. Ordinary sand 
blasting or wet grit blasting can seriously damage the sur­
face of the cast stone and should not be used (Fig. 14). 
Figure 13. Rusting of reinforcement near the surface of the stone may result 
in spa/ling. S ections of reinforcement, such as this, may be cut out and the 
spall repaired with a matching composite mortar. 
7 

Figure 14. Sandblasting and wet grit blasting can seriously erode the surface 
and should not be used to clean cast stone surfaces. 
Early cast stone installations may have been constructed 
with natural cement mortars, but in late 19th century and 
20th century installations, cast stone units were generally 
bedded and pointed with mortars composed of portland 
cement, lime, and sand. When repointing or replacement 
of the historic mortar is required, a Type N mortar (about 
one part cement, and one part lime to six parts of sand) is 
generally appropriate. When repointing any historic 
masonry, it is important to match both the character and 
color of the sand and color of the cement matrix in the his­
toric mortar. Cement matrix color can often be adjusted by 
using combinations of white, "light," and gray portland 
cement in the mortar. 
Joints in historic cast stone installations can be quite thin 
and the dense mortar thus difficult to remove. 
Unnecessary repointing can cause significant damage to 
8 
historic cast stone. Cracked and open joints will most often 
be found on exposed features, such as balustrades and cop­
ings, and, of course, require repointing. When a hard and 
tenacious mortar was used in the original installation or a 
later repointing, the removal of the mortar can easily chip 
the edges of the cast stone units. 
While the careless use of "grinders" to remove mortar has 
damaged countless historic masonry buildings, a skilled 
mason may sometimes use a hand held grinder fitted with 
a thin diamond blade to score the center of a joint, and then 
remove the rest of the mortar with a hand chisel. If this 
method is not done carefully, however, wandering of the 
blade can widen or alter joints and cause significant dam­
age to the cast stone. Care must be taken to prevent dam­
age from over cutting of vertical joints by stopping blades 
well short of adjacent units. The use of small pneumatic 
chisels, such as those used to tool stone, can also work well 
for mortar removal, but even this method can cause chip­
ping to the edges of cast stone units if it is not done 
carefully. 
Methods of Repair 
Much historic cast stone is unnecessarily replaced when it 
could easily be repaired in situ, or left untreated. This is 
especially true of areas that exhibit isolated spalls from 
rusting reinforcement bars or anchorage, or installations 
where erosion of the matrix has left a rough surface of 
exposed aggregate. 
The weathering of cast stone, while different from that of 
natural stone, produces a patina of age and does not war­
rant large-scale replacement, unless severe cement matrix 
problems or rusting reinforcement bars have caused exten­
sive scaling or spalling. Severe rusting of reinforcement 
bars on small decorative features, such as balusters, may 
signal carbonation (loss of alkalinity) of the matrix. Where 
carbonation of the matrix has occurred, untreated reinforce­
ment will continue to rust. Replacement may be an accept­
able approach for exposed and severely deteriorated fea­
tures, such as hand railings, roof balustrades, or wall cop­
ings, where disassembly is unlikely to damage adjacent 
construction. Conversely, small areas of damage should 
generally be repaired with mortar "composites", or left 
alone. 
Re-securing Separated Surface Facing 
Where the decorative facing of dry tamped cast stone has 
separated from core layers, injected grouts may be used to 
re-secure the facing. Re-attachment of a separated facing 
layer may be time consuming, and should be undertaken 
by a conservator, rather than a mason (Fig. 15). This tech­
nique may be the best, most economical, approach for 
repair of figurative sculpture or unique elements that are 
not repeated elsewhere on a building. Theoretically, 
cementitious grouts are most appropriate for re-attaching 
separated facings, but hairline fissures may require the use 
of resin adhesives. Low-viscosity epoxies have been used 
Repointing 

for this purpose, and may be applied through small injec­
tion ports . Cracks that would allow the adhesive to leak 
must be repaired prior to injection , of course . Holes made 
for adhesive injection will require patching after re-attach­
ment is complete . 
Repairing Spall s from Rusting Reinforcement Bars and 
Mechanical Damage 
Drilled holes, mechanically damaged corners , and occasion­
al spalls from rusting reinforcement bars and anchorage are 
repairable conditions that do not warrant the replacement 
of cast stone. Small "composite " repairs to damaged 
masonry units can be made with mortar formulated to 
visually match the original material, and may be success­
fully undertaken by a competent and sensitive mason . If 
deterioration appears widespread, however , or if large sur­
face areas are spalling or cracking and replacement appears 
necessary, the owner may wish to consult a preservation 
architect or consultant to determine the cause of deteriora­
tion and to specify necessary repairs or replacement , as 
appropriate. 
The methods of composite repair used for stone masonry 
are also generally applicable for the repair of historic cast 
stone . For repairs to damaged cast stone to be successful , 
however, both the cement matrix color and the aggregate 
size and coloration must match that of the historic unit. 
Crushed stone and slag (such as "Black Beauty" abrasive 
grit), which are similar to many common traditional aggre-
gates, are widely available, although some additional 
crushing and/ or sieving may be necessary to obtain aggre­
gate of an appropriate size. Remember that half or more of 
a weathered surface is exposed aggregate, so careful aggre­
gate selection and size grading is extremely important for 
patching. Even differences in aggregate angularity 
(rounded pebbles vs. crushed stone) will be noticeable in 
the final repair. If more than one aggrega te was used in the 
cast stone, the ratio of the selected aggregates in the mix is, 
of course, equally important. Variation in coloring of the 
cement matrix may be achieved through the use of either 
white, "light, " or gray portland cement. If additional tint­
ing is required, only inorganic alkali-resistant masonry pig­
ments should be used. Because most historic cast stone 
was manufactured primarily from portland cement and 
aggregate (with a less than 15% lime/ cement ratio), it is not 
necessary to add large amounts of hydrated lime to cast 
stone composite repair mixtures. Small amounts of lime 
may be added for plasticity of the working mix. 
To repair a spall caused by deterioration of a ferrous rein­
forcement bar or anchorage, it is necessary to remove all 
cracked concrete adjacent to the spall; grind and brush the 
reinforcement to remove all rust and scale; and paint the 
metal with a rust-inhibiting primer prior to applying the 
cast stone composite . If the reinforcement bar is much too 
close to the surface of the stone, it may be advisable to cut 
out the deteriorating section of reinforcement after consul­
tation with a structural engineer. If deteriorating cramps 
are removed, it may be necessary to install new stainless 
steel anchorage . 
Figure 15. A delaminated l ayer of ornamental cast stone on the Orpheum Theater, San Francisco, California (1925), was successfully re-attached using epoxy. The 
multiple delivery ports for the epoxy are removed after treatment and the holes patched. Photo: David P Wessell. 
9 

10 
Composite Repair of Damaged Masonry Units 
Figure 16. The (a) damaged area is cut out to create a shallow void of even depth,½" or more. Undercutting the sides of the void may provide better adhesion 
while the composite is being applied. A small grinder fitted with n diamond blade may be used to prepare the void. (b) A range of aggregates matching those 
in the cast stone is required. Matching aggregate size and angularity is very important. Small spatulas and trowels are used for application of the composite. 
The aggregates are mixed to a ratio approximating that in the cast stone. (c) Matching the color of the cementing matrix may require numerous tests. Only 
small amounts are required for any one repair. Lime may be added to the mix for workability. (d) The composite mortar is applied to the void with a small 
spatula or trowel. An aggregate rich mix may not adhere properly, and it may be desirable to apply n more cement rich mix directly to the substrate. (e) The 
composite mix is pressed into the void, leaving the patch slightly proud of the surface. (f) The composite is struck flush with the adjacent surfaces. (g) Patting 
the patch with a moist sponge removes matrix and exposes the aggregate. (h) It may be desirable to impress additional aggregate into the surface of the patch 
to achieve a better match to s11rrounding surfaces. If so, the mix aggregate shouldbe crushed to a smaller size. Laying in larger aggregate may result in a 
mosaic appearance which does not match adjacent surfaces. (i) This completed composite repair could have been improved by brushingto remove the matrix 
residue at the edges of the repair before the surface cured. 

Where spalls have a feather edge, it will be 
necessary to cut back the repair area to a 
uniform depth (1/2" or more). As with 
natural stone composite repairs, a bonding 
agent may assist adhesion of the repair 
material to the original concrete. For 
unusually large or deep patches, mechani­
cal anchoring of the repair with small 
nylon or stainless steel rods may be 
required. If the adjacent cast stone is 
tooled or weathered, it will be necessary to 
scribe or brush the repaired area to give it 
a matching surface texture. Adding 
enough coarse aggregate to match adjacent 
original material will sometimes interfere 
with adhesion of the composite, and it 
may be necessary to press additional 
aggregate into the applied patch prior to 
finishing. If this is not skillfully done, 
however, the surface of the patch may take 
on a mosaic appearance. For this reason, 
it is advisable to undertake test composite 
repairs in an unobtrusive location first 
(Fig. 16). Figure 17. Unlike natural stone, cast stone generally may not be tooled in place to reduce lippage of 
uneven surfaces at joints. Tooling often exposes coarse aggregate from below the surface. 
Surface Refinishing 
While re-tooling deteriorated natural stone may sometimes 
be appropriate, restoring the original appearance of cast 
stone where surface erosion has occurred is difficult or 
impossible. Tooling or grinding of the cast stone surface 
may expose coarse aggregate and will not, in any case, 
restore original patterned pigmentation that has weathered 
away (Fig. 17). Silicate paints or masonry stains may be 
applied in patterns to replicate the original appearance, but 
may not be durable or completely successful aesthetically. 
Where matrix has eroded, it is advisable to accept the 
weathered appearance of the cast stone, unless extensive 
replacement is mandated by other factors. 
Because cast stone depends on exposed aggregate to 
achieve its aesthetic effect, the use of an applied cementi­
tious surface coating dramatically alters the visual effect of 
the material and is inappropriate as a cast stone repair tech­
nique. A cementitious surface coating can also trap mois­
ture in the cast units and cause surface spalling. 
Figure 18. Long or thin cast 
stone elements require rein­
forcement. When possible, 
reinforcemen.t of new cast 
stone should be made of stain­
less steel. 
11 

Figure 19. Molds for the replication of cast stone may be made 011 site using 
rubber materials and reinforcement. The molded profile of this window pedi­
ment will be used to run a plaster mockup, from which a production mold will 
be made. Photo: Michael Devonshire. 
Replacement of Historic Cast Stone 
Installations 
Individual cast stone units, which are subject to repeated 
wetting (such as copings, railings and balusters) and exhib­
it severe failure due to spalling or reinforcement deteriora­
tion, may require replacement with new cast stone (Fig. 18). 
Fortunately, a number of companies custom manufacture 
precast concrete units and can replicate deteriorated units 
in existing buildings (Fig. 19). The variables involved in 
manufacture are considerable, and it is wise to use a firm 
with experience in ornamental and custom work rather 
than a precast concrete firm which manufactures stock 
structural items, concrete pipe, or the like. Several trade 
organizations, including the Cast Stone Institute, the 
National Precast Concrete Association, and the 
Architectural Precast Association, have developed recom­
mendations and/ or guide specifications for the manufac­
ture of cast stone and precast concrete. These specifications 
set standards for characteristics such as compressive 
strength and water absorptivity, and discuss additives such 
as air entraining agents and water reducing agents, which 
influence the longevity of new cast stone. Trade references 
and guide specifications should be consulted before con­
tracting for replacement of historic cast stone. 
Fabrication Defects in New Cast Stone 
While the cement matrix coloration and aggregate consider­
ations previously described require the most careful atten­
tion, project staff should also look for defects which are 
common to cast stone fabrication: 
Air bubbles. Small pits on the surface of the stone may form 
if the unit is not given adequate vibration to release 
trapped air during pouring. Bubbles can also be a problem 
12 
Figure 20. (top) After removal from the mold, new cast stone units are scrubbed, as shown, to 
remove surface paste and expose underlying aggregate, (middle) End cast pieces, such as 
columns or sculpture, may have numerous aur bubbles at the surface. (bottom) The holes on 
the surface of the casting are filled with a mortar similar to the concrete mix used to cast the 
element

Figure 21. Surface cracking 
may reduce the durability of cast 
stone units. Cracking is often 
problematic on reinforced ele­
ments with thin "necks," such 
as balusters, unless curing is 
carefully controlled. 
Surface cracking or checking. Overly wet mixes and insuffi­
cient moisture during curing can result in surface cracking 
of large castings, such as columns . Such cracking dramati­
cally reduces the durability of new cast stone. Small rein­
forced elements, such as baluster s, also frequently crack at 
thin "necks" in the castings (Fig. 21). 
Aggregate segregation. Cast stone formulations generally 
include a range of coarse aggregates (crushed stone) and 
fine aggregates (sand) (Fig. 22). When units are vibrated to 
assure compaction of the mix and liberate trapped air bub­
bles, coarse aggregates may begin to settle and separate 
from the paste of cement and sand. Aggregate segregation 
results in a visible concentration of coarse aggregate at one 
end of the casting. Segregation is more problematic when 
end casting long pieces, such as columns. 
Surface rippling or irregularity. Production 
molds for fabrication are often made of rub­
ber mold facings encased in larger "mother 
molds " of plaster and wood (Fig. 23). 
Vibration can loosen the rubber facing from 
the outer mold and result in rippling or 
irregularities on the surface of the finished 
casting (Fig. 24). Even when rippling is not 
noticeable, irregularity caused by mold 
movement can make it difficult to line up 
surfaces of adjacent units when assembling 
cast stone installations. 
Figure 22. Most cast stone formulations use a mixture of coarse and fine aggregates. Coarse aggregates 
are not usually as visible from the surface, but may settle in end cast pieces. 
Mold lines. Freestanding elements, such as 
columns, must be cast in two-part molds, 
which are separated to release the complet­
ed cast piece. If the mold parts do not join 
tightly, some leakage of cement paste will 
occur at the mold joint, resulting in a pro­
jecting line on the surface of the casting. 
This is generally tooled off before the cast­
ing completely cures. A mold line will be 
visible on the completed piece if the project­
ing material is not completely removed, or 
if the tooling at the mold line does not 
match the adjacent surface of the casting. 
Tooling at mold lines may also expose con­
trasting coarse aggregate beneath the sur­
face of the casting. 
13 
when end casting long items such as columns or railings, 
where it is difficult to vibrate bubbles away from the finish 
surface of the unit (Fig. 20). 

Other Considerations for Replacement of Cast Stone 
Several other considerations are worth noting when it is 
necessary to replace historic cast stone elements with 
matching new cast stone. 
Reinforcement. The alkalinity of new concrete generally pro­
vides adequate protection to steel reinforcement. In 
exposed areas where deterioration due to rusting of rein­
forcement has previously been a problem, however, the use 
of stainless steel reinforcement is recommended. 
Surface finishing. Post-fabrication surface toolingof new
cast stone is not currently common. Sandblasting 1s typi­
cally used to remove the surface film of cement and expose 
the aggregate. For replacement units replicating historic 
cast stone pieces in highly visible locations, it is sometimes 
possible to make a mold of a sound or repaired existing
piece to incorporate the original tooling in the casting pro­
cess. If the historic unit is too deteriorated to use as a pat­
tern, a plaster model may be made to replicate the dam­
aged piece. This is tooled to replicate the desired surface 
treatment or appearance, and a production mold is then 
made from the plaster model. 
Moist curing. Surface crystallization of soluble salts (efflo­
rescence) during curing may lighten the surface of some 
precast units, especially those simulating darker _stone. 
Some manufacturers use a series of wet/ dry curmg cycles 
or washing with acetic acid to remove soluble salts that 
might otherwise discolor finished surfaces. For most wet
cast products, simple moist curing under a plastic cover 1s 
sufficient. 
14 
Figure 23. Production molds (left) made 
of durable rubbers backed with wood and 
plaster supports are used to fabricate new 
cast stone. Production molds may be 
made from original elements which have 
been repaired with epoxies and plaster, or 
from new plaster mockups. (below) 
Appropriateness of Glass Fiber Reinforced 
Concrete as a Replacement Material 
Light-Weight Alternative 
Glass fiber reinforced concrete (GFRC) is more and more 
frequently encountered in building rehabilitation and is 
used to replicate deteriorated stone and cast stone, and 
even architectural terra cotta (Fig. 25). This is a relatively 
new material that uses short chopped strands of glass fiber 
to reinforce a matrix of sand and cement. GFRC has 
become a popular low-cost alternative to traditional precast 
concrete or stone masonry for some applications. 
Fabricators use a spray gun to spray the mortar-like mix 
into a mold of the shape desired. The resulting concrete 
unit, typically only ¾" thick, is quite rigid, but requires a 
metal frame or armature to secure it to the building sub­
strate. The metal frame is joined to the GFRC unit with 
small "bonding pads" of GFRC. 
GFRC has a dramatic advantage over traditional precast 
concrete where the weight of the installation is a concern, 
such as with cornices or window hoods. Many cast stone 
mixes can successfully be replicated with GFRC. Where it 
is used to simulate natural stone, GFRC, like cast stone, is 
most appropriate for simulation of fine-grained sandstones 
or limestones. 

Not for Use in Load Bearing Applications 
Because the GFRC system is in effect a "skin," GFRC cannot 
be used for load bearing applications without provision of 
additional support. This makes it unsuitable for some 
tasks, such as replacement of individual ashlar units . It is 
also not appropriate for small freestanding elements, such 
as balusters, or for most columns, unless they are engaged 
to surrounding masonry or can be vertically seamed, which 
may significantly alter the historic appearance. GFRC units 
must also allow for expansion and contraction , and are gen­
erally separated by sealant joints, not by mortar. A sealant 
joint may be unacceptable for some historic application s; 
however, substitution of GFRC for cast stone may be appro­
priate when an entire assembly, such as a cornice, roof 
dormer, or window hood, requires replacement. Great care 
must be taken when detailing a GFRC replacement for 
existing cast stone. 
Deterioration of GFRC 
Because it is a relatively new material, the long 
term durability of GFRC is still untested. When 
GFRC was first introduced, some installations 
experienced deterioration caused by alkaline sen­
sitivity of the glass fiber reinforcement. Alkali 
resistant glass is now used for GFRC manufac­
ture. Even when the GFRC skin is well manufac­
tured , however, the steel armature and bonding 
pad system used to mount the material is vulner­
able to damage from leakage at sealant joints or 
small cracks in wash surfaces. The use of galva ­
nized or stainless steel armatures , and stainless 
steel fasteners and bonding pad anchors is advis ­
able. 
Figure 25. Glass Fiber Reinforced Concrete (GFRC) is some­
times used to replicate deteriorated elements of cast or fine 
grained natural stone. Because the GFRC element is a rigid, but 
relatively thin shell, it must be supported and attached with an 
interior framework of steel. The attachment hardware inside this 
GFRC cartouche (left) will not be visible when the unit is 
installed (armature visible at right). Photos: Towne House 
Restorations, Inc. 
Summary 
Figure 24. Separation of an interior rubber mold 
from a plaster mother mold during casting may 
result in rippling or irregularity of the completed 
casting. 
Cast stone--a mixture of water, sand, coarse aggregate, and 
cementing agents--has proven over time to be an attractive 
and durable building material, when properly manufac­
tured. It gained popularity in the 1860s and, by the early 
decades of the 20th century, became widely accepted as an 
economical substitute for natural stone . Unfortunately, 
much historic cast stone is unnecessarily replaced when it 
could easily be repaired and preserved in situ, or left 
untreated. Appropriate repair of damaged units can 
extend the life of any cast stone installation. Because of the 
necessity of matching both matrix color and aggrega te size 
and ratio, conservation projects which involve repair or 
replication of cast stone should allow adequate lead time 
for the assembly of materials and the preparation of test 
samples . Understanding which conditions require repair, 
which warrant replacement, and which should be accepted 
as normal weathering is key to selecting the most appropri­
ate approach to the protection and care of historic cast 
stone. 
15 

Selected Reading 
Childe, H.L. Manufacture and Uses of Concrete Products and Cast Stone, 
London: Concrete Publications Limited, 1930. 
Jester, Thomas C., ed., Twentieth Century Building Materials, New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill, 1995. 
Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute , Architectural Precast Concrete, 
2nd ed., Chicago, Illinois: Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute, 1989. 
Whipple, Harvey, Concrete Stone Manufacture, Detroit: Concrete­
Cement Age Publishing Company, 1918. 
Acknowledgements 
Helpful Organizations 
Cast Stone Institute 
10 West Kimball Street 
Winder, GA 30680-2535 
National Precast Concrete Association 
10333 North Meridian Street, Suite 272 
Indianapolis, IN 46290 
Architectural Precast Association 
P.O. Box 08669 
Fort Myers, FL 33908-0669 
Kay D. Weeks, Heritage Preservation Services, National Park Service (NPS), served as project director and general editor. The author wishes to thank 
Alan Barr of Towne House Restorations, Inc., Ron Moore of Western Building Restoration, architect Theo Prudon , and conservator David Wessell of 
the Architectural Resources Group for their assistance in the preparation and review of this brief. Chuck Fisher and Anne Grimmer, Technical
Preservation Services, NPS, offered valuable comments during its development. MJM Studios provided access for photography of cast stone fabrica­
tion. Michael F. Lynch, Vice President, SPNEA, and Michael Devonshire, Principal, Jan Hird Pokorny Associates, generously lent images from the per­
sonal collections for the Brief. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interior to 
develop and make available information concerning historic properties. Comments about this publication should be directed to: Chuck Fisher, 
Technical Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, NC-200, Washington, DC 20240. 
<www2.cr.nps.gov / tps> This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and 
the National Park Service are appreciated. Unless otherwise noted, all photographs in the brief are by Richard Pieper. The photographs used in this 
publication may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 
16 
September 2001 