46 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
The Preservation and Reuse of 
Historic Gas Stations 
Chad Ran dl 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Unless your tank is empty, gasoline stations rarely 
attract attention. Yet, for the past hundred years gas 
stations have occupied prime locations on main street s 
and suburban corners, on small town roads, and 
along early highways. They are one of America's most 
common commercial building types and are emblematic 
of the twentieth century. Surviving historic stations are 
physical reminders of the transportation revolution and 
the influence of increased mobility on the landscape. 
They are a reflection of car culture, pop culture, 
corporate standardization , and an era of customer 
service that today seems quaint. 
Many of these now historic gas stations are deteriorating 
or abandoned (Fig. 1). Changing land use patterns have 
concentrated new development along commercial strips 
beyond the downtown and neighborhood locations 
where many historic stations survive. Interstates have 
routed traffic away from once-thriving gas stations on 
what are now secondary roads. Small buildings and 
small lots, unresolved environmental issues, and a 
relentless push for standardization are all challenges to 
the continuing use of historic gas station properties. 
Across the United States, however, gas stations are 
slowly being rediscovered for their historic significance. 
They have even been included on statewide endangered 
property lists. Once spumed as out of place incursions 
or eyesores, historic stations are increasingly appreciated 
for their contribution to the character of a neighborhood, 
and the way they are easily adapted for new uses. This 
Preservation Brief provides guidance on assessing the 
significance of historic gas stations and encourages 
their preservation by providing information on the 
maintenance and repair of existing structures . This Brief 
also describes appropriate rehabilitation treatments, 
including conversion for new functions 
when the historic use is no longer feasible. 
The unique features and characteristics 
that define historic gas stations can be 
respected and preserved through sensitive 
maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation. 
Such work minimizes unnecessary 
alterations and ensures that the building 
continues to contribute to the character 
and vitality of its community. 
Historical Background 
For early motorists, refueling was rarely 
convenient and often dangerous. At bulk 
depots on the edge of town, gasoline 
was transferred from large storage tanks 
to smaller glass or metal dispensers 
and then poured by hand. With the 
increasing availability of the motor car 
and the 1905 invention of the gas pump, 
Figure 1. Abandoned historic gas stations have in the past been viewed as a hindrance to 
the redevelopment of a neighborhood or community. Yet sensitive rehabilitations can ensure 
that the historic character of these buildings is preserved while providing for an economic 
reuse. This 1930s station in Milwaukee, WI, was later rehabilitated for use as a coffee shop. 
Photo: Robert Olin, Sherman Perk. 
1 

2 
car dealers, grocery stores, hardware 
stores, and other businesses contracted 
with refiners, installed pumps out 
front, and sold gas along the curbside 
(Fig. 2). Soon, the dramatic increase in 
car ownership led oil companies and 
entrepreneurs to introduce what we now 
commonly refer to as gas stations. Over 
the next hundred years, the gas station 
took many forms reflecting the ebb 
and flow of popular design trends, the 
growth of the petroleum industry, and a 
procession of new services and formats, 
from car washes to mini-marts. Though 
the evolution of gas station forms seen 
throughout this history is quite varied, 
a number of general types have been 
identified.
1 
Historic Gas Station Types 
Figure 3. This shed-type station with its prefabriated steel panels, pump island, and 
canopy prefigured many later gas station designs. Photo: American Petroleum Institute 
Photograph and Film Collection, Archives Center, National Museum of American 
History, Smithsonian Institution. 
Shed-Type Stations. Detached structures built 
specifically for the sale of gasoline appeared during 
the second decade of the twentieth century in an effort 
to meet the petroleum demand generated by the Ford 
Model T and other affordable automobiles. In the initial 
race to expand, companies and independent operators 
constructed basic sheds to serve as drive-in filling 
stations. Many were rudimentary frame shacks with 
wood or corrugated metal exteriors. More substantial 
designs featured prefabricated metal panels, industrial 
steel windows, and some limited ornament. In either 
case, the shed was a utilitarian building used for storage 
and office space, and to shelter the station attendant. 
Pumps were placed immediately adjacent to the 
structure or separated on the lot by a driveway where 
cars parked to refuel (Fig. 3). 
Figure 2. Although hardly an ideal sales system, pumps and 
underground tanks along the curb were an improvement over 
the earliest filling stations where gasoline was poured from 
hand containers. Photo: Utah State Historical Society, used by 
permission, all rights reserved. 
Multiple Use Stations. While shed stations were often 
located in central business districts, it was common 
in rural areas to see gas stations appended to existing 
structures. Businesses such as restaurants, inns, 
repair garages, oil depots, and general stores with 
gas pumps out front were an extension of the original 
urban curbside gas stands (and precursors to late­
twentieth century convenience store and rest stop-gas 
station combinations). Compared with earlier curbside 
stands, multiple use stations usually had ample land to 
accommodate separate drive-in spaces for cars to park 
while filling up-an especially important feature on 
higher speed rural roads. 
Some of these early multiple use stations had the gas 
retail function located within the existing structure; in 
other cases, a separate shed or house-type station was 
constructed on the site. Canopies were an increasingly 
common feature, extending over the refueling area to 
shelter the attendant and parked car. Soon canopies 
came to serve as large signifiers that the otherwise 
nondescript establishment was a gas station. 
House-Type Stations. By the early 1920s, oil companies, 
distributors, and private entrepreneurs were building 
new stations on spacious and prominent sites in 
established residential neighborhoods and in growing 
communities. As business increased, so did local 
complaints about the intrusion of gas stations into 
residential areas. 
In response the industry adopted conventional forms 
to make their stations look less like shacks and more 
like houses. Often with larger customer areas, and 
increasingly providing public bathrooms and service 
bays for car maintenance and repair, these stations were 
more substantial structures than earlier ones. Some 
were unassuming with simple clapboard siding, wood 
sash windows, and a pitched (often hipped) roof. The 

Programmatic gas stations could 
be very modest in size with a shape 
given over entirely to the object 
depicted . Shell Oil Company built 
a number of stations that were little 
more than sheds in the shape of 
their logo, the pec ten seashell (Fig. 
5). Colonial Beacon stations in New 
York State featured three-story 
lighthouses attached to otherwise 
unexceptional house-style stations. 
Equally peculiar, though generally 
more conventional in form, were 
the custom-built gas stations faced 
with unusual materials such as 
locally-ob tained cobblestones, 
petrified wood, or driftwood. 
Figure 4. Designs based on popular domestic forms helped stations blend in with residential 
neighborhoods while imparting a sense of stabilihJ and permanence. This Tudor Revival station 
was converted for use as a repair shop with virtually no change to the structure or site. 
Box-Type Stations. Departing 
notably from elaborate revival style 
stations, a new form appeared in 
the early 1930s, the box station. 
Blending Art Moderne and 
International Style motifs, box 
stations featured flat-roofs and 
unadorned exteriors of stucco, terra 
only clues that such structures were gas stations were 
the pumps, a sign, and the increasingly popular canop y 
linking the pump island and the building . 
Other stations reflected the period re vival trend popular 
in residential architecture at the time. Colonial Revival 
gas stations sheathed in brick with white columns , 
pilasters, double-hung windows, and cupolas were 
common . Tudor and Engli sh Cottage designs featuring 
casement windows, arched door opening s, and steepl y­
pitched roofs were also popular ( Fig. 4). Mission 
Revival stations with hipped roof s and stucco walls w ere 
developed by some companie s, while other s adapted 
Asian pagoda and temple form s. 
The move toward the house-type station wa s also a 
sign of growing competition within the oil industry as 
businesses worked to garner customer trust and loyalty . 
Companies developed distinctive brands and signatur e 
building forms. Pure Oil, for example was well-
known for its English Cottage stations , while Standard 
Oil favored Colonial Revival designs . The effort to 
develop iconic signage and stations foreshadowed all­
encompassing branding campaigns that dominated ga s 
station design later in the century. 
Programma tic Stations. During the 1920s and 30s and 
continuing after World War II, some gas stations showed 
a marked contrast to the predominant shed , house, and 
later box designs. Called programmatic architecture, 
these stations assumed the fanciful shape of animals, 
apples, tea kettles, tepees, windmills , castles, icebergs, and 
airplanes. Appealing to the curiosity of passing motori sts, 
programmatic stations were inspired b y local culture, 
distincti ve local materials, or the whim of the owner. 
cotta, porcelain enamel steel, or structural glass panels . 
With their glossy white exteriors and scientifically­
designed lighting schemes, box stations were meant to 
attract attention . 
These stations reflected the increasing importance 
petroleum companies placed on standardization and 
predictability. As with earlier house-type stations, 
companies introduced variations intended to provide 
designs with a visual identity that customers could 
easily associate with a particular brand. The use of 
glass and porcelain enamel presented a futuristic image 
of modern efficienc y, cleanliness, and professionalism . 
Texaco, Socony, and Gulf, among others, relied on 
these up -to-date bo x forms because they were easily 
replicated , were relatively low maintenance, and 
Figure 5. This 1936 Shell station in Winston-Salem, NC, is an 
example of a programmatic design, meant to attract attention and 
stick in the customer's mind. It was recently rehabilitated to serve 
as a field office for Preservation North Carolina. Photo: Preservation 
North Carolina. 
3 

4 
Understanding Significance 
Although form and decoration 
vary, most historic gas stations 
share a number of features that 
help define their character . These 
features can identify a particular 
structure as belonging to a common 
gas station type, like the clinker 
bricks used on Tudor house-type 
designs. Alternately, features 
may accentuate the uniqueness of 
a particular structure, such as a 
custom roof design or circular plan. 
Some features were highly unusual 
when first adopted, later became 
unexceptional, and today are once 
again rare and distinctive. A prime 
example is the V-shaped canopy 
found on postwar Phillips 66 gas 
stations (Fig. 8). 
Figure 6. Box-h;pe stations often incorporated Art Moderne forms such as this design's rounded 
corners, stripes, and large sales windows. Photo: American Petroleum Institute Photograph and 
Film Collection, Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution. 
functioned as elegant, yet affordable showcases for 
their products. 
The form and layout of box stations were also 
influenced by current economic conditions. Pushed 
during the Great Depression to explore other revenue 
streams, station owners added service and repair bays 
(emphasizing the characteristic rectangular footprint 
of box stations) as well as expanded sales areas to 
market lucrative car tires, batteries, and accessories. 
Large display windows and glazed service bay doors 
highlighted these products and services (Fig. 6). 
Styliz ed Boxes. After World War II, the rectangular 
box remained the primary American gas station 
form . Structurally, most postwar box stations were 
made of concrete block rather than the steel frames 
common among prewar box stations. To distinguish 
their establishments from others down the street, 
owners and companies began to vary this basic form 
as well as retrofit existing box stations to incorporate 
contemporary design trends. Display windows 
were often canted at an angle reminiscent of the tail 
fins sported by rockets and new automobiles. New 
canopies featured raking profiles, folded plate roofs, 
and boomerang-shaped supports reflecting a popular 
interest in aeronautics and high technology. 
Such space-age designs were relatively short lived . As 
in the past, changing architectural tastes and public 
complaints about the incompatibility of gas stations 
with their residential neighbors led station owners 
back to more conservative approaches. By the 1960s 
new stations with gently sloping shingled roofs, 
brick and stone facades, and period revival details 
appeared on what remained essentially rectangular box 
forms . Existing modern box designs were retrofitted 
with traditional features and ornament, fabricated 
increasingly of aluminum or molded-plastic (Fig. 7). 
Historic features that contribute to the character of a 
gas station should be preserved. Features that may not 
be original can, if they remain in place for a sufficient 
period, acquire significance. It is necessary, therefore, 
to determine not only how a structure appeared 
when first constructed, but how it changed over time. 
Understanding the history and evolution of a particular 
gas station and identifying its important characteristics 
are the first steps in any rehabilitation project. Archival 
photographs, original plans, newspaper clippings, 
personal scrapbooks, records, and reminiscences, as well 
as surviving physical evidence, can provide information 
about a building's earlier appearance. Informed 
decisions about reconciling new functions with the 
retention of historic features, and about the possible 
removal of later additions, can only be made after 
important features are identified and understood. 
Figure 7. During the 1960s existing box stations were often 
remodeled and new stations were designed with Colonial Revival 
or Ranch house details. Photo: American Petroleum Institute 
Photograph and Film Collection, Archives Center, National Museum 
of American History, Smithsonian Institution. 

Form. A gas station's structural form is of central 
importance. The outward appearance of a historic 
gas station-its size, shape, massing, and scale-often 
reflected a particular locale; it gives the historic 
property its identity; and contributes today to a public 
understanding of when and why it was constructed. 
Diminutive structures functioned as no-frills filling 
stations. Larger stations incorporating other services 
(some entirely unrelated to the automobile) suggested 
an ambitious effort to capitalize on a growing 
community or shifts in consumer demand. The 
character of the neighborhood and building lot often 
influenced the gas station designer's choice of size, 
architectural styling, or form; in some instances the 
introduction of the gas station then influenced how the 
neighborhood developed. 
Roof. The roof's configuration, pitch, and covering 
are also important (Fig. 9). Gas stations designed in 
the various Romantic revival styles popular during 
the first half of the 20th century often featured roofs 
that imitated historic forms. English Cottage stations 
featured slate roofs, while clay tiles (either rounded or 
flat and usually terracotta in color) appeared on the 
pitched roofs of Mission, Spanish, and Mediterranean 
Revival gas stations. The 1960s era Stylized Box 
stations with Ranch house detailing have shallow, often 
overlapping roof pitches central to the design. 
While some gas stations were defined, in part, by 
historicized roofs, others were characterized by the 
absence of a pitched roof. Flat roofs or very low-sloped 
roofs concealed behind parapets were common on 
both articulated contemporary designs, such as glass­
sheathed Streamline, Moderne, and International Style 
gas stations, as well as basic utilitarian boxes. 
Materials. Related to the gas station's outward form are 
the materials used to construct and finish it. Exterior 
materials and cladding help place the structure in a 
particular time period. Designers and owners selected 
finishes and building forms that they hoped would 
convey certain associations in the minds of customers. 
Figure 8. This former Phillips 66 gas 
station in Burlington, VT, sports a 
quintessential stylized box design. Its 
space age canopy is visible from Jar down 
the road. Photo: Devin A. Colman. 
Brick or stone suggested tradition, stability, and quality, 
while structural glass and porcelain enamel connoted 
up-to-date technology, cleanliness, and efficiency. Less 
distinguished materials could be adapted to a particular 
stylistic form-exposed concrete block was used on 
both Modernist and Colonial Revival gas stations. They 
could also reveal that the structure was built quickly in 
a strategic location to take advantage of existing traffic 
and anticipated growth. 
Windows and Doors. The casement windows on 
English Cottage stations and the wrap-around display 
glass and the steel sash used on side elevations of 
Streamline designs are examples of how windows 
can be integral to a gas station's historic character. As 
with other features, windows contribute to an overall 
architectural statement, help date the building to a 
particular period, and reflect the changing nature of 
the gas station. The large display windows that first 
became popular in the 1920s allowed owners to put 
lubricants and accessories on view while at the same 
time conveying the positive attributes of transparency 
and modern efficiency. Appearing between the World 
Wars, Colonial Revival stations with their double-hung 
and small divided-light windows presented a reassuring 
sense of tradition and dignity. 
Doors and entrances are likely to be significant, 
especially those on primary elevations. Perhaps the 
most important openings found on historic gas stations 
are the service bay doors. Surviving gas stations from 
the early-twentieth century may still have their folding 
or sliding doors. The majority of historic stations, 
however, likely feature segmental doors that were 
guided by wheels set into tracks. When first introduced 
these overhead doors were largely wood. Successive 
door models featured more numerous and larger glass 
lights. By the postwar era, overhead metal doors with 
fully-glazed panels predominated. 
Interior Spaces . Whether they date from 1916 or 1965, 
basic gas station sheds often contained a single room. 
Other modest stations usually had a sales area that 
5 

6 
For a modest or nondescript station, the 
canopy may have been a dominating 
feature. Often the canopy functioned as 
both shelter and sign. Sweeping out across 
the filling aisles and corning to a sharp 
point, supported by an open web post or 
cantilevered to appear weightless, canopies 
worked to attract the attention of passing 
motorists and stand out on cluttered 
commercial strips. 
Signage. Gasoline is essentially a non­
differentiable commodity; customers 
rarely see it and rarely notice a difference 
from one brand to the next. To establish 
a recognizable identity, companies have 
long tied their products to specific logos 
and signs. Texaco's star, Shell's pecten, 
and Mobil's pegasus are well-known 
examples. Other symbols and lettering, 
from those found on defunct franchises to 
neighborhood establishments with names 
painted directly on the brick, are less 
familiar, but often have local significance. 
Logos, stripes, and other color schemes all 
worked to brand the structure and signal 
Figure 9. The dominant feature of this former gas station (1929) in Cedarburg, WI, is 
its pagoda-style metal tile roof (complete with upturned eaves and Japanese lanterns 
suspended from the cupola). The building currently functions as a jewelry store. Photo: 
Kenneth M. ltle, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
included product displays and a counter. Depending 
on the structure's size, additional rooms may have 
opened off of this space, including an office, restroom, 
storeroom, and boiler room. When separate restroom 
facilities were provided for both genders, entry 
to the 
ladies room was traditionally provided through an 
exterior door . Service bays were typically connected to 
the sales area and sized to accommodate the repair and 
maintenance of one to four cars at a time. These open 
spaces featured tire racks and built-in shelving to store 
tools and parts along the sides and rear. When hydraulic 
lifts replaced below-grade repair pits, new service bay 
heights increased accordingly. Over time, the sales floor 
area generally increased as owners realized the profit 
potential of products from windshield wiper blades to 
snacks and soda. 
A gas station's interior, including room partitions, 
decorative moldings, floor and ceiling surfaces, ceiling 
fixtures, and built-in furnishings like shelves and 
counters may contribute to the building's historic 
integrity. By understanding the structure's evolution 
and history of past alterations, existing interior features 
can be evaluated as to their relative significance. 
Canopies. Either self-supporting, or more commonly 
extending from the main building across to the pump 
island, canopies sheltered attendants, customers, and 
pumps from inclement weather. They also provided 
prominent space to emblazon with company names, 
colors, and logos. They embellished an otherwise 
nondescript block building and could carry over an 
aesthetic theme such as sculpted streamline curves or 
boomerang angles (Fig . 10). 
to passing motorists a desirable place to stop. When the 
station was a simple rectangular box, its signs were all the 
more important in attracting customers. 
Site. In addition to the main structure, historic gas station 
sites typically included free-standing signs, pump islands, 
driveways, parking areas, and landscape plantings . 
They may also have featured a detached repair garage 
(if it was not appended as the station's service bay) , 
other outbuildings (for car washes and other services), 
storage sheds, and distinctive lighting units. Gas stations 
along highways and at rural crossroads were often part 
of a larger setting that was home to similarly-themed 
restaurants, general stores, and occasionally motor lodges , 
inns , or cabin courts. 
Maintenance 
The significance of a historic gas station is derived not 
just from its form and appearance but also its physical 
make-up of historic materials. The best preservation 
strategy is one of continual maintenance and repair that 
takes into consideration the historic character of these 
materials and forestalls more significant intervention. 
Regular maintenance helps preserve these materials and 
extends their useful life. Most of the materials found on 
historic gas stations, from slate, tile, and even composition 
roofs, to brick, concrete, stone and wood siding walls , are 
common 
to countless other older buildings. 
Whether dealing with a house, store, office, or gas station, 
a primary maintenance priority is to prevent unwanted 
water infiltration and the damage that can result. This 

includes making sure exterior joints in wood and 
masonry walls are properly sealed and that the roof is 
maintained. Gutters and downspouts should be cleaned 
regularly and kept in sound working condition. Another 
common maintenance principle especially relevant to 
gas stations is that historic building materials should 
be cleaned using the gentlest means possible. When 
considering chemical cleaners, first test the product's 
effect on a small inconspicuous location of the building. 
Harsh, abrasive cleaners should be avoided. Regular 
repainting of wood that is exposed to the weather, 
such as doors and windows is a well-established, cost­
effective maintenance principle. 
Box-type stations built between the 1930s and the 1960s 
were often finished with distinctive panels that deserve 
special attention. Porcelain enamel and structural glass 
wall panels originally offered the promise of durability 
and low maintenance as they purportedly were easily 
Figure 10. The canopies on this 1936 gas station in Shamrock, 
Texas, are both functional and integral features of the station's 
overall design. This building was recently converted for use by the 
local Chamber of Commerce, partially with FHWA Transportation 
Enhancements funding assistance. Photo: Mark Trew Photograpy. 
cleaned and never required repainting. However, 
these walls can be damaged by impact, harsh cleaning 
methods, and infrequent maintenance of the joints 
between panels. 
Repair 
As with maintenance procedures, the repair treatments 
prescribed for historic gas stations are in most respects 
the same as for any historic structure. Such work may 
include incidental repairs to fix weather or impact 
damage, or may be part of a larger rehabilitation 
project. (An overview of common repairs undertaken 
as part of a rehab project is also included in the 
Rehabilitation Considerations section of this 
Preservation Brief) Appropriate repairs to a historic gas 
station adhere to the following guidance. 
1) Deteriorated historic features should be repaired rather 
than replaced where possible. The historic integrity 
of a gas station is embodied not only in its design 
but also in its material. Whether exhibiting special 
craftsmanship, innovative uses of materials, or 
mass-produced products, the building fabric helps 
convey the history of the building. The visibility and 
significance of a building feature that is deteriorated 
will influence decisions as to repair or replacement. 
While repairing historic fabric is recommended over 
replacement, there are features such as flat composition 
roofs where visibility is not an issue and thus repair or 
replacement decisions can be based largely on service 
life, extent of deterioration, and cost. Alternately, a tile 
roof on a Mission Style station will be readily visible. 
The cost of replacing that deteriorated roof with tile 
may not be financially practical for a particular project 
and alternatives such as asphalt shingles will not 
match the historic appearance. Fortunately in most 
instances, tile roofs can be repaired and the service life 
of the historic roofing extended. 
2) Part of the character of any historic property is that 
it shows age. Small dents in tin ceilings and worn 
door edges are simply a reflection of use and often 
do not require intervention. A larger hole in a tin 
ceiling or a broken panel in a door can be corrected 
without replacing the historic fabric . Marine epoxy 
can be successfully used on metal ceilings to fill holes 
resulting from former light fixtures or ceiling fans, 
while a good carpenter can easily replace broken 
panels on a historic wood door . 
3) When undertaking repair work on a historic gas station, 
contractors or craftsmen experienced with historic materials 
and work on older buildings should be selected. From 
masonry repainting and tin ceiling repair to work 
involving more specialty material such as plastic 
molded panels and porcelain enamel and structural 
glass panels, selecting the right contractor will save 
money in the long run and more importantly will help 
insure that the work will be appropriately done. 
7 

-----
8 
Figure 11. The porcelain enamel facade of this former Texaco station 
(1960) had numerous dents and scratches that had exposed the 
steel beneath the enamel to deterioration (top). Rehabilitation work 
included repairing localized damage to the panels and blending 
patched areas to match adjacent historic material, replacing sleepers 
beneath the panels (center), replacing severely damaged panels 
with like material, and recaulking the joints (bottom). Photos: John 
Vaughan, Architectural Conservation Services. 
Porcelain enamel offers a good example of some of the 
problems and the level of skill and experience that may be 
required when repairing historic materials (Fig. 11). Spot 
repairs of damage (drill holes, impact damage) to these 
types of manufactured panels are challenging. Because 
the original glass-like finish was baked on at a high 
temperature, it is hard to adhere filler and paint to the 
enamel surface; blending new material with the original 
surface color is particularly difficult. The preferred, 
least intrusive, approach is to remove any rust, fill any 
depressions with a marine epoxy filler, prime, and repaint 
the surface with a high-quality glossy enamel. This paint 
coating will likely require a renewed treatment after some 
years. More severe damage may require replacement 
with a salvaged or newly fabricated panel. Where panels 
are loose or select ones need replacement, care should be 
taken during disassembly as they often are supported by 
an attachment system that requires a specific sequence of 
removal and reinstallation. 
Rehabilitation 
"Rehabilitation" is "the process of returning a property 
to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which 
makes possible an efficient contemporary use while 
preserving those portions and features of the property 
which are significant to its historic, architectural, and 
cultural values." Gas station operators may feel the need 
to upgrade 
their historic property to compete with newer 
stations. Or owners may stop selling gas and convert 
the site for traditional gas station reuse activities, from 
auto repair (exclusively) to used car sales. Some historic 
stations may be converted to an entirely new commercial, 
office, or other use. Photographs from the 1930s and 
40s show new businesses established in a variety of gas 
station types (Fig. 12). Rehabilitation projects with these 
three intended outcomes: continuing use, traditional 
reuse, and unrelated new use, in that order, generally call 
for increasing degrees of alteration of the historic station. 
2 
Continuing Use. Historic gas stations are characterized 
not only by their architecture but also by their function -
servicing automobiles and providing fuel for their use. 
Thus from a historic preservation perspective, retaining 
that function is nearly always the best use of a gas station. 
Continuing the same function can also reduce the need 
to alter the structure, and often avoid a host of issues 
encountered when introducing a new use. 
Gas station owners are engaged in a highly competitive 
business with considerable pressure to update, 
"modernize," and incorporate current marketing trends. 
Large franchises and petroleum suppliers have in recent 
years shown little interest in tradition and the historic 
qualities of older stations. However, an increasing 
number of individual owners of older stations have 
not only acknowledged the historic importance of their 
properties but have also taken steps to maintain and 

Figure 12. Gas stations have a long history of reuse (and 
abandonment and reuse again). By 1942 this gas station in Tulsa, 
OK, was already being reused as a bar. At one time the front 
island shed (on the left) functioned as a locksmith's shop but was 
vacant at the time of the photo. Photo: Library of Congress, Prints 
and Photographic Di vision, LC-USW3-9523-D. 
rehabilitate them in ways sensitive to the features that 
make them distinct (Fig. 13). Drawing upon customer 
loyalty, good service, and fair prices, as well as favorable 
locations, such operators have found successful ways to 
do business when faced with such potential limitation s 
as small lot sizes, more traditional building interior 
plans, and a less flashy contemporary look. They 
help distinguish their businesses by using history as 
an attractive quality. Appealing to the nostalgia of 
consumers they retain old signs (in combination with 
necessary new signage) and emphasize good building 
maintenance as a reflection of good car maintenance . 
Even the continuing use of a gas station for its original 
function is accompanied by change-from periodic 
reworking of standardized petroleum signs to the 
current emphasis on larger canopies. Alterations are 
often the result of shifting relationships betwee n station 
Figure 13. Essentially unchanged since its construction in 1950, 
this service st ation in Canisteo, NY, is current ly owned and 
operated by the son of the original owner. Photo: Debra 
Jane Seltzer. 
operators and petroleum suppliers, shifts hastened 
by the trend to mega mergers among the petroleum 
industry and the rush to rebrand their station outlets. 
Accommodating larger sales areas, especially for 
food and carry-outs, has been a challenge confronting 
the operators of surviving historic stations. Various 
approaches have been used including placing an 
addition on a secondary elevation, or introducing an 
expanded sales area in one or more of the service bays. 
Traditional Reuse. As in the past, it is common for 
vacant gas stations to be adapted for use by car-related 
businesses. Such traditional reuses often require only 
minimal alterations to the building and site. When 
an owner decides to discontinue the sale of gasoline 
and concentrate on auto maintenance and repair using 
the existing service bays, the only requisite change 
may be to remove the pump island. Gas stations are 
easily converted to used car dealerships . The stations' 
lucrative corner lots provide parking space and visibility, 
and their existing sales areas are converted to office 
space with just a change in furnishings. A more recent 
trend has been for historic stations to be reused for car 
rental franchises, again requiring only modest changes 
to the existing structure. 
New Reuse. Historic gas stations have shown in the 
past to be attractive properties for new uses unrelated to 
automobiles. The combination of dearly-defined sales 
areas and larger, more open unfinished service bays 
make historic stations easily adaptable to a variety of 
functions. In many cases, their locations on intersections 
and along busy streets remain attractive for commercial 
use. They are often ideal, aHordable sites for start-up 
businesses (Fig . 14). 
Successful rehabilitation projects have converted historic 
stations for use as restaurants, cafes, bakeries, medical 
supply stores, antique shops, visitor centers, and offices 
Figure 14. Abandoned gas stations make ideal homes for star t-up 
businesses. In 1978 the first Ben and Jerry's Scoop Shop opened 
in a converted station in Burlington, VT. Photo: Ben & Jerry's 
Homemade, Inc. 
9 

10 
Gas Station Restoration Projects 
A gas station restoration project depicts the form , 
features, and character of a building as it appear ed 
at a particular period of time. Restorations involv e 
removal of features from other periods in the 
station's history and reconstruction of missing 
features from the restoration period. The limited 
and sensitive upgrading of mechanical , electrical , 
and plumbing systems and other code-required 
work to make properties functional is appropriate 
within such a project. In recent years a number of 
gas stations have been restored for various uses . 
Occasionally, the property continues to operate a s 
a gas station. It is increasingly popular to restor e 
gas stations for use as museums or history center s, 
with exhibits on the station's history, the history of 
a local community or that of an important adjacent 
highway. Surviving remnants of historic roads 
like Route 66 feature gas stations bypassed by 
the interstate system that are now restored and 
patronized by tourists and the local community. 
These restored gas stations often become popular 
attractions and outdoor meeting places, especiall y 
for classic car fans and motorcycle enthusiasts. 
Depending on the new use, some restoration s 
are complete down to the installation of historic 
(replica or rebuilt) pumps, signage, and even period 
products on the sales area shelves . Others have 
involved a physical restoration of the exterior and 
interior, but utilize the sales area as a museum or 
office for a local organization. 
This 1932 Standard Oil Filling Station , located on th e 
original Route 66 in Odell, IL, wa s purchased by th e town 
and restored by Odell Touri sm and Community D evelopment 
Board, the Route 66 Preservation Committ ee of Illinois and 
many other volunteer s and contributors. It fun ctions as a 
museum and visitor center . Photo: John and Lenore Weiss 
and the Route 66 Preservation Committe e of lllinois. 
for local business organizations and non-profit groups. 
Service bays have been converted to art galleries, photo 
studios, seating areas for restaurants, and open office 
space. Some stations have even been rehabilitated 
for residential use. As gas stations are increasingly 
recognized as historically significant in their own right, 
the need to preserve important features of the historic 
design when adapting the property to new functions 
has received greater attention. 
Rehabilitation Considerations 
There are several considerations common to historic 
gas station rehabilitation projects regardless of whether 
the structure undergoes a change in use. Well-planned 
rehabilitation projects are built upon a documented 
understanding of the property's history combined 
with an assessment of its significant surviving historic 
features-some of which have been discussed in the 
Understanding Significance section. A rehabilitation 
should be designed so that it preserves the important 
characteristics of the gas station, and avoids damage or 
unnecessary removal of historic features or materials. 
Exterior. Retaining the form of a historic gas station is 
an important component of any preservation project. 
This is especially true of early shed stations and 
unusually-shaped programmatic designs that derive 
much of their significance from their form. The latter 
can be particularly difficult to alter sensitively without 
diminishing their historic significance. Throughout a 
rehabilitation project, modest structures should remain 
modest; box-shaped buildings should remain boxes, 
and extended, rectangular structures should retain 
their shape. 
On many larger gas stations it may be possible to 
construct a modest addition as part of a reuse project. 
Successful additions are appended to secondary 
elevations, preferably the rear. Such additions should 
be smaller and no taller than the existing structure, 
be compatible with the original gas station's shape, 
and be similar yet distinguishable from the historic 
construction. Enclosing the outside area beneath 
the canopy with solid or glazed walls as a means of 
obtaining additional interior space will significantly 
alter the character of the property and should not be 
undertaken. 
It is recommended that surviving historic roofs that 
are highly visible be repaired, and when necessary 
replaced, using the same material. In some cases, 
new roof products that accurately replicate the 
color, texture, shape, size, thickness, and profile of 
historic tiles and shingles may be suitable for use 
as replacements. Asphalt shingles are rarely an 
appropriate substitute for historic clay tiles or for slate 
or wood shingles where the roof is a distinctive feature 
of the building's design. An addition with a pitched 

roof would not be compatible with a historic flat-roofed 
Modernist or utilitarian structure. 
Sensitive rehabilitation projects favor historic window 
repair rather than replacement whenever possible. Gas 
station windows traditionally were made of wood, steel, 
and later, aluminum. Excepting sheet glass display 
windows, they usually featured operable sash. Wood 
and steel windows may require repair work beyond 
painting and reglazing. Repairs to damaged wood 
members (sill, frame, sash, or muntin) are typically 
undertaken by an experienced carpenter utilizing 
a wood dutchman or, where appropriate, through 
application of a wood epoxy treatment. Steel windows 
can often be repaired as well. It may be necessary to 
replace one or more windows either because they are too 
deteriorated to be repaired or because they are second 
generation windows that are incompatible with the 
building's historic character. A new stock window may 
be acceptable on a rear elevation provided the window is 
sized to fit the existing opening. Windows that require 
replacement on the front and prominent side elevations 
obviously require more attention to historic detail, 
carefully matching the design, shape, and appearance of 
the historic units. 
Doors to the sales office, service area, and restrooms 
entered from the outside were made of either wood or 
metal (steel and later aluminum) . Methods for repairing 
historic doors again follow traditional carpentry or 
metalwork methods. Often the existing doors are not 
original. If they need to be replaced, new doors should 
be compatible with the historic character of the building. 
Where the historic door opening is not a standard size, a 
custom door can be made to fit rather than blocking the 
opening to fit a stock door (see the discussion of ADA 
requirements below). Key features of doors should be 
identified, including the ratio of glazing to solid material 
in the door; whether a door traditionally had panels or 
was glazed; whether a door exhibited certain features 
reflecting the building's specialty design, and the degree 
of setback within the opening. Fully glazed doors should 
not be replaced with stock paneled doors purchased a t a 
home improvement store. 
If a historic door opening is no longer needed and the 
opening is on a main facade, either the existing door or 
a matching new one can be fixed in place. Since former 
restroom exterior doors tended to be on the side of the 
building, it may be possible to infill the opening in an 
appropriate manner. This is accomplished by recessing 
the new wall within the existing or new door frame (F ig. 
15). Avoid placing infill material flush with the exterior 
wall in a manner that would erase evidence of the 
former restroom door opening. 
Service bay doors are often among the most prominent 
features of a historic gas station. Except for the earliest 
versions, service bay doors typically featured a grid 
configuration of solid or glass panels. By the 1940s 
it was not uncommon for the glass panes used in 
Figure 15. The historic restroom door to the right of the display 
window was closed off (and entry provided on the inside) when this 
former gas station in Grand Rapids, Ml was converted to a carry-out 
restaurant. A flush panel was recessed in the opening to identifiJ the 
historic location of the door. Photo: M Buck Studios. 
these panels to extend in rows from the bottom to the 
top of the door. Where wood doors have survived, 
they can usually be repaired using regular carpentry 
methods, sometimes augmented by epoxy applications. 
Segmental overhead doors made of aluminum or steel 
were the most common service bay door type from the 
1930s on. If a historic overhead door survives it should 
be repaired whenever possible. If the existing service 
bay door is a later replacement that is compatible with 
the historic character of the building, there are the 
options of retaining or replacing it with one of a similar 
compatible design or with a reproduction of the historic 
door. For a further discussion of rehabilitation options, 
see the Service Bay Doors section on page 13. 
Interior. Every effort should be made to retain and, 
when necessary, repair historic interior features that 
characterize the gas station. A range of new functions 
can be accommodated within the historic form and 
interior layout without altering the overall character 
of the space. Some projects require no change to the 
interior. If a gas station is rehabilitated for continued use 
as a gas station or is reused for an auto detailing shop, 
for example, significant alteration to the interior may 
be unnecessary. Some new functions- satellite police 
stations, tourist offices, drive-thru coffee shops, and 
galleries-may also require only limited alteration of 
interior spaces (Fig. 16). Larger structures with service 
bays are easily adapted for retail and restaurant uses. 
Restaurants inserted into former gas stations often locate 
the kitchen and counter area where the sales and rear 
office area used to be; the service bays function as the 
dining room and are left undivided. Historic service 
bay doors can be retained and upgraded for energy 
conservation. If kept operable they can be opened in 
warm weather to provide the feel of outdoor dining. 
11 

Station Plan Restroom Detail 
Before 
After After 
12 
Another common reuse is to convert the 
station to offices. The original sales area 
becomes a reception room, private offices 
are located in the rear, and the former 
service bays are converted to an open plan 
office. It may even be possible to retain 
the original sales counter as a reception 
desk. 
The typical configuration of enclosed sales 
and office areas connected to larger, open 
service bays can accommodate a variety 
of 
new uses. In all cases, the distinction 
between the various historic interior 
spaces should be maintained and carried 
over to the new layout. If a particular 
reuse scheme requires extensive interior 
alteration, giving the space an entirely 
new character, it is likely that the new use 
is not appropriate for the historic building. 
When a rehabilitation is substantial or 
when the rehabilitated building will be 
open to the public, it may be necessary 
Figure 16. A postwar Stylized Box-type station in Newport, RI, was rehabilitated and 
converted to an art gallery. The service bays (here showing side and rear walls) provide 
open gallen; space while the small sales area (left) continues its historic retail function. 
to make some alterations in order to comply with 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and local 
building code requirements. If the floor is uneven 
from room to room, as when the office or sales area 
steps down into the service bays, it may be necessary to 
install a ramp that slopes between the different grades. 
When the difference in height is only a few inches and 
the historic floors are nondescript, another approach 
may be to raise the entire lower floor to match the 
position of the higher level. 
Restrooms are commonly an area of concern when it 
comes to accessibility. Historic gas station restrooms 
are small and typically have door openings narrower 
than those specified in ADA guidelines. Where there 
are multiple toilet stalls, a solution is to remove one 
of the toilets and the partition to provide sufficient 
space. Another common technique is to convert two 
separate restrooms into a single unisex restroom (Fig. 
17). When two restrooms are converted to one, the 
women's exterior entrance is usually closed off and, if 
necessary, the interior doorway is widened. It may also 
be possible to construct new rest room space along 
the rear wall of the service bay or as a small addition 
on the rear elevation. This new construction should be 
designed to blend with the historic structure yet plainly 
read as a later addition. 
Canopies, Signs, and Site. Because canopies, if 
present, are central to the appearance and function 
of historic gas stations, it is important to retain and 
repair them. Canopies featuring wood or steel beams 
supported on wood, steel, or masonry piers are rarely 
difficult to repair. Cantilevered canopies without 
supports, however, may require more significant 
intervention where they are connected to the station. 
Insufficient reinforcement in the original construction 
and subsequent deterioration can cause the canopies to 
deflect and damage the main structure. Deteriorated 
canopies dating from the 1960s that feature custom 
plastic fascia panels may require replacement pieces 
molded to match the existing materials. Custom steel 
trusswork, either in the supporting pier or the canopy 
itself, if it is deteriorated beyond repair can be replicated 
with newly-fabricated members matching the existing 
features. It may be possible to replace missing canopies 
with new ones based on historic documentation (Fig. 18). 
Aggressive marketing, corporate standardization, 
frequent changes in suppliers, and frequent changes in 
use contribute to the ephemeral nature of gas station 
Figure 17. A plan of the same station shown in Figure 15, illustrates 
how the historic men's and women's rooms were combined to make a 
single accessible restroom. Drawing: Lott3Metz Architecture. 

Existing 
Proposed 
~~~~~~11====U1 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ IF====! I I 
□□□□□ D1!====l1 
Service Bay Doors 
The earliest service bay doors featured wood sliding, 
folding, or swinging panels. When such doors are 
appropriate but the historic panels are missing, door and 
millwork shops can create custom reproductions. Several 
manufacturers produce reproduction doors that operate 
as overhead doors, yet have the appearance of traditional 
folding doors with inconspicuous breaks in the 
horizontal sections and vertical shadow lines replicating 
the original panel configuration. As historic service 
bay doors were typically utilitarian in appearance, 
appropriate stock replacement doors are generally non­
descript in design. 
Beginning in the 1930s stations increasingly used 
segmental overhead doors. Surviving doors can 
usually be retained and, 
if need be, upgraded as part 
of a rehabilitation. It may be possible to replace the 
existing single-glazed panels with insulated glazing 
and wood panels with insulated panels while retaining 
the original door structure. Such treatments may be 
particularly necessary when the former service bays are 
used as offices or dining spaces. Fixing a historic door 
in place is preferable to enclosing the opening with new 
construction. 
If a historic sectional door is deteriorated beyond repair, 
a replacement should be selected that matches the 
materials, panel profile, glazing configuration, and visual 
characteristics of the historic door. New overhead doors 
are generally available through commercial sectional 
door manufacturers. Because contemporary doors can be 
custom ordered with a variety of glazing configurations, 
it is relatively easy to match the appearance of a 
particular historic service bay door. Today's sectional 
doors are often made of inner and outer layers with 
an inner core of insulation. Contemporary aluminum 
door construction differs little from historic units-the 
primary distinction being a tendency in today's units to 
have narrower rails and muntins. 
If the historic door does not survive, a replacement 
in keeping with the form typical of the building 
construction, style, and period should be selected . 
Replacement doors with raised panels or decorative 
glazing should generally be avoided as they present 
an appearance at odds with the basic flat panels 
common on historic service bay doors. 
This 1938 concrete block gas station featured a pair of wood 
multi-light segmental service bay doors (top). When the station 
was converted to a coffee shop the service bays were reused 
as a dining area. The doors were fixed in place and a door for 
customers was introduced in the right opening in a manner that 
retained the original light configuration (above). To increase the 
thermal properties of the service bay doors, the single pane glass 
was removed and replaced with insulating glass (below). The 
appearance of the door is virtually unchanged and the building 
retains its historic character. Drawings courtesy Robert Olin, 
Sherman Perk. 
Modifying Overhead Door Mullions 
EXISTING WOOD 
OVERHEAD DOOR 
MULLION~ 
EXISTING QUARTER­
ROUND WOOD STOP 
EXISTING GLAZED 
PANEL OR WOOD -.........__ 
PANEL ---......._ 
Interior 
1-3/4' 3/4' INSULATED GLAZING 
OR INSULATED OPAQUE PANEL ~ 
JOINT TYPICAL 
AT HORIZONTAL 
MULLIONS 
Exterior 
QUARTER-ROUND --­
WOOD STOP 
3/4' PAINT GRADE / 
FINISH PLYWOOD 
GLUED AND SCREWED 
TO BACKSIDE OF 
EXISTING DOOR 
Interior 
JOINT TYPICAL 
AT HORIZONTAL 
MULLIONS 
COUNTER SUNK 
WOOD SCREWS 
Exterior 
13 

14 
Figures 18. The canopy of the 1920s Spruce Street Station in Ogallala, NE, was an important feature that contributed to the building's character 
(left). When recently purchased for rehabilitation the canopy had long since disappeared (center). Using photographic and physical evidence, the 
canopy was reconstructed to match the building's original appearance (right). The station currently functions as a Main Street program office, 
a visitor center (on Nebraska's Western Trails Historic and Scenic Byway as well as Lincoln Highway Scenic Byway), meeting room, and public 
restroom facility. Photo: Ogallala Main Street. 
signage. Still, historic signs occasionally survive a gas 
station's varied past and remain on buildings slated for 
rehabilitation. Depending on the gas station's new use, 
signs may be retained as part of a rehabilitation project. 
When historic signs are missing, check attics, basements, 
and other storage areas around the site to see if earlier 
signs may have been removed but not discarded. 
There are often ways of retaining some elements of a 
station's historic signage. However, if logos are still 
in use by an existing oil company or remain under 
trademark protection it may be necessary to remove the 
signs in question. Where the historic signs are missing, 
replacement signs (available from collectors and dealers 
in "petroliana") can in some cases be used instead. 
However, the installation of vintage signs not directly 
related to the original structure should be approached 
with caution and based on research that identifies 
similar signage used on the building in the past. 
Designs for affixing new signage to either a still­
functioning gas station or one being adapted for a new 
use should not damage or conceal the structure's historic 
features and finishes. Anchoring the sign in masonry 
joints, for example, facilitates a secure connection and 
allows for eventual removal of the sign without affecting 
the stone, brick, or porcelain enamel finishes. Attaching 
signs onto or over cornices, moldings, window 
surrounds, or other decorative features can usually be 
avoided. 
During any rehabilitation project, especially when a 
new function is introduced, care needs to be taken to 
maintain the relationship between the structures and 
features characteristic of a particular historic gas station 
landscape. 
If a site includes two distinct structures, a 
sales area and separate repair garage for example, it 
would be inappropriate to physically join them with a 
new hyphen as part of the rehabilitation. Historic light 
poles and other lighting fixtures that are part of the gas 
station's design should be retained. Surviving pump 
islands, 
if not removed as part of the project, should be 
retained in situ rather than moved to another place on 
the site where they were never located historically. The 
historic ratio of paved area to plantings and flowerbeds 
should be maintained at a reasonable level. Extensive 
grass, shrubbery, and other plantings inserted into 
a rehabilitated gas station site can obscure the main 
building's original function and historic context. 
Summary 
From their arrival a century ago, gas stations have 
been among the most underappreciated American 
architectural forms. This was due in part because of 
their utilitarian function and their intrusion into quiet 
residential neighborhoods. Yet the history of gas station 
architecture is richly varied, incorporating popular 
trends, unique programmatic designs, and well-known 
examples of corporate branding. Gas stations were 
designed to attract attention and lure customers with 
bold, contemporary themes or to blend in with the 
surrounding neighborhood relying on forms derivative 
of residential design. Historic gas stations ranged from 
one-room sheds to rectangular structures with sales 
areas and service bays to elaborate one-stop complexes 
that include restaurants and lodging. 
When a gas station is rehabilitated today, it is important 
that its style, form, exterior appearance, interior layout, 
and site be assessed as to how they contribute to its 
historic character. Significant features and design 
elements should be retained during rehabilitation or 
restoration work (Fig. 19). When sensitively maintained 
or when rehabilitated for new uses, gas stations can 
continue to contribute to a local economy and provide 
important services to local residents. As a unique 
building type, historic gas stations will continue as 
reminders of earlier eras when the automobile was still 
something of a novelty, or when every tank of gas came 
with an oil check and a cleaned windshield. 

Environmental Issues 
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimated 
in 2004 that there were at least 200,000 abandoned vacant 
sites with petroleum contamination in the United States, 
most of which are gas stations. Since the advent of 
dedicated gas stations, fuel has been stored beneath the 
ground, usually in steel tanks. Some stations, particularly 
those that included service bays, may also have buried 
tanks for waste oils, lift reservoirs, and other petroleum 
products. Corroded and leaking underground storage 
tanks (USTs) can contaminate soil, surface water, and 
groundwater. 
Over the past two decades, many older USTs have been 
removed or permanently closed. State environmental 
departments with support from the EPA provide UST 
regulation, guidance, and funding assistance. Most 
states have offices that deal specifically with UST 
issues and projects. Prospective gas station purchasers 
should coordinate with state and local programs to 
determine site-specific cleanup requirements and to 
secure appropriate "ready for reuse," or "RfR" technical 
determinations, such as "no further action notices" and 
"letters of intended use." 
Assessment and Remediation. Where leaking tanks 
remain, assessments are made to determine the extent 
of the release. Based on the proposed end-use an 
appropriate remediation plan is developed that includes 
tank repair, removal, or closure along with the necessary 
cleanup. If the site is to remain a gas station, tanks can 
sometimes be repaired by qualified professionals using 
standard industry practices. A program of testing is 
required after repairs are made to ensure that the tank 
does not continue to leak. 
Projects where the new use does not require USTs may 
call for closure or removal of the existing tank. To 
permanently close a UST the appropriate regulatory 
agency must be notified beforehand; all liquids, sludge, 
and dangerous vapor levels must be removed from the 
tank; the tank must be filled with an inactive solid like 
sand, and any necessary site assessment and remedial 
action must be undertaken. Removal involves taking 
the tank from the ground, mitigating soil or water 
contamination and infilling the site. In some cases, 
depending on the proposed new use, returning the soil 
100% to its pre-contamination state may not be required. 
Economic Revitalization. In addition to environmental 
damage, the continuing presence of leaking USTs 
dampens investor interest in reusing historic stations, 
hinders financing such projects, and perpetuates 
the existence of abandoned sites that can suppress 
nearby property values and development. In recent 
years states have moved beyond just cleaning up and 
closing underground storage tanks to explore effective 
ways of integrating these activities with broader 
plans for economic redevelopment of gas station sites. 
Municipalities are fostering collaborations with developers 
and investors interested in specific gas station sites that 
tie assistance with environmental remediation into a 
broader plan for neighborhood revitalization. Although it 
is still common for orphan gas stations to be demolished 
as part of a UST project, the number of site clean-ups that 
have included rehabilitating the existing station for a new 
function has increased. 
Funding Opportunities. Depending on the state, 
there may be direct or indirect funding opportunities 
targeting gas station clean up. Some programs offer 
site assessment grants, direct cleanup grants, funds for 
communities to establish low-interest revolving loans, and 
grants to purchase insurance against future unforeseen 
remediation costs. Some states and municipalities offer 
tax credits, abatements, and other tax incentives to offset 
cleanup costs. Twenty-five percent of the annual federal 
Brownfields allocation is directed towards "eligible 
petroleum Brownfields sites." 
Figure 19. Whenrnnverted for use as office a~d meeting space by a local community non-profit, the historic character of this 1960s gas station was 
retained. Poree/am enamel repairs to this statzon are illustrated in Figure 11. Photo: Scott Lapham Photography. 
15 

16 
Endnotes 
1 Jakie, John A. and Sculle, Keith A. The Gas Station in 
America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1994. In a 1978 journal article, expanded upon in this 
definitive book, cultural geographer John Jakie identified 
a gas station typology referenced in most subsequent gas 
station histories. It is adapted in the Historic Gas Station 
Types section of this Preservation Brief. 
2 The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of 
Historic Properties. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department 
of the Interior, National Park Service, 1995. 
Acknowledgements 
Selected Reading 
Halda, Bonnie J., Preservation Tech Notes, "Doors Number 
1, Historic Garage and Carriage Doors: Rehabilitation 
Solutions" Washington, D.C., National Park Service, 
1989. 
Jester, Thomas C., ed. Twentieth Century Building 
Materials: History and Conservation. New York: McGraw­
Hill, 1995. 
Liebs, Chester H. Main Street to Miracle Mile: American 
Roadside Architecture. Boston: Little, Brown and 
Company, 1985. 
Preservation Briefs. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department 
of the Interior, National Park Service. The collection 
of 
Preservation Briefs assist owners and developers of 
historic buildings in recognizing and resolving common 
preservation and repair problems prior to work. 
The author wishes to thank the following for their assistance in the preparation and review of this brief: John Jakie, Uni­
versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; John Vaughan, Architectural Conservation Services; Alison Oswald, Archives 
Center, Smithsonian Institution; Robert Olin, Sherman Perk; Robert Gamble and Melanie Betz, Alabama Historical Com­
mission; Steven McNeely, Office of Underground Storage Tanks, US Environmental Protection Agency, and Kaisa Barthu­
li, Route 66 Corridor Preservation Program, National Park Service. Thanks also go to the following Technical Preservation 
Services staff of the National Park Service: Sharon Park, FAIA, Anne Grimmer, Michael Auer, Elizabeth Creveling, and 
Lauren Van Damme. Charles E. Fisher, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, was the technical editor for 
this publication project. 
Front cover image: American Petroleum Institute Photograph and Film Collection, Archives Center, National Museum of 
American History, Smithsonian Institution. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, which directs the 
Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. Comments about 
this publication should be directed to: Charles Fisher, Technical Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation 
Services, National Park Service (org. 
2255), 1849 C Street, NW, Washington, DC 20240. Additional information offered by 
Technical Preservation Services is available through our website at www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps. This publication is not 
copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National Park 
Service are appreciated. Unless otherwise indicated, photographs are by the author. Excepting the author's photos, the 
photographs used in this publication may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners. 
ISBN: 978-0-16-081507-2 
U.S. Government Printing Office Stock Number: 024-005-01264-8 September 2008 