28 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Painting Historic Interiors 
Sara B. Chase 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Preservation Assistance 
The paint Americans used in the past is undeniably part of a 
technological and commercial record. But beyond that, the 
colors we have chosen and continue to select for our interior 
living and working spaces-bright and exuberant, 
purposefully somber, or a combination of hues-reflect our 
nation's cultural influences and our individual and 
collective spirit (see Figures 1, 2). Paint color is a simple, 
direct expression of the time , and of taste , values, and mood. 
To consider paint only as a protective coating is to 
misunderstand its meaning as an important aspect of 
America's heritage. 
Figure 1. Researching the interior paint history is the key to a successful preservation or restoration project. The 
decorative detailing can be appreciated in this Puerto Rico theater primarily because of appropriate paint color and 
paint placement. Photo: Max Toro. 
This Brief is about historic interior paints and choosing new 
paints for historic interiors if repainting is necessary br 
desirable. It addresses a variety of materials and features: 
plaster walls and ceilings; wooden doors, molding, and trim; 
and metal items such as radiators and railings. It provides 
background information about some of the types of paint 
which were used in the past, discusses the more common 
causes and effects of interior paint failure, and explains the 
principal factors guiding decisions about repainting, 
including what level of paint investigation may be 
appropriate. Careful thought should be given to each 
interior paint project, 
depending on the history of 
the building and its painted 
surfaces. Treatmen ts may 
range from protecting extant 
decorative surfaces, to 
ordering custom-made paint 
that replicates the original 
paint color, to using today's 
paint straight off the shelf 
and out of the can . 
Finally, stripping old paints 
or applying new oil/ alkyd 
paints poses serious heal th 
and safety concerns; the 
State Historic Preserva tion 
Officer should be contacted 
for current legal and 
technical informa tion on 
removal, disposal, and 
health and safety 
precautions. 
Constituents of 
Historic Paint: 
Pigment, Binder, 
and Vehicle 
Paint is a dispersion of small 
solid particles, usually 
crystalline, in a liquid 
1 

A B 
C 
2 
medium. Applied to a surface, this liquid has the special 
quality of becoming a solid, protective film when it dries. 
Paint also enhances the appearance of surfaces. A late 
Victorian writer observed that the coming of a painter to a 
house was cause for celebration. Indeed, these statements 
not only indicate the chemical and physical complexity of 
paint, but also its emotional impact. 
Pigment. Pigment made the paint opaque, thus preventing 
deterioration of the substrate caused by ultra-violet light, 
and added color, thus making the paint attractive. White 
lead, a whitish corrosion product of lead, was most often 
used to provide opacity. The white pigment in a colored 
paint is often called the "hiding" pigment. In addition to 
preventing the sun's damaging rays from hitting the 
surface of the substrate, the white lead also helped prevent 
the growth of mold and mildew. Not until early in the 20th 
century was a successful substitute, titanium dioxide 
(Ti02), patented, and even then, it did not come into 
prevalent use by itself until the mid-20th century (earlier in 
the century, titanium oxide and white lead were often 
mixed). Zinc oxide was used briefly as a hiding pigment 
after 1850 (see Figure 3). 
Figure 2. Paints-pLain and 
coLored-have been used 
throughout our history to define 
and accent interior spaces. Three 
examples serve to illustrate a 
variety of geographical and 
cultural influences, building types 
and uses, and interior designs from 
the 18th to the 20th century. (a) 
San Jose de Gracia Church, Las 
Trampas, New Mexico (1760). 
Photo: Kirk Gittings. (b) Frank 
Lloyd Wright Home and Studio, 
Oak Park, llinois (1889-98). 
Photo: Philip Turner for HABS. 
(c) U. S. Customs House, Trading 
Floor (1908), New York City. 
Photo: National Park Service files. 
Early tinting pigments for house paints consisted of the 
earth pigments-ochres, siennas, umbers made from iron­
oxide-containing clay-and a few synthesized colorants 
such as Prussian blue, or mercuric sulfide (crimson). From 
the early 1800s on more pigments were developed and used 
to offer a wider and brighter variety of hues. 
Binder. The most common binder in interior paints was, 
and still is, oil. Chalk was sometimes added to water-based 
paints to help bind the pigment particles together. Other 
common binders included hide glue and gelatin. 
Vehicle. The fluid component was termed the vehicle, or 
medium, because it carried the pigment. Historically, 
vehicles included turpentine in oil paints and water in 
water-based paints, but other vehicles were sometimes 
used, such as milk in casein paints. 
Oil-Based and Water-Based Paints 
The two major types of paint are termed oil-based and 
water-based. For oil-based paints, linseed oil was frequently 
chosen because it is a drying oil. When thinned with an 
organic solvent such as turpentine for easier spreading, its 
drying speed was enhanced. To make the drying even 
faster, drying agents such as cobalt compounds were 
frequently added. Because the addition of driers was most 
successfully done in hot or boiling oil, boiled linseed oil 
was preferable. The drying rate of linseed oil paints was 
relatively rapid at first, for several days immediately after 
application, and paint soon felt dry to the touch; it is 
important to remember, however, that linseed oil paint 
continues to dry-or more precisely, to cross-link-over 
decades and thus continues to a point of brittleness as the 
paint ages. Strong and durable with a surface sheen, oil­
based paints were mainly used for wood trim and metal. 
Whitewashes and distemper paints differed from oil paints 
in appearance primarily because the vehicle was water. 
Water-based paints were always flat, having no gloss of their 
own. Because the paint film dried to the touch as soon as 

BROOKLYN. N. 
& 
Fulton 
AND AMERICAN 
Y. 
MASURY WHITON, 
fit Street, New York, 
MANUFACTURERS OF 
FRENCH ZINC, 
AND 
the water evaporated, driers were not needed. Water-base 
paints were fairly strong, with the pigments well bound as 
in hide glue distempers, but they did not hold up to 
abrasion. Wood trim, therefore, was rarely painted with 
these types of paint historically, though interior plaster 
surfaces were frequently coated with whitewash and 
calcimine. Distemper paints were commonly used for 
decorative work. 
Figure 3. There were numerous companies producing white lead in the 
United States by mid-19th century. Shown is one manufacturer's trade 
flyer. Of note, production figures for white lead showed a marked 
increase after 1850, but a steady decline after 1880. This was, in part, 
due to a change of taste and style at the end of the 19th century-stains 
and clear finishes were preferred over opaque paints for interior 
decorative treatments. 
Types of Historic Paints 
Historic paints were often 
made with what was available, 
rather than adhering to strict 
formulas. Recipes for 
successful formulas can be 
found in historic documents, such as newspapers, 
illustrating the combinations of ingredients which 
could be used to produce a paint. 
Oil-based paints: Linseed oil, a volatile thinner such 
as turpentine; a hiding pigment (usually white lead) 
and coloring pigments. 
Enamels: natural resin varnish was added to oil­
based paint to provide a hard, more glossy surface. 
Glaze: a translucent layer applied to protect the paint 
and to impart a more uniform gloss surface. Usually 
made from linseed oil with natural resin varnish 
added. Some glazes have small quantities of tinting 
pigments such as verdigris or Prussian blue; some had 
no pigments added. 
Water-based paints: Water, pigment, and a binder, 
such as hide glue, other natural glues, or gums. 
Usually used on interior plaster surfaces. 
Whitewash: often used on interior plaster surfaces in 
utilitarian spaces and, at times, used on interior 
beams; consisted of water, slaked lime, salt, and a 
variety of other materials. Occasionally a pigment 
(usually an ochre or other earth pigment) was added 
to provide tint or color. 
Distemper: used for interior applications, were made 
from water, glues (one or more different natural glues, 
gelatine, and gums) with whiting as the basic white 
pigment to which other tinting pigments were added. 
Calcimine, or kalsomine: often used on interior 
surfaces and is another common name for distemper. 
Tempera: paint prepared with pigment, egg yolk or 
white and water; used almost exclusively for 
decorative treatments. 
Gouache: a water-based paint made of whiting, 
pigment, water, and gum arabic as the binder; used 
almost exclusively for decorative treatments. 
Milk-based paint: 
Casein: also called milk paint, was made with 
hydrated (slaked) lime, pigment, and milk. Most 
often oil was added, making a strong emulsion paint. 
Various recipes call for a large variety of additives to 
increase durability. Casein paints were also used for 
exterior surfaces. Recent Changes to Paint Constituents. Until the mid-20th 
century, almost all paints used in America could be divided 
according to the type of binder each had. Chemists sought 
to improve paints, especially when the two world wars 
made traditional paint components scarce and expensive . 
Modern paints are far more complex chemically and 
physically than early paints. More ingredients have been 
added to the simple three-part system of pigment, binder, 
and vehicle. Fillers or extenders such as clay and chalk 
were put in to make oil paints flow better and to make them 
cheaper as well. Mildewcides and fungicides were 
prevalent and popular until their environmental hazards 
were seen to outweigh their benefits. New formulations 
which retard the growth of the mildew and fungi are being 
used. As noted, lead was eliminated after 1950. Most 
recently, volatile organic solvents in oil paint and thinners 
have been categorized as environmentally hazardous. 
3 

4 
A major difference in modern paints is the change in binder 
from the use of natural boiled linseed oil to an alkyd oil 
which is generally derived from soybean or safflower oil. 
Use of synthetic resins, such as acrylics and epoxies, has 
become prevalent in paint manufacture in the last 30 years 
or so. Acrylic resin emulsions in latex paints, with water 
thinners, have also become common. 
Pre-1875 Paints 
Production and Appearance. How were paints made prior 
to the widespread use of factory-made paint after 1875? 
How did they look? The answers to these questions are 
provided more to underscore the differences between early 
paints and today's paints than for practical purposes. 
Duplicating the composition and appearance of historic 
paints, including the unevenness of color, the irregularity of 
surface texture, the depth provided by a glaze topcoat, and 
the directional lines of application, can be extremely 
challenging to a contemporary painter who is using modern 
materials. 
The pigments used in early paints were coarsely and 
unevenly ground, and they were dispersed in the paint 
medium by hand; thus, there is a subtle unevenness of color 
across the surface of many pre-1875 paints (see Figure 4). 
The dry pigments had to be ground in oil to form a paste 
and the paste had to be successively thinned with more oil 
and turpentine before the paint was ready for application. 
The thickness of the oil medium produced the shiny surface 
desired in the 18th century. In combination with the 
cylindrical (or round) shaped brushes with wood handles 
and boar bristles, it also produced a paint film with a 
surface texture of brush strokes. 
Figure 4. The Boston Stone 
(1737), a surviving relic of 
early paint production, was 
used for pigment grinding 
in the shop of Thomas Child 
of Boston, a London-trained 
painter and stainer. The 
early paint-grinding tool is 
the logo of the National 
Paint and Coatings 
Association. Photo: 
Courtesy, SPNEA. 
Geographical Variation. The early churches and missions 
built by the French in Canada and the Spanish in the 
southwestern United States often had painted decoration on 
whitewashed plaster walls, done with early water-based 
paints. By the mid-17th century oil paint was applied to 
wood trim in many New England houses, and whitewash 
was applied to walls. These two types of paint, one capable 
of highly decorative effects such as imitating marble or 
expensive wood and the other cheap to make and relatively 
easy to apply, brightened and enhanced American interiors. 
In cities such as Boston, Philadelphia, New York, and later, 
Washington, painters and stainers who were trained 
guildsmen from England practiced their craft and 
instructed apprentices. The painter's palette of colors 
included black and white and grays, buffs and tans, ochre 
yellows and iron oxide reds, and greens (from copper 
compounds) as well as Prussian blue . That such painting 
was valued and that a glossy appearance on wood was 
important are substantiated by evidence of clear and tinted 
glazes which may be found by microscopic examination. 
Brush Marks. Early paints did not dry out to a flat level 
surface. Leveling, in fact, was a property of paint that was 
much sought after later, but until well into the 19th century, 
oil paints and whitewashes showed the signs of brush 
marks. Application therefore was a matter of stroking the 
brush in the right direction for the best appearance. The 
rule of thumb was to draw the brush in its final stokes in 
the direction of the grain of the wood. Raised-field 
paneling, then, required that the painter first cover the 
surface with paint and afterward draw the brush carefully 
along the vertical areas from bottom to top and along the 
top and bottom bevels of the panel horizontally from one 
side to the other. 
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, for very fine finishes, 
several coats were applied with each coat being rubbed 
down with rotten stone or pumice after drying. A four to 
five coat application was typical; however nine coats were 
not uncommon at the end of the century for finishes in 
some of the grand mansions. Generally, they were given a 
final glaze finish. Though expensive, this type of finish 
would last for decades and give a rich, smooth appearance. 
Color. Color matching is complicated by the fact that all 
early paints were made by hand. Each batch of paint, made 
by painters using books of paint "recipes" or using their 
own experience and instincts, might well have slight 
variations in color-a little darker or lighter, a little bluer 
and so on. The earliest known book of paint formulations 
by an American painter is the 1812 guide by Hezekiah 
Reynolds. It gives instructions for the relative quantities of 
tinting pigments to be added to a base, but even with 
proportions held constant, the amount of mixing, or 
dispersion, varied from workman to workman and resulted 
in color variations. 
Knowing all of the facts about early paints can aid in 
microscopic paint study. For example, finding very finely 
and evenly ground pigments, equally dispersed throughout 
the ground or vehicle, is an immediate clue that the paint 
was not made by hand but, rather, in a factory. 
By the first decades of the 19th century more synthetic 
pigments were available--chrome yellow, chrome green, 
and shades of red. Discoveries of light, bright, clear colors 
in the plaster and mosaic decoration of dwellings at 
Pompeii caught the fancy of many Americans and came 
together with the technology of paint to make for a new 
palette of choice, with more delicacy than many of the 
somewhat greyed-down colors of the 18th century. Of 
course, the blues which could be produced with Prussian 
blue in the 18th and 19th centuries were originally often 
strong in hue. That pigment-as were a number of others­
is fugitive, that is, it faded fairly quickly and thus softened 
in appearance. It should be remembered that high style 
houses from the mid-17th to late 19th centuries often had 
wallpaper rather than paint on the walls of the important 
rooms and hallways. 
Glossy/Flat. Another paint innovation of the early 19th 
century was the use of flatter oil paints achieved by adding 
more turpentine to the oil, which thus both thinned and 
flatted them. By the 1830s the velvety look of flat paint was 
popular. Wherever decorative plaster was present, as it 

frequently was during the height of the Federal period, 
distemper paints were the coating of choice. Being both 
thin and readily removable with hot water, they permitted 
the delicate plaster moldings and elaborate floral or 
botanical elements to be protected and tinted but not 
obscured by the buildup of many paint layers. (The use of 
water-based paints on ceilings continued through the 
Victorian years for the same reasons.) 
Unfortunately, flat paints attract dirt, which is less likely to 
adhere to high gloss surfaces, and are thus harder to wash. 
Victorians tended to use high gloss clear (or tinted) finishes 
such as varnish or shellac on much of their wood trim and 
to use flat or oil paints on walls and ceilings. 
Decorative Painting. In interiors, paint could be used 
creatively and imaginatively, most often to decorate rather 
than to protect. Decorative forms included stencilling, 
graining and marbleizing, and trompe l'oeil (see Figures 5, 6). 
Figure 5. Owners of historic properties often find evidence of decorative 
painting on interior walls; however, the task of actually preserving or 
restoring decorative work, such as the complex stencilling pictured here, 
should only be undertaken by professionals who have specialized training 
and field experience. Photo: Courtesy, Alexis Elza. 
Figure 6. Historic doors 
may have graining 
patterns or clear finishes 
under one or several coats 
of plain paint, such as 
these restored 18th and 
early 19th century doors. 
Graining may appear even 
on more vernacular doors 
of the pre-1850 vintage. 
Photo: Jack E. Boucher for 
HABS. 
Stencilling. Stencilled designs on walls were often used in 
the first half of the 19th century in place of wallpaper. Old 
Sturbridge Village, in Massachusetts, has paintings showing 
the interiors of a (c. 1815-1820) farmhouse which has both 
stencilled walls-imitating wallpaper-and painted floors 
or oiled and painted floor cloths, imitating fine carpets. By 
1850 and for the next 60 years thereafter, stencilled and 
freehand-painted decoration for walls and ceilings became 
a high as well as a humble art. Owen Jones' Grammar of 
Ornament, published in 1859, provided the source for 
painted decoration from Portland to Peoria, Savannah to 
San Francisco. 
Graining and marbleizing. If floors, walls, and ceilings were 
decorated by paint in a variety of styles, the wood and stone 
trim of rooms was not omitted. The use of faux bois, that is, 
painting a plain or common wood such as pine to look like 
mahogany or some finer wood, or faux marbre, painting a 
wood or plaster surface to look like marble-realistically or 
fantastically-was common in larger homes of the 18th 
century. By the early 19th century, both stylized graining 
and marbleizing adorned the simple rural or small town 
houses as well. Often baseboards and stair risers were 
marbleized as were fireplace surrounds. Plain slate was 
painted to look like fine Italian marble. In many simple 
buildings, and, later, in the Victorian period, many 
prominent buildings such as town halls and churches, the 
wood trim was given a realistic graining to resemble 
quarter sawn oak, walnut, or a host of other exotic woods. 
Trompe L'oeil. Churches, courthouses, and state capitols 
frequently received yet another remarkable use of paint: 
trompe l'oeil decoration. Applied by skilled artists and 
artisans, painted designs-most often using distemper 
paints or oils-could replicate three-dimensional 
architectural detailing such as ornate molded plaster 
moldings, medallions, panels, and more. 
Factory-Made Paints after 1875 
An enormous growth of the paint industry began in the 
1860s, stimulated by the invention of a suitable marketing 
container-the paint can. The first factory-made paints in 
cans consisted of more finely ground pigments in an oil 
base; after purchase, additional oil was added to the 
contents of the can to make up the paint. Such paints saved 
the time of hand-grinding pigments, and were discussed at 
length by John Masury in his numerous books. After 1875, 
factory-made paints were available at a reasonable cost and, 
as a result, greater numbers of people painted and 
decorated more of their buildings, and more frequently. 
The new commercial market created by ready-mixed paint 
became the cornerstone of our modern paint industry (see 
Figure 7). 
20th Century Paints 
By the early decades of the 20th century, popular taste 
turned away from exuberant colors and decoration. Until 
the late 1920s both the Colonial Revival and Arts and Crafts 
styles tended toward more subdued colors and, in the case 
of Colonial Revival, a more limited palette. The use of faux 
finishes, however, continued. Residential architecture often 
featured stencilling, such as painted borders above 
wainscoting or at ceiling and wall edges to imitate 
decorative wallpaper. Institutional buildings in both cities 
5 

6 
E 3ro/JJI; 
.Pvllill t'Clll. 
/1P jJ,! 1;.& .Pn 1811 (11 vl.;7;Jf:!~ /tf!~ 
Iff"'!' 
fiN~Hd;r 
&PO ~ .... '"' 
and small towns used wood graining on metal-clad doors, 
door and window frames, and staircases, and had stencilled 
ceilings as well. Many high style public buildings of the 
1920s had painted ceilings which imitated the Spanish and 
Italian late medieval and Renaissance styles. 
Figure 7. This 1857 patent drawing of a paint can invented by Peter 
Brown shows a remarkable similarity in design to today's containers. An 
airtight, carryable container allowed the sale of small amounts of paint. 
It helped revolutionize the paint industry for typical consumers in the 
late 19th century because paint was now essentially available to anyone 
who wanted it. 
Although stenciling, gilding, and faux finishes can be 
found, they did not express the modem style of the time. 
On the other hand, glaze treatments were often used in the 
early 20th century to "antique" walls and trim that had 
been painted with neutral colors, especially in Spanish 
Colonial Revival and Mission architecture. The glazes were 
applied by ragging, sponging, and other techniques which 
gave an interesting and uneven surface appearance. 
Colored plasters were sometimes used, and air brushing 
employed to give a craftsmanlike appearance to walls, trim, 
and ceilings. During the same period, Williamsburg paint 
colors were produced and sold to people who wanted their 
houses to have a "historic Georgian look." Churches, 
country clubs, and many private buildings adopted the 
Williamsburg style from the late 20s onward. 
Often decorated with simple molded plaster designs of the 
Art Deco and Art Moderne styles, interiors of the 1930s and 
1940s were frequently accented with metal flake paints in a 
full range of metallic colors, from copper to bronze (see 
Figure 8). And enamels, deep but subdued hues, became 
popular. Paint technology had progressed and varying 
degrees of gloss were also available, including the mid­
range enamels, variously called satin, semi-gloss, or 
eggshell. In contrast to Victorian paint treatments, this 
period was characterized by simplicity. To some extent, the 
Bauhaus aesthetic influenced taste in the 1950s; interior 
paints were frequently chosen from a palette limited to a 
few "earth" colors and a "nearly neutral" palette of off­
whites and pale greys. 
While the trend in colors and decorative treatments was 
defined by its simplicity, paint chemists were developing 
paints of increasing complexity. Experimentation had started 
early in the 20th century and accelerated greatly after World 
War II. Of greatest significance was the manufacture of the 
latex paints for consumer use. Synthetic resin emulsions 
carried in water offered advantages over the traditional oil 
paints, and even over the oil I alkyd paints: they did not 
yellow; they permitted water clean-up until dried; and they 
emitted no toxic or hazardous fumes from solvent evaporation. 
Figure 8. The lobby foyer of the Paramount Theater in Sacramento, 
California (1931) features painted plaster columns and cornices which 
have been finished in gold and silver leaf The theater, a National 
Historic Landmark, is noted for its Art Deco style. Photo: Gabriel 
Moulin Studios. 
Paint Investigation 
Understanding each project's historic preservation goal and 
knowing what level of information needs to be collected to 
achieve that goal is an important responsibility of the 
purchaser of the service. Before someone is hired, the 
owner or manager needs to decide if a thorough 
investigation of painted surfaces is actually needed, and 
how to use the results when one is done. 
Specialists with both training and field experience conduct 
paint investigations. These experts use sophisticated 
instruments and procedures such as field sampling, cross­
section analysis, and fluorescent and chemical staining to 
learn about the components and behaviors of historic paints 
(see Figure 9). In addition, they utilize written 
documentation, verbal research, and visual information 
about past painting in the building in conjunction with 
findings in the field (Figure 10). 
Paint investigation can make several contributions to a 
project. A complete analysis of the paint layers on surfaces 
within a structure can tell a great deal about the sequence 
of alterations that have occurred within a building, as well 

A B 
as potentially providing ranges of dates for some of these 
changes. By establishing a full sequence of paint layers 
(termed a chromochron%gy), together with other research, 
alterations of various building spaces and features can be 
associated with specific paint layers. It is by establishing 
this association that the correct layer is identified; when the 
correct layer has been identified, the color may be matched. 
Figure 9. Conservators are shown in the two-part process of conducting 
a complete paint investigation: (a) Paint samples are carefully collected 
onsite. (b) In the laboratory, an ultra violet light microscope is used to 
identify pigment and binding media. Paint samples are photographed 
with the camera mounted on top of the microscope. (right). Photo left: 
Courtesy, Matthew J. Mosca; Photo right: Courtesy, Andrea M. Gilmore. 
Figure 10. Written, oral, and pictorial documentation-such as this 
historical rendering-are combined with essential field research to 
provide the framework for sound historic preservation decisions. Photo: 
Courtesy, SPNEA. 
In addition to its archeological value, paint analysis can 
determine the types and colors of paint on a given surface 
(identification of thin glazes, decorative paint schemes, 
binders and pigments) . Beyond color identification, then, 
paint analysis is also recommended to diagnose causes of 
paint failure. Knowing a paint binder can often explain 
causes as well as guide appropriate preservation or 
conservation treatments. 
Owners and managers should identify all of these needs 
before deciding on the extent of analysis. For example, a 
complete paint investigation is usually recommended as 
part of an historic structure report. For buildings with little 
documentation, additions and alterations can often be 
identified, and possibly dated, through analysis. Often the 
use of such seemingly expensive techniques can save 
money in the long run when determining the history of 
building change. 
It is possible to do some analysis on site; this is a much 
simpler process that can be undertaken for less cost than 
the complex laboratory procedures described above. 
However, the usefulness of onsite analysis is limited and 
the results will not be as precise as results from samples 
that are analyzed in a laboratory with a good microscope. 
Any short-cut approaches to paint analysis that do not 
follow scientific procedures are generally not worth the 
expense. In summary, if preservation and restoration 
treatments are being undertaken, a complete investigation 
is recommended; for a rehabilitation project, onsite analysis 
and color matching may provide an adequate palette . 
Choosing a Treatment 
Most projects involve re-painting. It is the historic 
appearance of the interior and the visual impression that 
will be created by new paint treatments that must be 
considered before choosing a particular course of action. 
The type and colors of paint obviously depend on the type 
of building and the use and interpretation of its interior 
spaces (see Figure 11). A consistent approach is best. 
Figure 11. A dark layer can be seen beneath the flaking lighter paint on 
these raised field panels. Depending on the project work goal and the 
period of the building's history being interpreted, anyone of the paint 
layers could be duplicated in repainting. National Park Service files. 
Preservation. When the treatment goal is preservation, a 
building's existing historic features and finishes are 
maintained and repaired, saving as much of the historic 
paint as possible. Sometimes, cleaning and washing of 
7 

8 
painted surfaces is all that is needed. Or a coating may be 
applied to protect important examples of history or art (see 
Figure 12). If repainting is required, the new paint is 
matched to existing paint colors using the safer, modern 
formulations. Re-creating earlier surface colors and 
treatments is not an objective. 
Figure 12. When discovered, important examples of history such as this 
pencilled Civil War graffiti should be preserved. A conservator can 
easily clean the area, then apply a protective coating. The history this 
hand-written message possesses is well worth the sacrifice of surface 
uniformity, even if it interrupts a freshly painted surface. Photo: Kaye 
Simonson. 
Rehabilitation. In a typical rehabilitation, more latitude 
exists in choosing both the kind of new paint as well as 
color because the goal is the efficient re-use of interior 
spaces. Decisions about new paint often weigh factors such 
as economy and durability-use of a high quality standard 
paint from a local or national company and application by a 
qualified contractor. Color choices may be based on paint 
research reports prepared for interior rooms of comparable 
date and style. More often, though, current color values 
and taste are taken into account. Again, the safer paint 
formulations are used (see Figure 13). 
Figure 13. Part of a 
historic freight depot, 
this is not a high-style 
room and its painted 
surfaces are obviously in 
poor condition from 
long-term neglect. 
Interior spaces that are 
being converted for a 
new use in rehabilitation 
projects can benefit from 
being repainted in 
historic period colors 
rather than a neutral off­
white. Photo: National 
Park Service files. 
Interiors of institutional buildings, such as university 
buildings, city halls, libraries, and churches often contain 
rich decorative detailing (Figure 14). During rehabilitation, 
careful choices should be made to retain or restore selected 
portions of the decorative work as well as match some of 
the earlier colors to evoke the historic sense of time and 
place. At the least, it is important to use period-typical 
paint color and paint placement. 
Figure 14. Holes left by insertion of toggle bolts used ill the structural 
strengthening of this ceiling can be seen in the decorative plaster work. 
Without great expense, a skilled painter can now clean and touch up the 
damaged areas. This type of targeted repair work can benefit both public 
and private buildings. Photo: National Park Service files. 
Restoration. In a restoration project, the goal is to depict 
the property as it appeared during its period of greatest 
significance. This mayor may not be the time of its original 
construction. For example, if a building dated from 1900 
but historians deemed its significance to be the 1920s, the 
appropriate paint color match would be the 1920s layer , not 
the original 1900 layer. 
Based on historical research, onsite collection of paint 
samples, and laboratory analysis, surface colors and 
treatments can be re-created to reflect the property at a 
particular period of time. It should be noted that scholarly 
findings may yield a color scheme that is not suited to the 
taste of the contemporary owner, but is nonetheless 
historically accurate. In restoration, personal taste in color 
is not at issue; the evidence should be strictly followed. 
In the restoration process, colors are custom-matched by 
professionals to give an accurate representation. If an artist 
or artisan can be found, the historically replicated paint 
may be applied using techniques appropriate to the period 
of the restoration (see Figure 15). Although custom paint 
manufacture is seldom undertaken, color and glazing are 
capable of being customized. In some projects, paint may 
be custom-made using linseed oil and, if building code 
variances allow it, white lead. For example, the repainting 
of a number of rooms at Mount Vernon demonstrates that it 
is possible to replicate historic paints and applications in all 
aspects; however, as noted, replication of historic paint 
formulation is not practical for the majority of projects. 
Identifying Deteriorated and Damaged Paint 
Surfaces 
Because painted surfaces are subject to abrasion, soiling, 
water damage, sunlight, and application of incompatible 
paints they generally need to be repainted or at least 
reglazed appropriately from time to time. 
Abrasion. From the baseboards up to a level of about six 
feet off the floor, wood trim is constantly subjected to wear 

~!I~
from being touched and inadvertently kicked, and from 
having furniture pushed against it (see Figure 16). Chair 
rails were in fact intended to take the wear of having chairs 
pushed back against them instead of against the more 
delicate plaster wall or expensive wallpaper. Doors in 
particular, sometimes beautifully grained, receive extensive 
handling. Baseboards get scraped by various cleaning 
devices, and the lower rails of windows, as well as window 
seats, take abuse. The paint in all of these areas tends to 
become abraded. Two things are important to bear in mind 
about areas of abraded paint. Samples taken to determine 
original paint colors and layer sequences will not be 
accurate except at undamaged edges. Also, dirt and oil or 
grease need to be removed before applying any new paint 
because new paint will not adhere to dirty, greasy surfaces. 
Figure 15. The decorative work on the walls and ceilings of the Senate 
Chamber, Providence, Rhode Island, City Hall (1875) is a rich 
combination of paint and gilding on ornate plaster features. It was 
carefully restored in 1975. Photo: Kate Gilliat. © Providence 
Preservation Society. 
Figure 16. This 
residential door 
shows how scuffed 
and abraded interior 
painted surfaces can 
become over time, 
particularly if the 
feature is in a high­
use area. In the 
preservation project, 
the door was simply 
cleaned and 
repainted the same 
color. Photo: Robert 
M . Smith, Jr. 
Dirt. Soiling is another problem of interior paint (see 
Figure 17). Fireplaces smoked; early coal-fired furnaces put 
out oily black soot; gas lights and candles left dark smudges. 
Sometimes the dirt got deposited on plaster walls or ceilings 
in a way that makes the pattern of the lath behind the plaster 
quite clear. Another source of dirt was polluted outside air, 
from factories or other industries, infilhating houses and 
other nearby buildings. Until smokestacks became very 
high, most air pollution was caused by nearby sources. 
Figure 17. A Federal period fireplace needs careful preparation for 
repainting. While the soot must obviously be cleaned off, it is important 
to Leave as much of the historic paint intact as possibLe. Photo: NationaL 
Park Service fiLes. 
In paint investigation, dirt on the surface of paint layers, as 
seen under the microscope, can be very useful in suggesting 
the length of time a given paint layer remained exposed, 
and in distinguishing a finish layer from a prime or 
undercoat layer. This kind of soiling can happen on any 
painted surface in a room, but may be slightly heavier in the 
recesses of moldings and on upward-facing horizontal 
edges. Using dirt as a sole measure, however, may be 
misleading if the surfaces have been cleaned . The fracture 
or bonding between paint layers is often used by 
professionals as a better means of indicating time 
differences between layers as well as indicating those layers 
that are part of a single decoration or painting. 
Water. Water, the usual source of deterioration for many 
kinds of material, is also a prime cause of interior paint 
failure (see Figure 18). As a liquid, it can come from roof 
leaks, from faulty plumbing or steam heating systems, or 
from fire-suppression systems that have misfired. As a 
vapor, it may come from such human activities as 
breathing, showering, or cooking. Plaster walls sealed with 
unpigmented hide-glue are notably susceptible to water 
damage because it forms a water-soluble layer between the 
plaster and the paint. This can cause the paint to lose 
Figure 18. The major crack along this cornice indicates that there has 
been long-term moisture problem in this room. Restoring the plaster 
work and repainting shouLd be done onLy after the water probLem is 
soLved. Photo: Jack E. Boucher for HABS. 
9 

10 
adhesion when even small amounts of moisture come into 
contact with the water-soluble sealer. 
Age/Sunlight. Finally, in historic interiors, especially 
where there is heavy paint build-up, paint can weaken and 
fail due to chemical or mechanical reasons. For example, 
the older linseed oil is, the more brittle it is (see Figure 19). 
It also darkens when it is covered and gets no ultra-violet 
exposure. In rooms where there is more sunlight on one 
area than on others, the oil or even oil! alkyd paint will get 
discernibly darker in the less exposed areas in as short a 
time as six months. Painted over, the oil medium in older 
paints gets quite yellow-brown, thus changing the color of 
the paint. Prussian blue is one of the tinting pigments that 
is particularly vulnerable to fading. 
Figure 19. Sunlight typically 
causes paint deterioration on 
windows and window sills. This 
alligatored surface can make 
paint research difficult, as later 
paints may have "run in" under 
earlier ones. This surface should 
be stripped of all degraded paint 
prior to repainting. Photo: 
Richard Graber. 
Incompatible Paints. Understanding some basic 
differences in the strength of various paints helps to explain 
certain paint problems. Paints that dry to a stronger film 
are incompatible with those which are weaker. Acrylic 
latex paints are stronger than oil! alkyd paints. Oil or 
oil I alkyd paint is stronger than water-based paint such as 
calcimine. When a stronger paint is applied over a weaker 
paint, it will tend to pull off any weaker paint which may 
have begun to lose its bond with its substrate. Thus, on 
many ceilings of older buildings where oil I alkyd paints 
have been applied over old calcimine, large strips of paint 
may be peeling. 
Oil or varnish glazes over older paints become brittle with 
age, and can make removal of later paints rather easy. 
Sometimes it is possible to take advantage of this 
characteristic to reveal an earlier decorative treatment such 
as graining or marbleizing. Getting under the edge of the 
glaze with a scalpel blade can make the removal of later 
paints relatively simple, and relatively harmless to the 
fancier paint treatment. Sometimes, paints separate from 
each other simply due to poor surface preparation in the 
past or the hardening of the earlier surface paint. Use of 
alkaline paint strippers can cause paint to lose adhesion. 
When insufficiently neutralized, they leave salts in wood 
which cause oil or oil I alkyd paints to fail to adhere to the 
surface. If dirt or oily residues are not cleaned from the 
surfaces to be painted, new paint will not remain well 
adhered. 
Surface Preparation 
First, it is important to note that the earlier, linseed oil­
based paints were penetrating type paints, forming a bond 
by absorption into the substrate. Often these thin oil 
coatings were slightly tinted with an iron-oxide pigment so 
coverage could be seen; the next coating applied would 
adhere to this first oil layer. Modern paints, on the other 
hand, are primarily bonding paints with little ability to 
penetrate a substrate. For this reason, surface preparation is 
extremely important for today's paints . 
Before preparing the interior for repainting, all moisture 
penetration from failing roofs or gutters or from faulty 
plumbing or interior heating elements should be identified 
and corrected. A paint job is only as good as the 
preparation that goes before it. The surface to be painted, 
old or new, wood, plaster, masonry, or metal must be made 
sound and capable of taking the paint to be applied. 
Scraping and Sanding. The first step in preparing interior 
wood and plaster surfaces which are coherent and sound is 
to remove any loose paint (see Paint Hazards sidebar). 
Careful hand scraping is always advisable for historic 
surfaces. Use of mechanical sanders usually leaves traces of 
the sander's edges, visible through the new paint film. 
Hand sanding is also necessary to feather the edges of the 
firmly adhering layers down to the bare areas so that 
shadow lines are avoided . Preparing previously painted 
interior masonry for new paint is basically similar to 
preparing plaster. Metals elements, such as radiators, 
valences, or firebacks are somewhat different (see Figure 
20). In order to get a sound paint job on metal items, the 
work is primarily that of sanding to remove any rust before 
repainting. If the existing paint is well adhered over the 
entire metal surface, then it may be necessary only to sand 
lightly to roughen the existing paint, thus providing some 
"tooth" for the primer and new paint layer. On wood, 
garnet sanding papers work well. Aluminum oxide and 
silicon carbide sandpapers are effective on other surfaces as 
well as wood; emery papers should be used on metals . 
Figure 20. Historic metal components, such as this decorative cast-iron 
radiator, should be preserved during interzor work. Following surface 
preparation, repainting with rust-inhibiting primer and finish coats is 
recommended. Photo: Jack E. Boucher for HABS. 
Paint Removal. When should surfaces be completely 
stripped? Obviously, new paint is wasted when applied on 

old paint which is loose, that is, extensi vely damaged and 
deteriorated. Sometimes paint on an architectural feature 
needs to be removed if it obscures delicate detailing (see 
Figure 21). For the most part, however, if the surface is 
intact-and the presence of lead paint has been shown to 
present no health dangers to building occupants-the 
existing paint can be overpainted . 
Well-adhered, intact paint layers (in at least one area of each 
room) should be covered with a sturdy protective tape, then 
painted over with the new paint and left in place to inform 
future research. The next owr.er may be interested in the 
building's past history, and methods of gleaning 
information from old paints grow more sophisticated all the 
time . 
Heat/Scraping. Propane torches should never be used 
because they can damage historic wood features . Also, 
charred areas of wood will not hold the new paint. Use of a 
heat gun or heat plate may be relatively fast, but has both 
health and safety drawbacks. Heat oxidizes lead paint, 
causing poisonous fumes. And old walls may contain fine 
debris which acts like tinder and smolders when heated, 
bursting into flame hours after the stripping. (Heat 
methods are best limited to those interior elements that can 
be safely removed from the building for stripping and re­
installed). Finally, scraping to remove heat-loosened paint 
may gouge and scar the wood or plaster substrate if not 
done carefully. Rotary wire brushes cut into wood and 
should be avoided altogether. 
Chemical stripping. Removing paint from wood and plaster 
features can be done with either caustic strippers 
(potassium or sodium hydroxide) or solvent strippers 
(organic compounds such as methylene chloride, methanol, 
or toluol). Caustic strippers are fairly fast acting, but can 
weaken wood fibers if left on too long, causing them to 
raise and separate. They also leave alkaline residues which 
must be neutralized by an acidic wash (usually white 
vinegar which contains 4% acetic acid). It is difficult to 
make the neutralizing 100% effective and, when it is not , 
chemical reactions between the alkaline residues and the 
new paint may cause the paint to lose adhesion. 
Figure 21. Stripping paint may sometimes be necessary to reveal the 
delicate detail of an elaborate piece of interior decoration such as this wood 
column capital. If total paint removal is deemed appropriate, all paint 
information should be carefully recorded. Photo; National Park Service 
files. 
Methylene chloride and other organic compounds are as 
effective as caustic strippers, but their fumes may be both 
flammable and toxic. While they may leave wood and 
plaster surfaces free from harmful residue, the newly 
cleaned surface must be washed down with mineral spirits 
or denatured alcohol before priming in order to remove 
additives, such as wax, that were put in the stripper to 
retard its drying . All hazard warnings on the labels of 
chemical strippers should be heeded. 
Detergent or vinegar and water. Water-based paints can 
usually be scrubbed off with hot water with a detergent 
added. Calcimine and whitewash are difficult to remove; 
because of the lime or whiting content (calcium carbonate), 
however, they can be broken down with acids. While 
strong acids may work quickly, they are very dangerous. 
Acetic acid in its most common form, vinegar, (4% acetic 
acid) is often used instead. In areas where any calcimine 
remains and is evident as chalk, the area can be coated with 
white shellac, which provides a stable surface for the new 
paint. 
Air pressure. Air pressure of 200-500 psi is effective for flat 
surfaces if there is a weak substrate surface bond. A flat 
nozzle is inserted between the paint layer and substrate, 
and the air pressure simply lifts the loose paint up for easy 
removal. When used carefully, this method is fast and 
causes little damage. 
Patching and Repair. Once the substrate and its surface are 
sound and clean, free from crumbling, loose material or 
dust, the next step is to undercut and fill any cracks in 
plaster surfaces. Plaster which has lost its key and is 
sagging should be re-attached or replaced. Friable plaster 
and punky wood need to be consolidated. Wood surfaces 
should be made as smooth as they were historically so that 
the paint film will cover a relatively uniform surface. 
Rotted wood must be removed and new wood carefully 
spliced in. Finally, gypsum plaster finishes can be painted 
as soon as the water has evaporated; a lime putty coat or 
traditional finish plaster can be primed almost immediately 
after drying as well, using alkali-resistant primers such as 
acrylic latex. 
Priming. The importance of a primer can hardly be 
overstated. It is the intermediary material between the 
immediate substrate, which may be an old paint layer or 
may be bare wood, plaster, or metal (rarely stone, as around 
a fireplace opening), and the fresh paint itself. The primer 
must be capable of being absorbed to some extent by the 
material underneath while being compatible and cohesive 
with the paint to be applied on top. Most paint 
manufacturers will provide explicit instructions about 
which primers are most compatible with their paints. 
Those instructions should be followed. 
The question of a primer for latex paint continues to be 
debated . Traditionalists recommend that the. primer 
between an old oil paint and a new latex paint be an oil 
primer, but the improvements to latex paint in recent years 
have led many experts to the conclusion that today's top 
grade latex primers are best for latex finish paints. If a latex 
primer is selected, the label on the can should specify 
clearly that it is one which can bond to an older oil or 
oil! alkyd paint. 
The most important general rule to remember is that softer 
or weaker paints should always go over harder and 
11 

stronger paints. For instance, because latex is stronger than 
oil, an oil or oil/ alkyd paint can go over a well adhered 
latex, but the reverse will run the risk of failure . Using 
primer and finish paints by a single company is a good way 
to guarantee compatibility . 
Choosing Modem Paint Types/Finish Coats 
Most frequently today, the project goal is preservation or 
rehabilitation. Because of the impracticality of replicating 
historic paints, restoration is least often undertaken. Given 
current laws restricting the use of toxic ingredients, such as 
lead, solvents, and thinners, contemporary substitute paints 
using safer ingredients need to be used . Many paint 
companies make latex paints in colors that are close to 
historic colors as well as appropriate gloss levels, but 
contain no white lead and no hazardous volatile organic 
compounds. 
Work on historic properties generally requires the services 
of a qualified paint contractor who has had at least five 
years of experience and who can list comparable jobs that a 
potential client can see. Then, too, getting a sample or a 
mock-up of any special work may be advisable before the 
job starts. While less experienced workers may be 
acceptable for preparing and priming, it is wise to have the 
most experienced painters on the finish work. 
Oil-based/alkyd paints. Today's version of oil paint has a 
binder that usually contains some linseed oil (read the 
paint-can label), but also has one of the improved 
synthesized oils, frequently soy-based, known as alkyds. 
They dry hard, have flexibility, and discolor far less than 
linseed oil. They can also be manufactured to dry with a 
high sheen, and can take enough tinting pigment to create 
even the very deep Victorian period colors. However, they 
all contain volatile organic compounds, and thus are 
forbidden by law in some parts of the United States. They 
are also less simple and more dangerous to use, as cleaning 
up involves mineral spirits. 
Acrylic water-borne paints (latex). Latex paints are 
synthetic resins carried in water. Before the paint dries or 
cross-links, it can be cleaned up with water . Early in the 
history of latex paints, some contained styrene/butadiene 
resins. Now nearly all top-grade latex paints contain acrylic 
resins, which are superior. Also, until fairly recently, the 
latex paints, while offering great strength, quick drying, 
and water clean-up, had some disadvantages for jobs which 
needed to have an historic look. Today, there are latex 
product lines with better gloss characteristics and more 
historic colors from which to choose. In addition, latex 
paints often have excellent color retention with very little 
fading. Still, it is always a good idea to buy a quart and 
"test paint" the color chosen for the job on site before 
making a total commitment. 
Calcimine/whitewash. Modern water-based paints such as 
calcimine can be purchased today and have much the same 
appearance as the early ones. The same is true of modern 
whitewash, although today's whitewashes do not leave the 
same ropy surface texture as the early ones. 
Glazes. Glazes were often part of historic paint treatments . 
Traditionally oil and turpentine, sometimes with a scant 
amount of pigment, today's glazes can be formulated with a 
water base and are relatively simple to apply by brush. An 
experienced decorative painter should be consulted before 
deciding whether to use a glaze coat rather than a high­
gloss enamel. The glaze is capable of providing protection 
as well as a more accurate historic appearance that includes 
a greater depth to the finish. 
EpoxieslUrethane. These were not available until relatively 
recently and thus are not appropriate for replication of 
traditional finishes. 
Types of Modern Paint 
Oil-based/alkyd: Non-volatile oils and resins, with 
thinners . (Alkyds are synthetic, gelatinous resins 
compounded from acids and alcohol.) Accept almost 
any type of coloring/hiding pigments. For use on 
interior wood and metal. 
Acrylic water-borne paints (latex): Suspension of 
acrylic or polyvinyl resins in water, with other resins, 
plus hiding and coloring pigments and extenders. 
Dries by evaporation. Commercially produced acrylic 
or latex enamels are also available in a complete range 
of gloss levels which are produced with the addition 
of various acrylic polymers. Use on interior plaster 
especially. 
Enamels: Modern alkyd paints are adjusted with the 
addition of synthetic varnishes to produce a complete 
range of gloss levels. 
Metal finishes: Paints marketed for use on metals, 
can either be alkyd, latex, or epoxy based, or 
combinations. The primers used for metals are 
formulated with rust-inhibiting ingredients. 
Special finishes: finishes such as urethane and epoxy­
based paints, marketed for very high gloss surface 
treatments. 
Applying Interior Paints 
Because flat wall surfaces generally dominate an interior 
painting job, some flexibility in applicators is suggested 
below : 
Brushes. Natural bristle brushes now have competition 
from synthetic brushes made of nylon or polyester which 
work well for applying either oil! alkyd or latex paints. 
Being harder than natural bristles, they tend to last longer. 
Since brushes come in a wide and very specific variety of 
types suited to different types of work, it is important to 
have a painter who will use the appropriate brush for the 
paint selected and for each portion of the job. One strong 
advantage of brushing paint on is that the paint is forced 
onto the surface and into all of its imperfections. Thus a 
good brushed-on paint job may last longer if the substrate 
is sound and the primer and finish coats are compatible and 
of top quality. 
Rollers. There is no harm in using a roller, or even an 
airless sprayer, to apply a prime coat to a large flat area. 
Since all contemporary commercial paints dry with a 
smooth surface anyway, use of a roller or sprayer is 
acceptable for priming, and even for a first finish coat. 
However, to get paint well pushed into articulated surfaces 
and to add some texture to larger flat surfaces, a brush is 
best. 
12 

13 
CAUTION: Before Painting/Know Paint 
Hazards and Take Action 
Before undertaking any project involving paint 
removal, applicable State and Federal laws on lead 
paint abatement and disposal must be taken into 
account and carefully followed. State and Federal 
requirements may affect options available to owners 
on both paint removal and repainting. These laws, 
as well as any requirements prohibiting volatile 
organic compounds (VOCs), should be requested from 
the State Historic Preservation Officer in each State. 
Below is a summary of the health hazards that 
owners, managers, and workers need to be aware of 
before removing paint and repainting: 
Lead and other heavy metal compounds. In virtually all 
paints made before 1950, the white or "hiding" 
pigment was a lead compound, or more rarely, zinc 
oxide. Work to remove lead paint such as scraping 
and dry sanding releases the lead-a highly 
damaging heavy metal-in dust. Lead dust then 
enters the human system through pores of the skin 
and through the lungs. The use of heat for stripping 
also creates toxic lead fumes which can be inhaled. 
To mitigate the hazards of lead paint ingestion, 
inhalation, or contact, it is extremely important to 
prevent the dust from circulating by masking room 
openings and removing all curtains, carpeting, and 
upholstered furniture. Drop cloths and masking 
containing lead dust should be carefully enclosed in 
tight plastic bags before removal. Workers and 
others in the room should wear High Efficiency 
Particulate Air (HEPA) filters for lead dust (fume 
filters if heat stripping is being used), change clothing 
just outside the room leaving the work clothes inside, 
and avoid any contact between bare skin (hands) and 
the paint being removed. Workers should also not 
eat, drink, or smoke where lead dust is present. 
Finally, anyone involved in lead paint removal 
~:lOuld undergo periodic blood testing. After work, 
ordinary vacuuming is not enough to remove lead 
dust; special HEPA vacuums are essential. The 
surfaces of the room must also be given a final wash 
with a solution of trisodium phosphate and water, 
changing the washing solution often and rinsing well. 
In addition to lead, early oil paints also had cobalt or 
other heavy metal compounds in them to accelerate 
drying. A small amount of mercury is also included 
in some latex paints to help prevent mildew and 
mold formation. 
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Organic paint 
strippers, such as methylene chloride, and oil I alkyd 
paints have VOCs as their solvent base. Inhaling 
these fumes can lead to respiratory and other 
illnesses, and to cancer. Especially in closed spaces 
(but in the outdoor environment as well) these 
compounds pollute the air and can damage health. 
Finally, decorative paint work in an historic interior­
whether simple or high-style-is well worth preserving or 
restoring, and when such fancy work is being undertaken, 
traditional tools should always be used (see Figure 22). To 
simplify by using short-cut methods or rejecting painted 
decoration is indeed to dismiss or skew history as well as to 
lose the enjoyment of a true historic finish. 
Figure 22. Traditional water-based paint and artists' brushes are being 
used to reproduce historic finishes within a restoration project. Photo: 
Courtesy, Alexis Elza. 
Summary 
First, it is most important to understand the range of 
approaches and treatments and to make choices with as 
much knowledge of the original and subsequent historic 
paints as possible, using the Secretary of the Interior's 
Standards for Historic Preservation Projects as a 
framework. 
A paint's patina of age expresses decades or centuries of 
endurance in the face of changing climate and conditions. 
Documenting the sequence of interior paint layers and 
protecting this information for future investigation should 
be an integral part of any historic preservation project. 
Except for the rare, scholarly restorations of historic 
interiors, most repainting jobs done today will employ 
modern paint formulations. Modern paints can recreate the 
appearance of historic colors, gloss and texture in varying 
degrees, but eliminate earlier toxic components such as 
white lead and volatile organic compounds. 

Additional Reading 
Clark, Victor S. History of Manufacturers in the United States, 
Vols. I-III. New York: McGraw-Hill,1929. 
Gettens, Rutherford J. and George L. Stout. Painting Materials: A 
Short Encyclopedia. New York: Dover Publications, 1966. 
MacDonald, Marylee . Preservation Briefs 21: Repairing Historic Flat 
Plaster-Walls and Ceilings. Washington, D.C.: National Park 
Service, U.s. Department of the Interior, 1989. 
Masury, John W. A Popular Treatise on the Art of House-Painting: 
Plain and Decorative. New York: D. Appleton & Co.,. 1868. 
Weeks, Kay D. and David W. Look, AlA. Preservation Briefs 10: 
Exterior Paint Problems on Historic Woodwork. Washington, D.C.: 
National Park Service, U.s . Department of the Interior, 1982. 
Winkler, Gail Caskey and Roger W. Moss. Victorian Interior 
Decoration: American Interiors 1830-1900. New York: Henry Holt 
and Company, 1986. 
Organizations 
National Paint and Coatings Association 
1500 Rhode Island Ave. N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
Painting and Decorating Contractors of America 
3913 Old Lee Highway, Suite 33B 
Fairfax, VA 22030 
Federation of Societies for Coatings Technology 
492 Norristown Rd. 
Blue Bell, PA 19422-2350 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks go to the technical experts in the field who reviewed the draft manuscript 
and made substantive contributions: Andrea M. Gilmore (Director, Architectural 
Services, Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities), Andy Ladygo 
(Jefferson's Poplar Forest), and Matthew J. Mosca, Historic Paint Research . 
Insightful comments were also offered by E. Blaine Cliver , Chief, Preservation 
Assistance Division. In addition, Technical Preservation Services Branch staff 
members (H. Ward Jand!, Chief) and the NPS Regions provided valuable 
suggestions on both content and organization. 
Photo: Matthew J. Mosca 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interior 
to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. 
Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be directed to: Chief, 
Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, P.O. Box 37127, 
Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. 
Kay D. Weeks served as project director and editor of the cooperative 
publication project. 
June, 1992. 
For sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328 14 