For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 
PRESERVATIO
BRIEFS 
The Preservation of Historic Glazed 
Architectural Terra-Cotta 
de Teel Patterson Tiller 
U.S. Department of the Interior National Park Service 
Preservation Assistance Division Technical Preservation Services 
Glazed architectural terra -cotta was significant in the devel­
opment of important architectural idioms in this country­
specifically. the "C hicago School,"" the High Rise and the 
Historic or Beaux Arts styles . In fact, glazed architectural 
terra-cotta is one of the most prevalent masonry building 
materials found in the urban environment today (Fig . I). 
Popular between the late 19th century and the 1930s, glazed 
architectural terra-cotta offered a modular , varied and rela­
tively inexpensive approach to wall and floor construction . 
It was particularly adaptable to vigorous and rich ornamental 
detailing . However, with changing vogues in materials and 
architectural styles and rising production costs , glazed archi­
tectural terra-cotta fell into disfavor and disuse by the mid-
20th century. 
Today, information on the maintenance , rehabilitation and 
replacement of glazed architectural terra-cotta is limited , as 
are sources of new glazed architectural terra-cotta . This re­
port, then, will discuss some of the major deterioration prob­
lems that commonly occur in historic glazed architectural 
terra-cotta , methods of determining the extent of that dete­
rioration and recommendations for the maintenance, repair 
and replacement of the deteriorated historic material. 
What is Terra-Cotta? 
Generically, the broadest definition of terr a-cotta refer s to 
a high grade of weathered or aged clay which , when mixed 
with sand or with pulverized fired clay , can be molded and 
fired at high temper atures to a hardnes s and compactnes not 
obtainable with brick . Simply put, terra-cotta is an enriched 
molded clay brick or block. The word terra-cotta is derived 
from the Latin word terra-cocta- literally , "coo ked earth. " 
Terra-cotta clays vary widely in color according to geogr aphy 
and types , ranging from red and brown to white . 
Terra-cotta was usually hollow cast in blocks which were 
open to the back, like boxes, with internal compartmt:nt -like 
stiffeners called webbing (Fig . 2) . Webbing substantially 
strengthened the load-bearing capacity of the hollow terra­
cotta block without greatly increasing its weight. 
Terra-cotta blocks were often finished with a glaze; that 
is, a slip glaze (clay wash) or an aqueous solution of metal 
salts was brushed or sprayed on the air-dried block before 
firing . Glazing changed the color , imitated different finishes, 
and produced a relatively impervious surface on the weather 
face of the final product . The glaze on the terra-cotta unit 
possessed excellent weathering propertie s when properly 
maintained. It had rich color and provided a hard surface that 
was not easily chipped off . Glazing offered unlimited and 
fade -resistant colors to the designer. Even today , few building 
materials can match the glazes on terra-cotta for the range 
and, most importantly, the durability of colors. 
Types of Terra-Cotta 
Historically there are four types or categories of terra-cotta 
which have enjoyed wide use in the history of the American 
building arts: 1) brownstone, 2) fireproof construction, 3) 
ceramic veneer, and 4) glazed architectural. 
Brownstone terra-cotta is the variety of this masonry material 
used earliest in American buildings (mid- to late 19th cen­
tury). The brownstone type is a dark red or brown block 
either glazed (usually a slip glaze) or unglazed. It was hollow 
cast and was generally used in conjunction with other masonry 
in imitation of sandstone , brick or real brownstone. It is often 
found in the architecture of Richard Upjohn, Jame s Renwick , 
H . H . Richardson and is associated with the Gothic and Ro­
manesque Revival movements through such ornamental de­
tailing as moldings, finials and cap itals. 
Fireproof construction terra-cotta was extensively developed 
as a direct result of the growth of the High Rise building in 
America . Inexpensive, lightweight and fireproof, these rough­
finished hollow building blocks were ideally suited to span 
the I-beam members in floor, wall and ceiling construction 
(Fig. 3) . Certain varieties are still in production today, al­
though fireproof construction terra-cotta is no longer widely 
employed in the building industry . 
Ceramic veneer was developed during the 1930s and is still 
used extensively in building construction today. Unlike tra­
ditional architectural terra-cotta , ceramic veneer is not hollow 
cast , but is as its name implies: a veneer of glazed ceramic 
tile which is ribbed on the back in much the same fashion as 
bathroom tile. Ceramic veneer is frequently attached to a 
grid of metal ties which has been anchored to the building. 
Glazed architectural terra-cott a was the most complex de­
velopment of terra-cotta as a masonry building mater ial in 
this country . The hollow units were hand cast in molds or 
carved in clay and heavily glazed (often in imitation of stone) 
and fired . Sometimes called "arc hitectural ceramics," glazed 
architectural terra-cotta was developed and refined through­
out the first third of the 20th century and has been closely 
associated with the architecture of Cass Gilbert, Louis Sul­
livan, and Daniel H. Burnham, among others . Significant 
examples in this country include the Woolworth Building 
(1913) in New York City and the Wrigley Building (1921) in 
Chicago. 
Late 19th and early 20th century advertising promoted the 
durable, impervious and ada ptable nature of glazed archi-

Section Throuith Typical Arch 
Perspective of Typical Arch 
Figure I. Terra-Cotta Detailing. Adaptable to every nuance of color, 
texture, and modeling , glazed architectural terra-cotta was ideally 
suited to satisfy the tastes of an eclectic age. Its popularity was, however , 
short lived; it endured only 30 or 40 years after its introduction as a 
building material late in the 19th century. (Larry Payne. Houston , 
Texas) 
tectural terra-cotta. It provided for crisp, vigorous modeling 
of architectural details as the molds were cast directly from 
clay prototypes without loss of refinement. Glazed architec­
tural terra-cotta could accommodate subtle nuances of mod­
eling, texture and color. Compared to stone, it was easier to 
handle, quickly set and more affordable to use. Thought to 
be fireproof and waterproof, it was readily adaptable to struc­
tures of almost any height. The cost of molding the cl ay, 
glazing and firing the blocks, when compared to carving 
Figure 2. Webbing. Webbing, or the hollow internal compartment 
construction of glazed architectural terra-cotta blocks. made them in ­
expensive to produce, easy to handle and light in construction; these 
were significant factors in the popularity of the material in the first 
decades of this century. 
2 
stone, represented a considerable savings, especially when 
casts were used in a modular fashion-that is, repeated over 
and over again. Maintenance of the fired and glazed surface 
was easy; it never needed paint and periodic washings re­
stored its original appearance . 
With the passage of time, many of the phenomenal claims 
of the early proponents of glazed architectural terra-cotta 
have proven true. There are many examples throughout this 
country that attest to the durability and permanence of this 
material. Yet present-day deterioration of other significant 
glazed architectural terra-cotta resources ultimately belie 
those claims . Why? Historically, the lack of foresight or un­
derstanding about the nature and limitations of the material 
has, in many instances, allowed serious deterioration prob­
lems to occur that are only now becoming apparent. 
Characteristics of Glazed Architectural Terra-Cotta as a 
Building Material 
Glazed architectural terra-cotta has many material properties 
similar to brick or stone. 
It also has many material properties 
radically different from those traditional masonry materials . 
It is those differences which must be considered for a better 
understanding of some of the material characteristics of 
glazed architectural terra-cotta when it is used as a building 
material. 
Difficult to identify: Glazed architectural terra-cotta probably 
comprises one of the largest if not the largest constituent 
material in some of our urban environments today. However, 
the infinite varieties of glazing have hidden this fact from the 
casual observer. One of the attractive features of glazed ar­
chitectural terra-cotta in its time was that it could be finished 
(glazed) in exact imitation of stone. In fact, many building 
owners and architects alike are often surprised to discover 
that what they presumed to be a granite or limestone building 
is glazed architectural terra-cotta instead. 
Two separate systems: Historically, glazed architectural terra­
cotta has been used in association with two specific and very 
different types of building systems: as part of a traditional 
load-bearing masonry wall in buildings of modest height. and 
as a cladding material in High Rise construction. As cladding, 
glazed architectural terra-cotta often utilized an extensive 
metal anchoring system to attach it or to "hang it" onto a 
wall framing system or superstructure (Fig. 4). In the first 
instance the anchoring was limited; in the second, the an­
choring was often extensive and complex. Likewise. in the 
first instance, deterioration has generally been limited. How ­
ever, where glazed architectural terra-cotta was used as clad-
Figure 3. Fireproof construction terra-cotta. Perspective anu secrion 
through fireproof construction terra-cotta and I-beam detailing in in­
dustrial floor construction. (Detail, "Sweets" Industrial Catalogue of 
Building Construction, 1906) 

Figure 4. Typical Construction Detail of Glazed Architectural Terra­
Cotta Ornament. Construction detailing was often complex. The terra­
cotta units (1) which were laid in mortar were fitted with holes or slots 
to receive the metal anchors (2) (often called "Z" straps or "light 
iron") which were often fitted directly to the building frame. Masonry 
backfill (])(either brick or poured cement) was laid between the terra­
cotta units, with the building frame encasing the metal anchor . Over­
hanging or protruding elements were further secured by metal dowels 
or outriggers (4). (Detail, Architectural Terra Cotta, Charles E. 
White, Jr., 1920) 
ding, particularly in high rise construction, present-day 
deterioration and failure are often severe. 
Complexity of deterioration: Deterioration is, by nature of 
the design, infinitely complex-particularly when glazed ar­
chitectural terra-cotta has been used as a cladding material. 
Deterioration creates a "domino "-like breakdown of the 
whole system: glazed units , mortar , metal anchors, and ma­
sonry backfill. In no other masonry system is material failure 
potentially so complicated. 
Poor original design: The root of deterioration in glazed ar­
chitectural terra-cotta systems often lies in a misapplication 
of the material. Historically , glazed architectural terra-cotta 
was viewed as a highly waterproof system needing neither 
flashing , weep holes nor drips . This supposition, howe ver, 
has proved to be untrue , as serious water-related failure was 
evident early in the life of many glazed architectural terra­
cotta clad or detailed buildings . 
Common Deterioration Problems 
No one case of deterioration in glazed architectural terra­
cotta is ever identical to another owing to the infinite number 
of variations with the material: original manufacture , original 
installation inconsistencies, number of component parts , on­
going repairs or the various types and source s of deteriora­
tion. However, certain general statements may be made on 
the nature of glazed architectural terra-cotta deterioration. 
Material failure can most commonly be attrib uted to water­
related problems . However, less frequent though no less se­
vere causes may include: faulty origina l craftsmanship , which 
is often cited but hard to det ermine; stress-re lated deterio­
ration; damage caused by later alterations and additions; or 
inappropriate repair s. 
Water-related deterioration: As with most building conser­
vation and rehabilitation problems. water is a principal source 
of deterioration in glazed architectural terra-cotta . Terra­
cotta systems are highly susceptible to such complex water -
related deterioration problem s as glaze crazing, glaze spalling 
and material loss , missing masonry units and deteriorated 
metal anchoring, 
among others. 
Crazing, or the formation of small random cracks in the glaze, 
is a common form of water-related deterioration in glazed 
architectural terra-cotta. When the new terra-cotta unit first 
comes from the kiln after firing, it has shrunken (dried) to 
its smallest possible size. With the passage of time, however , 
it expands as it absorbs moisture from the air, a process which 
may continue for many years. The glaze then goes into tension 
because it has a lesser capacity for expansion than the porous 
tile body; it no longer "fits" the expanding unit onto which 
it was originally fired . If the strength of the glaze is exceeded, 
it will crack (craze) (Fig. 5). Crazing is a process not unlike 
the random hairline cracking on the surface of an old oil 
painting . Both may occur as a normal process in the aging 
of the material. Unless the cracks visibly extend into the 
porous tile body beneath the glaze, crazing should not be 
regarded as highly serious material failure. It does, however, 
tend to increase the water absorption capability of the glazed 
architectural terra-cotta unit . 
Figure S. Crazing. Water and air-borne moisture entering the glazed 
architectural terra-cotta causes expansion of the porous clay body 
which increases its volume. This, in tum, is sufficient to upset the "fit " 
of the glaze and to make it shatter, commonly called crazing. 
Spalling, the partial loss of the masonry material itself, is, 
like crazing, caused by water and is usually a result not only 
of air-borne water but more commonly of water trapped 
within the masonry system itself. Trapped water is often 
caused by poor water detailing in the original design, insuf­
ficient maintenance , rising damp or a leaking roof . In most 
cases, trapped water tends to migrate outward through ma­
sonry walls where it eventually evaporates. In glazed archi­
tectural terra-cotta , the water is impeded in its journey by 
the relatively impervious glaze on the surface of the unit 
which acts as a water barrier . The water is stopped at the 
glaze until it builds up sufficient pressure (particularly in the 
presence of widely fluctuating temperatures) to pop off sec­
tions of the glaze (glaze spalling) or to cause the wholesale 
destruction of portions of the glazed architectural terra-cotta 
unit itself (material spalling). 
Glaze spalling may appear as small coin-size blisters where 
the glaze has ruptured and exposed the porous tile body be­
neath (Fig. 6) . This may occur as several spots on the surface 
or , in more advanced cases of deterioration , it may result in 
the wholesale disappearance of the glaze. Spalling of the glaze 
may also be symptomatic of deterioration (rusting) of the 
internal metal anchoring system which holds the terra-cotta 
units together and to the larger building structure . The in­
crease in volume of the metal created by rusting creates in­
creased internal pressures in the terra-cotta unit which , in 
3 

Figure 6. Glaze Spalling. Blistering of the glaze, like crazing , is the 
result of the increase in water in the porous clay body and the sub ­
sequent destruction of the glaze as a result of water migration and 
pressure . Glaze spa/ling may also be caused by deterioration of metal 
anchors behind the terra-cotta unit. 
Figure 7. Material Spalling. Excessive expansion of the porous tile 
body caused by water and freezing temperatures produces major ma­
terial spa/ling, a situation often difficult to repair. 
turn, may spall the glaze, or in more extreme cases, cause 
material spalling. 
Material spalling is a particularily severe situation. Not only 
is the visual integrity of the detailing impaired, but a large 
area of the porous underbody, webbing and metal anchoring 
is exposed to the destructive effects of further water entry 
and deterioration (Fig. 7). Both glaze and material spalling 
must be dealt with as soon as possible . 
Figure 8. Deterioration of Exposed Detailing. Exposed or .f reestand­
ing terra-cotta detailing (parapers, urns. balusrers, ere.) have rradi­
tional/y been subject to rhe most severe vicissirudes of deterioration as 
a result of freezing temperatures and water. (Colorado State Historic 
Preservation Office) 
4 
Missing units is a serious situation which particularly plagues 
architectural terra-cotta systems. Unlike brick or stone, dam­
aged glazed architectural terra-cotta is exceedingly difficult 
to replace . New production is extremely limited. Missing units 
create gaps which increase the structural load on the remain­
ing pieces and also permit water to enter the system. Exposed 
or freestanding glazed architectural terra-cotta detailing (bal­
usters, urns, parapet walls, etc.) are particularly susceptible 
to extensive loss of material (Fig. 8). These elements face the 
most severe vicissitudes of water- and temperature-related 
deterioration in direct proportion to the extent of their ex­
posure. The replacement of missing units should be a high 
priority work item in the rehabilitation of glazed architectural 
terra-cotta. 
Deterioration of metal anchoring: Deteriorated anchoring sys­
tems are perhaps the most difficult form of glazed architec­
tural terra-cotta deterioration to locate or diagnose. Often, 
the damage must be severe and irreparable before it is noticed 
on even the most intense "prima facie" examination. Water 
which enters the glazed architectural terra-cotta system can 
rust the anchoring system and substantially weaken or com­
pletely disintegrate those elements. Where water has been 
permitted to enter the system, some deterioration has more 
than likely taken place. Partial deterioration results in stain­
ing and material spalling. Total deterioration and the lack of 
any anchoring system may result in the loosening of the units 
themselves, threatening the architectural or structural integ­
rity of the building. Recently, falling glazed architectural 
terra-cotta units have become a serious safety concern to 
many building owners and municipal governments (Fig. 9). 
Early detection of failing anchoring systems is exceedingly 
difficult. 
Figure 9. Deterioration of Metal Anchoring and Masonry Backfill. 
Trapped water may deteriorate masonry backfill or rust metal an ­
choring causing overhanging architectural elements to loosen and drop 
from the building. This is particularly true when unmaintained roof 
drainage systems fail and soak the masonry system . Note the exposed 
metal anclforing. 
Deterioration of mortar and other adjacent materials: Dete­
riorated mortar has always been a key to the survival or 
failure of any masonry system. This is particularly true with 
glazed architectural terra-cotta. In recognition of the fragile 
nature of the system, the need for insuring a relatively dry 
internal system is important. Sound mortar is the "first line" 
of defense in terra-cotta systems. It is a maintenance "must." 
Deteriorated mortar joints are a singularly culpable source 
of water and, therefore, of deterioration. Mortar deteriora­
tion may result from improper original craftsmanship or air-

and water-borne pollution. More often, however, lack of on­
going maintenance is mainly responsible. Deteriorated mor­
tar should not be overlooked as a major source of glazed 
architectural terra-c0tta failure. 
The deterioration of materials adjoining the glazed archi­
tectural terra-cotta (flashing, capping, roofing, caulking 
around windows and doors) bears significant responsibility 
in its deterioration. When these adjoining materials fail, 
largely as a result of lack of maintenance, water-related de­
terioration results. For instance, it is not uncommon to find 
wholesale terra-cotta spalling in close proximity to a window 
or doorway where the caulking has deteriorated. 
Stress-related deterioration: Stress-related deterioration of 
glazed architectural terra-cotta frequently occurs in high rise 
buildings. The evolution of stress relieving details (flexible 
joints, shelf angles, etc.) occurred late in the development 
of American building construction. Consequently, most early 
continuously clad High Rise buildings (c .1900-1920s) had lit­
tle or no provisions for normal material and building move­
ment in their original design. The development of large stress­
related cracks or wholesale material deterioration is often 
caused by unaccommodated building-frame shortening under 
load, thermal expansion and contraction of the fac;ade and 
moisture expansion of the glazed architectural terra-cotta 
units themselves (Fig. 10). Cracks running through many units 
or stories or large areas of material deterioration often in­
dicate stress-related problems. This sort of deterioration, in 
turn, permits significant water entry into the terra-cotta sys­
tem. 
Figure IO. Structural Cracking. Structural cracking , whether static 
(nonmoving) or dynamic (moving or active), should be caulked to 
prevent water entry into the glazed architectural terra-cotta system. 
Note the exposed webbing. 
Inappropriate repairs: Inappropriate repairs result because 
using new terra-cotta for replacement of deteriorated or miss­
ing glazed architectural terra-cotta has generally been im­
practical. Repairs , therefore, have traditionally been made 
in brick or cementitious build ups of numerous materials such 
as stucco or fiberglass. Some materials are appropriate tem­
porary or permanent replacements, while others are not . 
(These issues are discussed at a later point in this report.) 
However, improper anchoring or bonding of the repair work 
or visual incompatibility of repairs have themselves, with the 
passage of time , become rehabilitation problems: replace­
ment brick that is pulling free, cement stucco that is cracking 
and spalling, or a cement or bituminous repairs that are not 
visually compatible with the original material. 
Alteration damage: Alteration damage has occurred as a re­
sult of the installation of such building additions as signs, 
screens, marquees or bird proofing . These installations often 
necessitated the boring of holes or cutting of the glazed ar­
chitectural terra-cotta to anchor these additions to the build­
ing frame beneath. As the anchoring or caulking deteriorated, 
or as these elements were removed in subsequent renovation 
work, these holes have become significant sources of water­
related damage to the glazed architectural terra-cotta system. 
Deterioration Inspection and Analysis 
Certain deterioration in glazed architectural terra-cotta may 
be on the building surface and patently obvious to the casual 
observer-crazing, spalling, deterioration of mortar joints . 
Other deterioration may be internal or within the masonry 
system and hard to determine-deterioration of anchoring, 
deterioration behind the glaze, crumbling of internal web­
bing. Prima facie, "first inspection," examination may indi­
cate surface deterioration problems while not revealing 
others. This demonstrates one of the most frustrating aspects 
of dealing with deteriorated glazed architectural terra-cotta : 
that there are two systems or levels of deterioration , one 
which is visible and the other which is not. 
Material failure in glazed architectural terra -cotta is nec­
essarily complex. For this reason, it is generally advised that 
the examination and repair of this material should be the 
responsibility of an experienced professional. Few restora­
tionists have experience in the inspection, repair and replace­
ment of glazed architectural terra-cotta. This is certainly 
never the province of the amateur or the most well-inten­
tioned but inexperienced architect or engineer. There are 
some methods of internal and external inspection and analysis 
which are relatively simple to the trained professional. Other 
methods , however, are expensive, time consuming, and only 
in the experimental stage at this writing. These all generally 
preclude the use of anyone but an experienced professional. 
Preliminary cleaning: Before a terra-cotta building is analyzed 
for deterioration , it is often advisable, but not always nec­
essary, to clean the surface of the material. This is particularly 
true when the material has been exposed to the vicissitudes 
of heavy urban pollution . While most building materials are 
cleaned for "cos metic" purposes, the cleaning of glazed ar­
chitectural terra-cotta for the purpose of inspection and anal­
ysis may be advised. Dirt on glazed architectural terra-cotta 
often hides a multitude of problems. It is only with cleaning 
that these problems become obvious. Recommended cleaning 
procedures are covered later in the report. 
Methods of inspection: 
Prima facie analysis is the unit by unit, first-hand, external 
inspection of the glazed architectural terra -cotta building sur­
face. Special note of all visible surface deterioration (staining, 
crazing, spalling, cracking, etc.) should be made on elevation 
drawings. Binoculars are often used where cost, height, or 
inaccessibility prevent easy inspection. However, much de­
terioration may go unnoticed unless scaffolding or window­
washing apparatus is used in a true "hands on" inspection of 
each unit of the fac;ade. 
Tapping, a somewhat inexact method of detection of internal 
deterioration is, nevertheless, the most reliable inspection 
procedure presently available. Quite simply, tapping is the 
striking of each unit with a wooden mallet. When struck, an 
undamaged glazed architectural terra-cotta unit gives a pro­
nounced ring, indicating its sound internal condition. Con­
versely, deteriorated units (i.e., units which are failing 
internally) produce a flat, hollow sound. Metal hammers are 
never to be used, as they may damage the glazed surface of 
the unit. Extensive experience is the best teacher with this 
inspection method. 
Infrared scanning is only in the experimental stage at this 
time , but its use seems to hold great promise in locating 
deteriorated internal material in terra-cotta. All materials 
emit heat-heat which can be measured in terms of infrared 
light. While infrared light cannot be seen by the human eye, 
it can be measured by infrared scanning. Infrared photog­
raphy, a kind of infrared scanning, has been of particular use 
in detecting sources of heat loss in buildings in recent years. 
5 

Broken or loose internal terra-cotta piece s have a less firm 
attachment to the surrounding firm or attached pieces and. 
therefore. have different thermal properties, i.e ., tempera­
tures. These temperature differences become evident on the 
infrared scan and may serve as a fair indication of internal 
material deterioration in terra-cotta. 
Sonic testing has been successfully used for some time to 
detect internal cracking of concrete members . In the hands 
of an experienced operator, there are conditions where it can 
detect internal failure in glazed architectural terra-cotta. 
Sonic testing registers the internal configuration of materials 
by penetrating the material with sound waves and reading 
the patterns that "bounce back" from the originating source 
of the sound. Readings at variance with those from undete­
riorated material might indicate collapsed webbing or pools 
of water in the interior of the terra-cotta unit. 
Metal detection is a nondestructive and generally useful way 
of locating the position of internal metal anchoring. Met al 
detectors indicate the presence of metals by electro-magnetic 
impulses. These impulses are transmitted onto an oscilloscope 
where they may be seen or they are converted to sound pat­
terns which may be heard by the operator. Original drawing s 
are eminently useful in predicting where internal metal an­
choring should be . Metal detectors can confirm that indeed 
they are still there . Without original drawings , the contractor 
or architect can still locate the metal anchoring, however. No 
reading where an anchor would be expected could indicate 
a missing anchor or one that has seriously deteriorated . The 
information produced by metal detection is, at best, only 
rough. However , it is the most viable way of locating the 
internal metal anchoring without physically removing, thu s 
irreparably damaging, the glazed architectural terra-cotta 
units themselves . 
Laboratory analysis may be carried out on samples of re­
moved original material to find glaze absorption, permeability 
or glaze adhesion, or to evaluate material for porosity. These 
tests are useful in determining the present material charac­
teristics of the historic glazed architectural terra-cotta and 
how they may be expected to perform in the future . 
Maintenance, Repair and Replacement 
Deterioration in glazed architectural terra-cotta is . by defi­
nition, insidious in that the outward signs of decay do not 
always indicate the more serious problems within. It is, there­
fore, of paramount importance that the repair and replace ­
ment of deteriorated glazed architectural terra -cotta not be 
undertaken unless the causes of that deterioration have been 
determined and repaired. As mentioned before , one of the 
primary agents of deterioration m glazed architectural terra­
cotta is water. Therefore , water -related damage can be re­
paired only when the soutces of that water have been elim­
inated. Repointing, caulking and replacement of missing 
masonry pieces are also of primary concern. Where detailing 
to conduct water in the original design has been insufficient , 
the installation of new flashing or weep holes might be con­
sidered. 
Where stress-related or structural problems have caused 
the deterioration of glazed architectural terra-cotta, the serv­
ices of a structural engineer should be sought to mitigate 
these problems. This may include the installation of relieving 
joints, shelf angles or flexible joints. In any case , stress-re­
lated and structural deterioration, like water-related deteri­
oration, must be stopped before effective consolidation or 
replacement efforts may begin. 
Cleaning: The successful cleaning of glazed architectural 
terra-cotta removes excessive soil from the glazed surface 
without damaging the masonry unit itself. Of the many clean­
ing materials available, the most widely recommended are 
water, detergent, and a natural or nylon bristle brush. More 
6 
stubborn pollution or fire-related dirt or bird droppings can 
be cleaned with steam or weak solutions of muriatic or oxalic 
acid. 
A note of caution: Any acids, when used in strong enough 
solutions , may themselves deteriorate mortar and "liberate" 
salts within the masonry system, producing a situation called 
efflorescence. For further information on this situation, refer 
to: "Preservation Briefs 1: The Cleaning and Waterproof 
Coating of Masonry Buildings," Heritage Conservation and 
Recreation Service, Department of the Interior, Washington , 
D.C. 
Commercial cleaning solutions may be appropriate but 
probably are not necessary when water and detergent will 
suffice. There are, however , certain cleaning techniques for 
glazed architectural terra-cotta which are definitely not rec­
ommended and which would damage the surface of the ma­
terial. These include: all abrasive cleaning measures (especially 
sandblasting), the use of strong acids (particularly fluoride­
based acids), high-pressure water cleaning and the use of 
metal bristle brushes . All of these techniques will irreparably 
harm the glaze in one fashion or another and subsequently 
expose the porous tile body to the damaging effects of water. 
It is important to remember that glazed architectural terra­
cotta was designed to be cleaned cheaply and easily. This , in 
fact, was one of its major assets and was much advertised in 
the selling of the material early in this century. 
Waterproofing: The covering of crazed glazing (see Fig. 5) 
with waterproof coatings is the subject of an on-going con­
troversy today. The question involves whether or not the 
micro-cracks conduct substantial amounts of water into the 
porous tile body . Tests indicate that the glaze on new unex ­
posed terra-cotta is itself not completely waterproof. Some 
testing also indicates that most crazing on historic glazed 
terra-cotta does not substantially increase the flow of mois­
ture into the porous tile body when compared to new ma­
terial. Excessive and serious crazing is, however, an exception 
and the coating of those areas on a limited scale may be 
wholly appropriate. 
In an effort to stem water-related deterioration, architects 
and building owners often erroneously attribute water-related 
damage to glaze crazing when the source of the deterioration 
is, in fact, elsewhere: deteriorated caulking, flashing, etc. The 
waterproof coating of glazed architectural terra-cotta walls 
may cause problems on its own. Outward migration of water 
vapor normally occurs through the mortar joints in these 
systems. The inadvertent sealing of these joints in the whole­
sale coating of the wall may exacerbate an already serious 
situation. Spalling of the glaze, mortar, or porous body will , 
more than likely, result. 
Repointing: Repointing of mortar which is severely deterio­
rated or improperly or infrequently maintained is one of the 
most useful preservation activities that can be performed on 
historic glazed architectural terra -cotta buildings. On-going 
and cyclical repointing guarantees the long life of this ma­
terial. Repointing should always be carried out with a mortar 
which has a compressive strength (measured in p .s.i.) lower 
than the adjacent masonry unit. Hard (Portland cement) or 
coarsely screened mortars may cause point loading and /or 
prevent the outward migration of the water through the mor­
tar joints, both of which ultimately damage the terra-cotta 
unit . Repointing with waterproof caulking compounds or sim­
ilar waterproof materials should never be undertaken be ­
cause, like waterproof coatings, they impede the normal 
outward migration of moisture through the masonry joints . 
Moisture then may build sufficient pressure behind the water­
proof caulk and the glaze on the terra-cotta to cause damage 
to the unit itself. 
Repair of glaze spalling: Glaze spalling is also a highly cul­
pable source of water-related deterioration in glazed archi-

tectural terra-cotta. It is important to coat or seal these 
blistered areas (see Fig. 6) and to prevent further entry of 
water into the system by this route. All loose or friable ma­
terial should be removed. This may be done easily by hand; 
chisels or similar small tools are most effective. The exposed 
material is then painted over. At this time, no permanently 
effective reglazing materials are available. However, there 
are several acrylic-based proprietary products and masonry 
paints which can be used effectively to protect these exposed 
areas, thus preventing the entry of water. These materials 
are effective for 5 to 7 years and can be reapplied. They also 
can be tinted to approximate closely the original glaze color. 
Repair of minor material spalling: Minor material spalling, 
where visual or cosmetic considerations are negligible, should 
be treated in a manner similar to glaze spalling damage. That 
is, areas where small portions of the body and glaze have 
spalled and which are far removed from close scrutiny (i.e., 
detailing on entablatures, upper story windows, etc.) are best 
remedied by painting with a masonry paint or an acrylic-based 
proprietary product. Units on which material spalling is easily 
observed (on the street level, door surrounds, etc.), and on 
which visual integrity is a consideration, may be better re­
placed. Patching is not appropriate. Stucco-like or cementi­
tious build-ups are difficult to form satisfactorily, safely and 
compatibly in situ to replace missing pieces of glazed archi­
tectural terra-cotta. Cementitious repairs never satisfactorily 
bond to the original material. The differential expans ion coef­
ficients of the two materials (the repair and the original) 
preclude a safe, effective and long-term attachment. 
Repair of major spalling: Glazed architectural terra-cotta 
units, which have spalled severely thereby losing much of 
their material and structural integrity in the wall, should be 
replaced. Partial in situ repair will not be long lasting and 
may, in fact, cause complicated restoration problems at a 
later date. Appropriate methods of replacement are discussed 
at a later point in this report. 
Temporary stabilization: Stabilization measures are necessary 
when deterioration is so severe as to create a situation where 
pieces of glazed architectural terra-cotta may fall from the 
building. This is a particular concern with greatly exposed 
detailing: cornices, balconies, balustrades, urns, columns, 
buttresses, etc. Restoration work on these pieces is expensive 
and often must be carried on over a period of time. Unstable 
terra-cotta pieces are often removed or destroyed in lieu of 
such measures . This is particularly true in areas of heavy 
traffic-related vibrations or in earthquake zones . There are, 
however, less severe measures which may be employed on 
a temporary basis . Substantial success has been achieved in 
securing unstable glazed architectural terra-cotta pieces with 
metal strapping and nylon net (Fig. 11). While these measures 
should not be seen as permanent preservation solutions, they 
do offer temporary alternatives to the wanton destruction of 
significant glazed architectural terra-cotta detailing in the 
name of public safety and local code compliance . 
Repair of addition and structural damage: Holes, sign an­
chors, slots for channel steel. or structural cracking in the 
surface of glazed architectural terra-cotta cladding should be 
permanently sealed with a material that will expand with the 
normal dynamics of the surrounding material, yet effectively 
keep water out of the system. Any one of a number of com­
mercially available waterproof caulking compounds would be 
appropriate for this work. Holes and static (nonmoving) 
cracks may be caulked with butyl sealants or acrylic latex 
caulks. For dynamic ( moving or active) cracks, the polysulfide 
caulks are most often used , although others may be safely 
employed. It is, however , important to remember that these 
waterproof caulking compounds are not viable repointing 
materials and should not be used as such. 
Figure 11. Temporary Stabilization Measures. Falling glazed archi­
tectural terra-cotta detailing has become a source of concern. partic­
ularly in dense urban areas and locations of high seismic activity. 
Nylon netting and metal strapping, while not seen as permanent pres­
ervation measures, do offer a temporary alternative to the removal of 
these elements. 
Temporary replacement: Temporary replacement measures 
should be implemented when missing units are scheduled to 
be replaced but work cannot be undertaken immediately. 
Lengthy delivery time, prorating of work or seasonal consid­
erations may postpone replacement work. Severe deterio­
ration should at least be ameliorated until work can begin. 
Temporary repointing, removal and saving of undamaged 
units to be reset later, or the temporary installation of brick 
infill to retard further deterioration might be considered. 
Removing earlier repairs: Removing earlier repairs may be 
necessary when the work has either deteriorated or has be­
come visually incompatible. Cementitious stucco, caulkings 
with black bituminous compounds or brick repair work may 
become structura lly or visually unstable or incompatible and 
should be removed and properly rehabilitated. 
Replacement of glazed architectural terra-cotta: Replacement 
of severely spalled, damaged, or missing glazed architectural 
terra-cotta elements is always difficult. Certainly, in-kind re­
placement is advisab le, but it has a number of drawbacks. 
Stone, fiberglass, and precast concrete are also viable choices, 
but like in-kind replacement, also have their inherent prob­
lems. 
Several notes on replacement: When replacing glazed archi­
tectural terra-cotta, all of the original deteriorated material 
should be completely removed. Half bricks or similar cos­
metic replacement techniques are not advised. 
-W hen possible and where applicable, replacement units 
should be anchored in a manner similar to the original. Both 
structural and visual compatibility are major considerations 
when choosing replacement materials. 
-Removing and reanchoring damaged glazed architectural 
terra-cotta is an extremely difficult"if not impossible task. The 
complexity of the interlocking system of masonry units, back-
7 

fill, and metal anchoring system precludes the removal of the 
glazed architectural terra-cotta unit without destroying it. 
Reanchoring deteriorated units is likewise impossible . There­
fore, if the terra-cotta in question is loose , severely deteri­
orated, or its structural integrity in serious question, it is best 
removed and replaced . 
In-kind replacement is possible today, but only on a limited 
basis . Most new glazed architectural terra-cotta is machine 
made , not hand made as the original. Thus, the porous tile 
body of the new material tends to be more uniform but less 
dense and often not as durable. The glaze on the new glazed 
architectural terra -cotta tend s to be thinner than that on the 
older material and subsequently more brittle. Machine proc­
essing has also produced a glaze that is uniform in color as 
opposed to historic glazes which were slightly mottled and, 
therefore , richer. Visual compatibility is an important con­
sideration when replacing in-kind . 
Only a fairly limited inventory of in-kind pieces is presently 
available for replacement such as plain ashlar blocks and the 
simpler details such as cappings and sills. When deterioration 
severely damages the more ornate pieces (urns, cartouche 
work, balusters, etc.) either expensive hand casting or alter­
native materials must be sought. There is a tendency today 
to replace damaged ornamental work with simpler , cheaper 
and more readily available units . This decision cannot, how­
ever, be supported, as the removal of this work inevitably 
diminishes the character and integrity of the building. An­
other major consideration in choosing in-kind replacement 
is the question of delivery time, which is often quite lengthy. 
If new glazed architectural terra-cotta is chosen as a replace­
ment material , the architect or building owner should plan 
far in advance. 
Stone may be a suitable replacement material for damaged 
glazed architectural terra-cotta . Its durability makes it highly 
appropriate, although the increase in weight over the original 
hollow units may be of some concern . The fact that historic 
glazed architectural terra-cotta was glazed in imitation of 
stone, however , may make the choice of stone as a replace­
ment material a fortuitous one. Metal anchoring may be ac­
commodated easily in the carving. Cost, however , is the 
major drawback in stone replacement, particularly where rich 
detailing must be carved to match the original. 
Fiberglass replacement is a viable alternative, particularly 
when rich and elaborate ornamentation has to be duplicated. 
Casting from original intact pieces can produce numerous 
sharp copies of entablatures , moldings , balusters , voussoirs, 
etc. Anchoring is easily included in casting. 
Significant drawbacks in using fiberglass replacement are 
color compatibility, fire code violations and poor weathering 
and aging properties. The appropriate coloring of fiberglass 
is exceedingly difficult in many instances . Painting is often 
unsatisfactory. as it discolors at a rate different than that of 
the historic glazed original. While fiberglass casting is lighter 
than the original units and. therefore, of great interest in the 
rehabilitation of buildings in areas of high seismic activity, 
many fire code requirements cannot be met with the use of 
this material. 
?recast concrete units show great promise in replacing glazed 
architectural terra-cotta at this writing. Precast concrete units 
can. like fiberglass, replicate nuances of detail in a modular 
fashion; they can also be cast hollow, use light-weight aggre­
gate and be made to accommodate metal anchoring when 
necessa ry. Concrete can be colored or tinted to match the 
original material with excellent results . It is cost effective and 
once production is in process, precast concrete can be pro­
duced quickly and easily. 
Experience shows that it is advisable to use a clear masonry 
coating on the weather face of the precast concrete units to 
guarantee the visual compatibility of the new unit, to prevent 
8 
moisture absorption, to obtain the proper reflectivity in im­
itation of the original glaze and to prevent weathering of the 
unit itself. Precast concrete replacement units are presently 
enjoying great use in replicating historic glazed architectural 
terra-cotta and show promise for future rehabilitation pro­
grams. 
Once the replacement material is selected (new glazed ar­
chitectural terra-cotta , stone, precast concrete, or fiberglass), 
it must be reanchored into the masonry system. Original 
metal anchoring came in numerous designs, materials and 
coatings ranging from bituminous-coated iron to bronze . 
While most of these anchors are no longer available, they 
may be easily replicated in large quantities either in the orig­
inal material when appropriate or out of more durable and 
available metals such as stainless steel. 
Since the masonry backfill is already in place in the historic 
building, the new replacement unit with anchoring may sim­
ply be fitted into the existing backfill by boring a hole or slot 
for anchor and bedding the anchor and the unit itself in mor ­
tar. When replacing historic glazed architectural terra-cotta 
which originally employed metal anchoring , it is important 
to replace that anchoring when replacing the unit. Serious 
problems may result if anchoring is omitted in restoration 
when it was used originally. It is erroneous to assume that 
mortar alone will be sufficient to hold these replacement 
pieces in place . 
Summary 
Today, many of this country's buildings are constructed of 
glazed architectural terra-cotta. However, many of these are 
in a state of serious deterioration and decay. Glazed archi­
tectural terra-cotta was, in many ways , the "wonder" material 
of the American building industry in the late 19th century 
and during the first decades of the 20th century. New tech­
nology and methods of rehabilitation now hold promise for 
the restoration and rehabilitation of these invaluable and sig­
nificant resources . Restoration /rehabilitation work on glazed 
architectural terra-cotta is demanding and will not tolerate 
half-way measures . Today 's preservation work should equal 
the spirit, attention to detail , pride in workmanship and care 
which characterized the craftsmanship associated with this 
widely used, historic masonry material. 
Suggested Further Readings 
" Recipes for Baked Earth ." Progressive Architecture, (November , 
1977). 
McIntyre, W .A . Investigations into the Durability of Architectural 
Terra Colla. Special Report 12. London: Department of Scien­
tific and Industrial Research, Building Research Station, 1929 . 
Prudon , Theodore H.M. "Architectural Terra-Cotta : Analyzing the 
Deterioration Problems and Restoration Approaches ." Tech­
nology and Conservation, Vol. 3 (Fall, 1978). pp . 30-38. 
Prudon, Theodore H.M . Terra Colla as a Building Material , A Bib­
liography. Ottawa , Ontario : Association for Preservation Tech­
nology. 1976. 
The illustrations for this brief not specifically credited are from the files of the 
Technical Preservation Services Division . 
This Preservation Brief was written by de Teel Patterson Tiller. Architectural 
Historian, Technical Preservation Services Division. Information for this pub ­
lication was based in part upon interviews and consultation with Theodore 
H.M. Prudon , The Eh renkrantz Group. P .C., New York. New York. Addi ­
tional comments and information were provided by Si A. Bortz . Illinois In ­
stitute of Technology Research Institute . Chicago. Illinois. and Jerry G . 
Stockbridge, Wiss, Janney . Elstner , and Associates . Northbrook . Illinois. 
This publication was prepared pur suant to Executive Order 11593, "Protection 
and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment ," which directs the Secretary of 
the Interior to "develop and make avai lable to Federal agencies and State and 
local governments information concerning professional methods and techniques 
for preserving , improving , restoring and maintaining historic properties ." The 
Brief has been developed under the technical editorship of Lee H. Nelson , AIA, 
Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, U.S. Depart ­
ment of the Interior, Washington , D.C. 20240. Comments on the usefulness of 
this information are welcome and can be sent to Mr. Nelson at the above ad­
dress. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penal ­
ty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National Park Service are 
appreciated. June 1979. 