44 
PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
 
The Use of Awnings on Historic Buildings: 
Repair, Replacement, and New Design 
Chad Randl 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
A shopkeeper rolls out an awning at the beginning of the 
workday; a family gathers under a porch awning on a 
late summer afternoon. These are familiar and compelling 
images of earlier urban and residential life in America. 
For two centuries, awnings not only played an important 
functional role, they helped define the visual character of 
our streetscapes. Yet, compared to historic photographs 
of downtowns and neighborhoods with myriad awnings, 
today's streets often seem plain and colorless. 
Throughout their history, awnings have had great appeal. 
Along with drapes, curtains, shutters, and blinds they 
provided natural climate control in an age before air 
conditioning and tinted glass. By blocking out the sun's 
rays while admitting daylight and allowing air to circulate 
between interior and exterior, they were remarkably 
efficient and cost effective. Awnings permitted window­
shopping on rainy days; they protected show window 
displays from fading due to sunlight. On the primary 
facade and near eye level, they were central to a building's 
appearance. Manufacturers came up with attractive, 
attention-getting awnings featuring distinctive stripes, 
ornate valances and painted lettering and logos. With a 
wide range of color and pattern choices, owners could 
select an awning that complemented the building and get 
both style and function in a relatively affordable package 
(Figs. 1 and 2). 
In recent years, building owners and others interested 
in historic buildings have rediscovered awnings. Local 
Figure 1. Storefront awnings over sidewalks and entrances were typical features of American streetscapes for much of the 19th and 20th centuries. 
Photo of Larimer Street, Denver, Colorado, c. 1870, Denver Public Library, Western History Collection, x-22058. 
1 

Figure 2. Awnings were an easy way to dress up and distinguish 
homes of virtually any style. Image: Otis Awning Fabrics Company 
brochure, c. 1920s. 
This Preservation Brief provides 
historical background 
information about diverse 
awning applications in the 
United States; suggests ways 
that historic awnings can best 
be maintained, repaired, and 
preserved; and recommends 
the varying circumstances in 
which replacement in kind, 
or new awning design may 
be appropriate for historic 
buildings. 
Historical Background 
much 'tis beaten about, betwixt the poles and cross­
beams." Over the next two millennia awnings appeared 
throughout the world, while the technology used in their 
construction changed little. 
Awnings in the 19th Century 
When awnings began to commonly appear on American 
storefronts-during the first half of the 19th century­
they were simple, often improvised, and strictly 
utilitarian assemblies. The basic hardware consisted of 
timber or cast-iron posts set along the sidewalk edge 
and linked by a front cross bar (Fig. 3). To lend support 
to larger installations, angled rafters linked the front 
cross bar to the building facade. The upper end of the 
canvas was connected to the facade with nails, with 
grommets and hooks, or by lacing the canvas to a head­
rod bolted to the facade. The other (projecting) end of 
the canvas was draped over, or laced to, a front bar with 
the edge often hanging down to form a valance. On 
ornate examples, metal posts were adorned with filigree 
and the tops decorated with spear ends, balls or other 
embellishments. On overcast days or when rain did 
not threaten, the covering was often rolled up against 
the building facade; during the winter months proper 
maintenance called for the removal and storage of 
Awnings are remarkable 
building features that have 
changed little over the course 
of history. Records dating 
back to ancient Egypt and 
Syria make note of woven 
mats that shaded market stalls 
and homes. In the Roman 
Empire, large retractable 
fabric awnings sheltered the 
seating areas of amphitheatres 
and stadiums, including the 
Coliseum. The Roman poet 
Lucretius, in 50 B.c., likened 
thunder to the sound that 
"linen-awning, stretched, o' er 
mighty theatres, gives forth at 
times, a cracking roar, when 
Figure 3. Early 19th century awnings featured canvas coverings stretched between the building facade 
and post-supported front bars. Projecting frameworks of extension bars were not common until later in 
the century. Photo: Second Street, Philadelphia, c. 1841, Print and Photo Collection, The Free Library of 
Philadelphia. 
2 
"main street" preservation programs encouraging-and 
in some cases funding-rehabilitation work have 
helped spur the awning's return. Continued concerns 
over energy efficiency have also persuaded building 
owners and developers to use awnings to reduce heat 
gain, glare, and cooling costs. Because awnings were 
so common until the mid-twentieth century, they are 
visually appropriate for many historic buildings, unlike 
some other means of energy conservation. 

Awning Vocabulary 
drop 
roller window awning 
r jecti n 
fixed pipe frame 
head-rod 
rafter 
fixed-arm awning 
roller 
awning 
covering 
extended 
valance 
hood 
scissors-arm awning \ 
3 

Figure 4. This 1892 photo shows the canvas sewing room of a large 
awning manufacturer. The wide variety of custom sizes and shapes, 
and the natural shrinkage of canvas demanded considerable skill in 
measuring, cutting and sewing. Photo: The Astrup Company.
Figure 5. During the second half of the 19th century, iron plumbing 
pipe became a popular material for fixed awning frames. Here, a pipe 
frame without its canvas cover extends around the corner of a build­
ing in Washington, D.C. Photo: Library of Congress, Prints and 
Photographic Division, LC-USZ62-121160. 
4 
awnings. Photographs from the mid-1800s often show 
the bare framework, suggesting that the covering was 
extended only when necessary. Canvas duck was the 
predominant awning fabric (Fig. 4). A strong, closely 
woven cotton cloth used for centuries to make tents and 
sails, canvas is a versatile material with a relatively short 
lifespan compensated for by its low cost. 
Awnings became a common feature in the years 
after the Civil War. Iron plumbing pipe, which was 
quickly adapted for awning frames, became widely 
available and affordable as a result of mid-century 
industrialization. It was a natural material for awning 
frames, easily bent and threaded together to make a 
range of different shapes and sizes (Fig. 5). At the same 
time the advent of the steamship forced canvas mills 
and sail makers to search for new markets. An awning 
industry developed offering an array of frame and fabric 
options adaptable to both storefronts and windows. 
Operable Awnings. In the second half of the 19th 
century, manufactured operable awnings grew in 
popularity (Fig. 6). Previously, most awnings had fixed 
frames-the primary way to retract the covering was to 
roll it up the rafters by hand. Operable systems for both 
storefront and window awnings had extension arms that 
were hinged where they joined the facade. The arms 
were lowered to project the awning or raised to retract 
the awning using simple rope and pulley arrangements. 
Because the canvas remained attached to the framework, 
retractable awnings allowed a more flexible approach to 
shading-shopkeepers and owners could incrementally 
adjust the amount of awning coverage depending upon 
the weather conditions. When the sun came out from 
behind clouds, the awning could be deployed with ease. 
In case of sudden storms, owners could quickly retract 
the awning against the building wall where it was 
protected from wind gusts. 
But the early operable awnings had their own 
drawbacks. When retracted, the covering on early 
operable awnings bunched up against the building 
facade where it was still partially exposed to 
inclement weather. (In fact, deterioration was 
often accelerated as moisture pooled in the fabric 
folds.) Also, the retracted fabric often obscured 
a portion of the window or door opening and 
unless it was folded carefully, presented an 
unkempt appearance. 
Figure 6. A 19th century shoe store in Rich­
mond, Virginia, had an operable awning retract­
ed against the building facade. Hinged extension 
arms were raised and lowered allowing for an 
awning configuration easily changed in response 
to weather conditions. This photo shows how 
the fabric gathered and was exposed to the ele­
ments when retracted -part of the reason roller 
awnings later became prevalent. Photo: Library 
of Congress, Prints and Photographic Division, 
LC-USZ62-99053. 

Roller Awnings. Addressing the drawbacks of the 
original hinged awning, new roller awnings featured a 
wood or metal cylinder around which the canvas was 
stored when the awning was retracted. When fully 
retracted, only the valance was visible (Fig. 7). The 
roller was usually bolted to a backboard set against the 
building and protected beneath a wood or galvanized 
metal hood. In some cases it was installed in a recessed 
box built into the facade. A long detachable handle 
(called a "winding brace"), or a gearbox and crankshaft 
attached to the building, was used to turn the roller. 
Some later models were operated by electric motor. 
Rollers, especially those on window awnings, often 
contained a spring that helped retract the awning and 
kept the canvas from sagging excessively. 
Most 19th century roller awnings had fixed arms that 
were similar to those found on the earlier operable 
awnings. The arms hinged flush to the building when 
the awning was retracted and, with the help of gravity, 
straightened out over the sidewalk when extended. 
When a storefront awning's projection exceeded its drop 
by more than a foot, its long arms were connected to 
an adjustable slide rod rather than hinged directly to 
the building facade-increasing head room along the 
sidewalk (Fig. 8). 
Shapes and Stripes. An expanded variety of available 
canvas colors, patterns, and valance shapes also 
appeared during this period . Some coverings were 
dyed a solid color; shades of slate, tan, and green were 
especially popular. Others had painted stripes on 
the upper surface of the canvas. Awning companies 
developed a colorful vocabulary of awning stripes that 
Figure 7. Early 20th century photo showing two operable awnings, 
an early version on the left and a next-generation roller awning on 
the right. The roller awning, with no side panels and just the valance 
showing, presented a clean storefront appearance. Photo: Utah State 
Historical Society, used by permission, all rights reserved. 
Vertical 
slide rod 
Figure 8. The roller bar at the top of a fixed-arm awning is cranked 
to release the fabric. As the canvas unfurls the vertical arms swing 
downward from their lower point. Because the pictured awning had 
a large projection, extending far from the building wall, the lower 
hinges were mounted on vertical slide rods affixed to the facade. 
When the awning is lowered, the bottom hinges of the arms travel up 
the slide rod to increase headroom beneath the fully extended awning. 
enhanced the decorative schemes of buildings, and in 
some cases, served as a building'S primary decora tive 
feature (Fig. 9). 
The broader choice of frame and canvas options 
encouraged the reassessment of awnings simply 
as a means to provide shelter from rain and sun. 
Homeowners found that the new generation of awnings 
could enhance exterior paint schemes and increase the 
visual appeal of their homes. Manufacturers deve loped 
new awning shapes, colors, patterns, and hardware 
to fit different house, door, win dow and porch styles 
(Fig. 10). They were an afforda ble, quick and simple 
improvement. They also proved to be an easy means 
of capturing outside space. Homeowners could use 
awning-covered balconies, porches and patios at 
any time of day; grocery stores were able to convert 
sidewalks to outdoor display areas protected from 
sunlight and quick changes in the weather. On Main 
Street, businesses used the expanded repertoire of 
awnings to draw attention to their buildings with bright 
colors, whimsical stripe patterns and exotic scallops. 
5 

Figure 9. A wide selection of striped patterns took the awning
beyond its original, utilitarian function to serve as a decorative and 
appealing building feature. Photo: LIbrary of Congress, Prints and 
Photographic Division, LC-D4-62072. 
Awnings increasingly functioned as signs identifying 
the proprietor's name, goods on offer, or year of 
establishment. It was a trend that would culminate over 
a century later with awning installations in which shelter 
was secondary to advertisement (Fig. 11). 
Awnings in the 20th Century 
Awning development during the early twentieth century 
focused on improving operability. Variations in roller 
awnings addressed the need to provide an increasingly 
customized product that accomodated a wide range of 
storefront configurations and styles. 
New folding-arm awnings appeared that operated either 
vertically or horizontally supplementing the fixed-arm 
awnings developed in the latter 19th century. Vertical 
folding arms were made up of smaller hinged arms 
that crossed like scissors. Operated by gravity the arms 
extended outward pulling the covering off the roller. 
Like a fixed-arm awning, the pitch of this scissors-type 
awning varied depending on whether it was fully or 
only partially extended (Fig. 12). Somewhat different 
was the "lateral arm awning" a horizontally operating 
awning that worked like a human elbow with the spring 
action in the arms pushing outward toward the street, 
WINDOW AWNINGS 
Square Top. Semi-circle. Round Corners . Segment Oval 
Figure 10. The expanding awning industry manufacturered frames 
and cut fabric for every type of window and door opening. This
19th century catalog illustration provides measuring .lnstructwns to 
assure a custom fit. Awnings were typzcally set within the wzndow 
opening. 
6 
21 DESIGNS FOR STORE AWNINGS 
Figure 11. A page from an early 20th century catalog shows lettering 
and signage that could be applied to commercial awnings. Image: 
Anchor Industries, Inc. 
unfurling the cover from the roller and maintaining 
tension. Lateral-arm awnings featured a shallow drop 
that remained relatively constant regardless of how far 
the arms were extended (Fig. 13). Operable awnings, 
whether fixed arm, scissors arm, or lateral arm, rapidly 
gained popularity as customers came to appreciate the 
flexibility, concealed appearance, and longer lifespan 
made possible by roller units. 
New Coverings. Slower to change was the fabric used 
to cover awnings. Canvas duck remained the common 
awning fabric during the first half of the 20th century. 
However, its tendency to stretch and fade, and its 
susceptability to mildew, and flammable materials like 
cigarettes and matches motivated the awning industry 
to search for alternatives. Shortly after World War II, 
a vinyl plastic coating that increased fade and water 
resistance was first applied to the canvas. By the 1960s, 
vinyl resins, acrylic fibers and polyester materials were 
all being used to provide a longer-lasting awning cover. 
Ironically, just when these innovations promised more 

Figure 12. Scissors-arm awnings have a pair of vertical, hinged arms 
on either side of the assembly supporting the front bar. To unfurl the 
awning, the roller is cranked and the arms extend outward pulling 
the cover away from the roller. 
Figure 13. Lateral-arm awnings were preferred on long eleva­
tions, especially those with sheet glass (where vertical arms could 
not be fastened to the building facade). When lateral arm awnings 
were installed across a broad storefront or porch, manufactur-
ers recommended spacing the arms at approximately eight foot 
intervals. 
durable awnings, the fabric awning industry felt the 
impact of changing architectural fashion, the widespread 
adoption of air conditioning, and the increasing 
availability of aluminum awnings . 
Modernism dominated commercial architecture during 
the postwar era. The style's signature form-austere 
steel, glass and concrete boxes-had little use for fabric 
awnings . Colorful awnings seemed old-fashioned, 
an unwanted distraction from the smooth lines of the 
machine aesthetic. The preference, instead, was for 
perforated structural screens or brises-soleil (French: 
"breaks the sun") that integrated shading functions with 
new building forms. It was assumed that new buildings 
had no need for awnings . Widely available for the first 
time, mechanical air conditioning threatened to make the 
awning an unnecessary vestige of an earlier era. Awning 
companies fought back with arguments that traditional 
shading systems could reduce the required size and 
investment in air conditioning systems. Though 
canvas awnings continued to be used on contemporary 
buildings , new types were often selected to do the job, 
aluminum and fibergla ss awnings. 
Widely available by the 1950s, aluminum awnings 
were touted as longer-lasting and lower-maintenance 
than traditional awnings. Though used on small-scale 
commercial structures , they were especially popular 
with homeowners . Aluminum awnings were made 
with slat s called "pan s" arranged horizontally or 
vertically . For variety and to match the building to 
which they were applied , different colored slats could be 
arranged to create stripes or other decorative patterns. 
While aluminum awnings were usually fixed, in the 
1960s several operable roller awnings were developed, 
including one with the trade name Flexalum Roll-Up 
{Fig. 14). 
Also during this period, manufactured flat-metal 
canopies were an increasingly popular feature, used in 
new comm ercial construction and when remodeling 
existing storefronts . They were particularly common in 
the South where shading was critical to the comfort of 
both window shoppers and store interiors . Often made 
of aluminum, the canopies could stretch across a single 
facade, or be connected to extend along an entire block. 
New Shapes. An increasing reliance upon fixed 
aluminum frames and plastic coverings spurred the 
development of new awning shapes during the 1970s 
and 1980s. Often, the awning served as a business's 
primar y sign. Mansard awnings, concave awnings, 
quarter-round awning s, and quarter-rounds with 
rounded dome ends appeared with increasing frequency. 
Most had vinyl or other plastic coverings that were 
tout ed as being more resilient than traditional materials . 
Featuring bold lettering and colors that were often 
emphaSized by illuminating the awnings from within, 
these awnings were common on new commercial 
strips and were even popular inside enclosed shopping 
7 

centers and food courts. They were also applied, less 
successfully, to older or historic buildings where their 
shape, size, and material bore little resemblance to 
traditional awnings. 
Although the 1950s and 1960s saw the end of the 
canvas awning's ubiquity on Main Street, it remained a 
moderately popular feature of residential architecture . 
New materials and technologies such as lateral arm 
operators, acrylic fabric, and aluminum kept the awning 
relevant to the postwar ranch house and afforded an 
economical way to update older structures. Colorful 
awnings helped suburban dwellers distinguish their 
homes from other, similar, models in the neighborhood. 
Awnings Today 
Today, awnings come in a variety of shapes, sizes, frames 
and fabrics. Fixed, quarter-round, back-lit awnings with 
broad faces featuring company names, logos, phone 
numbers, and street addresses function more as signs 
than sunshades . Restaurants and other commercial 
chains use illuminated awnings with nationally 
recognized brand graphics and stripe and color patterns 
to attract customers along suburban strips. The 
triangular shed frame shape has enjoyed a resurgence 
of popularity in recent years, in many cases playing off 
nostalgia for the traditional awning. Relatively new 
"staple-in" awnings with a shed shape are commonly 
used on new commercial construction. This system has 
a welded frame of extruded aluminum with a slot on 
the outer edge. The fabric covering is pulled taut, and 
the ends are secured in the groove with galvanized steel 
staples. A vinyl trim bead covers the groove, protecting 
the fabric edges and providing a flush appearance. 
Apart from the strip mall, awnings are also reappearing 
in historic business districts and residential 
neighborhoods. In these locations, new awnings 
typically feature fixed frames or operating lateral arms­
both differing little from the awnings of one hundred 
years before. Fixed-frame awnings have frames made 
of either aluminum or light-gauge galvanized or zinc-
8 
Figure 14. The years after World 
War II saw the widespread adoption 
of aluminum awnings on both 
storefronts and residences. Operable 
aluminum awnings incorporated a 
spring-loaded roller into the frontbar . 
coated steel pipes welded together. Frames are secured 
to building facades with clamps, z-shaped clips, and 
other hardware. Until recently, operable awnings found 
in historic commercial districts were primarily those 
with historic frames and hardware that had survived to 
the present. But new lateral-arm awnings with powder­
coated aluminum frames are an increasingly common 
choice for building owners who want the convenience of 
an operable system . 
Solution-dyed acrylics and acrylic-coated polyester­
cotton blended fabrics are often used to replicate historic 
awning coverings. These relatively new materials 
resemble canvas in appearance and texture, yet offer 
greater strength and durability. Because acrylics are 
woven (with the stripes and colors woven directly into 
the fabric rather than painted on the surface), they are 
durable and allow light to filter through while keeping 
heat out. They dry quickly, thereby reducing damage 
caused by mildew, and contain a UV inhibitor that 
further reduces sunlight damage. Poly-cotton fabrics 
coated with a thin acrylic layer that repels dirt and 
resists abrasion are also used. Both acrylic and poly­
cotton fabrics do not stretch or shrink like traditional 
canvas so they are generally easier to measure, cut, and 
install. 
Preserving Existing Historic Awnings 
If awnings already exist on a historic building, they 
should be evaluated to determine whether they are 
appropriate to the age, style, and scale of the building, 
using the criteria identified below. Backlit awnings 
and dome awnings are usually inappropriate for 19th 
century and other historic buildings, while aluminum 
awnings may be perfectly compatible with buildings 
from the 1950 or 60s (Fig. 15). The time is approaching 
when some aluminum awnings may even be considered 
appropriate to older buildings, if the awnings formed 
part of an updated storefront, or are central features of 
an intact postwar refashioning of the building's exterior 
(Fig. 16). 

When an existing awning is determined to be 
appropriate to the building, a program of repair 
and regular maintenance should be developed. The 
condition of its covering, hardware, connections between 
the hardware and the building, and the awning's 
operability should be evaluated. Hardware such as 
arms, rollers, and gearboxes may only need cleaning and 
lubrication. In other cases more substantial repairs by an 
awning company familiar with historic hardware may 
also be needed. 
Awning Repair and Maintenance. The best 
preservation practice is to maintain and repair historic 
features. The proper care and maintenance of existing 
awnings and canopies will extend the life of both 
hardware and covering while ensuring the safety of 
those passing beneath them. Parts for historic hardware 
can still be obtained from some suppliers, either from 
existing stock or as newly manufactured pieces. In some 
cases, new marine and boating hardware can substitute 
for missing historic awning hardware. Damaged pieces 
of the still popular galvanized pipe frames can easily 
be bent back into shape or, if necessary, replaced with 
virtually identical material. 
Figure 15. This 1950s-era dry cleaner has an aluminum awning that, 
with its vertical pattern and alternating stripes, complements the 
facade's porcelain enamel panes and aluminum mullions. The awning 
forms an essential element of the building's historic character. 
Ongoing maintenance consists of keeping all pivot 
points and gears lubricated and clean of debris. Regular 
inspections should also include checking for rust 
on the frame and hardware. Such areas should be 
promptly scraped and painted, as rust may discolor and 
deteriorate fabric coverings. When awning hardware 
is properly repaired and maintained, its lifespan can be 
significantly extended. 
Exposure to the elements and the limited lifespan 
of even new acrylic fabrics mean the repair and 
replacement of the covering will probably occur more 
frequently than work on the frame or hardware. The 
longevity of any fabric covering is largely dependent 
upon where it is installed and how it is cared for. 
Awnings beneath overhanging trees, for example, are 
vulnerable to sap, fruit, and animal droppings that 
contain acids, which can deteriorate and discolor fabrics. 
Branches, flags, banners or other objects brushing 
against an awning can abrade the awning fabric. With 
proper care acrylic fabrics on fixed awnings have 
a service life of eight to fifteen years of year-round 
exposure. 
Figure 16. These fiberglass "clamshell" awnings, although not as 
old as the 1930s building to which they were affixed, are important 
features that have acquired significance. They were retained when 
the building was recently rehabilitated. 
9 

Regular cleaning will lengthen the lifespan of any 
awning. About once a month the covering should be 
hosed down with clean water . Choose a sunny day 
so that the fabric dries quickly and thoroughly. Keep 
retractable awnings extended until they dry completely. 
The awning underside can be kept clean by brushing 
it with a household broom. Regular cleaning helps 
prevent dirt from becoming embedded in the fabric. At 
least twice a year the awning should be gently scrubbed 
using a soft brush and a mild, natural soap (not a 
detergent) and rinsed with a garden hose. Every two 
or three years, professional cleaning is recommended . 
During this process, the covering is usually removed 
from the building, washed, and treated with an 
appropriate water repellant solution. Local awning 
companies may offer this service or the building owner 
can ship the covering to a specialty awning cleaning 
firm. Depending on the frame style and fabric, some 
awnings may be cleaned without being removed. 
While most fixed awnings remain in place year round, 
they last longer if taken down at the end of the warm 
weather season. Preferably, coverings should be 
removed by an awning service that can clean them, 
restitch seams if necessary, and store them for the 
winter. Property owners removing awning coverings 
themselves need to store them in a dry place with good 
air circulation. 
If a covering begins to sag between cleanings, the cause 
(an object on top stretching the material, loose laces, a 
damaged seam) must be addressed as soon as possible . 
When other maintenance or repair work is undertaken 
on the building, it is advisable to remove fixed awnings 
temporarily, as they are easily damaged or stained by 
materials dropped from above. 
10 
Funding Awning and Canopy Work 
In some commercial districts, local "main stree t" 
associations, chambers of commerce, or business 
improvement district offices offer assistance for 
awning rehabilitation projects. Such organizations 
may sponsor grant programs or low-interest loan 
programs with funds that can be used for awning 
work. These initiatives, often bundled with facade 
improvement and signage programs, enhance 
the visual character of a street or neighborhood, 
encourage conformance with guidelines and 
offset what is in some cases the higher cost of 
a historically appropriate installation . When 
a building is located within a historic district, 
additional grants, loans and tax incentives may 
exist. The availability of funding assistance, in 
these cases, is usually contingent upon comple ting 
rehabilitation work in keeping with established 
preservation practices. 
Although more durable than in times past, awning 
covers can still develop tears and holes caused by 
ladders, falling trees, and vandalism. Fabric nearing the 
end of its service life is most vulnerable to tearing along 
the seams. Though awning companies are usually called 
to do repairs, enterprising owners can undertake some 
work themselves. If the damage is minor, repair work 
may be done while the awning remains in place . Small 
holes or tears in acrylic coverings can be immediately 
treated with a hot needle or awl that will melt the frayed 
edges and prevent the damage from spreading. Patch 
kits are available that function like band-aids, keeping 
the torn edges together. These patches, glued or sewn 
to the fabric, let the awning color show through but do 
have a semi-gloss sheen to them. Significant damage 
requires removing the covering and, usually, sending 
it to a sewing shop. There, work may include inserting 
a fabric patch, restitching seams, or replacing an entire 
fabric panel. If the awning is relatively new it is possible 
to obtain a good match between replacement and 
original material. 
Installing New Awnings 
Since fabrics are subject to weathering and deterioration 
and hardware is exposed to the elements, some awnings 
may be beyond repair. Depending on the circumstances, 
new awnings may replace deteriorated existing awnings 
in kind or be installed where awnings were once in place 
as seen in pictorial or physical documentation. In other 
instances, they may be newly installed where no awning 
previously existed, provided they are compatible with 
the historic building. Whatever the circumstances, it 
is important to select an appropriate awning shape, 
material, frame dimensions, signage (if any), and 
placement on the facade . 
If the condition of a historically appropriate existing 
awning is beyond repair, it should be used as the basis 
for selecting a replacement. When a historic awning 
is missing, owners should first look for evidence of a 
previous awning installation. Evidence can be either 
physical or documentary. The existence of surviving 
hardware-rollers and arms, gearboxes, clamps and 
other fasteners-or signs that hardware was once in 
place, such as bolt holes or recessed roller boxes-are 
the most likely forms of physical evidence (Fig. 17). 
Storefront remodeling projects often uncover concealed 
and disused awning hardware that can either be repaired 
or at least suggest what type of awning was formerly 
in place . This is especially true for awnings that had an 
operating rod, gearboxes, and perhaps motors concealed 
in recesses within the building wall. Protected from the 
elements, these items are likely to survive in repairable 
condition. Sometimes physical evidence of earlier 
awnings can be found in the basement or upper floors 
where hardware and even old coverings may have been 
stored after being removed from the facade. 
Clamps, fasteners, and bolt holes in an exterior wall can 
reveal the position, type and dimensions of a missing 

Figure 17. A gearbox, slide rod, roller, front bar, and extension 
arm reveal that this 19th century building once featured a 
retractable awning. It is likely that with minor repairs the 
surviving hardware could again be made operable, recovered with 
a canvas or acrylic fabric, and reused to service the storefront . 
awning installation. Fittings or other marks on the side 
of the entrance or windows, for example, suggest that a 
fixed-arm awning was present rather than a lateral-arm 
awning. Gearboxes point to a retractable rather than a 
fixed awning. 
Historic photographs and drawings are a primary 
documentary resource used to determine an earlier 
awning configuration. Photographs have the added 
benefit of providing information about the covering, 
such as stripe pattern, valance type, and lettering. When 
old photographs indicate that the historic character of a 
building was defined in part by distinctive awnings, it 
is appropriate to install new awnings that replicate their 
appearance (Fig. 18). If there is evidence that awnings 
were once present but no information about their color 
or signage is available, a color should be selected that is 
in keeping with the historic character of the building and 
district. 
Where no awning currently exists, and there is no 
evidence of a past one, it may still be possible to add an 
awning to a historic building without altering distinctive 
features, damaging historic fabric or changing the 
building's historic character. A new awning should 
be compatible with the features and characteristics 
of a historic building, as well as with neighboring 
buildings, or the historic district, if applicable. Historic 
photographs of similar neighboring buildings with 
awnings, can also be helpful in choosing an appropriate 
installation. When selecting and installing a new 
awning, a number of other factors should be considered: 
shape, scale, massing, placement, signage, and color. 
Shape. Traditionally, both residential and commercial 
awnings were triangular in section, usually with a 
valance hanging down the outside edge (Fig. 19). 
Early examples of these "shed" awnings had simple 
Figure 18. (Above) When the county clerk in Morgan County, 
West Virginia, was looking to reduce glare in the courthouse 
offices she located a 1940s photo showing sets of awnings on the 
first floor. (Below) Using the historic photos as a guide, new 
awnings with a similar shape and stripe pattern were installed 
increasing the comfort of employees and protecting county records 
from direct sunlight. Above photo: Frances Widmeyer and Debra 
Kesecker. 
11 

frameworks consisting of pipes or planks angling out 
from the building facade and supported on posts. Early 
retractable versions continued this triangular form. 
New awning shapes appeared in the later 19th century 
to accommodate the expanding variety of door and 
window configurations. Casement window awnings 
were box-like in shape to accommodate the outward 
swing of the vertical sash. Window openings with 
arched tops, such as those found on Italianate houses 
and commercial buildings, were often shaded by 
awnings with matching tops. 
Generally, traditional shed awnings are appropriate for 
most historic window, door, and storefronts installations. 
It is preferable (and in some historic districts, required) 
that these awnings have free-hanging valances, the 
flapping bottom pieces so characteristic of historic 
awnings. Quarter-round awnings, modern mansard 
awnings, and other contemporary commercial designs 
with distended, fixed valances have no precedent in 
traditional awning design and are usually inappropriate 
for historic buildings (Fig. 20). 
Likewise, staple-in systems are not recommended for 
historic buildings. One of the distinctive features of a 
staple-in system is an exceptionally taut and wrinkle-free 
appearance; indeed, this is a chief appeal of the system 
when applied to new construction. Historic awnings, 
however, were either retractable or built with a covering 
laced onto a frame. Both forms had a fair amount of 
give in the fabric. Staple systems, especially those with 
long valances, usually present an appearance more 
suited to newer construction. While not recommended 
for installation on most historic buildings, they may be 
suitable for infill construction within a historic district. 
Scale, Massing, and Placement. Because their primary 
purpose was functional rather than decorative, awnings 
were traditionally installed only where necessary. 
Window awnings were most commonly found on 
building elevations with southern exposures in the 
northern areas of the United States and on elevations 
with both northern and southern exposures in the 
southern United States. They were also found on east 
and west elevations, and sometimes just on selective 
windows. Retractable awnings were originally more 
common in northern climates where awnings required 
additional protection from extreme weather conditions. 
The design of a particular commercial building 
influenced the placement of its awnings. Some 
storefronts with traditional glass transoms had 
the awning placed below the transom, others, had 
the awning installed above the transom. On both 
commercial and residential buildings, awnings were 
only wide enough to cover the window openings that 
they sheltered; a single awning rarely covered two or 
more bays (Fig. 21). On storefronts, they were not higher 
up on the building facade than was necessary to shade 
the entrance and display window. Thus, it is important 
12 
Figure 19. Simple shed-type awnings with acrylic or canvas 
coverings and free-hanging valances are appropriate for most historic 
residences featuring rectilinear openings. 
Figure 20. A dome awning was an inappropriate addition to this 
circa 1890s building. In order to qualify for historic tax credits 
the new viny l awning was replaced with a shed awning with a 
canvas-like woven acrylic covering. 
Figure 21. Single awnings should not be set over more than one 
door or window bay. A separate shed awning with a canvas or 
acrylic covering would be more appropriate over each of these 
openings. 

when installing new awnings on historic buildings to 
ensure that the covering not obscure the building's 
distinctive architectural features (Fig. 22). Also, new 
awning hardware should not be installed in a way 
that damages historic materials. Clamps and fasteners 
used to attach awning frames should penetrate mortar 
joints rather than brick or other masonry surfaces. If 
new backboards and rollers are installed, care needs to 
be taken not to damage cornices or transoms. Finally, 
awning placement, size, and shape must be compatible 
with the historic character of the building (Figs. 23 and 
24). 
Material. Historically, awnings were covered with 
canvas that was either solid in color or painted with 
stripes. During the second half of the twentieth century 
canvas fell out of favor and was superceded by vinyl 
and other synthetic textiles. For various reasons 
-particularly its reflectivity and texture-vinyl is 
generally an unsuitable material for awnings on historic 
buildings. Many historic review commissions note the 
inappropriateness of vinyl in their guidelines and call 
for the use of canvas, canvas blends, or acrylics that 
resemble canvas. 
Figure 22. These window awnings today match what would 
have appeared in the 19th century. The fabric is slightly loose 
on the frames, the valances hang freely, each window bay has its 
own awning, and the awning frames are set within the openings. 
Photo: Mike Jackson. 
Weather-resistant acrylic fabrics such as solution-dyed 
acrylic and acrylic-coated polyester-cotton approximate 
the historic look of canvas coverings, yet afford a new 
level of durability, color-fastness, and ease of use. 
Quality poly-cotton coverings may be more appropriate 
in some cases because, like traditional awnings, the 
colors and stripes are painted directly on the upper 
surface, while the underside remains a pearl gray color. 
Signage. In addition to sheltering shoppers and 
merchandise, and reducing glare and temperatures, 
awnings on commercial buildings offer valuable 
advertising space. Photographs from the mid-19th 
century show a wide range of lettering and logos­
business names, types of trade (hosiery shop, telegraph 
house), street numbers-on the sloped coverings and 
side flaps of awnings. The most common placement 
of a shop proprietor's business name or service was on 
the valance hanging down from the awning edge. The 
front valance provided a flat surface visible whether the 
awning was retracted against the building wall or fully 
extended (Fig. 25). Many establishments, however, left 
their awnings unadorned without any lettering. 
Figure 23. This postwar aluminum awning does not contribute to 
the character of this 19th century residence and could be replaced 
during a rehabilitation project with a fabric shed awning more in 
keeping with the building's age and appearance. 
13 

Figure 24. This awning, extending across much of the building , is 
incompatible in shape. Of greater concern, however, is that its size 
wholly overshadows the modest historic building behind. 
Figure 26. The green and burgundy stripes that decorate these 
porch awnings complement the matching shutters and brick 
facade. 
designs embellished building facades like a necktie or 
scarf does a suit. The vibrancy they lent to city streets 
and neighborhoods is part of the history of these 
environments and similar results can be achieved today 
as well. 
Awning and Canopy Regulation 
Because commercial awnings often extend into the 
public right-of-way, municipal building departments 
usually regulate their use. Regulations specify 
construction type (materials and dimensions of framing 
members, the use of flame-retardant fabrics), minimum 
height above the sidewalk (usually between seven and 
ten feet), minimum distance between the projecting 
edge and the curb (usually between one and two feet), 
and maximum projection from the building wall. 
Such regulations are meant to ensure that awnings are 
securely built, do not pose a threat to pedestrians, and 
Today creating large lettered signs on a new awning 
as part of a rehabilitation project requires special care 
and is not appropriate in all cases. Used long before 
any local signage control, historic 
examples of such lettering often 
reflected the character of a district, 
with more upscale retail areas, for 
example, being more reserved than 
wholesale districts. Contemporary 
awning lettering can add visual 
interest and commercial identity but 
should be designed in keeping with 
the historic character of a building 
and its historic district. 
Color. As in the past, variety in 
awning color is an appropriate 
characteristic when reintroducing 
awnings in historic districts. 
Since the 19th century, awnings 
have featured a range of different 
stripe patterns and an extensive 
color palette (Fig. 26). These 
lively, even whimsical, 
14 
Awnings 
The canvasawningwas
color . 
of 
the on 
. hould be 
of 
color 
to for 
of so not to 
or to 
I 
--
Figure 27. Local historic district commissions and neighborhood improvement associations often 
publish awning guidance on their websites. Image: Ripon Main Street, Inc. 
Figure 25. Appropriate lettering, as on this roller awning valance, 
can function as distictive signage without detracting from the 
historic character of the building. 

are not at risk from widely-loaded trucks . Lettering, 
color, and the relationship to adjacent awning designs 
may also be subject to building department review and 
approval. 
Awning work on buildings located in historic districts 
will likely be reviewed by a historic district commission 
(HDC). HDCs may also review grant applications 
and recommend approvals for facade improvement 
programs, where such programs are in place. Though 
commissions look at projects on a case-by-case basis, 
many have established guidelines that address general 
issues and local concerns relating to awnings and 
canopies (Fig. 27). Often, local design guidelines are 
modeled upon The Secretary of the Interior's Standards 
and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
These standards set forth principles meant to ensure 
that new elements are added sensitively, do not damage 
historic fabric, and are compatible with the historic 
character of the building. 
Summary 
Like all exterior building features that are subjected to 
snow, rain, sunlight, wind, and pollution-awnings 
need regular attention. Covered even with modern 
materials, they require maintenance, repair, and 
eventually replacement. Awnings are often the first 
feature to be altered when historic buildings change 
owners or uses. They often have a significant role in 
contributing to the historic character of a building. It is 
important that owners, architects, engineers, historians, 
and others consider this when planning work on a 
historic building. 
Awnings and the Sun 
Although their effectiveness can be affected 
by many factors including location, climate, 
window size, and glass type, the energy efficiency 
advantages of awnings are clear. According to the 
Department of Energy, awnings can reduce heat 
gain up to 65% in south facing windows and up 
to 77% on windows facing east. Awnings reduce 
stress on existing air conditioning systems, and 
make it possible to install new HVAC systems 
with smaller capacity, thus saving purchasing and 
operating costs. Air conditioners need to work less 
hard, less often. When used with air conditioners, 
awnings can lower the cost of cooling a building 
by up to 25%.1 
Awnings offer a number of benefits to owners of 
historic buildings. Awnings can make unnecessary 
a host of other alterations made to buildings in 
the name of energy efficiency. Awnings provide 
nearly comparable glare reduction and reduced 
heat-gain as tinted windows or window films, 
yet are in keeping with the historic appearance 
of a building facade . They help protect historic 
windows and storefronts, and allow windows to 
remain open, and cool air to circulate, even during 
inclement weather. In warm climates, they reduce 
the need to replace existing windows with new 
insulating glass units for the purpose of energy 
conservation. 
Awnings were reinstalled on the east, west, and south 
windows of the Florida State Capitol in the 19808. With 
a design based on those seen in historic photographs of the 
building, the new awnings allowed a downsizing of the 
HVAC system by 25 tons. After installation, the exposed 
glass surface in a typical first floor office accounted for only 
46% of the required cooling load, down from 72%. Photo: 
Division of Historical Resources, Florida Department of 
State. 
15 

Selected Bibliograph y 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air­
Conditioning Engineers, Handbook Chapter 30: 
Fenestra tion, Atlanta: ASHRAE, 2001. 
Chandler, Ernest , Awnings and Tents: Construction and 
Design, New York: Ernest Chandler, 1914. 
"Fusion of Old and New," Fabrics and Architecture , 
September/October 1994, 42-45. 
Muckenfuss, Laura A. and Fisher, Charles E., 
Preservation Tech Note, "Windows Number 7, Window 
Awnings" Washington, D.C.: National Park Service, 
U.S. Department of the Interior, and Georgia Institute of 
Technology, 1984. 
1" Awnings Back in Style," Traditional Building, January / 
February 1997, 76. 
Acknowledgements 
Morenberg, Steve, "Awnings Through the Ages," 
Industrial Fabric Products Review, September 1993. 
U.S. Department of Energy, Cooling Your Home Naturally , 
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
Factsheet, DOE / CH10093-221, October 1994. 
White , Anthony G., Awnings , Canopies and Marquees : A 
Selected Bibliography, Vance Bibliographies, Architecture 
Series : Bibliography #A, 1986. 
Chad Randl is an Architectural Historian with Technical Preservation Services, Heritage Preservation Services Division, National 
Center for Cultural Resources, National Park Service, in Washington, D.C. 
The author wishes to thank the following for their assistance in the preparation and review of this brief . 
Scott Massey of Awning Cleaning Industries; Walter L. Conine of John Boyle & Company, Inc.; Jacob I. Luker of Muskegon 
Awning; Steve Morenberg of Reeves Brothers, Inc.; Karen Musech of the Industrial Fabrics Association International; Robert 
Mon tgomery of Montgomery Shade & Awning, Ltd .; Michelle Capek of the Astrup Company; Bruce N. Wright of Fabric 
Architecture; Lincoln H. Christensen of Anchor Industries, Inc.; Mike Jackson, FAIA, of the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; 
Stephen Stowell of the Lowell Historic Board; and Sharon C. Park , FAIA, Michael J. Auer, Kay D. Weeks, Anne Grimmer, Lauren 
Van Damme, and Charles E. Fisher of Heritage Preservation Services, National Park Service . 
Front cover image: Anchor Industries, Inc. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, which directs the Secretary 
of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. Comments about this publication 
should be directed to: Charles Fisher, Technical Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services, National Park 
Service, 1849 C Street, NW, 2255, Washington, DC 20240. <www.cr .nps.gov / hps / tps > This publication is not copyrighted and 
can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National Park Service are appreciated. 
Unless otherwise indicated, photographs are by the author . Excepting the author's photos, the photographs used in this 
publication may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners . 
ISSN: 0885-7016 
U.S. Government Printing Office: 2004 024-005-01222-2 April 2005 
16 