1
The concept of energy conservation in buildings is not 
new. Throughout history building owners have dealt 
with changing fuel supplies and the need for effi cient 
use of these fuels. Gone are the days of the cheap and 
abundant energy of the 1950’s. Today with energy 
resources being depleted and the concern over the 
effect of greenhouse gases on climate change, owners 
of historic buildings are seeking ways to make their 
buildings more energy effi  cient. These concerns are key 
components of sustainability — a term that generally 
refers to the ability to maintain the environmental, 
social, and economic needs for human existence. The 
topic of sustainable or “green” building practices is too 
broad to cover in this brief. Rather, this preservation 
brief is intended to help property owners, preservation 
professionals, and stewards of historic buildings make 
informed decisions when considering energy effi ciency 
improvements to historic buildings. 
Sound energy improvement measures must take into 
consideration not only potential energy savings, but 
also the protection of the historic property’s materials 
and features. This guidance is provided in accordance 
with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for 
Rehabilitation to ensure that the architectural integrity 
of the historic property is preserved. Achieving a 
successful retrofi  t project must balance the goals of 
energy effi  ciency with the least impact to the historic 
building. Planning must entail a holistic approach that 
considers the entire building envelope, its systems and 
components, its site and environment, and a careful 
evaluation of the effects of the measures undertaken. 
Treatments common to new construction need to be 
evaluated carefully before implementing them in historic 
buildings in order to avoid inappropriate alteration of 
important architectural features and irreparable damage 
to historic building materials. This brief targets primarily 
small-to medium-size historic buildings, both residential 
and commercial. However, the general decision-making 
principles outlined here apply to buildings of any size 
and complexity. 
Inherent Energy Efﬁ cient Features 
of Historic Buildings
Before implementing any energy conservation measures, 
the existing energy-effi  cient characteristics of a historic 
building should be assessed. Buildings are more 
than the sum of their individual components. The 
design, materials, type of construction, size, shape, site 
orientation, surrounding landscape, and climate all 
play a role in how buildings perform. Historic building 
construction methods and materials often maximized 
natural sources of heat, light and ventilation to respond 
to local climatic conditions. The key to a successful 
rehabilitation project is to understand and identify the 
existing energy-effi  cient aspects of the historic building 
and how they function, as well as to understand and 
identify its character-defi  ning features to ensure they 
are preserved. Whether rehabilitated for a new or 
continuing use, it is important to utilize the historic 
building’s inherent sustainable qualities as they were 
intended to ensure that they function effectively together 
with any new treatments added to further improve 
energy effi ciency.
Windows, courtyards, and light wells
Operable windows, interior courtyards, clerestories, 
skylights, rooftop ventilators, cupolas, and other features 
that provide natural ventilation and light can reduce 
energy consumption. Whenever these devices can be 
used to provide natural ventilation and light, they save 
energy by reducing the need to use mechanical systems 
and interior artifi cial lighting. 
Historically, builders dealt with the potential heat loss 
and gain from windows in a variety of ways depending 
on the climate. In cold climates where winter heat 
loss from buildings was the primary consideration 
before mechanical systems were introduced, windows 
were limited to those necessary for adequate light and 
ventilation. In historic buildings where the ratio of glass 
Improving Energy Effi ciency 
in Historic Buildings 
Jo Ellen Hensley and Antonio Aguilar
PRESERV ATION
BRIEFS
 
3
National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Technical Preservation Services

2
to wall is less than 20%, the potential heat loss through 
the windows is likely minimal; consequently, they are 
more energy effi  cient than most recent construction. In 
hot climates, numerous windows provided valuable 
ventilation, while features such as wide roof overhangs, 
awnings, interior or exterior shutters, venetian blinds, 
shades, curtains and drapes signifi  cantly reduced heat 
gain through the windows. Historic windows can play 
an important role in the effi  cient operation of a building 
and should be retained.
New architectural styles, beginning with the 
International Style of the 1920’s, brought about an 
increase in the percentage of glazing in the total 
building envelope. By the 1950’s, with the advent of 
the glass curtain wall, glazing constituted nearly 100% 
of a building’s exterior walls in many buildings. While 
many early modern buildings continued to use operable 
windows as a way to provide natural ventilation, greater 
reliance on mechanical heating and air conditioning 
systems eventually reduced the function of exterior 
glazing to providing light only, particularly in 
commercial, offi  ce, and institutional buildings. 
Walls
Thick masonry walls typical of the late-nineteenth 
and early-twentieth centuries have inherent thermal 
characteristics that keep the buildings cooler in 
the summer and warmer in the winter. Walls with 
substantial mass have the advantage of high thermal 
inertia, which reduces the rate of heat transfer through 
the wall. For instance, a wall with high thermal inertia, 
subjected to solar radiation for an hour, will absorb the 
heat at its outside surface, but slowly transfer it to the 
interior over a period as long as six hours. Conversely, a 
wall having the equivalent thermal resistance (R-value), 
but a substantially lower thermal inertia, will transfer 
the heat in perhaps as little as two hours. Heavy 
masonry walls also reduce the need for summer cooling. 
High thermal inertia is the reason many older public and 
commercial buildings without air conditioning still feel 
cool during the summer. The heat from the midday sun 
does not penetrate the buildings until late afternoon and 
evening, when it is less likely to be occupied or when 
exterior temperatures have fallen. Heavy masonry walls 
are also effective in moderating internal temperatures 
in the winter by dampening the overall peaks of heat 
gain and loss resulting in a fl  atter and more tolerable 
daily cycle. In areas that require cooling during the day 
and heating at night, masonry walls can help spread 
out excess heat gain from the day to cover some of the 
needed heating for the evening and night hours. 
Roofs 
Roof construction and design in historic buildings, 
particularly vernacular buildings, are strongly 
Fig. 1.  A decorative, stained glass skylight allows natural daylight 
into the interior.
Fig. 2.  Upper and lower shutters control daylight and provide privacy.
Fig. 3.  Stone walls with substantial mass have high thermal inertia.

3
infl  uenced by the conditions of the local climate. Wide 
overhangs that sometimes extend to create porches 
minimize the heat gain from the sun in warmer climates, 
while steep, sloping roofs with minimal or no overhang 
prevail in colder climates to allow for shedding snow 
and increasing benefi  cial solar heat gain through the 
windows. Materials and color also infl  uence the thermal 
performance of roofs. Metal and light colored roofs, for 
example, refl  ect sunlight and thereby reduce the heat 
gain from solar radiation. 
Floor Plans 
The fl  oor plan of many historic buildings, particularly 
traditional vernacular ones, was also designed to 
respond to the local climate. In cold climates, rooms 
with low ceilings were clustered around central 
chimneys to share the heat, while small windows 
with interior shutters reduced drafts and heat loss. In 
warmer climates, wide central halls with tall ceilings, 
breezeways, and large porches all maximized 
air circulation.
Landscape
Site orientation was another factor considered especially 
in the location of a historic building on its property. 
In cold climates, buildings were oriented against 
northern winds while buildings in warm climates were 
sited to take advantage of prevailing breezes. Evergreen 
trees planted on the north side of buildings shielded 
from winter winds; deciduous trees planted to the 
south provided summer shade and maximum sun in 
the winter. 
Energy Audit
Before implementing any measures to improve the 
thermal performance of a historic building, an energy 
audit should be undertaken to evaluate the current 
energy use of the building and identify defi ciencies 
in the building envelope or mechanical systems. In 
some areas, the local utility company may offer a free 
simple audit, however a more in-depth audit should 
be obtained from a professional energy auditor. The 
goal of the audit is to establish a baseline of building 
performance data to serve as a reference point 
when evaluating the effectiveness of future energy 
improvements. It is important to hire an independent 
auditor who does not have fi  nancial interests in the 
results, such as a product vendor. 
An energy auditor fi  rst documents the current energy 
use patterns in the building to establish an energy use 
history. This initial step includes obtaining the billing 
history from the local utility company over a one- or 
two-year period, as well as documenting the number 
of building occupants, how the building is used, and 
the type of fuel consumed. The location of any existing 
insulation is recorded and the approximate R-value of 
various components of the building envelope including 
walls, ceilings, fl  oors, doors, windows and skylights 
is calculated. The building envelope is inspected to 
identify areas of air infi  ltration and air loss. The type 
and age of mechanical systems and major appliances 
are also recorded. 
Tools such as a blower door test or infrared 
thermography are useful to identify specifi  c areas of 
infi  ltration, lack of insulation and thermal bridging. 
Mechanical depressurization along with infrared 
thermography is extremely useful in identifying 
locations of air leakage and heat loss followed by the use 
of tracer smoke to isolate specifi  c air leaks. These tests 
are often challenging to perform on buildings and must 
be undertaken by experienced professionals to avoid 
Fig. 4.  A typical 
New England saltbox 
features a steeply 
sloping roof to shed 
snow and a fl oor plan 
organized around a 
central chimney to 
conserve heat.
Lean-to 
Addition
Parlor Hall
Fig. 5.  The side porches of this house in Charleston, SC, shade the 
large windows and provide outdoor living spaces that take advantage 
of sea breezes.

4
misleading or inaccurate results. There are professional 
standards for audits, those of the Building Performance 
Institute (BPI) being the most widely used. 
The energy auditor then produces a detailed report 
that documents the fi  ndings of the audit and includes 
specifi  c recommendations for upgrades such as air 
sealing, adding insulation, general repairs, lighting, and 
improvements to or replacement of mechanical systems 
or major appliances. Cost estimates are provided 
for each of the improvements including the cost of 
implementation, potential operating cost savings, and, 
importantly, the anticipated payback period. Armed 
with this information, historic building owners can 
start to make informed decisions on how to improve 
the performance of their buildings. Usually the auditor 
fi  nds a few locations where there is major air leakage; 
large “holes” that are unique to a particular building 
and require equipment to fi  nd them. These anomalies 
are often invisible to the people who use the building on 
a regular basis. It is important to retest the performance 
of the building following the implementation of any 
upgrades undertaken as a result of an energy audit to 
ensure that the upgrades are performing as expected.
Prioritizing Energy Upgrades 
When implementing energy upgrades, efforts should 
be concentrated on improvements that will provide the 
most payback for the money expended and the least 
compromise to the historic character of the building. 
Some upgrades recommended in energy audits may not 
be introduced into a historic building feasibly without 
damaging historic fabric or altering the appearance 
of signifi  cant features. Removing historic siding and 
replacing it with new siding to introduce insulation 
into the wall cavity of a frame building or replacing 
repairable historic windows are examples of treatments 
that should not be undertaken on historic buildings. 
A common misconception is that replacing windows 
alone will result in major energy savings. This argument, 
often used to sell replacement windows, is simply not 
true. Although it varies from building to building, the 
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has documented that 
air loss attributable to windows in most buildings is 
only about 10% of the total air loss. Studies have shown 
that window replacement does not pay for itself in 
energy savings in a reasonable length of time. Moreover, 
there are ways to improve the performance of historic 
windows that do not require their replacement. 
In addition, historic windows can usually be repaired 
and are, thus, sustainable, while most new windows 
cannot be repaired, or even recycled, and may wind up 
in landfi lls. 
When considering energy upgrades, it is imperative to 
get a clear picture of what an improvement will cost 
initially and how long it will take to pay back the cost 
in energy savings. Therefore, the life cycle cost of the 
improvement must be considered as well as its impact 
on historic fabric. Reducing infi  ltration around existing 
windows and doors, sealing penetrations in the building 
envelope, and adding insulation — particularly in the 
attic where it has little impact on historic fabric — can 
result in signifi  cant improvements at relatively little 
cost. Updating mechanical systems or changing the way 
in which they are operated can also be cost-effective 
interventions. For example, installing a more effi cient 
mechanical system alone may pay for itself in ten years.
Fig. 6. (left)  A blower door is used to depressurize a building by exhausting air at a rate that allows pressure gages and tracer smoke to measure the 
amount and location of air leakage. Photo: Robert Cagnetta, Heritage Restoration, Inc. 
Fig. 7. (center and right)  The left thermal image shows the walls of this building before insulating. After insulation was added, the cooler and, thus 
darker exterior walls evidence how much the heat loss has been reduced. Photos: EYP Architecture & Engineering.

5
Actions to Improve Energy Efﬁ ciency
Reducing energy demands for heating and cooling 
may be accomplished in two steps. First, implement 
operational changes and upgrades to mechanical 
systems and major appliances — measures that do not 
require making alterations or adding new materials — 
to ensure that a building functions as effi ciently 
as possible. After all these measures have been 
implemented, corrective work or treatments, such as 
weatherization, that require other alterations to the 
building may be considered. 
Establishing Realistic Goals
Energy consumption data gathered by the U.S. Energy 
Information Administration (see chart) shows that 
residential buildings built before 1950 (the largest 
percentage of historic building stock) are about 30 to 
40 percent less energy effi  cient than buildings built 
after 2000. Using this as a baseline, a 30 to 40 percent 
upgrade of a historic building’s energy performance 
can be a realistic goal. A 40 percent increase in energy 
effi  ciency would of course be a more achievable goal for 
buildings that have had minimal upgrades since their 
original construction, i.e., added insulation, tightening 
of the exterior envelope, or more effi cient mechanical 
equipment. On the other hand, achieving “net zero” 
energy goals as it is currently done with some new 
construction can be a much more diffi  cult challenge to 
achieve in a historic retrofi  t. Attempting to reach such a 
goal with a historic building would most likely result in 
signifi  cant alterations and loss of historic materials. [The 
data for commercial buildings documents that buildings 
in 2003 used approximately the same energy as they did 
before 1920, after reaching their peak in the 1980’s.]
Operational Changes
One of the greatest effects on energy use is user 
behavior. Once an energy audit has established a 
baseline for the current energy use in a building, 
operational changes should be identifi  ed to control 
how and when the building is used to minimize the use 
of energy-consuming equipment. These changes can 
range from simple measures such as regular cleaning 
and maintenance of mechanical equipment to installing 
sophisticated controls that cycle equipment on and off 
in specifi  ed intervals for maximum performance. The 
following changes are recommended to reduce heating 
and cooling costs.
• Install programmable thermostats. 
• Close off r
ooms that are not in use and adjust the 
temperature in those rooms.
• Do not condition rooms that do not need to be 
conditioned, thereby reducing the thermal envelope.
• Use insulated shades and curtains to control heat gain 
and loss through windows.
• Use operable windows, shutters, awnings and 
vents as originally intended to contr
ol temperature 
and ventilation.
• 
Residential Energy Use Intensity by Age
Take advantage of natural light. 
• Install compact fl  uorescent lights (CFL) and light-
emitting diode (LED) lights. 
• Install motion sensors and timers for lighting and local 
ventilation, such as bathroom exhaust fans.
• Reduce “phantom” electricity loads by turning 
equipment off when not in use. 
• Clean and service mechanical equipment regularly. 
These measures should be undertaken fi  rst to save 
energy in any existing building and are particularly 
appr
opriate for historic buildings because they do not 
require alterations to historic materials. 
Upgrading Equipment and Appliances
In addition to maximizing the ener
gy effi ciency of 
existing building systems, substantial savings can be 
achieved through upgrading equipment and appliances. 
One should still weigh the operational savings against 
the initial cost of the new equipment, particularly if the 
existing equipment is not near the end of its life. 
Calculator aids that take into account the effi ciency 
of both the existing and new equipment are available 
Source: Residential Energy Consumption Survey, 2005
Year Built KBtu/sq ft/yr
Prior to 1950 74.5
1950 to 1969 66.0
1970 to 1979 59.4
1980 to 1989 51.9
1990 to 1999 48.2
2000 to 2005 44.7
Fig. 8.  Where Air Escapes From a House (by percentage) – Image 
based on data from Energy Savers, U.S. Department of Energy.  
Illustration: Blank Space LLC.

6
online to assist in determining the payback. Advance 
planning will allow time to fi  nd the most effi cient unit, 
as well as to investigate the availability of any state and 
federal energy credits. As energy prices continue to rise 
and technology advances, options such as the installation 
of a solar hot water heater or geothermal ground 
source or water source heat pumps are becoming more 
economically feasible. Recommendations for upgrading 
equipment and appliances include:
• Upgrade the heating system. It is important to install 
new furnaces that utilize outside combustion air to 
reduce air drawn into the building through uncontrolled 
infi  ltration. [All furnaces and boilers are now measured 
by their annual fuel utilization effi ciency 
or AFUE.] 
Heating equipment is now more effi  cient and gas 
furnaces that used to have a 60% (AFUE) rating can 
now operate at as much as 90 to 97% effi ciency.
• Upgrade the air conditioning system. 
• Replace the water heater. High-effi  ciency water heaters 
use far less energy than earlier models, and high-effi ciency 
tankless water heaters heat water on demand and offer 
even greater savings. Point of use water heat can also 
reduce costs and water consumption by reducing the time 
it takes to draw hot water.
• Upgrade appliances. Energy Star appliances, 
particularly refrigerators, washing machines and 
dishwashers can all reduce electricity use and additional 
indoor heating loads. 
Upgrading Building Components 
In addition to operational and mechanical upgrades, it 
can be possible to upgrade many building components 
in a manner that will not jeopardize the historic character 
of the building and can be accomplished at a reasonable 
cost. The goal of these upgrades is to improve the 
thermal performance of the building, resulting in even 
gr
eater energy savings. Retrofi
 t measures to historic 
buildings should be limited to those that achieve at least 
reasonable ener
gy savings, at reasonable costs, with the 
least impact on the character of the building. 
The following list includes the most common measures 
proposed to improve the thermal performance of 
an existing building; some measures are highly 
recommended for historic buildings, but others are less 
benefi  cial, and can even be harmful to a historic building.
Requires Minimal Alteration 
• Reduce air leakage. 
• Add attic insulation.
• Install storm windows.
• Insulate basements and crawlspaces. 
• Seal and insulate ducts and pipes.
• W
eather strip doors and add storm doors.
• Add awnings and shading devices where appropriate.
Requires More Alteration 
• Add interior vestibules.
• Replace windows.
• Add insulation to wood-frame walls.
• Add insulation to masonry walls.
• Install cool roofs and gr
een roofs.
The treatments listed fi  rst have less potential to 
negatively impact the historic fabric of a building. They 
tend to be less intrusive, are often reversible, and offer 
the highest potential for energy savings. Undertaking 
any of the tr
eatments in the second group, however, may 
pose technical pr
oblems and damage to historic building 
materials and architectural features. Their installation 
costs may also outweigh the anticipated energy savings 
and must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis with 
advice from professionals experienced in historic 
preservation and building performance.
Requires Minimal Alteration 
Reduce air leakage. Reducing air leakage (infi ltration 
and exfi  ltration) should be the fi  
rst priority of a 
preservation retrofi  t plan. Leakage of air into a building 
can account for 5 to 40 percent of space-conditioning 
costs, which can be one of the lar
gest operational costs 
for buildings.1 In addition, unwanted air leakage into 
and out of the building can lead to occupant comfort 
issues resulting from drafts. Air infi  ltration can be 
especially problematic in historic buildings because it 
is closely linked to increased moisture movement into 
building systems. 
Air fl  ow into and out of buildings is driven by three 
primary forces: wind pressure, mechanical pressure 
and the stack effect. Cold outside air that infi ltrates the 
building through big holes, as well as through loose 
windows, doors, and cracks in the outer shell of the 
building, causes the heating system to work harder and
consume more energy. In a multi-story building, cold 
air that enters the building at lower levels, including 
the basement or crawlspace, will travel up through 
the building and exit out leaky windows, gaps around 
windows and the attic as a result of temperature and 
pressure differential. This pattern of air movement 
Fig. 9.  An energy auditor tests the effi  ciency of a boiler.

7
is called the “stack effect.” Not only is valuable 
conditioned air lost, but damaging moisture may also 
enter the wall cavities and attic spaces. To stop the stack 
effect, the top and bottom of the exterior walls, inter-
fl  oor bypasses, and any existing chases or shafts must 
be sealed, or “draft proofed.” The use of spray foam 
sealants in basement and attic cracks is a particularly 
useful technique for reducing air infi ltration. 
Adding weatherstripping to doors and windows, sealing 
open cracks and joints at the base of walls and around 
windows and doors, sealing off recessed lighting fi xtures 
from above, and sealing the intersection of walls and 
attic, will substantially reduce air leakage. When using 
exterior caulk to seal the intersection of siding and doors 
or windows, do not caulk the underside of clapboards 
or below windows to allow any liquid water to escape. 
When infi  ltration and, consequently, exfi ltration are 
reduced, mechanical ventilation may be necessary to 
meet occupants’ requirements for fresh air.
Add attic or roof insulation. Heat loss and gain caused 
by increased interior/exterior temperature differentials 
primarily due to the stack effect and solar radiation are 
greatest at the top of a building. Therefore, reducing 
heat transfer through the roof or attic should be one of 
the highest priorities in reducing energy consumption. 
Adding insulation in unoccupied, unfi nished attics 
is not only very effective from an energy-savings 
perspective, but it is also generally simple to install and 
causes minimal disruption to historic materials. The U.S. 
Department of Energy (DOE) provides a recommended 
R-value chart based on climate zones to help determine 
the optimal amount of insulation that should be installed 
in a particular project. Local codes may also have specifi c 
insulation requirements. Insulating trap or access doors 
should not be overlooked. Even though they may be 
small, attic doors can be responsible for substantial 
heat loss and should be addressed as part of any attic 
insulation project.
In unfi  nished and unheated attics, the insulation 
material is typically placed between the fl oor joists 
using blown-in, batt, or rigid foam insulation. When 
using fi  berglass batts faced with a vapor retarder, 
the vapor retarder should be face down towards the 
heated interior. However, the use of a vapor retarder 
is not necessary in attic applications. If additional batt 
insulation is being added over existing insulation that 
is near or above the top of the joists, new un-faced batts 
should be placed perpendicular to the old ones to cover 
the top of the joists and reduce thermal bridging through 
the frame members. In low-pitched roofs, or where 
installing batt insulation is diffi  cult, a more complete 
coverage of the attic fl  oor may be achieved by using 
blown-in insulation. Unfi  nished attics must be properly 
ventilated to allow excess heat to escape.
   
Fig. 10.  The pattern of air movement referred to as the ”stack effect”.  
Illustration: Blank Space LLC.
Fig. 11.  Air infi  ltration and exfi ltration. 
Illustration: Blank Space LLC.
Fig. 12.  Recommended energy improvements vary widely based on 
climate. The information contained in this document is based primarily 
on the available data for the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic regions.
DOE Climate Zone Map

8
Radiant barriers may be used in attics to reduce thermal 
radiation across the air space between the roof deck 
and the attic fl  oor in order to reduce summer heat gain. 
They are most benefi  cial in reducing cooling loads in 
hot climates and consist of a highly refl  ective sheet or 
coating, usually aluminum, applied to one or both sides 
of a fl  exible material. They are effective only when the 
foil surface faces an air space, and as long as the surface 
remains shiny – that is, free from dirt, dust, condensation 
and oxidation. Radiant barriers should not be installed 
directly over insulation on the attic fl  oor, as they can act 
as vapor retarders and trap moisture in the insulation 
unless they are perforated. Their placement should be 
ventilated on both sides.
Insulating the underside of the roof rather than the attic 
fl  oor increases the volume of the thermal envelope of 
the building, thus making this treatment inherently less 
energy effi  cient. However, when mechanical equipment 
and/or ductwork are housed in an attic space, placing 
the insulation under the roof and treating the attic 
as a conditioned space is strongly recommended. 
This treatment allows the equipment to operate more 
effi  ciently and can prevent moisture-related problems 
caused by condensation on the mechanical equipment.
When insulation is placed under the roof, all vents in 
the attic and the intersection between the walls and roof 
rafters must be sealed. Rigid foam or batt insulation 
placed between the roof rafters is a common method of 
insulating the underside of a roof. Open cell spray foam 
(.5lb/cuft) may sometimes be applied under the roof 
deck only when there are no gaps in the sheathing which 
could allow the foam to expand under slates or shingles, 
preventing the re-use of the roofi  ng material. Also, if 
roof leaks do occur, they may go undetected until after 
major damage occurs. Consideration must also be given 
to the irreversibility of this procedure because the foam 
enters the pores of the wood. It may be more advisable 
to install a breathable layer of material that will allow for 
future removal without leaving a residue. 
When total roof replacement is required because of 
deterioration, installing rigid foam insulation on top 
of the roof deck before laying the new roofi ng material 
can be simple and effective, particularly on low-pitched 
or fl  at roofs. However, the added thickness of the roof 
caused by installing rigid foam can alter the appearance 
of projecting eaves, dormers, and other features. If this 
application would signifi  cantly alter the appearance of 
these features, consider other methods. 
Install storm windows. The addition of metal or wood 
exterior or interior storm windows may be advisable 
to increase the thermal performance of the windows 
in ways that weatherstripping and caulking cannot 
address. A single-glazed storm window may only 
increase a single-pane window’s thermal resistance to 
R2, however, that is twice as good as a single-glazed 
window alone. It will make a noticeable contribution 
to the comfort level of the building occupant, with 
the added benefi  t of protecting the historic window 
from weathering. Using clear, non-tinted, low-e glass 
in the storm window can further increase the thermal 
performance of the window assembly without the loss of 
historic fabric. Studies have shown that the performance 
of a traditional wood window with the addition of a 
storm window can approach that of a double-glazed 
replacement window.
2 Some storm windows are 
available with insulated low-e glass, offering even 
higher thermal performance without the loss of the 
historic window. Furthermore, a storm window avoids 
the problem of irreparable seal failure on insulated glass 
units (IGUs) used in modern replacement windows. 
While the lifespan of the IGU depends both on the 
quality of the seal and other factors, it is unreasonable to 
expect more than 25 years. Once the seal fails, the sash 
itself will usually need to be entirely replaced.
By providing an additional insulating air space and 
adding a barrier to infi  ltration, storm windows improve 
comfort and reduce the potential for condensation on the 
glass. To be effective and compatible, storm windows 
must be tight fi  tting; include a sealing gasket around the 
glass; align with the meeting rail of the primary sash; 
match the color of the sash; and be caulked around the 
frame to reduce infi  ltration without interfering with any 
weep holes. 
Whether a storm window or the historic window itself, 
the interior window must be the tighter of the two units 
to avoid condensation between the windows that can 
Fig. 14.  Sample installation of rigid foam insulation, tapered at the 
edge to avoid altering the appearance of the roof.
Fig. 13.  Sample installation of a radiant barrier.
Roof Decking
Air Space
Radiant Barrier
Insulation
Joist

9
occur in a cold climate that requires indoor heating. 
Condensation is a particular concern if it collects on 
the historic window, as can easily happen with a loose-
fi  tting, storm window. While interior storm windows 
can be as thermally effective as exterior storm windows, 
appropriate gaskets must be used to ensure that 
damage-causing condensation does not form on the 
inside face of the historic window. Opening or removing 
the interior storm windows during non-heating months 
also helps to avoid the negative effects of moisture 
build-up. 
For large, steel industrial windows, the addition of 
interior, insulated sliding glass windows that align 
with the primary vertical mullions has proven to be a 
successful treatment that allows the primary window to 
remain operable. 
Insulate basements and crawlspaces. The fi  rst step in 
addressing the insulation of basements and crawl spaces 
is to decide if they are to be part of the conditioned 
space and, therefore, within the thermal envelope of 
the building. If these areas are kept outside the thermal 
envelope of the building and treated as unconditioned 
areas, insulating between the fl  oor joists on the 
underside of the subfl  oor is generally recommended. 
Alternatively, rigid foam insulation installed over 
the bottom of the fl  oor joists on the basement or 
crawlspace side may also be used. All gaps between the 
unconditioned and conditioned areas of the building, 
including the band joists, should be air sealed to prevent 
air infi  ltration into the upper levels of the building. 
If the crawlspace contains mechanical equipment, or if 
high levels of moist air enter the crawlspace through 
vents during the summer months, it is advisable to 
include the crawlspace within the thermal boundary of 
the building. As in attics, water vapor can condense on 
ducts and other equipment located in unconditioned 
basements and crawlspaces. In the past, building codes 
routinely required that crawlspaces be treated as non-
conditioned spaces and be ventilated. However, this has 
not proven to be a best practice in all cases. Ventilation 
through crawlspace vents does not keep the space dry 
during humid summers. All vents should be sealed and 
access doors weather-stripped. Rigid foam insulation 
installed on the interior face of the wall is recommended 
for basement and crawlspace foundation walls, only 
after all drainage issues have been addressed. Special 
attention should be given to ensure that all the joints 
between the insulation boards are sealed. 
A moisture barrier on exposed dirt in a crawlspace is 
strongly recommended to prevent ground moisture 
from entering the building envelope. Whenever feasible, 
pouring a concrete slab over a moisture barrier in 
crawlspaces or basements with exposed dirt fl oors 
should be considered. 
Seal and insulate ducts and pipes. A surprisingly 
enormous amount of energy is wasted when heated 
or cooled air escapes from supply ducts or when 
hot attic air leaks into air conditioning return ducts. 
Based on data collected in ener
gy audits, as much as 
35 percent of the conditioned air in an average central 
air conditioning system may escape fr
om the ducts.3 
Care must be taken to completely seal all connections 
in the duct system and adequately insulate the ducts, 
especially in unconditioned spaces. This loss of 
energy is another reason to treat attics, basements and 
crawlspaces as conditioned spaces. Ducts located in 
unconditioned spaces should be insulated based on the 
recommendations for the appropriate climate zone. Hot 
water pipes and water heaters should be insulated in 
unconditioned spaces to retain heat, and all water pipes 
insulated to prevent freezing in cold climates.
Weather strip doors and add storm doors. Historic 
wood doors are often signifi  cant featur
es and should 
always be retained, rather than replaced. While an 
insulated r
eplacement door may have a higher R-value, 
doors represent a small area of the total building 
envelope, and the difference in energy savings after 
replacement would be insignifi  cant. The doors and 
frames should, however, have proper maintenance 
including regular painting, and the addition or renewal 
of weatherstripping. Storm doors can improve the 
thermal performance of the historic door in cold 
climates and may be especially recommended for a 
door with glazing. The design of the storm door should 
be compatible with the character of the historic door. 
A fully glazed storm door with a frame that matches 
the color of a historic door is often an appropriate 
choice because it allows for the historic door to remain 
visible. Storm doors are recommended primarily for 
residential buildings. They are not appropriate for 
commercial or industrial buildings. These buildings 
never had storm doors, because the doors were opened 
frequently or remained open for long periods. It may 
also not be appropriate to install a storm door on a 
highly signifi  cant entrance door. In some instances,  
Fig. 15.  Original steel windows were 
retained and made operable during 
the rehabilitation of this historic mill 
complex. Insulated sliding windows 
were added on the interior to improve 
energy effi ciency.

10
the addition of a storm door could add signifi cant heat 
gain on certain exposures or in hot climates, which could 
degrade the material or fi  nish of the historic door.
Add awnings and shading devices. Awnings and other 
shading devices can provide a considerable reduction 
of heat gain through windows and storefronts. Keeping 
existing awnings, or replacing them if previously 
removed, is a relatively easy way to enhance the energy 
performance of a building. Awnings should only be 
installed when they are compatible with the building 
type and character. In building types that did not have 
awnings historically, interior shades, blinds or shutters 
should be considered instead.
A wide range of shades, blinds and shutters is available 
for use in all types of buildings to control heat gain or 
loss through windows, as well as lighting levels. When 
properly installed, shades are a simple and cost-effective 
means of saving energy. Some shade fabrics block only 
a portion of the light coming in — allowing the use of 
natural light — while others block all or most of the 
light. The light-colored or refl  ective side of the shades 
should face the window to reduce heat gain. Quilted 
roller shades feature several layers of fi  ber batting and 
sealed edges, and these shades act as both insulation 
and an air barrier. They control air infi ltration more 
effectively than other soft window treatments. Pleated or 
cellular shades provide dead air spaces within the cells 
to add insulation value. These shades, however, do not 
measurably control air infi ltration.
Retractable awnings and interior shades should be 
kept lowered during the summer to prevent unwanted 
heat gain, but raised in the winter to take advantage 
of the heat gain. Interior shades, especially those that 
have some insulation value, should be lowered at night 
during the winter months.
Light shelves are architectural devices designed to 
maximize daylight coming through windows by 
refl ecting it deeper into the building. These horizontal 
elements are usually mounted on the interior above 
head height in buildings with high ceilings. Although 
they can provide energy savings, they are not compatible 
with most historic buildings. In general, light shelves 
are most likely to be appropriate in some industrial or 
modernist-style buildings, or where the historic integrity 
of interior spaces has been lost and they can be installed 
without being visible from the exterior.
Requires More Alteration 
Add interior vestibules. Vestibules that create a 
secondary air space or “air lock” are effective in 
reducing air infi  ltration when the exterior door is 
open. Exterior and interior vestibules are common 
architectural features of many historic buildings and 
should be retained wherever they exist. Adding an 
interior vestibule may also be appropriate in some 
historic buildings. For example, new glazed interior 
vestibules may be compatible changes to historic 
commercial and industrial buildings. New exterior 
vestibules will usually result in too great a change to the 
character of primary entrances, but may be acceptable 
in very limited instances, such as at rear entrances. Even 
in such instances, new vestibules should be compatible 
with the architectural character of the historic building.
Replace windows. Windows are character-defi ning 
features of most historic buildings. As discussed 
previously, the replacement of a historic window with 
a modern insulated unit is not usually a cost-effective 
choice. Historic wood windows have a much longer 
service life than replacement insulated windows, which 
cannot be easily repaired. Therefore, the sustainable 
choice is to repair historic windows and upgrade their 
thermal performance. However, if the historic windows 
are deteriorated beyond repair, if repair is impractical 
because of poor design or material performance, or 
if repair is economically infeasible, then replacement 
windows may be installed that match the historic 
windows in size, design, number of panes, muntin 
profi  le, color, refl  ective qualities of the glass, and the 
same relationship to the window opening. 
Other options should also be considered before 
undertaking complete window replacement. If only the 
sash is severely deteriorated and the frame is repairable, 
then only the sash may need to be replaced. If the 
limited lifespan of insulated glass is not a concern, the 
new sash can be made to accommodate double glazing.
Fig. 16.  Historic vestibules retain conditioned air in the living spaces.

11
Where the sashes are sound, but improved thermal 
performance without the use of a storm window 
is desired, some windows may be retrofi tted with 
insulated glass. If the existing sash is of suffi cient 
thickness, it may be routed to accept insulated, clear 
low-e glass without extensive loss of historic material 
or historic character. When insulated glass is added in 
a new or retrofi  tted sash, any weights will have to be 
modifi  ed to accommodate the signifi  cant extra weight.
Wall Insulation
Adding wall insulation must be evaluated as part of 
the overall goal to improve the thermal effi ciency of 
a building and should only be considered after the 
installation of attic and basement insulation. Can this 
goal be achieved without the use of wall insulation? Can 
insulation be added without causing signifi cant loss 
of historic materials or accelerated deterioration of the 
wall assembly? Will it be cost effective? These are basic 
questions that must be answered before a decision is 
made to insulate the walls and may require professional 
evaluation.
Add insulation to wood-frame walls. Wood is 
particularly susceptible to damage from high moisture 
levels; therefore, addressing existing moisture problems 
before the addition of insulation is essential. 
Un-insulated historic wood buildings have a higher 
rate of air infi  ltration than modern buildings; while 
this makes older buildings less effi  cient thermally, it 
helps dissipate the unwanted moisture and thus keeps 
building assemblies dry. Climate, building geometry, 
the condition of the building materials, construction 
details, and many other factors make it diffi  cult to assess 
the impact that adding insulation will have on reducing 
the air fl  ow and, hence, the drying rate in a particular 
building. For this reason, predicting the impact of 
adding insulation to wood-frame walls is diffi cult. 
Insulation Installed in the Wall Cavity: When sheathing is 
part of the wall assembly, and after any moisture-related 
problems have been addressed, adding insulation to the 
interior cavity of a wood-frame wall may be considered. 
Adding insulation in a wall where there is no sheathing 
between the siding and studs is more problematic, 
however, because moisture entering the wall cavity 
through cracks and joints by wind-driven rain or 
capillary action will wet the insulation in contact with 
the back of the siding. 
Installing blown-in insulation, either dense-packed 
cellulose or fi  berglass, into the wall cavity causes 
the least amount of damage to historic materials and 
fi  nishes when there is access to the cavity walls, and 
it is therefore a common method of insulating wood-
frame walls in existing buildings. In most cases, blowing 
insulation material into the wall cavity requires access 
through the exterior or interior wall surfaces. When 
historic plaster, wood paneling, or other interior 
historic decorative elements are present, accessing the 
cavity from the exterior is recommended by removing 
individual siding boards at the top of each wall cavity. 
In this manner the boards can be reinstalled without 
unsightly drill holes on the exterior. If the plaster is 
deteriorated and will require repair, then the wall cavity 
may be accessed from the interior through holes drilled 
through non-decorative plaster.
Of the materials available, dense-packed cellulose fi ber 
is most commonly used. Its R-value, ability to absorb 
and diffuse moisture, impediment to air fl ow, relatively 
simple installation, and low cost make it a popular 
choice. Cellulose insulation from most manufacturers is 
available in at least two grades that are characterized by 
the type of fi  re retardant added to the insulation. The fi re 
retardants are usually: (1) a mix of ammonium sulfate 
and boric acid or (2) boric acid only (termed “borate 
only”). The recommended type of cellulose insulation 
for historic buildings is the “borate only” grade, as 
cellulose treated with sulfates reacts with moisture in the 
air and forms sulfuric acid which corrodes many metals.
Optimum conditions for installing insulation inside 
the wall cavity occur in buildings where either the 
exterior materials or interior fi  nishes have been lost, 
or where the materials are deteriorated beyond repair 
and total replacement is necessary. However, wholesale 
removal of historic materials either on the exterior or 
interior face of a historic wall to facilitate insulation is 
Fig. 17.  Illustration of insulation from the 1889 trade catalog 
“The Uses of Mineral Wool in Architecture, Car Building and Steam 
Engineering”.  Collection Centre Canadien d’Architecture/Canadian 
Centre for Architecture, Montreal, Canada.

12
not recommended. Even when the exterior materials, 
such as wood siding, could potentially be r
einstalled, 
this method, no matter how carefully executed, usually 
results in damage to, and loss of historic materials.
If the wall cavity is open, the opportunity to properly 
install 
batt insulation is available. A tight fi t between 
the insulation and the adjacent building components 
is critical to the performance of the insulation. Batt 
insulation must be cut to the exact length of the cavity. 
A batt that is too short creates air spaces above and 
beneath the batt, allowing convection. A batt that is too 
long will bunch up, creating air pockets. Air pockets 
and convection currents signifi  cantly reduce the thermal 
performance of insulation. Each wall cavity should be 
completely fi  lled. Unfaced, friction-fi  t batt insulation 
fl  uffed to fi  ll the entire wall cavity is recommended. Any 
air gaps between the insulation and the framing or other 
assembly components must be avoided. Batts should be 
split around wiring, pipes, ducts and other elements in 
the wall rather than be pushed or compressed around 
obstacles.
When adding insulation to the sidewalls, the band joist 
area between fl  oors in multi-story, platform-framed 
buildings should be included in the sidewall insulation 
retrofi  t. The R-value of the insulation installed in the 
band joist area should be at least equal to the R-value of 
the insulation in the adjacent wall cavities. In balloon-
framed buildings, the wall cavity is continuous between 
fl  oors except where fi  re stops have been inserted. 
The use of spray foam or foamed-in-place insulation 
would appear to have great potential for application 
in historic wood-frame buildings due to their ability to 
fl  ow into wall cavities and around irregular obstacles. 
Their high R-value and function as an air barrier make 
them a tempting choice. However, their use presents 
several problems. The injected material bonds tightly to 
historic materials making its removal diffi cult, especially 
if it is encased in an existing wall. The pressure caused 
by the expansion rate of these foams within a wall can 
also damage historic material, including breaking the 
plaster keys or cracking existing plaster fi nishes.
Insulation Installed on Either Side of the Wall: Batt, rigid 
foam board, and spray foam insulation are commonly 
added to the interior face of walls in existing buildings 
by furring-out the walls to accommodate the additional 
thickness. However, this often requir
es the destruction 
or alteration of important architectural features, such 
as cornices, base boards, and window trim, and the 
removal or covering of plaster or other historic wall 
fi  nishes. Insulation installed in this manner is only 
recommended in buildings where interior spaces and 
features lack architectural distinction or have lost 
signifi  cance due to previous alterations. 
Adding rigid foam insulation to the exterior face of 
wood-frame buildings, while common practice in 
new construction, is never an appropriate treatment 
for historic buildings. Exterior installation of the foam 
boards requires removal of the existing siding and trim 
to install one or more layers of polyisocyanurate or 
polystyrene foam panels. Depending on the amount 
of insulation added for the particular climate, the wall 
thickness may be dramatically increased by moving 
Band Joist
Fig. 18.  Dense-packed cellulose insulation is being blown in through 
holes drilled in the sheathing. Once the operation has been completed, 
the shingles will be reinstalled. Photo: Edward Minch.
Fig. 20.  The walls 
have been furred 
out inappropriately 
around the historic 
window trim creating 
an appearance the 
interior never had 
historically. 
Fig. 19.  Platform framing (left) and Balloon framing (right).

13
the siding as much as 4 inches out from the sheathing. 
Even if the historic siding and trim could be removed 
and reapplied without signifi  cant damage, the historic 
relationship of windows to walls, walls to eaves, 
and eaves to roof would be altered, which would 
compromise the architectural integrity and appearance 
of the historic building.
Solid Masonry Walls: As with frame buildings, installing 
insulation on the interior walls of a historic masonry 
structure should be avoided when it would involve 
covering or removing important architectural features 
and fi  nishes, or when the added thickness would 
signifi  cantly alter the historic character of the interior. 
The addition of insulation on solid masonry walls 
in cold climates results in a decr
eased drying rate, 
an increased frequency of freeze-thaw cycles, and 
prolonged periods of warmer and colder temperatures 
of the masonry. These changes can have a direct effect on 
the durability of materials.
Depending on the type of masonry, exterior masonry 
walls can absorb a signifi  cant amount of water when it 
rains. Masonry walls dry both toward the exterior and 
the interior. When insulation is added to the interior side 
of a masonry wall, the insulation material reduces the 
drying rate of the wall toward the interior, causing the 
wall to stay wet for longer periods of time. Depending 
on the local climate, this could result in damage to 
the historic masonry, damage to interior fi nishes, and 
deterioration of wood or steel structural components 
What about moisture?
The issue of moisture in insulated assemblies is the 
subject of much debate.  While there is no conclusive 
way to predict all moisture problems, especially 
in historic buildings, experts seem to agree on a 
few basic tenants.  Exterior materials in insulated 
buildings become colder in the winter and stay wet 
longer following a rain event. While the wetness may 
not pose a problem for robust materials, it may speed 
the deterioration of some building materials, and 
lead to more frequent maintenance such as repainting 
of wood or repointing of masonry. Summer moisture 
problems are most commonly associated with 
excessive indoor cooling and the use of interior wall 
fi  nishes that act as vapor retarders (paint buildup or 
vinyl wall coverings). Good air-sealing at the ceiling 
plane usually controls moisture in insulated attics.
Most problems are caused by poor moisture 
management, poor detailing which does not allow 
the building to shed water, or inadequate drainage.  
Therefore, a thorough assessment of the building’s 
ability to keep out unwanted moisture must be done 
before adding new insulation materials.  Refer to 
Preservation Brief #39: Holding the Line: Controlling 
Unwanted Moisture in Historic Buildings for more 
information.  Because of all the uncertainties 
associated with insulating walls, brick walls in 
particular, it may be advisable to hire a professional 
consultant who specializes in the many factors that 
affect the behavior of moisture in a building and 
can apply this expertise to the unique characteristics 
of a particular structure. Sophisticated tools such 
as computer modeling are useful to predict the 
performance of building assemblies, but they require 
interpretation by a skilled practitioner and the results 
are only as good as the data entered. It is important 
to remember, there are no reliable prescriptive 
measures to prevent moisture problems.
4
Vapor Retarders (Barriers): Vapor retardants are 
commonly used in modern construction to manage 
the diffusion of moisture into wall cavities and 
attics.  For vapor retardants to work properly, 
however, they must be continuous, which makes 
their installation diffi  cult in existing buildings, and 
therefore generally not recommended. Even in new 
construction, installation of vapor retardants is not 
always indicated.  Formerly, the recommended 
treatment was to install a vapor retardant toward 
the heated side of the wall (toward the interior 
space in cold climates and toward the exterior in hot 
climates).  DOE now recommends that if moisture 
moves both to the interior and exterior of a building 
for signifi  cant parts of the year, it is better not to use 
a vapor retarder at all.
5
Fig. 21.  The interior face of a brick masonry wall shows damage that 
resulted from the installation of a vapor retardant (foil facing) and 
thermal insulation. Photo: Simpson Gumpertz & Heger.

14
imbedded in the wall. Masonry walls of buildings that 
are heated during the winter benefi  t from the transfer of 
heat from the inside to the outside face of the walls. This 
thermal transfer protects the exterior face of the wall by 
reducing the possibility of water freezing in the outer 
layers of the wall, particularly in cold and wet climates. 
The addition of insulation on the interior of the wall not 
only prolongs the drying rate of the exterior masonry 
wall, but keeps it colder as well, thereby increasing the 
potential for damage due to freeze-thaw cycles.
6
Extreme swings in temperature may also have negative 
effects on a historic masonry wall. The addition of 
insulation materials to a historic masonry wall decreases 
its ability to transfer heat; thus, walls tend to stay warm 
or cold for longer periods of time. In addition, walls 
exposed to prolonged solar radiation during winter 
months can also be subject to higher swings in surface 
temperature during the day. Deleterious effects due 
to stress caused by expansion and contraction of the 
building assembly components can result. 
Buildings with masonry materials of higher porosity, 
such as those built with low-fi red brick, or certain 
soft stones, are particularly susceptible to freeze-thaw 
cycles and must be carefully evaluated prior to adding 
insulation. Inspection of the masonry in areas that are 
not heated such as parapets, exposed wing walls, or 
other parts of the building is particularly important. A 
noticeable difference in the amount of spalling or sanding 
of the masonry in these areas could predict that the same 
type of deterioration will occur throughout the building 
after the walls are insulated. Brick that was fi red at lower 
temperatures was often used on the inside face of the 
wall or on secondary elevations. Even masonry walls 
faced with more robust materials such as granite may 
have brick, rubble, mortar or other less durable materials 
as backing.
Spray foams are being used for insulation in many 
masonry buildings. Their ability to be applied over 
irregular surfaces, provide good air tightness, and 
continuity at intersections between, walls, ceilings, fl oors 
and window perimeters makes them well suited for use 
in existing buildings. However, the long-term effects 
of adding either open- or closed-cell foams to insulate 
historic masonry walls as well as performance of these 
products have not been adequately documented. 
Use of foam insulation in buildings with poor quality 
masonry or uncontrolled rising damp problems should 
be avoided. 
Periodic monitoring of the condition of insulated 
masonry walls is strongly recommended regardless of 
the insulation material added.
Install cool roofs and green roofs: Cool roofs and 
vegetated “green roofs” help to reduce the heat gain 
from the roof, ther
eby cooling the building and its 
environment. Cool roofs include refl  ective metal roofs, 
light-colored or white roofs, and fi berglass shingles 
that have a coating of refl  ective crystals. All of these 
roofi  ng materials refl  ect the sun’s radiation away from 
the building, which lessens heat gain, resulting in a 
reduction of the cooling load. Cool roofs are generally 
not practical in northern climates where buildings 
benefi  t from the added heat gain of a dark-colored 
roof during colder months. Cool and green roofs are 
appropriate for use on historic buildings only when they 
are compatible with their architectural character, such 
as fl  at roofs with no visibility. A white-colored roof that 
is readily visible is not appropriate for historic metal 
roofs that were traditionally painted a dark color, such 
as green or iron oxide red. A white refl  ective roof is most 
suitable on fl  at roofed historic buildings. If a historic 
building has a slate roof, for example, removing the 
slate to install a metal roof is not a compatible treatment. 
It is never appropriate to remove a historic roof if the 
material is in good or repairable condition to install 
a cool roof. However, if the roof has previously been 
changed to an asphalt shingle roof, fi berglass shingles 
with special refl  ective granules may be an appropriate 
replacement. 
A green roof consists of a thin layer of vegetation 
planted over a waterproofi  ng system or in trays installed 
on top of an existing fl  at or slightly sloped roof. Green 
roofs are primarily benefi  cial in urban contexts to reduce 
the heat island effect in cities and to control storm water 
run-off. A green roof also reduces the cooling load of 
the building and helps cool the surrounding urban 
environment, fi  lters air, collects and fi  lters storm water, 
and can provide urban amenities, including vegetable 
gardens, for building occupants. The impact of increased  
Fig. 22.  Installation of both cool and green roofs in an urban 
environment.

15
structural loads, added moisture, and potential for 
leaks must be considered before installing a green roof. 
A green roof is compatible on a historic building only if 
the plantings are not visible above the roofl  ine as seen 
from below. 
Alternative Energy Sources 
Although not the focus of this publication, alternative 
energy sources are dealt with in more detail in The 
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation & 
Illustrated Guidelines on Sustainability for Rehabilitating 
Historic Buildings and other NPS publications. 
Devices that utilize solar, geothermal, wind and other 
sources of energy to help reduce consumption of 
fossil fuel-generated energy can often be successfully 
incorporated in historic building retrofi  ts. However, if 
the alterations or costs required to install these devices 
do not make their installation economically feasible, 
buying power generated off site from renewable 
sources may also be a good alternative. The use of most 
alternative energy strategies should be pursued only 
after all other upgrades have been implemented to make 
the building more energy effi  cient because their initial 
installation cost is usually high. 
Solar Energy: Man has sought to harness the power 
of solar energy to heat, cool, and illuminate buildings 
throughout history. Construction techniques and design 
strategies that utilize building materials and components 
to collect, store, and release heat from the sun are 
described as “passive solar design.” As previously 
discussed, many historic buildings include passive solar 
features that should be retained and may be enhanced. 
Compatible additions to historic buildings also offer 
opportunities to incorporate passive solar features. 
Active solar devices, such as solar heat collectors and 
photovoltaic systems, can be added to historic buildings 
to decrease reliance on grid-source fossil-fuel powered 
electricity. Incorporating active solar devices in existing 
buildings is becoming more common as solar collector 
technology advances. Adding this technology to historic 
buildings, however, must be done in a manner that 
has a minimal impact on historic roofi  ng materials and 
preserves their character by placing them in locations 
with limited or no visibility, i.e., on fl  at roofs at a low 
angle or on a secondary roof slope. 
Solar collectors used to heat water can be relatively 
simple. More complex solar collectors heat a fl uid or 
air that is then pumped through the system to heat or 
cool interior spaces. Photovoltaic panels (PV) transform 
solar radiation into electricity. The greatest potential 
for the use of PV panels in historic buildings is on 
buildings with large fl  at roofs, high parapets, or roof 
confi  gurations that allow solar panels to be installed 
without being prominently visible. The feasibility 
of installing solar devices in small commercial and 
residential buildings will depend on installation costs, 
conventional energy rates, and available incentives, all of 
which will vary with time and location. The same factors 
apply to the use of solar collectors for heating water, but 
smaller installations may meet a building’s need and the 
technology has a considerable track record. 
Geothermal Energy: The use of the earth’s heat is 
another source of readily-accessible clean energy. The 
most common systems that utilize this form of energy 
are geothermal heat pumps, also known as geo-
exchange, earth-coupled, ground-source, or water-source 
heat pumps. Introduced in the late 1940s, geothermal 
heat pumps rely on heat from the constant temperature 
of the earth, unlike most other heat pumps which use 
the outside air temperature as the exchange medium. 
This makes geothermal heat pumps more effi cient than 
conventional heat pumps because they do not require an 
electric back-up heat source during prolonged periods of 
cold weather. 
There are many reasons that geothermal heat pumps 
are well suited for use in historic buildings. They 
can reduce the amount of energy consumption and 
emissions considerably, compared to the air exchange 
systems or electric resistance heating of conventional 
HVAC systems. They require less equipment space, 
have fewer moving parts, provide better zone space 
conditioning, and maintain better internal humidity 
levels. Geothermal heat pumps are also quieter because 
they do not require external air compressors. Despite 
higher installation costs, geothermal systems offer 
long-term operational savings and adaptability that 
may make them a worthwhile investment in some 
historic buildings. 
Fig. 23.  Solar collectors installed in a compatible manner on low 
sloping sawtooth monitors. Top Photo: Neil Mishalov, Berkeley, CA.

16
Wind Energy: For historic properties in rural areas, 
where wind power has been utilized historically, 
installation of a wind mill or turbine may be suitable to 
the historic setting and cost effective. Before choosing to 
install wind-powered equipment, the potential benefi t 
and the impact on the historic character of the building, 
the site and surrounding historic district must be 
analyzed. In order for the turbines to work effectively, 
average wind speeds of 10 mph or higher are necessary. 
This technology may not be practical in more densely-
populated areas sheltered from winds or regions where 
winds are not consistent. In cities with tall buildings, 
there is potential for installing relatively small rooftop 
turbines that are not visible from the ground. However, 
because of the initial cost and size of some turbines, it is 
generally more practical to purchase wind power from 
an off-site wind farm through the local utility company. 
Summary
With careful planning, the energy effi  ciency of historic 
buildings can be optimized without negatively 
impacting their historic character and integrity. 
Measuring the energy performance of buildings after 
improvements are completed must not be overlooked, 
as it is the only way to verify that the treatments 
have had the intended effect. Ongoing monitoring of 
buildings and their components after alterations to 
historic building assemblies are completed can prevent 
irreparable damage to historic materials. This, along 
with regular maintenance, can ensure the long-term 
preservation of our historic built environment and the 
sustainable use of our resources.
Acknowledgements
Jo Ellen Hensley, Senior Architectural Historian, LEED Green Associate, and Antonio Aguilar, Senior Historical Architect, Technical 
Preservation Services Branch, National Park Service, revised Preservation Brief 3: Conserving Energy in Historic Buildings, written 
by Baird M. Smith, FAIA and published in 1978.  The revised Brief contains expanded and updated information on the subject of 
energy effi  ciency in historic buildings. A number of individuals and organizations have contributed their time and expertise in the 
development of this Brief, beginning with the participants of the “Improving Energy Effi  ciency in Historic Buildings—A Round Table 
Symposium,” Washington, DC, 2002. Special thanks go to Mike Jackson, FAIA, Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; Edward Minch, 
Energy Services Group; William B. Rose, Research Architect, University of Illinois; Bradford S. Carpenter, P .E., LEED AP; and Mark 
Thaler, AIA, for their technical advice. The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation’s Sustainability Task Force, the General Services 
Administration’s Center for Historic Buildings, and our colleagues at the National Center for Preservation Technology and Training 
commented on the manuscript. In addition, the Technical Preservation Services professional staff, in particular Anne Grimmer, 
Michael J. Auer and John Sandor, provided critical and constructive review of the publication.
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary 
of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. Additional information about the programs of 
Technical Preservation Services is available on the website at www.nps.gov/tps. Comments about this publication should be addressed 
to: Charles E. Fisher, Technical Preservation Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services,  National Park Service, 
1201 Eye Street, NW, 6
th Floor, Washington, DC 20005. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. 
Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park Service are appreciated. The photographs used in this publication 
may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners. Cover photograph: Farmhouse with energy effi cient 
historic storm windows.
ISBN: 978-0-16-089762-7
U.S. Government Printing Offi  ce Stock Number: 024-005-01294-0 
December 2011
End Notes
1 John Krigger and Chris Dorsi, “Air Leakage,” in Residential 
Energy: Cost Savings and Comfort for Existing Buildings. Helena, 
Montana: Saturn Resource Management, 2004, p. 73.
2 Measured Winter Performance of Storm Windows. A 2002 study done 
by Lawrence Berkeley National Labs.
3 Midwest Weatherization Best Practices Field Guide. Prepared for the 
U.S. Department of Energy Weatherization Assistance Program, 
May 2007, p. 157.
4 Adapted from comments provided by William B. Rose, Research 
Architect, University of Illinois, April 2011.
5 U.S. Department of Energy, Insulation Fact Sheet, DOE/CE-0180, 
2008, p.14.
6 Bradford S. Carpenter, P .E., LEED AP et al., The Designer’s 
Dilemma: Modern Performance Expectations and Historic Masonry 
Walls (paper presented at the RCI  2010 Symposium on Building 
Envelope Technology, San Antonio, Texas).