U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
35 
PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
Und erstanding Old Buildings: 
The Process of Architectural Investigation 
Travis C. McDonald, Jr. 
If you have ever felt a sense of excitement and mystery 
going inside an old building-whether occupied or vacant­
it is probably because its materials and features resonate 
with the spirit of past people and events. Yet excitement 
about the unknown is heightened when a historic structure 
is examined architecturally, and its evolution over time 
emerges with increasing clarity to reveal the lives of its 
occupants. Architectural investigation is the critical first 
step in planning an appropriate treatment-understanding 
how a building has changed over time and assessing levels 
of deterioration. 
Whether as a home owner making sympathetic repairs, a 
craftsman or contractor replacing damaged or missing 
features, or a conservator reconstituting wood or restoring 
decorative finishes, some type of investigative skill was used 
to recognize and solve an architectural question or explain a 
difficult aspect of the work itself. 
To date, very little has been written for the layman on the 
subject of architectural investigation. This Preservation Brief 
thus addresses the often complex investigative process in 
broad, easy-to-understand terminology. The logical 
sequence of planning, investigation and analysis presented 
in this Brief is applicable to all buildings, geographic 
locations, periods, and construction types . It is neither a 
"how to" nor an exhaustive study on techniques or 
methodologies; rather, it serves to underscore the need for 
meticulous planning prior to work on our irreplaceable 
cultural resources. 
Determining the Purpose of Investigation 
Both the purpose and scope of investigation need to be 
determined before formulating a particular approach. For 
example, investigation strictly for research purposes could 
produce information for an architectural surveyor for an 
historic designation application at the local, state or national 
level. 
Within the framework of The Secretary of the Interior's 
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, 
investigation is crucial for "identifying, retaining, and 
preserving the form and detailing of those architectural 
materials and features that are important in defining the 
historic character" of a property, whether for repair or 
replacement. A rehabilitation project, for instance, might 
require an investigation to determine the historic 
configuration of interior spaces prior to partitioning a room 
to meet a compatible new use. Investigation for 
preservation work can entail more detailed information 
about an entire building, such as determining the physical 
sequence of construction to aid in interpretation. 
Investigation for a restoration project must be even more 
comprehensive in order to re-capture the exact form, 
features, finishes, and detailing of every component of the 
building. 
Whether investigation will be undertaken by professionals­
architects, conservators, historians-or by interested 
homeowners, the process is essentially comprised of a 
preliminary four-step procedure: historical research, 
documentation, inventory, and stabilization. 
Historical Research. Primary historical research of an old 
building generally encompasses written, visual and oral 
resources that can provide valuable site-specific information. 
Written resources usually include letters, legal transactions, 
account books, insurance policies, institutional papers, and 
diaries. Visual resources consist of drawings, maps, plats, 
paintings and photographs. Oral resources are people's 
remembrances of the past. Secondary resources, comprised 
of research or history already compiled and written about a 
subject, are also important for providing a broad contextual 
setting for a project. 
Historical research should be conducted well in advance of 
physical investigation. This allows time for important 
written, visual, and oral information to be located, 
transcribed, organized, studied and used for planning the 
actual work. 
A thorough scholarly study of a building's history provides 
a responsible framework for the physical investigation; in 
fact, the importance of the link between written historical 
research and structural investigation cannot be 
overestimated. For example, the historical research of a 
building through deed records may merely determine the 
sequence of owners. This, in turn, aids the investigation of 
the building by establishing a chronology and identifying 
the changes each occupant made to the building. A letter 
1 

."1',J ~..J~ 
"., ~ ift~ ~ 
o$io..d ~¥l"4 M.l1-~ .... ~ 
• I\.t.otu., 
, , 
c." +-
r 
2 
may indicate that an occupant painted the building in a 
certain year; the courthouse files contain the occupant's 
name and paint analysis of the building will yield the actual 
color. Two-dimensional documentary research and three­
dimensional physical investigation go hand-in-hand in 
analyzing historic structures. The quality and success of 
any restoration project is founded upon the initial research. 
Figure 2. Early photographs discovered during historical research can be 
enhanced through photo-micrography to accurately recreate missing 
elements and details during restoration. The enlargements helped clariftj 
questions about the porch column detail and the type of shutter hardware. 
photo: E. C. Stanton House, courtesy Seneca Falls Historical Society, 
New York; insets: NPS North Atlantic Cultural Resource Center, 
Building Conservation Branch. 
Documentation. A building should be documented prior to 
any inventory, stabilization or investigative work in order 
to record crucial material evidence. A simple, 
comprehensive method is to take 35 mm photographs of 
every wall elevation (interior and exterior), as well as 
general views, and typical and unusual details. The 
systematic numbering of rooms, windows and doors on the 
floor plan will help organize this task and also be useful for 
labelling the photographs. Video coverage with annotated 
sound may supplement still photographs. Additional 
methods of documentation include written descriptions, 
sketches, and measured drawings. 
Significant structures, such as individually listed National 
Register properties or National Historic Landmarks, benefit 
from professional photographic documentation and 
accurate measured drawings. Professionals frequently use 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for 
Architectural and Engineering Documentation: 
HABS/HAER Standards. It should be remembered that the 
documents created during investigation might play an 
unforeseen role in future treatment and interpretation. 
Documentation is particularly valuable when a feature will 
be removed or altered. 
Figure 3. Dating, labeling, and providing annotated photographs is a 
simple, yet effective, way to document today's preservation efforts for 
future work and research. A useful document can be created by mounting 
a photograph upon archival paper and writing the annotations by hand. 
photo: NPS Preservation Assistance Division Files. 
Inventory. The historic building and its components should 
be carefully inventoried prior to taking any action; 
premature clean-up of a structure or site can be a mistake. 
A careful look at all spaces in and around a building may 
reveal loose architectural artifacts, fragile evidence or clues 
to historic landscape features. This thorough observation 
includes materials and features which have fallen off due to 
deterioration, fragments removed and stored in basements, 
attics or outbuildings, and even materials which have 
seemingly been discarded. 
In the beginning, anything that seems even remotely 
meaningful should be saved. A common mistake is to 
presume to know the value of artifacts or features at the 
beginning of a project. Even if the period of significance or 
interpretation is known from the beginning, evidence from 
all periods should be protected. Documentation for future 
study or use includes labelling and, if possible, 
photographing prior to storage in a secure place. 
Stabilization. In many cases, emergency stabilization is 
necessary to ensure that a structure does not continue to 
deteriorate prior to a final treatment or to ensure the safety 
of current occupants, investigators, or visitors. Although 
severe cases might call for structural remedies, in more 
common situations, preliminary stabilization would be 
undertaken on a maintenance level. Such work could 
involve installing a temporary roof covering to keep water 
out; diverting water away from foundation walls; removing 
plants that hold water too close to the walls; or securing a 

An old building may require temporary remedial work on 
exterior surfaces such as reversible caulking or an 
impermanent, distinguishable mortar. Or if paint analysis 
is contemplated in the future, deteriorated paint can be 
protected without heavy scraping by applying a 
recognizable "memory" layer over all the historic layers. 
Stabilization adds to the cost of any project, but human 
safety and the protection of historical evidence are well 
worth the extra money . 
structure against intruding insects, animals and vandals . 
Figure 4. An inventory of animal nests found within hidden spaces of a 
structure may yield unexpected evidence, such as informatioll about food, 
decorative arts, and cultural or social traditions of every day life. Typical 
items of paper, fabric and wood are important artifacts which are 
generally not found during archeology digs in the ground. photo: Tom 
Graves, Jr., courtesy Jefferson's Poplar Forest. 
Figure 5. Investigation frequently identifies urgent needs of stabilization. 
Priority must be given to issues of safety and structural integrity. 
Supplemental support, such as temporary shoring, may be required to 
prevent collapse and should be reviewed by a structural engineer. 
Investigators and Investigative Skills 
General and Specialized Skills. The essential skill needed 
for any level of investigation is the ability to observe closely 
and to analyze. These qualities are ideally combined with a 
hands-on familiarity of historic buildings-and an open 
mind! Next, whether acquired in a university or in a 
practical setting, an investigator should have a good general 
knowledge of history, building design history and, most 
important, understand both construction and finish 
technologies. 
But it is not enough to know architectural style and 
building technology from a national viewpoint; the 
investigator needs to understand regional and local 
differences as well. While investigative skills are 
transferable between regions and chronological periods, 
investigators must be familiar with the peculiarities of any 
given building type and geographical area. 
Figure 6. An investigator must have the skill and ability to closely 
observe and analyze the materials with a broad understanding of historic 
construction practices and technologies. Through the collection of 
samples and analysis of materials, investigative questions are either 
answered, refined, or formulated. 
Architectural survey and comparative fieldwork provides a, 
crucial database for studying regional variations in historic 
buildings . For example, construction practices can reflect 
shared experiences of widely diverse backgrounds and 
traditions within a small geographical area. Contemporary 
construction practice in an urban area might vary 
dramatically from that of rural areas in the same region. 
Neighbors or builders within the same geographical area 
3 

(A) CIRCA 1760 
(8) 
(C) CIRCA 1800 
(D) CIRCA 1850 
PERIOD I 
PERIOD II 
PERIOD III 
PERIOD IV 
r-
-f1.., 
") 
4 
Showing the Evolution of an 
18th Century Farmhouse 
Most structures evolve over time. Houses, perhaps 
more than other building types, are often subjected 
to a full range of change that reflects a wide variety 
of solutions for creating new living space or 
eliminating outmoded spaces. Architectural changes 
to historic houses can be studied through the close 
physical examination of construction and decorative 
details. Tracing the history of alterations over time 
is tantamount to "excavating" the structure, 
somewhat like an archeological investigation. By 
peeling back its layers of occupation and assembling 
plan changes, a sequence of consecutive solutions or 
transformations can be developed that reveals 
people's ongoing desires for new and improved 
living conditions . 
The example of a Sussex County, Delaware, house-­
from ca. 1790 to the early 1900s--illustrates how 
complicated the pattern of change over time can 
become in outlining an individual house history. 
The Hunter Farm House was built in the 18th 
century as a double-cell, double-pile, half-passage 
plan (a). Two bays across the front and two stories 
tall, the house possessed back-to-back corner 
fireplaces with fully paneled fireplace walls in the 
front and back rooms. A stair in the rear passage 
provided access to the second floor. A one-story, 
two-room shed that was attached to the gable wall 
farthest from the fireplace was accessed by a low 
door leading from the front room. 
During the course of its history, the house was 
altered at least three times. The five-part illustration 
shows the house's transformation from an open plan 
to a Georgian plan and the subsequent addition and 
re-arrangement of service rooms for cooking and 
storage. The first remodelling occurred in the early 
nineteenth century when the lean-to shed was 
removed, and a two-story, single-pile, two-bay 
house was moved up and attached to the northwest 
gable of the existing building (b). (The newly 
attached building had originally been furnished 
with opposing doors and windows on the front and 
back facades, a fireplace on the southeast gable, and 
double windows on the opposite end.) When the 
second building was joined to the first, the fireplace 
in the newer building was relocated to the opposite 
gable; the front door in the older house moved to a 
more central position; and a center-hall plan created 
with a roughly symmetrical front elevation (c). A 
subsequent alteration later in the nineteenth century 
included the addition of a one-story rear service ell 
(d). Finally, in the early 1900s, the one-story service 
wing was increased. During this last remodeling, the 
large kitchen hearth was demolished and replaced 
with a stove and new brick flue (e). 
Sidebar: Bernard L. Herman and Gabrielle M. Lanier, 
University of Delaware. Drawings by: Center for Historic 
Architecture and Engineering, University of Delaware. 

.... 
+l===t=;;;:;;;;;;;;-t:==:::;:r 1.-.., 
~.~ I 
~I 
WI 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I _-1 _________ _ 
often practice different techniques of constructing similar 
types of structures contemporaneously . Reliable dating 
clues for a certain brick bond used in one state might be 
unreliable for the same period in a different state. Regional 
variation holds true for building materials as well as 
construction. 
Finally, even beyond regional and local variation, an 
investigator needs to understand that each building has its 
own unique history of construction and change over time. 
Form, features, materials and detailing often varied 
according to the tastes and finances of both builder and 
supplier; construction quality and design were also 
inconsistent , as they are today. 
Specialists on a Team. Because architectural investigation 
requires a wide range of knowledge and many different 
skills, various people are likely to interact on the same 
project. While homeowners frequently execute small-scale 
projects, more complex projects might be directed by a 
craftsman, an architect or a conservator. For large-scale 
projects, a team approach may need to be adopted, 
consisting of professionals interacting with additional 
consultants. Consulting specialists may include 
architectural historians, architectural conservators , 
craftsmen, historic finish analysts, historians, archeologists, 
architects, curators, and many others . The scope and needs 
of a specific project dictate the skills of key players. 
Architectural investigation often includes the related fields 
of landscape and archeological investigation . Landscape 
surveyor analysis by horticulturists and landscape 
architects identify pre-existing features or plantings or those 
designed as separate or complementary parts of the site. 
Both above and below-ground archeology contribute 
information about missing or altered buildings , 
construction techniques, evidence of lifestyle and material 
culture, and about the evolution of the historic landscape 
itself. 
Architectural Evidence: Studying the Fabric 
of the Historic Building: 
Original Construction and Later Changes. Research prior 
to investigation may have indicated the architect, builder or 
a building's date of construction. In the absence of such 
information, architectural histories and field guides to 
architectural style can help identify a structure 's age 
through its form and style. 
Any preliminary date , however, has to be corroborated 
with other physical or documentary facts. Dates given for 
stylistic periods are general and tend to be somewhat 
arbitrary, with numerous local variations. Overall form and 
style can also be misleading due to subsequent additions 
and alterations . When the basic form seems in conflict with 
the details, it may indicate a transition between styles or 
that a style was simply upgraded through new work. 
The architectural investigation usually determines original 
construction details, the chronology of later alterations , and 
the physical condition of a structure . Most structures over 
fifty years old have been altered, even if only by natural 
forces. People living in a house or using a building for any 
length of time leave some physical record of their time 
there, however subtle. 
A longer period of occupancy generally counts for greater 
physical change. Buildings acquire a "historic character" as 
changes are made over time. 
Changes to architectural form over time are generally 
attributable to material durability, improvement in 
convenience systems, and aesthetics . First, the durability of 
building materials is affected by weathering, temperature 
and humidity, by disasters such as storms, floods or fire, or 
by air pollution from automobiles and industry. Second, 
changes in architectural form have always been made for 
convenience ' sake-fueled by technological innovations­
as people embrace better lighting, plumbing, heating, 
sanitation, and communication. People alter living spaces 
to meet changing family needs . Finally, people make 
changes to architectural form, features, and detailing to 
conform to current taste and style. 
Conducting the Architectural Investigation 
Architectural investigation can range from a simple one 
hour walk-through to a month long or even multi-year 
project-and varies from looking at surfaces to professional 
sub-surface examination and laboratory work. 
All projects should begin with the simplest, non-destructive 
processes and proceed as necessary. The sequence of 
investigation starts with reconnaissance and progresses to 
surface examination and mapping, sub-surface non ­
destructive testing, and various degrees of sub-surface 
destructive testing . 
Figure 8. During the initial visit, the architectural investigator may be 
able to resolve many questions about the building's condition and 
chronology while recording their observations through field notes and 
annotated sketches. Drawing by Marianne Graham, courtesy Jefferson's 
Poplar Forest Restoration Field School. 
5 

6 
Looking More Closely at Historic Building 
Materials and Features 
Although brick or wood frame buildings are the most common 
in this country, similar sets of characteristics and questions can 
be established for examining log, adobe, steel, or any other 
material. 
Figure A. Careful examination of the masonry reveals different periods of 
construction and repair through the composition and detailing of bricks 
and mortar. Depending upon location, open vertical joints may indicate 
the location of nailing blocks for decorative trim or weeps for drainage. 
These open joints at the building's cornice show evidence of an earlier 
wooden entablature extending down two courses below the present trim. 
The paint ghosts below the lowest blocks confirms the entablature's 
existence and provides clues to its size and finish. 
Masonry. Studying historic brickwork can provide 
important information about methods of production and 
construction. For example, the color, size, shape and 
texture of brick reveals whether it was hand molded and 
traditionally fired in a clamp with hardwoods, or whether 
it was machine molded and fired in a kiln using modern 
fuels. Similarly, the principal component part of masonry 
mortar, the lime or cement, reveals whether it was 
produced in a traditional or modern manner. Certain 
questions need to be asked during investigation. Is the 
mortar made with a natural or a Portland cement? If a 
natural cement, did it come from an oyster shell or a 
limestone source? Is it hydrated or hydraulic? As a 
construction unit, brick and mortar further reveal 
something about the time, place and human variables of 
construction, such as the type of bond, special brick 
shapes, decorative uses of glazed or rubbed brick, 
coatings and finishes, and different joints, striking and 
tooling. Does the bond conform with neighboring or 
regional buildings of the same period? Does the pattern of 
"make up" bricks in a Flemish Bond indicate ·the number 
of different bricklayers? What is the method of attaching 
wood trim to the masonry? The same types of questions 
related to production and construction characteristics can 
be applied to all types of masonry work, including stone, 
concrete, terra cotta, adobe and coquina construction. A 
complete survey undertaken during "surface mapping" 
can outline the materials and construction practices for the 
various periods of a structure, distinguishing the original 
work as well as the additions, alterations, and 
replacements. 
Figure B. Without damaging or altering historic fabric, X-ray images of 
wood connections provide internal views of construction materials and 
techniques. These x-ray images show nails being used to form the 
connections of a door opening in a wood stud wall covered with plaster 
and cut wooden lath. A single technician can operate the portable 
equipment and develop the film on site for immediate analysis. photos: 
NPS North Atlantic Cultural Resource Center, Building Conservation 
Branch. 
Wood. Buildings constructed with wood have a very 
different set of characteristics, requiring a different line of 
questioning. Is the wooden structural system log, timber 
frame, or balloon frame construction? Evidence seen on 
the wood surface indicates whether production was by 
ax, adze, pit saw, mill saw (sash or circular), or band saw. 
What are the varying dimensions of the lumber used? 
Finished parts can be sawn, gouged, carved, or planed (by 
hand or by machine). Were they fastened by notching, 
mortise and tenon, pegs, or nailing? If nails were used, 
were they wrought by hand, machine cut with wrought 
heads, entirely machine cut, or machine wire nails? For 
much of the nineteenth century the manufacture of nails 
underwent a series of changes and improvements that are 
dateable, allowing nails to be used as a tool in establishing 
periods of construction and alteration. Regardless of 
region or era, the method of framing, joining and 
finishing a wooden structure will divulge something 
about the original construction, its alterations, and the 
practices of its builders. Finally, does some of the wood 

appear to be re-used or re-cycled? Re-used and 
reproduction materials used in early restoration projects 
have confused many investigators. When no 
identification record was kept, it can be a problem 
distinguishing between materials original to the house 
and later replacement materials. 
Figure C. In many cases, new materials or coverings are placed directly 
over existing exterior features, preserving the original materials 
underneath. Here, the removal of a modern shingle roof and its 
underlayment revealed an historic standing seam metal roof. photo: 
courtesy, Phillips and Opperman, P.A. 
Roofs. Exterior features are especially prone to alteration 
due to weathering and lack of maintenance. Even in the 
best preserved structures, the exterior often consists of 
replaced or repaired roofing parts. Roof coverings 
typically last no more than fifty years. Are several 
generation of roof coverings still in place? Can the layers 
be identified? If earlier coverings were removed, the 
sheathing boards frequently provide clues to the type of 
covering as well as missing roof features. Dormers, 
cupolas, finials, cresting, weathervanes, gutters, lightning 
rods, skyligh ts, balustrades, parapets and platforms come 
and go as taste, function and maintenance dictate. The 
roof pitch itself can be a clue to stylistic dating and is 
unlikely to change unless the entire roof has been rebuilt. 
Chimneys might hold clues to original roof pitch, 
flashings, and roof feature attachments. Is it possible to 
look down a chimney and count the number of flues? 
This practice has occasionally turned up a missing 
fireplace. In many parts of the country, nineteenth­
century roof coverings evolved from wooden shingles or 
slate shingles, to metal shingles, to sheet metal, and still 
later in the twentieth century, to asphaltic or asbestos 
shingles. Clay tiles can be found covering roofs in 
seventeenth and eighteenth-century settlements of the east 
coast as well as western and southwestern Spanish 
settlements from the same period. Beyond the mid­
nineteenth century, and into the twentieth, the range and 
choice of roof coverings greatly expanded. 
Floors. In addition to production and construction clues, 
floors reveal other information about the interior, such as 
circulation patterns, furniture placement, the use of 
carpets, floor cloths, and applied floor finishes. Is there a 
pattern of tack holes? Tacks or tack holes often indicate 
the position and even the type of a floor covering. A 
thorough understanding of the seasonal uses of floor 
coverings and the technological history of their 
manufacture provide the background for identifying this 
type of evidence. 
Figure D. Building styles change over time as moldings and trims are 
added and removed. The ghosts of the previous woodwork are often left 
behind and preserved under the new trim. This photograph shows 
distinct profiles of architectural trim from three successive periods. 
photo: courtesy, Valentine Museum, Richmond, Virginia. 
Walls. Walls and their associated trim, both outside and 
inside, hold many clues to the building'S construction and 
changes made over time. The overall style of moldings, 
trim and finishes, and their hierarchical relationship, can 
help explain original construction as well as room usage 
and social interaction between rooms. Holes, scars, 
patches, nails, nail holes, screws and other hardware 
indicate former attachments. Are there "ghosts," or 
shadow outlines of missing features, or trim attachments 
such as bases, chair rails, door and window casings, 
en tablatures, cornices, mantels and shelves? Ghosts can be 
formed by paint, plaster, stucco, wear, weathering or dirt. 
Interior walls from the eighteenth and early nineteenth­
century were traditionally plastered after grounds or 
finished trim was in place, leaving an absence of plaster on 
the wall behind them. Evidence of attachments on 
window casings can also be helpful in understanding 
certain interior changes . Other clues to look for include 
7 

8 
Figure E. Discarded items are routinely stored within attics, then 
forgotten, only to be discovered during a later investigation. Seemingly 
worthless clutter and debris may help answer many questions. A 
thorough inventory should be performed before evaluating any object's 
usefulness. 
Attics and Basements. Attics and basements have been 
known as collection points for out-of-date, out-of-style and 
cast-off pieces such as mechanical systems, furnishings, 
family records and architectural fragments. These and 
other out-of-the-way places of a structure provide an 
excellent opportunity for non-destructive investigation. 
Not only are these areas where structural and framing 
members might be exposed to view, they are also areas 
which may have escaped the frequent alteration campaigns 
that occur in the more lived-in parts of a building. If a 
building has been raised or lowered in height, evidence of 
change would be found in the attic as well as on the 
exterior. Evidence of additions might also be detected in 
both the attic and the basement. Attics frequently provide 
a "top-side" view at the ceiling below, revealing its 
material, manner of production and method of attachment. 
A "bottom-side" view of the roof sheathing or roof 
covering can be seen from the attic as well. 
the installation of re-used material brought into a house or 
moved about within a house; worker's or occupant's 
graffiti, especially on the back of trim; and hidden finishes 
or wallpaper stuck in crevices or underneath pieces of 
trim. Stylistic upgrading often resulted in the re-use of 
outdated trim for blocking or shims. Unexpected 
discoveries are particularly rewarding. Investigators 
frequently tell stories about clues that were uncovered 
from architectural fragments carried off by rats and later 
found, or left by workers in attics, between walls and 
under floors. 
Basements generally relate more to human service 
functions in earlier buildings and to mechanical services 
in more recent eras. For example, a cellar of an urban 
1812 house disclosed the following information during an 
investigation: first period bell system, identification of a 
servant's hall, hidden fireplace, displacement of the 
service stairs, identification of a servants' quarters, an 
1850s furnace system, 1850s gas and plumbing systems, 
relocation of the kitchen in 1870, early use of 1890s 
concrete floor slabs and finally, twentieth century utility 
systems. While the earliest era had been established as 
the interpretation period, evidence from all periods was 
documented in order to understand and interpret how the 
house evolved or changed over time. 
Figure F. Outdated fixtures and systems are frequently abandoned in 
place when more modern units are installed. Examining and 
documenting their existence can provide a technological reference to 
the history and use of many rooms or structures. photo: NPS 
Preservation Assistance Division Files. 
Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing and Other Systems. 
Systems of utility and convenience bear close scrutiny 
during investigation. All historic buildings inhabited and 
used by people reveal some association, at the very 
minimum, with the necessities of lighting, climate control, 
water, food preparation, and waste removal. Later 
installations in a building may include communication, 
hygiene, food storage, security, and lightning protection 
systems. Other systems, such as transportation, are 
related to more specific functions of commercial or public 
structures. Although research into the social uses of 
rooms and their furnishings has borne many new studies, 
parallel research into how people actually carried out the 
most mundane tasks of everyday life has been fairly 
neglected. Utility and convenience systems are most 
prone to alteration and upgrading and, at the same time, 
less apt to be preserved, documented or re-used. 
Understanding the history or use of a building, and the 
history of systems technology can help predict the 
physical evidence that might be found, and what it will 
look like after it is found. 

~._.- -.---.---.-.-----~-t @-----------1, ;,&-----0 
@i~ ::-------~ ~ -:..~\ ~.::.-----_--::::.::.::_: 
I I 
" II: @ A 
: ~ __ -I---'L.>~ 
I , -----------,- -- \1 
I ... -------- .. -----
, I 
:: 0 
~~-~-:..~!~=~ 
: -~, ------t--liHlf ~f ~£Jl 
~ J t1.r<~EI.o tJE.I4~r 
G-f ! 0 t>f ~~W'Pf. 
;, ~:-,~--------,----
I ------------
SUPPORT 
Figure 9. Raking light is used to show irregularities on flat surfaces. Patches, repairs, and alterations can then be mapped by the shadows or ghosts they cast. 
In this case, the pattern of patched plaster suggested the removal shelves and a balustrade handrail from the wall. Historical research and plaster analysis 
confirmed the findings and the sequence of change. 
Reconnaissance. An initial reconnaissance trip through a 
structure-or visual overview-provides the most limited 
type of investigation. But experienced investigators 
accustomed to observation and analysis can resolve many 
questions in a two-to-four hour preliminary site visit. They 
may be able to determine the consistency of the building's 
original form and details as well as major changes made 
over time . 
Surface Mapping. The first step in a thorough, systematic 
investigation is the examination of all surfaces. Surface 
investigation is sometimes called "surface mapping" since it 
entails a minute look at all the exterior and interior surfaces. 
The fourfold purpose of surface mapping is to observe 
every visible detail of design and construction; develop 
questions related to evidence and possible alterations; note 
structural or environmental problems; and help develop 
plans for any further investigation. Following 
investigation, a set of documentary drawings and 
photographs is prepared which record or "map" the 
evidence. 
While relying upon senses of sight and touch, the most 
useful tool for examining surfaces is a high-powered, 
portable light used for illuminating dark spaces as well as 
for enhancing surface subtleties. Raking light at an angle on 
a flat surface is one of the most effective means of seeing 
evidence of attachments, repairs or alterations. 
Figure 10. Top: A boroscope is a fiber-optic tube which can provide views 
into the framing connections of a wall through an existing crack or hole. 
Bottom: Once the image is oriented, the investigator can see an open joint 
between the wood stud and its nailed lateral support. photos: NPS North 
Atlantic Cultural Resource Center, Building Conservation Branch. 
Non-Destructive Testing. The next level of investigation 
consists of probing beneath surfaces using non-destructive 
methods. Questions derived from the surface mapping 
examination and analysis will help determine which areas 
to probe. Investigators have perfected a number of tools 
and techniques which provide minimal damage to historic 
fabric. These include x-rays to penetrate surfaces in order 
to see nail types and joining details; boroscopes, fiber optics 
and small auto mechanic or dentists' mirrors to look inside 
of tight spaces; and ultra violet or infra-red lights to observe 
differences in materials and finishes . The most advanced 
9 

10 
technology combines the boroscope with video cameras 
using fiber optic illumination . In addition to the more 
common use of infra-red photography, similar non­
destructive techniques used in archeological investigations 
include remote sensing and ground-penetrating radar. 
Small material samples of wood, plaster, mortar, or paint 
can also be taken for laboratory analysis at this stage of 
investigation. For instance, a surface examination of a 
plaster wall using a raking light may show clear evidence of 
patching which corresponds to a shelf design. Were the 
shelves original or a later addition? A small sample of 
plaster from the patched area is analyzed in the laboratory 
and matches plaster already dated to a third period of 
construction. A probe further reveals an absence of first 
period plaster on the wall underneath . The investigator 
might conclude from this evidence that the shelves were an 
original feature and that the plaster fill dates their removal 
and patching to a third period of construction. 
Destructive Testing. Most investigations require nothing 
more than historical research, surface examination and non­
destructive testing. In very rare instances the investigation 
may require a sub-surface examination and the removal of 
fabric. Destructive testing should be carried out by a 
professional only after historical research and surface 
mapping have been fully accomplished and only after non­
destructive testing has failed to produce the necessary 
information. Owners should be aware that the work is a 
form of demolition in which the physical record may be 
destroyed. Sub-surface examination begins with the most 
accessible spaces, such as retrofitted service and mechanical 
chases; loose or previously altered trim, ceilings or floor 
boards; and pieces of trim or hardware which can be easily 
removed and replaced. 
Non-destructive testing techniques do not damage historic 
fabric. If non-destructive techniques are not sufficient to 
resolve important questions, small "windows" can be 
opened in surface fabric at predetermined locations to see 
beneath the surface. This type of subsurface testing and 
removal is sometimes called "architectural archeology" 
because of its similarity to the more well-known process of 
trenching in archeology. The analogy is apt because both 
forms of archeology use a method of destructive 
investigation. 
Photographs, video and drawings should record the before, 
during and after evidence when the removal of historic 
fabric is necessary. The selection and sequence of material 
to be removed requires careful study so that original extant 
fabric remains in situ if pOSSible. If removed, original fabric 
should be carefully put back or labelled and stored. At 
least one documentary patch of each historic finish should 
be retained in situ for future research. Treatment and 
interpretation, no matter how accurate, are usually not 
final; treatment tends to be cyclical, like history, and 
documentation must be left for future generations, both on 
the wall and in the files. 
Figure 11. The physical evidence of cracks and patches seen during surface mapping suggested an abandoned fireplace. Right: Exploratory testing was used 
to verijij its location. Left: Museum restoration required more detailed probing to discover the original detailing. Plaster and brick were carefully 
documented and removed to determine the fireplace's type, size, and decoration. The rectangular slots held wooden nailing blocks supporting the mantel and 
surround. A indicates the inside edge of the surround; B points to the ghost from an iron firebacl< and C shows the original floor level of the hearth. 
Laboratory Analysis. Laboratory analysis plays a scientific 
role in the more intuitive process of architectural 
investigation. One of the most commonly known 
laboratory procedures used in architectural investigation is 
that of historic paint analysis. The chronology and 
stratigraphy of applied layers can establish appropriate 
colors, finishes, designs or wall coverings. When 
conducted simultaneously with architectural investigation, 
the stratigraphy of finishes, like that of stratigraphic soils in 
archeology, helps determine the sequence of construction or 
alterations in a building. Preliminary findings from in situ 
examinations of painted finishes on walls or trim are 
common, but more accurate results come from extensive 

sampling and microscopic laboratory work using chemical 
analysis and standardized color notations . Consultants 
without the proper kno~ledge have been known to cause 
far more harm than good. 
Figure 12. During a thorough investigation, the mortar sample is viewed 
under ~ microscope using various lighting to find the presence of coatings 
or additIVes. It IS then ;sround and washed in an acid bath to separate 
and free the sand and fIbers. After further cleaning, these fines are stored 
and used for comparison in matching or dating repairs and alterations. 
photos: NPS North Atlantic Cultural Resource Center, Building 
Conservation Branch. 
Mortar and plaster analysis often provide a basis for dating 
construction with minimal intervention. Relatively small 
samples of the lime-based materials can be chemically 
separated into their component part s of sands and fines, 
which are then visually compared to equivalent parts of 
known or dated samples . A more thorough scientific 
approach may be used to accurately profile and compare 
samples of other materials through elemental analysis. Two 
similar methods in common use are Neutron Activation 
and Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS). Neutron 
Activation identifies the sample's trace elements by 
monitoring their response to neutron bombardment. EDS 
measures the response to electron bombardment through 
the use of an electron microscope. In both tests, the 
gathered information is plotted and matched with the 
reactions of ·known elements. The results provide a 
quantitative and qualitative profile of the sample's 
elemental compone~nts for use in further comparisons . 
Dendrochronology presents a minimally destructive 
process for dating wooden members. Also called tree ring 
dating , this process relies on the comparative wet and dry 
growth seasons of trees as seen in their rings via a core 
sample. This technique has two limitations : a very 
extensive data base must be compiled for climatic 
conditions over a long span of years and matched with 
corresponding tree ring samples; and the core samples can 
only be taken from timber which still has a bark edge . 
Simple identification of wood species during an 
inves tigation can be determined from small samples sent to 
a forest products laboratory. 
After Architectural Investigation: 
Weighing the Evidence 
Evidence, questions, and hypotheses must be continually 
evaluated during investigation. Like a detective 
constructing a case, an investigator must sort out 
information to get at "the facts." Yet, are the "facts" 
conclusive at any time? 
Observa tions made during the surface mapping may 
identify random features . These features begin to form 
patterns ; then , sets of patterns, perhaps representing 
alterations from multiple eras, begin to appear. If the right 
questions are not asked, the evidence can remain hidden. 
Hypotheses are formed, questioned, tested, re-formed and 
either rejected or substantiated. This process is repeated as 
more "facts" are uncovered and questions asked. 
Eventually the evidence seems conclusive . These 
conclusions, in turn, may lead to re-examination, more 
historical research, and the advice of specialized 
consultants. At some point, treatment generally follows 
based on the collective, educated conclusions of an entire 
professional team . 
Keeping a Responsible Record 
for Future Investigators 
The evidence collected during investigation, and any 
conclusions which can be drawn from it, should be 
documented in a written report. The complexity of a 
project dictates the complexity of the resulting record . It 
may be wise to maintain a report in an expandable format if 
long or extensive work is expected-additional evidence 
will undoubtedly need to be incorporated that alters 
previous conclusions . Reports tend to range from 
annota ted photographs in loose-leaf binders to full-length 
bound "book s." 
Putting findings and conclusions in an accessible form 
helps those who are planning treatment. For example, a 
reha bilitation project may require documentation to satisfy 
gra nt funding or tax credit program requirements; 
preservation and restoration projects always need careful 
documentation to guide the work. After work, the 
investigation report and notes on the treatment itself are 
made into a permanent file record . Whether or not work is 
11 

12 
being planned, the architectural investigation report will 
always be of value to future researchers or owners of the 
building. 
The most common professional document is called an 
Historic Structure Report . This invaluable tool for 
preservation typically contains historical as well as physical 
information. Sections include a history of the building, an 
architectural description of the original structure and 
changes made over time, the results of all investigations, a 
record of current conditions or problems, of past repairs 
and treatments, and recommendations for current and 
future action. They are seldom definitive; thus, research is a 
continuing process. 
Conclusion 
Architectural investigation plays a critical role in making 
responsible decisions about treating and interpreting 
historic buildings. A successful project to research, 
inventory, document, and ultimately treat and interpret a 
building is directly linked to the knowledge and skills of 
architectural investigators and other historic preservation 
specialis ts. The expressed goal of historic preservation is to 
protect and preserve materials and features that convey the 
significant history of a place. Careful architectural 
investigation-together with historical research-provides 
a firm foundation for this goal. 
Bibliography 
Bullock, Orin M. Jr., The Restoration Manual. Norwalk, CT.: 
Silvermine Publishers, 1966. 
Burns, John A, editor. Recording Historic Structures. 
Washington, D.C.: The AlA Press, 1989. 
Howard, Hugh. How Old Is This House? New York: 
Noonday Press, 1989. 
Howe, Barbara J., Dolores A Fleming, Emory L. Kemp, and 
Ruth Ann Overbeck. Houses and Homes: Exploring Their 
History. Nashville, TN.: American Association for State and 
Local History, 1987. 
Judd, Henry A, Before Restoration Begins. Nashville, TN.: 
American Association for State and Local History, 1973. 
Kitchen, Judith L., Caring For Your Old House. Washington, 
D.C.: The Preservation Press, 1991. 
Seale, William, Recreating the Historic House Interior. 
Nashville, TN.: American Association for State and Local 
History, 1979. 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic 
Properties. Washington, D.C.: Preservation Assistance 
Division, National Park Service, U.S. Department of the 
Interior, 1992. 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for 
Architectural and Engineering Documentation: HABS/HAER 
Standards. Washington, D.C.: HABS/HAER, National Park 
Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1990. 
Cover Photo: 
An historical architect analyzes and records his investigative findings 
while on site. photo: courtesy Valentine Museum. 
Acknowledgements 
Travis C. McDonald, Jr. is an architectural historian who serves as the 
Restoration Coordinator at Thomas jefferson's Poplar Forest near Lynchburg, 
Virginia . He respectively dedicates this work to three masters of architectural 
investigation: Henry A. Judd, former Chief Historical Architect of the National 
Park Service; Lee H. Nelson, former Chief, Preservation Assistance Division NPS; 
and Paul E. Buchanan, former Director of Architectural Research at the Colonial 
Williamsburg Foundation. The author gratefully acknowledges the following 
professionals for their help in reviewing this manuscript: Edward A. Chappell, 
Colonia l Williamsburg; E. Blaine Cliver, Preservation Assistance Division NPS; 
Stanley O. Graves, National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers; 
Bernard L. Herman, University of Delaware; H. Ward Jand!, Preservation 
Assistance Division NPS; Hugh C. Miller, Virginia State Historic Preservation 
Office; Orlando Ridout V, Maryland Historical Trust; William Seale; and 
professional staff members of the National Park Service. Timothy A. Buehner 
served as project coordinator and Kay D. Weeks as project editor. 
All photographs are by the Author unless otherwise noted. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interior 
to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. 
Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be directed to: Preservation 
Assistance Division, National Park Service, P.O. Box 37127, Washington, D.C. 
20013-7127. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without 
penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park 
Service are appreciated. 
ISSN: 0885-7017. 