51
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Building Codes for Historic and Existing Buildings: 
Planning and Maximizing their Application 
Marilyn E. Kaplan, Architect, FAPT 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Technical Preservation Services 
The rehabilitation of historic and existing buildings often 
triggers compliance with building codes  that establish 
the minimum level of safety and performance to protect 
the public health, safety, and welfare. When applied to 
historic buildings, codes originally written for new con-
struction can require major changes to signifcant historic 
features, spaces, and materials, or can render their rehabil-
itation infeasible. In contrast, codes written specifcally for 
existing buildings and historic buildings acknowledge 
their special construction and physical limitations and can 
allow for less invasive and more cost-effective means to re-
habilitate them while still meeting minimum code require-
ments. [Note: Words in bold are defned in the glossary.] 
The aim of this Brief is to provide information on how to 
meet the goals of building codes while also preserving 
or minimizing alterations to the character-defning  
features, spaces, materials, and fnishes  of historic 
buildings. The Brief presents an overview of the most 
widely adopted codes in the United States and their 
provisions for historic buildings. It provides guidance for 
selecting the optimal code compliance path and suggests 
best practices for achieving code-compliant solutions that 
also allow for the preservation of a building’s historic 
character. While the Brief is primarily intended to apply to 
historic buildings, much of the information also applies to 
the rehabilitation of existing buildings. 
An existing, legally-occupied building is typically not re-
quired to comply with current code requirements, except 
when a jurisdiction has adopted retroactive  code require-
ments (typically regarding life-safety) or when a build-
ing undergoes improvements classifed by the code as a 
repair, alteration, or change of occupancy. Code-required 
improvements may be limited to the area where work is 
proposed or involve other areas of the building. The code 
requirements are established as a function of whether a 
proposed project is classifed under the code as a  repair, 
alteration, change in occupancy , or addition. These 
categories/terms are separate and independent from those  
used or defned in the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards 
for the Treatment of Historic Properties , which defnes 
Preservation , Rehabilitation, Restoration, and Recon-
struction as four different treatments. 
For purposes of this Brief, ‘code’ is the general term en-
compassing all adopted construction requirements related 
to improvements to historic buildings. These may be codes, 
appendices, local ordinances, or referenced standards . 
Because jurisdictions often lag in adopting the most recent 
edition of a model code and may also modify the model 
code or adopt unique ordinances to supplement the model 
code, the frst step for every project is to identify the codes 
and other requirements applicable to a given rehabilita -
tion project in its jurisdiction. 
Excluded from the Brief 
are requirements gener-
ated by other zoning or 
planning codes including 
those administered by his-
toric preservation or de-
sign review commissions,  
local ordinances, funding 
sources, or specialized 
codes or requirements 
like those used for spe-
cifc building types such 
as hospitals or schools or 
developed by a property 
insurer. Also, while every 
attempt has been made 
to accurately quote and/ 
or characterize the codes 
and code requirements  
discussed in this Brief, the 
adopted, current code  
applicable to the individual  
project should always  
be consulted. 
Figure 1: The installation 
of an exterior automatic 
fre sprinkler system for the 
historic multi-story porches  
allowed these important, 
character-defning features  
to be retained to meet life and 
fre-safety code requirements.   
Photo: Robert Holcomb 
1 

Development Of Building  
Construction Codes in   
The United States 
General 
The earliest building code regulations adopted in the 
United States in the 19th and early 20th centuries focused 
on fre safety following catastrophic fres and earthquakes 
as well as improving substandard housing conditions. 
Over time, codes have expanded to establish minimum 
requirements for natural light, clean water, waste 
treatment, structural integrity, wind and food resistance, 
minimum room dimensions, building exits , and hundreds 
of other requirements that affect life and property 
safety. After World War II, codes also served as available 
mechanisms to implement new public and government 
priorities related to housing, universal accessibility, 
and energy conservation. Over the next 75 years, the 
codes and their administration became increasingly 
complex, a pattern that continues as new code changes 
continue to raise the level of required performance of 
buildings. Examples include provisions focused on energy 
consumption and conservation, carbon reduction, design 
and performance of ventilation systems, and protection 
from wildfres at the urban-wilderness interface. 
Housing Controls 
Nineteenth-century land use controls addressed outbreaks 
of infectious diseases, poor sanitation, and inadequate 
ventilation in overcrowded slums, as well as the confagra-
tions that destroyed dense, and often wood-frame, con-
struction in cities where residential, manufacturing, and 
industrial uses comingled. Local regulations controlled 
building height and size, interior room heights, street 
drainage, wall thickness and material, and chimneys and 
freplaces. They also prohibited certain uses based on po-
tential fre and health hazards. Early tenement-focused 
legislation in New York City (1867, 1879), Chicago (1902), 
and the state of California (1909) included requirements 
for light and fresh air in habitable rooms, interior toilets, 
heat, fre escapes, and minimum room sizes and ceiling 
heights. Other codes and legislation responded to disas-
ters such as the 1871 Chicago fre and the 1906 San Francis-
co earthquake. Collectively, these regulations remain the 
foundation for the minimum housing standards present in 
current codes. 
Fire Safety 
Most mid-19th-century manufacturing and industrial 
buildings operating in the Northeastern United States 
were highly susceptible to fre. Rudimentary fre 
protection systems  were installed in many of these 
buildings, with the frst known perforated pipe sprinkler 
system installed in 1852 at the plant of the Proprietors 
of the Locks and Canals in 1852 in Lowell, Massachusetts. 
The sprinkler head patented in 1874 by Henry Parmelee of 
New Haven, Connecticut, was used in hundreds of systems 
installed between 1878 and 1882 through arrangements 
with the Providence Steam and Gas Company. Owned by 
Frederic Grinnell, the company patented its own device in 
1881. Grinnell later invented the glass disc sprinkler, the 
precursor of modern sprinkler heads, as well as secured 
numerous patents including those for dry pipe valves and 
automatic fre alarm systems. 
Fire-resistant construction and  fre suppression  systems 
were championed by insurance companies and manufac-
turers. The 1896 Report of Committee on Automatic Sprin -
kler Protection, prepared by representatives of insurance 
organizations and others, provided design and installation 
standards in response to the hundreds of unique, non-
standardized installations that existed. The meetings that 
produced the report also created the National Fire Pro-
tection Association (NFPA) to administer these standards. 
Prior to 1904, NFPA membership was limited to the insur-
ance industry. 
The National Board of Fire Underwriters (NBFU), organized 
in 1866, also recognized the problems of unsafe building 
construction and uncontrolled fre hazards, as well as the 
importance of water supply and local fre departments. 
Their comprehensive 1905 Recommended Building Code , 
renamed the National Building Code by 1927, was based on 
damage assessment caused by major fres, including those 
following the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. 
Contemporaneous efforts sought to standardize early 
electrical installations prone to overcurrents and fre. The 
demand for electricity exploded following Thomas Edi-
son’s 1879 development of the incandescent lamp, the 
1882 construction of the frst electric light-power station in 
New York City, and the use of electric lighting at the 1893 
World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago. The 1897 Nation-
al Electrical Code (NEC), published by the NBFU, was trans-
Figure 2: Sprinkler heads and 
other equipment can be selected 
and placed to have minimal visual 
intrusion with no impact on 
functionality, such as these fxed  
(left) or concealed (right, with 
arrow) sprinkler heads. Photos: 
Marilyn Kaplan 
2 

ferred to the NFPA in 1911, the second step in establishing 
the NFPA as the principal American organization produc-
ing codes and standards associated with fre safety. 
In 1927 the NFPA published the Building Exits Code , 
incorporating fndings from nationally publicized fres 
with loss of life at the Iroquois Theatre (Chicago, 1903), 
the Collinwood School (Cleveland, 1908), and the Triangle 
Shirtwaist Company (New York, 1911). Theaters, schools, 
factories, and other places of public assembly  received  
special attention in codes following these events. The 
adopted code provisions focused on stairways, fre escapes, 
and the construction and arrangement of multiple exits in 
these buildings. In 1963 the NFPA changed the title of the 
code to Code for Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and 
Structures and, subsequently, to the NFPA 101 Life Safety 
Code. Fire safety principles from these early documents, 
ranging from marking of exits to calculation of the number 
of required exits, have been enhanced, expanded, and 
incorporated into all contemporary building codes. For 
specialized buildings such as hospitals, universities, schools, 
and public buildings, NFPA 101 is commonly enforced,  
often in conjunction with a model building code. Although 
NFPA published its frst general construction code in 2000, 
NFPA 5000:  Building Construction and Safety Code , it has 
not been widely adopted. 
Seismic 
The destruction caused by the San Francisco earthquake 
of 1906 illustrated the threat to cities identifed as having 
moderate or high risk of experiencing signifcant seismic 
activity. The frst seismic provisions included in the 
1927 Uniform Building Code were expanded following 
technical and scientifc advances including the earthquake 
magnitude scale in 1935 and the creation of the frst 
seismic hazard maps in 1949. Passage of the 1977 Federal 
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act permitted funding 
of risk mitigation studies by engineering, scientifc, 
and technical organizations. The state of California’s 
earthquakes with signifcant loss of life in San Fernando 
(1973), Loma Prieta (1989), and Northridge (1992) resulted 
in expanded technical requirements for new construction 
and existing buildings.  
Alongside requirements that Federal agencies incorporate 
seismic-resistant design in newly owned or leased build-
ings by 1994, seismic provisions began to be incorporated 
into the model codes by the early 1990s. Code provisions 
have continued to be revised as more is learned about 
seismic activity and building performance in earthquakes. 
In many jurisdictions, ordinances requiring voluntary or 
mandatory seismic risk reduction programs have been ad-
opted or are under consideration to address buildings with 
unreinforced masonry as well as non-ductile concrete con-
struction. Some jurisdictions with large urban centers in 
high seismic risk areas have also adopted more restrictive 
construction and rehabilitation requirements than those  
contained in the model building code or standard. 
Accessibility 
Late-1950s research at the University of Illinois produced  
the frst comprehensive document addressing accessibil -
ity in buildings, the 1961 Specifcations for Making Build -
ings and Facilities Accessible to and Usable by the Physically  
Handicapped. Additional research in the 1970s resulted in  
the 1980 and subsequent editions of ANSI A117.1, published  
by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).  
In 1968 the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) became the frst  
Federal effort to require accessibility to buildings and facili-
ties designed, built, altered, or leased by Federal agencies.  
Under this act, standards for accessibility were incorporat-
ed into the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS).  
The model code organizations’ engagement in accessibility  
began in 1987, when the Council of American Building Of-
fcials (CABO) developed an accessibility standard intended  
to be compatible with code and enforcement procedures.  
Following the 1990 passage of the Americans with Disabili-
ties Act (ADA), administered by the U.S. Department of  
Justice, Civil Rights Division, the ADA Accessibility Guide-
lines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG) were published in 
1991. The ADA and ABA guidelines were later merged into a  
single document, the 2004 Accessibility Guidelines. 
The ADA brings expanded accessibility of the built  
environment by means of one of its major component  
parts, “Title III, Public Accommodations.” This part is  
applicable to private persons or groups that own, operate,  
or lease places of public accommodation. Examples of  
such places are restaurants, hotels, theaters, medical  
offces, pharmacies, retail stores, museums, libraries,  
parks, private schools, and day care centers. It requires  
that all new construction, as well as alterations and  
additions to existing buildings, meet specifc accessibility  
standards. Exempt from its requirements are buildings or  
parts of buildings controlled by private clubs or religious  
organizations. Accessibility requirements for housing  
funded or whose fnancing is guaranteed by the Federal  
government was compulsory under Section 504 of the  
Rehabilitation Act of 1973. In 1988 the Fair Housing  
Amendments Act made new privately-funded housing of  
four units or more accessible to persons with disabilities.  
The ADA’s accessibility guidelines have had multiple re-
visions since 1990 including those which create closer 
coordination with accessibility requirements which are 
incorporated by reference into the locally adopted and 
enforceable model codes. Special provisions and consider-
ations for historic buildings exist in both the ADA and the 
model code. When CABO joined the ICC in 1998, the ICC 
assumed the role of Secretariat of the Standard, publishing 
the ICC / ANSI A117.1-Accessible and Usable Buildings and 
Facilities in 1998. This publication was an important effort 
to incorporate accessibility requirements into the model 
codes and thus enforceable by local building offcials as 
part of the permitting process. The ADA is otherwise en-
forceable only by Federal District Courts through lawsuits 
brought by individuals. 
3 

Energy Conservation 
Beginning in the 1970s, energy conservation standards for  
residential construction were included in the Model En -
ergy Code  published by CABO and, for commercial build -
ings, in the 90.1 series of codes published by ASHRAE,  
formerly the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,  
and Air-Conditioning Engineers. In 2000 these documents  
were merged into the International Energy Conservation  
Code (IECC) and have currently been adopted by many  
jurisdictions as a minimum standard. Energy codes typi -
cally address building envelope (roof, walls, windows, and  
doors), mechanical systems, service water heating (do -
mestic hot water), lighting, and electrical power. In some  
cases, above-minimum codes such as the International  
Green Construction Code  (IgCC) and other state or munic -
ipal codes or energy policy have also been adopted. Con -
sistent with local, state, and Federal policy, energy per -
formance standards will continue to increase. As already  
adopted by some jurisdictions, with possible eventual in -
corporation into the IECC, newer approaches address top -
ics ranging from establishing limits for  a  building’s  energy  
use to carbon reduction. 
Natural Disasters 
By the 1930s the Federal government provided funding for  
repair and reconstruction of certain public facilities follow-
ing earthquakes and other disasters. Major catastrophic  
events of the 1960s and 1970s precipitated additional Feder-
al efforts, frst within the Department of Housing and Urban  
Development (HUD) and later within the Federal Emergency  
Management Agency (FEMA). Created in 1979 to centralize  
disaster-related responsibilities, FEMA in turn became part  
of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in 2003.  
The model codes include extensive provisions related to 
protection from seismic events, hurricanes, and fre, and 
more limited provisions for protection from foods. For 
the latter, in 1968 the National Flood Insurance Act (NFIA) 
made food insurance available to homeowners, and soon 
thereafter food insurance was mandatory for certain 
properties located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. Guidance 
and construction requirements published by FEMA include 
their publications specifc to hurricanes, tsunamis, fooding, 
earthquakes, and fre. Code and other Federal program 
requirements have continued to evolve following unprec-
edented natural disasters in recent years. 
Model Code Organizations 
While the earliest regulations focused on fre safety and 
were often developed by property insurance companies, 
the advent of regional code organizations concerned with 
broader construction-related issues established the tech-
nical and administrative framework still followed today. 
Most of these organizations’ members were building  
code offcials  from cities, towns, and government agen-
cies, although contractors, manufacturers, and design 
professionals also participated. Each of the model code 
organizations produced comprehensive, regionally-tailored 
building codes available for local or state adoption. 
The Building Offcials and Code Administrators (BOCA), 
founded in 1915, published its frst model code widely 
used in the northeastern states, the BOCA Basic Building  
Code, in 1950. The Southern Building Code Congress Inter-
national (SBCCI), established in 1940, published the Stan -
dard Building Code in 1945 which was widely adopted by 
southeastern states. The International Conference of Build-
ing Offcials (ICBO), formed in 1922 by Pacifc Coast build-
ing code offcials, published the Uniform Building Code in 
1927 which was broadly used in states west of the Missis-
sippi River. In 1972 these organizations formed the Council 
of American Building Offcials (CABO), publishing the One- 
and Two-Family Dwelling Code for residential buildings 
less than four stories in height. 
By the early 1990s, efforts to create a single set of nation-
al model codes had gained wide acceptance. In 1994 the  
three model code organizations created the International  
Code Council (ICC), which quickly became the predomi-
nant national organization of the building code community.  
While the NFPA was only initially involved in the consolida-
tion effort, it remains the principal organization recognized  
for fre protection expertise, codes, and standards.  
In 2000 the ICC published the frst International Building  
Code (I
BC), merging the composition and content of the  
three regional model codes into one code document. The  
ICC currently publishes an integrated family of ffteen  
codes, each revised on a three-year cycle, ranging in topic  
from existing buildings to energy conservation. 
Codes for Existing and  
Historic Buildings  
The post-World War II construction boom and Federal  
urban renewal program funded through The Housing Act 
of 1949, active through the 1980s, supported the demo-
lition of thousands of buildings considered to be urban 
slums. In response, 1960s grassroots preservation advocacy 
efforts led to the passage of the National Historic Preser-
vation Act of 1966. In addition to the creation of the Na-
tional Register of Historic Places, this Federal legislation 
required Federal agencies to consider the potential effect 
or impact on historic properties through a consultation 
process for projects undertaken, approved, funded,  
permitted, or licensed by Federal agencies. 
Further protection of historic buildings arose as states 
adopted their own state-level historic registries and 
consultation processes, and more historic preservation 
or design review commissions were created at the local 
level. Federal grants-in-aid and tax incentive programs 
were adopted in the 1970s to encourage historic building 
rehabilitation. For these programs, the Secretary of 
the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic 
Properties and its now widely adopted Standards for 
4 

Figure 3: Some code challenges 
such as exiting and fre 
protection requirements on  
smaller Main Street buildings  
can be mitigated by using the 
IEBC. Photo: Marilyn Kaplan 
Rehabilitation were created. Simultaneously, other 
Federal agencies, including HUD, shifted funds to support 
rehabilitation projects. 
Historically, building codes were written for new 
construction, largely ignoring existing buildings or  
requiring compliance with new construction standards for 
substantial rehabilitation projects. Building code offcials, 
known in various jurisdictions as the “ authority having 
jurisdiction,” had wide discretion in determining what 
improvements were required as part of a rehabilitation 
project, thus making it diffcult to predict not only what 
would be required but also the level of diffculty and cost 
to meet those requirements. Presidential commissions 
of the 1960s, recognizing the potential contribution of 
existing buildings to meet the nation’s housing needs,  
directed HUD (created in 1965) to develop model standards 
for incorporation into local building codes with special 
preference to the rehabilitation of existing housing and 
to expand the funds available for building rehabilitation. 
HUD recognized that to remove barriers to rehabilitation 
these codes needed to be fexible and to maximize 
retention of existing materials, construction techniques, 
and foor-plan confgurations.  
HUD’s groundbreaking  Rehabilitation Guidelines series, 
addressing technical and administrative obstacles to the 
reuse of existing buildings, included the 1980 edition of 
Number 8, Guideline on Fire Ratings of Archaic Materials 
and Assemblies. Revised in 2000, this document remains 
an important resource relative to evaluating the fre-resis-
tance of older building materials. 
Efforts by HUD and others also resulted in the adoption 
of unique rehabilitation codes, chapters, or provisions 
in the model codes and the codes of some jurisdictions. 
Approaches to the challenge of balancing safety, cost, 
and other parameters in existing and historic buildings 
varied widely. Some jurisdictions required compliance with 
new construction standards when 50% of the value of 
a building was exceeded in the rehabilitation, allowing 
fewer code upgrades when the rehabilitation costs were 
25%, or between 25% and 50%, of the building value. 
Others, such as in Massachusetts and Chicago, established 
requirements based on the level of hazard increase when 
comparing the pre-rehabilitation and proposed post-
rehabilitation uses.  
An important advance in building codes was the develop-
ment of a numerical scoring system to measure the level  
of safety provided by a building or a proposed rehabilita-
tion. This advancement, developed in Ohio in the 1980s,  
was based on a methodology developed for New York  
City high-rise offce buildings and an appendix of the  
NFPA’s  Life Safety Code for health care occupancies. By  
assigning scores to existing safety parameters, attributes  
could be recognized and credited against code defcien -
cies to determine whether the overall proposed conditions  
would provide an acceptable level of safety. In 1985 this  
system was adopted as a supplement to the BOCA Nation-
al Building Code, subsequently renamed Articles 25 and  
32. Eventually incorporated into the International Building  
Code (IBC), this system was relocated to the International 
Existing Building Code (IEBC) where it continues to serve  
as the basis of the Performance Compliance Method. 
Another approach to increased code predictability was to  
apply requirements as a function of owner-elective work.  
Rather than the earlier codes’ abrupt jumps when 50% of  
building value was reached, in this approach the extent  
and stringency of code requirements gradually increased  
for projects defned as a repair, alteration, or change  
of occupancy. This served as the framework for three  
infuential rehabilitation codes: ICBO’s 1997 Uniform Code  
for Building Conservation (UCBC), the 1997 Nationally  
Applicable Recommended Rehabilitation Provisions  
(NARRP) prepared for HUD, and the 1998 New Jersey 
Rehabilitation Subcode. 
5 

This approach was included as the Work Area 
Compliance Method  in the frst edition of the 
International Existing Building Code , published in 2003. 
For projects undergoing a change of occupancy , it also 
established requirements as a function of whether fre 
and life safety hazards were increased or decreased as 
a result of the occupancy change. While the Work Area 
Compliance Method included a special chapter for historic 
buildings, other compliance methods had separate but 
less comprehensive provisions for historic buildings. The 
“stepped” approach to rehabilitation has been followed 
in other building codes, including the International 
Residential Code’s  (IRC) Appendix J and "Chapter 43: 
Building Rehabilitation", of the NFPA 101: Life Safety Code. 
Prior to the publication of the IEBC, some jurisdictions 
and the model code organizations developed unique 
approaches for historic buildings. These included allowing 
the building code offcial or appointed boards to approve 
exceptions or variances; special provisions for historic 
house museums, bed-and-breakfasts, or a jurisdiction’s 
most signifcant historic buildings as listed in the code; 
enforcement of minimum maintenance standards for 
historic properties; and the development of unique codes 
for historic buildings, such as the state of California’s  
1975 adoption of its frst California State Historical  
Building Code. 
Most jurisdictions now use the IEBC and its historic build-
ing provisions, and few jurisdictions have continued to 
maintain or develop their own separate historic building 
code provisions. In many cases, adoption includes modif-
cations to the model code to meet local priorities. 
Code Development, Adoption,   
and Enforcement 
Code Development 
Codes have expanded from single-focus documents 
concentrating on life safety to a suite of separate 
publications establishing thousands of minimum 
architectural and engineering requirements. Separate 
codes regulate construction and rehabilitation of 
residential properties, existing buildings, and new 
construction; ongoing operations and property  
maintenance; and topics such as plumbing, electrical, and 
mechanical systems. To eliminate redundancies, codes 
often explicitly refer to provisions of other codes or 
reference standards. Additional provisions and guidelines 
are included in informational or mandatory appendices of 
the codes or related, separate, ordinances adopted by the 
jurisdiction.  
The International Code Council (ICC), the National Fire Pro-
tection Association (NFPA), and other organizations pre-
paring codes and standards have unique processes for the 
writing and updating of codes, typically involving mem-
ber participation to develop, review, and accept proposed 
changes. Although ICC codes are updated on three-year 
cycles, few jurisdictions immediately adopt the newest 
edition or adopt the full suite of ICC codes. Separate pro-
cedures exist for code organizations’ updating of materi-
als classifed as informational only, such as guidelines and 
handbooks. Most code organizations follow the voluntary 
consensus standards for the development of codes, over-
seen by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
Types of Codes 
Code provisions can be prescriptive-based , with require-
ments explicitly established, or  performance-based , 
specifying overall goals and permitting the designer and 
building code offcial to determine how these will be met. 
Prescriptive provisions that identify specifc materials or 
methods are traditionally the easiest to use for new con-
struction where little interpretation or negotiation is re-
quired. Performance provisions that specify a performance 
goal and permit the designer to determine the means to 
achieve that goal provide greater fexibility and can be 
benefcial in resolving situations presented by the specifc 
or unique conditions of existing and historic buildings. Ex-
amples of performance provisions include the numeric rat-
ing system of the Performance Compliance Method of the 
International Existing Building Code (IEBC) and the energy 
code requirements in the International Energy Conserva -
tion Code (IECC) that establish the amount of energy (En-
ergy Use Intensity) a building is permitted to use annually. 
In both cases, the code establishes a numeric value repre-
senting the minimum performance level a building must 
achieve, permitting the designer to select the building 
systems and components that cumulatively will meet the 
required level of performance.  Equivalencies, like code 
provisions for “alternative methods and materials,” are 
another means to demonstrate that a code-established 
performance level will be met. Multiple references to this 
concept exist within the IEBC, although it can be diffcult 
to quantitatively establish equivalency without computer  
modeling or extensive testing.  
Code Enforcement: Adoption, Permitting, 
and Inspections 
Most jurisdictions in the United States have adopted one 
or more of the ICC model codes. Adoptions can occur at 
the state or local level, and procedures for adoption vary. 
It is not uncommon for the code’s frst administrative chap-
ter to be modifed by the adopting jurisdiction, for exam-
ple, to select only certain codes of the ICC model codes for 
adoption or to amend some sections of the code to refect 
local conditions and priorities such as to include provisions 
addressing natural disasters, sea level rise, and greater en-
ergy performance.  
Code enforcement is typically the responsibility of a ju-
risdiction, although third-party frms or state or county 
agencies may be authorized to act on the jurisdiction’s 
behalf. Procedures are established for permits, inspections, 
6 

 
  
Minimum Property Maintenance and 
Housing Codes 
appeals, whether  construction documents  must be pre-
pared by a registered design professional , which build-
ing types and scopes of work require a permit and inspec-
tion, and if contractors must meet licensing or certifcation 
requirements. State and Federal agencies may be exempt 
from local requirements and undertake their own code 
compliance procedures. 
Enforcement responsibilities can be assigned to a single 
building department or shared, most typically with the fre 
department. Separate review and inspection may occur by 
topic area (plumbing, electrical, energy conservation) or by 
other departments or boards associated with zoning, plan-
ning, historic preservation, etc. 
Permits and Inspections 
When required, plans and/or specifcations are reviewed to 
confrm that the proposed work complies with the require-
ments of the jurisdiction. Issuance of the building permit  
indicates that the proposed design complies with applica-
ble code requirements and that legal permission is granted 
to begin construction. The permit may specify required 
inspections for foundations, insulation, and electrical and 
plumbing installations. Inspections may be undertaken by 
the jurisdiction or a third-party inspector, as is common for 
electrical installations.  
Figure 4: Creative life- and fre-safety code solutions may be 
required for special buildings and conditions, such as the use of an 
automatic accordion type, horizontal-sliding fre and security door  
to meet code requirements. Concealed when not in use, such systems 
can provide up to a 3-hour fre-resistance rating.  
Photo: U.S. General Services Administration 
Final inspections, often initiated by a letter from the 
design professional indicating the completed project 
has been constructed in a code-compliant manner, are 
required for the issuance of a Certifcate of Occupancy  
or Certifcation of Completion . Where inspected 
conditions are found to be defcient, additional work  
may be required. 
Appeals, Waivers, and Variances 
The appeal process for a project denied a permit and 
for projects for which a waiver of code requirements 
or a variance is requested varies by jurisdiction. In some 
cases, such requests can be acted on by staff, the building 
code offcial, or an appeal body comprised of expert 
professionals, while in others a more complex process 
involving a regional or state review board may be required. 
Existing Occupied Buildings 
Provided that no unsafe conditions exist, codes generally 
allow existing, legally constructed, and occupied buildings 
to remain in operation without complying with current 
code requirements. Most minor maintenance work can  
be undertaken without engagement in the code process.  
Only in rare instances are new code requirements 
retroactive. These are typically limited to items considered 
most critical to public health and safety, for example, 
smoke detectors in certain residential occupancies or 
swimming pool enclosures. 
Certain occupancies such as places of public assembly 
and schools, or certain building equipment, such as 
elevators and mechanical or fre protection equipment, 
may be required to have annual or periodic inspections. 
Such requirements and enforcement responsibilities may  
be established in the fre code or other local or state 
legislation and may address topics such as access and 
egress, special events, safe storage and use of hazardous 
materials, emergency planning and response, etc. 
Poorly maintained and vacant buildings are at risk of  
vandalism and damage due to exposure to the elements,  
fre, and earthquakes. These vulnerabilities not only  
affect their occupants, but also extend to neighboring  
buildings. Protection for and from these buildings is  
available through the enforcement of adopted minimum  
property maintenance standards, such as the International  
Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), housing, or fre codes.  
Unlike the building and rehabilitation codes that guide  
construction efforts, these minimum standards establish  
the minimum conditions for legal occupancy. Often, their  
enforcement is sporadic and reactive when a complaint has  
been lodged. 
Enforcement of these minimum standards is the most  
effcient means to protect housing and other historic  
7 

Codes / Publisher Scope Special Historic Building Provisions 
International Existing 
Building Code (IEBC) 
— 
I
nternational Code 
Coun
cil, Inc. (ICC) 
Repair, alteration, change of 
occupancy, additions, and relocation 
of existing buildings. 
Chapter 3. Historic building provisions, applicable to all 
compliance paths, are limited to those addressing acces-
sibility (accessible routes and entrances, toilet rooms). 
Note: Appendices/Resources include 
Guidelines for Seismic Retroft, 
Accessibility, Wind Retroft, and Fire 
Ratings of Archaic Materials a nd 
Assemblies. 
Separate  provisions for Prescriptive Compliance Method 
are included in Chapter 5, and Work Area Compliance 
Method in Chapter 12. 
Appendix B, Supplementary Accessibility Requirement  
for Existing Buildings and Facilities establishes a 
consultation process if the appendix has been adopted 
by the jurisdiction. 
buildings from accelerated deterioration caused by  
unaddressed, unsafe conditions. A jurisdiction’s efforts  
can be reinforced by programs that identify and monitor  
vulnerable buildings, such as establishing an inventory  
of vacant or rental properties and implementing robust  
inspection programs. Timely code enforcement follow-up  
of noted unsafe and non-compliant conditions can avoid a  
catastrophic fre, structural collapse, unplanned relocation  
of occupants, or a costly emergency demolition.  
Protection of these properties requires the adoption of  
appropriate codes and local regulations and adequate  
staffng and resources to support enforcement, including  
proactive inventorying and monitoring of existing build -
ings. Additional protections can also be achieved when a  
jurisdiction has the legal authority to undertake critical  
repairs at the expense of the property owner or to trans -
fer ownership of delinquent properties to an appointed  
International   
Residential Code  
(IRC) 
— 
ICC 
New construction or existing buildings that 
are three stories or less above grade. Lim-
ited to single-family houses, two-family 
houses (duplexes), and buildings consisting 
of three or more townhouse units. 
Existing Buildings and Structures , an expansion of Ap-
pendix AJ of previous IRC editions, is similar in format 
to the historic building provisions of the IEBC Work Area 
Compliance Method. The appendix is informational only 
and must be separately adopted by the jurisdiction. 
Energy conservation requirements  
for new and existing buildings and 
residential and commercial buildings. 
Requirements separated for commercial  
and residential buildings. 
In addition to Chapter 5 exceptions for alterations, 
code provisions are not mandatory if documentation 
demonstrating  that compliance with the code would 
threaten, degrade, or destroy historic features is 
submitted. 
International Energy  
Conservation Code (IECC) 
— 
ICC 
Construction in new and existing buildings, 
including Chapter 11 retroactive provisions. 
Chapter 11 references NFPA 914 Code for the  
Protection of Historic Structures for fre protection 
planning (maintenance and availability of fre safety  
and evacuation plans). 
International Fire Code  
(IFC) 
— 
ICC 
Energy requirements for new and existing 
buildings; a code-allowed alternate to the 
International Energy Conservation Code 
(IECC). 
Includes requirements for alterations. 
Standard 90.1 Energy 
Standard for Buildings 
Except Low Rise 
Residential Buildings 
— 
ASHRAE 
Historic buildings are exempted. 
Addresses retrofts, such as building 
envelope improvements, environmental  
control strategies, energy system analysis, 
HVAC selection, and lighting design. 
Addresses technical requirements and op-
erations, such as fre protection, fre pre-
vention, security, construction efforts, and 
special events. 
Guideline 34 Energy 
Guideline for Historic 
Buildings 
— 
ASHRAE 
Written for historic structures. 
NFPA 914 Code for the 
Protection of Historic 
Structures 
—  
National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) 
Written for historic structures. 
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 
—  
NFPA 
Addresses fre safety and related hazards 
for new and existing buildings. Often 
applied to larger and institutional 
buildings including hospitals, schools, and 
public buildings.  
Three compliance options for historic buildings:  
comply with Chapter 43 provisions for historic 
buildings, with Chapter 43 work category (similar in 
format to IEBC), or with NFPA 914. 
Primary Codes and Guidelines for Historic Buildings 
Figur
e 5. Special provisions for existing and historic buildings. 
8 

 Construction and Occupancy/Use 
Classifcations 
receiver or other entity committed to the building’s pro -
tection and rehabilitation. Engagement with the courts  
and related agencies as part of these code enforcement  
actions is also essential.  
The Secretary of the Interior’s 
Standards 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment 
of Historic Properties (36 CFR Part 68, 1995) consists of 
four treatment standards: Preservation, Rehabilitation,  
Restoration, and Reconstruction. While not a code, they 
are regulatory for projects receiving Historic Preservation 
Fund Grant assistance and other federally-assisted 
projects. The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for 
Rehabilitation (36 CFR Part 67, 1990), which are included 
in the Treatment Standards, are regulatory for the Federal 
Historic Preservation Tax Incentives program (commonly 
known as the “Historic Tax Credits”) and are the criteria 
used to determine if a project qualifes as “a certifed 
rehabilitation,” and, therefore, for certain tax benefts 
under the Internal Revenue Code. 
The 1990 (specifc to the tax incentives program) and the 
19
95 versions of the Rehabilitation Standards convey the 
same intent and provide the same guidance, although 
they are worded slightly differently, and “shall” replaces 
“will” in the 1995 version. The Secretary of the Interior's 
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties , in 
particular the Standards for Rehabilitation , are intended 
as general guidance for work on all historic properties, are 
widely used, and have been adopted at Federal, state, and 
local levels. 
Using the Codes 
Model International Codes 
The International Code Council’s (ICC) ffteen model codes, 
which address a multitude of topics associated with public 
health, safety, and welfare, are the most adopted codes 
in the United States. These model codes are adopted as 
published or with modifcations as determined by the local 
jurisdiction. Adoption may explicitly reference the title of 
the model code and the date of its publication or instead 
rename the code to include the name of the jurisdiction 
and the date adopted. 
The International Existing Building Code (IEBC) contains a 
full chapter dedicated to historic buildings. The Interna -
tional Plumbing Code  (IPC) and others have requirements 
for existing installations and how alterations or additions 
are addressed. This includes the retroactive provisions of 
Chapter 11 of the International Fire Code (IFC), applicable 
always regardless of whether a repair or alteration is un-
dertaken. Additional codes published by the ICC, generally 
with less impact on historic buildings, are shown in Figure 
22. The principal codes and guidelines affecting historic 
and existing buildings are identifed in Figure 5. 
Codes are organized by two key risk factors that 
establish the minimum level of safety a building must 
provide: construction classifcation  and occupancy  
classifcation . The interplay of these classifcations 
determines maximum building height, number of stories, 
and building area; permitted occupancies; and other 
requirements primarily related to fre protection and 
means of egress. 
Figure 6. The IEBC 
provides opportunities  
to retain character-
defning features such 
as historic stairways  
that would not be 
permitted to remain by 
codes written for new 
construction. 
Photo: Marilyn Kaplan  
Construction Classifcation is based on the materials used 
in construction. Buildings are further described by fre-
resistance ratings assigned to key building elements: 
primary structural frame, exterior and interior bearing 
walls, exterior nonbearing walls, interior nonbearing walls  
and partitions, foor construction, and roof construction. 
A “Type I” building using protected non-combustible struc-
tural elements, such as concrete and freproofed steel, has 
a higher degree of fre-resistance than a “Type V,” fully 
wood-framed building. Typical 19th-century buildings 
classifed as “Type III” include three-story “Main Street” 
buildings with masonry exteriors and interior wood fram-
ing. “Type IV” buildings include traditional heavy-timber 
and mass-timber construction, as the larger dimensions of 
the wood structural components provide greater fre-resis-
tance than the smaller dimensions of modern lumber. 
Occupancy classifcation of buildings or spaces is based on  
their purpose and function and relative risk to the occu -
pants (Figure 7). A small commercial tenant space pres -
ents less risk than a day care, hospital, or nightclub use.  
Further sub-classifcations within the broad occupancy  
groups are based on the characteristics of a specifc use.  
Multiple classifcations can be assigned, such as with Main  
Street mixed-use buildings with commercial or offce use  
on the frst foor and residential use on the upper foor(s).  
Model  International Existing  
Building Code 
Prior to the 2003 publication of the IEBC, rehabilitation  
projects were regulated by the IBC or the IRC. The IBC  
and IRC were primarily written for new construction,  
9 

    
    
    
     
Common Occupancy and Use Classifcations 
Classifcation Examples 
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE * 
Assembly Group A
    Assembly Group A-1 Motion Picture Theaters, Symphony and Concert Halls, Theaters
    Assembly Group A-2 Banquet Halls, Nightclubs, Restaurants
    Assembly Group A-3 Art Galleries, Community Halls, Libraries, Museums 
Business Group B Banks, Education Occupancies (Above 12th Grade), Professional Services 
Mercantile Group M Department Stores, Markets 
Residential Group R 
Residential Group R-1 Hotels, Congregate Living (Transient) 
Residential Group R-2 Apartment Houses, Dormitories (Non-Transient) 
Residential Group R-3 Buildings up to 2 Dwelling Units, Smaller Care and Living Facilities 
Residential Group R-4 Assisted Living Facilities, Group Homes with 5-16 Occupancy, 
24-Hour Residential 
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 
No specifc occupancy or use classifcations. 
Figure 7 . *Additional Occupancies include Educational (Grades K-12), Factory and Industrial, High Hazard, Institutional, Storage, Utility,  
and Miscellaneous. 
although Chapter 34 of the IBC, since relocated to the IEBC,  
addressed existing buildings. While rehabilitation projects  
continue to be allowed to use these codes, the unique  
conditions of historic and other existing buildings are often  
better addressed by the provisions specifcally written for  
rehabilitation projects contained within the IEBC and the  
IRC’s  Appendix J Existing Buildings and Structures. Of these,  
only the IEBC contains specifc historic building provisions. 
The 2024 edition of the IEBC incorporates numerous modi-
fca
tions to the original document while remaining similar  
in approach and format to previous editions still in effect in  
many jurisdictions. Changes and updates are prepared on  
three-year cycles. While the IRC is designed to contain most  
requirements in a single code book, the IEBC is more com-
plex given its references to other codes and its applicability  
to the full array of existing buildings and the unique condi-
tions they present.  
The IEBC offers multiple paths to establish code compli-
ance for all residential and non-residential rehabilitation  
projects. The IBC and IRC can also be used for rehabilitation  
projects, although proposed work must meet the require -
ments for new construction. Special provisions for exist-
ing buildings are included in the IRC Appendix BO, Existing  
Buildings and Structures in jurisdictions where it has been  
adopted. Using the IEBC also incorporates requirements  
of other codes, most signifcantly the International Energy 
Conservation Code (IECC) and the IFC. The organization of  
the IEBC is shown in Figure 8. 
 Repairs 
Repairs are defned as, “The reconstruction, replacement  
or renewal of any part of an existing building for the  
purpose of its maintenance or to correct damage.”  
Requirements are limited in scope (structure, food hazard  
areas, and electrical, mechanical, and plumbing systems).  
In general, a building cannot be made less safe or less  
code compliant.  
Repairs to historic buildings need only comply with the 
requirements in "Chapter 12: Historic Buildings." Repairs 
using original or like materials and methods of construc-
tion and replacement of existing or missing features using 
original materials are allowed. Replacement glazing in  
hazardous locations must comply with requirements for 
new construction, except for glass block walls, louvered 
windows, and jalousies. Hazardous materials not allowed 
in new construction cannot be used. 
 Relocation 
Repairs, alterations, and changes of occupancy of moved or  
relocated buildings may follow any one of the compliance  
paths of the IEBC, or the IBC or IRC. For historic buildings  
using the IEBC Work Area Compliance Method, foundation,  
exterior wall, and opening requirements must comply with  
new construction requirements or with the compliance  
alternatives of the historic building chapter. All other  
historic building provisions of that chapter are applicable. 
For historic buildings using the Prescriptive or 
Performance Compliance Methods, work must comply 
with the requirements for repair, alteration, or change of 
occupancy. New construction requirements are applied to 
the foundation system and when a building is relocated 
into a food hazard area. With some exceptions, new 
construction requirements for wind, seismic, and snow 
loads also apply. 
10 

Figure 8. Identifying which code compliance method [(Prescriptive (Chapter 5); Work Area (Chapters 6-11); or Performance (Chapter 13)]  is 
best suited to a particular project is essential. Early consultation with the building code ofcial to discuss the selected path can expedite the 
design and code review/processes.  
 Organization of the 2024 IEBC 
Chapter 
1 Scope and Administration Applies to all compliance methods. 
2 Defnitions Applies to all compliance methods. 
3 Provisions for All Compliance Methods Applies to all compliance methods. In addition to the Prescriptive 
Compliance, Performance Compliance, and Work Area Compliance 
methods, it establishes an additional code path for Alterations based on 
code provisions in place at the time the building was constructed. 
4 Repairs Establishes minimum requirements for projects of limited scope. 
Repairs to Historic Buildings are only required to comply with repair 
requirements of Chapter 12. 
5 Prescriptive Compliance Method Prescriptive Compliance Method 
6 Classifcation of Work Work Area Compliance Method 
7 Alterations – Level 1 Work Area Compliance Method 
8 Alterations – Level 2 Work Area Compliance Method 
9 Alterations – Level 3 Work Area Compliance Method 
10 Change of Occupancy Work Area Compliance Method 
11 Additions Work Area Compliance Method 
12 Historic Buildings Work Area Compliance Method Chapter 12 serves as an overlay 
to Chapters 7–10. 
13 Performance Compliance Method Performance Compliance Method 
14 Relocated or Moved Buildings Applies to all repairs and compliance methods, with specifc requirements 
for new foundations, structural work, and food hazard areas. 
15 Construction Safeguards Applies to all compliance methods. 
16 Referenced Standards If adopted by jurisdiction, applies to all compliance methods. 
Appendix 
A Guidelines for the Seismic Retroft of 
Existing Buildings 
If adopted by jurisdiction, applies to all compliance methods. 
B Supplementary Accessibility Requirements 
for Existing Buildings and Facilities 
If adopted by jurisdiction, applies to all compliance methods. Provides 
consultation process with historic preservation offcials. 
C Guidelines for the Wind Retroft of 
Existing Buildings 
If adopted by jurisdiction, applies to all compliance methods. 
Resource 
a Guidelines on Fire Ratings of Archaic 
Materials and Assemblies. 
Applies to all compliance methods. Provides fre-resistance ratings 
for older building elements or materials not typically included in 
modern codes. 
Alterations and Changes of Occupancy: 
Compliance Methods 
For projects classifed as an alteration  or change of oc-
cupancy, the IEBC provides a choice of compliance paths:  
Prescriptive Compliance, Work Area Compliance, Perfor-
mance Compliance, or, for Alterations, compliance with re-
quirements at the time the building was constructed, with 
limitations and additional provisions. Use of this so-called 
“law-in-existence” approach may work best with more re-
cently constructed historic buildings. 
Although typically less well-suited to historic buildings, 
rehabilitation projects can also comply with the new 
construction requirements of the IBC, the IRC, or the IRC’s 
Appendix J provisions for existing buildings if this has been 
adopted by the jurisdiction. 
Prescriptive Compliance Method.  This traditional ap-
proach to building regulation originated in Chapter 34 of 
the IBC and was relocated to the IEBC in 2012. It is often 
preferred by those most familiar with the IBC due to its 
similar format and content. 
11 

  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 Code Compliance Paths for Existing Buildings 
IEBC Chapter 1 (Scope and Administration) 
IEBC Chapter 2 (Defnitions) 
IEBC Chapter 3 (Provisions for All Compliance Methods) 
Building Code (IBC) or 
Residential Code (IRC) 
Prescriptive 
Compliance Method 
(Chapter 5) Requires 
compliance with IFC 
Work Area 
Compliance Method 
(Chapter 6–11) Al-
terations Level 1,2,3; 
Change of Occupancy, 
Additions, Historic 
Buildings 
Performance 
Compliance Method 
(Chapter 13) 
Law-in-Existence 
(IEBC Section 301.3) 
Use of path for 
alteration projects 
requires approval 
by code offcial. 
Path permits 
compliance with law 
in existence at time 
of construction, with 
some exceptions 
Additional 
Fire Code (IFC) Retroactive Provisions 
Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 
Referenced requirements from IEBC or IBC/IRC 
Local requirements 
This method includes extensive structural requirements  
related to earthquake damage and seismic design; grav-
ity, lateral, and wind loads; improvements in foor hazard  
areas; fre-resistant ratings; and fre escapes, as well as win -
dows and emergency escape openings when an addition is  
constructed or an alteration or change of occupancy occurs.  
For historic buildings, the application of this method is lim-
ited to conditions judged by the code offcial to constitute 
a distinct life safety hazard . Special allowances are also 
available to buildings located in food hazard areas  and 
in the application of structural provisions. 
Performance Compliance Method . Also originating 
from Chapter 34 of the IBC, this method uses a numeri-
cal scoring system to determine if a project will meet an 
acceptable level of safety. Scores calculated for twenty-
one safety parameters are used to determine the total 
minimum scores for the categories of fre safety, means of 
egress, and general safety. Defciencies in one parameter 
can be compensated by a higher score in another. A total 
building score equal to or exceeding the minimum safety 
scores for the three categories establishes compliance. 
This method can be extremely fexible in responding to the  
unique conditions presented by different historic and ex-
isting buildings. It benefts smaller rehabilitation projects,  
including those with business or mixed-use occupancies, by  
often allowing a building to forgo a new sprinkler system or  
to maintain an existing system. The method is a scoring sys-
tem of twenty-one fre safety parameters (Figure 12a, 12b).  
Work Area Compliance Method . Projects using this 
method are classifed as one of three levels of alteration, 
based on the extent of proposed work, a change of occu-
pancy, or an addition. 
The Work Area Compliance Method establishes code  
requirements incrementally, based on the scale and type  
of proposed work. Requirements increase in stringency  
from the lowest level, Alteration—Level 1, to the highest  
levels of work, either Alteration—Level 3 (when the work  
area exceeds 50% of the building area) or a change of  
occupancy. Requirements for projects involving a change  
of occupancy also increase or decrease based on the hazard  
rating associated with the change. The hazard ratings of  
existing and proposed occupancies are compared using  
three hazard scales (Means of Egress, Heights and Areas,  
and Exposure of Exterior Walls).  
Figure 9. The IEBC contains 4 compliance paths: the ffth path permits the use of the IBC or IRC. This fgure illustrates the general structure of 
the 2024 IEBC, excluding chapters applicable to Repairs, Relocated or Moved Buildings, Construction Safeguards, and Appendices. Variations 
may occur depending on which model codes, and which edition of each, have been adopted by the jurisdiction. Note that use of the IRC’s 
Appendix AJ provisions for existing buildings requires the jurisdiction to have explicitly adopted this appendix. 
12 

Figure 10. A modern horizontal 
element was installed to meet the 
code-required railing height while  
still retaining the lower historic 
railing. Photo: Nicholas Vann 
The most restrictive require-
ments are applied to projects  
involving a change of occu-
pancy, with the most restrictive  
provisions applied to occupan-
cies the code considers having 
the highest hazard. For exam-
ple, since an Assembly occupancy is considered more haz-
ardous  than  a  Business  occupancy in all three hazard scales,  
requirements for the proposed Business occupancy would  
be less stringent than those for the Assembly space. 
Application to Historic Buildings 
According to the IEBC, historic buildings are defned   
as, “Any building or structure that is one or more of the  
following: 
1. L ist ed, or certifed as eligible for listing, by the State  
Historic Preservation Offcer or the Keeper of the  
National Register of Historic Places, in the National  
Register of Historic Places.  
2. D esi
gnated as historic under an applicable state or   
local law. 
3. C ertifed as a contributing resource within a National  
Register, state designated or locally designated   
historic district.” 
This defnition excludes buildings that have only been  
determined  eligible  for listing by a locality or only  
identifed in a historic resources survey or inventory.  
Additionally, in the Prescriptive Compliance Method, a  
slightly different defnition of historic buildings is used in  
determining when full improvements in food hazard areas  
are required. 
"Chapter 3: Provisions for All Compliance Methods" contains  
the base provisions applicable to the four compliance paths  
contained in the IEBC. Additional or modifed provisions  
unique to the selected compliance method found in other  
Work Area Compliance Method, Classifcation of Work 
Classifcation Defnition Comment 
Alteration – 
Level 1 
(Chapter 7) 
Removal and replacement, or the 
covering of existing materials, elements, 
equipment, or fxtures using new 
materials, elements, equipment, or 
fxtures that serve the same purpose. 
Building cannot be made less safe, specifcally regarding means of 
egress and fre protection. 
Includes limited requirements for new building elements and 
materials (interior fnishes, windows, emergency egress/rescue,  
fuel gas piping), reroofng, structural requirements for reroofng, 
and energy conservation in work area. 
Alteration – 
Level 2 
(Chapter 8) 
Reconfguration of space, the addition 
or elimination of any door or window, 
the reconfguration or extension of 
any system, or the installation of any 
additional equipment. 
Requirements from Alteration - Level 1 plus requirements for new 
work including some exceptions from IBC (windows, electrical, 
dead-end corridors, ceiling height, below grade transportation, 
and structural). 
Includes requirements for vertical openings, fre protection, means 
of egress, and structural components in work area and beyond. 
Additional requirements for electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and 
energy conservation limited to work areas. 
Alteration – 
Level 3 
(Chapter 9) 
Work area exceeds 50 percent of the total 
building area. 
Requirements from Alteration - Levels 1 and 2, plus special 
requirements for high-rise buildings; extension of area of required 
work for building elements and materials including in means 
of egress; and additional requirements for fre protection and 
structural components. 
Change of  
Occupancy 
(Chapter 10) 
Includes any change of occupancy classif-
cation, any change from one group to an-
other within an occupancy classifcation, 
or any change in use within a group for a 
specifc occupancy classifcation. 
Includes requirements for fre protection, means of egress, 
accessibility, structural, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing. Some 
requirements are established as a function of the relative change 
of hazard between the previous and the new occupancies (higher, 
equal, or less). 
Additions 
(Chapter 11) 
An extension or increase in the foor area, 
number of stories, or height of a building  
or structure. 
For additions not separated from the existing building by a fre 
wall, it provides some exceptions from requirements for new con-
struction (except height and area), as well as some requirements 
applicable to the existing building. 
Figure 11. All of the above classifcations must also comply with Provisions for all Compliance Methods. The provisions of  
Chapter 12 Historic Buildings serve as an overlay to each of these classifcations. 
13 

SAFETY PARAMETERS FIRE SAFETY (FS) MEANS OF EGRESS (ME) GENERAL SAFETY (GS) 
1305.2.1 Building height 
1305.2.2 Building area 
1305.2.3 Compartmentation 
1305.2.4 Tenant and dwelling unit 
separations 
1305.2.5 Corridor walls 
1305.2.6 Vertical openings 
1305.2.7 HVAC systems 
1305.2.8 Automatic fire detection 
TABLE 1305.2.3—COMPARTMENTATION VALUES 
       
        
         
        
    
       
      
     
       
        
       
     
      
  
 
   
    
       
   
      
 
       
      
         
       
            
      
      
     
     
 
   
      
      
      
       
  
    
Performance Compliance Method 
TABLE 1305.2.3—COMPARTMENTATION VALUES 
 OCCUPANCY 
  CATEGORIESa
a  b  c  d  e  
  A-1, A-3 0  6   10  14  18 
 A-2 0  4   10  14  18 
    A-4, B, E, S-2 0  5   10  15  20 
    F, M, R, S-1 0  4   10  16  22 
 I-2 0  2  8   10  14 
a.  For  compartment  sizes  between  categories,  the  compartmentation  value  shall  be  obtained  by  linear  interpolation.  
Figure 12a. Table 1305.2.3 shows how the Compartmentation Value used in the Summary Sheet (Table 1306.1 in the 2024 IEBC) is 
determined. A value between 0 and 22, based on building size as further detailed in the chapter, is selected and added to the appropriate 
column of the Summary Sheet in order to establish a total building score. 
Figure 12b. Shows the list of twenty-one parameters addressed in Table 1306.1. Summary Sheet- Building Codes, (partially excerpted in this 
f
gure). Tables 1305.2.3 and 1306.1 are copyrighted materials excerpted from the 2024 International Existing Building Code. Copyright © 2023. 
International Code Council, Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission. www.ICCSAFE.org . 
1305.2.9 Fire alarm system 
1305.2.10 Smoke control * * * * 
1305.2.11 Means of egress * * * * 
1305.2.12 Dead ends * * * * 
1305.2.13 Maximum exit access 
travel distance * * * * 
1305.2.14 Elevator control 
1305.2.15 Means of egress emer-
gency lighting * * * * 
1305.2.16 Mixed occupancies * * * * 
1305.2.17 Automatic sprinklers ÷ 2 = 
1305.2.18 Standpipes 
1305.2.19 Incidental use 
1305.2.20 Smoke 
compartmentation 
1305.2.21.1 Care recipients ability 
for self-preservationa * * * * 
1305.2.21.2 Care recipients 
concentrationa * * * * 
1305.2.21.3 Attendant-to-care 
recipients ratioa * * * * 
Building score–total value 
* * * *No applicable value to be inserted. 
a. Only applicable to Group I-2 occupancies. 
TABLE 1306.1— SUMMARY SHEET— BUILDING CODETABLE 1306.1—SUMMARY SHEET—BUILDING CODE 
14 

chapters also apply. Chapter 3 provisions for historic build-
ings only apply to accessibility. Additional historic building  
provisions included in Appendix B, Supplementary Accessi-
bility Requirements for Existing Buildings and Facilities, ap-
ply when the appendix has been adopted by the jurisdiction.  
Figure 13. Careful selection, design, and location of exit signs can 
help preserve the historic character of signifcant historic spaces 
while still meeting code requirements. Photo: Marilyn Kaplan 
Although the Performance Compliance Method does not  
include additional provisions for historic buildings, it can  
and has been successfully applied to many historic building  
projects. The Prescriptive Compliance Method includes spe -
cial provisions for historic buildings related to life safety  
hazards, food hazard areas, and structural requirements.  
The Work Area Compliance Method contains the most pro -
visions for historic buildings in its chapter titled, "Chapter  
12: Historic Buildings." 
Historic Buildings: Work Area Compliance Method . 
"Chapter 12: Historic Buildings" is an overlay to the require-
ments established for alterations and changes of occupan -
cy in non-historic buildings. This chapter includes specifc  
provisions and procedures that may allow many historic  
features, materials, and conditions to remain.  
Additional Codes and Standards  
Impacting Historic Buildings 
Some states and jurisdictions use other approaches to regu -
late existing and historic buildings. The simplest of these  
are amendments to the IEBC that address local conditions  
or priorities. For example, among other amendments to  
the IEBC, the Existing Building Code of Massachusetts mod -
ifes the provisions for historic house museums to include  
specifc requirements for maximum occupancy,  exiting,  
and fre protection equipment.  
The state of Ohio regulates existing buildings within its  
Ohio Building Code . Many requirements parallel or match  
those in the IEBC, including the Performance Compliance  
Method, titled therein as Compliance Alternatives . For 
historic buildings, the code only states that “The provision  
of this code relating to the construction, repair, alteration,  
addition, restoration and movement of buildings, and  
change of occupancy shall not be mandatory for historic  
buildings where such buildings are judged by the building  
code offcial to not constitute a distinct life safety hazard.”   
The state of California has maintained its State Historical  
Building Code since 1975. Unique to this code is its author-
ship by the State Historical Building Safety Board, which  
is separate from the state’s code adoption process for the  
California Building Code. While the California Building Code  
serves as the base document, it is the Safety Board that de-
termines if a particular alternative is “reasonably equiva-
lent” to a requirement established by the California Build-
ing Code. Having a single board responsible for all historic  
building code-related activities—from writing the code to  
hearing appeals—provides the framework to document and  
ultimately codify commonly accepted alternative solutions.  
The New Jersey Rehabilitation Subcode , developed in  
parallel to the IEBC in the late 1990s, is unique in format,  
designed to eliminate barriers, and be a stand-alone, user-
friendly document. Noteworthy are the more expansive  
and explicit allowances for historic house museums and its  
establishment of the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards  
for the Treatment of Historic Properties as the basis for us -
ing the historic building provisions.  
Since 2001, NFPA 914 Code for Fire Protection of Histor-
ic Structures has been successfully used on some historic 
building projects. This code uniquely establishes a deci-
sion-making process that includes construction, equipment, 
and operational approaches for fre prevention and secu-
rity. NFPA 914 is identifed in the International Fire Code as 
an alternate approach to developing a fre protection plan. 
For existing buildings, the state of Vermont adopts only  
the structural provisions of the IEBC; otherwise, it relies on 
the provisions of "Chapter 43: Building Rehabilitation" of 
NFPA 101. Vermont specifcally establishes NFPA 914 as the 
code to be used for historic buildings. 
 
 
Existing Buildings Not Undergoing 
Improvement 
With few exceptions, existing conditions are  grandfa-
thered. Unless a repair, rehabilitation project, or addi -
tion is planned, requirements of the International Exist -
ing Building Code  (IEBC) are not applied retroactively.  
Exceptions include retroactive provisions such as those  
contained within the International Fire Code (IFC) and  
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), which  
establish minimum requirements for ongoing occupancy  
including those related to maintenance of safety-relat -
ed features. Additional minimum property standards for  
housing are sometimes adopted by local ordinance.  
  The International Energy Conservation 
Code (IECC) and other Energy Provisions 
The International Energy Conservation Code  (IECC) con-
tains energy conservation measures for residential and  
15 

Topic Key Summary of Provision 
GENERAL (1201) 
Scope 101.1 R,A,C This section establishes that the intent of the chapter is the preservation of historic buildings, with specif-
ic provisions for a documentation report, treatment of museums, and requirements for historic buildings  
located in food hazard areas or determined to be unsafe. 
Report 1201.2 R,A,C The requirement to submit a Report is determined by the building code offcial. The Report must iden-
tify all unsafe conditions; provide a structural description and assessment of strengths or weaknesses for  
buildings classifed as Seismic Design Category D, E or F; and describe building components with a level  
of safety substantially below those required of existing nonhistoric buildings. It is not required for Level 1- 
Alterations. Further guidance is provided in the Historic Building Code Report section of this Brief. 
Special Occupancy  
exceptions - 
museums 1201.3 
R,A,C Allows single family residences less than 3,000 square feet per foor and a maximum of 3 stories to be  
used for museum tours and other public assembly activities to be classifed as a Group B occupancy,  
as approved by the building code offcial. A Group B occupancy is less restrictive than an Assembly  
occupancy and allows some fexibility in addressing life safety and egress conditions.  
Flood Hazard  
Areas 1201.4 
R,A,C For work defned as a substantial improvement, food hazard requirements of the IBC and IRC do not  
apply if the building will retain its historic status following work (note: unique defnition of ‘historic’ than  
otherwise used in the IEBC). 
Unsafe conditions  
1201.5 
R,A,C Limits the scope of required repairs to specifc conditions deemed unsafe by the building code offcial. 
REPAIRS (1202) 
General 1202.1 R Allows use of original or like materials and methods of construction, except for hazardous materials or  
glass in hazardous areas.  
 Replacement 
1202.2 
R Replacement of existing or missing features using original materials and matching the original confgura-
tion, height and size are permitted. With the exception of permitted repair of glass block walls, louvered  
windows and jalousies, replacement glazing in hazardous locations must meet the requirements of the IBC. 
FIRE SAFETY  (1203)           Provides alternate treatment of elements ranging from means of egress to exit signs for alterations and change of oc-
 cupancy. However, if the building code offcial determines that a distinct fre hazard exists, an automatic fre sprinkler 
system may be required. 
 General (Fire 
Suppression) 
1203.2 
A,C Buildings that do not conform to the construction requirements of the IEBC and that are determined to  
constitute a distinct fre hazard must have an automatic sprinkler system as determined appropriate by  
the code offcial. The sprinkler system may be considered an acceptable alternative to code requirements  
except for the required number of exits. 
Means of Egress  
1203.3 
A,C Existing door openings and corridor and stairway widths may be approved when the code offcial deter-
 mines these to have suffcient width and height for passage. 
The existing swing of front or main exit doors can remain if suffcient egress exists at other locations, as  
 approved by the code offcial. 
Transoms  
1203.4 
A,C In Group R-1, R-2, and R-3 sprinklered occupancies, transoms in corridors and other fre-resistance rated walls  
may be maintained if fxed in the closed position and a sprinkler is installed on each side of the transom.  
Interior Finishes  
1203.5 
A,C Existing fnishes demonstrated to be historic are permitted to be retained. 
Stairway   
Enclosure 1203.6 
A,C In buildings of 3 stories or less, a fre-resistant rating of the exit enclosure is not required if the use of  
tight-ftting doors and solid elements limit the spread of smoke.  
One-hour fre-re -
sistant Assemblies  
1203.7 
A,C  Existing wall and ceiling fnishes of wood or metal lath and plaster are not required to achieve a 1-hour 
fre-resistant rating.  
Glazing in fre-
resistance  
Rated Systems  
1203.8 
A,C Historic glazing materials can remain in interior walls without achieving a 1-hour fre-resistant rating if  
the opening has approved smoke seals and the affected area has an automatic sprinkler system. 
Stairway Railings  
1203.9 
A,C Grand stairways are not required to meet handrail and guard requirements.  
At all stairways, existing handrails and guards can remain provided they are not structurally dangerous.  
Guards  
1203.10 
A,C Existing guards can be repaired to maintain the level of protection provided by the means of egress. 
Spacing between existing intermediate railings or openings with ornamental patterns can remain.  
Missing historic elements or members can be replaced in kind.  
Exit Signs  
1203.11 
A,C Alternative exit signs identifying exits and egress path that avoid damage to historic character are  
permitted, as approved by the code offcial. 
Historic Building Provisions of the IEBC Work Area Method 
R =Repair, A =Alteration, C =Change of Occupancy 
16 

Topic Key Summary of Provision 
 Automatic 
 sprinkler systems 
1203.12  
A,C Buildings that do not conform to the construction requirements of the IBC and determined to constitute  
 a distinct fre hazard shall be accepted if provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system, or an 
alternative life-safety system approved by the code offcial.  
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY (1204) 
 Building Area 
1204.2 
C Allowable foor area established in the IBC can be exceeded by 20%. 
Location on   
Property   
1204.3 
C When there is an increase to a higher hazard category for Exposure of Exterior Walls, alternative meth-
 ods to achieve the fre-resistance and exterior opening protective requirements are permitted. These 
may require completion of a Historic Building Report per 1201.2.  
 Occupancy  
Separation 1204.4 
C A required fre separation of 1 hour is not required if the building has an approved automatic sprinkler  
system throughout. 
 Roof Covering 
1204.5  
C  Roof-covering materials with no less than a Class C rating (ASTM E108, UL 790) are permitted in lieu of a 
 fre-retardant roof covering. 
Means of Egress  
1204.6 
C  Existing door openings and corridor and stair widths can remain providing there is suffcient width 
and height for passage, the capacity of the exit system is adequate for the occupant load, or where  
operational controls to limit occupancy are approved by the code offcial. 
Door Swing  
1204.7 
C Existing swing of front doors can remain if other approved exits have suffcient capacity to serve the  
total occupant load, as approved by the code offcial. 
 Transoms 
1204.8 
C Existing transoms in corridor walls required to have a fre-resistance rating can remain if fxed in a closed  
position with fxed wire glass or other approved glazing installed on one side of the transom, or if in  
compliance with 1203.4. 
 Interior Finishes 
1204.9 
C In lieu of compliance with the fre test requirements of the IBC, non-conforming materials can remain if  
 surfaced with an approved fre-retardant coating that achieves the required classifcation. Testing of the 
 fre-retardant coating is required. 
This coating is not required if the building has an automatic sprinkler system throughout and the non-
conforming materials are historic. 
One-hour  
 Fire-resistant  
Assemblies 1204.10 
C Existing wall and ceiling fnishes of wood lath or plaster are not required to achieve a   
1-hour fre-resistant rating. 
Stairways and  
Guards 1204.11 
C Alternatives for stairways and guards that meet the requirements of 1203 shall be accepted provided 
these are acceptable or judged to meet the intent of the code by the code offcial. 
Existing conditions at all stairways and guards are permitted to remain for buildings less than 3,000 
 square feet. 
 Exit Signs 
1204.12 
C Alternative exit sign locations identifying exits and exit path that avoid damage to historic character are  
permitted, as accepted by the code offcial.  
 Exit Stair Live Load 
1204.13 
C  Historic stairways in buildings changed to a Group R-1 or R-2 occupancy can remain if demonstrated to 
be capable of supporting a 75-psf live load.  
 Natural Light 
1204.14 
C The existing level of natural lighting can remain if compliance with natural light requirements would lead  
to a loss of historic character or materials.  
STRUCTURAL (1205)           Modifes the structural requirements established in other chapters. Authorizes the building code offcial to accept exist -
ing and previously approved live and roof live loads and limits the extent of repair required when substantial structural  
damage has occurred. 
Structural  
1205.1 
R,A,C Existing foor structure previously approved live loads and roof live loads can be accepted by the code of-
fcial, including operational controls limiting live load or roof live load.  
 Regardless of the level of damage, structural repairs to return a building to its pre-damaged condition 
are permitted without additional work.  
 Dangerous  
Conditions 1205.2 
 Conditions determined dangerous by the code offcial are not required to be remedied beyond what is 
required to address the dangerous condition. 
RELOCATED BUILDINGS (1206.1) 
 Relocated  
Buildings 1206.1 
R,A,C Allows relocated buildings to use the historic building provisions, provided that new foundations and ex-
terior wall and opening requirements comply with the IBC or the IEBC. The building must also retain its  
historic designation. 
Figure 14. References to the IBC require compliance with provisions for new construction included in that code. “Section 1203 Fire Safety” 
heading includes provisions for Alterations and Changes of Occupancy. “Section 1204 Change of Occupancy” provisions are applicable only  
to projects defned as a Change of Occupancy. For the complete text of noted provisions, refer to the current edition of the IEBC, as adopted 
by the jurisdiction. 
17 

non-residential buildings. For smaller residential buildings,  
the IECC’s provisions are repeated within the International  
Residential Code  (IRC). While the IECC is one of the most  
widely-used energy codes, the state of California’s 2022  
Building Energy Effciency Standards and ANSI/ASHRAE/IES  
Standard 90.1 Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-
Rise Residential Buildings (Standard 90.1) establish alter -
nate performance standards and design approaches. 
Figure 15. Small and mid-size house museums are provided special treatment in the IEBC, provided that adequate exiting is available. Given 
the level of careful oversight of these buildings, house museums can be great candidates to use the alternate approaches contained in NFPA 914. 
Photo: Marilyn Kaplan 
In response to Federal and state policy and mandates,  
recent editions of the widely adopted IECC have expanded  
in scope and requirements. Some jurisdictions have also  
adopted rating systems, building performance standards,  
and codes such as the International Green Construction  
Code  (IgCC) or ASHRAE Standard 189.1—Standard for the  
Design of High-Performance Green Buildings to increase a  
building’s energy and environmental performance beyond  
the minimum established by the IECC. Less common are  
local or state ‘stretch’ or ‘reach’ codes, such as the state of  
Massachusetts’  Stretch Code, enacted in 2009 to establish  
energy performance requirements exceeding those of the  
state’s base building energy code. 
The IECC is one of the more complex of the model codes.  
It contains three compliance path options: prescriptive,  
modeling, or compliance with Standard 90.1. Modeling,  
using the IECC’s Section C407 or the two modeling paths  
in Standard 90.1, is most often undertaken for complex  
buildings or those with additional sustainability goals.  
Nationwide, using the prescriptive path is the most  
common approach.  
The IECC specifes energy effciency measures based on a  
project’s categorization as a repair, alteration, change of  
occupancy, or addition. Like the stepped approach of the  
Work Area Compliance Method of the IEBC, the improve -
ments imposed by IECC are proportionate to the scope  
of owner-elective work. All existing buildings are grant -
ed certain exceptions from the IECC, including allowing  
storm windows or window-flm to be installed over single-
glazed windows, and minimal or no insulation when wall,  
ceiling, or roof cavities are not exposed.  
Prior to 2015, the IECC exempted historic buildings.  
The IECC now requires the submission of a report to  
document when energy effciency measures would  
“threaten, degrade, or destroy the historic form, fabric, or  
function” of the historic building. This documentation  
is similar to the report identifed for historic buildings  
in the IEBC, although in the IEBC it is only mandatory  
18 

Figure 16. Summary of provisions for historic buildings in the fre and energy codes. 
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
Residential buildings  
(all existing buildings) 
Residential buildings  
(historic buildings) 
Commercial buildings  
(all existing buildings) 
 Commercial buildings 
(historic buildings) 
(R503.1.1) For work to all existing buildings (except repairs or additions), if energy use of the building is  
not increased, the following is permitted: 
• Storm windows installed over existing fenestration.  
• I nsulation at ceiling, wall, or foor cavities exposed during construction limited to  
flling cavity with insulation. 
• N o insulation required if existing roof, wall, or foor cavity is not exposed during  
construction. 
• N o insulation required if project is limited to roof replacement. 
• I nsulation limited to above or below sheathing where reroofng exposes sheathing  
or insulation. 
Installation of surface-applied window flm (to reduce solar heat gain) on existing single pane fenes -
tration that is permitted to be retained. 
(R501.6) Compliance is not required if the Historic Building Report submitted demonstrates that com-
pliance would threaten, degrade, or destroy the historic form, fabric, or function of the building. Re-
port must be signed by owner, design professional, a representative of the State Historic Preservation 
Offce, or the historic preservation authority having jurisdiction. 
(C503.1.1) For work to all existing buildings (except repairs or additions), if energy use of the building is 
not increased, following is permitted: 
• Storm windows installed over existing fenestration. 
•  Installation of surface-applied window flm (to reduce solar heat gain) on existing single 
pane fenestration that is permitted to be retained. 
• I nsulation at ceiling, wall, or foor cavities exposed during construction limited to flling 
cavity with insulation. 
• N o work if existing roof, wall, or foor cavity is not exposed during construction. 
• N o work for projects limited to roof recover. 
Air barriers not required for roof recover and roof replacement if project excludes other work at 
building envelope.  
(C501.6) Compliance is not required if the historic building Report submitted demonstrates that 
compliance would threaten, degrade, or destroy the historic form, fabric, or function of the historic 
building. Report must be signed by design professional, a representative of State Historic Preservation 
Offce, or the historic preservation authority having jurisdiction. 
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 
All buildings (S102.6) Establishes that compliance is not mandatory where buildings do not constitute a distinct 
hazard to life or property, providing that a fre protection plan per S1103 has been developed. 
Construction project (S1103.1.1) Fire safety requirements including equipment and construction are not required for 
historic buildings with a fre protection plan developed in accordance with NFPA 914, provided 
that fre safety and evacuation plans are maintained and available. 
Ongoing use / retroactive (S1032) Requirements for maintenance of the means of egress system for historic and existing build-
ings; no other provisions for historic buildings. 
if required by the code offcial to document that  
compliance with other (non-historic) provisions “would  
be damaging to the contributing historic features.” In  
some jurisdictions, the local or state historic preservation  
offce may be asked to document which historic features  
would be adversely affected by proposed energy  
effciency measures. The Secretary of the Interior’s  
Standards for Rehabilitation & Illustrated Guidelines on  
Sustainability for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (2017)  
and Preservation Brief 3: Improving Energy Effciency  
in Historic Buildings  provide guidance on how to  
make historic buildings more sustainable and energy-
effcient while preserving their historic character and  
features. With careful planning and execution, many  
historic rehabilitation projects can achieve higher  
levels of energy performance than those strictly  
required by code. 
Provisions for Historic and Existing Buildings in the International Energy  
Conservation and Fire Codes 
19 

The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
and Accessibility Codes 
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a Federal civil 
rights law prohibiting discrimination against individuals 
with disabilities, became law in 1990. State and local gov-
ernments are governed by Title II of the Act, while Title III 
governs public accommodations in privately-owned, leased, 
or operated hotels, restaurants, retail spaces, doctor’s of-
fces, movie theaters, etc. 
Owners of places of public accommodation are responsible 
for ‘readily achievable’ barrier removal, with priorities es-
tablished in the following order: 
1. A ccess into the place of public  accommodation  
from public sidewalks, parking, or public  
transportation. 
2. Access to areas where goods and services are  
available to the public. 
3. Access to restroom facilities. 
4. Access to the goods, services, facilities, privileges,  
advantages, or accommodations of a place of  
public accommodation. 
Barrier removals at buildings includes items such as the  
installation of ramps, widening of doorways, rearranging  
shelves and furniture, and accessible door hardware.  
As defned in the Act, ‘readily achievable’ means easily ac -
complishable and able to be carried out without much dif -
fculty or expense, as determined by factors such as:  
1. The nature and cost of the action needed, 
2. The overall fnancial resources of the site or sites  
involved in the action; the number of persons  
employed at the site; the effect on expenses and  
resources; legitimate safety requirements that  
are necessary for safe operation, including crime  
prevention measures; or the impact otherwise of  
the action upon the operation of the site, 
3. The geographic separateness, and the  
administrative or fscal relationship of the site  
or sites in question to any parent corporation or  
entity, 
4. If applicable, the overall fnancial resources of  
any parent corporation or entity; the overall size  
of the parent corporation or entity with respect  
to the number of its employees; the number,  
type, and location of its facilities, and 
5. If applicable, the type of operation or  
operations of any parent corporation or  
entity, including the composition, structure,  
and functions of the workforce of the parent  
corporation or entity. 
Title III (Public Accommodations) of the ADA has no  
retroactive construction requirements. When work  
on an existing building occurs, however, 20% of the  
expenditures must be spent over a three-year period  
to provide an accessible path of travel. Once the 20%  
threshold has been reached, no additional funds need be  
spent to improve the accessible path of travel. However,  
future requirements for readily achievable barrier  
removal are only eliminated once the building is 100%  
accessible per new construction standards. 
Efforts to coordinate the technical provisions of the ADA  
with those of the IEBC and other model codes continue.  
Given the often technical and practical diffculty of  
making existing buildings fully accessible, both the ADA  
and IEBC accept a lesser level of accessibility for existing  
buildings when compared to new construction. In the  
IEBC, the accessibility requirements are triggered when  
construction associated with an alteration, change  
of occupancy, or addition occurs. Also, accessibility  
requirements are identical in all compliance paths, and  
no accessibility requirements are triggered for projects  
classifed as a repair, or for buildings undergoing a  
change of occupancy classifcation if no construction  
work is required or undertaken. However, ADA-
established thresholds and requirements for removing  
barriers in places of public accommodation still apply. 
The ADA includes exceptions for existing buildings when  
implementation would be  technically infeasible , i.e.,  
unable to be accomplished without moving a major struc -
tural element. For historic buildings, additional excep -
tions for site arrival points, accessible routes, entrances,  
and toilet facilities exist when compliance would threaten  
or destroy the historic signifcance of the property.  
Fire Codes 
The IFC is typically used to establish a minimum level of  
performance for building use and operations once con -
struction is complete. Although there is overlap and co -
ordination with the IBC and the IEBC, the IFC addresses a  
wider range of topics such as handling or the use of haz -
ardous materials, treatment of vacant premises, indoor  
displays, ongoing maintenance of fre protection systems  
and features, fre protection water supply, and fre appa -
ratus access roads. 
Enforcement of the IFC begins with the issuance of an oc-
cupancy permit and is ongoing at a schedule set by the  
jurisdiction. Some jurisdictions use the IFC without adop -
tion of other construction codes, while most use the IFC  
in conjunction with the IBC and/or NFPA 1 or NFPA 101.  
Inconsistencies in procedures or requirements can occur  
when the codes are not developed by the same organi -
zation. Enforcement of the IFC is most often assigned to  
the fre department, with potential overlap when the fre  
safety aspects of the building code are enforced by the  
building code offcial.  
20 

Figure 17. Metal ceilings 
commonly present code 
challenges when fre 
separation is required 
between diferent uses on 
the frst and upper foors. 
Acceptable code solutions  
permitting retention may 
include the application of  
intumescent coatings, the  
addition of a sprinkler 
system, or the addition 
of fre-rated material  
above the ceiling, in which 
case the original metal 
ceilings can be salvaged 
and reinstalled or, if not 
possible, replaced with 
matching new ceiling tiles. 
Photo: Benton Henry 
Although most requirements are not retroactive, some  
jurisdictions may enforce provisions from the chapters  
entitled "Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings"  
and "Means of Egress." One of the many informational  
and optional appendices included in the IFC is the appen -
dix High-Rise Buildings – Retroactive Automatic Sprinkler  
Requirements . The IFC overlaps with the scope of codes  
and standards published by the National Fire Protection  
Association, many of whose documents are included as  
reference standards in the IFC. 
The administrative chapter, which may be modifed by  
a jurisdiction, includes the following section on historic  
buildings which refers the user back to NFPA 914:  “The  
provisions of this code relating to the construction,  
alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or  
moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory  
for existing buildings or structures identifed and classifed  
by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings  
where such buildings or structures do not constitute  
a distinct hazard to life or property. Fire protection in  
designated historic buildings shall be provided with an  
approved fre protection plan as required in Section  
1103.1.1.”   
 Coordination with the Secretary of the 
Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation 
Of the ten standards of the Secretary of the Interior’s  
Standards for Rehabilitation (36 CFR 68, issued 1995),  
Standards 2, 5, and 6 generally have the most impact on  
the use and application of building codes (the separate  
sets of standards for the treatments Preservation,  
Restoration, and Reconstruction have similar implications  
in the application of codes):  
Standard 2. The historic character of a property will  
be retained and preserved. The removal of distinc -
tive materials or alteration of features, spaces and  
spatial relationships that characterize a property  
will be avoided.  
Standard 5. Distinctive materials, features, fnishes,  
and construction techniques or examples of  
craftsmanship that characterize a property will be  
preserved.  
Standard 6. Deteriorated historic features will be  
repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity  
of deterioration requires replacement of a distinc -
tive feature, the new feature will match the old in  
design, color, texture and, where possible, materials.  
Replacement of missing features will be substanti -
ated by documentary and physical evidence.  
Additional guidance on code-required work and its  
impact on historic building features, spaces, materials,  
and fnishes is included as separate sections in the  
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and  
Reconstructing Historic Buildings  that accompany The 
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of  
Historic Properties. 
21 

 
Best Practice: Balancing Historic Preservation and Code Compliance 
Optimizing code solutions for historic  
buildings requires coordination of the  
owner’s program; code, architectural, and  
engineering requirements; and historic  
preservation goals. The following steps are  
recommended:  
Step 1: Establish a Qualifed Project Team  
Step 2: I dentify Historic Signifcance and  
Character-Defning Features 
Step 3: I ntegrate Preservation Goals into   
Project Planning  
Step 4:  Select Optimal Code Compliance Path  
St
ep 5:  Coordinate with Building Code,   
F
ire Code, and Historic Preservation   
Offcials  
 
St
ep 6:  Adjust and Present Final Submission  
   Step 1: Establish a Qualifed 
Project Team 
The project team should be led by design 
professionals experienced in the planning of 
historic preservation projects and may include 
a historic preservation or code consultant. 
The team’s familiarity and/or research on 
acceptable preservation practices, emerging 
materials and technologies, and innovative so-
lutions can minimize identifed conficts. Early 
introduction of the full team to the project, 
ideally starting with the development of con-
cept drawings and preliminary identifcation 
of character-defning features, provides the 
greatest likelihood that preservation-related  
concerns will be successfully integrated into 
the planning process and considered by all 
team members. 
The team should work closely with the build-
ing and fre code offcials to confrm appli-
cable codes and ordinances, procedures, and 
special concerns of the jurisdiction, to learn 
of successful solutions from relevant projects, 
and determine whether additional require-
ments, including a Historic Building Report, 
would be required to support alternative 
solutions. The IFC deserves special attention 
as the requirements can be differently inter-
preted and enforced by the fre and building 
departments.  
 Step 2: Identify Historic Signifcance and 
Character-Defning Features 
Evaluation of  the historic signifcance of the 
property and identifcation of its character-
defning features should be undertaken by 
a qualifed design professional or historic 
preservation consultant. These features may 
be identifed in documentation used for the 
historic designation, in a Historic Structure Re-
port if one has been prepared, or in a build-
ing survey undertaken as part of the project 
planning. The National Park Service’s Preser-
vation Brief 17: Architectural Character—Iden-
tifying the Visual Aspects of Historic Buildings 
as an Aid to Preserving their Character and 
Preservation Brief 18: Rehabilitating Interiors 
in Historic Buildings: Identifying and Preserv-
ing Character-Defning Elements  and other 
Preservation Briefs and guidance on building 
interiors can assist in the identifcation and 
treatment of character-defning features. Lo -
cal and state preservation offcials can also be 
of assistance. Conficts between code require -
ments and historic preservation goals can 
best be resolved by early identifcation and 
consideration in the project’s early design and 
planning stages. 
Step 3: Integrate Preservation Goals into 
Project Planning 
Planning and detailing code-related work 
must strive to protect a building’s historic 
character, by  avoiding or minimizing altera-
tions of signifcant historic spaces, architec -
tural features, and materials. The appropriate 
treatment of historic buildings is guided by 
22 

the  S
ecretary of the Interior’s Standards for  
Rehabilitation, w hich are widely used and  
adopted at the Federal, state, and local levels.  
Many jurisdictions have adopted alternate  
language based on the Standards.  
Design and treatment decisions should be  
made on a case-by-case basis in consideration  
of the relative importance of the building’s  
historic character-defning features, including  
previous alterations that have acquired  
historic signifcance. Existing conditions  
must also be evaluated and documented,  
anticipating that certain conditions may  
only be discovered during construction.  
This requires adequate research from the  
project team at the onset of the project so  
that design and system options that meet  
the  Standards can be explored. Some   
solutions may also require custom details  
or materials. Achieving a design that meets  
the Standards and complies with applicable  
codes requires fexibility, as multiple iterations  
and/or refnements may be necessary before  
arriving at the fnal design.  
 Step 4: Select Optimal Code Compliance 
P
ath and Alternatives 
Experienced design professionals and building 
c
ode offcials may be able to anticipate the 
compliance method most appropriate to a 
particular project. For example, the IEBC’s 
Performance Compliance Method can work 
well on “Main Street” projects involving 
older, small-scale commercial buildings, while 
the law-in-existence path may be suitable to 
more recently constructed historic buildings. 
The Work Area Compliance Method allows 
the retention of features such as historic 
transoms, interior fnishes, stairway railings, 
windows, doors, and glazing, although in 
some cases a sprinkler system may be required. 
Given that each project is unique relative 
to its construction, occupancy classifcation, 
program, condition, and extent of character-
defning features present, evaluating multiple 
compliance paths may be necessary to fnd the 
optimal solution. 
The Work Area Compliance Method is the 
only path that may require a Historic Building 
Report. This report, or a preservation offcial’s 
written confrmation of historic designation 
or identifcation of character-defning fea -
tures, can also serve as supporting documen-
tation regardless of compliance path. 
Step 5: Coordinate with Building 
Code, Fire Code, and Historic 
Preservation Offcials 
Once character-defning features and confict-
ing code requirements have been identifed, 
coordination should begin with building code 
and historic preservation offcials. A prelimi-
nary meeting attended by both parties will 
allow early discussions of any specifc project 
concerns, including identifcation of successful 
solutions from similar projects, direction for 
further investigations, and clarity on where 
code fexibility may be possible. In some cases, 
the initial meeting may determine that in-
put from a higher-ranking code offcial or a 
waiver or variance will be required. 
Coordinating review and approvals on time-
sensitive projects can be an additional chal-
lenge when reviews by different departments 
are required for various code compliance 
issues such as fre and building for construc-
tion-related matters, in addition to planning 
and zoning approvals required for historic 
preservation or design review. 
Step 6: Adjust and Present Final 
Submission. 
Submission requirements vary widely by agen-
cy and jurisdiction. In addition to providing all 
required and requested information, the fnal 
submission to the building code offcial must 
clearly document all aspects of the project, 
including where alternates and equivalencies 
are presented. A supplemental report based 
on the format and content of the report speci-
fed in the Work Area Compliance Method 
can be a useful supplement to the mate
rials 
submitted to the building code offcial. 
23 

 Historic Building Code Report 
Figure 18. The 
building code 
review for this 
mixed-use building 
in Monroe, WI, in-
cluded a compari -
son of requirements 
established by 
application of the 
three compliance 
Methods of the 
IEBC. In lieu of a 
sprinkler system,  
the Performance 
Compliance Meth -
od permitted the 
use of other fre and 
life safety features.  
Photo: Chris Rute 
When using the Historic Building chapter as part of the  
Work Area Compliance Method of the IEBC, the building  
code offcial may require the submission of a Historic Build -
ing Code Report to document the basis for acceptance of  
alternatives.  
For projects where other compliance paths do not allow 
character-defning features to be retained, the Report can 
be used to “demonstrate how the intent of these provi-
sions is complied with in providing an equivalent level of 
safety.” To establish equivalency, the frst administrative 
chapter of the IEBC, and most jurisdictional codes based 
on the IEBC, includes a section titled "Alternative materi-
als, design and methods of construction, and equipment,"  
similar to the text included in the IECC and IRC.  
The building code offcial may request supporting research, 
such as test reports from approved sources, or other tests 
to establish equivalency. For items related to fre-resis-
tance, Resource A of the IEBC, Guidelines on Fire Ratings of 
Archaic Materials and Assemblies , is an invaluable tool for 
establishing fre-resistance ratings of older materials and 
systems not typically found in the modern codes. 
The requirement for the Report and confrmation of the re -
quired content should be reviewed with the building code  
offcial in advance. In the IEBC, the Report is prepared by a  
design professional and may include the following compo-
nents, as required in previous editions of the IEBC. 
1.   Identifcation of the specifc provisions of the Historic 
Buildings chapter applicable to the proposed work.  
2.  Discussion of how compliance with provisions of other 
IEBC chapters would damage character-defning 
features. 
3. For buildings of Seismic Design Category D, E, F, a 
structural evaluation and identifcation of any 
strengths or weaknesses of vertical and horizontal 
elements of the lateral force-resisting system is 
required. 
4. For character-defning features unable to be preserved 
using the Historic Buildings chapter, alternative 
solutions providing equivalent levels of safety can 
be presented following the code’s administrative 
requirements of Chapter 1, which may differ 
depending on jurisdiction. 
The content of the Report can be included in the code 
analysis that establishes a project’s existing conditions 
and design parameters. Incorporating the Report in the 
construction drawings increases the likelihood of future 
discovery as part of a project’s permanent record and 
communicates the project’s historic preservation goals to 
the contractor and trades undertaking the work. A sample 
format for the Report is shown in Figure 19. 
In the 2024 edition of the IEBC, the code offcial cannot 
require a Report for Level 1 alterations unless the 
proposed work makes the building less compliant with the 
provisions of the IBC. Where a Report is required by the 
code offcial, it must document unsafe conditions, address 
the structural components per Number 3 above, and 
describe any components of the building providing a level 
of safety below that of existing nonhistoric buildings. 
24 

Historic Building Report Format  
TITLE SUMMARY 
1 Code Analysis Identifcation of applicable codes and selected code compliance 
method, construction, and occupancy classifcations; building 
description (size, height, construction materials, etc.); and 
 additional key code requirements. 
2 Summary of Chapter 3 Requirements Identifcation of applicable requirements associated with 
structural design, accessibility, smoke alarms and carbon 
 monoxide detection, and exterior wall coverings. 
2 
Code Conficts with the Secretary of the Interior’s 
 Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties 
 (or Standards for Rehabilitation or other applicable 
 or adopted historic preservation standards) 
Identifcation of specifc code provisions damaging to 
character-defning features (termed “contributing features” 
in the IEBC). 
3 Conficts resolved by Historic Building Provisions of the 
IEBC (Work Area Compliance Method only) 
Identifcation of features compliant with Historic  
 Building Provisions. 
4 Seismic Evaluation  As required by Chapter 3 and modifed by selected 
compliance path.  
5 Conficts Unresolved by Historic Building Provisions Proposed Modifcations, Alternatives, and Equivalencies, 
 following requirements of Chapter 1. 
6  Photographs Overall and close-up views as required to depict  
character-defning features.  
7 Existing and Proposed Drawings  Floor plans and/or elevations, depending on the scope of  
 project. Information, and seal of design professional as  
required by jurisdiction. 
Figure 19. Sample report format (IEBC, Chapter 12). 
Modifcations, Alternatives, and Equivalencies 
Code Section Text 
IEBC 104.23 The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to 
prohibit any design or method of construction not specifcally prescribed by this code, provided 
that any such alternative is not specifcally prohibited by this code and has been approved. 
Exception: Performance-based alternative materials, designs or methods of construction and 
equipment complying with the ICC Performance Code. This exception shall not apply to alternative 
structural materials or to alternative structural designs. 
Alternative materials, 
design and methods 
of construction, and 
equipment 
IEBC 104.2.3.4 An alternative material, design or method of construction shall, for the purpose intended, be 
not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in the code with respect to all of the following, 
as applicable: 1. Quality.  2. Strength  3. Effectiveness.  4. Durability.  5. Safety, other than fre 
safety. 6. Fire safety. 
Equivalency criteria 
IEBC 104.24 Where there are practical diffculties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code 
offcial shall have the authority to grant modifcations for individual cases, provided that the code 
offcial shall frst fnd that one or more special individual reasons makes the strict letter of this code 
impractical, and that the modifcation is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code 
and that such modifcation does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fre safety, or structural 
requirements. The details of the written request for and action granting modifcations shall be 
recorded and entered in the fles of the Department of Building Safety.  
Modifcations 
Figure 20. Alternate solutions accepted by the building code ofcial as meeting the intent of the code are permitted in all codes to allow the use of 
new technologies and non-specifed materials or designs. 
25 

Figure 21. The photograph on the right illustrates partial deployment of vertical fre curtains activated as part of a fre alarm and 
detection system. In this installation, a combination of fxed glazing and smoke curtains to separate the open corridors from the 
multi-story atrium permitted the stunning historic atrium space to remain largely unaltered and the corridors to be included in the 
building’s egress calculations in meeting code requirements. Photo: Higgins Quasebarth & Partners, LLC 
Summary 
Successful application of code requirements in a  
manner that is sympathetic to historic buildings and  
their character-defning features, spaces, materials, and  
fnishes is essential for their long-term preservation  
and viability. Historic buildings must respond to current  
performance requirements for accessibility, fre and  
structural safety, and energy conservation, as well as  
emerging requirements addressing protection from  
natural disasters and resilience.  
The last two decades have brought tremendous  
advancements in how the model codes address  
historic buildings. Unique codes, special code  
provisions, and new compliance paths are now  
available, although updates and refnements will  
continue. Future editions of the construction and  
fre prevention codes may result in easier application  
to the single historic building project, although  
such advancements are unlikely to reach the ease  
of navigating codes for new construction. Instead,  
achieving success in the interplay of historic  
26 

preservation and health and public safety goals will  
always rely on the collaborative application of experience,  
knowledge, and creativity of the project team working  
with the building and fre code offcials.  
Glossary 
Addition (IEBC) . “An extension or increase in foor area  
or height of a building or structure.” 
Alteration (IEBC). “Any construction or renovation to an 
existing structure other than a repair or addition.” 
Appeal. A process by which the decision of the building 
code offcial can be presented to higher-ranking staff or 
an independent body for review and possible reversal or 
modifcation. 
Approved (IEBC). “Acceptable to the code offcial.” 
Authority Having Jurisdiction.  Se e building code  
offcial.  
Building Code. A document establishing the minimum 
standards for construction materials and methods that are 
permitted for construction. 
Building Code Offcial . The governmental unit, agency 
offcer, or other designated authority responsible for code 
administration and enforcement. Alternate terms can be 
“building offcial,” “code offcial,” “code enforcement off -
cial,” and “authority having jurisdiction.” 
Building Permit . Document issued by the jurisdiction  
certifying a proposed project’s compliance with applicable  
codes and other laws. 
Certifcate of Completion . Document issued by design  
professional or other inspector attesting that a project  
has been executed and accepted as being constructed in  
accordance with all requirements. 
Certifcate of Occupancy . Document issued by the  
jurisdiction certifying a building’s compliance with  
applicable codes and other laws, indicating it to be in a  
condition suitable for occupancy. 
Change of Occupancy . A change from one specifc  
occupancy classifcation to another occupancy  
classifcation. A change of use is a change within one  
occupancy classifcation.  
Character-Defning Features . The historic features and  
defning characteristics of a historic building that are il -
lustrative of a type, period, and/or style of architecture  
and establish the building’s historic and visual character.  
Historic building rehabilitations should not change, ob -
scure, damage or destroy distinctive materials, features,  
spaces, or spatial relationships. See the National Park  
Service’s  Preservation Brief 17: Architectural Character:  
Identifying the Visual Aspects of Historic Buildings as an  
Aid to Preserving their Character and Preservation Brief  
18: Rehabilitating Interiors in Historic Buildings: Identi -
fying and Preserving Character-Defning Elements and 
other guidance for more information. 
Compartmentation . Division of a building into  
compartments for fre risk management to contain a  
fre within a specifc section of a building and limit the  
passage of fames and smoke. A compartment is defned  
by its fre-resistant materials including fre doors and  
other barriers. 
Construction Classifcation . The code’s classifcation  
of a building or space based on the fre-resistance  
ratings of the construction elements, used to establish  
minimum construction requirements. For fre safety,  
buildings are classifed from least safe, such as  
constructed with dimensional wood framing, to the  
safest, i.e., concrete construction.  
Construction Documents . Written and graphic  
documentation describing the design, location, and  
physical characteristics of a project’s elements necessary  
to guide construction and obtain a building permit.  
De Minimis. A legal term for slight variations or  
tolerances from a requirement with no meaningful  
impact on performance.  
Design Professional . An individual, including an  
architect or engineer, who is registered or licensed   
to practice their respective design profession as defned  
by the professional registration laws of a state or  
jurisdiction.  
Distinct Fire Hazard . A condition that diminishes the  
level of fre safety, life safety, or property protection of  
a structure to an unacceptable level as deemed by the  
local code or fre offcial.  
Egress. The path an occupant follows to leave a  
building or room. See means of egress. 
Equivalent or Equivalency . Alternate materials,  
equipment, or devices to those specifed in a particular  
code that will meet its established performance  
standards. 
Existing Building (IEBC) . “A building erected prior to  
the date of adoption of the appropriate code or one for  
which a legal building permit has been issued.” 
27 

Existing Structure . For application of provisions in food  
hazard areas, a building or structure for which the start  
of construction commenced before the effective date  
of the community's frst food plain management code,  
ordinance, or standard. 
Exit. Components of a means of egress between exit  
access and exit discharge, including exterior exit doors  
at the level of exit discharge, interior exit stairway and  
ramps, exit passageways, exterior exit stairways and  
ramps, and horizontal exits. 
Fire Alarm System (ICC) . “A system or portion of a  
combination system consisting of components and circuits  
arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fre  
alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to  
initiate the appropriate response to those signals.” 
Fire Code. A document establishing the minimum  
standards for fre safety for construction, rehabilitation,  
and ongoing operations. 
Fire Code Offcial . The governmental unit, agency  
offcer, or other designated authority responsible  
for administration and enforcement of the fre code.  
Alternate term to “fre prevention code offcial” and  
“authority having jurisdiction.”  
Fire Protection System (ICC) . “Approved devices,  
equipment and systems or combinations of systems used  
to detect a fre, activate an alarm, extinguish or control  
a fre, control or manage smoke and products of a fre or  
any combination thereof.”  
Fire-Resistance Rating (ICC) . “The period of time a  
building element, component, or assembly maintains  
the ability to confne a fre, continues to perform a given  
structural function, or both, as determined by the tests, or  
the methods based on tests, prescribed in Section 703.” 
Fire Suppression System . An automatic system used 
to extinguish, control, or prevent a fre from occurring 
or spreading. The system includes a method of early 
detection of a fre through heat, smoke, and other 
warning signals, a supply of water or other substance 
that is discharged through an integrated system of 
piping, and additional operating equipment. While 
water-based systems are most common, including water 
mist systems that use water droplets and require a 
separate pressure source, systems may also use gaseous 
or chemical agents. Most standards for the many types 
of systems available are published by the National Fire 
Protection Association. 
Flood Hazard Areas (IEBC) . “The greater of the 
following two areas: 
1. T he area within a food plain subject to a 
1-percent or greater chance of fooding in  
any year. 
2.  The a rea designated as a food hazard area on 
a community’s food hazard map, or otherwise 
legally designated.” 
Gr
andfathered. A code provision in which existing 
conditions are permitted to remain and are not required 
to meet current code. 
Higher Hazard Seismic Area . Based on maps by U.S. 
Geological Survey or others, areas that are more likely 
prone to earthquake hazards. 
Historic Building (IEBC). “Any building or structure that 
is one or more of the following: 
1. Listed, or certifed as eligible for listing, by the 
State Historic Preservation Offcer or the Keeper 
of the National Register of Historic Places, in the 
National Register of Historic Places. 
2. Designated as historic under an applicable state 
or local law. 
3. Certifed as a contributing resource within a 
National Register, state designated, or locally 
designated historic district.” 
Historic Building Code Report . See Report. 
Intumescent Fire-Resistant Coatings (ICC) . “Thin flm 
liquid mixture applied to substrates by brush, roller, spray, 
or trowel which expands into a protective foamed layer to 
provide fre-resistant protection of the substrates when 
exposed to fame or intense heat.” 
Live Load (ICC). “A load produced by the use and 
occupancy of the building or other structure that does not 
include construction or environmental loads such as wind 
load, snow load, rain load, earthquake load, food load or 
dead load.” 
Means of Egress (ICC) . “A continuous and unobstructed 
path of vertical and horizontal egress travel from any 
occupied portion of a building or structure to a public way. 
A means of egress consists of three separate and distinct 
parts: the exit access, the exit, and the exit discharge.” 
28 

Figure 22. Within the family of codes published by the International Code Council (ICC), the International Existing Building Code  
(IEBC) provides the most fexibility for historic and existing buildings. Photo: International Code Council 
Model Code. Code written for building construction  
developed and maintained by a code standards  
organization and available for adoption by a  
jurisdiction. Model codes are adopted as published or  
with modifcations. 
National Register of Historic Places . The offcial list  
of the nation’s historic places worthy of preservation,  
authorized by the National Historic Preservation Act  
of 1966. The National Register is maintained by the  
National Park Service as part of a national preservation  
program to coordinate and support public and private  
efforts to identify, evaluate, and protect America’s  
historic and cultural resources. 
Occupancy. The purpose or activity for which a building 
or space is designed or intended to be used. Occupancies 
are further subclassifed according to their group. 
Occupancy Classifcation . A classifcation determined  
by the code used to establish minimum construction-
related requirements. Higher-hazard occupancies such  
as warehouses storing paint, furniture, or paper; barns;  
pulp and paper mills, etc., typically require the inclusion  
of more fre protection features.  
Operational Features . Non-built features that  
contribute to life safety and property protection  
through the creation and enforcement of policy  
regulating how a building is to be used and maintained.  
Examples include a limitation on the number of persons  
permitted to occupy a space to address foor load  
capacity or visitation led by docents familiar with the  
building in the case of museums with egress limitations.  
Performance Based . A code or code provision that  
establishes an overall performance goal for a building  
component or system, permitting the goal to be  
achieved in ways presented by the design professional  
and approved by the code offcial. Performance-based  
codes are considered to have greater fexibility, permit  
the use of new technology and materials, and address  
the unusual conditions provided by existing buildings.  
Performance Compliance Method . One of the  
compliance methods in the IEBC, using a quantitative  
method for evaluating existing and acceptable risk.  
Permit. An offcial document or certifcate issued by a  
building or fre department authorizing performance  
of a specifed activity, such as a Building Permit,  
Certifcate of Completion of a construction project, or  
Certifcate of Occupancy.  
Prescriptive Based . A code or code provision that  
requires each building component to be built to a  
certain standard, e.g., a one-hour fre-rated wall, or  
36-inch stair width.  
Prescriptive Compliance Method . One of the  
compliance methods in the IEBC, most like the  
approach of the codes for new construction. 
29 

Preservation (NPS) . One of the four established  
treatments of historic properties under the Secretary  
of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic  
Properties , defned as “the act or process of applying  
measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity,  
and materials of an historic property.” Work, including  
preliminary measures to protect and stabilize a property,  
generally focuses on the ongoing maintenance and  
repair of historic materials and features rather than  
extensive replacement or new construction. New exterior  
additions are not within the scope of this treatment  
(see Rehabilitation); however, the limited and sensitive  
upgrading of mechanical, electrical, and plumbing  
systems and other code-required work to make properties  
functional is appropriate within a preservation project. 
Public Assembly. Buildings or spaces designed or  
occupied for gatherings such as civic, social, recreation, or  
religious functions, as well as food or drink consumption.  
Depending on the jurisdiction, an occupant load as small  
as 50 persons can be defned as a public assembly. 
Reconstruction (NPS) . One of the four established  
treatments of historic properties under the Secretary  
of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic  
Properties , defned as, “the act or process of depicting,  
by means of new construction, the form, features, and  
detailing of a non-surviving site, landscape, building,  
structure, or object for the purpose of replicating its  
appearance at a specifc period in time and in its   
historic location.”  
Reference Standard . An adopted technical document,  
developed by an industry organization and/or profes -
sional association, establishing supplemental criteria for  
minimum quality and performance for the design, manu -
facture, testing or installation of a material, product, or  
assembly. Unless noted as included for informational pur -
poses only, a reference standard is an enforceable exten -
sion of the code. 
Rehabilitation (NPS) . One of the four established  
treatments of historic properties under the Secretary  
of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic  
Properties , defned as “the act or process of making  
possible a compatible use for a property through  
repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those  
portions or features which convey its historical, cultural,  
or architectural values.” The Standards for Rehabilitation  
are the most commonly used and adopted of the four  
sets of Standards , along with associated guidelines and  
other related guidance issued by the National Park Service  
(NPS). The 1990 version of the Standards for Rehabilitation  
is used to determine if a project qualifes as “a certifed  
rehabilitation” under the Federal Historic Preservation Tax  
Incentives program. 
Rehabilitation (IEBC). “Any work, as described by the 
categories of work defned herein, undertaken in an 
existing building.”  
Relocatable Building (IEBC) . “A partially or completely 
assembled building constructed and designed to be reused 
multiple times and transported to different building sites.” 
Repair (IEBC). “The reconstruction, replacement or 
renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose 
of its maintenance or to correct damage.”  
Report. In the context of the Historic Buildings Chapter 
of the IEBC, a historic building code report establishes 
the basis and requirements for using this chapter when 
required by the building code offcial. 
Restoration (NPS). One of the four established 
treatments of historic properties under the Secretary 
of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic 
Properties, defned as “the act or process of accurately 
depicting the form, features, and character of a property 
as it appeared at a particular period in time by means 
of the removal of features from other periods in its 
history and reconstruction of missing features from the 
restoration period.”  The limited and sensitive upgrading 
of mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems and other 
code-required work to make properties functional as 
appropriate with a restoration period. 
Retroactive. Building-related conditions that must 
be brought to current code regardless of whether a 
construction project is proposed. Retroactive requirements 
are generally limited, as most conditions that were lawfully 
constructed are permitted to remain. See Grandfathered. 
Seismic Design Category (ICC) . “A classifcation 
assigned to a structure based on its risk category and  
the severity of the design earthquake ground motion   
at the site.”  
Seismic Forces (IEBC) . “The loads, forces, and  
requirements prescribed herein, related to the response  
of the building to earthquake motions, to be used in the  
analysis and design of the structure and its components.  
Seismic forces are considered either full or reduced, as  
provided in Chapter 3.”  
State Historic Preservation Offcer . As established 
in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, the  
appointed offcial and offce in each of the 59 states,  
territories, and the District of Columbia responsible  
for Federal and state historic preservation activities  
including maintaining historic registers, review of  
projects for Federal Section 106 compliance and the  
Historic Tax Credit program, and related programs  
supporting historic preservation. 
30 

Substa
ntial Damage (IEBC) . “For the purpose of  
determining compliance with the food provisions of  
this code, damage of any origin sustained by a structure  
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent  
of the market value of the structure before the damage  
occurred.” 
Substantial Improvement (IEBC) . “For the purpose of  
determining compliance with the food provisions of this  
code, any repair, alteration, addition, or improvement of a  
building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds  
50 percent of the market value of the structure, before  
the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has  
sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered  
substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair  
work performed. As used in the IEBC, the term does not,  
however, include either of the following: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building  
required to correct existing health, sanitary,  
or safety code violations identifed by  
the code offcial and that is the minimum  
necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any al teration of a historic structure,  
provided that the alteration will not preclude  
the structure's continued designation as a  
historic structure.” 
Sub
stantial Structural Alteration (IEBC) . “An alteration 
in which the gravity load-carrying structural elements 
altered within a 5-year period support more than 30 
percent of the total foor and roof area of the building or 
structure. The areas to be counted toward the 30 percent 
shall include mezzanines, penthouses, and in-flled courts 
and shafts tributary to the altered structural elements.” 
Technically Infeasible . As used in the Accessibility 
Standards, an alteration that has little likelihood of being 
accomplished because the existing structural conditions 
require the removal or alteration of a load-bearing 
member that is an essential part of the structural frame; 
or because other existing physical or site constraints 
prohibit modifcation or addition of elements, spaces or 
features which are in full and strict compliance with the 
minimum requirements for new construction and which 
are necessary to provide accessibility. 
Tolerances. An allowable deviation from dimensional 
requirements of the code that will have insignifcant 
impact on safety and performance. 
Unsafe (IEBC) . “Buildings, structures or equipment that 
are unsanitary, or that are defcient due to inadequate 
means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, 
or that constitute a fre hazard, or in which the structure 
or individual structural members meet the defnition 
of ‘Dangerous,’ or that are otherwise dangerous to 
human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal 
or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance 
shall be deemed unsafe. A vacant structure that is not 
secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.” 
Variance. A regulatory process by which an applicant 
can request permission to deviate from the code 
provisions. 
Waiver. See Variance. 
Work Area (IEBC) . “That portion or portions of 
a building consisting of all reconfgured space as 
indicated on the construction documents. Work area 
excludes portions of the building where incidental 
work entailed by the intended work must be 
performed and portions of the building where work 
not initially intended by the owner is specifcally 
required by this code.” 
Work Area Compliance Method . One of the 
compliance methods in the IEBC; it includes the most 
provisions specifc to historic buildings. 
31 

References 
California Historical Building Code, California Code of  
Regulations. Title 24, Part 8. California Building Standards  
Commission, 2019.  
Hensley, Jo Ellen, and Antonio Aguilar. Preservation  
Brief 3, Improving Energy Effciency in Historic Building s. 
Washington, D.C.: National Park Service, 2011. 
International Code Council (ICC). International Existing  
Building Code (2024). Falls Church, VA. 
International Code Council (ICC). International Property  
Maintenance Code (2024). Falls Church, VA. 
Jandl, H. Ward. Preservation Brief 18, Rehabilitating  
Interiors in Historic Buildings: Identifying and Preserving  
Character-Defning Elements . Washington, D.C.: National  
Park Service, 1988. 
Nelson, Lee H., FAIA. Preservation Brief 17, Architectural  
Character—Identifying the Visual Aspects of Historic  
Buildings as an Aid to Preserving their Character . 
Washington, D.C.: National Park Service, 1988. 
Watts, Jack. Fire Safety in Historic Buildings. 
Washington, DC.: National Trust for Historic  
Preservation, 2008. 
The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the  
Treatment of Historic Properties and Guidelines  
for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and  
Reconstructing Historic Buildings . Washington,  
D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, National  
Park Service, Technical Preservation Services, 2017.  
The Treatment Standards are codifed in 36 CFR  
68. A separate, but substantively similar, version  
of the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for  
Rehabilitation  (36 CFR 67) is used to determine if  
a project qualifes as “a certifed rehabilitation”  
under the Federal Historic Preservation Tax  
Incentives program (commonly known as the  
Historic Tax Credits) to qualify for certain tax  
benefts under the Internal Revenue Code. 
This publication and other sets of NPS guidelines,  
related guidance, and technical preservation  
information are available from the Technical  
Preservation Services website at   
https://www.nps.gov/tps/index.htm. 
Acknowledgements 
The author wishes to thank the following:  Antonio Aguilar, Senior Historical Architect, Brian Goeken, Division  
Chief, and Charles E. Fisher, Architectural Historian (retired), Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service,  
for their guidance and expertise; Timothy R Costello, PE, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc., John Curley, AIA,  
CBCO, CFM, Chief Development Services Offcer, City of Aurora, IL, Dijana Cuvalo, AIA, Historic Preservation  
Division, City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development, Sean Denniston, Principal, Heritage Green  
Consulting, Frank Heitzman, AIA, ASID, Heitzman Architects, Oak Park, IL, Chris Rute, AIA, RIBA, Principal, CR  
Designs, Beth Tubbs, PE, FSFPE, Chief Fire Protection Engineer, International Code Council, and Nicholas Vann, AIA,  
Washington State Offce of Equity and Belonging, formerly State Historical Architect, Washington Department of  
Archaeology & Historic Preservation for their assistance in reviewing the brief; and to Angela Shearer, Elizabeth  
Tune, and Jennifer K. Bailey, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, for their help in the fnal edits  
of the publication. The author also wishes to thank the Getty Conservation Institute for their generous support of  
the research contained in this  Brief while a 2021–2022 Conservation Guest Scholar. 
Front cover image: Davenport Hotel, Spokane, WA. Photo: Nicholas Vann. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which  
directs the Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. This  
publication is available from the Technical Preservation Services website 
at https://www.nps.gov/tps/index.htm or  
hard copies may be purchased from the Government Printing Offces at the U.S. Government Bookstore. 
C
omments about this publication should be addressed to: Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service,  
1849 C Street NW, Mail Stop 7246, Washington, DC 20240 or by email to NPS_TPS@nps.gov. This publication is not  
copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National  
Park Service are appreciated. Unless NPS fle photos, the photographs used in this publication may not be used to  
illustrate other publications without permission of the owners. 
June 2024 
32 