 
 
50
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Lightning Protection 
for Historic Structures 
Charles E. Fisher 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Technical Preservation Services 
Introduction 
The loss of historic buildings as a result of lightning 
strikes makes local front page news every year. 
Lightning strikes make no distinction between historic 
properties and other types of structures. Historic 
barns, churches, museums, homes, stores, factories, 
lighthouses, schools, and other buildings, as well 
as structures such as tall monuments, may be at 
unnecessary risk of damage or loss as a result of a strike 
by lightning. 
The insurance industry reports that 5% of all claims 
are lightning-related in the U.S., with annual building 
damage estimated as high as $1 billion according 
to Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. Certain types 
of structures are especially susceptible to damage, 
particularly churches where lightning accounts for 
nearly one-third of all church-building fires each year 
(Fig.1). 
Figure 1. Saved from a wrecking ball and renovated in 1970 by a 
70-person congregation, the Sanctuary of the Holy Spirit church 
was the oldest operating place of worship in Winder, Georgia.  
Just five years later, the 1904 church was destroyed by fire, hav-
ing been struck by lightning during a violent thunderstorm.                       
Photo: Paul Brennen/shutterstock.com
Lightning protection systems in the United States date 
back to colonial days and the time of Benjamin Franklin. 
Old systems that have survived in whole or in part on 
historic structures may be historic features in their own 
right and deserve preservation.  Such historic lightning 
protection systems may still be operating properly 
or can be repaired and upgraded. Some old systems 
simply are too deteriorated, incomplete, or archaic to 
repair and make fully functional, raising the question 
whether they should be sav
ed in place or removed 
in whole or in part for safety. For historic structures 
that have none and are located in areas that are prone 
to lightning strikes, or are of special significance and 
deemed irreplaceable, a modern lightning protection 
system may merit installation. 
This Preservation Brief is designed for owners, property 
managers, architects, contractors, and others involved 
in the preservation of historic structures.  It includes 
information on the care, maintenance, and repair 
of historic and older lightning protection systems; 
discusses factors to consider in assessing the need for 
a lightning protection system where none exists; and 
includes historic preservation guidance on the design 
and installation of new systems. 
What Causes a Lightning Strike? 
During violent storms, ice particles form in the 
atmosphere and collide with each other, resulting in a 
transfer of negative ions among ice particles.  Smaller ice 
particles or crystals tend to lose negative ions, becoming 
positively charged, and are then carried through 
updrafts to the upper levels of the clouds.  Heavier ice 
particles gain negative charges and settle below within 
the clouds. Lightning is produced when these opposite-
charged cloud values create high electric fields—nature’s 
way of reducing the imbalance. 
The more tyical negative electrical charges travel 
in leaders or about 150-foot segments. During 
thunderstorms, bursts of negative charges extend closer 
to the ground. Under such conditions, higher exposed 
objects on the ground in turn may send positively 
charged leaders upward.  When two oppositely charged 
1 

 
leaders connect, a massive stroke of current travels to the 
ground along one or more paths of low resistance (Fig. 
2). Usually several strokes occur in rapid succession, 
appearing to the human eye as a single lightning bolt to 
the ground. 
The mechanical force of this enormous energy flow can 
have a blast effect on a structure, exploding, for example, 
a large chimney, parapet or corner of a building. Heat up 
to 50,000°F generated along its path through wood and 
other building material can result in fire and considerable 
damage. Besides the risk of injury and loss of human life, 
irreparable damage to cultural resources can occur as a 
consequence of a lightning strike. 
Figure 2. Positive and negative electrical charges occur naturally 
under certain weather conditions, causing imbalances.  When a 
downward stream of strong negative charges in the air meets with a 
shorter leader of positive charges that have accumulated on, and are 
arising from a building, tree, or object, the resulting flash is lighting. 
The drawing shows a building with a lightning protection system 
providing a safe path for the lightning to travel to the ground rod 
beneath the soil. Courtesy: Cornell Agricultural Safety and Health 
Program, Jim Houghton, illustrator. 
Components of Conventional 
(Traditional) Systems 
The function of a conventional lightning protection 
system is not to prevent lightning from striking a 
structure, but rather to provide a specific path of low 
resistance for lightning current to travel to the ground 
that will result in no damage or injury. Since the 18th 
century, it has proven effective. 
There are three principal components of a conventional 
system: the lightning rod (air terminals), conductor, 
and ground (Fig. 3).  Besides these three traditional 
components, a system includes the bonding of other 
metal features of a building considered to be a lightning 
hazard and, particularly today, the use of surge 
suppressors. 
The lightning rod (air terminal) typically is the most 
prominent visual component of the system, and in 
its older, more traditional form could appear as an 
ornamental feature on a structure. In most cases, rods 
are used at prescribed locations and distances, joined 
together by connecting wires to conductors. In today’s 
contemporary applications, the lightning rods are very 
simple in design, most often consisting of utilitarian air 
terminals measuring 10 to 12 inches in height, although 
certain conditions may require taller terminals. By 
contrast, lightning rods of the late 19th and early 20th 
century were usually taller, typically four to six feet in 
height, and often had a more decorative appearance 
with embellishments, such as a weather or directional 
vane or glass balls (Fig. 4). 
Each lightning rod must be attached to the grounding 
system through horizontal roof cables and vertical 
conductors.  Cables are used to join individual lightning 
rods, most often in loops or series, and then in turn 
attached to two or more main conductors running 
to metal grounds. One major exception occurs in 
structures with structural steel where, under certain 
conditions, lightning rods may be tied directly to 
the steel frame. The steel needs to be continuously 
connected, since it must serve as the conductor and be 
tied to the ground for the lightning protection system to 
be complete. 
Cables vary by weight and number of strands of wire, 
with heavier cables required for use on structures taller 
than 75 feet. The number of required main conductors 
depends in part on the perimeter length of the structure.  
Even on smaller historic buildings, two or more down 
conductors are needed to help diffuse the electrical 
charge from a lightning strike along its path to the 
ground. 
The grounding system usually consists of long solid-
metal grounding rods driven into the soil, usually to 
a depth of at least 10 feet, to which the down cables 
Conductor 
Lightning rod 
(air terminal) 
Ground rods 
Cable under eave 
Figure 3. Conventional lightning protection systems consist of three 
principal components: the lightning rods, which are connected by 
cables to the system; two or more down conductors, which connect 
the lightning rods to the grounding system; and the ground rods. 
Adapted from a 1950 U. S. Department of Agriculture illustration. 
2 

Positive and negative electrical 
charges occur naturally under 
certain weather conditions, 
causing inbalances. Drawing 
shows a lightning protection 
system providing a safe path 
for the lightning to travel to the 
ground rod.
Figure 4. The most common historic lightning rods of the late 19th to 
early 20th century consisted of a lightning rod or air terminal, glass 
ball, and a stand attached to the roof. These rods tended to run four 
to six feet in height and were quite prominent on the roof. Courtesy: 
Charles Fisher Collection. Drawing: New Old Products, Inc. 
Bayonet-style tip 
Lightning rod 
Glass ball with 
metal collars 
Stand 
are attached at one end using special connectors. On 
buildings today, the most commonly used grounding 
rod is an 8 to 10-foot copper, copper-clad steel, or 
stainless steel rod. Depending on the soil condition, 
depth of soil, and presence of bedrock near the surface, 
additional grounding rods may be needed or may need 
to be placed in a different manner. In some cases, an 
alternate grounding system is needed altogether. Other 
grounding systems, such as those used for electrical, 
telephone service, or a satellite dish, need to be 
connected to the lightning protection ground. 
Whenever a structure has metal gutters and 
downspouts, metal roof vents, large metal awnings or 
other conductive objects that contribute to lightning 
hazards, these objects need to be bonded to the lightning 
protection system. On the inside of a building, copper 
and galvanized-iron water lines as well as steam or 
hot water heating systems with metal pipes must be 
connected to the ground conductors. Bonding of these 
objects to the lightning protection system through use of 
metal conductors deters an electrical charge caused by 
a lightning strike from seeking alternative paths to the 
earth.  Bonding also deters side flashing whereby current 
otherwise could jump from components of the lightning 
protection system to nearby conductive objects.  As it 
is impractical to bond all metal objects, such as each 
steel or aluminum window on a building, only objects 
considered more hazardous are usually bonded to the 
lightning protection system (Fig. 5). 
Lightning damage to a structure can occur from 
lightning striking distant or nearby power lines. 
Resulting power surges can affect not only sensitive 
electronic equipment, such as computers and security 
systems, but also common household items such as 
land-line telephones, electric appliances, and home 
entertainment centers. There is always the human safety 
risk as well from such power surges, thus the adage stay 
off the phone (land-line) during an electrical storm. For 
safety and to protect against excess voltage, different 
types of surge protective devices (SPD) are used. 
History 
Lightning strikes have mystified man since the 
beginning of time. While it has been observed long ago 
that lightning tends to strike tall objects, not until the 
mid-1700s did there emerge a general understanding of 
lighting and how to prevent damage to structures.  
In the late 1740s and early 1750s, interest in static 
electricity led Benjamin Franklin to investigate the 
nature of electricity, including lightning. In a series 
of letters to Peter Collinson, a Fellow of the Royal 
Figure 5. Bonding of conductive material on a structure to the 
lightning protection system is important to deter damage from side 
flashing. In this drawing, the metal downspout has been bonded to 
the down conductor. Unless bonded, metal gutters and downspouts 
provide a good path for an electrical discharge to side flash and cause 
damage to a building. Drawing: English Heritage© 
3 

Society of London, Franklin described his experiments 
and observations on electricity.  Published together in 
London in 1751, these letters soon led Thomas-Francois 
Dalibard and a colleague, collaborating in Paris, to 
experiment with a tall metal rod that was insulated in 
the ground. Their experiment in May 1752 was based 
on a proposal described by Franklin in his letters and 
succeeded in drawing sparks, helping to confirm that 
thunderclouds are electrified.
Franklin probably conducted his famous kite 
experiement shortly thereafter, unaware at that point of 
the earlier french experiment. He did publish in his Poor 
Richard’s Almanac a description of a lightning protection 
system in 1753, and, in the same year, he was awarded 
the prestigious Copley Gold Metal by the Royal Society 
of London for his “curious experiments and observations 
on electricity.” Franklin had envisioned a means to 
protect a structure from being struck by lightning. Yet 
he soon came to realize that rather than preventing 
strikes, lightning protection systems functioned to 
provide a safe path of travel for the electrical discharge. 
 
In a letter written in 1762, Franklin provided a detailed 
description of a lightning protection system: 
Prepare a steel rod 5 or 6 feet long, half an Inch thick at its 
biggest End, and tapering to a sharp Point; which Point 
should be gilt to prevent its rusting.  Let the big End of the 
Rod have a strong Eye or Ring of half an inch Diameter: 
Fix this Rod upright to the Chimney or highest Part of the 
Building, by means of Staples, so as may be kept steady. Let 
the pointed End be upwards, and rise three or four Feet above 
the Chimney or Building that the Rod is fix’d to.  Drive into 
the Ground an Iron Rod of about an Inch Diameter, and ten 
or twelve feet long, that has also an Eye or Ring in the upper 
End. 
It is best that the Rod should be at some Distance from 
the Foundation of the Building, not nearer than ten feet, if 
your Ground will allow so much. Then take as much Length 
of Iron Rod of about half an Inch Diameter, as will reach from 
the Eye in the Rod above to that in the Rod below; and fasten 
it securely to those Rods, by passing its Ends thro’ the Rings, 
and bending those Ends round till they likewise form Rings. 
This Length of Rod may be in one or several Pieces.  If in 
several, let the Ends of the Pieces be also well hooked to each 
other. Then close and cover every Joint with Lead…that there 
should be considerable Quantity of metalline Contact between 
Piece and Piece: For if they were only hook’
d together, and 
so touch’d each other but in Points, the Lightning in passing 
thro’ them might melt and break where they join. The Lead 
will also prevent the Weakening of the Joints by Rust.  To 
prevent the Shaking of this Rod by the Wind, you may secure 
it by a few Staples to the Building till it comes down within 
ten feet of the Ground, and thence carry it off to your Ground 
Rod; near to which should be planted a Post, to support the 
Iron Conductor above the heads of the people walking under it. 
In such a remarkable short time, the basics of today’s 
lightning protection system for ordinary structures were 
in place, and this invention became popularly known as 
the Franklin system. It is still the most commonly used 
lightning protection system for structures throughout 
the world. Yet even Franklin acknowledged that he and 
his colleagues benefited from some luck in arriving so 
quickly at a lightning protection system that worked. 
In the second half of the 18th century, lightning 
protection systems w
ere being installed from Boston 
to South Carolina. Yet this was a pioneering period 
and installations were far from common.  Relying 
principally on descriptions provided by Franklin rather 
than first-hand experience, early installers operated 
with some trial and error. A number of the known early 
installations seem to have worked reasonably well in 
providing a safe path to the ground for the charge from 
an electrical strike, establishing for the first time that 
buildings could be protected from significant damage 
caused by lightning. 
When strikes to a protected structure occurred, damage 
to the lightning protection system still could result 
due to material deficiencies or improper installation. 
The “Electric Rod and Conductor” on Christ Church 
in Philadelphia was struck by lightning in June 1777, 
and rendered useless, although additional damage to 
the church seemingly did not occur. System damage 
reported at other buildings included the narrower 
pointed end of the rod at times melting and needing 
to be replaced; large metal staples securing a down 
conductor to the building dislodging and having to 
be reattached; and down conductor sections joined 
with hook and eye connections needing to be rejoined.  
Failures did occur as a result of undersized conductors, 
too few lightning rods, or lack of bonding to nearby 
metal objects, with resulting damage to buildings. It 
soon became clear that thicker conductors needed to be 
used; connectors needed to be more secured and, where 
possible, reduced in numbers; and, to avoid damage to 
foundations, more extensive grounding was required, 
depending upon soil condition. 
Evidence of late eighteenth-century installations have 
survived, including ones in Franklin’s hometown.  A 
section of a hand-forged, wrought-iron conductor 
remains inside the stair tower of Independence Hall 
and would have been joined in a series of sections using 
hook-and-eye connections to form the down conductor. 
In Portsmouth, New Hampshire, a system was installed 
in 1767 on the Warner House, purportedly under the 
personal inspection of Franklin. An early system still 
survives on the Warner House, consisting of a long 
forged-welded piece of wrought iron (Fig. 6).  A hook-
and-eye section of the ground has even survived and is 
now on display inside the building. 
In Europe, individuals that shared Franklin’s scientific 
interest in lightning protection helped to guide early 
installations on buildings. Despite some initial 
resistance on religious grounds, lightning rods soon 
appeared on many larger steeple-topped churches 
that had a propensity for being struck by lightning. 
4 

Figure 6. Lightning protection was installed on the Warner House 
in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in 1767, purportedly under the 
personal inspection of Benjamin Franklin. An early system still 
survives on the building, consisting of a long forged-welded rod of 
wrought iron which extended up and above the chimney, comprising 
both the conductor and the air terminal. The conductor was joined 
to a separate, buried, iron ground rod by a forged hook and eye 
connector. Photo: Peter Michaud. 
Specialized applications soon followed such as for 
powder magazines and lighthouses. 
The installation by 1788 of the lightning rod on the dome 
of the Maryland State House in Annapolis, Maryland, 
represented a superb example of a building-specific 
application of the Franklin system. Still in place and 
fully functional, the historic wrought-iron lightning rod 
measures 28 feet in height and is 2 1/2 inches square 
at its base, its thickest point. This lightning rod has a 
decorative flare, including a weathervane toward the top 
and an acorn and pedestal at its base. As part of a 18th- 
century renovation of the State House, Joseph Clark, a 
local architect and builder, erected the large dome and 
installed the lightning protection system, essentially 
using the Franklin system (Fig. 7). 
Figure 7. The c. 1788 wrought-iron lightning rod on the Maryland 
State House dome measures 28 feet in height, 2-1/2 inches square at 
its base, and is pointed at its top. The rod passes through a decorative 
copper-paneled wood acorn that is nearly 4 feet in diameter. The 
acorn helps provide stability to the rod that, in turn, is secured 
to the pedestal or base of the acorn. While based on the Franklin 
system, this rod had a decorative flare, including a weathervane 
and ornamental base. Prominently located in Annapolis along the 
Chesapeake Bay, an area of frequent summer lightning storms, the 
building has been struck by lightning as recently as 2016, surviving 
undamaged. Photo by Niagara (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http:// 
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons. 
Despite no real manuals or standards, the early 
installations of the “Franklin rod” often proved effective.  
The experience derived from the early applications 
provided for an enlightened learning process. Still, there 
were failures that reinforced the belief among some that 
lightning rods actually attracted lightning and should 
not be used. 
By at least the early 19th century, individuals were 
marketing lightning protection, sometimes with little or 
no understanding of the working of the Franklin system.  
In 1824, the newspaper New England Farmer reprinted a 
letter attributing many of the recent failures to improper 
grounding and installation, stating that "Lightning 
rods are generally made and put up by persons wholly 
unacquainted with the principles of electricity and what is 
necessary to constitute a safe conductor." 
The letter goes on to provide instructions for proper 
installation that include the use of five or more points at 
the end of the rod, with points sharpened, tipped with 
silver, and elevated five or six feet above the highest part 
of the building. The writer specified that the rod (and 
conductor) should be at least ¾ inch in diameter, with 
a continuous weld rather than linked where possible, 
and should terminate in the earth six or seven feet deep, 
set in a bed of two or three bushels of wet charcoal. 
The letter’s author noted that the expense for one rod 
on a two-story building would not exceed $50, still a 
considerable sum for the time 
5 

According to the writer of the aforementioned letter, 
a single rod could protect a building for 20 feet on 
each side. Practice and observation were still guiding 
lightning protection work. 
As to the number and placement of the lightning rods, 
in 1823 the French Academy of Sciences carried out 
scientific investigations and proposed that the protection 
zone (cone of protection) of an air terminal was a radius 
twice its height. This provided a framework needed to 
determine the placement and number of air terminals. 
Included along with other detailed information in the 
report entitled “Instruction sur les paratonneres,” it was 
adopted by the French government and gained wide 
distribution in the United States. 
Information on how to protect structures from lightning 
was shared through newspapers and other means, 
reaching not only an urban audience but farmers as 
well.  Because of their typical large size, location in 
open areas, and their use to store flammable hay and 
Figure 8. Church steeples, roof turrets, and chimneys were 
identified early on as being susceptible to lightning strikes. Finials, 
weathervanes, and other such ornamentation in these locations could 
often serve as lightning rods when connected to down conductors and 
grounds. The cupula on the Home Moravian Church in Winston-
Salem, North Carolina, is an excellent example. Old Salem, Inc., has 
a number of Moravian buildings where early lightning protection 
systems are still in place. Photo: Sunni L. Goodson. 
grains, barns were recognized as being high risks for 
lightning strikes. A description for proper installation of 
lightning protection on a New England barn appearing 
in an 1848 issue of The Cultivator, a New England farm 
journal, reflects the prevailing view that multiple rods/ 
terminals and ground components were needed for most 
structures. 
In applying the conductor to the barn, begin at the northwest 
corner, by inserting the rod far enough into the ground to 
always insure its contact with the moist ground; carry it along 
the gable end to one end of the ridge pole, thence along the 
ridge pole to the other end of the ridge pole, thence along the 
other gable end, and down the southwest corner continuing 
into the ground....There should be a point at the eaves on each 
corner, and one on each side of the ridge pole, which should 
be covered with a coating of silver to prevent them from 
rusting.... 
It w
as common practice to locate the conductor on the 
outside since most systems were installed on existing 
buildings. However, installations that ran down the 
interior still were occurring.  An 1847 article in the 
Burlington Gazette refers to a church in Philadelphia that 
recently was destroyed as a result of lightning: "It was 
provided with a conductor, but it ran down from the 
steeple inside the church!…. Such blundering ignorance 
as that of setting a rod to conduct the lightning into the 
house, we have seldom heard of.  The precise reason for 
the failure was not stated." 
By the mid-19th century, the collegial nature of the 
pioneers of early lightning protection system was giving 
way to a competitive field and proprietary products. 
This change came at a time that fostered a growth in 
the marketing and sales of lightning protection across 
an expanding country. New lightning protection 
products and patented systems could get ready 
exposure as a result of the proliferation of newspapers 
and manufacturing trade catalogues. The New York 
firm of Marshall Lefferts & Brothers, manufacturers 
of galvanized and iron building products, marketed 
in their 1854 trade catalog the sale of galvanized iron 
for lightning protection systems that eliminated the 
degrading effects of rusting. Galvanized steel soon 
became, along with copper, the common materials used 
for components. 
About the same time, David Munson of Indianapolis, 
Indiana, purportedly invented a copper tubular spiral 
lightning rod, using copper because of its greater 
conductivity than iron. Made of sheet copper for 
affordability, the distinctive tubular spiral shape 
provided needed rigidity and became a popular type for 
years. In the 1858 publication,  A Chapter on Thunder and 
Lightning, Their Causes and Effects, numerous advantages 
of the Munson Rod were touted, including that it did 
not rust. Conducting rods came in 5-foot lengths with 
connections made by lapping and wiring. The lightning 
rod also was made of copper with a terminal consisting 
of multiple points. 
6 

Figure 9. While plain round, 4-inch to 5-inch, color-glass lightning 
rod balls were most common in the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries, balls also came in more decorative patterns and 
shapes such as the pleated round balls shown here in a variety of 
colors. Courtesy: Ferdinand Meyer Collection. 
By the 1850s, patents were appearing for glass insulators 
to secure cables running between air terminals and 
to secure the main conductors, enabling cables not to 
directly touch the building. The use of different styles of 
glass and porcelain insulators became common, all in a 
perceived effort to help direct a lightning discharge. 
With the Industrial Revolution, lightning protection 
products became mass-produced at affordable prices 
and shipped by railroad across the country. For the 
Franklin system, there now were many different parts 
that were available, such as specialized insulators and 
connectors, and a variety of shapes and sizes available 
for air terminals—some utilitarian and others quite 
decorative. 
The westward movement onto the Great Plains 
following the Civil War contributed to the Golden 
Age of lightning protection, as this included areas 
thought particularly prone to turbulent lightning. The 
long stretches of flat land made buildings on isolated 
farmsteads and grain storage containers along railroad 
sidings at risk. 
A 4-inch to 5-inch glass or ceramic ball became a 
common feature on many late 19th and early 20th-
century rods. They came in different patterns, colors, 
and shapes, with plain round colored balls dominating 
the landscape. Balls could be added to one or more of 
the lightning rods on the roof. Folklore has it that the 
balls were functional, designed to break when lightning 
struck, thus giving notice to the building owner that the 
system both had worked and should be inspected for 
any possible damage. In fact, the glass balls were purely 
decorative and intended to aid sales (Fig. 9). Additional 
decoration could be added to a lightning rod. Multiple, 
color glass balls and custom-crafted metalwork were 
two ways to accent it.  A directional weather vane 
a
ttached to one of the rods could in turn be embellished 
with colored glass or a metal animal or sailboat, 
reflecting the building use or owner’s interest.
The longer length of air terminals of this period typically 
required a sturdy stand for stability and attachment 
to the roof. The height of these stands varied widely, 
commonly ranging from one to three feet, meaning that 
the rods could measure as high as fi
ve feet or more. 
Three-foot stands with five-foot rods were the most 
prevalent size.  The rod would usually have a point, 
with common shapes being a shell point or a bayonet 
shape. A rounded point was also available, though not 
as popular in the U.S. as in Europe. 
In an unusual application, and the first use of aluminum 
as part of a lightning protection system, a pyramid-
shaped cast of aluminum was selected to be the top of 
the Washington Monument and was installed in 1884.  It 
was later augmented with lightning rod points (Fig. 10). 
By the 1880s, the commonly accepted measurement 
that helped determine the number and placement of 
Figure 10. When the Washington Monument was completed in 1884, 
it was capped with a pyramid made of aluminum. Though intended to 
function as a lightning rod, it proved within the year to be deficient. 
After lightning struck, a crack appeared under the top stone. As a 
remedy, copper rods attached to a copper band were placed around 
the base of the aluminum apex. The band was directly connected 
to the iron elevator shaft inside the monument that was part of the 
rest of the otherwise functioning system. The cap is the first use of 
aluminum as a lightning rod in the United States. Photo: Theodor 
Horydczak, Library of Congress. 
7 

lightning rods was a cone of protection served by each 
air terminal that had a radius of the circle at the base 
measuring the same height as the air terminal—a 1:1 
ratio. At such a ratio, more lightning rods were typically 
needed than was common prior to the Civil War. 
Scientific investigation in lightning protection continued 
throughout this time along with a growing need 
for professional standards. In Great Britain, "rules 
[recommendations] for those who installed lightning 
protection systems" was published in 1882 in The Report 
of the Lightning Rod Conference. 
One of the conclusions of 
the conference was that there was "no authentic case on 
record where a properly-constructed conductor failed to 
do its duty." 
In the United States, the National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) drew upon this report when 
they developed and published in 1904 Specifications 
for Protection of Buildings against Lightning. 
Though 
more conservative than the British report in terms of 
the ability of a properly installed lightning protection 
system to be effective in all cases, they concluded that 
lightning protection systems materially reduced the risk 
of fire loss to structures where prone to such damage. 
They noted that within a 5-year period, 3,842 dwellings, 
9,375 barns, 328 churches, and 59 ice houses had losses 
from fires due to lightning.
By 1908, the Underwriters Laboratories in the United 
States began the independent testing and certifying 
of certain lightning protection equipment. Such 
specifi
cations and quality assurance were sorely needed. 
Traveling salesmen hawking lightning protection 
to unsuspecting homeowners, farmers, and small 
merchants too often were more interested in a quick sale 
rather than whether the system was properly installed.  
Figure 11. Two salesmen kits used by F. B. Renak operating out of 
Racine, Wisconsin. He was a reputable agent for several companies 
including the Security Lightning Rod Company, which offered a 
reasonable 10-year guarantee upon installation at a time when some 
unscrupulous companies offered essentially worthless hundred-
year or lifetime guarantees. The kits included sectional pieces of a 
twisted copper conductor and two styles of air terminals--one was a 
bayonet shape and the other came in a shell or bullet shape. The shell 
terminals were available in several materials, including copper and 
nickel-coated copper. Courtesy: Charles Fisher Collection. 
In many communities, particularly in the Midwest, 
popular opinion turned against the salesman and the 
potential benefits of lightning protection. Ironically, 
this came at a time when there was general support 
among the scientific community as to the effectiveness of 
properly installed lightning protections (Fig. 11). 
Using scare techniques, parlor tricks to simulate 
lightning, testimonials, and flashy advertising, 
unscrupulous traveling salesmen frequently gave little 
consideration as to whether a structure was at risk and 
merited lightning protection. Going hand-in-hand 
with aggressive sales techniques was often over-priced, 
shoddy work. Where grounds were not functional or 
conductors improperly connected, flashy air terminals 
on a roof provided no protection and written guarantees 
were of little value. 
The "Golden Age" of lightning protection came to an 
end by the 1930s, a victim of the excesses of so many 
traveling salesmen and the Great Depression.  Many 
of the lightning protection manufacturers ceased 
production. Fortunately, a few of the companies did 
survive and continue today to offer various traditional 
components that meet modern standards. 
In the decade after World War II, a number of important 
changes occurred. Aluminum became an alternative 
to the use of more expensive copper for terminals and 
cables and remains, along with copper, one of the 
two most common materials available today.  Since 
aluminum is a better conductor than galvanized steel, 
does not rust, and was competitively priced, it generally 
replaced the use of galvanized steel. 
The older method of determining placement of air 
terminals—the “cone of protection”—became less used. 
The 150-ft Rolling Sphere Model, developed in the 1950s, 
has gained more common acceptance. Except for some 
historic reproductions, air terminals are now shorter 
than many of their predecessors and are available in 
both pointed and blunted (rounded) tips. 
“Surge protectors” or surge protective devices (SPD) 
have become a significant part of modern lightning 
protection work, reflecting our increased reliance on 
electronics and technology (Fig. 12). Besides providing 
for surge protection at the main electrical service box, 
second-stage or point-of-use surge protectors are needed 
to protect sensitive electrical devices such as computers.  
These surge protectors must be rated for lightning 
protecttion. With the proliferation of service lines to a 
structure, proper bonding of these service lines to the 
common ground of the lightning protection system 
remains important. 
Risk Assessment 
The majority of buildings in this country neither 
have existing lightning protection nor may they be 
8 

Figure 12. A surge 
protector covering the 
electrical lines in a house, 
barn, or other such 
structure is relatively 
inexpensive to have 
installed. With two or more 
electrical service boxes, each 
will need one. The surge 
protector includes one or 
more LED lights which 
indicate whether or not it 
is properly functioning. 
In areas of frequent 
thunderstorms, the unit 
may need to be replaced 
after a severe or repeated 
number of power surges in 
the line. Photo: Independent 
Lightning Protection 
Company. 
in real need of such protection. Nevertheless, there 
are significant number of structures, including many 
historic ones, at risk of loss or damage due to lightning 
strikes and which merit protection. Local building 
codes or fire marshals may require certain buildings 
being rehabilitated or undergoing a change in use to 
install lightning protection. In most cases, the decision 
to install or maintain an existing lightning protection 
system for a historic building is voluntary. If an owner 
elects to install one, many local building codes do set 
forth installation standards, often drawing upon the 
National Fire Protection 
Association’s Standard for 
Installation of Lightning Protection Systems (NFPA 780). 
The frequency of lightning strikes varies considerably 
across the country (Fig 13).  Coastal areas in the 
southeast are particularly prone to high numbers of 
lightning strikes, while the west coast has few.  Even 
within a single state, the number of lightning events 
each year can vary considerably by location.  Lightning 
activity and lightning strikes are tracked on a continuing 
basis by companies providing fee services for weather 
forecasts, insurance claims, and other business purposes. 
These companies are the best source of data for a specific 
area where such information is not publicly available. 
In Annex L to NFPA 780, information on lightning 
risk assessment is provided. The described method 
takes into account the building environment, type of 
construction, structure occupancy, structure contents, 
and lightning stroke consequences. Among the 
examples that NFPA 780 cites, and where the need 
for protection should be given serious consideration 
regardless of the outcome of the risk assessment, 
are structures located where there is high lightning 
frequency, tall isolated structures, buildings containing 
explosive or flammable materials, and buildings 
containing irreplaceable cultural heritage. While 
most historic structures by their very nature may be 
considered irreplaceable, practical constraints, including 
financial ones, often result in an informed owner having 
Figure 13. The frequency of lightning strikes varies considerably across the country and is tracked and reported nationwide.  States with a high 
number of cloud-to-ground flashes in 2016 included Louisiana and Kansas with over one million each; states with a low number included Maine and 
New Hampshire with each around 10,000. Ben Franklin's home state of Pennsylvania had 182,071 cloud-to-ground flashes in 2016 while across the 
country, California had 48,958. Courtesy of Vaisala. 
9 

to weigh the risks of not installing a lightning protection 
systems—in other words, the likelihood of lightning 
striking a building and the resulting damage and 
potential loss of life that could occur. 
Buildings with towers or spires such as historic 
courthouses and churches are at greater risk because of 
their height and since they are often the most prominent 
buildings within a small community. 
On the other 
hand, a downtown historic building, even one with 
a tower such as a firehouse, set among much taller, 
newer buildings, is less likely to be struck by lightning. 
Structures such as lighthouses that are tall and in 
exposed locations are at high risk when located where 
lightning strikes occur. Similarly, an isolated building 
on a hilltop is more prone to a lightning strike than a 
rowhouse in an urban district. 
The type of construction is another factor taken into 
account, particularly the structural framework and 
the roof type. For example, a wood roof has a higher 
risk value than a fiberglass shingle roof because of its 
greater flammability; a structural steel-frame building 
with a metal roof that is electrically continuous is at a 
lower risk than a concrete building with a composition 
roof. Another factor is the occupancy use and damage 
that may occur. With theaters, schools, and large retail 
stores, a lightning strike may cause both fire and panic 
with loss of life. For farms, there is the risk of fire and 
loss of business, and for museums there is the additional 
irreplaceable loss of cultural heritage. 
A lightning risk assessment should be undertaken by a 
qualified, experienced individual, usually an architect 
or engineer, who operates independent of any lightning 
protection company. For structures that have been 
previously struck by lightning, and where conditions 
have not changed that otherwise would significantly 
lower risk, remember that lightning can and has struck 
twice in the same place. 
Inspection, Evaluation, and Maintenance 
Whether old or quite recent, lightning protection 
systems need to be periodically inspected and 
maintained. Systems can be impacted by changes to a 
structure, as with an addition of a dormer, attachment 
of a new metal blade sign, or installation of a new roof. 
Fasteners and certain other components degrade over 
time, requiring cleaning, securing, or replacement. 
Components may also suffer from man’s careless or 
unintentional actions. While performing as intended, a 
system might even incur some damage, such as to the 
tip of an air terminal or damage to a surge protector, as a 
result of a lightning strike. 
The inspection should either ensure that the system is 
fully functional or identify components that are broken, 
dislodged, or otherwise deficient (Fig. 14). Historic 
components needing conservation work should be 
identified. While today’s lightning protection standards 
Figure 14. Lightning protection systems should be visually inspected 
every year and once every five years be inspected by an experienced 
professional. Note the break in the down conductor at the top of the 
photograph and the lack of a bonded connection to the cable at the 
bottom, which goes to one or more grounds. The old ground rod 
should be bonded to the new ground. Photo by author. 
do not classify older systems as obsolete, even functional 
systems may merit some upgrading, and this should be 
noted in the inspection. 
The recommended number and placement of air 
terminals needed for coverage today usually will exceed 
that of older systems.  Also, some old lightning rods may 
be connected to only one conductor, rather than today’s 
required two or more conductors and grounds. It is 
important to check whether pertinent objects and service 
lines are properly bonded to the lightning protection 
system. As part of the inspection and evaluation 
process, existing surge suppressors and arresters should 
be checked, and those locations lacking adequate surge 
protections should be identified. 
On older systems, new ground rods usually need to be 
installed and connected to the old ground rod. Even 
under normal conditions, grounding components decay 
and usually will need replacement within 30 years or 
less, depending upon soil conditions (Fig. 15). The 
inspection should also indicate whether additional 
ground rods need to be installed. Particular attention 
should be placed on recent site work, such as trenching 
for cable lines or installation of landscape features like 
10 

Figure 15. Ground rods decay and may need replacement within 30 
years or less depending upon soil conditions.  Ground rods should be 
copper-clad steel, solid copper, or stainless steel. They should be 8 feet 
long and no less than 1/2 inch in diameter. Reprinted with permission 
from NFPA Standard 780, 2017, Standard for the Installaton of 
Lightning Protection Systems, Copyright © 2016, National Fire 
Protection Association, Quincy, MA.  This reprinted material is 
not the complete and official position of the NFPA on the referenced 
subject, which is represented only by the standard in its entirety. 
a metal flagpole, which may have cut or otherwise 
disturbed a previously functioning ground. 
Besides visual inspection, a ground resistance test can 
help establish if an existing ground is working properly. 
If a visual inspection of certain components is not 
possible, as with concealed conductors, a continuity test 
can be run instead. A visual inspection by an individual 
familiar with lightning protection systems should 
take place annually and at least every five years be 
undertaken by a professional who also tests the ground 
and the system’s conductivity. Where roof replacement 
or repairs to chimneys, parapets, or similar features has 
occurred, a visual inspection should immediately follow.     
With an older system, an assessment should be made 
at the outset as to its overall historic significance and 
that of individual components. A lightning rod with a 
colorful glass ball and crafted weathervane dating to the 
turn-of-the-twentieth century can easily be appreciated, 
yet early connectors, conductors, and glass insulators, 
while more utilitarian in function, may be significant as 
well and merit preservation considerations. 
There are additional considerations when an older 
system is determined to be a historic feature of a 
building. If a lightning rod is rare or quite distinctive 
and exhibits deterioration, it may be appropriate in some 
cases, particularly with museums and public buildings, 
to replace it with a replica, conserving and retaining the 
original piece for display or storage inside. Examples 
include a deteriorated rod that exhibits high quality 
craftsmanship and specifically designed for a structure; a 
rod that is of unusual design and is considered valuable 
folk art; or a surviving 18th-century lighting rod. 
Where historic lightning rods and other components 
can function properly and are in fair to good condition, 
identifying steps to conserve and secure them in place 
is usually the preferred preservation approach.  When 
repairs are necessary, finding certain parts for old 
systems may be more difficult and may necessitate 
utilizing reproduction parts that may not have been UL- 
certified, but are otherwise serviceable.  If the existing 
system is in poor condition and needs substantial 
upgrading, replacement may be the only alternative.  
Recommendation of the inspector should be explained 
in the evaluation, including a discussion of alternatives.  
With serviceable pre-Civil War lightning rods, and 
even with more common decorative rods of the Golden 
Era, special attention is needed where there is a risk of 
vandalism or theft.  If a building is being mothballed 
or is undergoing major repairs and is not in a secured 
location, historic lightning rods with any decoration 
usually should be temporarily removed. If the risk is 
high for lightning strike, an interim system with modern 
terminals may need to be installed. 
Traditionally, the most common threat of vandalism is 
due to a glass ball or weathervane being used for target 
purposes, particularly on vacant and isolated buildings.  
While rarely preventable, glass balls broken as a result 
of vandalism can often be replaced, since a number of 
the common designs and colors are still available today 
as moderately priced reproductions using original tools 
(Fig. 16).  Theft occurs as well, since historic lightning 
rods with glass balls or decorative weathervanes are 
Figure 16. This three-piece vintage mold for a round pleated-glass 
lightning rod ball is still used to make accurate reproductions today. 
Photo by author. 
11 

valued by collectors, and copper conductors can be sold 
for scrap metal. 
Proper maintenance of historic lightning protection 
systems includes some similar tasks associated with 
modern systems. 
Attachment hardware and connectors 
may become loose and simply need to be retightened. 
On a common tripod stand, excessive rust on a steel or 
iron screw, or water leakage where the screw is attached 
through the roof, will over time cause one or more of the 
legs of the stand to detach from the roof. As a result, the 
rod usually will bend or deflect to one side. Thus, it is 
important to re-secure the stand and ensure that the roof 
is watertight at the connection. 
Historic hardware may need to be cleaned to ensure 
proper function and longer wear. Where historic 
hardware is severely corroded or broken, has suffered 
from past abuse, or is otherwise seriously deficient, 
replacement parts should be used. 
With replacement hardware even as simple as screws, 
care must be taken to avoid use of dissimilar metals 
that have different electrical properties which can 
result in galvanic corrosion. If the existing conductors 
are copper, the connectors should be copper or brass. 
Similarly, only aluminum connectors should be used 
with aluminum conductors. Because of appearance 
and durability, plastic anchors and connectors should 
generally be avoided for historic buildings. Parts 
designed for lightning protection installations should be 
used in replacement work. 
It may be necessary to clean iron and steel parts 
of the lightning rod. Particularly with decorative 
weathervanes and directional signs, care must be taken 
to avoid unnecessary damage when cleaning. Where 
the object appears to be discolored, this can be the result 
of a natural patina that provides some protection, and 
the object may be prized for this visual quality and 
undisturbed nature. With copper and brass, cleaning 
to an as-new appearance should generally be avoided 
except where repairs are made at connectors. 
Decorative objects, such as a fish or horse on a 
weathervane, were typically formed from relatively 
thin sheet metal, as opposed to heavier weight castings 
that also were sometimes used. Where cleaning is 
appropriate, use the gentlest means possible, avoiding 
unnecessary abrasion or etching. The best cleaning 
approach is to use methods suitable for the cleaning of 
similar art and historic objects. If the decorative objects 
have vestiges of early paint, it may be appropriate to 
take steps to conserve the paint since it adds to the 
historical value. More than one metal material may 
be used in a single lightning rod assembly, so it is 
important to identify the metals on each part and to use 
an appropriate cleaning method for each type. 
Iron and later steel used for stands to support a lightning 
rod are somewhat more forgiving in terms of cleaning 
methods than softer metals like aluminum, copper, 
nickel, bronze, and brass, which generally should not be 
cleaned. Gentle hand scraping, soft wire brushing, and 
sanding with medium grit emery paper can remove rust 
on iron and steel, except for where fine detail requires 
more delicate work. Because iron and steel easily rust, 
support stands and applied decorative objects that are 
to be painted should be cleaned and treated with a 
zinc-based metal primer on the same day. Air terminal 
stands, connectors, and cables can be painted without 
impeding the flow of electricity in case of a lightning 
strike. 
Historic and reproduction glass balls are a fragile 
component of the lightning rod and should be handled 
carefully. Glass can inadvertently be scratched or etched 
when in contact with certain metal cleaners used on 
adjacent metal parts. Cleaning to remove bird waste and 
other harmful residue should be done by washing with 
a soft cloth, warm water, and a mild non-ionic detergent.  
Because of their outdoor exposure, cleaning glass to an 
as-new appearance is not recommended so as to avoid 
unnecessary risk of breakage. 
Glass and porcelain insulators used to fasten cables to 
a building are no longer made for lightning protection 
work. The cable typically ran through or was secured 
to the side of a glass insulator, which came in a wide 
range of colors. The insulator was in turn attached 
to the building in a variety of ways, typically with 
a metal bracket or ring. By the early 20th century, 
porcelain insulators became prevalent, replacing 
the glass insulator. They can still be used in place 
when maintaining or upgrading older systems (Fig. 
17). Where existing insulators have major cracks, are 
broken, or missing altogether, they can be replaced 
with appropriate metal fasteners. As historic insulators 
Figure 17. Glass insulators were attached to a structure in a variety 
of ways using metal rings, staples, wire, or similar fasteners. Where 
old insulators are damaged and no longer functional, they can be 
replaced with appropriate metal fasteners. Photo by author. 
1212 

are replaced, samples should be retained for record 
purposes and future reference. 
Conductors can be cleaned and painted to inhibit 
corrosion or reduce their visibility. Since the exterior 
walls of many historic buildings were periodically 
painted, special cable mounts were often used in the past 
that allowed the cable to be secured approximately one 
inch off the wall.  
Repair 
Repairing and augmenting an existing lightning 
protection system on a historic building follows some 
of the same basic principals, whether the system is 
historic or more contemporary, yet there are also some 
key differences. With historic systems, there is a greater 
emphasis on retaining old materials through repairs 
and, where necessary, augmentation. An 1870 system 
that has survived on a building would most likely be 
considered deficient today in terms of the number and 
placement of air terminals. For example, there is the 
current requirement that one or more terminals be used 
at each chimney, depending upon chimney size—a 
practice not always common in the past.   
Historic lightning rods can often be repaired and 
coverage augmented where needed with smaller, plain 
contemporary air terminals. The taller lightning rods 
typically used in the past were usually set on individual 
stands. Misshapen or bent stands can usually be 
straightened, while fasteners securing the legs of the 
stand to the roof often need to be replaced. It is also 
important to check that the roof is sound where the legs 
are attached and to correct any wood rot or other roof 
decay prior to reattaching the stands. Where lightning 
rods are partially concealed in the roof, it is important to 
renew seals where they penetrate the roof (Fig. 18). 
Particularly on late 19
th-and early 20th-century buildings, 
accurate reproduction lightning rods often can be used 
where a historic terminal is missing or to augment for 
proper coverage where historic ones exist.  There are 
both some age-old companies as well as newer ones 
that not only manufacture a number of the traditional 
lightning rods, but also offer cables, connectors, and 
other hardware for lightning protection systems that are 
very similar, and at times, a true match to various older 
designs. Besides cost, factors influencing the decision 
whether to use traditional replacement parts or those 
of more modern design include the historic significance 
of the existing system; the preservation approach as to 
whether maintain, restore, or rehabilitate a building; and 
the visibility of a particular component. 
Where historic lightning rods are of galvanized steel or 
iron, it is possible to retain them in place, depending 
upon condition. These rods usually were connected in 
the past to conductors of the same or similar material. 
While iron or steel does not meet code today for 
conductors and rods, there are tests that can be run 
Figure 18. With concealed lightning protection systems, cable wire 
connecting lightning rods and conductors are partially or totally 
concealed on the exterior by running most of the lines within the 
structure. Where the lightning rod stand is attached to the roof, as 
well as where the concealed cable is attached on the outside to the 
lightning rod, are all areas that need to be routinely inspected and 
repaired as needed. The roof seal at the junction of the cable through 
the roof will need to be replaced over time.  Drawing: Courtesy of 
Independent Lightning Protection Company. 
for continuity in a circuit (but not for capacity). As in 
the case of the Maryland State House, the historic iron 
lightning rod was repaired and retained as an essential 
part of a functioning system. 
Where historic lightning rods and conductors are 
determined to be comparable or equivalent with modern 
ones in terms of functionality, they can be treated as 
intergral to the lightning protection system. Where 
functionally deficient, they can be retained in place and 
bonded to the updated system. Such old terminals or 
conductors would thus not be essential to the system, 
but rather retained as a historic feature. 
Where one or more existing terminals are connected by 
a cable to only one down conductor, installing a second 
path to an additional ground is important. In the case 
of old conductors, an inspection may find that they 
are not working properly. Historic conductors may be 
undersized, frayed, or otherwise degraded and need to 
be replaced with appropriately-sized modern wire cable 
that is U.L.-approved for lightning protection.  

Case Study 
Upgrading old lightning protection on a       
historic building 
Mumma House, Antietam National 
Battlefield, Sharpsburg, Maryland
Located within the Antietam National Battlefield, 
the historic Samuel Mumma farm house had 
lightning protection devices installed some years 
after the Civil War.  As part of an exterior stabiliza-
tion of the wood-framed residence in the 1990s, the 
National Park Service also provided for a newly-
functioning lightning protection system. 
The existing system, which appeared to date to the 
late 1800s, included four tall ornamented lightning 
rods on the terne-metal roof, each consisting of a 
galvanized- steel point with a sunburst air terminal 
on top. The tall rods had been bent over time 
and the three-legged galvanized steel braces were 
twisted and loose from the roof. The two original 
steel down conductors, consisting of twisted 
section rods, were still in place and connected to 
ground rods. There were several above-grounds 
breaks in the down conductors, rendering the 
system inoperable. Most of the original glass 
insulators used to attach the down conductors to 
the masonry walls remained, though a number 
were broken or missing altogether. 
For its time, the original protection system would 
have been considered a proper functioning 
system with a correct placement of lightning rods, 
use of two down conductors securely attached 
to grounds, and cables correctly connecting to 
lightning rods appropriately sized. While this 
building feature had acquired historic significance 
over time and was visually prominent on the 
roofline, it no longer served its intended function. 
Besides breaks in the conductors and damage to 
the lightning rods, there were other deficiencies 
by today’s standards, including the lack of air 
terminals at the chimneys and the distance 
between existing terminals being too great.  
Furthermore, replacement steel air terminals and 
steel conductors are no longer used. 
In asses
sing whether the system should be repaired 
and upgraded or be replaced altogether, a number 
of factors were considered.  After the National Park 
Service was in contact with a long-established, 
Figure A.  Rear view of the Mumma House showing three of 
the four tall reproduction lightning rods placed close to the 
same locations as the historic ones, which were too deteriorated 
to reuse. Running down the left side of the house below the 
chimney is one of the two historic down conductors, which were 
saved in place and bonded to the new system. Photo by author. 
Figure B. Photo shows one of the reproduction tall lightning 
rods being secured in place. New cables connected the 
reproduction lightning rods and the modern air terminals to the 
down conductors that lead to the grounds. Photo: Independent 
Lightning Protection Company. 
Figure C. The historic down conductor with its original insulator 
attached to the house just above the stone foundation is still connected to 
the old ground while bonded to the new conductor and new ground rod.  
Photo by author. 
14 

lightning protection manufacturer in Goshen, 
Indiana, it was determined that the historic air 
terminals and a number of the connectors could 
still be easily replicated using old molds that the 
company had for casting of new parts. Since the 
historic terminals were in poor condition and 
mounted high on the roof, it was decided to replace 
the four lightning rods with matching designs. 
Replacement steel terminals were not considered a 
suitable option, so lead-coated copper was selected 
for its durability and similar coloration to the 
original terminals. 
Figure E. Plan for the 
installation of the new 
system. Note that the 
historic systems did not 
include any lightning rods 
at the chimneys, while 
today’s code requires two 
air terminals on each side 
of this size chimney. The 
required new air terminals 
were much smaller than 
the historic ones and were 
relatively inconspicuous 
along the ridge of the roof.  
Drawing: courtesy of the 
Independent Lightning 
Protection Company. 
The four reproduction lightning rods were installed 
close to the original locations. To augment and 
ensure proper coverage, additional contemporary 
terminations were installed.  There was no effort to 
conceal the new connecting cables since visibility 
was a historic feature of the old system.  New copper 
down conductors were placed at needed locations, 
including where two historic steel conductors 
existed. The new conductors were connected to 
new grounding rods. Both of the historic down 
conductors with their glass insulators were retained 
in place and bonded to adjacent new conductors, 
providing an informative way to preserve in place 
part of the old system. 
Upon completion of the work, the visual prominence 
of the historic lightning rods had been re-established 
while integrating non-obtrusive additions to the 
system in order to meet code. A distinctive rooftop 
feature, the large reproduction lightning rods are part 
of a fully-functional lightning protection system. 
Figure D. Tall lightning rods once again stand out on the Mumma 
House. These reproduction rods along with retention of the historic 
down conductors have been incorporated into the modern lightning 
protection system that was installed.  Much smaller, contemporary air 
terminals located on the roof are barely discernable from below. 
Photo by author. 
15 

Depending upon age and significance, if a historic down 
conductor or the cables connecting the air terminals are 
to be replaced, one or more sections should be saved; 
tagged as to its function, location, and date of removal; 
and stored with the structure’s historic artifacts for 
future reference. Remember, it may be possible to retain 
in place an inadequate historic down conductor by 
simply bonding it to a new down conductor (see case 
study on page 14). 
When installing new down conductors, each should be 
fitted with a purpose-made test clamp at an accessible 
location to permit periodic testing. Where conditions 
permit, new ground conductors on masonry structures 
should be attached only at joints rather than to masonry 
units (Fig. 19). 
Any sharp bends in conductors require attention since 
they raise the risk of flashover problems.  Sharp bends 
can be either reworked so as to form a minimum bend 
radius of eight inches, or, if that is not possible, the 
Figure 19. Placement of down conductors along inside corners 
or adjacent to downspouts helps minimize their visibility. This 
conductor has been placed on an inside corner. Other good 
installation practices shown in the drawing include the use of clamps 
to attach the conductor at mortar joints, rather than damaging 
the stones; the avoidance of sharp bends in the conductor; and 
provisions for a test clamp and an inspection pit accessing the ground 
connection which can be used during periodic inspections of the 
system. Drawing: English Heritage©. 
section of the conductor should be replaced and the 
alignment changed. 
In most cases, repair work involving neglected 
systems includes new ground rods being installed. 
Most old grounding rods do not merit special historic 
preservation considerations and can be left in place and 
bonded to the new ground rods. When installing new 
grounding rods, avoid where possible any archeological 
resources. All service lines should be bonded to the new 
lightning grounds. 
Surge protective devises that are not functioning 
properly should simply be replaced with modern units 
and, where lacking, new ones should be added. Metal 
objects and features at risk that lack proper bonding to 
the lightning protection system should be connected as 
well. 
Installing a New System 
Installing a new system on a historic structure requires 
a number of special considerations. Depending upon 
the nature of the structure, such as its height, complexity 
of the roof, internal access, type of structure, historic 
significance, and use, the decision has to be made 
whether to conceal as much as possible or surface mount 
the new terminals and conductors. On a high-rise 
building with a continuous steel structure, it is common 
practice to tie the lightning protection system to the steel 
structure. High-rise buildings are prone to be stuck by 
lightning (Fig. 20). The Empire State Building in New 
York City is struck on the average of more than 20 times 
a year.  Small modern air terminals mounted on a high 
rooftop usually have little visual impact from below. 
Most historic buildings, however, are much lower in 
height and their roofs are often readily seen. For these 
buildings, the decision as to the extent of concealment 
may involve consideration of two or more possible 
options, with the most common options being: 
1. Elect to place modern air terminals and conductors in 
a manner that minimizes their visual impact yet remains 
fully exposed on the outside. 
2. Select an installation approach that conceals within 
the structure as much of the lightning protection system 
as possible. 
3. Choose to install reproduction lightning rods 
appropriate to the period and type of the structure, 
augmenting with contemporary terminals as needed, 
and elect not to conceal the system. 
Some of the earliest 18
th-century installations concealed 
part of the down conductor within the building such as 
at Independence Hall and Christ Church in Philadelphia. 
This approach fell out of favor for a number of years, as 
systems generally were surface mounted on the outside.  
Since the Golden Age, there are a multitude of products 
16 

and installation techniques that permit concealment 
of the conductors or cables connecting lightning rods. 
Current standards and building codes generally allow 
the use of either exposed or concealed systems. 
With concealed systems, the exposed air terminals run 
through the roof and are typically attached below to a 
ridge board or other part of the inside roof structure, 
permitting the connecting conductors to run inside 
the roof. The terminals require a good weather seal at 
the roof. The connecting conductors can be attached 
to outside ground conductors or to concealed ground 
conductors that are either set in a wall cavity on finished 
interiors or, on some utilitarian structures, left partially 
exposed on the interior side of outside walls.  At grade, 
the inside ground conductors can then be run to the 
outside and be joined to the grounding rods. 
Concealment applications exist for specialty features 
even as mundane as metal rooftop ventilators commonly 
found on small manufacturing buildings and barns. 
Figure 20. High-rise buildings in cities 
such as New York, Chicago, and Atlanta 
have a higher risk of being struck by 
lightning, and it is not uncommon for 
some structures to be hit multiple times 
during a year. Multiple strokes from a 
single lightning occurrence can strike 
more than one building at the same 
time as shown in this photograph of the 
Atlanta skyline during a thunderstorm. 
Photo: David Selby©. 
With ventilators, the air terminal would extend from 
inside the vent up through the center top and be secured 
inside the vent to the conducting cables. 
One of the factors when considering concealment 
methods is how much initial disturbance is required on 
the interior of a structure. For historic buildings, such 
an approach may not be advisable if historic interior 
finishes and distinctive features are adversely impacted. 
On the other hand, if such disturbance is not necessary 
or the interior is undergoing considerable work, 
concealment techniques are a plausible option. 
In many cases, the most practical approach is to design 
a modern system that is largely an outside mount, but 
where special attention is placed on utilizing appropriate 
techniques and materials that help minimize the visual 
impact of the cabling and multiple air terminals. 
Fortunately, today’s smaller air terminals accommodate 
simple, unobtrusive attachment methods, unlike the 
taller stands commonly used in the past. While roof 
Reroofing a Structure that has Lightning Protection
Most reroofing work necessitates temporary removal of portions of the lightning protection system.  With some small 
simple roofs, a roofer may be capable of undertaking the reinstallation work, subject to an inspection by a qualified 
lightning protection professional upon completion of the work. In most cases, however, the removal and reinstallation 
should be done by a qualified lightning protection contractor. If the work must be undertaken during a season of high 
lightning risk, every effort should be made to closely coordinate the overall work in order to minimize the time when 
the building is left unprotected. 
While reroofi
ng, it is often important that certain aspects of the lightning protection systems unaffected by the roof 
work remain functional. This particularly applies to surge protection. Where there is a high risk, any components 
of the lightning protection system remaining in place during the roof work should not create unintended paths for 
electrical discharge from a potential lightning strike. If the reroofing stems in part from related new construction that 
will affect the design of the existing lightning protection systems, as with the construction of a large addition or a new 
dormer, services of a qualified lightning protection professional should be used. 
17 

Common Questions about 
Lightning Protection Systems
By installing a lightning protection system is 
there a greater risk of a lightning strike? No. 
Is a licensed contractor required for installation? 
Even though many of the components of a traditional 
lightning protection system are readily available to 
the public and contractors, licensed and certified 
installers should be used in most cases. 
In a lightning-prone region should a weather-
vane on a building be bonded to a lightning 
protection system? 
Yes. Where no system exists, 
it may be best to leave the weathervane ungrounded 
rather than undertake a do-it-yourself project. 
What to do with an old decorative rod on a 
building where the system has not been func-
tional for years?  If the building is considered to be 
at risk, repair and upgrade the lightning protection 
or remove the rod and store for possible later reuse.  
If the area is not highly prone to lightning and the 
building risk is low, probably no immediate action is 
needed. 
What about the use on a historic building of 
one of the non-conventional types of lightning 
protection systems that have been marketed in 
recent years?  NFPA and UL safety standards for 
lightning protection only apply to the widely ac-
cepted Franklin system. The conventional/traditional 
Franklin system remains effective and has stood the 
test of time. 
With a working lightning protection system, 
are there any precautions to be taken during a 
lightning storm? There are still the normal precau-
tions to be taken such as avoiding metal water pipes 
(no baths) for personal safety, disconnecting sensitive 
electronics when possible, and staying indoors. 
Can landscape features like trees be protected 
from lightning damage? Yes.  Lightning protection 
can be installed on trees. 
mounted terminals are typically connected by conductor 
wires running along the roof top, down conductors 
can often be placed at inside corners, beside or behind 
downspouts, or on less prominent elevations for reduced 
visibility. 
On chimneys and rooftop features such as 
parapets, the small terminals can be placed on the least 
prominent side or in a way that best minimizes their 
visual impact while providing the necessary protection. 
Both lightning protection systems that primarily use 
copper components and ones that use aluminum are 
available today.  With copper terminals and cables, 
some of the connectors and fasteners usually are made 
of bronze. For historic buildings, copper systems often 
are preferred because they have been traditionally used 
in the past and may be a good visual match where 
replication is desired. While copper is more costly, 
aluminum as a material is a slightly poorer conductor, 
requiring heavier gauge cables and components. As 
a replacement for galvanized cables and terminals, 
aluminum or sometimes lead-coated copper may be 
preferred over copper for a closer color match. 
The choice as to whether to use copper or aluminum 
is at times dictated by the existing roofing material. 
Copper should not be used for lightning protection 
on old galvanized steel or corrugated iron roofs, as it 
will tend over time to stain and erode the roofing due 
to galvanic corrosion.  Aluminum should also be used 
on steel, iron, and zinc roofs. For such commonly-
found historic roofing materials as slate, wood, asphalt 
shingles, and rolled roofing, either copper or aluminum 
may be used. 
While the installation of lightning protection should 
always be done by a certified lightning protection 
contractor, there are projects where a roofing contractor 
needs to be involved as well.  Such close coordination 
is important, especially on membrane roofs, to ensure 
both that the lightning protection is properly installed 
and that the integrity of the roofing and flashing is 
not impaired. The appropriate means of attaching air 
terminals to the roof and securing the connecting cables 
without reducing the service life of the roof depends 
on a variety of factors.  The use of specific sealants, 
adhesives, cap sheet materials, and metal fasteners to 
secure cables and terminals to the roof depends in part 
on the type of roof, roofing material, and other building 
specific conditions. Fasteners must be attached in a 
manner that minimizes the risk of future water leaks. 
For smaller historic structures such as most residences 
and barns, there is the option of installing a new system, 
utilizing period reproduction air terminals where 
appropriate and augmenting with modern smaller 
air terminals at chimneys and other locations where 
dictated by today’s standards (Fig. 21). This approach 
can be used to replace a missing system, or where it is 
simply the preference of the property owner, providing 
the intent is not to create a major new visual feature 
where one did not historically exist. Care should be 
18 

taken to select a design that is compatible with the 
historic character of the building, especially in regards 
to any ornamentation. Because of availability, the 
best building candidates for reproduction terminals 
are those dating to the Golden Age.  Even some of the 
manufacturers’ cables and connectors available today for 
general installations are a match to historic ones. 
Although lightning protection can be added to a 
structure anytime, the best time is when a roof is being 
replaced. 
Existing surge protection that is deficient 
should be upgraded or replaced whenever needed.  For 
building uses such as museums with special climate 
controls, businesses with vital data equipment, or even 
homes with expensive home entertainment centers, up-
to-date protection from power surges is important.  Such 
surges may be caused not only by lightning but also by 
electrical malfunctions. If the installation of a traditional 
lightning protection is being postponed or because 
of low risk not being considered, appropriate surge 
protective devices still should be installed and care be 
taken that electrical service, cable, and similar systems 
are properly grounded. 
The locations for down conductors are usually derived 
as a result of requirements of standards and codes and 
aesthetic considerations. For historic buildings of special 
significance, particular care in the installation of the 
grounds should be taken so as to minimize disturbance 
and risks to historic landscape features and damage to 
any archeological resources. Furthermore, location of 
drain pipes and underground utility lines should be 
marked prior to grounds being installed. 
Codes, Standards, and Contracts 
For large or complex structures, special applications, 
certain uses, or buildings of high historic significance, 
the services of an architect or engineer experienced with 
lightning protection is usually desirable to assist with 
major upgrades or new installations. A number of the 
major manufacturers of lightning protection systems 
Figure 21. Small air terminals have been used in this more recent 
installation and have little visual impact. If a partially concealed 
system was desired, the cable and the mount for two of the air 
terminals could have been concealed within the ventilators.         
Photo by author. 
also provide helpful design assistance. In more common 
building cases where design services independent of 
the installation contractor are not used, the property 
representative needs to check with the local building 
department as to relevant code provisions.  While 
the National Electrical Code, which includes general 
references to lightning protection may be cited, the most 
commonly referred to safety standard specifically for 
lightning protection work is that issued by the National 
Fire Protection Association and entitled, NFPA 780 
Standard for Installation of Lightning Protection Systems. 
The Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL),  has a 
similar standard covering the installation of lightning 
protection, UL 96A Standard for Installation Requirements 
for Lightning Protection Systems.  In addition, UL has 
requirements that cover the components used in 
the system, UL 96 Standard for Lightning Protection 
Components. These standards can be specified in a 
contract document along with NFPA 780.  
Where a historic system is being repaired or undergoing 
upgrades using specialty reproduction parts, all 
functional replacement parts, unlike ornamental 
pieces, should be UL-listed products. UL-listed 
products help provide quality assurance, but it does 
not necessarily mean that non-UL-approved parts 
are unsafe to use. For new installations and for some 
older systems, UL also offers an optional Inspection 
Certificate Program through UL-listed installers. A UL 
Certificate assures that a lightning protection system 
installed on a structure has been inspected by a UL-field 
representative and is in compliance with UL, NFPA, or 
U.S. government standards. 
The Lightning Protection Institute (LPI) is a voluntary 
membership association for lightning protection 
manufacturers and contractors that provides training 
and certifications for designers and installers. They 
offer different levels of certifications for installers.  A 
membership list can be found on their website.  The 
Institute also administers a quality assurance program 
that certifies an installation meets their quality assurance 
program through a third-party inspector. 
For most projects, competitive proposals from 
experienced lightning protection installers are desirable. 
However, with historic systems, the choice of installers 
may be more limited. Depending upon the historic 
resource and conditions, it may be important to use a 
contractor both with experience in lightning protection 
systems and historic buildings. Work on historic 
buildings often requires knowledge of older building 
materials and construction; an appreciation of the 
importance of installing a lightning protection system 
that does not unnecessarily impact the structure’s 
historic appearance or damage historic materials; and a 
commitment to the highest quality of work. 
The cost of a new system varies according to many 
factors such as the size of a structure, roof type, and 
19 

materials. Features that require individual protection, 
such as dormers, chimneys, and metal skylights, will 
add to the cost. Porches and lower additions to a 
building may necessitate additional work to ensure full 
protection coverage.  The type of materials to be used 
affects costs, with copper and copper alloys being more 
expensive than aluminum.  Copper cannot be used on 
structures with aluminum siding or most metal roofs, 
and similarly aluminum cannot be used on a copper 
roof. The extent of required bonding of nearby objects 
and the level of surge protection coverage desired are 
also cost factors. 
The cost of a new system installed on a simple 
monument, house, or barn with a small footprint and 
plain roofline tends to be relatively inexpensive.  A new 
system on a medium-sized residence or commercial 
building with multiple dormers, chimneys, and 
numerous features that need to be bonded to the system 
will cost considerably more. Among some other factors 
affecting costs are whether conductors are concealed 
or run exposed, the ease of access to the building, and 
where the building is located. 
Summary 
The use of lightning protection systems to protect 
structures and provide for public safety is scientifically 
accepted. Various government entities require such 
installations on their buildings and local building codes 
in areas of frequent lightning may require such systems 
depending upon the use of a structure. While there are 
no special requirements simply because a building is 
historic, as an irreplaceable cultural resource, historic 
structures at risk of damage or loss from a lightning 
strike merit protection. 
Acknowledgements 
Charles Fisher, Technical Preservation Services, National 
Park Service, has over 44 years of experience in historic 
building conservation and rehabilitation. 
The author would like to thank the assistance of Robert 
E. Cripe, Sr. and Jan Yoder, Independent Protection 
Company; Doug Franklin, retired president, Thompson 
Lightning Protection; Terry Portfleet, Michigan Lightning 
Protection; Sandy Easley, New Old Products, Inc.; Sunni 
L. Goodson, historic preservation consultant; Bruce Gill, 
Christ Church in Philadelphia; and Peter Michaud, New 
Hampshire Division of Historical Resources. 
Special thanks go to Dr. E. Philip Krider, University of 
Arizona. Assistance provided by Kaaren Staveteig and 
Brian Goeken, Chief, Technical Preservation Services, of 
the National Park Service, are gratefully acknowledged.  
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the 
National Historic Preservation Act, which directs the 
Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available 
information concerning historic properties. Additional 
information offered by Technical Preservation Services is 
available on our website at 
www.nps.gov/tps. Comments 
about this publication should be made to: Technical 
Preservation Services, National Park Service, 1849 C 
Street NW, Washington, DC 20240.  
This publication is not copyrighted and can be 
reproduced without penalty. 
Normal procedures for 
credit to the author and the National Park Service are 
appreciated. Except for the photographs by the author, 
illustrations used in this publication may not be used in 
other print or electronic media without permission of the 
owners. Photographs by the author should be credited 
with author’s name, National Park Service.  
October 2017 
20 