U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
40 PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Preserving Historic Ceramic Tile Floors 
Anne E. Grimmer and Kimberly A. Konrad 
With a tradition that dates to ancient civilizations, ceramic* 
tile flooring can be found in a variety of settings in diverse 
cultures and structures, including residential buildings 
ranging from large apartment buildings to small private 
houses, institutional buildings such as government offices 
and schools, and religious buildings such as cathedrals and 
mosques . Historically, its widespread use may be attributed 
to the fact that a readily available natural material-clay­
could be converted by a relatively simple manufacturing 
process-baking or firing-into a very durable, long-lasting 
and attractive floor tile that is easy to maintain. Ceramic 
floor tiles exhibit a versatility of colored glazes and 
decoration, and they range from the plainest terra cotta tiles 
to highly decorated individual ceramic tiles and elaborately 
patterned tile floors. Their modularity, as standardized 
units, make them easy to fit into different sized spaces which 
also explains much of the popularity of ceramic floor tiles 
throughout history (Fig . 1). 
Figure 1. Minton encaustic tile floor, 3rd floor, Patent Office Building 
(now the National Portrait Gallery), Washington, D.C. Originally 
constructed between 1836-40 under the supervision of Robert Mills, the 
upper floors of this portion of the building were restored and redecorated in 
1877 in the "Modern Renaissance style" by Cluss & Shulze, Architects, 
after a disastrous fire. Photo: Jack E. Boucher, HABS Collection. 
This Brief begins with an overview of ceramic tiles as a 
traditional flooring material. It includes an explanation of 
the various kinds of historic floor tiles used in the United 
States and how they were made . General guidance is given 
on preservation treatments, focusing on maintenance, and, 
when necessary, selective replacement of damaged floor 
tiles . The Brief is intended to provide owners and managers 
of historic properties with an understanding of the 
significance and historical background of ceramic floor tiles, 
and a basic awareness of maintenance techniques and 
various deterioration problems to which tile floors are 
especially prone . In the case of significant historic ceramic 
tile floors, a professional conservator of ceramics should be 
consulted to advise in matters of repair, restoration or 
conservation. Historically, ceramic tiles were used on walls 
as wainscotting, on fireplace hearths and fireplace 
surrounds, and even on furniture, as well as for flooring. 
However, because floor tiles are subject to greater damage 
and deterioration, they are the primary emphasis of this 
Brief. Highlights include: a short history of ceramic floor 
tiles; a description of ceramic tile types; a summary of 
traditional installation methods; maintenance techniques; 
and guidance on repair and replacement. 
1 

-~-............ 11 .. 
~~ 
f • 4 • 1' "' • e e • 
-------------
.......... ~:'I 
l1J1."""'-. 
~, ! 4 
4i..AA 
• 
2 
The Tile-Making Process 
Clay is an earthen material, moldable or plastic when wet, 
non-plastic when dry, and permanently hard when baked 
or fired. It is widely distributed geographically, and often 
found mixed with sand in soils of a loam type-a mixture 
of clay, silt and sand. Relatively pure clay is not usually a 
surface deposit, although, in some cases, it may be exposed 
by erosion. Clay types vary throughout the world, and 
even within a region. Each type of clay possesses a unique 
combination of special properties such as plasticity, 
hardness and lightness, as well as color and texture, which 
makes some clays better suited for one kind of ceramic than 
another. The correct clay mixture needed for a particular 
purpose can be created by blending clays and adding other 
materials, but using the wrong type of clay can result in 
expensive production problems such as crazing (the 
formation of tiny cracks in a tile glaze) or warping of the 
tile itself. Traditionally, chalky clays have been preferred 
for many kinds of ceramic tiles, in part because they 
produce, when fired, a white body which is desirable for 
decorating. Other materials can be added, including grog 
(or ground-up fired clay) that helps aerate the clay and 
prevents warping, speeds firing and reduces shrinking, or 
calcined flint, to harden it. 
There are several methods used for making ceramic tiles: 
extrusion; compaction or 
dust-pressing; cutting from a sheet 
of clay; or molded in a wooden or metal frame. Quarry 
tiles are extruded, but most ceramic floor tiles, including 
traditional encaustic, geometric and ceramic "mosaic" tiles 
are made from refined and blended ceramic powders using 
the compaction method, known as dust-pressing. 
Encaustic tiles, which were made by dust-pressing, are 
unique in that their designs are literally "inlaid"into the tile 
body, rather than surface-applied. Once formed, tiles are 
dried slowly and evenly to avoid warpage, then fired in a 
special kiln that controls high, even heat at temperatures up 
to 1200°C (or approximately 2500°F) for 30-40 hours. 
Higher temperatures produce denser tiles with harder 
glazes. Most ceramic tiles require only one firing to achieve 
low porosity and become vitrified or glasslike, but some, 
especially highly decorated tiles, are fired more than once. 
Non-vitreous and semi-vitreous tiles are fired at lower 
temperatures and are much more porous. 
Historical Background 
Historically, the use of ceramic floor tiles goes back to the 
fourth millennium B.C. in the Near and Far East. The 
Romans introduced tile-making in Western Europe as they 
occupied territories. However, that art was eventually 
forgotten in Europe for centuries until the 12th century 
when Cistercian monks developed a method of making 
encaustic floor tiles with inlaid patterns for cathedral and 
church floors. But, this skill was again lost in the 16th 
century following the Reformation. Except for finely 
decorated wall tiles made in Turkey and the Middle East, 
and Delft tiles made in Holland in the 17th century, ceramic 
floor tiles were not made again in Europe until almost the 
mid-19th century. 
The modern tile industry was advanced by Herbert Minton 
in 1843 when he revived the lost art of encaustic tile­
making in England. The industry was further 
revolutionized in the 1840s by the "dust-pressing" method 
which consisted of compressing nearly dry clay between 
two metal dies. Dust-pressing replaced tile-making by 
hand with wet clay, and facilitated mechanization of the 
tile-making industry. Throughout the rest of the 19th 
century, dust-pressing enabled faster and cheaper 
production of better quality floor tiles in a greater range of 
colors and designs. 
In the 1850s encaustic tiles were 
selected for such important structures as the new Palace at 
Westminster in London, and Queen Victoria's Royal 
Residence on the Isle of Wight. By the latter part of the 19th 
century, despite the fact that encaustic tiles were still quite 
expensive, they had become a common flooring material in 
many kinds of buildings. 
Development of the Tile Industry in America. Although 
plain, undecorated ceramic tiles were traditionally a 
common flooring material in many parts of the Americas, 
especially in Latin and South America, ceramic floor and 
roof tiles were probably not made in the North American 
Colonies until the late-16th or early-17th century. It was, 
however, in the Victorian era that ceramic tile flooring first 
became so prevalent in the United States. The production 
of decorative tiles in America began about 1870 and 
flourished until about 1930. 
Like so many architectural fashions of the day, the 
popularity of ceramic tile floors in America was greatly 
influenced by the noted architect and critic, Andrew 
Jackson Downing. In his book The Architecture of Country 
Houses, published in 1850, Downing recommended 
encaustic floor tiles for residential use because of their 
practicality, especially in vestibules and entrance halls. 
The 1876 Philadelphia Centennial Exposition, with its 
European and even a few American exhibits of decorative 
floor tile, was a major factor in popularizing ceramic tile 
floors in the U.S. Initially, most ceramic tiles-other than 
purely utilitarian floor tiles-were imported from England, 
and their relatively high cost meant that only wealthy 
Americans could afford them. However, when English tile 
companies realized the potential for profitable export, they 
soon established agents in major U.S. cities to handle their 
Figure 2. In the 19th century, Minton tiles were sold from this catalogue 
to American clients-including the Architect of the Capitol-by Miller & 
Coates, 279 Pearl Street, New York. Photo: David W. Look, AJA. 

b 1n 
"" TO 
SfCTICN 
- ,-T 
,. 
~ I 
5ECTION A·A 
American business (Fig. 2). The English near monopoly 
actually stimulated the growth of the U.S. tile industry in the 
1870s resulting in sharply decreased English imports by 1890. 
The location of potteries and ceramic tile factories is 
dependent upon the ready availability of suitable ball clay 
(clay that balled or held together), kaolin (a white clay used 
as a filler or extender), and feldspar (a crystalline mineral), 
and an accessible market. Since the cost of shipping the 
manufactured products tended to restrict profitable sales to 
limited areas, this usually determined whether a factory 
would succeed. Although the United States Pottery in 
Bennington, Vermont, is known to have made encaustic 
tiles as early as 1853, the Pittsburgh Encaustic Tile 
Company (later the Star Encaustic Tiling Company), was 
the first successful American tile company, and is generally 
considered the first to manufacture ceramic tile in the U.S. 
on a commercial basis beginning in 1876. 
At least 25 ceramic tile companies were founded in the 
United States between 1876 and 1894. In the East, several 
notable tile firms that were established in this period 
flourished in the Boston area, such as the Chelsea Kerarnic 
Art Works, the Low Art Tile Works, and the Grueby 
Faience Company. Other East Coast companies organized 
in the late-19th and early-20th century included the 
International Tile & Trim Company, in Brooklyn, New 
York; the Trent Tile Company, Providential Tile Company, 
Mueller Mosaic Tile Company, and the Maywood Tile 
Company, all in New Jersey; and the Moravian Pottery and 
Tile Works 
in Doylestown, Pennsylvania (Fig . 3). 
Figure 3. (a) The Moravian Pottery and Tile Works, a National Historic 
Landmark in Doylestown, PA, was designed in the Spanish Mission style 
and constructed by Henry Chapman Mercer over a period of years from 
1911-1917. Tiles were manufactured primarily by hand in keeping with 
Mercer's Arts and Crafts ideals. (b) Mercer's tiles, seen here in the 
library, were used throughout his house, Fonthill. (c-e) One of Mercer's 
most important commissions was the floor of the Pennsylvania State 
Capitol in Harrisburg. (f) The factory closed in 1930 after Mercer's 
death, but resumed tile-making in 1974. New tiles are dated and made in 
the traditional way. (a) Drawing: Leslie S. Claytor, Benita C. Welch, 
Isabel C. Yang, HAER Collection; (b) Photo: Jack E. Boucher, HABS 
Collection; (c-e) Photos: Courtesy, Mercer Museum, The Bucks County 
Historical Society; (f) Photo: Anne Grimmer. 
Many factories were also established 
in the Midwest-in 
Indiana, Michigan, and, especially, in Ohio. In the last 
quarter of the 19th century, the town of Zanesville, Ohio, 
was the largest center for pottery and tile-making in the 
world. Some of the factories in Zanesville included: Ohio 
Encaustic Tile Company; Mosaic Tile Company; Zanesville 
3 

Majolica Company; and J.B. Owens Pottery, later to become 
the Empire Floor and Wall Tile Company (Fig. 4). The 
American Encaustic Tiling Company, established in 1876, 
was one of the first, and most successful manufacturers in 
Zanesville (Fig. 5). In the early 1930s it was the largest tile 
company in the world, producing large quantities of floor 
tile, plain and ornamental wall tile, and art tile until it 
closed about 1935, as a result of the Depression. The United 
States Encaustic Tile Company, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Rookwood Pottery, Cincinnati, Ohio; Cambridge Art Tile 
Works, Covington, Kentucky; and Pewabic Pottery, Detroit, 
Michigan, were some of the other well-known potteries in 
the Midwest. 
4 
Figure 4. The tiled Presidential Seal in the courtyard of the Pension 
Building (now the National Building Museum), Washington, D.C., was 
installed in honor of President William McKinlei/s second inauguration 
in 1901. The"heavy Damask design," resembling fabric, that was used to 
decorate the tiles, indicates they were probably manufactured by The 
Mosaic Tile Company, Zanesville, Ohio, which first introduced this 
design. Photo: Kimberly A. Konrad. 
Figure 5. Geometric tiles made by the American Encaustic Tiling 
Company, also in Zanesville, were installed in the corridors of the 
Pension Building in 1888, several years after the building's completion. 
Photo: Kimberly A. Konrad. 
Around the turn of the century, the industry began to 
expand as tilemakers moved West and established potteries 
there. Joseph Kirkham started the ceramic tile industry on 
the West Coast in 1900 when he set up the Pacific Art Tile 
Company in Tropico, California, after his company in Ohio 
was destroyed by fire. In 1904 the company became the 
Western Art Tile Company, surviving for five years until it 
went out of business in 1909. During the early-20th 
century, other companies were founded in Southern 
California, in and around Los Angeles (Fig. 6). Batchelder 
& Brown, in particular, of Pasadena (later Batchelder­
Wilson in Los Angeles), was well-known for its Arts and 
Crafts-style tiles in the teens and 1920s. By the early 1940s 
California had become one of the leading producers of tile, 
especially faience, in the U.S. (Fig. 7) . 
Figure 6. The Los Angeles Union Passenger Terminal features ceramic 
tile floors in the Art Deco-style. Photo: HABS Collection. 
Ceramic engineers, potters and artists not only moved 
frequently from one pottery to another, but often struck out 
on their own and established new factories when 
dissatisfied with a former employer. Also, it was not 
uncommon for one company to reuse a defunct factory or 
purchase another pottery business, change the name and 
increase the product line. As a result, many of the 
companies in existence today are descendants of the early 
pioneering firms. 
Changes in the Tile Industry. The majority of ceramic floor 
tile made in the U.S. before 1890 was encaustic, but various 
factories gradually began to develop and produce other 
kinds of tiles. The Trent Tile Company, among others, 
started to manufacture both white and colored ceramic 
mosaic tiles by the mid-1890s (Fig. 8). White vitreous wall 
tile became available, as well as more decorative tiles with 
colored glazes, such as the variegated faience glazes 
intended to give a more hand-crafted appearance that were 
originated by the Grueby Faience and Tile Company in 1894, 
and soon adopted by other potteries (Fig. 9). 
In the 19th and early-20th century, many ceramic tile firms 
had their own engraving departments, while some used 
commercial designs supplied by professional printers. 
Well-known designers were often commissioned to work 
on specific product lines for a particular firm. These 
designers worked for one firm after another which resulted 
in similar designs being produced by different companies. 
(Historic ceramic floor tiles were usually identified by a 
manufacturer's or designer's mark on the back, if they were 
marked at all.) By the latter part of the 19th century ready­
mixed glazes and colors were also available. This was a 
great advantage for potters who, prior to this, had to mix 
their own colors and glazes. 
During the 20th century, the floor tile industry continued to 
evolve as much as it had in the previous century. Modern 

methods of production employed sophisticated machinery , 
new materials and decorating techniques. In the years 
following World War II, there were many advances in the 
industry. Commercially manufactured dust-pressed tiles, 
which had previously required more than 70 hours just in 
the kiln, could be made in less than two hours from the raw 
material stage to finished tiles, boxed and ready to ship. 
Dried, unglazed tiles were sprayed with colored glaze 
evenly and automatically as conveyors carried the tiles into 
the tunnel kilns, and the extrusion process ensured that the 
tiles were cut to a uniform thickness and size. The changes 
and developments in the production of floor tile brought 
forth a wide range of shapes and sizes, along with new 
colors, glazes and decorating techniques. 
Figure 7. "Scotti/s Castle" in Death Valley, California, was built over a 
10-year period, beginning in 1922. Many of the rooms, the salon (a), as 
well as the kitchen (b), have tile floors. Some are composed of both local 
California-made tiles, and Spanish tiles. Photos: Jack E. Boucher, HABS 
Collection. 
Figure 8. Th e Trent Tile Company advertised its "Ceramic Mosaic 
Floor" tiles in the 1906 edition of "Sweet's" Indexed Catalogue of 
Building Construction. Photo: Sharon C. Park, AJA. 
Fig_ure 9._ Beginning in_ the lat~-19th century, a decorative frieze with a 
r~lief _design, _such as ~his clas~ical egg and dart motif, was often added to 
highlight plam ceramic wall tile. Photo: Kimberly A. Konrad. 
After the turn of the century, fewer encaustic floor tiles 
were used, particularly in residential architecture . The 
introduction of ceramic mosaic floor tiles was a factor in 
their decline (Fig. 10). The development of rubber 
interlocking floor tiles in 1894, along with other, more 
resilient, flooring materials, was instrumental in the 
decreased popularity not only of encaustic tiles, but also 
other ceramic tile flooring. These new materials were not 
only cheaper, they were not as fragile ; they were also lighter 
and thinner, and easier to install. 
Figure 10. Ceramic mosaic tile floors were practical for structures like this 
Bath House, Hot Springs, Arkansas (1914-1915). Photo: Jack E. Boucher, 
HABS Collection. 
Ceramic mosaic tiles remained in common use through the 
1930s in part because an innovative development had made 
laying such small tiles easier. The tiles were pre-mounted 
in decorative patterns on 12" x 12" sheets of paper, and sold 
ready to lay in cement. This greatly simplified the tile 
setter's work, and no doubt was a significant factor in the 
increased popularity of ceramic mosaic tiles. Sophisticated 
mosaic floor designs became common in entrance foyers of 
public and private buildings (Fig. 11). Small, white , 
unglazed tiles in round, square, octagonal or hexagonal 
shapes were promoted for their sanitary qualities, 
particularly for bathroom floors, while larger, rectangular , 
white , glazed tiles were used for bathroom walls or 
wainscotting. Colored tiles were also popular, especially 
for bathrooms, and even kitchens (Fig. 12). Quarry tile, 
which was larger and thicker than other ceramic floor tile of 
this period, was often used in public buildings, as well as 
for entrance halls, small studies, libraries, dining rooms and 
even living rooms in private homes. But, by the 1930s, the 
fashion for art tile had diminished to the point where floor 
tiles were, for the most part, generally regarded as 
primarily utilitarian, as opposed to important decorative 
elements. 
Ceramic Floor Tile Types 
The thickness of historic ceramic floor tiles varied 
considerably according to their intended use and when they 
were made. Floor tiles were thicker and harder than wall or 
ceiling tiles . Stove tiles, meant to retain the heat of the 
stove, were sometimes as much as several inches thick. 
Medieval floor tiles were usually one inch thick ; encaustic 
tiles of the Victorian era tended to be slightly thinner. 
Modern, 20th-century tiles, with the exception of some art 
pottery tiles, are the thinnest, as a result of modern 
5 

manufacturing methods. The backs of most, but not all, 
ceramic floor tiles are covered with raised ( or sometimes 
recessed) ridges, circles or squares which help to increase 
the bonding capability of the tile. 
Figure 11. Ceramic mosaic tiles were used decoratively on the entrance 
floor of this early-20th century school building. Photo: Kimberly A. 
Konrad. 
Figure 12. These colorful (yellow, black and white), and boldly patterned 
Art Deco-style ceramic tiles were made in France. Ernest Hemingway's 
wife, Pauline, brought them back to the U.S. in the 1930s and had them 
installed in a bathroom in their house in Key West, Florida. Photo: 
Susan Escherich. 
6 
Unglazed and Glazed Tiles 
Ceramic floor tiles can generally be divided into two types : 
unglazed and glazed. Unglazed tiles include: quarry tiles ; 
encaustic and geometric tiles; and ceramic mosaic tiles, 
which can be either glazed or unglazed. Most other ceramic 
floor tiles are glazed. 
Unglazed Tiles 
Quarry tiles are the most basic type of historic ceramic floor 
tile (Fig. 13). Originally made from quarried stone, they are 
machine-made using the extrusion process. Quarry tiles are 
unglazed, semi-vitreous or vitreous, and essentially are 
square or rectangular slabs of clay baked in a kiln . The 
colors of quarry tiles are natural earthen shades of gray, red 
and brown determined by the clay and, to some extent, the 
temperature and duration of firing. Quarry tiles , which 
range from 1 / 4" to 1 / 2" in thickness, are available in square 
and rectangular shapes in sizes that include 3", 4-1 / 4 ", 6" 
(one of the most common sizes), 9" and 12" squares; 6" x 12", 
6" x 9", 4-1 / 4" x 9", 3" x 6", and 3" x 9" rectangles; and 4" x 8" 
hexagon shapes . (Pavers or paver tiles are a simpler, and 
tend to be somewhat cruder, version of quarry tiles . Like 
quarry tiles, they are usually unglazed, but slightly thicker. 
Machine-made pavers are either semi-vitreous or vitreous , 
and generally formed by dust-pressing, although 
sometimes are extruded . Hand-made pavers which are 
common in Mexico and southern Europe are non-vitreous .) 
Encaustic tiles are a type of traditional unglazed-yet 
decorative-floor tile, manufactured by the dust-pressed 
method. Whereas most ceramic tiles are surface-decorated 
or decorated with impressed or embossed designs created 
by a mold, encaustic tiles are unique in that their decorative 
designs are not on the surface, but are inlaid patterns created 
as part of the manufacturing process . First, a thin, 
approximately 1 / 4" layer of fine, almost powder-dry, clay 
was pressed into a mold with a relief design at the bottom 
which formed a depression in the face of the tile. A second, 
thicker layer of coarser clay was laid over the first layer , then 
covered with another layer of fine clay. This "sandwich" 
helped prevent warping and ensured that the body of the 
tile was strong and had a fine, smooth surface. The layers of 
clay "dust" were compacted by presses, after which the 
mold was inverted and the die removed, thus producing a 
tile with an indented or intaglio pattern on top. After the tile 
dried, colored slip (liquid white clay colored with dyes), was 
poured to fill in the intaglio pattern. Each color had to 
dry 
before another color of slip was added . The recessed area 
was overfilled to allow for shrinkage, and after drying for 
several days, and before firing, the excess slip was scraped 
off the surface by a rotating cutter that created a flat, 
although not completely smooth, face. Problems might arise 
during the firing. Due to the dissimilar rates of contraction 
of the different clays, the inlaid clay could shrink too much 
and fall out of the tile recesses; or, the tile could be stained 
by the different pigments used for the design if impure or 
unstable (Fig. 14). 
By the 1840s, encaustic tiles were made entirely with almost­
dry clay using the dust-pressed method. This served to 
eliminate the possibility of staining the body of the tile with 
other colors and permitted the use of more colors on a 
single tile. Thus , an encaustic tile can sometimes be dated 
according to the complexity and the number of colors in its 
pattern. Red tiles with white figurative patterns were 
generally the earliest , followed by brown and buff colored 
tiles. In the 1860s, blue tiles with yellow or buff patterns 
were popular, succeeded by more subtle color schemes 
featuring a "chocolate" red with a soft grey. By 1860, up to 
six colors were used in a single tile to form a pattern . 
Toward the end of the century, white encaustic tiles with a 
black or gold design were common, as well as tiles with 
complicated color patterns of white, black, gold, pink, green 
and blue . Encaustic tiles were decorated with traditional as 
well as original designs. Some, particularly intricate, 
designs were painted on the surface of the tile with opaque 
colored glazes, instead of being inlaid (Fig. 15). Most major 
tile manufacturers sold many of the same pre-formed 
encaustic floor tile patterns through catalogues. Encaustic 
tiles were produced in a variety of sizes, mostly square or 
octagonal in shape, and almost any design could be custom­
made for a special purpose or to fit a particular space. 
Historic , 19th-century encaustic tiles were generally slightly 
less than 1" thick, about 15/16." Cheaper tiles of lesser 
quality were also made of clay or cement. These designs 

resembled those commonly found on encaustic tiles but 
applied as a transfer printed pattern, or using a multi-color 
lithographic or silkscreen process. These are still manu­
factured and popular in many parts of the world (Fig. 16). 
Figure 13. Quarry tiles were used in the corridors on many of the upper 
floors of the U.S. Department of the Interior Building (1935-1936). They 
were laid in a pattern identical to the more expensive marble floor tiles 
that were used in the public spaces. Photo: Brooks Photographers, HABS 
Collection. 
Figure 14. Making encaustic tiles. When finished, a reproduction encaustic tile resembles a historic tile, but the reproduction process is quite different from the 
traditional method. Designs for reproduction tiles are recreated by a computer from drawings of the original tile. (a) The computer image of the design is transferred 
to, and machine-cut into, a Plaster of Paris mold. Plastic, buff-colored clay is pressed into the mold to form the main body of the tile, and left to dry for 24 hours. (b) 
Colored slip, or liquid clay, is poured into the indented portions of the tile to create the pattern. (Each color of slip must dry before another color can be poured.) (c) 
After drying, and before firing, excess slip is scraped off, leaving the surface of the tile smooth, but the slip-filled areas still slightly recessed. (d) A side view of the 
19th-century tile at the top of the photograph clearly shows the 3-layer clay "sandwich," as well as the 2 colors of slip that form the inlaid design. The new tile, below, 
is slightly thinner and is made from only I layer of clay. Photos: (a-b) H&R Johnson Tiles Ltd.; (c-d) Wayne Firth, Office of the Architect of the Capitol. 
Smaller, single-colored versions of encaustic tiles that, 
when assembled together form a geometric pattern, are 
called geometric tiles in England. However, in the United 
States they are generally not differentiated from encaustic 
tiles. Based on the geometric ~egments of a six-inch square, 
they were typically rectangular, square, triangular or 
hexagonal in shape, and about the same thickness as 
patterned encaustic tiles (Fig. 17). Geometric tiles were 
especially well suited for decorative borders, and a wide 
variety of floor designs could be created with their many 
shapes, sizes and colors-either alone or combined with 
patterned encaustic tiles. The cost of producing geometric 
tiles was much less than of encaustic tiles because each tile 
involved only one type of clay and one color. By the end of 
the 19th century, over 60 different shapes and sizes of 
geometric tiles were available in up to ten colors, including 
buff, beige or tan, salmon, light grey, dark grey, red, 
chocolate, blue, white and black. 
Ceramic mosaic tiles are essentially smaller versions of 
geometric tiles (usually no larger than 2-1 / 4", and no 
thicker than 1 / 4") ranging in size from 1 / 2" to 2 3 / 16", in 
square, rectangular or oblong, hexagonal, pentagonal and 
trapezoidal shapes. Both vitreous and semi-vitreous 
mosaic tiles were available, unglazed in solid or variegated 
colors with a matte finish, or glazed in unlimited colors. 
Single, one-piece tiles were also fabrica ted to give the 
appearance of multiple mosaic pieces. This was achieved 
with a mold, which gave the appearance of recessed 
mortar joints separating individual "mosaics" (Fig. 18). 
Glazed Tiles 
With the exception of quarry tiles, encaustic tiles, and 
some mosaic tiles, most ceramic floor tiles are decorated 
with a glaze . While unglazed tiles derive their color solely 
from the clay, or from oxides, dyes or pigments added to 
the clay, the color of glazed tiles is provided by the glaze, 
either shiny or matte . Some potteries specialized in certain 
kinds of glazes and were famous for them. The earliest 
and most common method of clay tile decoration made use 
of tin-glazes which were essentially transparent lead 
glazes. Tiles were either dipped into the glaze or the glaze 
was brushed on the tile surface. Glazes were generally 
made with white lead, flint, or china clays ground up and 
mixed with finely ground metallic oxides that provided 
the color. Colored glazes were commonly known as 
"enamels". Colors included blue derived from cobalt, 
green from copper, purple from manganese, yellow from 
antimony and lead, and reds and browns from iron. An 
opaque glaze was created by adding tin oxide. 
Laying Ceramic Tile Floors 
19th Century Techniques. Aside from the use of 
improved tools and modern materials, installation 
methods have changed little since the mid-19th century. 
M. Digby Wyatt, an architect for one of the major 19th 
century encaustic tile manufacturers in Britain, Maw & 
Co., described this procedure for laying encaustic and 
geometric tiles in 1857: 
First, either an even layer of bricks, a 2-1 / 2" bed of 
concrete of quicklime and gravel, or a mixture of Portland 
cement and clean sharp sand was laid to prepare a solid 
foundation for the tiles . 
If the tiles were to be laid over an 
existing wooden floor, the floor boards had to be pulled 
up, sawn into short lengths and fitted between the joists. 
Concrete filled in the spaces and made the base flush with 
the upper face of the joists, and created a level surface 
finished within 1" of the finished floor line. A layer of 
7 

cement mortar was then laid on top . This allowed the tiles 
to fit in the same amount of space as the floorboards they 
replaced.*
8 
Figure 15. The detailed features of the portrait on this round tile in the 
U.S. Capitol were painted on the surface of the tile rather than inlaid. 
Photo: David W. Look, AJA. 
Figure 16. Historic cement floor tiles in a house at 103 Calle San Jose, Old 
San Juan, Puerto Rico, feature a design intended to resemble wood parquet. 
(Note the mismatched repair.) Photo: Jack E. Boucher, HABS Collection. 
Figure 17. Shown here are typical geometric tile patterns popular in the 
/ate-19th century, 
as illustrated in Decorative Tile Designs in Full 
Color. Selected and arranged by Carol Belanger Grafton. NY: Dover 
Publications, Inc., 1992, pp. 73, 83. 
Figure 18. One-piece tiles were made with a mold that created the 
appearance of mortar joints and individual 
mosaics, as illustrated in 
Decorative Tile Designs in Full Color. Selected and arranged by 
Carol Belanger Grafton. NY: Dover Publications, Inc., 1992, p. 87. 
Before laying the tiles, skirting boards or shoe moldings 
were to be removed, and replaced after the tiles were laid. 
This eliminated having to cut the outer tiles to fit exactly, 
and resulted in a neater appearance. 
Next, the floor design was marked off with mason's string 
or chalk lines which divided the space into equal quadrants. 
The first section to be laid out was defined by two parallel 
strips of wood, or guide pieces, about 4" wide. A level 
thickness of cement was spread between these strips. The 
tiles, thoroughly soaked in water, were laid in the cement 
and leveled with a straight-edge. The foundation had to be 
kept wet while the tiles were being laid. Small strips of 
wood temporarily placed at right angles to the guide pieces 
helped keep elaborate patterns straight. 
When the bed was hard, the joints were filled with pure 
cement mortar-sometimes colored with lamp black , red 
ochre or other natural pigments-mixed to the consistency 
of cream. Excess mortar was wiped off the tile s with a 
piece of flannel or sponge. 
*The traditional practice of sawing the original floor boards and fitting 
them between the joists, still used today to maintain a low finished floor 
profile, has resulted in numerous cracked tiles and other failures. I11stead,
a better approach is to leave the existing floor boards, if they are i 11 good 
shape, and install a cementitious backer board (CBU) available in 
thicknesses ranging from 114" to 5/8" as the setting bed for the tiles. 
 
► ■ ◄ 
►♦ • ■ ♦◄ 
► • ◄ 
► • ◄ 
► ◄ 
► • ◄ 
►♦ ■ • ♦◄ 
► 
■ 
◄ 
A newly-laid tile floor could not be walked on for 4-6 days 
until the cement hardened properly. Occasional washing 
would remove the saline scum that often appeared on the 
surface right after the tiles were laid . 
20th Century Techniques. Almost 50 years later, in 1904, 
the Tile Manufacturers of the United States of America 
published Suggestions for Setting Tile with the intent of 
bringing tile-laying up to a uniform standard. This 
guidance was very similar to that given by Wyatt. But, 
there were some differences, such as using hollow clay tile 
as a foundation material and heavy tar paper when laying 
tile over a wooden floor to protect the floor boards from the 
moisture of the mortar mix. Emphasis was placed on using 
the best quality cement, sand, and purest water to obtain a 
durable tile floor. Soaking the tiles before setting was no 
longer necessary, but using stiffer mortar was suggested to 
prevent it from rising up between the tiles. 
Tile-laying methods changed somewhat more later in the 
20th century, mostly due to the availability of new materials 
and techniques. By the 1920s small ceramic mosaic tiles 
were manufactured as 12" square sheets held together by a 
face-mounted paper "skin." This made it possible to lay the 
12" square of tiles as a unit rather than each of the small tiles 
individually. Mounting the tiles directly in the cement 
resulted in a very strong bond. But the face-mounted paper 
obscured the tiles from view making it difficult for the tile­
setter to see if the tiles were being laid straight. The fact 
that the paper was not removed until after the tiles were 
firmly set in the cement bond coat further complicated 

realignment of crooked tiles. This paper "skin " was 
eventually replaced with a fabric mesh backing. This 
permitted the tiles to be aligned as soon as the moisture 
from the bond coat loosened the mesh from the back of the 
tile; it also allowed a single tile to be cut away from the 
mesh and repositioned immediately . Although the fabric 
mesh made tile setting faster, sometimes it also resulted in a 
weaker bond by reducing the contact area between the 
backs of the tiles and the bond coat. 
Following World War II , different methods of preparing a 
foundation for a ceramic tile floor were developed to be 
more compatible with new materials , such a s reinforced 
concrete , expanded wire mesh, pol yethylene and 
waterproof plywood. New adhesives and grout s also 
facilitated tile installation , and an increased variety of 
epoxy and cement mortars allowed for different setting bed 
thicknesses. But today , after half a century of practical 
application , some of these "new " materials, such a s 
plywood, particle board, oriented strand board s and other 
wood panels, are no longer recommended for us e with 
ceramic tile . 
Mortar beds are lighter, more flexible , and much thinner 
than they were previously , having shrunk from several 
inches to as thin as 3 / 32". A greater variety of materials are 
used for setting ceramic floor tiles , including bonding 
agents and waterproof membranes. Basic installation 
methods have not changed significantly , but they vary 
according to the type of subfloor on which the tile is to be 
laid. While the same concerns for level underlayment and 
strong adhesion exist, advancement has occurred mostly in 
the increased speed and ease of la ying the tiles . 
Historic Ceramic Floor Tile: Preservation and 
Maintenance 
Before undertaking any work more complicated than 
regular maintenance or a very simple repair on a significant 
historic ceramic tile floor , or on an y historic tile floor where 
serious damage has occurred, it is recommended that a 
professional conservator of ceramics, an historical architect, 
an architectural historian , or a chemist with particular 
knowledge and experience in this field be consulted . This 
will ensure that all future work, whether it be regularly­
scheduled maintenance or more technical and specialized 
repair and restoration, is done in accordance with the 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of 
Historic Properties. 
Cleaning Meth ods. Ceramic tiles are essentially a practical, 
low-maintenance flooring material. Yet , even glazed tiles 
are somewhat porous, and can get dirty and stained, 
especially in heavy traffic areas or where oil, fat, and grass 
stains are likely to occur. Although heavily soiled areas 
may be difficult or impossible to clean completely, in most 
instances, cleaning ceramic tile floors is relatively easy. 
Cleaning should always begin with the gentlest means 
possible, which may be as simple as warm water. Regular 
maintenance should include sweeping, or preferably dry or 
damp mopping or vacuuming to reduce grit. Tiles can 
usually be cleaned with a non-soap-based household floor 
cleaner, such as one of the commercial products intended 
for cleaning ceramic tile floors available on the market. 
All cleaning and stain-removal products should always be 
tested on a small, inconspicuous area before using . 
Abrasive cleaners (including powdered cleansers and even 
"mildly" abrasive creams) and mechanical equipment can 
damage and wear away the protective surface, as well as 
the decorative design on the tiles, and should not be used 
on ceramic tile floors . Generally, acid-based cleaning 
solutions should also not be used on ceramic tile floors 
because they can damage the complex silicates in a glaze. 
However , there are some acid-based cleaners specially 
formulated for cleaning and removing coatings from 
ceramic tile floors that may be acceptable, but even these 
must be used with caution. Sometimes an acid -based 
cleaner may, in fact, be needed to remove discoloration or 
staining caused by lime or cement mortar. But, it should be 
tested first, used with caution , and applied only to a 
thoroughly wetted tile floor from which excess water has 
been removed . Pre-wetting a ceramic tile floor before 
cleaning is a good policy to observe with all cleaners. The 
water saturates the porous tile and prevents chemicals or 
other cleaning agents from penetrating into the tile body. 
Floor tiles should be always rinsed thoroughly after 
cleaning . 
Figure 19. Regular maintenance treatments for the historic quarry tile 
floors in the U.S. Department of the Interior, shown here in a side 
corridor, include: stripping and waxing once a year; weekly spraying and 
buffing with a commercial "floor finish revitalizer/cleaner" that is slip 
resistant; and dust mopping or damp mopping 4 times a week. Photo: 
Brooks Photographers, HABS Collection. 
Figure 20. The surfaces of these 
late-19th century encaustic tiles 
have become worn and much of 
the pattern has been lost after 
more than 100 years of use. Photo: 
Anne Grimmer. 
Figure 21. These cracked 
geometric tiles may have been 
damaged by the repeated passage 
of heavy equipment over the floor. 
Photo: Anne Grimmer. 
9 

Plastic pot-scrubbers may be effective in loosening and 
removing superficial dirt without abrading the glazed or 
vitrified surface of the tiles. Stubborn asphalt or oil stains, 
scuff marks, or soiling can sometimes be removed with 
ammonia or one of the household spray products intended 
for cleaning kitchen or bathroom tiles. 
If necessary, a 
solvent may be applied carefully to pre-wetted tiles, but it 
should not be left on the surface for an extended amount of 
time as it may cause discoloration. 
If possible, a stain 
should always be identified first in order to select the 
material best-suited to remove it. 
10 
Organic growth, such as mold or mildew, can be eliminated 
with a dilute solution of household bleach and a neutral 
household detergent, or a dilute (5-10%) solution of tri­
sodium phosphate (TSP) . After applying either of these 
solutions, it may be necessary to scrub the floor with a 
natural bristle or nylon brush, and then rinse with clear 
water. Even a dilute bleach solution should not be left on a 
ceramic tile floor for more than a few minutes, since the 
alkali in the bleach can lead to the formation of a white 
efflorescent deposit. Efflorescence (a whitish haze of 
water-soluble salts) may stain and streak the tile, or may 
even cause minor spalling around the joints. 
Regular maintenance of a ceramic tile floor should always 
begin with vacuuming to remove loose dirt and grit. Then, 
a mild cleaning solution may be applied and left on the 
floor for 10-15 minutes, without letting it dry on the tiles. 
Heavily soiled areas may be scrubbed with a natural bristle 
or nylon brush to loosen dirt from the tile surface. Finally, 
the floor should be thoroughly rinsed with clean, clear 
water, preferably twice, and dried with terry cloth towels, if 
necessary. Any proprietary cleaning product should 
always be used in accordance with the manufacturer's 
directions (Fig. 19). 
Protective Coatings. In most instances, traditional ceramic 
tile floors probably would not have been treated or given a 
protective coating other than wax. In the 19th century, 
some encaustic tile floors were treated with linseed oil, but 
this is not a practice recommended today because linseed 
oil tends to attract dirt and discolors as it ages. Most 
historic ceramic tile floors simply acquired a natural 
"polish" or sheen through use. Because the surface of 
ceramic tiles is already protected with a fired skin or a 
glaze, an additional protective coating should generally not 
be needed. 
Opinions differ concerning the use of protective coatings, 
penetrating sealers, or waxes on ceramic tile floors, and, 
especially, on historic ceramic tile floors. 
If properly 
applied and regularly cleaned, a coating can sometimes be 
an effective maintenance treatment, but only on interior 
floors. However, if not adequately or properly maintained, 
rather than facilitating maintenance of ceramic tile floors in 
high traffic areas, such coatings may tend to emphasize 
traffic patterns as they wear away or become scratched. 
Some coatings may also peel in spots, or cause tile to appear 
hazy or cloudy if the coating is not applied in accordance 
with the manufacturer's specifications, or if the tiles are not 
perfectly clean when the coating is applied. Furthermore, 
applying such a coating may actually increase maintenance 
costs, since a coating requires periodic removal and 
renewal . The frequent removal of a coating can also 
damage a ceramic tile floor 
if it is carried out with harsh 
chemicals or abrasive mechanical equipment. If any coating 
is considered, a traditional coating, such as floor wax, may 
be the most suitable. Wax is easy to remove when it 
becomes worn, and does not impart a high, potentially 
inappropriate, gloss to the surface. 
On the other hand, a penetrating sealer, or impregnator, may 
be worth considering to protect patterned encaustic tiles, or 
painted or printed tiles featuring a design that might be 
worn off, particularly in public buildings with a high 
volume of foot traffic. For example, some manufacturers of 
new, reproduction encaustic tiles recommend applying a 
penetrating sealer to the replacement tiles, as well as to the 
historic tiles. lmpregnators do not change the color of the 
tile surface and, unlike some penetrating sealers, are 
completely invisible after they have been applied. They can 
reduce the porosity or water absorption of the tile surface, 
and provide some protection for the tile (and the grout) 
against staining. This may be particularly useful on light­
colored floors. Whether to apply an impregnator to an 
historic ceramic tile floor, and what type or product to use, 
are decisions that should generally made in consultation 
with a conservator or ceramic tile specialist. 
It may also be 
necessary to comply with certain safety standards and friction 
requirements of the ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act). The 
ADA Guidelines recommend "a static coefficient of friction" of 
0.6 for level surfaces and 0.8 for ramps. This may require the 
application of a non-slip sealer or wax to historic ceramic tile 
floors in some public buildings. 
Figure 22. Original section drawing of the 2nd and 3rd floors of the 
House of Representatives Wing of the U.S. Capitol shows how 
Montgome1:1 '7· Meigs ensured the durability of the encaustic tile floors 
that were laid m the 1850s. He specified that the 3/4" tiles be laid on top 
of 112 to 3/4" mud (or mortar), which, in turn, was to be laid over a coal 
tar membrane on top of 3" of brick over an air space of 4-6". Photo: 
Wayne Firth, Office of the Architect of the Capitol. 

Despite the non-traditional shiny finish they may impart to 
a floor surface, two-part, acrylic-based coating systems are 
commonly used today on historic ceramic tile floors in 
many public buildings, primarily because they facilitate 
easy maintenance. If it is decided that a sealer is to be used, 
a product with a matte or dull finish may be preferable, or 
more appropriate, for a historic ceramic tile floor than one 
with a high-gloss. 
In some cases, temporary protection may be the best 
approach until a better solution is found. Non-permanent 
protection for an historic ceramic tile floor may be as simple 
as using floor mats at doors or in heavy traffic areas . 
Historic Ceramic Floor Tile: Damage and 
Deterioration Problems 
Loss of Tile Surface and Pattern. Ceramic tiles are among 
the most durable of historic flooring materials, but natural 
wear and a certain amount of deterioration or damage is 
inevitable. Some tiles, such as dense, close-textured quarry 
tiles and ceramic mosaic tiles, resist abrasion and stain 
absorption very well. But many others, especially patterned 
encaustic and geometric tiles, are extremely susceptible to 
abrasion. Heavy traffic can also result in uneven wear, or 
even cupping, in certain areas of tile floors that get more use 
than others, such as doorway entrances. The particular clay 
mix, or the dye or pigment used to color the clay, can also 
affect the hardness and durability of individual tiles or an 
entire ceramic tile floor (Fig. 20) . 
Tile Glaze Failure. Occasionally some glazes can become 
pitted or powdery as they age. Lead glazes used in the 19th 
century, which were fired at low temperatures, deteriorated 
relatively quickly. Glazes have different physical properties 
from the fired clay tile body itself, and as a result may 
sometimes crack or craze. Unless the crazing visibly 
extends into the porous clay of the tile body beneath, this is 
not generally a serious material failure; however, dirt 
entering these cracks cannot be removed, and will discolor 
the tile. If the crazing penetrates through the glaze, it may 
increase the water absorption of the tile. 
Tile Breakage. Ceramic floor tiles are very susceptible to 
damage and breakage caused when something heavy is 
dropped. Repeated passage of heavy objects, or carts, over 
a floor can also crack and break ceramic tiles, as well as 
heavy vibration from outside traffic (Fig. 21). 
Moisture Damage to Tile. Ceramic tile floors have been 
traditionally viewed as highly waterproof systems that do 
not require protection from moisture. In reality, however, 
this is not true. Water-related problems are one of the most 
common causes for the deterioration and failure of historic 
tile floors, particularly in bathrooms and other rooms where 
there is a lot of moisture. Water that is allowed to sit in 
areas around shower stalls and bathtubs can eventually 
damage grout and mortar, and loosen tiles. Some of the 
more porous kinds of tiles that are not as hard-fired may 
actually begin to powder or spall if subjected to constant 
moisture. 
Loose, Cracked, Broken or Unbonded Tile due to Mortar 
Failure. The durability of ceramic tile floors depends to a 
great extent on a sound mortar bed and sound mortar joints. 
The wrong mortar type or mortar that is inadequately 
mixed can also spell trouble for a ceramic tile floor . Failure 
of a tile floor system laid over a subfloor is often the result 
of weakened or deteriorated grout or mortar which allows 
the tiles to become loose. Mortar may also be weakened or 
loosened by cleaning solutions that are too strong. 
Proper tile-laying technique includes the use of a material 
that will allow for some movement of the tiles. 
Traditionally, a layer of asphalt (replaced by a layer of 
plastic or building paper in more modern construction) was 
inserted to separate the base and the bedding underneath 
(Fig. 22). This prevents bonding between the base and the 
bed, and allows for some "relative" movement. It is 
intended to prevent the ceramic tile floor from arching or 
ridging, a condition in which single or entire rows of tiles 
can pop up to relieve tension and separate completely from 
the bed. When this happens, the condition will probably 
require taking up and relaying many or all of the tiles. 
Tile Damage or Loss caused by Systems Update. The 
installation of new plumbing, electrical and HV AC systems, 
or the attachment of new fixtures and furnishings, may be 
one of the most common sources of damage to an historic 
ceramic tile floor. Earlier remodeling projects to remove old 
pipes or to replace "out-dated" bathroom fixtures may have 
resulted in the loss of floor tiles (Fig. 23). Different shapes 
and sizes of new fixtures, equipment or pipes may have 
exposed previously untiled areas that have been 
inappropriately patched with cement. Careless workers 
and insensitive installations can also result in damage, 
breakage or removal of historic floor tiles. All of these 
conditions will require matching replacement tile. 
Figure 23. These non-matching tiles are inappropriate replacements for 
original tiles that were damaged during bathroom remodeling. Photo: 
Anne Grimmer. 
Historic Ceramic Floor Tile: Repair and 
Replacement 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of 
Historic Properties emphasize the retention and preservation 
of historic building material. Preservation and repair 
treatments are always preferable to replacement. 
Mortar Joint Repair. Deteriorated mortar joints and loose 
mortar or grout can generally be repaired. First, the entire 
floor should be checked for loose tiles that need to be 
regrouted. Damaged mortar should be carefully removed 
by hand and the joints wetted or a bonding agent applied in 
preparation for regrouting. When making mortar repairs, it 
is important to use grout that matches the old in color and 
consistency as closely as possible. 
11 

12 
Figure 24. U.S. Capitol Restoration Project. Restoration of the historic 
ceramic tile flooring at the U.S. Capitol is one of the most extensive on­
going undertakings of this kind in the U.S. When the Office of the 
Architect of the Capitol contacted H&R Johnson-Richards, the 
manufacturer of Minton Hollins tiles, regarding restoration of the tile 
floors in preparation for the American Bicentennial, t/,e company was 
unaware of the extent of original Minton encnustic and geometric floor 
tiles in the U.S. Capitol building. Montgomery C. Meigs, Supervising 
Engineer, and Architect of the Capitol Extension, Thomas U. Walter, 
specified Minton encaustic tiles for the floors in the two wings that were 
added to the Capitol. The tiles were ordered from the fncton; in England 
through Miller & Contes, a Minton supplier in New York City, and 
installed in the 1850s. 
When the project was initiated, the intent was to replace only those tiles 
that were severely damaged or worn. Removing and replacing selected 
sections of the tile floor in their entirety was determined to be a better 
approach because of the difficulty of removing one tile without damaging 
adjacent tiles in good condition, in addition to the difficulty of matching 
new and old tiles which are slightly different in color, pattern and 
thickness. This means that sometimes tiles in good condition may have to 
be removed, but they are salvaged and stored for future reuse. 
Before ordering the reproduction tiles, each section of the Capitol floor was 
drawn and photo-documented. The condition of all the tiles was evaluated 
based 011 n rating of one to four (excellent, good, damaged, or, in need of 
replacement), and color-coded accordingly. Every tile that needed to be 
replaced was individually numbered and photographed with dimensional, 
color and grey scales. 
(a-b) Above: By the mid-1970s, many of the patterns in the encaustic tile floors had become faint, and some had completely worn off in the most heavily 
trafficked areas. (c) Below left: Damaged areas of the floor had been patched with salvaged pieces of tile that fit, but did not match. Photos: Wayne Firth, 
Office of the Architect of the Capitol. 
H g, R 
JOHNSON 
~:-.::::""'."".:.:::=:: .. -:.:.::;:=-_ 
•~:.:::.=.,-.. _ - ----

(d) Since the early-20th century, making 
encaustic tiles had, again, become a lost 
art. Thus, H&R Johnson-Richards not 
only had to learn how encaustic tiles had 
been made historically, but, also, how to 
reproduce them. After studying old 
records of the early tile manufacturers, the 
company began reproducing tiles using 
modern-day computer-assisted technology 
(CAD/CAM). Drawing: H&R Johnson 
Tiles Ltd.; Photo: Wayne Firth, Office of 
the Architect of the Capitol. 
(e) The top tile is a new reproduction of the historic tile below. (f) This design is identified as No. 84 in Miller 
& Coates' Minton Tile Catalogue (detail Figure 2). (g) What might appear lo be an inappropriate repair with 
non-matching modern tile in the center of the star is, in reality, a neatly executed patch to serve as temporary 
in-fill for the reproductions thnt hnve been ordered. (h) Shown below is a restored section of the Capitol floor. 
Photos: (e,g,h) Wayne Firth, Office of the Architect of the Capitol; (f) David W. Look, AJA. 
13 

Figure 25. This comparison of an original, historic encaustic tile (top) 
with a reproduction encaustic tile (bottom) reveals an obvious difference 
in thickness, but only a slight difference in the design. Photo: Wayne 
Firth, Office of the Architect of the Capitol. 
14 
Tile Repair. Trying to remove one tile can endanger 
surrounding tiles. Thus, it may be better to preserve and 
retain an original historic tile that is only slightly damaged, 
rather than replace it. Sometimes cracks may be repaired, 
or a corner or piece of tile that has broken off may be 
reattached, using an epoxy glue, or grout. If a tile is 
chipped or a small corner or edge is missing, a carefully 
executed patch of epoxy-mixed with colored enamel, or 
mortar tinted to blend with the tile, may be less 
conspicuous than trying to replace every tile that has even 
the slightest damage. And, it is a better preservation 
treatment. 
In limited instances, glaze failure or surface powdering of 
ceramic floor tiles may sometimes be treated successfully 
by a conservator with a specially formulated, solvent-based, 
mineral densifying agent (such as silicic acid}, followed by a 
siloxane sub-surface repellent, applied 24 hours later. 
Under the right circumstances, such a treatment can harden 
and bind the surface, and lower the absorbency of the tile, 
and still maintain the vapor transmission. But this is a 
highly complex undertaking and should only be attempted 
by a conservator after appropriate testing . Not only are 
these chemicals highly toxic and dangerous to handle, but if 
used improperly, they can cause greater damage to the tile! 
Tile Replacement. When an individual tile or a larger 
portion of an historic ceramic tile floor is missing or so 
severely damaged that it cannot be repaired, or if it has 
become a safety hazard, then it should be replaced. When a 
ceramic tile floor has deteriorated as a result of long term 
wear and abrasion, or from settlement or vibration damage 
to the setting bed, there are a number of factors that need to 
be considered before choosing a preservation treatment. If 
damage to tiles is the result of more than normal wear and 
tear, the source of the problem needs to be identified, and 
the problem corrected before replacing the damaged tiles. 
Successful replacement not only depends on the availability 
of matching tiles, but on the condition of the substrate on 
which the tiles are laid. Before installing the replacement 
tiles, any problems, such as settlement or vibration, will 
have to be addressed, and the height of the new setting bed 
may have to be adjusted for the thickness of the new tiles. 
Selective Replacement of Individual Tiles. This cautious 
approach, typically an attempt to replace only the most 
seriously damaged tiles, is often taken or considered when 
only a small number of tiles are involved. Unless old, 
matching tiles can be found and reused, replacement often 
requires specially fabricated reproduction tiles. 
In some 
instances, individual historic tiles that are damaged may be 
replaced with matching tiles salvaged from other, less 
prominent areas of the floor or from other buildings. This 
is most feasible if the tiles to be replaced are either plain, 
and easy to match, or decorated with a common historic 
floor tile pattern. 
In order to replace damaged tiles, it can be helpful to 
identify the manufacturer and the approximate date of the 
tiles, if possible. However, many mass-produced tiles are 
not marked and give little or no information as to their 
origin, although stylistic similarities with other marked tiles 
may sometimes provide a clue as to the manufacturer. 
Some decorating firms seldom signed their work, while 
many firms made bisque tiles (plain, unglazed, once-fired 
tiles) for other companies, as well as their own use. 
Identifying marks will generally be found on the back of 
the tile. A mark impressed or molded into the back of the 
tile may give the name or initials of the company which 
made the tile or the bisque; sometimes a printed or painted 
mark indicates if it was decorated by a different company, 
or artist. Historic building records and construction docu­
ments may provide information about the tile company or 
supplier. Catalogues of the period may also be useful in 
identifying the tile manufacturer of unmarked tiles. 
Replacing a single damaged tile is based on the ability to 
remove only the deteriorated tile without harming 
surrounding tiles. Attempts to remove one or several 
damaged tiles often fail because a hammer and chisel are 
used. The shock of the blows to the tile being removed 
travels through the grout into surrounding tiles and cracks 
them. To avoid damaging good tiles, all the grout around 
the tile must be removed. This is best accomplished by an 
experienced tile installer using a hand tool called a grout 
saw or, for grout joints wider than 3 / 8", a dry-cutting dia­
mond blade, mounted in an angle grinder or circular saw. 
Other difficulties may be encountered when selectively 
replacing damaged tiles with reproduction tiles. New tiles, 
especially encaustic tiles, may be different in thickness and , 
sometimes, despite the attention to detail of the 
reproduction process, slightly different in color and design 
from historic tiles. This can cause both visual and physical 
problems, especially if the replacements are being laid in a 
piecemeal fashion. 
If the setting bed does not have enough mortar to grip and 
hold the tile, one new tile laid among the originals will 
eventually come loose. If the new and old tiles are different 
thicknesses, the setting bed in which the new tiles are laid 
must be at a different height to create a level finished 
surface. In addition, the two levels of setting beds may be 
of different composition; one may be harder, stronger and 
less flexible than the other. This may also lead to problems, 
since the setting bed foundation should act and respond as 
a unit to the load and stresses placed upon it. 
Sectional Replacement of Tiles. In some instances, the 
best approach may be to remove a complete section of 
damaged original tiles and replace that section of floor in its 
entirety with new reproduction tiles. Advantages of this 
method include the ability to lay a level setting bed, as well 
as achieving a finished product that is uniform in color and 
pattern match. Although this approach may involve 

replacing more original tiles with reproduction tiles than 
may be absolutely necessary, original tiles that remain in 
good condition can be saved to be reused in other sections 
where only a few tiles are damaged . This technique is 
generally most appropriate either when the section being 
replaced is the most damaged portion of the floor, or is in a 
relatively inconspicuous location and the tiles that are 
removed will supply enough salvaged pieces to permit in­
kind repair of a more visually prominent area (Fig. 24). 
When laying a section of reproduction tiles, it may be a 
good idea to use contemporary materials and installation 
methods such as expansion joints or flexible expansion 
material. One of the major causes of ceramic floor tile 
installation failure and cracked, broken or disbonded tiles 
is the lack of expansion joints. Expansion joints were 
sometimes used in laying historic ceramic tile floors, and 
these are frequently the ones that have survived in the best 
condition. Many preservation contractors hesitate to use 
conventional expansion joint filler materials because of 
their limited range of colors. However, there are new 
flexible sealants in a wide range of colors that are available 
in either sanded or unsanded textures to match the 
surrounding grout joints. As a result, the expansion joints 
are almost invisible. A bonding agent may also be 
considered-if recommended by the tile manufacturer­
and any drawings provided by the manufacturer should be 
used to guide the installation. 
Each preservation technique has advantages and 
disadvantages that the historic property owner or manger 
should take into consideration before deciding which one is 
best suited to the particular flooring problem. For example, 
slight differences in the shape, size, color and the pattern 
between the old and the new tiles are frequently 
encountered. If replacing an entire section, the slightest 
difference in size and dimension between the original tiles 
and the reproduction tiles, even if it is as small as 1 / 8" or 
1 / 16", can mean that the new section of tile will not fit 
inside an existing border (Fig. 25). Even though drawings 
and photos are provided to the manufacturer, there may be 
some variation in the design and pattern size on the new 
tiles. Thus, they may not align perfectly with the original 
tiles, and as a result the section of the floor that has been 
replaced may be quite conspicuous. 
Summary 
Historic ceramic tiles are a common flooring material in 
many different kinds of small, as well as large, private and 
public, structures throughout the United States. Whether 
plain, or decoratively patterned, traditional ceramic floor 
tiles are important in defining the character of historic 
buildings. Although ceramic floor tiles are a practical 
material, they are also fragile, and can be easily damaged 
by improper installation techniques, insensitive 
remodeling, harsh cleaning methods, and even regular 
daily use. Preserving them requires careful day-to-day 
maintenance. This should begin with using gentle, non­
abrasive methods and materials to clean them, and, in some 
instances, using an appropriate coating or impregnator to 
protect them. 
Some historic ceramic tile floors, due to their manufacturer, 
their unique design, or their location in a certain room or 
within a particular building, may have greater significance 
than those that are purely utilitarian. Such floors should be 
accorded special care, and a ceramics conservator or 
preservation specialist should always be consulted to 
prepare responsible maintenance plans and to provide 
guidance concerning repair treatments and replacement 
techniques for them . 
Unless an historic ceramic tile floor is extensively damaged with 
many missing and broken tiles and, therefore, potentially 
hazardous, it may be preferable to leave it alone. An unevenly 
worn floor surface, worn colors or patterns on the tiles, or 
slight cracks, chips, or scratches in the tiles themselves does 
not necessarily mean that the tiles should be replaced. Such 
relatively minor imperfections seldom detract from the 
character of an historic ceramic tile floor. They may, in fact, 
impart character, and be less noticeable or obtrusive than 
replacement of a single tile or a larger section with new tiles 
that do not match the originals exactly. Each situation 
should be evaluated on its own basis before selecting the 
preservation approach best suited to the project. 
Selected Reading 
Austwick, Jill. The Decorated Tile: An Illustrated His ton; of English Tile­
making and Design. New York: Scribners, 1980. 
Barnard, Julian. Victorian Ceramic Tiles. Greenwich, CT: New York 
Graphic Society Ltd., 1972. 
Bruhn, Thomas P. American Decorative Tiles, 1870-1930. Storrs, CT: 
William Benton Museum of Art, 1979. 
Byrne, Michael. Setting Tile. Newtown, CT: The Taunton Press, 1995. 
Decorative Tile Designs in Full Color. Selected and arranged by Carol 
Belanger Grafton. New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1992. 
Fidler, John. "Protective Custody: John Fidler examines the options on 
caring for brick, tile or stone floors. " Traditional Homes. (August 1989) , 
pp. 112-115. 
Furnival, William James. Leadless Decorative Tiles, Faience & Mosaic. 
Stone, Staffordshire: W.J. Furnival, 1904. 
Lavenberg, George N. Ceramic Tile Manual. Los Angeles: Building 
News, 1986. 
Massey, James C., and Shirley Maxwell. "Decorative Tile: Art for the 
Victorian and Arts and Crafts Home." Old-House Journal. Vol. XIX, No. 
2 (March/ April 1991), pp. 54-58. 
Massey, James C., and Shirley Maxwell. "The Ceramic Circus ." Old­
House Journal. Vol. XXIII, No. 2 (March/ April 1995), pp . 46-51. 
Riley, Noel. Tile Art: A History of Decorative Ceramic Tiles. London: The 
Apple Press, 1987. 
Rosenstiel, Helene Von, and Gail Caskey Winkler. 
Floor Coverings for 
Historic Buildings: A Guide to Selecting Reproductions. Washington, D.C.: 
The Preservation Press, 1988. 
Taylor, Joseph A. "Ceramic Tiles in Commerce." BR Building 
Renovation . (Fall 1994), pp. 45-48. 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic 
Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and 
Reconstructing Historic Buildings. Kay D. Weeks and Anne E. Grimmer. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park 
Service, Cultural Resource Stewardship and Partnerships, Heritage 
Preservation Services, 1995. 
Tunick, Susan. American Decorative Tiles. Sponsored by Assopiastrelle 
(Association of Italian Ceramic Tile and Refractories Manufacturers), 
and coordinated by D. Grosser and Associates, Ltd., New York (1991). 
Vandenburgh, Jayne M., IBO. "Restoring the Ohio State Senate 
Building: An American Tile Classic Returns ." Tile Design and 
Installation. Vol. 8, No. 1 Ganuary 1995), pp. 32-35. 
Wyatt, M. Digby. Specimens of Geometric Mosaic Manufactured by Maw 
& Co. of Benthall, near Broseley. 
London: M. Digby Wyatt, 1857. 
15 

16 
Some Sources for Replacement Tiles 
There are a number of companies that offer standard lines of 
reproduction tiles, while others focus on custom work. Some new 
lines of reproduction tile attempt to be exact replicas of original tiles 
from the late-19th and early-20th century, while others are modern 
interpretations or adaptations of traditional designs, and may not be 
appropriate as replacement tiles in a preservation or restoration 
project. For additional sources see: "Traditional Building's Ceramic 
Tile SourceList," Traditional Building, Vol. 9, No. 4 (July/ August 1996), 
pp. 92-93. 
Designs in Tile 
P.O. Box 358 
Mt. Shasta, CA 96067 
Custom-made reproduction art tile. 
Fulper Tile 
P.O. Box373 
Yardley, PA 19067 
Reopened factory reproduces historic tiles using original Arts and Crafts­
period glazes. 
H&R Johnson Tiles Ltd. 
Head Office: Highgate Tile Works 
Tunstall , Stoke-on-Trent 
England ST6 4JX 
U.S. Office: Johnson USA Inc. 
P.O. Box 2335 
Farmingdale, NJ 07727 
Stock and custom reproductions of Minton Hollins encaustic and geometric 
tiles. 
L'Esperance Tile Works 
237 Sheridan Avenue 
Albany, NY 12210 
Custom-made encaustic, geometric, mosaic and other traditional ceramic tiles. 
Moravian Pottery and Tile Works 
Swamp Road 
Doylestown, PA 18901 
Reproduction tiles based on Henry Chapman Mercer's original designs. 
Motawi Tileworks 
33 North Staebler Road, Suite 2 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48103 
Reproduction tiles in Arts and Crafts, Ari Nouveau and other styles. 
Native Tile and Ceramics 
4230 Glencoe Avenue 
Marina Del Rey, CA 90292 
Reproduction decorative tiles in Southern California tradition of Craftsman, 
Mission, Art Deco and other styles. 
Original Style 
Stovax Ltd. 
Falcon Road , Sowton Industrial Estate 
Exeter, Devon 
England EX2 7LF 
Reproduction ceramic tiles from 1750-1902. 
Pewabic Pottery, Inc. 
10125 East Jefferson Avenue 
Detroit, Ml 48214 
Reopened factory reproduces original tile designs and glazes. 
Terra Designs Tileworks 
241 East Blackwell Street 
Dover, NJ 07801 
Mosaic tessarae experts, and reproduction of historic ceramic tiles. 
Tile Guild 
2840 East 11th Street 
Los Angeles, CA 90023 
Reproduction of traditional Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, Italian and English 
tiles. 
Tile Restoration Center, Inc. 
3511 Interlake N . 
Seattle, WA 98103 
Reproduction of Arts and Crafts-period tiles. 
Helpful Organizations 
The American Institute for Conservation of 
Historic and Artistic Works (AIC) 
1717 K Street, N.W ., Suite 301 
Washington, DC 20006 
Ceramic Tile Institute of America, Inc. 
12061 Jefferson Boulevard 
Culver City, CA 90030-6212 
Friends of Terra Cotta, Inc. 
771 West End Avenue, lOE 
New York, NY 10025 
Tile Council of America 
P.O. Box 1787 
Clemson, SC 29633 
Tile Heritage Foundation 
P. 0. Box 1850 
Healdsburg, CA 95448 
Acknowledgements 
Anne E. Grimmer is Senior Architectural Historian , Technical Preservation 
Services Branch, Heritage Preservation Services Program , National Park Service , 
Washington , D.C. Kimberly A. Konrad is a Preservation Planner , Boston 
Landmarks Commission , The Environment Department, City of Boston, MA. The 
authors wish to thank the following individuals for providing technical review 
and other assistance in the development of this publication: Marc Tartaro, AIA , 
and William Allen, Office of the Architect of the Capitol, Washington , DC; Mary 
Catherine Bluder, Bucks County Historical Society, Doylestown, PA ; Michael F. 
Byrne, Ceramic Tile Education Foundation, Clemson, SC ; Milford Wayne 
Donaldson, FAIA, Los Angeles, CA; Gray Lafortune, CTC , Ceramic Tile Institute 
of America, Inc., Culver City , CA; Joseph Taylor, Tile Heritage Foundation , 
Healdsburg, CA; Susan Tunick, Friends of Terra Cotta , Inc., New York, NY; Anne 
Weber, Ford Forewell Mills and Gatsch, Architects, Princeton, NJ; Glenn 
Wharton, Wharton & Griswold Associates , Inc., Santa Barbara , CA; Charles E . 
Fisher, Sharon C. Park, AIA, and, especially, Kay D. Weeks, National Park 
Service, Washington , DC. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interior 
to develop and make available information concerning historic properties . 
Comments about this publication should be directed to de Teel Patterson Tiller, 
Acting Manager, Heritage Preservation Services Program, National Park Service , 
P. 0. Box 37127, Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. This publication is not 
copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for 
credit to the authors and the National Park Service are appreciated . 
•Ceramic : Any product manufactured from a nonmetallic mineral (such as clay) , 
by firing at high temperatures. 
Cover Logo: "Ceramic Mosaic and Vitreous Floor Tile." American Encaustic 
Tiling Company, Ltd., Zanesville, Ohio. "Sweet's" Indexed Catalogue of 
Building Construction. NY , NY: The Architectural Record Co., 1906. 
Photo: Sharon C. Park, AJA. 
October 1996 ISSN: 0885-7016 