U.S. Department of the Interior 
Nati onal Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
39 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Holdi ng the Line: Controlling Unwanted 
Moist ure in Histo ric Buildings 
Shar on C. Park, AlA 
Uncontrolled moisture is the most prevalent cause of 
deterioration in older and historic buildings. It leads to 
erosion, corrosion, rot, and ultimately the destruction of 
materials, finishes, and eventually structural components. 
Ever-present in our environment, moisture can be controlled 
to provide the differing levels of moisture necessary for 
human comfort as well as the longevity of historic building 
materials, furnishings, and museum collections. The 
challenge to building owners and preservation professionals 
alike is to understand the patterns of moisture movement in 
order to better manage it - not to eliminate it. There is 
never a single answer to a moisture problem. Diagnosis and 
treatment will always differ depending on where the 
building is located, climatic and soil conditions, ground 
water effects, and local traditions in building construction. 
Reme dial Acti ons within an Historic 
Preservati on Context 
In this Brief, advice about controlling the sources of 
unwanted moisture is provided within a preservation 
context based on philosophical principles contained in the 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic 
Properties. Following the Standards means significant 
materials and features that contribute to the historic 
character of the building should be preserved, not damaged 
during remedial treatment (see fig.I). It also means that 
physical trea tments should be reversible, whenever possible. 
The majority of treatments for moisture management in this 
Brief stress preservation maintenance for materials, effective 
drainage of troublesome ground moisture, and improved 
interior ventilation. 
The Brief encourages a systematic approach for evaluating 
moisture prob lems which, in some cases, can be undertaken 
by a building owner. Because the source of moisture can be 
elusive, it may be necessary to consult with historic 
preservation professionals prior to starting work that would 
affect historic materials. Architects, engineers, conservators, 
preservation contractors, and staff of State Historic 
Preservation Offices (SHPOs) can provide such advice . 
Regardless of who does the work, however, these are the 
principles that should guide treatment decisions: 
• Avoid remedial treatments without prior careful 
diagnosis. 
• Undertake treatments that protect the historical 
significance of the resource. 
• Address issues of ground-related moisture and rain run­
off thoroughly. 
• Manage existing moisture conditions before introducing 
humidified / dehumidified mechanical systems. 
• Implement a program of ongoing monitoring and 
maintenance once moisture is controlled or managed. 
• Be aware of Significant landscape and archeological 
resources in areas to be excava ted. 
Finally, mitigating the effects of catastrophic moisture, such 
as floods, requires a different approach and will not be 
addressed fully in this Brief. 
Fig. 1. Moisture problems, if not properly corrected, will increase damage to 
historic buildings. This waterproof coating trapped moisture from the leaking 
roof, causing portions of the masonry parapet to fail. Photo: NPS Files. 
1 

2 
How and Where to Look for 
Damaging Moisture 
Finding, treating, and managing the sources of damaging 
moisture requires a systematic approach that takes time, 
patience, and a thorough examination of all aspects of the 
problem-including a series of variable conditions (See thi
page). Moisture problems may be a direct result of one of 
these factors or may be attributable to a combination of 
interdependent variables. 
Factors Contributing to Moisture Problems 
A variety of simultaneously existing conditions 
contribute to moisture problems in old buildings. For 
recurring moisture problems, it may be necessary for the
owner or preservation professional to address many, if 
not all, of the following variables: 
• Types of building materials and construction systems 
• Type and condition of roof and site drainage systems 
and their rates of discharge 
• Type of soil, moisture content, and surface / subsurface 
water flow adjacent to building 
• Building usage and moisture generated by occupancy 
• Condition and absorption rates of materials 
• Type, operation, and condition of heating, ventilating, 
cooling, humidification/ dehumidification, and 
plumbing systems 
• Daily and seasonal changes in sun, prevailing winds, 
rain, temperature, and relative humidity (inside and 
outside), as well as seasonal or tidal variations in 
groundwater levels 
• Unusual site conditions or irregularities of construction 
• Conditions in affected wall cavities, temperature and 
relative humidity, and dewpoints 
• Amount of air infiltration present in a building 
• Adjacent landscape and planting materials 
Fig. 2. Historic buildings plagued by dampness problems will benefit 
from systematic documentation to set a baselme agaznst whIch mOIsture 
changes can be measured. Exterior areas wIth hl$her mOIsture levels may 
have algae growth or discoloration stains. Drawzng: John H. Stubbs. 
Diagnosing and treating the cause of moisture problems 
requires looking at both the localized decay, as well as 
understanding the performance of the entire building and 
site. Moisture is notorious for traveling far from the source, 
and moisture movement within concealed areas of the 
building construction make accurate diagnosis of the source 
and path difficult. Obvious deficiencies, such as broken 
pipes, clogged gutters, or cracked walls that contribute to 
moisture damage, should always be corrected promptly. 
For more complicated problems, it may take several months 
or up to four seasons of monitoring and evaluation to 
complete a full diagnosis. Rushing to a solution without 
adequate documentation can often result in the unnecessary 
removal of historic materials-and worse-the creation of 
long-term problems associated with an increase, rather than 
a decrease, in the unwanted moisture. 
Looking for Signs 
Identifying the type of moisture damage and discovering its 
source or sources usually involves the human senses of 
sight, smell, hearing, touch, and taste combined with 
intuition. Some of the more common signs of visible as 
well as hidden moisture damage (see fig. 2, 3) include: 
• Presence of standing water, mold, fungus, or mildew 
• Wet stains, eroding surfaces, or efflorescence (salt 
deposits) on interior and exterior surfaces 
• Flaking paint and plaster, peeling wallpaper, or moisture 
blisters on finished surfaces 
• Dank, musty smells in areas of high humidity or poorly 
ventilated spaces 
• Rust and corrosion stains on metal elements, such as 
anchorage systems and protruding roof nails in the attic 
• Cupped, warped, cracked, or rotted wood 
• Spalled, cracked masonry or eroded mortar joints 
• Faulty roofs and gutters including missing roofing slates, 
tiles, or shingles and poor condition of flashing or gutters 
• Condensation on window and wall surfaces 
• Ice dams in gutters, on roofs, or moisture in attics 
Fig. 3. The deterioration of this wooden cover was a sign that water was 
leaking from the fan coil unit behind. Photo: author. 

Uncovering and Analyzing Moisture 
Problems 
Moisture comes from a variety of external sources. Most 
problems begin as a result of the weather in the form of rain 
or snow, from high ambient relative humidity, or from high 
water tables. But some of the most troublesome moisture 
damage in older buildings may be from internal sources, 
such as leaking plumbing pipes, components of heating, 
cooling, and climate control systems, as well as sources 
related to use or occupancy of the building. In some cases, 
moisture damage may be the result of poorly designed 
original details, such as projecting outriggers in rustic 
structures that are vulnerable to rotting, and may require 
special treatment. 
The five most common sources of unwanted moisture 
include: 
• Above grade exterior moisture entering the building 
• Below grade ground moisture entering the building 
• Leaking plumbing pipes and mechanical equipment 
• Interior moisture from household use and climate control 
systems 
• Water used in maintenance and construction materials. 
Above grade exterior moisture generally results from 
weather related moisture entering through deteriorating 
materials as a result of deferred maintenance, structural 
settlement cracks, or damage from high winds or storms 
(see fig. 4). Such sources as faulty roofs, cracks in walls, 
and open joints around window and door openings can be 
corrected through either repair or limited replacement. Due 
to their age, historic buildings are notoriously "drafty," 
allowing rain, wind, and damp air to enter through missing 
mortar joints; around cracks in windows, doors, and wood 
siding; and into uninsulated attics. In some cases, 
excessively absorbent materials, such as soft sandstone, 
become saturated from rain or gutter overflows, and can 
allow moisture to dampen interior surfaces. Vines or other 
vegetative materials allowed to grow directly on building 
Fig. 4. Deferred maintenance often leads to blocked gutters and 
downspouts. ThIS cracked gutter syste~1 allowed moisture to penetrate 
the upper exterIOr wall, erode mortar Jomts, and rot fascia boards. Photo: 
NPS files. 
materials without trellis or other framework can cause 
damage from roots eroding mortar joints and foundations 
as well as dampness being held against surfaces. In most 
cases, keeping vegetation off buildings, repairing damaged 
materials, replacing flashings, rehanging gutters, repairing 
downspouts, rep ointing mortar, caulking perimeter joints 
around windows and doors, and repainting surfaces can 
alleviate most sources of unwanted exterior moisture from 
entering a building above grade. 
Below grade ground moisture is a major source of 
unwanted moisture for historic and older buildings. Proper 
handling of surface rain run-off is one of the most important 
measures of controlling unwanted ground moisture. Rain water 
is often referred to as "bulk moisture" in areas that receive 
significant annual rainfalls or infrequent, but heavy, 
precipitation. For example, a heavy rain of 2" per hour can 
produce 200 gallons of water from downspout discharge 
alone for a house during a one hour period. When soil is 
saturated at the base of the building, the moisture will wet 
footings and crawl spaces or find its way through cracks in 
foundation walls and enter into basements (see fig. 5). 
Moisture in saturated basement or foundation walls-also 
exacerbated by high water tables-will generally rise up 
within a wall and eventually cause deterioration of the 
masonry and adjacent wooden structural elements. 
Builders traditionally left a working area, known as a 
builder's trench, around the exterior of a foundation wall. 
These trenches have been known to increase moisture 
problems if the infill soil is less than fully compacted or 
includes rubble backfill, which, in some cases, may act as a 
reservoir holding damp materials against masonry walls. 
Broken subsurface pipes or downspout drainage can leak 
into the builder's trench and dampen walls some distance 
from the source. Any subsurface penetration of the 
foundation wall for sewer, water, or other piping also can 
act as a direct conduit of ground moisture unless these 
holes are well sealed. A frequently unsuspected, but 
serious, modern source of ground moisture is a landscape 
irrigation system set too close to the building. Incorrect 
placement of sprinkler heads can add a tremendous amount 
of moisture at the foundation level and on wall surfaces. 
Fig. 5. Excavating this foundation revealed that the downspout pipe had 
corroded at the." u-trap" and was leaking moisture into the soil. Openings 
around the horzzontal water supply lme and cracks in the wall allowed 
moisture to penetrate the basement in multiple locations. Photo: author. 
3 

4 
The ground, and subsequently the building, will stay much 
drier by 1) re-directing rain water away from the 
foundation through sloping grades, 2) capturing and 
disposing downspout water well away from the building, 3) 
developing a controlled ground gutter or effective drainage 
for buildings historically without gutters and downspouts , 
and 4) reducing splash-back of moisture onto foundation 
walls. The excavation of foundations and the use of 
dampproof coatings and footing drains should only be used 
after the measures of reducing ground moisture listed 
above have been implemented . 
Leaking plumbing pipes and mechanical equipment can 
cause immediate or long-term damage to historic building 
interiors. Routine maintenance, repair, or, if necessary, 
replacement of older plumbing and mechanical equipment 
are common solutions. Older water and sewer pipes are 
subject to corrosion over time. Slow leaks at plumbing 
joints hidden within walls and ceilings can ultimately rot 
floor boards, stain ceiling plaster, and lead to decay of 
structural members. Frozen pipes that crack can damage 
interior finishes (see fig. 6). In addition to leaking 
plumbing pipes, old radiators in some historic buildings 
have been replaced with water-supplied fan coil units 
which tend to leak. These heating and cooling units, as well 
as central air equipment, have overflow and condensation 
pans that require cyclical maintenance to avoid mold and 
mildew growth and corrosion blockage of drainage 
channels. Uninsulated forced-air sheet metal ductwork and 
cold water pipes in walls and ceilings often allow 
condensation to form on the cold metal, which then drips 
and causes bubbling plaster and peeling paint. Careful 
design and vigilant maintenance, as well as repair and 
insulating pipes or ductwork, will generally rid the 
building of these cornmon sources of moisture. 
Fig. 6. Uninsulated plumbing pipes close to the exterior wall froze and 
cracked, wetting this ornamental plaster ceiling before the water supply 
line could be shut off. As a result, limited portions of the ceiling needed 
reattaching. Photo: author. 
Interior moi sture from building use and modern 
humidified heating and cooling systems can create serious 
problems. In northern U.S. climates, heated buildings will 
have winter-time relative humidity levels ranging from 
10%-35% Relative Humidity (RH). A house with four 
occupants generates between 10 and 16 pounds of water a 
day (approximately 1- 2 gallons) from human residents. 
Moisture from food preparation, showering, or laundry use 
will produce condensation on windows in winter climates . 
When one area or floor of a building is air-conditioned and 
anoth er area is not, there is the chance for condensation to 
occur between the two areas. Most periodic condensation 
does not create a long-term problem . 
Humidified climate control systems are generally a major 
problem in museums housed within historic buildings. 
They produce between 35%-55% RH on average which, as 
a vapor , will seek to dissipate and equalize with adjacent 
spaces (see fig. 7). Moisture can form on single-glazed 
windows in winter with exterior temperatures below 30 F 
and interior temperatures at 70 F with as little as 35% RH. 
Frequent condensation on interior window surfaces is an 
indication that moisture is migrating into exterior walls, 
which can cause long-term damage to historic materials. 
Materials and wall systems around climate controlled areas 
may need to be made of moisture resistant finishes in order 
to handle the additional moisture in the air. Moist interior 
conditions in hot and humid climates will generate mold 
and fungal growth. Unvented mechanical equipment, such 
as gas stoves, driers, and kerosene heaters, generate large 
quantities of moisture . It is important to provide adequate 
ventilation and find a balance between interior 
temperature, relative humidity, and airflow to avoid 
interior moisture that can damage historic buildings. 
Fig. 7. Condensation dripping from the large overhead courtyard 
skylight was damaging the masonry in this museum. A new skylight 
with thermal glazing was installed, replacing the deteriorated single­
glazed unit. A new climate control system monitors interior temperature 
and humidity. Photo: © Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston. 
Moisture from maintenance and construction materials 
can cause damage to adjacent historic materials. Careless 
use of liquids to wash floors can lead to water seepage 
through cracks and dislodge adhesives or cup and curl 
materials. High-pressure power washing of exterior walls 
and roofing materials can force water into construction 
joints where it can dislodge mortar, lift roofing tiles, and 
saturate frame walls and masonry . Replastered or newly 

plastered interior walls or the construction of new additions 
attached to historic buildings may hold moisture for 
months; new plaster, mortar, or concrete should be fully 
cured before they are painted or finished. The use of 
materials in projects that have been damaged by moisture 
prior to installation or have too high a moisture content 
may cause concealed damage (see fig. 8). 
Fig. 8. Damaging moisture conditions can occur during construction. 
Peeling paint on this newly rehabilitated frame wall was attributed to 
wall insulation that had become wet during the project and was not 
discovered. Photo: NPS Files. 
Transport or Movement of Moisture 
Knowing the five most common sources of moisture that 
cause damage to building materials is the first step in 
diagnosing moisture problems. But it is also important to 
understand the basic mechanisms that affect moisture 
movement in buildings. Moisture transport, or movement, 
occurs in two states: liquid and vapor. It is directly related 
to pressure differentials . For example, water in a gaseous or 
vapor state, as warm moist air, will move from its high 
pressure area to a lower pressure area where the air is 
cooler and drier. Liquid water will move as a result of 
differences in hydrostatic pressure or wind pressure. It is 
the pressure differentials that drive the rate of moisture migration 
in either state. Because the building materials themselves 
resist this moisture movement, the rate of movement will 
depend on two factors: the permeability of the materials 
when affected by vapor and the absorption rates of 
materials in contact with liquid. 
The mechanics, or physics, of moisture movement is 
complex, but if the driving force is difference in pressure, 
then an approach to reducing moisture movement and its 
damage is to reduce the difference in pressure, not to 
increase it. That is why the treatments discussed in this 
Brief will look at managing moisture by draining bulk moisture 
and ventilating vapor moisture before setting up new barriers 
with impermeable coatings or over-pressurized new climate 
control systems that threaten aging building materials and 
archaic construction systems. 
Three forms of moisture transport are particularly 
important to understand in regards to historic buildings -
infiltration, capillary action, and vapor diffusion -remem­
bering, at the same time, that the subject is infinitely 
complex and, thus, one of continuing scientific study (see 
fig. 9). Buildings were traditionally designed to deal with 
the movement of air. For example, cupolas and roof 
lanterns allowed hot air to rise and provided a natural draft 
to pull air through buildings. Cavity walls in both frame 
and masonry buildings were constructed to allow moisture 
to dissipate in the air space between external and internal 
walls. Radiators were placed in front of windows to keep 
cold surfaces warm, thereby reducing condensation on 
these surfaces. Many of these features, however, have been 
altered over time in an effort to modernize appearances, 
improve energy efficiency, or accommodate changes in use. 
The change in use will also affect moisture movement, 
particularly in commercial and industrial buildings with 
modern mechanical systems. Therefore, the way a building 
handles air and moisture today may be different from that 
intended by the original builder or architect, and poorly 
conceived changes may be partially responsible for chronic 
moisture conditions. 
Moisture moves into and through materials as both a visible 
liquid (capillary action) and as a gaseous vapor (infiltration 
and vapor diffusion). Moisture from leaks, saturation, 
rising damp, and condensation can lead to the deterioration 
of materials and cause an unhealthy environment. 
Moisture in its solid form, ice, can also cause damage from 
frozen, cracked water pipes, or split gutter seams or spalled 
masonry from freeze-thaw action. Moisture from melting 
ice dams, leaks, and condensation often can travel great 
distances down walls and along construction surfaces, 
pipes, or conduits. The amount of moisture and how it 
deteriorates materials is dependent upon complex forces 
and variables that must be considered for each situation. 
Fig. 9. The dynamic forces that move air and moisture through a 
building are important to understand particularlly when selecting a 
treatment to correct a moisture problem. Air infiltration, capillary 
action, and vapor diffusion all affect the wetting and drying of materials. 
Drawing; NPS Files. 
5 

6 
Determining the way moisture is handled by the building is 
further complicated because each building and site is 
unique. Water damage from blocked gutters and 
downspouts can saturate materials on the outside, and high 
levels of interior moisture can saturate interior materials. 
Difficult cases may call for technical evaluation by 
consultants specializing in moisture monitoring and 
diagnostic evaluation. In other words, it may take a team to 
effectively evaluate a situation and determine a proper 
approach to controlling moisture damage in old buildings. 
Infiltration is created by wind, temperature gradients (hot 
air rising), ventilation fan action, and the stack or chimney 
effect that draws air up into tall vertical spaces. Infiltration 
as a dynamic force does not actually move liquid water, but 
is the vehicle by which dampness, as a component of air, 
finds its way into building materials. Older buildings have 
a natural air exchange, generally from 1 to 4 changes per 
hour, which, in turn, may help control moisture by diluting 
moisture within a building. The tighter the building 
construction, however, the lower will be the infiltration rate 
and the natural circulation of air. In the process of 
infiltration, however, moisture that has entered the building 
and saturated materials can be drawn in and out of 
materials, thereby adding to the dampness in the air (see 
fig. 10). Inadequate air circulation where there is excessive 
moisture (i.e., in a damp basement), accelerates the 
deterioration of historic materials. To reduce the unwanted 
moisture that accompanies infiltration, it is best to 
incorporate maintenance and repair treatments to close 
joints and weatherstrip windows, while providing 
controlled air exchanges elsewhere. The worst approach is 
to seal the building so completely, while limiting fresh air 
intake, that the building cannot breathe. 
Fig. 10. Infiltration of damp air can occur around loose-fitting or 
deteriorated window sash and through cracks or open joints in building 
exteriors. Photo: Ann Brooks Prueher. 
Capillary action occurs when moisture in saturated porous 
building materials, such as masonry, wicks up or travels 
vertically as it evaporates to the surface. In capillary 
attraction, liquid in the material is attracted to the solid 
surface of the pore structure causing it to rise vertically; 
thus, it is often called "rising damp," particularly when 
found in conjunction with ground moisture. It should not, 
however, be confused with moisture that laterally 
penetrates a foundation wall through cracks and settles in 
the basement. Not easily controlled, most rising damp 
comes from high water tables or a constant source under 
the footing. In cases of damp masonry walls with capillary 
action, there is usually a whitish stain or horizontal tide 
mark of efflorescence that seasonally fluctuates about 1- 3 
feet above grade where the excess moisture evaporates 
from the wall (see fig. 11). This tide mark is full of salt 
crystals, that have been drawn from the ground and 
building materials along with the water, making the 
masonry even more sensitive to additional moisture 
absorption from the surrounding air. Capillary migration 
of moisture may occur in any material with a pore structure 
where there is a constant or recurring source of moisture. 
Fig. 11. Capillary rise of moisture in masonry is often accompanied with 
a horizontal tide-mark line several feet above the grade, as seen here. 
Removing or redirecting as much ground moisture as possible usually 
helps reduce moisture within a wall. Photo: NPS Files. 
The best approach for dealing with capillary rise in building 
materials is to reduce the amount of water in contact with 
historic materials. If that is not possible due to chronically 
high water tables, it may be necessary to introduce a 
horizontal damp-proof barrier, such as slate course or a 
lead or plastic sheet, to stop the vertical rise of moisture. 
Moisture should not be sealed into the wall with a 
waterproof coating, such as cement parging or vinyl wall 
coverings, applied to the inside of damp walls. This will 
only increase the pressure differential as a vertical barrier 
and force the capillary action, and its destruction of 
materials, higher up the wall. 
Vapor diffusion is the natural movement of pressurized 
moisture vapor through porous materials. It is most readily 
apparent as humidified interior air moves out through 
walls to a cooler exterior. In a hot and humid climate, the 
reverse will happen as moist hot air moves into cooler, 
dryer, air-conditioned, interiors. The movement of the 
moisture vapor is not a serious problem until the dewpoint 
temperature is reached and the vapor changes into liquid 
moisture known as condensation. This can occur within a 
wall or on interior surfaces. Vapor diffusion will be more of 

Insulation -6io.lII. .-I 
Electrical 
Outlet 
WARM 
MOIST 
INTERIOR 
Wood ---'-1..-- Siding 
Codensation 
On Cool 
Surface 
a problem for a frame structure with several layers of infill
materials within the frame cavity than a dense masonry 
structure. Condensation as a result of vapor migration 
usually takes place on a surface or film, such as paint, 
where there is a change in permeability. 
The installation of climate control systems in historic 
buildings (mostly museums) that have not been properly 
designed or regulated and that force pressurized damp air 
to diffuse into perimeter walls is an ongoing concern. These 
newer systems take constant monitoring and back-up 
warning systems to avoid moisture damage. 
Long-term and undetected condensation or high moisture 
content can cause serious structural damage as well as an 
unhealthy environment, heavy with mold and mildew 
spores. Reducing the interior / exterior pressure differential 
and the difference between interior and exterior 
temperature and relative humidity helps control unwanted 
vapor diffusion. This can sometimes be achieved by 
reducing interior relative humidity. In some instances, 
using vapor barriers, such as heavy plastic sheeting laid 
over damp crawl spaces, can have remarkable success in 
stopping vapor diffusion from damp ground into buildings. 
Yet, knowledgeable experts in the field differ regarding the 
appropriateness of vapor barriers and when and where to 
use them, as well as the best way to handle natural 
diffusion in insulated walls. 
Adding insulation to historic buildings, particularly in 
walls of wooden frame structures, has been a standard 
modern weatherization treatment, but it can have a 
disastrous effect on historic buildings. The process of 
installing the insulation destroys historic siding or plaster, 
and it is very difficult to establish a tight vapor barrier. 
While insulation has the benefit of increasing the efficiency 
of heating and cooling by containing temperature 
controlled air, it does not eliminate surfaces on which 
damaging moisture can condense. For insulated residential 
frame structures, the most obvious sign of a moisture 
Fig. 12. Vapor diffusion can result in damp air migrating into absorbent 
materials and condensing on colder surfaces, thereby wetting insulation, 
damaging electrical conduits, and causing deterioration of the wooden 
framing. Drawing: NPS Files. 
diffusion problem is peeling paint on wooden siding, even 
after careful surface preparation and repainting. Vapor 
impermeable barriers such as plastic sheeting, or more 
accurately, vapor retarders, in cold and moderate climates 
generally help slow vapor diffusion where it is not wanted. 
In regions where humidified climate control systems are 
installed into insulated frame buildings, it is important to 
stop interstitial, or in-wall, dewpoint condensation. This is 
very difficult because humidified air can penetrate breaches 
in the vapor barrier, particularly around electrical outlets 
(see fig. 12). Improperly or incompletely installed retrofit 
vapor barriers will cause extensive damage to the building, 
just in the installation process, and will allow trapped 
condensation to wet the insulation and sheathing boards, 
corrode metal elements such as wiring cables and metal 
anchors, and blister paint finishes. Providing a tight wall 
vapor barrier, as well as a ventilated cavity behind wooden 
clapboards or siding appears to help insulated frame walls, if 
the interior relative humidity can be adjusted or monitored 
to avoid condensation. Correct placement of vapor 
retarders within building construction will vary by region, 
building construction, and type of climate control system. 
Surveying and Diagnosing Moisture Damage: 
Key Questions to Ask 
It is important for the building to be surveyed first and the 
evidence and location of suspected moisture damage 
systematically recorded before undertaking any major work 
to correct the problem. This will give a baseline from 
which relative changes in condition can be noted. 
When materials become wet, there are specific physical 
changes that can be detected and noted in a record book or 
on survey sheets. Every time there is a heavy rain, snow 
storm, water in the basement, or mechanical systems 
failure, the owner or consultant should note and record the 
way moisture is moving, its appearance, and what variables 
might contribute to the cause. Standing outside to observe a 
building in the rain may answer many questions and help trace 
the movement of water into the building. Evidence of 
deteriorating materials that cover more serious moisture 
damage should also be noted, even if it is not immediately 
clear what is causing the damage. (For example, water 
stains on the ceiling may be from leaking pipes, blocked fan 
coil drainage pans above, or from moisture which has 
penetrated around a poorly sloped window sill above.) 
Don't jump to conclusions, but use a systematic approach to 
help establish an educated theory - or hypothesis - of 
what is causing the moisture problem or what areas need 
further investigation. 
Surveying moisture damage must be systematic so that relative 
changes can be noted. Tools for investigating can be as simple 
as a notebook, sketch plans, binoculars, camera, aluminum 
foil, smoke pencil, and flashlight. The systematic approach 
involves looking at buildings from the top down and from 
the outside to the inside. Photographs, floor plans, site plan, 
and exterior elevations - even roughly sketched - should 
be used to indicate all evidence of damp or damaged 
materials, with notations for musty or poorly ventilated 
areas. Information might be needed on the absorption and 
permeability characteristics of the building materials and 
soils. Exterior drainage patterns should be noted and these 
base plans referred to on a regular basis in different seasons 
and in differing types of weather (see fig. 13). 
7 

DATE: June 2 1992 
WEATHER:.-1F,-,aULir __ 
TEMP: ...,70,--° __ 
TIME: 10:00AM 
OTH ER: -'-!.!J,!W"""-"t!l.ill!L....l 
revi 
8 
Glossary: 
Air flow/ infiltration: The movement that carries moist air into 
and through materials. Air flow depends on the difference 
between indoor and outdoor pressures, wind speed and 
direction as well as the permeability of materials. 
Bulk water: The large quantity of moisture from roof and 
ground run-off that can enter into a building either above 
grade or below grade. 
Capillary action: The force that moves moisture through the 
pore structure of materials. Generally referred to as rising 
damp, moisture at or below the foundation level will rise 
vertically in a wall to a height at which the rate of 
evaporation balances the rate at which it can be drawn up b
capillary forces. 
Condensation: The physical process by which water vapor is 
transformed into a liquid when the relative humidity of the 
air reaches 100% and the excess water vapor forms, 
generally as droplets, on the colder adjacent surface. 
Convection: Heat transfer through the atmosphere by a 
difference in force or air pressure is one type of air transport.
Sometimes referred to as the "stack effect," hotter less dense 
air will rise, colder dense air will fall creating movement of 
air within a building. 
Dewpoint: The temperature at which water vapor condenses 
when the air is cooled at a constant pressure and constant 
moisture content. 
Diffusion: The movement of water vapor through a material. 
Diffusion depends on vapor pressure, temperature, relative 
humidity, and the permeability of a material. 
Evaporation: The transformation of liquid into a vapor, 
generally as a result of rise of temperature, is the opposite of 
condensation. Moisture in damp soil, such as in a crawl 
space, can evaporate into the air, raise the relative humidity 
in that space, and enter the building as a vapor. 
Ground moisture: The saturated moisture in the ground as a 
result of surface run-off and naturally occuring water tables. 
Ground moisture can penetrate through cracks and holes in 
foundation walls or can migrate up from moisture under the 
foundation base. 
Monitoring instrumentation: These devices are generally used 
for long term diagnostic analysis of a problem, or to measure 
the preformance of a treatment, or to measure changes of 
conditions or environment. In-wall probes or sensors are 
often attached to data-loggers which can be down-loaded 
into computers. 
Permeability: A characteristic of porosity of a material 
generally listed as the rate of diffusion of a pressurized gas 
through a material. The pore structure of some materials 
allows them to absorb or adsorb more moisture than other 
materials. Limestones are generally more permeable than 
granites. 
Relative humidity (RH): Dampness in the air is measured as 
the percent of water vapor in the air at a specific 
temperature relative to the amount of water vapor that can 
be held in a vapor form at that specific temperature. 
Survey instrumentation: technical instrumentation that is used
on-site to provide quick readings of specific physical 
conditions. Generally these are hand-held survey 
instruments, such as moisture, temperature and relative 
humidity readers, dewpoint sensors, and fiber optic 
boroscopes. 
Fig. 13. Using sketch plans and elevation drawings to record the 
moisture damage along with the date, time, and weather conditions will 
show how moisture is affecting buildings over time. Drawing: Courtesy, 
Quinn Evans Architects. 
It is best to start with one method of periodic 
documentation and to use this same method each time. 
Because moisture is affected by gravity, many surveys start 
with the roof and guttering systems and work down 
through the exterior walls. Any obvious areas of water 
penetration, damaged surfaces, or staining should be noted. 
Any recurring damp or stain patterns, both exterior and 
interior, should also be noted with a commentary on the 
temperature, weather, and any other facts that may be 
relevant (driving rains, saturated soil, high interior 
humidity, recent washing of the building, presence of a 
lawn watering system, etc.). 
The interior should be recorded as well, beginning with the 
attic and working down to the basement and crawl space. 
It may be necessary to remove damaged materials 
selectively in order to trace the path of moisture or to 
pinpoint a source, such as a leaking pipe in the ceiling. 
The use of a basic resistance moisture meter, available in 
many hardware stores, can identify moisture contents of 
materials and show, over time, if wall surfaces are drying 
or becoming damper (see fig. 14). A smoke pencil can chart 
air infiltration around windows or draft patterns in interior 
spaces. For a quick test to determine if a damp basement is 
caused by saturated walls or is a result of condensation, 
tape a piece of foil onto a masonry surface and check it 
after a day or two; if moisture has developed behind the 
foil, then it is coming from the masonry. If condensation is 
on the surface of the foil, then moisture is from the air. 
Comparing current conditions with previous conditions, 
historic drawings, photographs, or known alterations may 
also assist in the final diagnOSis. A chronological record, 
showing improvement or deterioration, should be backed 
up with photographs or notations as to the changing size, 
condition, or features of the deterioration and how these 
changes have been affected by variables of temperature and 
rainfall. If a condition can be related in time to a particular 
event, such as efflorescence developing on a chimney after 
the building is no longer heated, it may be possible to 
isolate a cause, develop a hypothesis, and then test the 
hypothesis (by adding some temporary heat), before 
applying a remedial treatment. 

f
f
Fig. 14. Using instruments in this damp-check kit can help determine 
the relative change in wet conditions over time. This involves readings of 
air temperature, computing dewpoint temperatures, and tracking the 
moisture content of materials to indicate if they are drying properly. 
Photo: Dell Corporation. 
If the owner or consultant has access to moisture survey 
and monitoring equipment such as resistance moisture 
meters, dewpoint indicators, salt detectors, infrared 
thermography systems, psychrometer, fiber-optic 
boroscopes, and miniaturized video cameras, additional 
quantified data can be incorporated into the survey (see fig. 
15). If it is necessary to track the wetting and drying of 
walls over a period of time, deep probes set into walls and 
in the soil with connector cables to computerized data 
loggers or the use of long-term recording of 
hygrothermographs may require a trained specialist. 
Miniaturized fiber-optic video cameras can record the 
condition of subsurface drain lines without excavation (see 
fig. 16). It should be noted, however, that instrumentation, 
while extremely useful, cannot take the place of careful personal 
observation and analysis. Relying on instrumentation alone 
rarely will give the owner the information needed to fully 
diagnose a moisture problem. 
Fig. 15. Psychrometric charts quantify the amount of relative humidity a 
building can tolerate before dewpoint condensation occurs. This is 
important when the range of temperature and humidity are critical to 
both collections management and historic building preservation. Chart: 
Landmark Facilities Group. 
Fig. 16. Contractors 
specializing in 
building diagnostics 
often have video 
cameras or fiber 
optic equipment that 
allow the viewing of 
inaccessible areas. 
This is particularly 
helpful in chimney 
lues or subsurface 
drains, as shown 
here. In the past, 
these areas would 
need to be excavated 
or visual 
inspection. 
Photo: author. 
To avoid jumping to a quick-potentially erroneous­
conclusion, a series of questions should be asked first. This 
will help establish a theory or hypothesis that can be tested 
to increase the chances that a remedial treatment will 
control or manage existing moisture. 
How is water draining around building and site? What is 
the effectiveness of gutters and downspouts? Are the 
slopes or grading around foundations adequate? What are 
the locations of subsurface features such as wells, cisterns, 
or drainage fields? Are there subsurface drainage pipes (or 
drainage boots) attached to the downspouts and are they in 
good working condition? Does the soil retain moisture or 
allow it to drain freely? Where is the water table? Are there 
window wells holding rain water? What is the flow rate of 
area drains around the site (can be tested with a hose for 
several minutes)? Is the storm piping out to the street 
sufficient for heavy rains, or does water chronically back up 
on the site? Has adjacent new construction affected site 
drainage or water table levels? 
How does water/moisture appear to be entering the 
building? Have all five primary sources of moisture been 
evaluated? What is the condition of construction materials 
and are there any obvious areas of deterioration? Did this 
building have a builder's trench around the foundation that 
could be holding water against the exterior walls? Are the 
interior bearing walls as well as the exterior walls showing 
evidence of rising damp? Is there evidence of hydrostatic 
pressure under the basement floor such as water 
percolating up through cracks? Has there been moisture 
damage from an ice dam in the last several months? Is 
damage localized, on one side of the building only, or over 
a large area? 
What are the principal moisture dynamics? Is the moisture 
condition from liquid or vapor sources? Is the attic 
moisture a result of vapor diffusion as damp air comes up 
through the cavity walls from the crawl space or is it from a 
leaking roof? Is the exterior wall moisture from rising 
damp with a tide mark or are there uneven spots of 
dampness from foundation splash back, or other ground 
9 

10 
moisture conditions? Is there adequate air exchange in the 
building, particularly in damp areas, such as the basement? 
Has the height of the water table been established by 
inserting a long pipe into the ground in order to record the 
water levels? 
How is the interior climate handling moisture? Are there 
areas in the building that do not appear to be ventilating 
well and where mold is growing? Are there historic 
features that once helped the building control air and 
moisture that can be reactivated, such as operable skylights 
or windows? Could dewpoint condensation be occurring 
behind surfaces, since there is often condensation on the 
windows? Does the building feel unusually damp or smell 
in an unusual way that suggest the need for further study? 
Is there evidence of termites, carpenter ants, or other pests 
attracted to moist conditions? Is a dehumidifier keeping 
the air dry or is it, in fact, creating a cycle where it is 
actually drawing moisture through the foundation wall? 
Does the moisture problem appear to be intermittent, 
chronic, or tied to specific events? Are damp conditions 
occuring within two hours of a heavy rain or is there a 
delayed reaction? Does rust on most nail heads in the attic 
indicate a condensation problem? What are the wet 
patterns that appear on a building wall during and after a 
rain storm? Is it localized or in large areas? Can these rain 
patterns be tied to gutter over-flows, faulty flashing, or 
saturation of absorbent materials? Is a repaired area 
holding up well over time or is there evidence that 
moisture is returning? Do moisture meter readings of wall 
cavities indicate they are wet, suggesting leaks or 
condensation in the wall? 
Once a hypothesis of the source or sources of the moisture 
has been developed from observation and recording of 
data, it is often useful to prove or disprove this hypothesis 
with interim treatments, and, if necessary, the additional 
use of instrumentation to verify conditions. For damp 
basements, test solutions can help determine the cause. For 
example, surface moisture in low spots should be 
redirected away from the foundation wall with regrading 
to determine if basement dampness improves. If there is 
still a problem, determine if subsurface downspout 
collection pipes or cast iron boots are not functioning 
properly. The above grade downspouts can be 
disconnected and attached to long, flexible extender pipes 
and redirected away from the foundation (see fig. 17). If, 
after a heavy rain or a simulation using a hose, there is no 
improvement, look for additional ground moisture sources 
such as high water tables, hidden cisterns, or leaking water 
service lines as a cause of moisture in the basement. New 
data will lead to a new hypothesis that should be tested and 
verified. The process of elimination can be frustrating, but is 
required if a systematic method of diagnosis is to be successful. 
Selecting an Appropriate Level of Treatment 
The treatments in chart format at the back of this 
publication are divided into levels based on the degree of 
moisture problems. Level I covers preservation 
maintenance; Level II focuses on repair using historically 
compatible materials and essentially mitigating damaging 
moisture conditions; and Level III discusses replacement 
and alteration of materials that permit continued use in a 
chronically moist environment. It is important to begin 
Fig. 17. In testing a theory for the cause of basement wetness, the owner 
used long black extellder pipes to direct roof run-off away from the 
foundation. This test established that the owner did not need expensive 
waterproofing of the foundation, but a better drainage system. Photo: 
Baird M. Smith. 
with Level I and work through to a manageable treatment 
as part of the control of moisture problems. Buildings in 
serious decay will require treatments in Level II, and 
difficult or unusual site conditions may require more 
aggressive treatments in Level III. Caution should always 
be exercised when selecting a treatment. The treatments 
listed are a guide and not intended to be recommendations 
for specific projects as the key is always proper diagnosis. 
Start with the repair of any obvious deficiencies using 
sound preservation maintenance. If moisture cannot be 
managed by maintenance alone, it is important to reduce it 
by mitigating problems before deteriorated historic 
materials are replaced (see fig. 18). Treatments should not 
remove materials that can be preserved; should not involve 
extensive excavation unless there is a documented need; 
and should not include coating buildings with waterproof 
sealers that can exacerbate an existing problem. Some 
alteration to historic materials, structural systems, 
mechanical systems, windows, or finishes may be needed 
when excessive site moisture cannot be controlled by 
drainage systems, or in areas prone to floods. These 
changes, however, should, be sensitive to preserving those 
materials, features, and finishes that convey the historic 
character of the building and site. 
Ongoing Care 
Once the building has been repaired and the larger 
moisture issues addressed, it is important to keep a record 
of additional evidence of moisture problems and to protect 
the historic or old building through proper cyclical maintenance 
(see fig. 19) In some cases, particularly in museum 
environments, it is critical to monitor areas vulnerable to 
moisture damage. In a number of historic buildings, in­
wall moisture monitors are used to ensure that the moisture 
purposely generated to keep relative humidity at ranges 
appropriate to a museum collection does not migrate into 
walls and cause deterioration. The potential problem with 
all systems is the failure of controls, valves, and panels over 
time. Back-up systems, warning devices, properly trained 
staff and an emergency plan will help control damage if 
there is a system failure. 

4" Top 
Perforated 
Pipe Around ~I++''!+ 
Perimeter 
Walls 
Fig. 18. This detail drawing shows a sub-surface perimeter drain in 
conjunction with a historic brick ground gutter system to help control 
roof run-off moisture from entering the historic foundation. Detail: 
Courtesy, Gunston Hall Plantation. Photo: Elizabeth Sasser. 
Fig. 19. Maintaining gutters and downspouts in good operable 
condition, repairing exteriors to keep water out, redirecting damaging 
moisture away from foundations and controlling interior moisture and 
condensation are all important when holding the line on moisture 
deterioration. Photo: Nebraska State Historical Society. 
Ongoing maintenance and vigilance to situations that could 
potentially cause moisture damage must become a routine 
part of the everyday life of a building . The owner or staff 
responsible for the upkeep of the building should inspect 
the property weekly and note any leaks, mustiness, or 
blocked drains. Again, observing the building during a rain 
will test whether ground and gutter drainage are working 
well. 
For some buildings a back-up power system may be 
necessary to keep sump pumps working during storms 
when electrical power may be lost. For mechanical 
equipment rooms, condensation pans, basement floors, and 
laundry areas where early detection of water is important, 
there are alarms that sound when their sensors come into 
contact with moisture . 
Conclusion 
Moisture in old and historic buildings, though difficult to 
evaluate, can be systematically studied and the appropriate 
protective measures taken . Much of the documentation and 
evaluation is based on common sense combined with an 
understanding of historic building materials, construction 
technology, and the basics of moisture and air movement. 
Variables can be evaluated step by step and situations 
creating direct or secondary moisture damage can generally 
be corrected. The majority of moisture problems can be 
mitigated with maintenance, repair, control of ground and 
roof moisture, and improved ventilation. For more complex 
situations, however, a thorough diagnosis and an 
understanding of how the building handles moisture at 
present, can lead to a treatment that solves the problem 
without damaging the historic resource. 
It is usually advantageous to eliminate one potential source 
of moisture at a time . Simultaneous treatments may set up 
a new dynamic in the building with its own set of moisture 
problems. Implementing changes sequentially will allow 
the owner or preservation professional to track the success 
of each treatment. 
Moisture problems can be intimidating to a building owner 
who has diligently tried to control them. Keeping a record 
of evidence of moisture damage, results of diagnostic tests, 
and remedial treatments, is beneficial to a building's long­
term care. The more complete a survey and evaluation, the 
greater the success in controlling unwanted moisture now 
and in the future. 
Holding the line on unwanted moisture in buildings will be 
successful if 1) there is constant concern for signs of 
problems and 2) there is ongoing physical care provided by 
those who understand the building, site, mechanical 
systems, and the previous efforts to deal with moisture. 
For properties with major or difficult-to-diagnose 
problems, a team approach is often most effective. The 
owner working with properly trained staff, contractors and 
consultants can monitor, select, and implement treatments 
within a preservation context in order to manage moisture 
and to protect the historic resource. 
11 

12 
MOISTURE: LEVEL I PRESERVATION MAINTENANCE 
Exterior: Apply cyclical maintenance procedures to eliminate rain and moisture 
infiltration. 
Roofing/ guttering: Make weather-tight and operational; inspect and 
clean gutters as necessary depending on number of nearby trees, but at 
least twice a year; inspect roofing at least once a year, preferably spring; 
replace missing or damaged roofing shingles, slates, or tiles; repair 
flashing; repair or replace cracked downspouts. 
Walls: Repair damaged surface materials; repoint masonry with 
appropriately formulated mortar; prime and repaint wooden, metal, or 
masonry elements or surfaces; remove efflorescence from masonry with 
non-metallic bristle brushes. 
Window and door openings: Eliminate cracks or open joints; caulk or 
rep oint around openings or steps; repair or reset weatherstripping; check 
flashing; repaint, as necessary. 
Ground: Apply regular maintenance procedures to eliminate standing water and vegetative 
threats to building/site. 
Grade: Eliminate low spots around building foundations; clean out 
existing downspout boots twice a year or add extension to leaders to carry 
moisture away from foundation; do a hose test to verify that surface 
drains are functioning; reduce moisture used to clean steps and walks; 
eliminate the use of chlorides to melt ice which can increase freeze / thaw 
spalling of masonry; check operation of irrigation systems, hose bib leaks, 
and clearance of air conditioning condensate drain outlets. 
Crawl space: Check crawl space for animal infestation, termites, ponding 
moisture, or high moisture content; check foundation grilles for adequate 
ventilation; seasonally close grilles when appropriate - in winter, if not 
needed, or in summer if hot humid air is diffusing into air conditioned 
space. 
Foliage: Keep foliage and vines off buildings; trim overhanging trees to 
keep debris from gutters and limbs from rubbing against building; remove 
moisture retaining elements, such as firewood, from foundations. 
Basements and foundations: Increase ventilation and maintain surfaces to avoid moisture. 
Equipment: Check dehumidifiers, sump pump, vent fans, and water 
detection or alarm systems for proper maintenance as required; check 
battery back-up twice a year. 
Piping/ductwork: Check for condensation on pipes and insulate / seal 
joints, if necessary. 
Interior: Maintain equipment to reduce leaks and interior moisture. 
Plumbing pipes: Add insulation to plumbing or radiator pipes located in 
areas subject to freezing, such as along outside walls, in attics, or in 
unheated basements. 
Mechanical equipment: Check condensation pans and drain lines to keep 
clear; insulate and seal joints in exposed metal ductwork to avoid drawing 
in moist air. 
Cleaning: Routinely dust and clean surfaces to reduce the amount of 
water or moist chemicals used to clean building; caulk around tile floor 
and wall connections; and maintain floor grouts in good condition. 
Ventilation: Reduce household-produced moisture, if a problem, by 
increasing ventilation; vent clothes driers to the outside; install and 
always use exhaust fans in restrooms, bathrooms, showers, and kitchens, 
when in use. 
A. Inspecting the overall building on at 
least an annual basis will identify areas 
needing maintenance. A bucket lift is 
helpful for large buildings. Photo: author. 
B. Repair exterior surfaces, paint, and recaulk 
as needed. Photo: Williamsport Preservation 
Training Center (WPTC), NPS. 
C. Cleaning out gutters and downspouts 
should be done at least twice a year. 
Photo: WPTC, NPS. 
D. Protect the building from damage by 
maintaining equipment and using alarms, like 
this floor water sensor. Photo: Dell Corporation. 

 
 
 
 
MOISTURE: LEVEL II REPAIR AND CORRECTIVE ACTION 
Exterior: Repair features that have been damaged. Replace an extensively deteriorated 
feature with a new feature that matches in design, color, texture, and where possible, 
materials. 
Roofing: Repair roofing, parapets and overhangs that have allowed 
moisture to enter; add ice and water shield membrane to lower 3-4 feet or 
roofing in cold climates to limit damage from ice dams; increase attic 
ventilation, if heat and humidity build-up is a problem. Make gutters 
slope @ 1/8" to the foot. Use professional handbooks to size gutters and 
reposition, if necessary and appropriate to historic architecture. Add 
ventilated chimney caps to unused chimneys that collect rain water . 
Walls: Repair spalled masonry, terra cotta, etc. by selectively installing 
new masonry units to match; replace rotted clapboards too close to grade 
and adjust grade or clapboards to achieve adequate clearance; protect or 
cover open window wells . 
Ground: Correct serious ground water problems; capture and dispose of downspout water
away from foundation; and control vapor diffusion of crawlspace moisture. 
Grade: Re-establish positive sloping of grade; try to obtain 6" of fall in the
first 10' surrounding building foundation; for buildings without gutter 
systems, regrade and install a positive subsurface collection system with 
gravel, or waterproof sheeting and perimeter drains; adjust pitch or slope
of eave line grade drains or French drains to reduce splash back onto 
foundation walls; add subsurface drainage boots or extension pipes to 
take existing downspout water away from building foundation to the 
greatest extent feasible . 
Crawl space: Add polyethylene vapor barrier (heavy construction grade 
or Mylar) to exposed dirt in crawlspace if monitoring indicates it is 
needed and there is no rising damp; add ventilation grilles for additional 
cross ventilation, if determined advisable. 
Foundations and Basements: Correct existing high moisture levels, if other means of 
controlling ground moisture are inadequate. 
Mechanical devices: Add interior perimeter drains and sump pump; add
dehumidifiers for seasonal control of humidity in confined, unventilated 
space (but don't create a problem with pulling dampness out of walls); 
add ventilator fans to improve air flow, but don't use both the 
dehumidifier and ventilator fan at the same time. 
Walls: Remove commentates coatings, if holding rising damp in walls; coat
walls with vapor permeable lime based rendering plaster, if damp walls 
need a sacrificial coating to protect mortar from erosion; add termite 
shields, if evidence of termites and dampness cannot be controlled . 
Framing: Reinforce existing floor framing weakened by moisture by 
adding lolly column support and reinforcing joist ends with sistered or 
parallel supports. Add a vapor impermeable shield, preferably non­
ferrous metal, under wood joists coming into contact with moist 
masonry. 
Interior: Eliminate areas where moisture is leaking or causing a problem. 
Plumbing: Replace older pipes and fixtures subject to leaking or 
overflowing; insulate water pipes subject to condensation. 
Ventilation: Add exhaust fans and whole house fans to increase air flow 
through buildings, if areas are damp or need more ventilation to control 
mold and mildew. 
Climate: Adjust temperature and relative humidity to manage interior 
humidity; Correct areas of improperly balanced pressure for BV AC 
systems that may be causing a moisture problem . 
A. Mitigate poor drainage with gravel, filter cloth, 
or the use of subsurface drainage mats under 
finished paving. Photo: Larry D. Dermody. 
B. Repair roofs and add ice and water shields at 
eaves and under valleys in cold climates. Photo: 
Larry D. Dermody. 
C. Develop new drainage systems for roof run-off 
that remove moisture from the bas.e of the 
building. Photo: WPTC, NPS. 
D. Install ventilating fans when additional air 
circulation will improve damp conditions in 
buildings or reduce cooling loads. Photo: Ernest 
A. Conrad, P. E. 
13 

14 
MOISTURE: LEVEL III REPLACEMENT / ALTERATIONS 
A. This Lead sheet was installed at the base of the 
repLacement column to stop rising damp. Photo: 
Bryan Blundell. 
B. Wood sills set on grade were replaced with 
concrete pier foundation and new wooden sill 
plates. Changes were not visible on the exterior 
(see C). Photo: WPTC, NPS. 
C. The new ground gutter gravel base helps 
drainage around the concrete foundation (see B 
above) which is not visible behind the replaced 
wooden wall shingles. Photo: WPTC, NPS. 
Exterior: Undertake exterior rehabilitation work that follows professional repair practices 
-i.e., replace a deteriorated feature with a new feature to match the existing in design, 
color, texture, and when possible, materials. In some limited situations, non-historic 
materials may be necessary in unusually wet areas. 
Roofs: Add ventilator fans to exhaust roofs but avoid large projecting 
features whose designs might negatively affect the appearance of the 
historic roof. When replacing roofs, correct conditions that have caused 
moisture problems, but keep the overall appearance of the roof; for 
example, ventilate under wooden shingles, or detail standing seams to 
avoid buckling and cracking. Be attentive to provide extra protection for 
internal or built-in gutters by using the best quality materials, flashing, 
and vapor impermeable connection details. 
Walls: If insulation and vapor barriers are added to frame walls, 
consider maintaining a ventilation channel behind the exterior cladding 
to avoid peeling and blistering paint occurrences. 
Windows: Consider removable exterior storm windows, but allow 
operation of windows for periodic ventilation of cavity between exterior 
storm and historic sash. For stained glass windows using protective 
glazing, use only ventilated storms to avoid condensation as well as heat 
build-up. 
Ground: Control excessive ground moisture. This may require extensive excavations, 
new drainage systems, and the use of substitute materials. These may include concrete or 
new sustainable recycled materials for wood in damp areas when they do not impact the 
historic appearance of the building. 
Grade: Excavate and install water collection systems to assist with 
positive run-off of low lying or difficult areas of moisture drainage; use 
drainage mats under finished grade to improve run-off control; consider 
the use of column plinth blocks or bases that are ventilated or 
constructed of non-absorbent substitute materials in chronically damp 
areas. Replace improperly sloped walks; repair non-functioning catch 
basins and site drains; repair settled areas around steps and other 
features at grade. 
D. In a flood plain, rotted joists were replaced 
with a concrete slab and sleepers designed to 
drain water. Spaced flooring allowed drainage 
and room for damp wood to swell without 
buckling. Harper's Ferry Center, NPS. 
E. Mechanical systems on the lower level 
were placed on platforms above the flood 
line. Harper's Ferry Center, NPS. 

Interior: Control the amount of moisture and condensation on the interiors of historic 
buildings. Most designs for new HV AC systems will be undertaken by mechanical 
engineers, but systems should be selected that are appropriate to the resource and 
intended use. 
FOR CHRONICALLY DAMP CONDITIONS 
Foundations: Improve performance of foundation walls with damp-proof treatments 
to stop infiltration or damp course layers to stop rising damp. Some substitute 
materials may need to be selectively integrated into new features. 
Walls: excavate, rep oint masonry walls, add footing drains, and 
waterproof exterior subsurface walls; replace wood sill plates and 
deteriorated structural foundations with new materials, such as 
pressure treated wood, to withstand chronic moisture conditions; 
materials may change, but overall appearance should remain similar. 
Add damp course layer to stop rising damp; avoid chemical injections 
as these are rarely totally effective, are not reversible, and are often 
visually intrusive. 
Windows, skylights: Add double and triple glazing, where necessary 
to control condensation. A void new metal sashes or use thermal 
breaks where prone to heavy condensation. 
Mechanical systems: Design new systems to reduce stress on 
building exterior. This might require insulating and tightening up the 
building exterior, but provisions must be made for adequate air flow. 
A new zoned system, with appropriate transition insulation, may be 
effective in areas with differing climatic needs. 
Control devices/Interior spaces: If new climate control systems are 
added design back-up controls and monitoring systems to protect 
from interior moisture damage. 
Walls: If partition walls sit on floors that periodically flood, consider 
spacers or isolation membranes behind baseboards to stop moisture 
from wicking up through absorbent materials. 
I. Critically damp foundation walls were protected with a layer ofbentonite clay to reduce 
moisture penetration. This work was in combination with new downspouts that were connected 
to drainage boots that deposited captures roof run-off away from the foundation. 
Photo: Courtesy, Larry D. Dermody and the National Trust for Historic Preservation. 
F. Triple glazed windows replaced the originals 
to control condensation. Photo: © Isabella 
Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston. 
G. New sensors which monitor temperature and 
relative humidity are located throughout this 
museum and tied to a computer that controls the 
climate control system. Photo: © Isabella Stewart 
Gardner Museum, Boston. 
H. New computers tie a variety of monitoring 
and security features into a comprehensive 
system which provides warning and backup alerts 
when any of the system components are not 
functioning properly. Photo: © Isabella Stewart 
Gardner Museum, Boston. 
15 

Back Cover: The Diagnosing Moisture in Historic Building Symposium held in Washington, DC, May, 1996, brought together practitioners in the field of 
historic preservation to 4iscuss the issues contained in this Preservation Brief Attendees are standing in front of the cascading fountains at Meridian Hill 
Park, a National Historic Landmark. Photo: Eric Avner. 
Reading List 
Conrad, Ernest A., P.E. "The Dews and Don'ts of 
Insulating." Old House Journal, May /June, 1996. 
Cumberland, Don, Jr. "Museum Collection Storage in an 
Historic Building Using a Prefabricated Structure." 
Preservation Tech Notes. Washington, DC: National Park 
Service, issue PTN-14. September, 1985. 
Jessup, Wendy Claire, Ed. Conservation in Context: Finding a 
Balance for the Historic House Museum. Washington, DC: 
National Trust for Historic Preservation (Symposium 
Proceedings March 7-8,1994). 
Labine, Clem. "Managing Moisture in Historic Buildings" 
Special Report and Moisture Monitoring Source List. 
Traditional Building, Vol 9, No.2, May-June 1996. 
Leeke, John. "Detecting Moisture; Methods and Tools for 
Evaluating Water in Old Houses." Old House Journal, 
May /June, 1996. 
Moisture Control in Building~ . Heinz R. Trechsel, Editor. 
Philadelphia: American Society for Testing and Materials 
(ASTM manual series: MNL 18), 1993. 
Museums in Historic Buildings (Special Issue). APT 
Bulletin. The Journal of Preservation Technology, Vol 26, 
No.3. Williamsburg, VA: APT, 1996. 
Oxley, T.A. and A. E. Gobert. Dampness in Buildings: 
Diagnosis, Treatment, Instruments. London, Boston: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1994. 
Park, Sharon C. AlA. Preservation Brief24: Heating, 
Ventilating, and Cooling Historic Buildings: Problems and 
Recommended Approaches. Washington, DC: Department of 
the Interior, Government Printing Office, 1991. 
Rose, William. "Effects of Climate Control on the Museum 
Building Envelope," Journal of the American Institute for 
Conservation, Vol. 33, No.2. Summer, 1994. 
Smith, Baird M. Moisture Problems in Historic Masonry Walls; 
Diagnosis and Treatment. Washington, DC.: Department of 
the Interior, Government Printing Office, 1984. 
Tolpin, Jim. "Builder's Guide to Moisture Meters," Tools of 
the Trade Vol 2, No.1 (Quarterly Supplement to The Journal 
of Light Construction). Richmond, Vermont: Builderburg 
Group Inc. Summer, 1994. 
Acknowledgments 
Sharon C. Park, AlA is the Senior Historical Architect, Technical Preservation 
Services, Heritag e Preservation Services Program , National Park Service, 
Washington, D.C. The author wishes to thank the following individuals and 
organizations for providing technical review and other assistance in developing 
this publication: The attendees, speakers, and sponsors of the Diagnosing 
Moisture in Historic Buildings Symposium held in Washington, DC in 1996 and 
funded by a grant from the National Center for Preservation Technology and 
Training, National Park Service; Hugh C. Miller, FAIA; Michael Henry , AlA, 
PE, PP; Baird M. Smith, AlA; Ernest A. Conrad, P.E.; William B. Rose; Rebecca 
Stevens. AlA; Wendy Claire Jessup; Elizabeth Sasser, AlA; Bryan Blundell; 
George Siekkinen, AlA; Larry D. Dermody; Kimberly A. Konrad; Barbara J. 
Mangum and the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston; Gunston Hall 
Plantation; Friends of Meridian Hill; Friends of Great Falls Tavern; The National 
Trust for Historic Preservation; Thomas McGrath, Douglas C. Hicks and The 
Williamsport Preservation Training Center, NPS; the staff at Heritage 
Preservation Services, NPS, Charles E. Fisher, Brooks Prueher, Anne E. 
Grimmer, Antoinette Lee, and especially Kay D. Weeks. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interior to 
develop and make available information concerning historic properties. 
Comments about this publication should be directed to de Teel Patterson Tiller, 
Acting Manager, Heritage Preservation Services Program , National Park Service, 
P.O. Box 37127, Washington, DC 20013-7127. This publication is not copyrighted 
and can be reproduced without penalty. Copyright photographs included in 
this publication may not be used to illustrate publications other than as a 
reference to this Preservation Brief, without permission of the owners. 
Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park Service 
are appreciated. 
Cover Photo: Masonry repointing in a wet environment. 
Photo: Williamsport Preservation Training Center, NPS. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 October, 1996 