U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
PRESERVATION
BRIEFS 
The Repair and 
Thermal Upgrading of 
Historic Steel Windows 
Sharon C. Park, AIA 
The Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation" require that where historic windows are individually significant features, or where 
they contribute to the character of significant facades, their distinguishing visual qualities must not be destroyed. Further, the rehabilitation 
guidelines recommend against changing the historic appearance of windows through the use of inappropriate designs, materials, finishes, or colors 
which radically change the sash, depth of reveal , and muntin configuration; the reflectivity and color of the glazing; or the appearance of the 
frame. 
Windows are among the most vulnerable features of 
historic buildings undergoing rehabilitation. This is 
especially the case with rolled steel windows, which are 
often mistakenly not deemed worthy of preservation in the 
conversion of old buildings to new uses. The ease with 
which they can be replaced and the mistaken assumption 
that they cannot be made energy efficient except at great 
expense are factors that typically lead to the decision to 
remove them. In many cases, however, repair and retrofit 
of the historic windows are more economical than whole­
sale replacement, and all too often, replacement units are 
unlike the originals in design and appearance. 
If the win­
dows are important in establishing the historic characte r of 
the building (see fig. 1), insensitively designed replacement 
windows may diminish-or destroy-the building's historic 
character. 
This Brief identifies various types of historic steel 
windows that dominated the metal window market from 
1890-1950. It then gives criteria for evaluating deterioration 
and for determining appropriate treatment, ranging from 
routine maintenance and weatherization to extensive 
repairs, so that replacement may be avoided where possi­
ble. This information applies to do-it-yourself jobs and to 
large rehabilitations where the volume of work warrants the 
removal of all window units for complete overhaul by pro­
fessional contractors. 
1 
This Brief is not intended to promote the repair of fer­
rous metal windows in every case, but rather to insure 
that preservation is always the first consideration in a 
rehabilitation project. Some windows are not important 
elements in defining a building's historic character; others 
are highly significant, but so deteriorated that repair is in­
feasible. In such cases, the Brief offers guidance in 
evaluating appropriate replacement windows. 
Fig. I Often highly distinctive in design and craftsmanship, rolled steel 
windows play an important role in defining the architectural character of 
many later nineteenth and early twentieth century buildings. Art Deco, 
Art Moderne, the International Style, and Post World War II Moder­
nism depended on the slim profiles and streamlined appearance of metal 
windows for much of their impact. Photo: William G . Johnson . 
'The technical information given in this brief is intended for most ferrous (or 
magnetic) metals, particularly rolled steel. While stainless steel is a ferrous metal , 
the cleaning and repair techniques outlined here must not be used on it as the finish 
will be damaged. For information on cleaning stainless steel and non-ferrous 
metals, such as bronze, Mone!, or aluminum, refer to Metals in America's Historic 
Buildings (see bibliography) . 

ROLLING SECTION FROM BAR 
1ST PASS 2ND PASS 3RD PASS 4TH PASS 
5TH PASS 6TH PASS 7TH PASS 8 .TH PASS 
.!!' +J! 
1· 
,. -.. 
,·~:. 
1' 
•• 
§ It. !di I~ : : 
,-::. i' 
FULL SIZE 
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT 
Although metal windows were available as early as 1860 
from catalogues published by architectural supply firms, 
they did not become popular until after 1890. Two factors 
combined to account for the shift from wooden to metal 
windows about that time. Technology borrowed from the 
rolling industry permitted the mass production of rolled 
steel windows. This technology made metal windows cost 
competitive with conventional wooden windows. In addi­
tion, a series of devastating urban fires in Boston, 
Baltimore, Philadelphia, and San Francisco led to the 
enactment of strict fire codes for industrial and multi­
story commercial and office buildings. 
As in the process of making rails for railroads, rolled 
steel windows were made by passing hot bars of steel 
through progressively smaller, shaped rollers until the ap­
propriate angled configuration was achieved (see fig. 2). 
The rolled steel 
sections, generally 1/8" thick and l" -
1 1/2" wide, were used for all the components of the win­
dows: sash, frame,and subframe (see fig. 3). With the ad­
dition of wire glass, a fire-resistant window resulted. 
These rolled steel windows are almost exclusively found in 
masonry or concrete buildings. 
A byproduct of the fire-resistant window was the 
strong metal frame that permitted the installation of 
larger windows and windows in series. The ability to have 
expansive amounts of glass and increased ventilation 
dramatically changed the designs of late 19th and early 
20th century industrial and commercial buildings. 
The newly available, reasonably priced steel windows 
soon became popular for more than just their fire­
resistant qualities. They were standardized, extremely 
durable, and easily transported. These qualities led to the 
use of steel windows in every type of construction, from 
simple industrial and institutional buildings to luxury 
commercial and apartment buildings. Casement, double­
hung, pivot, projecting, austral, and continuous windows 
differed in operating and ventilating capacities. Figure 4 
outlines the kinds and properties of metal windows 
available then and now. In addition, the thin profiles of 
metal windows contributed to the streamlined appearance 
of the Art Deco, Art Moderne, and International Styles, 
among others. 
The extensive use of rolled steel metal windows con­
tinued until after World War II when cheaper, non­
corroding aluminum windows became increasingly 
popular. While aluminum windows dominate the market 
today, steel windows are still fabricated. Should replace­
ment of original windows become necessary, replacement 
windows may be available from the manufacturers of 
some of the earliest steel windows. Before an informed 
decision can be made whether to repair or replace metal 
windows, however, the significance of the windows must 
be determined and their physical condition assessed. 
Cover illustration: from Hope's Metal Windows and Casements: 
1818-1926, currently Hope 's Architectural Products, Inc . Used with per ­
mission. 
2 
Fig. 2. The process of rolling a steel bar into an angled section is il­
lustrated above. The shape and size of the rolled section will vary slight­
ly depending on the overall strength needed for the window opening and 
the location of the section in the assembly: subframe, frame, or sash. 
The 118 " thickness of the metal section is generally standard. Drawing: 
A Metal Window Dictionary. Used with permission . 
Fig. 3 A typical section through the top and bottom of a metal window 
shows the three component parts of the window assembly: subframe, 
frame, and sash. Drawings: Catalogue No. 15, January 1931; Interna­
tional Casement Co, Inc., presently Hope's Architectural Products, Inc., 
Jamestown, NY. Used with permission. 

EVALUATION 
Historic and Architectural Considerations 
An assessment of the significance of the windows should 
begin with a consideration of their function in relation to 
the building's historic use and its historic character. Win­
dows that help define the building's historic character 
should be preserved even if the building is being converted 
to a new use. For example, projecting steel windows u sed 
to introduce light and an effect of spaciousness to a 
warehouse or industrial plant can be retained in the con­
version of such a building to offices or residences. 
Other elements in assessing the relative importance of 
the historic windows include the design of the window s 
and their relationship to the scale, proportion, detailing 
and architectural style of the building . While it may be 
easy to determine the aesthetic value of highly ornamented 
windows, or to recognize the importance of streamlined 
windows as an element of a style, less elaborate windows 
can also provide strong visual interest by their small panes 
or projecting planes when open, particularly in simple , 
unadorned industrial buildings (see fig. 5) . 
One test of the importance of windows to a building is 
to ask if the overall appearance of the building would be 
changed noticeably if the windows were to be removed or 
radically altered. 
If so, the windows are important in 
defining the building's historic character, and should be 
repaired if their physical condition permits . 
Physical Evaluation 
Steel window repair should begin w ith a careful evaluation 
of the physical condition of each unit. Either drawings or 
photographs, liberally annotated, may be used to reco rd 
the location of each window, the type of operability, the 
condition of all three parts-sash, frame and sub­
frame-and the repairs essential to its continued use . 
Specifically, the evaluation should include : presence and 
degree of corrosion; condition of paint; deterioration of 
the metal sections, including bowing, misalignment of the 
sash, or bent sections; condition of the glass and glazing 
compound; presence and condition of all hardware, 
screws, bolts, and hinges; and cond ition of the masonry 
or concrete surrounds, including need for caulking or 
resetting of improperly sloped sills. 
Corrosion, principally rusting 
in the case of steel win­
dows, is the controlling factor in window repair; 
therefore, the evaluator should first test for its presence. 
Corrosion can be light, medium, or heavy, depending on 
how much the rust has penetrated the metal sections. If 
the rusting is merely a surface accumulation or flaking, 
then the corrosion is light. 
If the rusting has penetrated 
the metal (indicated by a bubbling texture), but has not 
caused any structural damage, then the corrosion is 
medium. 
If the rust has penetrated deep into the metal, 
the corrosion is heavy. Heavy corrosion generally results 
in some form of structural damage,through delaminat ion, 
to the metal section, which must then be patched or splic­
ed. A sharp probe or tool, such as an ice pick, can be us­
ed to determine the extent of corrosion in the metal. If 
the probe can penetrate the surface of the metal and brit­
tle strands can be dug out, then a high degree of corrosive 
deterioration is present. 
In addition to corrosion, the condition of the 
paint, the 
presence of bowing or misalignment of metal sections, the 
amount of glass needing replacement, and the condition 
of the masonry or concrete surrounds must be assessed in 
the evaluation process. These are key factors in determin­
ing whether or not the windows can be repaired in place. 
The more complete the inventory of existing conditions, 
the easier it will be to determine whether repair is feasible 
or whether replacement is warranted. 
Rehabilitation Work Plan 
Following inspection and analysis, a plan for the 
rehabilitation can be formulated. The actions necessary to 
return windows to an efficient and effective working con­
dition will fall into one or more of the following 
categories: routine maintenance, repair, and weatheriza­
tion. The routine maintenance and weatherizatiori 
measures described here are generally within the range of 
do-it-yourselfers. Other repairs, both moderate and ma­
jor, require a professional contractor. Major repairs nor­
mally require the removal of the window units to a 
workshop, but even in the case of moderate repairs, the 
number of windows involved might warrant the removal 
of all the deteriorated units to a workshop in order to 
realize a more economical repair price. Replacement of 
windows should be considered only as a last resort. 
Since moisture is the primary cause of corrosion in steel 
windows, it is essential that excess moisture be eliminated 
and that the building be made as weathertight as possible 
before any other work is undertaken. Moisture can ac­
cumulate from cracks in the masonry, from spalling mor­
tar, from leaking gutters, from air conditioning condensa­
tion runoff, and from poorly ventilated interior spaces. 
Finally, before beginning any work, it is important to 
be aware of health and safety risks involved. Steel win­
dows have historically been coated with lead paint. The 
removal of such paint by abrasive methods will produce 
toxic dust. Therefore, safety goggles, a toxic dust 
respirator, and protective clothing should be worn. 
Similar protective measures should be taken when acid 
compounds are used. Local codes may govern the 
methods of removing lead paints and proper disposal of 
toxic residue. 
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE 
A preliminary step in the routine maintenance of steel 
windows is to remove surface dirt and grease in order to 
ascertain the degree of deterioration, if any. Such minor 
cleaning can be accomplished using a brush or vacuum 
followed by wiping with a cloth dampened with mineral 
spirits or denatured alcohol. 
3 

Fig. 4 Typical rolled steel windows available from 1890 to the present . The various operating and ventilating capacities in combination 
with the aesthetics of the window style were important considerations in the selection of one window type over another. Drawings : 
Sharon C. Park, AJA . 
Double-hung industrial windows 
duplicated the look of traditional wooden 
windows. Metal double-hung windows were 
early examples of a building product adapt­
ed to meet stringent new fire code require­
ments for manufacturing and high-rise 
buildings in urban areas. Soon supplanted 
in industrial buildings by less expensive 
pivot windows, double-hung metal win­
dows regained popularity in the 1940s for 
use in speculative suburban housing. 
Pivot windows were an early type of in­
dustrial window that combined inexpen­
sive first cost and low maintenance . Pivot 
windows became standard for warehouses 
and power plants where the lack of screens 
was not a problem. The window shown 
here is a horizontal pivot. Windows that 
turned about a vertical axis were also 
manufactured (often of iron). Such ver­
tical pivots are rare today . 
Projecting windows, sometimes called 
awning or hopper windows, were perfected 
in the 1920s for industrial and institutional 
buildings. They were often used in "combi­
nation" windows, in which upper panels 
opened out and lower panels opened in. 
Since each movable panel projected to 
one side of the frame only, unlike pivot 
windows, for example, screens could be 
introduced . 
Austral windows were also a product of 
the 1920s. They combined the appearance 
of the double-hung window with the in­
creased ventilation and ease of operation 
of the projected window. (When fully 
opened, they provided 70% ventilation as 
compared to 50% ventilation for double­
hung windows.) Austral windows were 
often used in schools, libraries and other 
public buildings. 
Casement windows adapted the English 
tradition of using wrought iron casements 
with leaded cames for residential use . 
Rolled steel casements (either single, as 
shown, or paired) were popular in the 
1920s for cottage style residences and 
Gothic style campus architecture . More 
streamlined casements were popular in the 
1930s for institutional and small industrial 
buildings. 
-
I"" I 
~ 
-
-
Ji 
Continuous windows were almost exclusively used for in­
dustrial buildings requiring high overhead lighting. Long 
runs of clerestory windows operated by mechanical 
tension rod gears were typical. Long banks 
of continuous windows were possible 
because the frames for such 
windows were often 
structural elements 
of the building . 
Fig. 5 Windows often provide a strong visual element to relative­
ly simple or unadorned industrial or commercial buildings. This 
design element should be taken into consideration when eval­
uating the significance of the windows. Photo: Michael Auer . 
If it is determined that the windows are in basically 
sound condition, the following steps can be taken: 1) 
removal of light rust, flaking and excessive paint; 2) prim­
ing of exposed metal with a rust-inhibiting primer; 3) 
replacement of cracked or broken glass and glazing com­
pound; 4) replacement of missing screws or fasteners; 5) 
cleaning and lubrication of hinges; 6) repainting of all 
steel sections with two coats of finish paint compatible 
with the primer; and 7) caulking the masonry surrounds 
with a high quality elastomeric caulk. 
Recommended methods for removing light rust include 
manual and mechanical abrasion or the application of 
chemicals. Burning off rust with an oxy-acetylene or pro­
pane torch, or an inert gas welding gun, should never be 
attempted because the heat can distort the metal. In addi­
tion, such intense heat (often as high as 3800° F) 
vaporizes the lead in old paint, resulting in highly toxic 
fumes. Furthermore, such heat will likely result in broken 
glass. Rust can best be removed using a wire brush, an 
aluminum oxide sandpaper, or a variety of power tools 
4 

adapted for abrasive cleaning such as an electric drill w ith 
a wire brush or a rotary whip attachment. Adjacent sills 
and window jambs may need protective shielding. 
Rust can also be removed from ferrous metals by using 
a number of commercially prepared anti-corrosive acid 
compounds. Effective on light and medium corrosion, 
these compounds can be purchased either as liquids or 
gels. Several bases are available, including phosphoric 
acid, ammonium citrate, oxalic acid and hydrochloric 
acid. tiydrochloric acid is generally not recommended; it 
can leave chloride deposits, which cause future corrosion. 
Phosphoric acid-based compounds do not leave such 
deposits, and are therefore safer for steel windows. 
However, any chemical residue should be wiped off with 
damp cloths, then dried immediately. Industrial blow­
dryers work well for thorough drying. The use of running 
water to remove chemical residue is never recommended 
because the water may spread the chemicals to adjacent 
surfaces, and drying of thes_~ surfaces may be more dif­
ficult. Acid cleaning compounds will stain masonry; 
therefore plastic sheets should be taped to the edge of the 
metal sections to protect the masonry surrounds. The 
same measure should be followed to protect the glazing 
from etching because of acid CO!}tact. 
Measures that remove rust will ordinarily remove flak­
ing paint as well. Remaining loose or flaking paint can be 
removed with a chemical paint remover or with a 
pneumatic needle scaler or gun, which comes with a series 
of chisel blades and has proven effective in removing flak­
ing paint from metal windows. Well-bonded paint may 
serve to protect the metal further from corrosion, and 
need not be removed unless paint build-up prevents the 
window from closing tightly. The edges should be feath­
ered by sanding to give a good surface for repainting. 
Next, any bare metal should be wiped with a cleaning 
solvent such as denatured alcohol, and dried immediately 
in preparation for the application of an anti-corrosive 
primer. Since corrosion can recur very soon after metal 
has been exposed to the air, the metal should be primed 
immediately after cleaning. Spot priming may be required 
periodically as other repairs are undertaken. Anti­
corrosive pr~mers generally consist of oil-alkyd based 
paints rich in zinc or zinc chromate. Red lead is no 
longer available because of 
its toxicity. All metal primers, 
however, are toxic to some degree and should be handled 
carefully . Two coats of primer are recommended. Manu­
facturer's recommendations should be followed concern­
ing application of primers. 
2 
REPAIR 
Repair in Place 
The maintenance procedures described above will be in­
sufficient when corrosion is extensive, or when metal win­
dow sections are misaligned. Medium to heavy corrosion 
that has not done any structural damage to the metal sec­
tions can be removed either by using the chemical cleaning 
process described under "Routine Maintenance" or by 
sandblasting. Since sandblasting can damage the masonry 
surrounds and crack or cloud the glass, metal or plywood 
shields should be used to protect these materials. The 
sandblasting pressure should be low, 
80-100 pounds per 
square inch, and the grit size should be in the range of 
#10-#45. Glass peening beads (glass pellets) have also been 
successfully used in cleaning steel sections. While sand­
blasting equipment comes with various nozzle sizes, 
pencil-point blasters are most useful because they give the 
operator more effective control over the direction of the 
spray. The small aperture of the pencil-point blaster is 
also useful in removing dried putty from the metal sec­
tions that hold the glass. As with any cleaning technique, 
once the bare metal is exposed to air, it should be primed 
as soon as possible. This includes the inside rabbeted sec­
tion of sash where glazing putty has been removed. To re­
duce the dust, some local codes allow only wet blasting. 
In this case, the metal must be dried immediately, general­
ly with a blow-drier (a step that the owner should consider 
when calculating the time and expense involved). Either 
form of sandblasting metal covered with lead paints pro­
duces toxic dust. Proper precautionary measures should 
be taken against toxic dust and silica particles. 
Bent or bowed metal sections may be the 
result of 
damage to the window through an impact or corrosive ex­
pansion. If the distortion is not too great, it is possible to 
realign the metal sections without removing the window to 
a metal fabricator's shop. The glazing is generally remov­
ed and pressure is applied to the bent or bowed section. 
In the case of a muntin, a protective 2 x 4 wooden brac­
ing can be placed behind the bent portion and a wire 
cable with a winch can apply progressively more pressure 
over several days until the section is realigned. The 2 x 4 
bracing is necessary to distribute the pressure evenly over 
the damaged section. Sometimes a section, such as the 
bottom of the frame, will bow out as a result of pressure 
exerted by corrosion and it is often necessary to cut the 
metal section to relieve this pressure prior to pressing the 
section back into shape and making a welded repair. 
Once the metal sections have been cleaned of all corro­
sion and straightened, small holes and uneven areas 
resulting from rusting should be filled with a patching 
material and sanded smooth to eliminate pockets where 
water can accumulate. A patching material of steel fibers 
and an epoxy binder may be the easiest to apply. This 
steel-based epoxy is available for industrial steel repair; it 
can also be found in auto body patching compounds or in 
plumber's epoxy. As with any product, it is important to 
follow the manufacturer's instructions for proper use and 
best results . The traditional patching technique-melting 
steel welding rods to fill holes in the metal sections-may 
be difficult to apply in some situations; moreover, the 
window glass must be removed during the repair process, 
or it will crack from the expansion of the heated metal 
sections. After these repairs, glass replacement, hinge 
lubrication, painting, and other cosmetic repairs can be 
undertaken as necessary. 
'Refer to Table IV . Types of Paint Used for Painting Metal in Metals in Ameri ca's 
Historic Buildings, p. 139. (See bibliography). 
5 

To complete the checklist for routine maintenance, 
cracked glass, deteriorated glazing compound, missing 
screws, and broken fasteners will have to be replaced; 
hinges cleaned and lubricated; the metal windows painted, 
and the masonry surrounds caulked. If the glazing must 
be replaced, all clips, glazing beads, and other fasteners 
that hold the glass to the sash should be retained, if possi­
ble, although replacements for these parts are still being 
fabricated. When bedding glass, use only glazing com­
pound formulated for metal windows. To clean the hinges 
(generally brass or bronze), a cleaning solvent and fine 
bronze wool should be used. The hinges should then be 
lubricated with a non-greasy lubricant specially for­
mulated for metals and with an anti-corrosive agent. 
These lubricants are available in a spray form and should 
be used periodically on frequently opened windows. 
Final painting of the windows with a paint compatible 
with the anti-corrosive primer should proceed on a dry 
day. (Paint and primer from the same manufacturer 
should be used.) Two coats of finish paint are recom­
mended if the sections have been cleaned to bare metal. 
The paint should overlap the glass slightly to insure 
weathertightness at that connection. Once the paint dries 
thoroughly, a flexible exterior caulk can be applied to 
eliminate air and moisture infiltration where the window 
and the surrounding masonry meet. 
Caulking is generally undertaken after the windows 
have received at least one coat of finish paint. The 
perimeter of the masonry surround should be caulked 
with a flexible elastomeric compound that will adhere well 
to both metal and masonry. The caulking used should be 
a type intended for exterior application, have a high 
tolerance for material movement, be resistant to 
ultraviolet light, and have a minimum durability of 10 
years. Three effective compounds (taking price and other 
factors into consideration) are polyurethane, vinyl acrylic, 
and butyl rubber. In selecting a caulking material for a 
window retrofit, it is important to remember that the 
caulking compound may be covering other materials in a 
substrate. In this case, some compounds, such as silicone, 
may not adhere well. Almost all modern caulking com­
pounds can be painted after curing completely. Many 
come in a range of colors, which eliminates the need to 
paint. 
If colored caulking is used, the windows should 
have been given two coats of finish paint prior to caulk­
ing. 
Repair in Workshop 
Damage to windows may be so severe that the window 
sash and sometimes the frame must be removed for clean­
ing and extensive rust removal, straightening of bent sec­
tions, welding or splicing in of new sections, and reglaz­
ing. These major and expensive repairs are reserved for 
highly significant windows that cannot be replaced; the 
procedures involved should be carried out only by skilled 
workmen. (see fig. 6a-6f.) 
6 
As part of the orderly removal of windows, each win­
dow should be numbered and the parts labelled. The 
operable metal sash should be dismantled by removing the 
hinges; the fixed sash and, if necessary, the frame can 
then be unbolted or unscrewed. (The subframe is usually 
left in place. Built into the masonry surrounds, it can only 
be cut out with a torch.) Hardware and hinges should be 
labelled and stored together. 
The two major choices for removing flaking paint and 
corrosion from severely deteriorated windows are dipping 
in a chemical bath or sandblasting. Both treatments re ­
quire removal of the glass. 
If the windows are to be dip­
ped, a phosphoric acid solution is preferred, as mentioned 
earlier. While the dip tank method is good for fairly even­
ly distributed rust, deep set rust may remain after dipping . 
For that reason, sandblasting is more effective for heavy 
and uneven corrosion. Both methods leave the metal sec­
tions clean of residual paint. As already noted, after 
cleaning has exposed the metal to the air, it should be 
primed immediately after drying with an anti-corrosive 
primer to prevent rust from recurring. 
Sections that are seriously bent or bowed must be 
straightened with heat and applied pressure in a 
workshop. Structurally weakened sections must be cut 
out, generally with an oxy-acetylene torch, and replaced 
with sections welded in place and the welds ground 
smooth. Finding replacement metal sections, however , 
may be difficult. While most rolling mills are producing 
modern sections suitable for total replacement, it may be 
difficult to find an exact profile match for a splicing 
repair. The best source of rolled metal sections is from 
salvaged windows, preferably from the same building. 
If 
no salvaged windows are available, two options remain . 
Either an ornamental metal fabricator can weld flat plates 
into a built-up section, or a steel plant can mill bar steel 
into the desired profile. 
While the sash and frame are removed for repair, the 
subframe and masonry surrounds should be inspected. 
This is also the time to reset sills or to remove corrosion 
from the subframe, taking care to protect the masonry 
surrounds from damage. 
Missing or broken hardware and hinges should be 
replaced on all windows that will be operable. Salvaged 
windows, again, are the best source of replacement parts. 
If matching parts cannot be found, it may be possible to 
adapt ready-made items. Such a substitution may require 
filling existing holes with steel epoxy or with plug welds 
and tapping in new screw holes. However, if the hardware 
is a highly significant element of the historic window, it 
may be worth having reproductions made. 
Following are illustrations of the repair and thermal 
upgrading of the rolled steel windows in a National 
Historic Landmark (fig. 6). Many of the techniques 
described above were used during this extensive rehabilita­
tion. The complete range of repair techniques is then sum ­
marized in the chart titled 
Steps for Cleaning and Repair­
ing Historic Steel Windows (see fig. 7). 

Fig. 6 a. View of the flanking wing of the State Capitol where the 
rolled steel casement windows are being removed for repair. 
Fig. 6 c. View of the rusted frame which was unscrewed from the 
subframe and removed from the window opening and taken to a 
workshop for sandblasting. In some cases, severely deteriorated sec­
tions of the frame were replaced with new sections of milled bar 
steel. 
Fig. 6 e. View looking down towards the sill . The cleaned frame 
was reset in the window opening. The frame was screwed to the 
refurbished subframe at the jamb and the head only. The screw 
holes at the sill, which had been the cause of much of the earlier 
rusting, were infilled . Vinyl weatherstripping was added to the 
frame. 
Fig. 6 b . View from the exterior showing the deteriorated condition 
of the lower corner of a window prior to repair. While the sash was 
in relatively good condition, the frame behind was rusted to the 
point of inhibiting operation. 
Fig. 6 d. View looking down towards the sill. The subframes ap­
peared very rusted, but were in good condition once debris was 
vacuumed and surface rust was removed, in place, with chemical 
compounds. Where necessary, epoxy and steel filler was used to 
patch depressions in order to make the subframe serviceable again. 
Fig. 6 f View from 
the outside of the 
completely 
re.furbished window. 
In addition to the 
steel repair and the 
installation of vinyl 
weatherstripping, 
the exterior was 
caulked with 
polyurethane and 
the single glass was 
replaced with 
individual lights of 
thermal glass. The 
repaired and 
upgraded windows 
have comparable 
energy efficiency 
ratings to new 
replacement units 
while retaining the 
historic steel sash, 
frames and 
subframes. 
Fig. 6. The repair and thermal upgrading of the historic steel windows at the State Capitol, Lincoln, Nebraska. This early twentieth 
century building, designed by Bertram Goodhue, is a National Historic Landmark. Photos: All photos in this series were provided by 
the State Building Division. 
7 

STEPS FOR CLEANING AND REPAIRING HISTORIC STEEL WINDOWS ________ _ 
Work 
Recommended 
Techniques 
Tools, Products and 
Procedures Notes 
•(Must be done in a 
workshop) 
General maintenance 
and chemical cleaning 
1. Removing 
dirt and 
grease· from 
metal 
Vacuum and bristle brushes to 
remove dust and dirt; solvents 
(denatured alcohol, 
mineral 
spirits), and clean cloths to 
remove grease. 
Solvents can cause eye and skin ir-
ritation. Operator should wear pro-
tective gear and work in ventilated 
area. Solvents should not contact 
masonry. Do not flush with water. 
2. Removing 
Rust/ 
Corrosion 
Light Manual and mechanical 
abrasion 
Wire brushes, steel wool, 
rotary attachments to electric 
drill, sanding 
blocks and 
disks. 
Handsanding will probably be 
necessary for corners . Safety 
goggles 
and masks should be worn. 
Chemical cleaning Anti-corrosive jellies and Ii-
quids (phosphoric acid prefer-
red); clean damp cloths. 
Protect glass and metal with plastic 
sheets attached with tape. Do not 
flush with water. Work in ventilated 
area. 
Medium Sandblasting/ abrasive 
cleaning 
Low pressure (80-100 psi) and 
small grit (#10-#45); glass 
peening beads . Pencil blaster 
gives good control. 
Removes both paint and rust. Codes 
should be checked for environmen-
ta! compliance. Prime exposed 
metal promptly. Shield glass and 
masonry. Operator should wear 
safety gear . 
Heavy •chemical dip tank Metal sections dipped into 
chemical 
tank (phosphoric 
acid preferred) from several 
hours to 24 hours. 
Glass and hardware should be 
removed. Protect operator. Deepset 
rust may remain, but paint will be 
removed. 
•Sandblasting/ 
abrasive cleaning 
Low pressure (80-100 psi) and 
small grit (#10-#45). 
Excellent for heavy rust. Remove o r 
protect glass. Prime exposed metal 
promptly. Check codes for en-
vironrnental compliance. Operator 
should wear safety gear. 
3. Removing 
flaking 
paint. 
Chemical method Chemical paint strippers 
suitable for ferrous metals. 
Clean cloths. 
Protect glass and masonry. Do not 
flush with water. Have good ven-
tilation and protection for operator. 
Mechanical abrasion Pneumatic needle gun chisels, 
sanding disks . 
Protect operator; have good ventila-
tion. Well-bonded paint need not be 
removed if window closes properly. 
4. Aligning 
bent, bowed 
metal 
sections 
Applied pressure Wooden frame as a brace for 
cables and winch mechanism. 
Remove glass in affected area . 
Realignment may take several days. 
•Heat and pressure Remove to a workshop. Apply 
heat and pressure to bend 
back. 
Care should be taken that heat does 
not deform slender sections . 
8 

Recommended Tools, Products and 
Work Item Techniques Procedures Notes 
*(Must be done in a 
workshop) 
Epoxy and steel filler Epoxy fillers with high con-
tent of steel fibers; plumber's 
epoxy or autobody patching 
compound. 
Epoxy patches generally are easy to 
apply, and can be sanded smooth. 
Patches should be primed. 
Welded patches Weld in patches using steel 
rods and oxy-acetylene torch 
or arc welder. 
Prime welded sections after grinding 
connections smooth. 
6. Splicing in 
new metal 
sections 
•cut out decayed sec-
tions and weld in new 
or salvaged sections 
Torch to cut out bad sections 
back to 45 ° joint. Weld in 
new pieces and grind smooth. 
Prime welded sections after grinding 
connection smooth. 
7. Priming 
metal 
sections 
Brush or spray 
application 
At least one coat of anti-cor-
rosive primer on bare metal. 
Zinc-rich primers are general-
ly recomm ended . 
Metal should be primed as soon as 
it is exposed. 
If cleaned metal will 
be repaired another day, spot prime 
to protect exposed metal. 
8. Replacing 
missing 
screws and 
bolts 
Routine maintenance Pliers to pull out or shear off 
rusted heads. Replace screws 
and bolts with similar ones, 
readily available. 
If new holes have to be tapped into 
the metal sections, the rusted holes 
should be cleaned, filled and primed 
prior to redrilling. 
9. Cleaning, 
lubricating 
or replac-
ing hinges 
and other 
hardware 
Routine maintenance, 
solvent cleaning 
Most hinges and closure hard-
ware are bronze. Use solvents 
(mineral spirits), bronze wool 
and clean cloths. Spray with 
non-greasy lubricant contain-
ing anti-corrosive agent. 
Replacement hinges and fasteners 
may not match the original exactly . 
If new holes are necessary, old ones 
should be filled. 
10. Replacing 
glass and 
glazing 
compound 
Standard method for 
application 
Pliers and chisels to remove 
old glass, scrape putty out of 
glazing rabbet, save all clips 
and beads for reuse. Use only 
glazing compound formulated 
for metal windows. 
Heavy gloves and other protective 
gear needed for the operator. All 
parts saved should be cleaned prior
to reinstallation. 
11. Caulking 
masonry 
surrounds 
Standard method for 
application 
Good quality (10 year or bet-
ter) elastomeric caulking com-
pound suitable for metal. 
The gap between the metal frame 
and the masonry opening should be 
caulked; keep weepholes in metal 
for condensation run-off clear of 
caulk. 
12. Repainting 
metal 
windows 
Spray or brush At least 2 coats of paint com-
patible with the anti-corrosive 
primer. Paint should lap the 
glass about l /8 " to form a 
seal over the glazing 
compound. 
The final coats of paint and the 
primer should be from the same 
manufacturer to ensure compatibili-
ty. If spraying is used, the glass and 
masonry should be protected. 
Fig. 7. STEPS FOR CLEANING AND REPAIRING HISTORIC STEEL WINDOWS. Compiled by Sharon C. Park, AJA. 
9 
5. Patching 
depressions 

Sprln11-metal EXTE,1',10"1 / 
,-~- 7 
Spring-metal comds in bronze, brass or 
stainless steel with an integral friction-lit 
~ clip. The weatherstripping is applied after 
1 
the repaired windows are painted to avoid 
galvanic corrosion . This type of thin 
weatherstripping is intended for windows 
\.JEAfHJ!."1?1'"'111" 
in good condition . 
Vinyl Strips EXTEl'\101'> Vinyl strips are scored and fold into a '"V" 
configuration. Applied adhesive is necessary 
~ .,;,, wm ;",~·~ "' '"''"= "' "' weatherstripping, making it inappropriate 
f l',l>/1 for some situations . The weatherstripping 
is generally applied to the window after 
'C.... painting . 
Wl:ATHE>l'\;!°l'11P' 
Foam Tape .:m :1<1101"> Closed cell foam tape comes either with 
or without an adhesive backing . It is 
=~"'" ? 
effective for windows with a gap of 
approximately 1/4" and is easy to install. 
However , this type of weatherstripping 
f l'lAl1Ez_,,, , will need frequent replacement on 
windows in regular use . The metal section 
'l.Wi:ATH~IS,rl'\IP should be cleaned of all dirt and grease 
prior to its application . 
Sealant Bead EXif.l"llO,-, This very effective type of weatherstripping 
involves the application of a clean bead of 
~ 
firm setting caulk on the primed frame 
with a polyethelene bond breaker tape on 
the operable sash . The window is then 
closed until the bead has set and takes the f M 
form of the gap . The sash is then opened 
'LWE:A1\iEl!l~r'IIP and the tape is removed leaving the set 
caulk as the weatherstripping. 
WEATHERIZATION 
Historic metal windows are generally not energy efficient; 
this has often led to their wholesale replacement. Metal 
windows can, however, be made more energy efficient in 
several ways, varying in complexity and cost. Caulking 
around the masonry openings and adding weatherstrip­
ping, for example, can be do-it-yourself projects and are 
important first steps in reducing air infiltration around the 
windows. They usually have a rapid payback period. 
Other treatments include applying fixed layers of glazing 
over the historic windows, adding operable storm win­
dows, or installing thermal glass in place of the existing 
glass. In combination with caulking and weatherstripping, 
these treatments can produce energy ratings rivaling those 
achieved by new units. 
3 
Weatherstripping 
The first step in any weatherization program, caulking, 
has been discussed above under "Routine Maintenance." 
The second step is the installation of weatherstripping 
where the operable portion of the sash, often called the 
ventilator, and the fixed frame come together to reduce 
perimeter air infiltration (see fig. 8). Four types of 
weatherstripping appropriate for metal windows are 
spring-metal, vinyl strips, compressible foam tapes, and 
sealant beads. The spring-metal, with an integral friction 
fit mounting clip, is recommended for steel windows in 
good condition. The clip eliminates the need for an ap­
plied glue; the thinness of the material insures a tight 
closure. The weatherstripping is clipped to the inside 
channel of the rolled metal section of the fixed frame. To 
insure against galvanic corrosion between the weather­
stripping (often bronze or brass), and the steel window, 
the window must be painted prior to the installation of 
the weatherstripping. This weatherstripping is usually ap­
plied to the entire perimeter of the window opening, but 
in some cases, such as casement windows, it may be best 
to avoid weatherstripping the hinge side. The natural 
wedging action of the weatherstripping on the three sides 
of the window often creates an adequate seal. 
Vinyl weatherstripping can a1so be applied to metal win­
dows. Folded into a "V" configuration, the material 
forms a barrier against the wind. Vinyl weatherstripping is 
usually glued to the frame, although some brands have an 
adhesive backing. As the vinyl material and the applied 
glue are relatively thick, this form of weatherstripping 
may not be appropriate for all situations. 
Compressible foam tape weatherstripping is 
often best 
for large windows where there is a slight bending or 
distortion of the sash. In some very tall windows having 
closure hardware at the sash mid-point, the thin sections 
of the metal window will bow away from the frame near 
the top. 
If the gap is not more than 1/4", foam 
weatherstripping can normally fill the space. If the gap ex­
ceeds this, the window may need to be realigned to close 
more tightly. The foam weatherstripping comes either 
with an adhesive or plain back; the latter variety requires 
application with glue. Compressible foam requires more 
frequent replacement than either spring-metal or vinyl 
weatherstripping. 
'One measure of energy efficiency is the U-value (the number of BTUs per hour 
transferred through a square foot of material). The lower the U-value, the better 
the performance. According to ASHRAE HANDBOOK-1977 Fundamentals, the 
U-value of historic rolled steel sash with single glazing is 1.3. Adding storm win­
dows to the existing units or reglazing with S/ 8" insulating glass produces a 
U-value of .69. These methods of weatherizing historic steel windows compare 
favorably with rolled steel replacement alternatives: with factory installed I" in­
sulating glass ( .67 U-value); with added thermal-break construction and factory 
finish coatings (.62 U-value) . 
10 
A fourth type of successful weatherstripping involves 
the use 
of a caulking or sealant bead and a polyethylene 
bond breaker tape. After the window frame has been 
thoroughly cleaned with solvent, permitted to dry, and 
primed, a neat bead of low modulus (firm setting) caulk, 
such as silicone, is applied. A bond breaker tape is then 
applied to the operable sash covering the metal section 
where contact will occur. The window is then closed until 
the sealant has set (2-7 days, depending on temperature 
and humidity). When the window is opened, the bead will 
have taken the shape of the air infiltration gap and the 
bond breaker tape can be removed. This weatherstripping 
method appears to be successful for all types of metal 
windows with varying degrees of air infiltration. 
Since the several types of weatherstripping are ap­
propriate for different circumstances, it may be necessary 
to use more than one type on any given building. Suc­
cessful weatherstripping depends upon using the thinnest 
material adequate to fill the space through which air 
enters. Weatherstripping that is too thick can spring the 
hinges, thereby resulting in more gaps. 
Fig. 8 APPROPRIATE TYPES OF WEATHERSTRIPPING 
FOR METAL WINDOWS. Weatherstripping is an important 
part of upgrading the thermal efficiency of historic steel windows. 
The chart above shows the jamb section of the window with the 
weatherstripping in place. Drawings: Sharon C. Park, AJA. 

A 
EXTEGIOPL 
AFTLIEr? EXTEPilOf'i' 
ACl'iYLIC l"'ANEL? 
I NT rn.1 Oft. 
Thermal Glazing 
The third weatherization treatment is to install an addi­
tional layer of glazing to improve the thermal efficiency 
of the existing window. The decision to pursue this treat ­
ment should proceed from careful analysis. Each of the 
most common techniques for adding a layer of glazing 
will effect approximately the same energy savings (approx­
imately double the original insulating value of the win­
dows); therefore, cost and aesthetic considerations usually 
determine the choice of method. Methods of adding a 
layer of glazing to improve thermal efficiency include ad­
ding a new layer of transparent material to the window; 
adding a separate storm window; and replacing the single 
layer of glass in the window with thermal glass . 
The least expensive of these options is to install a clear 
material (usually 
rigid sheets of acrylic or glass) over the 
original window. The choice between acrylic and glass is 
generally based on cost, ability of the window to support 
the material, and long-term maintenance outlook. If the 
material is placed over the entire window and secured to 
the frame, the sash will be inoperable. If the continued 
use of the window is important (for ventilation or for fire 
exits), separate panels should be affixed to the sash 
without obstructing operability (see fig. 9) . Glass or 
acrylic panels set in frames can be attached using mag ­
netized gaskets, interlocking material strips, screws or 
adhesives. Acrylic panels can be screwed directly to 
the metal windows, but the holes in the acrylic panels 
should allow for the expansion and contraction of this 
material. A compressible gasket between the prime sash 
and the storm panel can be very effective in establishing a 
thermal cavity between glazing layers. To avoid condensa­
tion, 1/8" cuts in a cop corner and diagonally opposite 
bottom corner of the gasket will provide a vapor bleed, 
through which moisture can evaporate. (Such cuts, how­
ever, reduce thermal performance slightly.) 
If condensa­
tion does occur, however, the panels should be easily re­
movable in order to wipe away moisture before it causes 
corrosion. 
The second method of adding a layer of glazing is to 
have independent storm windows fabricated. (Pivot and 
austral windows, however, which project on either side of 
the window frame when open, cannot easily be fitted with 
storm windows and remain operational.) The storm w in­
dow should be compatible with the original sash con­
figuration. For example, in paired casement windows, 
either specially fabricated storm casement windows or 
sliding units in which the vertical meeting rail of the slider 
reflects the configuration of the original window shou ld 
be installed. The decision to place storm windows on the 
inside or outside of the window depends on whether the 
historic window opens in or out, and on the visual impact 
the addition of storm windows will have on the building. 
Exterior storm windows, however, can serve another pur­
pose besides saving energy: they add a layer of protection 
against air pollutants and vandals, although they will par­
tially obscure the prime window. For highly ornamental 
windows this protection can determine the choice of ex­
terior rather then interior storm windows. 
The third method of installing an added layer of glazing 
is to replace the original single glazing with thermal glass. 
Except in rare instances in which the original glass is of 
special interest (as with stained or figured glass), the glass 
can be replaced if the hinges can tolerate the weight of the 
additional glass. The rolled metal sections for steel win­
dows are generally from l" - 1 1/2" thick. Sash of this 
thickness can normally tolerate thermal glass, which 
ranges from 3/8" - 5/8". (Metal glazing beads, readily 
available, are used to reinforce the muntins, which hold 
the glass.) This treatment leaves the window fully opera­
tional while preserving the historic appearance. 
It is, 
however, the most expensive of the treatments discussed 
here. (See fig. 6f). 
Fig. 9 Two examples of adding a second layer of glazing in order to im­
pro.ve the thermal performance of historic steel windows . Scheme A 
(showing jamb detail) is of a ¼ " acrylic panel with a closed cell foam 
gasket al/ached with self-tapping stainless steel screws directly to the ex­
terior of the outwardly opening sash . Scheme B (showing jamb detail) is 
of a glass panel in a magnetized frame affixed directly to the interior of 
the historic steel sash. The choice of using glass or acrylic mounted on 
the inside or outside will depend on the ability of the window to tolerate 
additional weight, the location and size of the window, the cost, and the 
long-term maintenance outlook. Drawing: Sharon C. Park, AIA . 
WINDOW REPLACEMENT 
Repair of historic windows is always preferred within a 
rehabilitation project. Replacement should be considered 
only as a last resort. However, when the extent of 
deterioration or the unavailability of replacement sections 
renders repair impossible, replacement of the entire win­
dow may be justified. In the case of significant windows, 
replacement in kind is essential in order to maintain the 
historic character of the building. However, for less 
significant windows, replacement with compatible new 
windows may be acceptable. In selecting compatible 
replacement windows, the material, configuration, color, 
operability, number and size of panes, profile and propor­
tion of metal sections, and reflective quality of the 
original glass should be duplicated as closely as possible. 
A number of metal window manufacturing companies 
produce rolled steel windows. While stock modern win­
dow designs do not share the multi-pane configuration of 
11 

historic windows, most of these manufacturers can 
reproduce the historic configuration if requested, and the 
cost is not excessive for large orders (see figs. 10a and 
10b). Some manufacturers still carry the standard pre­
World War II multi-light windows using the traditional 
12" x 18" or 14" x 20" glass sizes in industrial, commer­
cial, security, and residential configurations. In addition, 
many of the modern steel windows have integral 
weatherstripping, thermal break construction, durable 
vinyl coatings, insulating glass, and other desirable 
features. 
Fig. JO a. A six-story concrete manufacturing building prior to 
the replacement of the steel pivot windows . Photo: Charles 
Parrott . 
Fig. JO b. Close-up view of the new replacement steel windows 
which matched the multi-lighted originals exactly. Photo: Charles
Parrott. 
Windows manufactured from other materials generally 
cannot mate!) the thin profiles of the rolled steel sections. 
Aluminum, fpr example, is three times weaker than steel 
and must be extruded into a box-like configuration that 
does not reflect the thin historic profiles of most steel 
windows. Wooden and vinyl replacement windows 
generally are not fabricated in the industrial style, nor can 
they reproduce the · thin profiles of the rolled steel sec­
tions, and consequently are generally not acceptable 
replacements. 
For product information on replacement windows, the 
owner, architect, or contractor should consult manufac­
turers' catalogues, building trade journals, or the Steel 
Window Institute, 1230 Keith Building, Cleveland, Ohio 
44115. 
SUMMARY 
The National Park Service recommends the retention of 
significant historic metal windows whenever possible. 
Such windows, which can be a character-defining feature 
of a historic building, are too often replaced with inap­
propriate units that impair rather than complement the 
overall historic appearance. The repair and thermal 
upgrading of historic steel windows is more practicable 
than most people realize . Repaired and properly maintain­
ed metal windows have greatly extended service lives . 
They can be made energy efficient while maintaining their 
contribution to the historic character of the building . 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ASHRAE Handbook- 1977 Fundamentals. New York: American 
Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Airconditioning Engineers, 
1978. 
Crittal, W. F. A Metal Window Dictionary. London:Curwen Pres s, 
1926. Reprinted by 8.T. Batsford , Ltd., 1953 . 
Gayle, Margot; David W. Look, AlA; John G. Waite.Metals in 
America's Historic Buildings: Uses and Preservation Treatments. 
Technical Preservation Services , U.S. Department of the Interior. 
Washington,D.C.: U.S.Government Printing Office , 1980. 
Gillet, William. "Steel Windows." Windows and Glass in the Exterior 
of Buildings. National Academy of Sciences Publication 478. 
Washington, D.C .: 1957,75-78. 
Sarton, R. H. "Selecting and Specifying an Appropriate Type of Steel 
Window." Meta/craft. Vol 6, No. 1 (January, 1931): 43-48, 64-65 . 
Sweet's Architectural Catalogue. 13th Edition, New York, Sweets 
Catalogue Service, Inc., 1918 . 
The author gratefully acknowledges the invaluable assistance of co­
worker Michael Auer in preparing 
this brief for publication. This 
publication is an extension of research initiated by Frederec E. Kleyle. 
Special thanks are given to Hope's Architectural Products, Inc., 
Jamestown, NY, for their generous contribution of historic metal win­
dow catalogues which were an invaluable source of information. The 
following individuals are also to be thanked for reviewing the manuscript 
and making suggestions: Hugh Miller , Chief, Park Historic Architecture 
Division, National Park Service; Barclay L. Rogers, Museum Services , 
National Park Service; Susan M. Young, Steel Window Institute , and 
Danny Schlichenmaier, State Building Division, Lincoln, Nebraska . 
Finally, thanks go to Technical Preservation Services Branch staff and to 
cultural resources staff of the Nation;,.) Park Service Regional Offices, 
whose valuaie comments were incorporated into the final text and who 
contributed t the publication of this brief. 
This public tion has been prepared pursuant to the Economic 
Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which directs the Secretary of the Interior to 
certify rehabilitations of historic buildings that are consistent with their 
historic character; the guidance provided in this brief will assist property 
owners in complying with the requirements of this law. 
Preservation Briefs: 13 has been developed under the technical editor ­
ship of Lee H . Nelson, AIA, Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, 
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, 
D.C . 20240. Comments on the usefulness of this information are 
welcomed and can be sent to Mr. Nelson at the above address . 