15 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Preservation of Historic Concrete 
Paul Gaudette and Deborah Slaton 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Introduction to Historic Concrete 
Concrete is an extraordinarily versatile building material 
used for utilitarian, ornamental, and monumental 
structures since ancient times. Composed of a mixture 
of sand, gravel, crushed stone, or other coarse material, 
bound together with lime or cement, concrete undergoes 
a chemical reaction and hardens when water is added. 
Inserting reinforcement adds tensile strength to 
structural concrete elements. The use of reinforcement 
contributes significantly to the range and size of 
building and structure types that can be constructed 
with concrete. 
While early twentieth century proponents of modern 
concrete often considered it to be permanent, it is, 
like all materials, subject to deterioration. This Brief 
provides an overview of the history of concrete and 
its popularization in the United States, surveys the 
principal causes and modes of concrete deterioration, 
and outlines approaches to repair and protection that 
are appropriate to historic concrete. In the context of this 
Brief, historic concrete is considered to be concrete used 
in construction of structures of historical, architectural, 
or engineering interest, whether those structures are old 
or relatively new. 
Brief History of Use and Manufacture 
The ancient Romans found that a mixture of lime putty 
and pozzolana, a fine volcanic ash, would harden 
under water. The resulting hydraulic cement became 
a major feature of Roman building practice, and was 
used in many buildings and engineering projects 
such as bridges and aqueducts. Concrete technology 
was kept alive during the Middle Ages in Spain and 
Africa. The Spanish introduced a form of concrete to 
the New World in the first decades of the sixteenth 
century, referred to as "tapia" or "tabby." This material, 
a mixture of lime, sand, and shell or stone aggregate 
mixed with water, was placed between wooden forms, 
tamped, and allowed to dry in successive layers. Tabby 
was later used by the English settlers in the coastal 
southeastern United States. 
The early history of concrete was fragmented, 
with developments in materials and construction 
techniques occurring on different continents and in 
various countries. In the United States, concrete was 
slow in achieving widespread acceptance in building 
construction and did not begin to gain popularity until 
the late nineteenth century. 
It was more readily accepted 
for use in transportation and infrastructure systems. 
The Erie Canal in New York is an example of the 
early use of concrete in transportation in the United 
States . The natural hydraulic cement used in the canal 
construction was processed from a deposit of limestone 
found in 1818 near Chittenango, southeast of Syracuse. 
The use of concrete in residential construction was 
Figure 1. The Sebastopol House in Seguin, Texas, is an 1856 Greek 
Revival-style house constructed of lime concrete. Lime concrete 
or "limecrete" was a popular construction material, as it could be 
made inexpensively from local materials. By 1900, the town had 
approximately ninety limecrete structures, twenty of which remain. 
Photo: Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. 
1 

Figure 2. Chatterton House was the home of the post trader at Fort 
Fred Steel in Wyoming, one of several forts established in the 1860s 
to protect the Union Pacific Railroad. The walls of the post trader's 
house were built using stone aggregate and lime, without cement. 
The use of this material presents special preservation challenges. 
2 
publicized in the second edition of Orson S. Fowler's A 
Home for All (1853) which described the advantages of 
"gravel wall" construction to a wide audience. The town 
of Seguin, Texas, thirty-five miles east of San Antonio, 
already had a number of concrete buildings by the 1850s 
and came to be called "The Mother of Concrete Cities," 
with approximately ninety concrete buildings made 
from local "lime water" and gravel (Fig. 1). 
Impressed by the economic advantages of poured gravel 
wall or "lime-grout" construction, the Quartermaster 
General's Office of the War Department embarked on a 
campaign to improve the quality of building for frontier 
military posts. As a result, lime-grout structures were 
constructed at several western posts soon after the Civil 
War, including Fort Fred Steele and Fort Laramie, both 
in Wyoming (Fig. 2). By the 1880s, sufficient experience 
had been gained with unreinforced concrete to permit 
construction of much larger buildings. A notable 
example from this period is the Ponce de Leon Hotel in 
St. Augustine, Florida. 
Figure 3. The Lincoln Highway Association promoted construction of 
a high quality continuous hard surface roadway across the country. 
The Boys Scouts of America installed concrete road markers along the 
Lincoln Highway in 1928. 
Extensive construction in concrete also occurred through 
the system of coastal fortifications commissioned by the 
federal government in the 1890s for the Atlantic, Pacific, 
and Gulf coasts. Unlike most concrete construction 
to that time, the special requirements of coastal 
fortifications called for concrete walls as much as 20 feet 
thick, often at sites that were difficult to access. Major 
structures in the coastal defenses of the 1890s were built 
of mass concrete with no internal reinforcing, a practice 
that was replaced by the use of reinforcing bars in 
fortifications constructed after about 1905. 
The use of reinforced concrete in the United States dates 
from 1860, when S.T. Fowler obtained a patent for a 
reinforced concrete wall. In the early 1870s, William E. 
Ward built his own house in Port Chester, New York, 
using concrete reinforced with iron rods for all structural 
elements. Despite these developments, such construction 
remained a novelty until after 1880, when innovations 
introduced by Ernest L. Ransome made the use of 
reinforced concrete more practicable. Ransome made 
many contributions to the development of concrete 
construction technology, including the use of twisted 
reinforcing bars to improve bond between the concrete 
and the steel, which he patented in 1884. Two years later, 
Ransome introduced the rotary kiln to United States 
cement production. The new kiln had greater capacity 
and burned more thoroughly and uniformly, allowing 
development of a less expensive, more uniform, and 
more reliable manufactured cement. Improvements in 
concrete production initiated by Ransom led to a much 
greater acceptance of concrete after 1900. 
The Lincoln Highway Association, incorporated in 
1913, promoted the use of concrete in construction of a 
coast-to-coast roadway system. The goal of the Lincoln 
Highway Association and highway advocate Henry 
B. Joy was to educate the country in the need for good 
roads made of concrete, with an improved Lincoln 
Figure 4. The highly ornamental concrete panels on the exterior 
facade of the Baha'i House of Worship in Wilmette, Illinois, illustrate 
the work of fabricator John ]. Earley, known as "the man who made 
concrete beautiful." 

Figure 5. Following World War II, architects and engineers took 
advantage of improvements in concrete production, quality control, 
and advances in precast concrete to design structures such as the Police 
Headquarters building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, constructed in 
1961. Photo: Courtesy of the Philadelphia Police Department. 
Highway as an example. Concrete "seedling miles" 
were constructed in remote areas to emphasize the 
superiority of concrete over unimproved dirt. The 
Association believed that as people learned about 
concrete, they would press the government to construct 
good roads throughout their states . Americans' 
enthusiasm for good roads led to the involvement 
of the federal government in road-building and the 
creation of numbered U.S. routes in the 1920s (Fig. 3). 
During the early twentieth century, Ernest Ransome 
in Beverly, Massachusetts, Albert Kahn in Detroit, and 
Richard E. Schmidt in Chicago, promoted concrete 
for use in "Factory Style" utilitarian buildings with 
an exposed concrete frame infilled with expanses 
of glass. Thomas Edison's cast-in-place reinforced 
concrete homes in Union Township, New Jersey 
(1908), proclaimed a similarly functional emphasis 
in residential construction. From the 1920s onward, 
concrete began to be used with spectacular design 
results: examples include John J. Earley's Meridian 
Hill Park in Washington, D.C.; Louis Bourgeois' 
exuberant, graceful Baha'i Temple in Wilmette, Illinois 
(1920-1953), for which Earley fabricated the concrete 
(Fig. 4); and Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater 
near Bear Run, Pennsylvania (1934). Continuing 
improvements in quality control and development 
of innovative fabrication processes, such as the 
Shockbeton method for precast concrete, provided 
increasing opportunities for architects and engineers. 
Wright's Guggenheim Museum in New York City 
(1959); Geddes Brecher Qualls 
& Cunningham's Police 
Headquarters building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
(1961); and Eero Saarinen's soaring terminal building at 
Dulles International Airport outside Washington, D.C., 
and the TWA terminal at Kennedy Airport in New 
York (1962), exemplify the masterful use of concrete 
achieved in the modern era (Fig. 5). 
Figure 6. The Bailey Magnet School in Jackson, Mississippi, was 
designed as the Jackson Junior High School by the firm of N. W. 
Overstreet & Town in 1936. The streamlined building exemplifies the 
applicability of concrete to creating a modern architectural aesthetic. 
Photo: Bill Burris, Burris/Wagnon Architects, P.A. 
Figure 7. Detailed bas reliefs as well as sculptures, such as this lion at 
the Bailey Magnet School, could be used as ornamentation on concrete 
buildings. Sculptural concrete elements were typically cast in molds. 
Throughout the twentieth century, a wide range of 
architectural and engineering structures were built using 
concrete as a practical and cost-effective choice-and 
concrete also became valued for its aesthetic qualities. 
Cast in place and precast concrete were readily adapted 
to the Streamlined Moderne style, as exemplified by the 
Bailey Magnet School in Jackson, Mississippi, designed 
as the Jackson Junior High School by N.W. Overstreet 
& Town in 1936 (Figs. 6 and 7) . The school is one of 
many concrete buildings designed and constructed 
under the auspices of the Public Works Administration. 
Recreational structures and landscape features also 
utilized the structural range and unique character of 
exposed concrete to advantage, as seen in Chicago's 
Lincoln Park Chess Pavilion, designed by Morris 
Webster in 1956 (Fig. 8), and the Ira C. Keller Fountain 
in Portland Oregon, designed by Lawrence Halprin in 
1969 (Fig. 9). Concrete was also popular for building 
interiors, with ornamental features and exposed 
structural elements recognized as part of the design 
aesthetic (See Figs. 10 and 11 in sidebar). 
3 

4 
The expanded use of concrete provided new opportunities to 
create dramatic spaces and ornate architectural detail on the 
interiors of buildings, at a significant cost savings over traditional 
construction practices. The architectural design of the Berkeley 
City Club in Berkeley, California, expressed Moorish and Gothic 
elements in concrete on the interior of the building (Fig. 10). Used 
as a woman's social club, the building was designed by noted 
California architect Julia Morgan and constructed in 1929. The 
vaulted ceilings, columns, and ornamental capitals of the lobby 
and the ornamental arches and beamed ceiling of the "plunge" are 
all constructed of concrete. 
Historic Interiors 
Figure 10. The Berkeley City Club has significant interior spaces and features of 
concrete construction, including the lobby and pool. Photos: Una Gilmartin (left) 
and Brian Kehoe (right), Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
The historic character of a building's interior can also be conveyed 
in a more utilitarian manner in terms of concrete features and 
finishes (Fig. 11). The exposed concrete structure-columns, 
capitals, and drop panels-is an integral part of the character 
of this old commercial building in Minneapolis. 
In concrete 
warehouse and factory buildings of the early twentieth century, 
exposed concrete columns and formboard finish concrete slab 
ceilings are common features as seen in this warehouse, now 
converted for use as a parking garage and shops. 
Figure 11. Whether in a circa 1925 office (left) or in a parking garage 
and retail facility (right), exposed concrete structures help characterize 
these building interiors. Photo: Minnesota Historical Society (left). 
Concrete Characteristics 
Concrete is composed of fine (sand) and 
coarse (crushed stone or gravel) aggregates 
and paste made of portland cement and water. 
The predominant material in terms of bulk is 
the aggregate. Portland cement is the binder 
most commonly used in modern concrete. It 
is commercially manufactured by blending 
limestone or chalk with clays that contain 
alumina, silica, lime, iron oxide and magnesia, 
and heating the compounds together to high 
temperatures. The hydration process that 
occurs between the portland cement and water 
results in formation of an alkali paste that 
surrounds and binds the aggregate together as 
a solid mass. 
The quality of the concrete is dependent on 
the ratio of water to the binder; binder content; 
sound, durable, and well-graded aggregates; 
compaction during placement; and proper 
curing. The amount of water used in the mix 
affects the concrete permeability and strength. 
The use of excess water beyond that required 
in the hydration process results in more 
permeable concrete, which is more susceptible 
to weathering and deterioration. Admixtures 
are commonly added to concrete to adjust 
concrete properties such as setting or hardening 
time, requirements for water, workability, and 
other characteristics. For example, the advent 
of air entraining agents in the 1930s provided 
enhanced durability for concrete. 
During the twentieth century, there was 
a steady rise in the strength of ordinary 
concrete as chemical processes became better 
understood and quality control measures 
improved. In addition, the need to protect 
embedded reinforcement against corrosion 
was acknowledged. Requirements for concrete 
cover over reinforcing steel, increased cement 
content, decreased water-cement ratio, and air 
entrainment all contributed to greater concrete 
strength and improved durability. 
Mechanisms and Modes of 
Deterioration 
Causes of Deterioration 
Concrete deterioration occurs primarily because 
of corrosion of the embedded steel, degradation 
of the concrete itself, use of improper techniques 
or materials in construction, or structural 
problems. The causes of concrete deterioration 
must be understood in order to select an 
appropriate repair and protection system. 

Figure 8. The Chess Pavilion in Chicago's Lincoln Park 
was designed by architect Morris Webster and constructed 
in 1956. The pavilion is a distinctive landscape feature, 
with its reinforced concrete cantilevered slab that provides 
cover for chess players. 
Figure 9. The Ira C. Keller Fountain in Portland, Oregon, 
was designed by Lawre11ce Halprin and constructed in 
1969. The fountain is constructed primarily of concrete 
pillars with formboard textures and surrounding elements, 
patterned with geometric lines, which facilitate the path 
of water. Photo: Anita Washko, Wiss, Janney, Elstner 
Associates, Inc. 
While reinforcing steel has played a pivotal role in 
expanding the applications of concrete in twentieth 
century architecture, corrosion of this steel has also 
caused deterioration in many historic structures. 
Reinforcing steel embedded in the concrete is normally 
surrounded by a passivating 
oxide layer that, when present, 
protects the steel from corrosion 
and aids in bonding the 
steel and concrete. When the 
concrete's normal alkaline 
environment (above a pH 
of 10) is compromised and 
the steel is exposed to water, 
water vapor, or high relative 
humidity, corrosion of the 
steel reinforcing takes place. A 
reduction in alkalinity results 
from carbonation, a process that 
occurs when the carbon dioxide 
in the atmosphere reacts with 
calcium hydroxide and moisture 
in the concrete. Carbonation 
starts at the concrete 's exposed 
surface but may extend to the 
reinforcing steel over time. 
When carbonation reaches 
the metal reinforcement, the 
concrete no longer protects the 
steel from corrosion. 
Corra ion of embedded 
reinforcing steel may be 
initiated and accelerated 
if 
calcium chloride was added to 
the concrete as a set accelerator 
during original construction 
to promote more rapid curing. 
It may also take place if the 
concrete is later exposed to 
deicing salts, as may occur 
during the winter in northern 
climates. Seawater or other 
marine environments can 
also provide large amounts 
of chloride, either from 
inadequately washed original aggregate or from 
exposure of the concrete to seawater. 
Corros ion-related damage to reinforced concrete is 
the result of rust, a product of the corrosion process of 
steel, which expands and thus requires more space in 
the concrete than the steel did at the time of installation . 
This change in volume of the steel results in expansive 
forces, which cause cracking and spalling of the 
adjacent concrete (Fig. 12). Other signs of corrosion of 
embedded steel include delamination of the concrete 
(planar separations parallel to the surface) and rust 
staining ( often a precursor to spalling) on the concrete 
near the steel. 
Lack of proper maintenance of building elements 
such as roofs and drainage systems can contribute to 
water-related deterioration of the adjacent concrete, 
particularly when concrete is saturated with water 
and then exposed to freezing temperatures. As water 
within the concrete freezes, it 
expands and exerts forces on 
the adjacent concrete. Repeated 
freezing and thawing can result 
in the concrete cracking and 
delaminating. Such damage 
appears as surface degradation, 
including severe scaling and 
micro-cracking that extends 
into the concrete. The condition 
is most often observed near 
the surface of the concrete but 
can also eventually occur deep 
within the concrete. This type 
of deterioration is usually most 
severe at joints, architectural 
details, and other areas with 
more surface exposure to 
weather. 
In the second half of 
the twentieth century, concrete 
has utilized entrained air (the 
incorporation of microscopic 
air bubbles) to provide 
enhanced protection against 
damage due to cyclic freezing 
of saturated concrete. 
The use of certain aggregates 
can also result in deterioration 
of the concrete. Alkali­
aggregate reactions-in some 
cases alkali-silica reaction 
(ASR)-occur when alkalis 
normally present in cement 
react with certain aggregates, 
leading to the development of 
an expansive crystalline gel. 
When this gel is exposed to 
moisture, it expands and causes 
cracking of the aggregate and 
concrete matrix. Deleterious 
aggregates are typically found only in certain areas of 
the country and can be detected through analysis by an 
experienced petrographer. Low-alkali cements as well 
as fly ash are used today in new construction to prevent 
such reactions where this problem may occur . 
Problems Specifically Encountered with 
Historic Concrete 
Materials and workmanship used in the construction 
of historic concrete structures, particularly those built 
before the First World War, sometimes present potential 
sources of problems. For example, where the aggregate 
consisted of cinder from burned coal or crushed brick, 
5 

6 
the concrete tends to be weak and porous 
because these aggregates absorb water. Some of 
these aggregates can be extremely susceptible 
to deterioration when exposed to moisture 
and cyclic freezing and thawing. Concrete 
was sometimes compromised by inclusion of 
seawater or beach sand that was not thoroughly 
washed with fresh water, a condition more 
common with coastal fortifications built prior to 
1900. The sodium chloride present in seawater 
and beach sand accelerates the rate of corrosion 
of the reinforced concrete. 
Another problem encountered with historic 
concrete is related to poor consolidation of the 
concrete during its placement in forms, or in molds in the case 
of precasting. This problem is especially prevalent in highly 
ornamental units. Early twentieth century concrete was often 
tamped or rodded into place, similar to techniques used in 
forming cast stone. Poorly consolidated concrete often contains 
voids ("bugholes" or "honeycombs"), which can reduce the 
protective concrete cover over the embedded reinforcing 
bars, entrap water, and, 
if sufficiently large and strategically 
numerous, reduce localized concrete strength. Vibration 
technology has improved over time and flowability agents are 
also used today to address this problem. 
A common type of deterioration observed in concrete is the 
effect of weathering from exposure to wind, rain, snow, and 
salt water or spray. Weathering appears as erosion of the 
cement paste, a condition more prevalent in northern regions 
where precipitation can be highly acidic. This results in the 
exposure of the aggregate particles on the exposed concrete 
surface. Variations may occur in the aggregate exposure due 
to differential erosion or dissolution of exposed cement paste. 
Erosion can also be caused by the mechanical action of water 
channeled over concrete, such as by the lack of drip grooves in 
belt courses and sills, and by inadequate drainage. 
In addition, 
high-pressure water when used for cleaning can also erode the 
concrete surface. 
In concrete structures built prior to the First World War, 
concrete was often placed into forms in relatively short 
vertical lifts due to limitations in lifting and pouring 
techniques available at the time. Joints between different 
concrete placements (often termed cold joints or lift lines) may 
sometimes be considered an important part of the character of 
a concrete element (Fig. 13). However, wide joints may permit 
water to infiltrate the concrete, resulting in more rapid paste 
erosion or freeze-thaw deterioration of adjacent concrete in 
cold climates. 
In the early twentieth century, concrete was sometimes placed 
in several layers parallel to the exterior surface. A base concrete 
was first created with formwork and then a more cement rich 
mortar layer was applied to the exposed vertical face of the 
Figure 12. The concrete lighthouse at the Kilauea Point 
Light Station, Kilauea, Kauai, Hawaii, was constructed 
circa 1913. The concrete, which was a good quality, high 
strength mix for its day, is in good condition after almost 
one hundred years in service. Deterioration in the form of 
spa/ling related to corrosion of embedded reinforcing steel 
has occurred primarily in areas of higher ornamentation 
such as projecting bands and brackets (see close-up photo). 
Figure 13. Fort Casey on Admiralty Head, Fort Casey, Washington, was 
constructed in 1898. The lift lines from placement of concrete are clearly 
visible on the exterior walls and characterize the finished appearance. 

base concrete. The higher cement content in the facing 
concrete provided a more water-resistant outer layer 
and finished surface. The application of a cement-rich 
top layer, referred to in some early concrete publications 
as "waterproofing," was also used on top surfaces of 
concrete walls, or as the top layer in sidewalks. With this 
type of concrete construction, deterioration can occur 
over time as a result of debonding between layers, and 
can proceed very rapidly once the protective cement-rich 
layer begins to break down. 
It is common for historic concrete to have a highly 
variable appearance, including color and finish texture. 
Different levels of aggregate exposure due to paste 
erosion are often found in exposed aggregate concrete. 
This variability in the appearance of historic concrete 
increases the level of difficulty in assessing and repairing 
weathered concrete. 
Signs of Distress and Deterioration 
Characteristic signs of failure in concrete include 
cracking, spalling, staining, and deflection. Cracking 
occurs in most concrete but will vary in depth, width, 
direction, pattern, and location, and can be either active 
or dormant (inactive). Active cracks can widen, deepen, 
or migrate through the concrete, while dormant cracks 
remain relatively unchanged in size. Some dormant 
cracks, such as those caused by early age shrinkage of 
the concrete during curing, are not a structural concern 
but when left unrepaired, can provide convenient 
channels for moisture penetration and subsequent 
damage. Random surface cracks, also called map cracks 
due to their resemblance to lines on a map, are usually 
related to early-age shrinkage but may also indicate 
other types of deterioration such as alkali-silica reaction . 
Structural cracks can be caused by temporary or 
continued overloads, uneven foundation settling, seismic 
forces, or original design inadequacies. Structural cracks 
are active 
if excessive loads are applied to a structure, if 
the overload is continuing, or if settlement is ongoing. 
These cracks are dormant if the temporary overloads 
have been removed or 
if differential settlement has 
stabilized. Thermally-induced cracks result from 
stresses produced by the expansion and contraction 
of the concrete during temperature changes. These 
cracks frequently occur at the ends or re-entrant corners 
of older concrete structures that were built without 
expansion joints to relieve such stress. 
Spalling (the loss of surface material) is often associated 
with freezing and thawing as well as cracking and 
delamination of the concrete cover over embedded 
reinforcing steel. Spalling occurs when reinforcing 
bars corrode and the corrosion by-products expand, 
creating high stresses on the adjacent concrete, which 
cracks and is displaced. Spalling can also occur when 
water absorbed by the concrete freezes and thaws (Fig . 
14). 
In addition, surface spalling or scaling may result 
from the improper finishing, forming, or other surface 
phenomena when water-rich cement paste (laitance) 
rises to the surface. The resulting weak material is 
vulnerable to spalling of thin layers, or scaling. In some 
cases, spalling of the concrete can diminish the load­
carrying capacity of the structure. 
Deflection is the bending or sagging of structural beams, 
joists, or slabs, and can be an indication of deficiencies in 
the strength and structural soundness of concrete. This 
condition can be produced by overloading, corrosion 
of embedded reinforcing, or inadequate design or 
construction, such as use of low-strength concrete or 
undersized reinforcing bars. 
Staining of the concrete surface can be related to soiling 
from atmospheric pollutants or other contaminants, 
dirt accumulation, and the presence of organic growth. 
However, stains can also indicate more serious 
underlying problems, such as corrosion of embedded 
reinforcing steel, improper previous surface treatments, 
alkali-aggregate reaction, or efflorescence, the deposition 
of soluble salts on the surface of the concrete as a result 
of water migration (Fig. 15). 
Figures 14. Layers of architectural concrete that have debonded 
(spa/led) from the surface were removed from a historic water tank 
during the investigation performed to assess existing conditions. 
Photos: Anita Washko, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
7 

8 
Planning for Concrete Preservation 
The significance of a historic concrete building or 
structure-including whether it is important for its 
architectural or engineering design, for its materials 
and construction techniques, or both -guides decision 
making about repair and, if needed, replacement 
methods. Determining the causes of deterioration is also 
central to the development of a conservation and repair 
plan. With historic concrete buildings, one of the more 
difficult challenges is allowing for sufficient time during 
the planning phase to analyze the concrete, develop 
mixes, and provide time for adequate aging of mock-ups 
for matching to the original concrete. 
An understanding of the original construction 
techniques ( cement characteristics, mix design, original 
intent of assembly, type of placement, precast versus 
cast in place, etc.) and previous repair work performed 
on the concrete is important in determining causes 
of existing deterioration and the susceptibility of the 
structure to potential other types of deterioration . 
For example, concrete placed in short lifts (individual 
concrete placements) or constructed in precast segments 
will have numerous joints that can provide entry points 
for water infiltration. Inappropriate prior repairs, such 
as installation of patches using an incompatible material, 
can affect the future performance of the concrete. Such 
prior repairs may require corrective work. 
As with other preservation projects, three primary 
approaches are usually considered for historic concrete 
structures: 
maintenance, repair, or replacement. 
Maintenance and repair best achieve the preservation 
goal of minimal intervention and the greatest retention 
of existing historic fabric. However, where elements of 
the building are severely deteriorated or where inherent 
problems with the material lead to ongoing failures, 
replacement may be necessary. 
During planning, information is gathered through 
research, visual survey, inspection openings, and 
laboratory studies. The material should then be 
reviewed by professionals experienced in concrete 
deterioration to help evaluate the nature and causes of 
the concrete problems, to assess both the short-term and 
long-term effects of the deterioration, and to formulate 
proper repair approaches. 
Condition Assessment 
A condition assessment of a concrete building or 
structure should begin with a review of all available 
documents related to original construction and prior 
repairs. While plans and specifications for older 
concrete buildings are not always available, they can 
be an invaluable resource and every attempt should be 
made to find them. They may provide information on 
the composition of the concrete mix or on the type and 
location of reinforcing bars. If available, documents 
related to past repairs should also be reviewed to 
Figure 15. Evidence of 
moisture movement through
concrete 
is apparent 
in the form of mineral 
deposits on the concrete 
surface. Cyclic freezing 
and thawing of entrapped 
moisture, and corrosion of 
embedded reinforcement, 
have also contributed to 
deterioration of the concrete 
column on this fence at 
Crocker Field in Fitchburg, 
Massachusetts, designed by 
the Olmsted Brothers. 
understand how the repairs were made and to help 
evaluate their anticipated performance and service life. 
Archival photographs can also provide a valuable source 
of information about original construction. 
A visual condition survey will help identify and 
evaluate the extent, types, and patterns of distress 
and deterioration. The American Concrete Institute 
offers several useful guides on how to perform a visual 
condition survey of concrete. Generally, the condition 
assessment begins with an overall visual survey, 
followed by a close-up investigation of representative 
areas to obtain more detailed information about modes 
of deterioration. 
A number of nondestructive testing methods can be 
used in the field to evaluate concealed conditions. Basic 
techniques include sounding with a hand-held hammer 
(or for horizontal surfaces, a chain) to help identify areas 
of delamination. More sophisticated techniques include 
impact-echo testing (Fig. 16), ground penetrating radar, 
pulse velocity, and other methods that characterize 
concrete thickness and locate voids or delaminations. 
Magnetic detection instruments are used to locate 
embedded reinforcing steel and can be calibrated to 
identify the size and depth of reinforcement. Corrosion 
measurements can be taken using copper-copper 
sulfate half-cell tests or linear polarization techniques to 
determine the probability or rate of active corrosion of 
the reinforcing steel. 
To further evaluate the condition of the concrete, 
samples may be removed for laboratory study to 
determine material components and composition, 
and causes of deterioration. Samples need to be 
representative of existing conditions but should be taken 
from unobtrusive locations. Laboratory studies of the 
concrete may include petrographic evaluation following 
ASTM C856, 
Practice for Petrographic Examination 
of Hardened Concrete. Petrographic examination, 
consisting of microscopical studies performed by a 
geologist specializing in the evaluation of construction 
materials, is performed to determine air content, water­
cement ratio, cement content, and general aggregate 
characteristics. Laboratory studies can also include 

chemical analyses to determine chloride content, sulfate 
content, and alkali levels of the concrete; identification 
of deleterious aggregates; and determination of depth 
of carbonation. Compressive strength studies can 
be conducted to evaluate the strength of the existing 
concrete and provide information for repair work. The 
laboratory studies provide a general identification of 
the original concrete's components and aggregates, 
and evidence of damage due to various mechanisms 
including cyclic freezing and thawing, alkali-aggregate 
reactivity, or sulfate attack. Information gathered 
through laboratory studies can also be used to help 
develop a mix design for the repair concrete. 
Figure 16. Impact echo testing is performed on a concrete structural 
slab to help determine depth of deterioration. In this method, a short 
pulse of energy is introduced into the structure and a transducer 
mounted on the impacted surface of the structure receives the 
reflected input waves or echoes. These waves are analyzed to help 
identify flaws and deterioration within the concrete. 
Cleaning 
As with other historic structures, concrete structures are 
cleaned for several reasons: to improve the appearance 
of the concrete, as a cyclical maintenance measure, or 
in preparation for repairs. Consideration should first be 
given to whether the historic concrete structure needs to 
be cleaned at all. If cleaning is required, then the gentlest 
system that will be effective should be selected. 
Three primary methods are used for cleaning concrete: 
water methods, abrasive surface treatments, and 
chemical surface treatments. Low-pressure water (less 
than 200 psi) or steam cleaning can effectively remove 
surface soiling from sound concrete ; however, care is 
required on fragile or deteriorated surfaces. In addition, 
water and steam methods are typically not effective in 
removing staining or severe soiling. Power washing 
with high-pressure water is sometimes used to clean or 
remove coatings from sound, high-strength concrete, but 
high-pressure water washing is generally damaging to 
and not appropriate for concrete on historic structures. 
When used with proper controls and at very low 
pressures (typically 35 to 75 psi), microabrasive 
surface treatments using very fine particulates, such 
as dolomitic limestone powder, can sometimes clean 
effectively. However, microabrasive cleaning may alter 
the texture and surface reflectivity of concrete. Some 
concrete can be damaged even by fine particulates 
applied at very low pressures. 
Chemical surface treatments can clean effectively 
but may also alter the appearance of the concrete by 
bleaching the concrete, removing the paste, etching 
the aggregate, or otherwise altering the surface. 
Detergent cleaners or mild, diluted acid cleaners may 
be appropriate for removal of staining or severe soiling. 
Cleaning products that contain strong acids such as 
hydrochloric (muriatic) or hydrofluoric acid, which will 
damage concrete and are harmful to persons, animals, 
site features, and the environment, should not be used. 
For any cleaning process, trial samples should be 
performed prior to full-scale implementation. The 
intent of the cleaning program should not be to return 
the structure to a like new appearance. Concrete can 
age gracefully, and as long as soiling is not severe or 
deleterious, many structures can still be appreciated 
without extensive cleaning. 
Methods of Maintenance and Repair 
The maintenance of historic concrete often is thought of 
in terms of appropriate cleaning to remove unattractive 
dirt or soiling materials. However, the implementation 
of an overall maintenance plan for a historic structure is 
the most effective way to help protect historic concrete. 
For examples, the lack of maintenance to roofs and 
drainage systems can promote water related damage 
to adjacent concrete features. The repeated use of 
deicing salts in winter climates can pit the surface of old 
concrete and also may promote decay in embedded steel 
reinforcements. Inadequate protection of concrete walls 
adjacent to driveways and parking areas can result in the 
need for repair work later on. 
The maintenance of historic concrete involves the regular 
inspection of concrete to establish baseline conditions 
and identify needed repairs. Inspection tasks involve 
monitoring protection systems, including sealant joints, 
expansion joints, and protective coatings; reviewing 
existing conditions for development of distress such as 
cracking and delaminations; documenting conditions 
observed; and developing and implementing a cyclical 
repair program. 
Sealants are an important part of maintenance of historic 
concrete structures. Elastomeric sealants, which have 
replaced traditional oil-resin based caulks for many 
applications, are used to seal cracks and joints to keep 
out moisture and reduce air infiltration. Sealants are 
commonly used at windows and door perimeters, 
at interfaces between concrete and other materials, 
and at attachments to or through walls or roofs, such 
as with lamps, signs, or exterior plumbing fixtures. 
9 

10 
Figure 17. (a) The 63rd Street Beach House was constructed on the shoreline of Chicago in 1919. The highly exposed aggregate concrete of the 
exterior walls of the beach house was used for many buildings in the Chicago parks as an alternative to more expensive stone construction. Photo: 
Leslie Schwartz Photography. (b) Concrete deterioration included cracking, spa/ling, and delamination caused by corrosion of embedded reinforcing 
steel and concrete damage due to cyclic freezing and thawing. (c) Various sizes and tt;pes of aggregates were reviewed for matching to the original 
concrete materials. (d) Mock-ups of the concrete repair mix were prepared for comparison to the original concrete. Considerations included aggregate 
type and size, cement color, proportions, aggregate exposure, and surface finish. (e) The craftsman finished the surface to replicate the original 
appearance in a mock-up on the structure. Here, he used a nylon bristle brush to remove loose paste and expose the aggregate, creating a variable 
surface to match the adjacent original concrete. 
Where used for crack repairs on historic facades, the 
finished appearance of the sealant application must 
be considered, as it may be visually intrusive. In some 
cases, sand can be broadcast onto the surface of the 
sealant to help conceal the repair. 
Urethane and polyurethane sealants are often used to 
seal joints and cracks in concrete structures, paving, 
and walkways; these sealants provide a service life of 
up to ten years. High-performance silicone sealants 
also are often used with concrete, as they provide a 
range of movement capabilities and a service life of 
twenty years or more. Some silicone sealants may stain 
adjacent materials, which may be a problem with more 
porous concrete, and may also tend to accumulate 
dust and dirt. The effectiveness of sealants for sealing 
joints and cracks depends on numerous factors 
including proper surface preparation and application. 
Sealants should be examined as part of routine 
maintenance inspections, as these materials deteriorate 
faster than their substrates and must be replaced 
periodically as a part of cyclical maintenance. 
Repair of historic concrete may be required to 
address deterioration because the original design and 
construction did not provide for long-term durability, 
or to facilitate a change in use of the structure. 
Examples include increasing concrete cover to protect 
reinforcing steel and reducing water infiltration into the 
structure by repair of joints. Any such improvements 
must be thoroughly evaluated for compatibility with 
the original design and appearance. Care is required in 
all aspects of historic concrete repair, including surface 
preparation; installation of formwork; development 
of the concrete mix design; and concrete placement, 
consolidation, and curing. 
An appropriate repair program addresses existing 
distress and reduces the rate of future deterioration, 
which in many cases involves moisture-related issues. 
The repair program should incorporate materials and 
methods that are sympathetic to the existing materials 
in character and appearance, and which provide good 
long-term performance. 
In addition, repair materials 
should age and weather similarly to the original 
materials. In order to best achieve these goals, concrete 
repair projects should be divided into three phases: 
development of trial repair procedures, trial repairs and 
evaluation, and production repair work. 

For any concrete repair project, the process of investigation, 
laboratory analysis, trial samples, mock-ups, and full-scale 
repairs allows ongoing refinement of the repair work as 
well as implementation of quality-control measures. The 
trial repair process provides an opportunity for the owner, 
architect, engineer, and contractor to evaluate the concrete 
mix design and the installation and finishing techniques for 
the repairs from both technical and aesthetic standpoints. 
The final repair materials and procedures should match 
the original concrete in appearance while meeting the 
established criteria for durability. Information gathered 
through trial repairs and mock-ups is invaluable in refining 
the construction documents prior to the start of the overall 
repair project (Fig. 17). 
Surface Preparation 
In undertaking surface preparation for historic concrete 
repair, care must be taken to limit removal of existing 
material while still providing an appropriate substrate for 
repairs. This is particularly important where ornamentation 
and fine details are involved. Preparation for localized 
repairs usually begins with removal of the loose concrete 
to determine the general extent of the repair, followed by 
saw-cutting the perimeter of the repair area. The repair area 
should extend beyond the area of concrete deterioration 
to a sufficient extent to provide a sound substrate. When 
repairing concrete with an exposed aggregate or other 
special surface texture, a sawcut edge may be too visually 
evident. To hide the repair edge, techniques such as lightly 
hand-chipping the edge of the patch may be used to 
conceal the joint between the original concrete and the new 
repair material. The depth to which the concrete needs to 
be removed may be difficult to determine without invasive 
probing in the repair area. Removal of concrete should 
typically extend beyond the level of the reinforcing steel, if 
present, so that the patch encapsulates the reinforcing steel, 
which provides mechanical attachment for the repair. 
If the concrete was originally of lower strength and quality, 
the assessment of present soundness is more difficult. 
Deteriorated and unsound concrete is typically removed 
using pneumatic chipping hammers. Removal of concrete 
in historic structures is better controlled by using smaller 
chipping hammers or hand tools. The area of the concrete 
to be repaired and the exposed reinforcing steel are 
then cleaned, usually by careful sandblast and air blast 
procedures applied only within the repair area. Adjacent 
original concrete surfaces should be protected during this 
work. 
In some cases, project constraints such as dust control 
may limit the ability to thoroughly clean the concrete and 
steel. For example, it may be necessary to use needle scaling 
(a small pneumatic impact device) and wire brushing 
instead of sandblasting. 
Supplemental steel may be needed when existing 
reinforcing steel is severely deteriorated, or if reinforcing 
steel is not present in repair areas. Exposed existing 
reinforcing and other embedded steel elements can be 
cleaned, primed, and painted with a corrosion-inhibiting 
coating. The patching material should be reinforced 
and mechanically attached to the existing concrete. 
Reinforcement materials used in repairs most often 
include mild steel, epoxy-coated steel, or stainless steel, 
depending on existing conditions. 
Formwork and Molds 
Special formwork is needed to recreate ornamental 
concrete features-which may be complex, in high 
relief, or architecturally detailed-and to provide special 
surface finishes such as wood form board textures. 
Construction of the formwork itself requires particular 
skill and craftsmanship. Reusable forms can be used for 
concrete ornamentation that is repeated across a building 
facade, or precast concrete elements may be used to 
replace missing or unrepairable architectural features. 
Formwork for ornamental concrete is often created using 
a four-step process: a casting of the original concrete is 
taken; a plaster replica of the unit is prepared; a mold or 
form is made from the plaster replica; and a new concrete 
unit is cast. Custom formwork and molds are often the 
work of specialty companies, such as precasters and cast 
stone fabricators. 
The process of forming architectural features or special 
surface textures is particularly challenging if early age 
stripping (removal of formwork early in the concrete 
curing process) is needed to perform surface treatment 
on the concrete. Timing for formwork removal is related 
to strength gain, which in turn is partly dependent on 
temperature and weather conditions. Early age removal of 
formwork in highly detailed concrete can lead to damage 
of the new concrete that has not yet gained sufficient 
strength through curing. 
Selection of Repair Materials and Mix Design 
Selection and design of proper repair materials is a 
critical component of the repair project. This process 
requires evaluation of the performance, characteristics, 
and limitations of the repair materials, and may involve 
laboratory testing of proposed materials and trial repairs. 
The materials should be selected to address the specific 
type of repair required and to be compatible with special 
characteristics of the original concrete. Some modern 
repair materials are designed to have a high compressive 
strength and to be impermeable. Even though inherently 
durable, these newer materials may not be appropriate for 
use in repairing a low strength historic concrete. 
The concrete's durability, or resistance to deterioration, 
and the materials and methods selected for repair 
depend on its composition, design, and quality of 
workmanship. In most cases, a 
mix design for durable 
replacement concrete should use materials similar to 
those of the original concrete mix. Prepackaged materials 
are often not appropriate for repair of historic concrete. 
The concrete patching material can be air entrained or 
polymer-modified if subject to exterior exposure, and 
should incorporate an appropriate selection of aggregate 
and cement type, and proper water content and water 
11 

• • I \ \ I ·' • 
~ , . , \ ,•'!' ·1\\ 
... ,.· \:• .... <..,_~, ,·,··i "')·'·,·. ;·· q . l .. • ~~ I • ~ . •'· • . • , 
. , ... \ ... j\ ·;.,♦ .. ;.,; .... ·• ,\' 
. ~•. - ' f • I . • I, ' • l ' . \' . ,• • ) • 
1· ·. '~ ;·• I ,. i \.: , ~ ' f , 
12 
to cement ratio. Some admixtures, including polymer modifiers, 
may change the appearance of the concrete mix. Design of the 
concrete patching material should address characteristics required 
for durability, workability, strength gain, compressive strength, 
and other performance attributes. During installation of the 
repair, skilled workmanship is required to ensure proper mixing 
procedures, placement, consolidation, and curing. 
Figure 18. (a) Exposed aggregate precast concrete is 
sounded with a hammer to detect areas of deterioration. 
Corrosion of the exposed reinforcing steel bar has led to 
spalling of the adjacent concrete. (b) Samples of aggregate 
considered for use in repair concrete are compared to the 
original concrete materials in terms of size, color, texture, 
and reflectance. (c) Various sample panels are made using 
the selected concrete repair mix design for comparison to 
the original concrete on the building, and the mix design is 
adjusted based on review of the samples. (d) After removal 
of the spa/I, the concrete surface is prepared for installation 
of a formed patch. (e) Prior to placement of the concrete, 
a retarding agent is brush-applied to the inside face of the 
formwork to slow curing at the surface. After the concrete 
is partially cured, the forms are removed and the surface 
of the concrete is rubbed to remove some of the paste and 
expose the aggregate to match the original concrete. 
Matching and Repair Techniques for Historic Concrete 
Repair measures should be selected that retain as much of the 
original material as possible, while providing for removal of an 
adequate amount of deteriorated concrete to provide a sound 
substrate for a durable repair. The installed repair must visually 
match the existing concrete as closely as possible and should be 
similar in other aspects such as compressive strength, permeability, 
and other characteristics important in the mix design of the 
concrete (Fig. 18). 
Understanding the original construction techniques often provides 
opportunities in the design of repairs. For example, joints between 
the new and old concrete can be hidden in changes in surface 
profile and cold joints. The required patching mix for the concrete 
to be used in the repair will likely need to be specially designed 
to replicate the appearance of the adjacent historic concrete. A 
high level of craftsmanship is required for finishing of historic 
concrete, in particular to create the sometimes inconsistent finish 
and variation in the original concrete in contrast to the more even 
appearance required for most non-historic repairs. 
To match the various characteristics of the original concrete, trial 
mixes should be developed. These mixes need to take into account 
the types and colors of aggregates and paste present in the original 
concrete. Different mixes may be needed because of variations 
in the appearance and composition of the historic concrete. The 
trials should utilize different forming and finishing techniques 
to achieve the best possible match to the original concrete. Initial 
trials should first take place on site but off the structure. The mix 
designs providing the best match are then installed as trial repairs 
on the structure, and assessed after they have cured. 
Achieving compatibility between repair work and original 
concrete may be difficult, especially given the variability often 
present in historic concrete materials and finishes. Formed rather 
than trowel-applied patch repairs are recommended for durability, 
as forming permits better ranges of mix ingredients (such as coarse 
aggregates) and improved consolidation as compared to trowel­
applied repairs. Parge coatings usually are not recommended 
as they do not provide as durable repair as formed concrete. 
However, in some cases parge coatings may be appropriate to 
match an original parged surface treatment. Proper placement 
and finishing of the repair are important to obtain a match with 
the original concrete. To minimize problems associated with rapid 
curing of concrete, such as surface cracking, it is important to use 
proper curing methods and to allow for sufficient time. 
Hairline cracks that show no sign of increasing in size may often 
be left unrepaired. The width of the crack and the amount of 
movement usually limits the selection of crack repair techniques 
that are available. Although it is difficult to determine whether 
cracks are moving or non-moving, and therefore most cracks 

should be assumed to be moving, it is possible to repair 
non-moving cracks by installation of a cementitious 
repair mortar matching the adjacent concrete. It is 
generally desirable not to widen cracks prior to the mortar 
application. Repair mortar containing sand in the mix may 
be used for wider cracks; unsanded repair mortar may be 
used for narrower cracks. 
When it is desirable to re-establish the structural integrity 
of a concrete structure involving dormant cracks, epoxy 
injection repair has proven to be an effective procedure. 
Such a repair is made by first sealing the crack on both sides 
of a wall or structural member with epoxy, polyester, wax, 
tape, or cement slurry, and then injecting epoxy through 
small holes or ports drilled in the concrete. Once the epoxy 
in the crack has hardened, the surface sealing material 
may be removed; however, this type of repair is usually 
quite apparent. Although it may be possible to inject epoxy 
without leaving noticeable residue, this process is difficult 
and, in general, the use of epoxy repairs in visible areas of 
concrete on historic structures is not recommended . 
Active structural cracks (which move as loads are 
added or removed) and thermal cracks (which move as 
temperatures fluctuate) must be repaired in a manner that 
will accommodate the anticipated movement. In some more 
extreme cases, expansion joints may have to be introduced 
before crack repairs are undertaken. Active cracks may 
be filled with sealants that will adhere to the sides of 
the cracks and will compress or expand during crack 
movement. The design, detailing, and execution of sealant 
repairs require considerable attention, or they will detract 
from the appearance of the historic building. The routing 
and cleaning of a crack, and installation of an elastomeric 
sealant to prevent water penetration, is used to address 
cracks where movement is anticipated. However, unless 
located in a concealed area of the concrete, this technique 
is often not acceptable for historic structures because the 
repair will be visually intrusive (Fig. 19). Other approaches, 
such as installation of a cementitious crack repair, may need 
to be considered even though this type of repair may be less 
effective or have a shorter service life than a sealant repair. 
Figure 19. A high-speed grinder ia used to widen a crack in 
preparation for installation of a sealant. This process is called 
"routing." After the crack is prepared, the sealant is installed to 
prevent moisture infiltration through the crack. Although sealant 
repairs can provide a durable, watertight repair for moving cracks, 
they tend to be very visible. 
Replacement 
If specific components of historic concrete structures are 
beyond repair, replacement components can be cast to 
match historic ones. Replacement of original concrete 
should be carefully considered and viewed as a method of 
last resort. In some cases, such as for repeated ornamental 
units, it may be more cost-effective to fabricate precast 
concrete units to replace missing elements. The forms 
created for precast or cast-in-place units can then be used 
again during future repair projects. 
Careful mix formulation, placement, and finishing are 
required to ensure that replacement concrete units will 
match the historic concrete. There is often a tendency to 
make replacement concrete more consistent in appearance 
than the original concrete. The consistency can be in 
stark contrast with the variability of the original concrete 
due to original construction techniques, architectural 
design, or differential exposure to weather. Trial repairs 
and mock-ups are used to evaluate the proposed 
replacement concrete work and to refine construction 
techniques (Fig 20). 
Protection Systems 
Coatings and Penetrating Sealers. Protection systems 
such as a penetrating sealers or film forming coating 
are often used with non-historic structures to protect 
the concrete and increase the length of the service life 
of concrete repairs. However, film-forming coatings 
are often inappropriate for use on a historic structure, 
unless the structure was coated historically. Film­
forming coatings will often change the color and 
appearance of a surface, and higher build coatings can 
also mask architectural finishes and ornamental details. 
For example, the application of a coating on concrete 
having a formboard finish may hide the wood texture 
of the surface. Pigmented film-forming coatings are 
also typically not appropriate for use over exposed 
aggregate concrete, where the uncoated exposed surface 
contributes significantly to the historic character of 
13 

14 
Figure 20. (a) The Jefferson Davis Memorial in Fairview, Kentucky, 
constructed from 1917-1924, is 351 feet tall and constructed of 
unreinforced concrete. The walls of the memorial are 8 feet thick at the 
base and 2 feet thick at the top of the wall. Access to the monument 
for investigation was provided by rappelling techniques, while ground 
supported and suspended scaffolding was used to access the exterior during 
repairs. (b) The concrete was severely deteriorated at isolated locations, with 
spalling and damage from cyclic freezing and thawing of entrapped water. 
In addition, previous repairs were at the end of their service life and removal 
of deteriorated concrete and failed previous repairs was required. Light 
duty chipping hammers were used to avoid damage to adjacent material 
when removing deteriorated concrete to the level of sound concrete. (c) 
Field samples were performed to match the color, finish, and texture of the 
original concrete. A challenge in matching of historic concrete 
is achieving 
variabilitt; of appearance. (d) The completed surface after repairs exhibits 
intentional variability of the concrete surface to match the appearance of 
the original concrete. Some formwork imperfections that would normally be 
removed by finishing were intentionally left in place, to replicate the highly 
variable finish of the original concrete. (e) The Jefferson Davis Memorial 
after completion of repairs in 2004. Photo e: Joseph Lenzi, Sen/er, Campbell 
& Associates, Inc. 

concrete. In cases where the color of a substrate needs to 
be changed, such as to modify the appearance of existing 
repairs, an alternative to pigmented film-forming coatings is 
the use of pigmented stains. 
Many proprietary clear, penetrating sealers are currentl y 
available to protect concrete substrates. These products 
render fine cracks and pores within the concrete 
hydrophobic; however, they do not bridge or fill cracks. 
Clear sealers may change the appearance of the concrete in 
that treated areas become more visible after rain in contrast 
to the more absorptive areas of original concrete. Once 
applied, penetrating sealers cannot be effectively removed 
and are therefore considered irreversible . They should 
not be used on historic concrete without thorough prior 
consideration. However , clear penetrating sealers provide 
an important means of protection for historic concrete that 
is not of good quality and can help to avoid more extensive 
future repairs or replacement. Thus they are sometimes 
appropr iate for use on historic concrete. Once applied, these 
sealers will require periodic re-application. 
Waterproofing membranes are systems used to protect 
concrete surfaces such as roofs, terraces, plazas, or balconies, 
as well as surfaces below grade. Systems range from coal 
tar pitch membranes used on older buildings, to asphalt or 
urethane-based systems. On historic buildings, membrane 
systems are typically used only on surfaces that were 
originall y protected by a similar system and surfaces that are 
not visible from grade. Waterproofing membranes may be 
covered by roofing, paving, or other architectural finishes. 
Laboratory and field testing is recommended prior to 
application of a protection system or treatment on any 
concrete structure; testing is even more critical for historic 
structures because many such treatments are not reversible . 
As with other repairs, trial samples are important to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment and to determine 
whether it will harm the concrete or affect it s appearance . 
Cathodic Protection. Corrosion is an electrochemical 
process in which electrons flow between cathodic (positi vely 
charged) and anodic (negatively charged) areas on a 
metal surface; corrosion occurs at the anodes. Cathodic 
protection is a technique used to control the corro sion of 
metal by making the whole metal surface the cathode of 
an electrochemical cell. This technique is used to protect 
metal structures from corrosion and is also sometimes 
used to protect steel reinforcement embedded in concrete. 
For reinforced concrete, cathodic protection is typically 
accomplished by connecting an auxiliary anode to the 
reinforcing so that the entire reinforcing bar becomes a 
cathode. 
In sacrificial anode (passive) systems , current flows 
naturally by galvanic action between the less noble anode 
(such as zinc) and the cathode. In impressed-current (active) 
systems , current is impressed between an inert anode 
(such as titanium) and the cathode . Cathodic protection is 
intended to reduce the rate of corrosion of embedded steel 
in concrete , which in turn reduces overall deterioration . 
Protecting embedded steel from corrosion helps to prevent 
concrete cracking and spalling. 
Impressed-current cathodic protection is the most 
effective means of mitigating steel corrosion and has 
been used in practical structural applications since the 
1970s. However, impressed-current cathodic protection 
systems are typically the most costly to install and 
require substantial ongoing monitoring, adjustment, 
and maintenance to ensure a proper voltage output 
(protection current) over time. Sacrificial anode cathodic 
protection dates back to the 1800s, when the hulls of 
ships were protected using this technology. Today 
many industries utilize the concept of sacrificial anode 
cathodic protection for the protection of steel exposed 
to corrosive environments. It is less costly than an 
impressed-current system, but is somewhat less effective 
and requires reapplication of the anode when it becomes 
depleted. 
Re-alkalization. Another technique currently available 
to protect concrete is realkalization, which is a process 
to restore the alkalinity of carbonated concrete. The 
treatment involves soaking the concrete with an alkaline 
solution, in some cases forcing it into the concrete to 
the level of the reinforcing steel by passage of direct 
current. These actions increase the alkalinity of the 
concrete around the reinforcement, thus restoring the 
protective alkaline environment for the reinforcement. 
Like impressed-current cathodic protection methods, it 
is costly. Other corrosion methods are also available but 
have a somewhat shorter history of use. 
Careful evaluation of existing conditions, the causes and 
nature of distress, and environmental factors is essential 
before a protection method is selected and implemented. 
Not every protection system will be effective on each 
structure. 
In addition, the level of intrusion caused by 
the protection system must be carefully evaluated before 
it is used on a historic concrete structure. 
Summary 
In the United States, concrete has been a popular 
construction material since the late nineteenth century 
and recently has gained greater recognition as a historic 
material. Preservation of historic concrete requires a 
thorough understanding of the causes and types of 
deterioration, as well as of repair and replacement 
materials and methods. It is important that adequate 
time is allotted during the planning phase of a project 
to provide for trial repairs and mock-ups in order 
to evaluate the effectiveness and aesthetics of the 
repairs. Careful design is essential and, as with other 
preservation efforts, the skill of those performing 
the work is critical to the success of the repairs. The 
successful repair of many historic concrete structures 
in recent years demonstrates that the techniques and 
materials now available can extend the life of such 
structures and help ensure their preservation. 
15 

16 
Selected Reading 
Acknowledgements 
Paul Gaudette is an engineer with Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc., in Chicago, Illinois. Deborah Slaton is an architectural 
conservator with Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc., in Northbrook, Illinois. All photographs by Paul Gaudette unless otherwise 
stated. Front cover image: Kyle Normandin, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. 
The authors wish to thank William Bing Coney, author of the first edition of this preservation brief, who served as a peer reviewer 
for the current edition. In addition, the authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of the following individuals as peer reviewers 
of this brief: Ame Johnson and Una Gilmartin, Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.; Robert Joyce, Quality Restorations, Inc.; Susan 
Macdonald, New South Wales Heritage Office; Miles T. Murray, Restruction Corporation; and Jack Pyburn, OJP/Architect, Inc. Anne 
E. Grimmer, Chad Randl, arid former staff Sharon C. Park, FAIA, of the Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, offered 
valuable comments during development of the brief. Charles E. Fisher of the National Park Service was the technical editor for this 
publication project. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary 
of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. Comments about this publication should 
be addressed to: Charles E. Fisher, Technical Preservation Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services-2255, 
National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Washington, DC 20240. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without 
penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park Service should be provided. The photographs used in 
this publication may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners. For more information about the 
programs of the National Park Service's Technical Preservation Services see our website at http://www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps.htrn 
ISBN: 978-0-16-078946-5 
U.S. 
Government Printing Office Stock Number: 024-005-01253-2 2007 
American Concrete 
Institute. Guide for Making a Condition Survey of Concrete in Service. ACI Committee 201, ACI 201.lR-92. 
American Concrete Institute. Guide to Evaluation of Concrete Structures before Rehabilitation. ACI Committee 364, ACI 364.lR-07. 
American Concrete Institute. Concrete Repair Guide. ACI Committee 546, ACI 546R-04. 
American Concrete Institute. Guide for Evaluation of Existing Concrete Buildings. ACI Committee 437, ACI 437R-03. 
Childe, H.L. Manufacture and Uses of Concrete Products and Cast Stone. London: Concrete Publications Limited, 1930. 
Collins, Peter. Concrete: The Vision of a New Architecture. New York, New York: Faber and Faber, 1959. 
Cowden, Adrienne B., comp. Historic Concrete: An Annotated Bibliography. Washington, D.C.: National Park Service, 1993. 
Komandant, August E. Contemporary Concrete Structures. New York, New York: McGraw Hill, 1972. 
Erlemann, Gustav G. "Steel Reinforcing Bar Specification in Old Structures." Concrete International, April 1999, 49-50. 
Federal Highway Administration. Guide to Nondestructive Testing of Concrete. FHWA Publication Number FHWA-SA-97-105. 
Gaudette, Paul E. "Special Considerations in Repair of Historic Concrete." Concrete Repair Bulletin, January/February 2000, 12-13. 
Jester, Thomas C., ed. Twentieth Century Building Materials. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995. 
Johnson, Ame P., and Seung Kyoung Lee. "Protection Methods for Historic Concrete at Soldier Field." Preserve and Play: Preserving 
Historic Recreation and Entertainment Sites. Washington, D.C.: Historic Preservation Education Foundation, National Council for 
Preservation Education, and National Park Service, 2006. 
Macdonald, Susan, ed. Concrete: Building Pathology. Osney Mead, Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell Science, 2003. 
McGovern, Martin S. "A Clear View of Sealers." Concrete Construction, January 2000, 53-58. 
Morton, W. Brown III, Gary L. Hurne, Kay D. Weeks, H. Ward Jandl, and Anne E. Grimmer. The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for 
Rehabilitation & Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. Washington, D.C.: National Park Service, 1983, reprinted 1997. 
"Repairing Cracks." Concrete Repair Digest, August/September 1992, 160-164. Condensed from ACI document 224.lR-93. 
Slaton, Deborah. "Cleaning Historic Concrete." Concrete Repair Bulletin, January/February 2000, 14-15. 