U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Heritage Preservation Services 
PRESERVATIO
BRIEFS 
The Repair, Replacement, and 
Maintenance of Historic Slate Roofs 
Jeffrey S. Levine 
Introduction 
Slate is one of the most aesthetically pleasing and durable 
of all roofing materials. It is indicative at once of the 
awesome powers of nature which have formed it and the 
expertise and skill of the craftsman in hand -shaping and 
laying it on the roof. Installed properly, slate roofs require 
relatively little maintenance and will last 60 to 125 years 
or longer depending on the type of slate employed, roof 
configuration, and the geographical location of the 
property. Some slates have been known to last over 200 
years. Found on virtually every class of structure, slate 
roofs are perhaps most often associated with institutional, 
ecclesiastical, and government buildings , where longevity 
is an especially important consideration in material 
choices. In the slate quarrying regions of the country, 
where supply is abundant, slate was often used on farm 
and agricultural buildings as well. 
Because the pattern, detailing , and craftsmanship of slate 
roofs are important design elements of historic buildings, 
they should be repaired rather than replaced whenever 
possible. The purpose of this Preservation Brief is to assist 
property owners, architects, preservationists, and building 
managers in understanding the causes of slate roof 
failures and undertaking the repair and replacement of 
slate roofs. Details contributing to the character of historic 
slate roofs are described and guidance is offered on 
maintenance and the degree of intervention required at 
various levels of deterioration. 
The relatively large percentage of historic buildings roofed 
with slate during the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries means that many slate roofs, and the 60 to 125 
year life span of the slates most commonly used , may be 
nearing the end of their serviceable lives at the end of 
the twentieth century. Too often, these roofs are being 
improperly repaired or replaced with alternative roofing 
materials, to the detriment of the historic integrity and 
appearance of the structure. Increased knowledge of the 
characteristics of slate and its detailing and installation on 
the roof can lead to more sensitive interventions in which 
original material is preserved and the building's historic 
character maintained . Every effort should be made to 
replace deteriorated slate roofs with new slate and to 
develop an effective maintenance and repair program for 
slate roofs that can be retained. 
History of Slate Use in the United States 
Although slate quarrying was not common in the United 
States until the latter half of the nineteenth century, slate 
roofing is known to have been used prior to the Revolution .
Archeological excavations at Jamestown, Virginia,have 
unearthed roofing slate in strata dating from 1625-1650 
and 1640-1670. Slate roofs were introduced in Boston as 
early as 1654 and Philadelphia in 1699. Seventeenth 
century building ordinances of New York and Boston 
recommended the use of slate or tile roofs to ensure 
fireproof construction. 
In the early years of the Colonies, nearly all roofing slate 
was imported from North Wales. It was not until 1785 
that the first commercial slate quarry was opened in the 
United States, by William Docher in Peach Bottom 
Township, Pennsylvania. Production was limited to that 
which could be consumed in local markets until the 
middle of the nineteenth century. Knowledge of the 
nation's abundant stone resources was given commercial 
impetus at this time by several forces, including a rapidly 
growing population that demanded housing, advances in 
quarrying technology, and extension of the railroad system 
to previously inaccessible markets. Two additional factors 
helped push the slate industry to maturity: the immigration 
of Welsh slate workers to the United States and the 
introduction of architectural pattern and style books 
(Figure 1). Slate production increased dramatically in the 
years following the Civil War as quarries were opened in 
Vermont, New York, Virginia, and Lehigh and 
Northampton Counties , Pennsylvania. By 1876, roofing 
slate imports had all but dried up and the United States 
became a net exporter of the commodity . 
1 

Figure 1. Ar chitectural pattern books of th e mid-nineteenth century 
awakened A111ericn11s to the availability and quality of slate for roofing 
purposes by incorporating slate roofs in their designs. Design XX, 
'A French Roof House," in A.] . Downi11g's Victorian Cotta ge 
Residen ces is shown. 
The U.S. roofing slate industry reached its highest point in 
both quantity and value of output in the period from 1897 
to 1914. In 1899, there were over 200 slate quarries 
operating in 13 states, Pennsylvania historically being the 
largest producer of all. The decline of the U.S . roofing 
slate indus try began c.1915 and resulted from several 
factors, including a decline in skilled labor for both the 
fabrication and installation of slate and competition from 
substitute materials, such as asphalt shingles, which could 
be mass produced, transported and installed at a lower 
cost than s late. Only recently, with the increasing 
populari ty of historic preservation and the recognition of 
the superiori ty of slate over other roofing materials, has 
slate usage begun to increase. 
The Character and De tailing o f Hist oric 
Slate Roofs 
During some periods of architectural history , roof design 
has gone far beyond the merely functional and contributed 
much to t he charac ter of buildings. Roofs, by their 
compelling forms, have defined styles and , by their 
decorative patterns and colors, have imparted both dignity 
and beau ty to buildings . The architectural styles prevalent 
during the latter half of the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries placed strong emphasis on prominent roof lines 
and greatly influenced the demand for slate. Slate , laid in 
multi-colored decorative patterns, was particularly well 
suited to the Mansard roofs of the Second Empire style, 
the steeply pitch roofs of the Gothic Revival and High 
Victorian Gothic sty les, and the many prominent roof 
planes and turrets associated with the Queen Anne style. 
The Tudor style imitated the quaint appearance of some 
English s lates which, because of their granular cleavage , 
are thick and irregular. These slates were often laid in a 
graduated pattern, with the largest slates at the eaves and 
the courses diminishing in size up the roof slope, or a 
textural pattern (Figure 2) . Collegiate Gothic style 
buildings, found on many university campuses, were 
often roofed with slate laid in a graduated pattern . 
The configuration, massing, and style of historic slate 
roofs are important design elements that should be 
preserved . In addition, several types of historic detailing 
2 
were often employed to add visual interest to the roof , 
essentially elevating the roof to the level of an ornamental 
architectural element. When repairing or replacing a slat e 
roof, original details affecting its visual character should 
be retained . 
Before repairing or replacing an existing slate roof, it i s 
important to document the existing conditions and 
detailing of the roof using written, visual, and physical 
evidence so that original features can be identified and 
preserved . Documentation should continue through the 
repair or replacement process as significant details , long 
obscured , are often rediscovered while carrying out these 
activities. Local histories , building records , old receipts 
and ledgers, historic photographs , sketches, and painting s, 
shadow lines and nail hole patterns on the roof deck , and 
bits of historic material left over from previous intervent ion s 
(often found in eave cavities) are all useful sources of 
information which can be of help in piecing together the 
original appearance of the roof. Size , shape, color , textur e, 
exposure , and coursing are among the most important 
characteristics of the original slates which should be 
documented and matched when repairing or replacing an 
historic slate roof. 
Historically , three types of slate roofing-standard , 
textural , and graduated-were available according to the 
architectural effect desired. St~ndard grade slate roof s 
were most common . These are characterized by their 
uniform appearance , being composed of slates 
approximately 3 /16" (0.5cm) thick , of consistent length 
and width, and having a smooth cleavage surface. Thirty 
different standard sizes were available, ranging from 10 " 
(25cm) x 6" to 24" x 14" (15cm x 61cm x 35cm). The 
slates were laid to break joints and typically had square 
ends and uniform color and exposure . Patterned and 
polychromatic roofs were created by laying standard slate s 
of different colors and shapes on the roof in such a wa y as 
to create sunbursts , flowers , sawtooth and geometric 
designs , and even initials and dates (Figure 3). On 
utilitarian structures , such as barns and sheds, large gaps 
were sometimes left between each slate within a given 
course to reduce material and installation costs and 
provide added ventilation for the interior (Figure 4). 
Figure 2. The quaint character of this Tudor style residence is derived, 
i11 part, from its textural roof. 

Fig11re 3. A sawtooth geo111elric design composed of red, green, n11d 
black slates makes this roof the 111ost vis11ally i111porta11t feature of the 
b11ildi11g. 
Textural slate roofs incorporate slates of different 
thicknesses , uneven tails , and a rougher texture than 
standard slates. Textural slate roofs are perhaps most often 
associated with Tudor style building s where slates of 
different colors are used to enhance the effect. 
Graduated slate roofs were frequently installed on large 
institutional and ecclesiastical structures (Figure 5). The 
slates were graduated according to thickness , size, and 
exposure, the thickest and largest slates being laid at the 
eaves and the thinnest and smallest at the ridge . Plea sing 
architectural effects were achieved by blending sizes and 
colors. 
Detailing at the hips , ridges and valleys provided added 
opportunity to ornament a slate roof. Hips and ridge s can 
be fashioned out of slate according to various traditional 
schemes whereby the slates are cut and overlapped to 
produce a watertight joint of the de sired artistic effect. 
Traditional slate ridge details are the saddle ridge, strip 
saddle ridge, and comb ridge , and for hips , the saddle 
hip, mitered hip , Boston hip , and fantail hip (Figure 6). 
A more linear effect was achieved by cpvering the ridges 
and hips with flashing called "cresting" or "ridge roll" 
formed out of sheet metal , terra cotta , or even slate 
(Figure 7). Snow guards , snow board s, and various types 
of gutter and rake treatments also contributed to the 
character of historic slate roofs (Figure 8). 
Two types of valleys were traditionally employed, the 
open valley and the closed valley. The open valley is lined 
with metal over which slates lap only at the sides. Closed 
valleys are covered with slate and have either a continuous 
metal lining or metal flashing built in with each course. 
Open valleys are easier to install and maintain , and are 
generally more watertight than clo sed valleys. Round 
valleys are a type of closed valley with a concave rather 
than V -shaped section (Figure 9). Given the broader 
sweep of the round valley, it was not uncommon for 
roofers to interweave asphalt saturated felts rather than 
copper sheet in the coursing in order to cut costs. 
Figure 4. Widely spaced ope11 slating was often used on utilitarian 
structures where ventilation was desirable. II provided an interesting 
texture a11d visual pattern to often plai11 struct'U res. 
Fig11re 5. This graduated slate roof is composed of large, thick slates at 
the eave which are reduced i11 size and thickness as the slating 
progresses to the ridge. 
Although principally associated with graduated and 
textural slate roofs, round valleys were infrequently 
employed due to the difficulty and expense of their 
installation. 
Common types of sheathing used include wood boards, 
wood battens, and, for fireproof construction on 
institutional and government buildings, concrete or steel 
(Figure 10). Solid wood sheathing was typically 
constructed of tongue and groove, square edged, or 
shiplapped pine boards of 1" (2.5 cm) or 11 /4" (3 cm) 
nominal thickness . Boards from 6" (15 cm) to 8 " (20 cm) 
wide and tongue and groove boards were generally 
preferred as they were less likely to warp and curl. 
Wood battens, or open wood sheathing, consisted of wood 
strips, measuring from 2 " (5 cm) to 3" (7.5 cm) in width, 
nailed to the roof rafters. Spacing of the battens depended 
on the length of the slate and equaled the exposure. Slates 
were nailed to the batten that transected its mid-section. 
The upper end of the slate rested at least 1 /2" (1.25 cm) on 
the batten next above. Open wood sheathing was employed 
primarily on utilitarian, farm, and agricultural structures 
in the North and on residential buildings in the South 
where the insulating value of solid wood sheathing was 
not a strict requirement . To help keep out dust and wind 
driven rain on residential buildings, mortar was often 
placed along the top and bottom edge of each batten , a 
practice sometimes referred to as torching . 
3 

4 
Various Roofing Details 
Figure 6. Hips are fanned at the extemal angle of two roofing slopes. 111 (a), the hips at both the roof and the dormer are covered with metal. Note also the 
open valley and the built-in gutter. In (b), the dormer hip slates have been laid in a fantail pattern to help shed water. Note also the metal ridge cap. 
Figure 7. Ridge caps and cresting can be elaborate. Ridges are formed at the long horizontal juncture of two roofing slopes and capping protects this joint 
from moisture. In (a), a terracotta capping with a decorative profile complements the finial over the various roof peaks. In (b), the mansard roof has a 
decorative iron cresting at the break between the lower and the upper roof slopes. 
Figure 8. Eave details include snow guards, snow boards, gutter treatments. Snow guards are generally used in areas where ice and snow accumulate to 
avoid dangerous slides from the roof. In (a) the snow guards are set in two staggered rows above a pole gutter. In (b), the copper wire snow guards are set 
more frequently up a very steep gable. 

(a) TYPICAL SLATE 
WIDTH 
~] LAP 
+ HOLES + 
LENGTH 
(b) TYPICAL SLATE ON OPEN LATH 
(d) SLATE ON IRON PURLIN (NORCROSS) 
SCREW 
Figure 9. Valleys are formed at the internal angle of two roofing slopes. Flashing is often placed under the slate to increase moisture protect at this 
vulnerable joint. Shown in (a) is a closed valley where the slates are held tight to the valley line. (b) illustrates of a round vallei; where the transition 
between the two slopes is a continuous curve. lt requires careful workmanship and an experienced roofer. 
Figure 10. (a) shows a typical slate; exposure 111ay be calculated btj 
subtracting the headlap from the total length of the slate and dividing bt; 
two. Slates were typically nailed either to closed wooden decking or to 
open laths (b). In the late 19th century, with the concem for fireproof 
construction, special fasteners were developed to secure slate to steel 
pu rlins (c) 1881 patent to James G. Hill; (d) 1889 patent to Orlando W 
Norcross). 
Steel angles substituted for the wood battens in fireproof 
construction. The slates were secured using wire wrapped 
around the steel angle , where it was twisted-off tight . 
Alternately, any of a variety of special fasteners patented 
over the years could have been used to attach the slate to 
the steel angle (Figure 10). On roofs with concrete decks, 
slates were typically nailed to wood nailing strips 
embedded in the concrete. 
Beginning in the late nineteenth century, asphalt saturated 
roofing felt was installed atop solid wood sheathing. The 
felt provided a temporary, watertight roof until the slate 
could be installed atop it. Felt also served to cushion the 
slates, exclude wind driven rain and dust, and ease slight 
unevenness between the sheathing boards. 
Slate was typically laid in horizontal courses starting at the 
eaves with a standard headlap of 3" (7.5 cm) (Figure 10). 
Headlap was generally reduced to 2 " (5 cm) on Mansard 
roofs and on particularly steep slopes with more than 20 " 
(50 cm) of rise per 12 " (30 cm) of run . Conversely, headlap 
was increased to 4 " (10 cm) or more on low pitched roofs 
with a rise of 8" (20 cm) or less per 12 " (30 cm) of 
horizontal run. The minimum roof slope necessary for a 
slate roof was 4" (10 cm) of rise per 12 " (30 cm) of run. 
Where Does Slate Come From? 
Slate is a fine grained, crystalline rock derived from 
sediments of clay and fine silt which were deposited on 
ancient sea bottoms . Superimposed materials gradually 
consolidated the sedimentary particles into bedded 
deposits of shale. Mountain building forces subsequently 
folded, crumpled, and compressed the shale. At the same 
time , intense heat and pressure changed the original clays 
into new minerals such as mica , chlorite, and quartz . By 
such mechanical and chemical processes bedded clays 
were tran sformed , or metamorphosed , into slate, whole 
5 

QUARRIED BLOCK 
CLEAVAGE PLANE 
Cutting 
Original block is crosscut with a wet diamond blade saw 
A hammer and chisel are used to split the block to the proper dim ension along the grain 
Splitting 
Shingles or tiles are created with a hammer and chisel by systematically halving and 
splitting the smaller block along the cleavage plane 
Figure 11. Slate roofing tiles or shingles are still manufactured using 
traditional methods brought to this countn; In; Welsh immigrants in 
the nineteenth centunJ Shown above are the first 3 steps of cutting, 
sculping and splitting. Once the rough slate tile is made it is trimmed 
and punched for holes. 
geologic ages being consumed in the process. Slates vary 
in composition, structure, and durability because the 
degree to which their determinant minerals have been 
altered is neither uniform nor consistent . 
The adaptation of slate for roofing purposes is inextricably 
linked to its genesis . The manufacturing processes of 
nature have endowed slate with certain commercially 
amenable properties which have had a profound influence 
on the methods by which slate is quarried and fabricated 
(Figure 11), as well as its suitability for use as a roofing tile. 
Slate roofing tiles are still manufactured by hand using 
traditional methods in a five step process: cutting, 
sculping, splitting, trimming, and hole punching . In the 
manufacturing process, large, irregular blocks taken from 
the quarry are first cut with a saw across the grain in 
sections slightly longer than the length of the finished 
roofing slate. The blocks are next sculped, or split along 
the grain of the slate, to widths slightly larger than the 
widths of finished slates . Sculping is generally 
accomplished with a mallet and a broad-faced chisel, 
6 
although some types of slate must be cut along their 
grain. In the splitting area , the slightly oversized blocks 
are split along their cleavage planes to the desired shingle 
thickness. The splitter 's tools consist of a wooden mallet 
and two splitting chisels used for prying the block into 
halves and repeating this process until the desired 
thinness is reached (Figure 12) . The last two steps involve 
trimming the tile to the desired size and then punching 
two nail holes toward the top of the slate using a formula 
based on the size and exposure of the slate . 
Minerals, the building blocks of rocks , through their 
characteristic crystalline structures define the physical 
properties of the rocks which they compose. Slate consists 
of minerals that are stable and resistant to weathering and 
is, therefore , generally of high strength, low porosity, and 
low absorption. The low porosity and low absorption of 
slate mitigate the deleterious action of frost on the stone 
and make it well adapted for roofing purposes. The two 
most important structural properties of slate are cleavage 
and grain. 
The metamorphic processes of geologic change necessary 
to produce slate are dependent upon movements in the 
earth's crust and the heat and pressure generated thereby. 
For thi s reason, slate is found only in certain mountainous 
regio ns . The most economically important slate deposits 
in this country lie in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern 
states transversed by or bordering on the Appalachian 
Mountain chain. Variations in local chemistry and 
conditions under which the slate was formed have 
Figure 12. 111 the splitting area, the slightly oversized blocks are split 
along their cleavage planes. The splitter's tools consist of a wooden 
mallet and splitting c/1ise/s. The process of halving the split portio11s 
is repeated until a tile or shingle of appropriate thinness is obtained. 

Figllre 13. Paper thin lamination can be seen flaking off of this 
weathered, 120 year piece of Pennsylvania Hard-Vein slate. 
produced a wide range of colors and qualities and 
ultimately determine the character of the slate found in 
these areas . 
Slate is available in a variety of colors . The most common 
are grey, blue-grey, black, various shades of green , deep 
purple, brick red, and mottled varieties. The presence of 
carbonaceous matter, derived from the decay of marine 
organisms on ancient sea floors, gives rise to the black 
colored slates . Compounds of iron generate the red, 
purple , and green colored slates . 
Generally, the slates of Maine , Virginia, and the Peach 
Bottom district of York County, Pennsylvania are deep 
blue-black in color. Those of Virginia have a distinctive 
lustrous appearance as well due to their high mica 
content . The slates of Lehigh and Northampton Counties , 
Pennsylvania, are grayish-black in color . Green , red, 
purple , and mottled slates derive from the New York­
Vermont district . The slate producing region of New York, 
which centers around Granville and Middle Granville , is 
particularly important because it contains one of the few 
commercial deposits of red slate in the world . 
Slates are also classified as fading or unfading according 
to their color stability . Fading slates change to new shade s 
or may streak within a short time after exposure to the 
atmosphere due to the presence of fine -grained 
disseminated pyrite . For example , the "weathering green " 
or "sea-green" slates of New York and Vermont are grayish 
green when freshly quarried . Upon e xposure, from 20% to 
60% of the slates typically weather to soft tones of orange­
brown , buff, and gray while the others retain their original 
shade. Slates designated as unfading maintain their 
original colors for many years . 
Color permanence generally provides no indication of 
the durability of slate . Rather, time has shown that the 
Vermont and New York slates will last about 125 years ; 
Buckingham Virginia slates 175 years or more; and 
Pennsylvania Soft-Vein slates in excess of 60 years ; 
Pennsylvania Hard-Vein slates and Peach Bottom slates, 
neither of which is still quarried , had life spans of roughl y 
100 and at least 200 years respectively . The life spans 
provided should be used only as a general guide in 
determining whether or not an existing slate roof i s 
nearing the end of it s serviceabl e life. 
Ribbons are visible as bands on the cleavage face of slate 
and represent geologic periods during which greater 
amounts of carbonaceous matter, calcite, or coarse quartz 
particles were present in the sediment from which the 
slate was formed. Ribbons typically weather more and 
were most common in Pennsylvania slate quarries . As 
they were not as durable as clear slates, ribbon slate is no 
longer manufactured for roofing purposes. Mottled grey 
slates from Vermont are the closest match for Pennsylvania 
ribbon slate available today . 
In recent years, slates from China, Africa, Spain and other 
countries have begun to be impor ted into the United 
States, primarily for distribution on the West Coast . The 
use of imported slates should probably be limited to new 
construction since their colors and textures often do not 
match those of U.S. slate . 
Deterioration of Slate and Slate Roofs 
The durability of a slate roof depends primarily on four 
factors : the physical and mineralogical properties of the 
slate ; the way in which it is fabricated; installation 
techniques employed; and, regular and timely 
maintenance . The first three of these factors are examined 
below . The maintenance and repair of slate roofs are 
discussed in later sections of this Brief . 
The natural weathering of roofing slate manifests itself as 
a slow process of chipping and scaling along the cleavage 
planes (Figure 13) . Paper thin laminations flake off the 
surface of the slate and the slate becomes soft and spongy 
as the inner layers begin to come apart, or delaminate. 
The nature of the sound given off by a slate when tapped 
with one's knuckles or slating hammer is a fair indication 
of its condition . High-grade slate, when poised upon the 
fingertips and struck , will emit a clear, solid sound. 
Severely weathered slates are much less sonorous, and 
give off a dull thud when tapped. 
The weathering of slate is chiefly due to mineral 
impurities (primarily calcite and iron sulfides) in the slate 
which , in concert with alternating wet/dry and hot /cold 
cycles, react to form gypsum (Figure 14). Because gypsum 
Figure 14. The white blotches on these Pennsylvania Soft-Vein slates 
indicate areas where gypsum is leaching out onto the Sllrface of the 
slates. 
7 

8 
Figure 15. View of the underside of slates laid on open sheathing shows 
that delamination and flaking is just as bad or worse on the underside of 
slates as on the exposed surface. This is why most slates cannot be 
flipped over for reuse. 
molecules take up about twice as much volume as calcite 
molecules, internal stresses result from the reaction, 
causing the slate to delaminate. This type of deterioration 
is as prominent on the underside of the roof as on the 
exposed surface due to the leaching and subsequent 
concentration of gypsum in this area (Figure 15) . 
Consequently, deteriorated roofing slates typically cannot 
be flipped over and re-used. 
The chemical and physical changes which accompany 
slate weathering cause an increase in absorption and a 
decrease in both strength and toughness. The tendency of 
old, weathered slates to absorb and hold moisture can 
lead to rot in underlying areas of wood sheathing. Such 
rot can go undetected for long periods of time since, often, 
there is no accompanying leak. Due to their loss of 
strength, weathered slates are more prone to breakage, 
loss of corners, and cracking. 
Slates with low calcite content tend to weather slowly. 
Dense slates, with low porosity, likewise decay slower 
than slates with equal calcite, but with a greater porosity. 
The pitch of a roof can also affect its longevity. The steeper 
the pitch, the longer the slate can be expected to last as 
water will run off faster and will be less likely to be drawn 
under the slates by capillary action or driven under by 
wind forces. Spires and the steep slopes of Mansard roofs 
often retain their original slate long after other portions of 
the roof have been replaced. Areas of a roof subject to 
concentrated water flows and ice damming, such as along 
eaves and valleys, also tend to deteriorate more rapidly 
than other areas of the roof. 
Mechanical agents, such as thermal expansion and 
contraction and the action of frost, are subordinate in the 
weathering of slate, coming into play only after the slate 
has been materially altered from its original state by the 
chemical transformation of calcite to gypsum. The more 
rapid deterioration of slates found on roof slopes with the 
most severe exposure to the sun, wind, and rain (typically, 
but not always, a southern exposure) may be attributable 
to the combined result of the deleterious effects of impurities 
in the slate and mechanical agents. Atmospheric acids 
produce only negligible deterioration in roofing slate. 
It is difficult to assess the procedures by which a piece of 
slate has been fabricated without visiting the quarry and 
observing the process first hand. The location and size of 
nail holes, grain orientation, the condition of corners, and 
the number of broken pieces are all things which may be 
observed in a shipment of slate to judge the quality of its 
fabrication. Nail holes should be clean and with a shallow 
countersink on the face of the slate for the nail head; grain 
oriented along the length of the slate; and, corners left 
whole. An allowance for 10% breakage in shipment is 
typically provided for by the quarry. 
Installation problems often involve the improper nailing 
and lapping of slates. The nailing of slates differs from 
that of other roofing materials. Slate nails should not be 
driven tight as is the case with asphalt and wood shingles. 
Rather, they should be set such that the slate is permitted 
to hang freely on the nail shank. Nails driven too far will 
crack the slate and those left projecting will puncture the 
overlying slate (Figure 16). Nail heads left exposed accelerate 
roof deterioration by providing a point for water entry. 
Non-ferrous slater's nails, such as solid copper or stainless 
steel, should always be used since plain steel and galvanized 
nails will usually rust out long before the slate itself begins 
to deteriorate. The rusting of nineteenth century cut nails 
is a common cause of slate loss on historic roofs. 
When joints are improperly broken (i.e., when slates lap 
the joints in the course below by less than 3" (7.5 cm]), it 
is possible for water to pass between the joints, through 
the nail holes and ultimately to the underlying felt, where 
it will cause deterioration and leaks to develop. Insufficient 
headlap can also result in leaks as water entering the joints 
between slates may have a greater tendency to be wind 
blown beyond the heads of the slates in the course below. 
Occasionally, individual slates are damaged. This may be 
caused by falling tree limbs, ice dams in gutters, valleys, 
and chimney crickets, the weight of a workman walking 
on the roof, or a naturally occurring fault in the slate unit. 
Whatever the form of damage, if it is caught soon enough, 
the roof can usually be repaired or selectively replaced 
and deterioration mitigated. 
The ability to lay slate properly so as to produce a water­
tight and aesthetically pleasing roof requires training, 
much practice, and the right tools (Figure 17). The 
Figure 16. Detail view of a slate which /ms been punctured by the head 
of a nail used to secure the slate in the course below. Likely, the nail was 
not hammered in far enough when originally installed. 

Figure 17. Slater's Tools. The cutter (a) is used to trim slate edges; the slate hammer (b) is used for hammering nails, trimming, cutting and punching 
holes in slates, and pulling roofing nails; the steak (c) is a T-shaped piece of iron upon which the slater places the edge of a slate to be trimmed; and the 
ripper (d) is slid under the slates to pull out the nails. 
Figure 18. A method of securing replacement slates is shown. The copper strip is nailed to the roof sl1eathing just above the head of the slate in the 
course below. The replacement slate is then inserted and the copper tab folded over its tail. This type of repair is not recommended for northern climates 
where snow and ice can cause the copper tab to fold over, allowing the replacement slate to slide out of position as occurred here 011 the left. 
9 

Repair Sequence 
(e) The bib is cut along its edges and bent into a concave shape to create a 
friction fit. 
(f) The slate hammer is used to push the bib in place over the nail head. 
Figure 19. Above is a repair sequence for replacing a damaged slate. 
10 

The installation and repair of slate roofs should be entrusted 
only to experienced slaters. 
Repairing Slate Roofs 
Broken, cracked, and missing slates should be repaired 
promptly by an experienced slater in order to prevent 
water damage to interior finishes, accelerated deterioration 
of the roof and roof sheathing, and possible structural 
degradation to framing members (Figures 18 and 19). 
The damaged slate is first removed by cutting or pulling 
out its nails with a ripper. If steel cut nails, rather than 
copper nails, were used in laying the roof, adjacent slates 
may be inadvertently damaged or displaced in the ripping 
process, and these, too, will have to be repaired . If the 
slate does not slide out by itself, the pointed end of the 
slate hammer can be punched into the slate and the slate 
dragged out. A new slate, or salvaged slate, which should 
match the size, shape, texture, and weathered color of the 
old slate, is then slid into place and held in position by 
one nail inserted through the vertical joint between the 
slates in the course above and approximately one inch 
below the tail of the slate two courses above. To prevent 
water penetration through the newly created nail hole, a 
piece of copper with a friction fit, measuring roughly 3" 
(7.5 cm) in width and 8" (20 cm) in length, is slid lengthwise 
under the joint between the two slates located directly 
above the new slate and over the nail. Alternate methods 
for securing the replacement slate include the use of metal 
hooks, clips, and straps that are bent over the tail end of 
the slate. The application of roofing mastic or sealants to 
damaged slates should not be considered a viable repair 
alternative because these materials, though effective at first , 
will eventually harden and crack, thereby allowing water to 
enter (Figure 20). Mastic also makes future repairs more 
difficult to execute, is unsightly, and, when applied to 
metal flashings, accelerates their corrosion . 
When two or more broken slates lie adjacent to each 
other in the same course, or when replacing leaky valley 
flashings, it is best to form pyramids (i.e., to remove a 
diminishing number of slates from higher courses) to keep 
the number of bibs required to a minimum . When 
re-installing the slates, only the top slate in each pyramid 
will need a bib. Slates along the sides of the pyramid will 
receive two nails, one above the other, along the upper 
part of its exposed edge. 
When many slates must be removed to effect a repair, the 
sheathing should be checked for rotted areas and projecting 
nails . Plywood is generally not a good replacement 
material for deteriorated wood sheathing due to the 
relative difficulty of driving a nail through it (the bounce 
produced can loosen adjacent slates). Instead, new wood 
boards of similar width and thickness to those being 
replaced should be used. Because the nominal thickness 
of today's dimension lumber is slightly thinner than that 
produced in the past, it may be necessary to shim the new 
wood boards so that they lie flush with the top surface of 
adjacent existing sheathing boards. Pressure treated 
lumber is not recommended due to its tendency to shrink . 
This can cause the slates to crack and become displaced . 
To permit proper re-laying of the slate, the new roof 
sheathing must be of smooth and solid construction. At 
least two nails should be placed through the new boards 
at every rafter and joints between the ends of the boards 
should occur over rafters. Insufficient nailing will cause 
the boards to be springy, making nailing of the slates 
difficult and causing adjacent slates to loosen in the 
process . Unevenness in the sheathing will show in the 
finished roof surface and may cause premature cracking of 
the slate. Roof sheathing in valleys and along hips, ridges, 
and eaves may be covered with waterproof membrane 
underlayment rather than roofing felt for added protection 
against leakage. 
In emergency situations , such as when severe hurricanes 
or tornadoes blow numerous slates off the roof, a 
temporary roof covering should be installed immediately 
after the storm to prevent further water damage to the 
interior of the building and to permit the drying out 
process to begin. Heavy gauge plastic and vinyl tarpaulins 
are often used for this purpose, though they are difficult 
to secure in place and can be blown off in high winds. Roll 
roofing, carefully stitched in to areas of the remaining 
roof, is a somewhat more functional solution that will 
allow sufficient time to document the existing roof 
conditions, plan repairs, and order materials (Figure 21). 
Slate roof repair is viable for localized problems and 
damaged roofs with reasonably long serviceable lives 
remaining. If 20% or more of the slates on a roof or roof 
slope are broken, cracked, missing, or sliding out of 
position, it is usually less expensive to replace the roof 
than to execute individual repairs. This is especially true 
of older roofs nearing the end of their serviceable lives 
Figure 20. This roof l1as been poorly repaired numerous times in the 
past. The installation of mastic lo seal out moisture has only exacerbated 
the problem. A timely repair and good maintenance could have extended 
the life of this roof. 
11 

Figure 21. As a result of hurricanes and other disasters, it may be necessan; to temporarily stabilize a roof until materials can be obtained and a qualified 
roofing contractor hired. Heavy roofing felt was stitched into this slate roof to stop moisture penetration until matching slate was obtained for repair. 
Significant slate roofs should not be stripped off and replaced with asphalt shingles. Photograph courtesy of the National Park Service. 
because even the most experienced slater will likely 
damage additional slates while attempting repairs. 
Depending on the age of the slate, its expected serviceable 
life, and the cause(s) of deterioration, it may or may not be 
cost effective to salvage slates. Where deteriorated nails or 
flashings are the cause of the roof failure, salvage of at 
least some slates should be possible for use in repairs. 
When salvaging slates, each must be sounded to discover 
cracks and faults and the degree to which it has 
weathered. It is usually wise to salvage slates when only 
a portion of the roof is to be replaced. In this way, the 
salvaged slates may be used for future repairs to the 
remaining sections of the roof. 
12 
The Replacement of D eteriorated Roofs 
Historic slate roofs should be repaired rather than 
replaced whenever possible. Before replacing a slate roof, 
check for isolated damage, corroded and worn flashings, 
leaky gutters, poor ventilation in the attic, and other 
possible sources of moisture. All too often slate roofs are 
mistakenly replaced when, in fact, they could have been 
effectively repaired. Deciding whether an historic slate 
roof should be repaired or replaced can be difficult and 
each roof must be judged separately (see guidance in 
shaded box on page 16). 
If repair is not possible and a new slate roof must be 
installed, it is important to remember that more than just 
the replacement of the slate is involved (Figure 22). The 
old slate should be removed to prevent overloading of the 
roof timbers. Stripping should be done in sections, with 
felt installed, to avoid exposing the entire sub-roof to the 
weather. In the process, rotted wood sheathing should be 
replaced and the roof timbers checked for signs of stress, 
including deflection, cracking, and twisting. If such 
conditions are found, a structural engineer experienced in 
working with older buildings should be consulted. Other 
repairs, such as chimney repointing, which may require 
access to the roof should be completed before the new 
roof is put on. 
Drawings and specifications for a new slate roof should be 
prepared by a restoration architect, especially if the project 
is going to be competitively bid or if the roof is particularly 
complex. Standard specifications, like those published in 
1926 by the National Slate Association may be used as a 
basis for developing specifications appropriate for a 
particular project. The specifications and drawings should 
contain all the information necessary to replicate the 
original appearance of the roof as closely as possible. 
Certain changes may have to be accepted, however, since 
several types of slate once prominent in this country, such 
as ribbon slate, are no longer quarried. It is wise to 

(d) Deteriorated sheathing was replaced and rafter tails were reinforced. 
(e) Roofing felt was installed aver decking; a rubberized membrane was used (f) Lead coated copper flashing was installed throu:;(hout. Seen is the 
selectively at the eaves and under some flashing. offset between the portico roof and the main roof in progress. 
Figure 22. Installing a new roof involves more than just slate. Above is a sequence of views of the roof replacement at Arlington House. Photographs 
courtesy of the National Park Service. (Seque11ce conti1111ed 011 page 14.) 13 

(g) Maso11n; chimneys were repaired a11d metal crickets were fabricated 
al the chimneys. 
(h) This installation pattern allows the slates to be laid in courses 
leaving a temporary path of travel to avoid stepping 011 i11sln/led slates. 
(i) Although the gutters and s11ow boards were the las/ elements 
installed, their support brackets were installed as the slates were laid. 
14 
anticipate the replacement of older roofs so that proper 
planning can be undertaken and financ ial resources set 
aside, thereby, reducing the likelihood of rash last minute 
decisions . 
Roofing slate is sold by the square in the United States. 
One square is enough to cover 100 square feet (13.3 square 
meters) of plain roof surface when laid with a standard 
headlap of 3" (7.5cm). When ordering slate, considerable 
lead time should be allowed as delivery may take 
anywhere from 4 to 12 weeks and even as long as 1 year 
for special orders. Orders for random widths of a 
particular slate can generally be filled more quickly than 
orders for fixed widths. Once on site, slates should be 
stored on edge, under cover on pallets . 
A roof and its associated flashings, gutters , and 
downspouts function as a system to shed water. Material 
choices should be made with this in mind . For example, 
use a single type of metal for all flashings and the 
rainwater conductor system to avoid galvanic action. 
Choose materials with life spans comparable to that of 
the slate, such as non-ferrous nails. Use heavier gauge 
flashings or sacrificial flashings in areas that are difficult 
to access or subject to concentrated water flows . 
Flashings are the weakest point in any roof. Given the 
permanence of slate, it is poor economy to use anything 
but the most durable of metals and the best workmanship 
for installing flashings. Copper is one of the best flashing 
materials, and along with terne, is most often associated 
with historic slate roofs. Copper is extremely durable , easily 
worked and soldered, and requires little maintenance . 
Sixteen-ounce copper sheet is the minimum weight 
recommended for flashings. Lighter weights will not 
endure the erosive action of dust and grit carried over the 
roof by rain water. Heavier weight, 20 oz. (565 grams) or 
24 oz. (680 grams), copper should be used in gutters, 
valleys, and areas with limited accessibility. Lead coated 
copper has properties similar to copper and is even more 
durable due to its additional lead coating. Lead coated 
copper is often used in restoration work. 
Terne is a less desirable flashing material since it must be 
painted periodically. Terne coated stainless steel (TCS) is a 
modern-day substitute for terne . Although more difficult 
to work than terne, TCS will not corrode if left unpainted ; 
a great advantage, especially in areas that are difficult to 
access. 
Once a metal is chosen, it is important to use it throughout 
for all flashings, gutters , downspouts, and metal roofs . 
Mixing of dissimilar metals can lead to rapid corrosion of 
the more electronegative metal by galvanic action. Where 
flashings turn up a vertical surface , they should be covered 
with a cap flashing. Slates which overlap metal flashings 
should be nailed in such a manner as to avoid puncturing 
the metal. This may be accomplished by punching a 
second hole about 2" (5cm) above the existing hole on the 
side of the slate not overlapping the metal flashing. It is 
important that holes be punched from the back side of the 
slate. In this way, a shallow countersink is created on the 
face of the slate in which the head of the nail may sit. 
◄ Continuation of the roof repair sequence of Arlington House from page 13. 

Figure 23. Slate roofs sho11/d not be walked on if at all possible. For 
large projects, lifts can be used to inspect roofs periodically to assess 
111ai11te11a11ce needs. Photograph courtesy of the National Park Service. 
The use of artificial, mineral fiber slate is not recommended 
for restoration work since its rigid appearance is that of a 
man-made material and not one of nature . Artificial slates 
may also have a tendency to fade over time . And, although 
artificial slate costs less than natural slate, the total initial 
cost of an artificial slate roof is only marginally less than a 
natural slate roof. This is because all the other costs 
associated with replacing a slate roof, such as the cost of 
labor, flashings, and tearing-off the old roof, are equal in 
both cases. Over the long term , natural slate tends to be a 
better investment because several artificial slate roofs will 
have to be installed during the life span of one natural 
slate roof. 
Clear roof expanses can be covered by an experienced 
slater and one helper at the rate of about two to three 
squares per day. More complex roofs and the presence of 
chimneys, dormers, and valleys can bring this rate down 
to below one square per day. One square per day is a 
good average rate to use in figuring how long a job will 
take to complete. This takes into account the installation of 
flashings and gutters and the set-up and break-down of 
scaffolding. Tear-off of the existing roof will require 
additional time. 
Maintenance 
Given the relatively high initial cost of installing a new 
slate roof, it pays to inspect its overall condition annually 
and after severe storms. For safety reasons , it is 
recommended that building owners and maintenance 
personnel carry out roof surveys from the ground using 
binoculars or from a cherry picker (Figure 23). Cracked , 
broken, misaligned, and missing slates and the degree to 
which delamination has occurred should be noted, along 
with failed flashings (pin holes, open seams, loose and 
misaligned elements, etc .) and broken or clogged 
downspouts. A roof plan or sketch and a camera can aid 
in recording problems and discussing them with 
contractors. In the attic, wood rafters and sheathing 
should be checked for water stains and rot . Critical areas 
are typically near the roof plate and at the intersection of 
roof planes, such as at valleys and hips . Regular 
maintenance should include cleaning gutters at least twice 
during the fall and once in early spring, and replacing 
damaged slates promptly. Every five to seven years 
inspections should be conducted by professionals 
experienced in working with slate and steep slopes. Good 
record keeping, in the form of a log book and the 
systematic filing of all bills and samples, can help in 
piecing together a roof's repair history and is an important 
part of maintenance. 
As part of regular maintenance, an attempt should be 
made to keep foot traffic off the roof. If maintenance 
personnel, chimney sweeps, painters, or others must walk
on the roof, it is recommended that ladders be hooked 
over the ridge and that the workmen walk on the ladders 
to better distribute their weight. lf slates are to be walked 
on, it is best to wear soft soled shoes and to step on the 
lower-middle of the exposed portion of the slate unit. 
Conclusion 
Slate roofs are a critical design feature of many historic 
buildings that cannot be duplicated using substitute 
materials (Figure 24). Slate roofs can, and should be, 
maintained and repaired to effectively extend their 
serviceable lives. When replacement is necessary, details 
contributing to the appearance of the roof should be 
retained. High quality slate is still available from reputable 
quarries and, while a significant investment, can be a cost 
effective solution over the long term. 
Further Reading 
Copper And Brass Research Association. Copper Flashings. 2nd ed. 
New York: Copper And Brass Research Association , 1925. 
Dale, T. Nelson , and others. Slate ln The United States, Bulletin 
586. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior , United 
States Geological Survey, 1914. 
Heim , David . "Roofing With Slate:' Fine Homebuilding, No. 20 
(April/May 1984): 38-43 . 
Levine, Jeffrey S. "Slate Roofs For Historic Religious Buildings :' 
Inspired. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Historic Preservation 
Corporation, 1987 . 
"Slate Quarrying and Shingle Manufacture ." Fine Homebuilding, 
No.71 (Jan. 1992): 64-68 . 
McKee, Harley J. "Slate Roofing." APT Bulletin, Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2 
(1970): 77-84. 
National Slate Association. Slate Roofs. 1925. Reprint. Fair Haven , 
Vermont: Vermont Structural Slate Co., Inc., 1977. 
Pierpont , Robert N. "Slate Roofing." APT Bulletin, Vol. 19, No. 2 
(1987): 10-23. 
Sweetser , Sarah M. "Roofing for Historic Buildings ." Preservation 
Briefs, No. 4. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the 
Interior, Technical Preservation Services Division, 1975. 
15 

16 
Repair/Replacement Guideline 
The following guideline is provided to assist in the 
repair/replace decision making process : 
1. Consider the age and condition of the roo f versus 
its expected serviceable life given the type of slate 
employed. 
2. Calculate the number of damaged and mi ssing 
slates. Is the number less than about 20%? I s the 
roof generally in good condition? If so, the roof 
should be evaluated fo r repair rather than 
replacement. Also, keep in mind that the olde r a 
roof becomes , the more maintenance it will likely 
require. 
3. Determine if there are active leaks and what their 
source may be . Do not assume the slates are 
leaking. Gutters , valleys and flashings are mo re 
likely candidate s. "False leaks" can be caused by 
moisture condensation in the attic due to improper 
ventilation. 
4. Check the roof rafters and sheathing for moistur e 
stains. Poke an awl into the wood to determine if it 
is rotted. Remember that very old, delaminatin g 
slates will hold moisture and cause adjacent wo od 
members to deteriorate even if there are no 
apparent leaks . 
5. Are many slates sliding out of position? If so, it 
may be that ferrous metal fasteners were u sed and 
that these are corroding, while the slates are still in 
good condition. Salvage the slates and re -lay them 
on the roof. If the slates have worn around the 
nails holes , it may be necessary to punch new 
holes before re-laying them. 
6. Consider the condition of the roofs flashing s. 
Because slate is so durable, metal flashings often 
wear out before the slate does . Examine the 
flashings carefully. Even the smallest pinhole can 
permit large quantities of water to enter the 
building. 
7. Is the deterioration of the slate uniform? Often this 
is not the case . It may be that only one slope 
needs replacement and the other slopes can be 
repaired. In this way, the cost of replacement can 
be spread over many years . 
8. Press down hard on the slates with your hand . 
Sound slates will be unaffected by the pressure. 
Deteriorated slates will feel brittle and will crack. 
Tap on slates that have fallen out or been removed. 
A full, deep sound indicates a slate in good 
condition, while a dull thud suggests a slate in 
poor condition. 
9. Are new slates readily available? Even if replacement 
is determined to be necessary, the existing roof 
may have to be repaired to allow time for 
documentation and the ordering of appropriat e 
replacement slates . 
Figure 24. Although slate replacement roofs are expensive, the superiority 
of materials and craftsmanship will give years of continued service. If 
amortized over the life of the roof, the replacement cost can be ven; 
reasonable. Photograph courtesy of the National Park Service. 
Note: measurements in this publication are given in both 
U.S. Customary System and International (Metric) System 
for comparative purposes. Metric conversions are in some 
cases approximate and should not be relied upon in 
preparing technical specifications. 
Acknowledgements 
The author, Jeffrey S. Levine, is an Architectural Conservator with John Milner 
Associates, Inc., and gratefu lly acknowledges the technical review of this 
publication by the following: Russel Watsky, Watsky Associates; Kenton Lerch, 
The Structural Slate Company; Matt Millen, Millen Roofing Co.; Alex 
Echeguren , Echeguren Slate Company; Bill Markcrow, Vermont Structural Slate 
Company; and Dick Naslund, Department of Geo logical Sciences, State 
University of New York at Binghamton. In addition, invaluable comments were 
provided by Sharon Park, Doug I licks and Michael J. Auer, Nationa l Park 
Service; Suzanna Barucco, Martin Jay Rosenblum, R.A. & Associates; and F~ed 
Walters, John Milner Associates , Inc. All photographs are by the author unless 
otherwise noted. 
Sharon C. Park, AlA, Senior Historical Architect, Preservation Assistance 
Division, National Park Service, is credited with directing the deve lopment of 
this publication and with its technica l editorsh ip. This pub lication has been 
prepared pursuant to the National Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which 
directs the Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available information 
concerning historic properties. Comments on the usefu lness of this publication 
may be directed to 11. Ward Jandl, Chief, Technical Preservation Services 
Branch, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, P.O. Box 37127, 
Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. Drawings for this pub lication were prepared by 
Karin Murr Link. This publication is not copy righted and can be reproduced 
without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the National 
Park Service are appreciated. 
ISSN: 0885-7016 Spring 1993 
Cover Photograph: A portion of a11 advertisement for Slatington-Bangor 
Slate Syndicate (Slatington, PA) which appeared in the July 1910 issue 
of Building Age (Vo/.32 No.7). 