1
33
PRESERV ATION
BRIEFS
The Preservation and Repair of 
Historic Stained and Leaded Glass
Neal A. Vogel and Rolf Achilles
National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Heritage Preservation Services
“Stained glass” can mean colored, painted or enameled glass, 
or glass tinted with true glass “stains.”  In this Brief the 
term refers to both colored and painted glass.  “Leaded glass” 
refers generically to all glass assemblies held in place by lead, 
copper, or zinc cames.  Because the construction, protection, 
and repair techniques of leaded glass units are similar, 
whether the glass itself is colored or clear, “stained glass” and 
“leaded glass” are used interchangeably throughout the text.  
Glass is a highly versatile medium.  In its molten 
state, it can be spun, blown, rolled, cast in any shape, 
and given any color.  Once cooled, it can be polished, 
beveled, chipped, etched, engraved, or painted.  Of 
all the decorative eﬀ ects possible with glass, however, 
none is more impressive than “stained glass.”  Since 
the days of ancient Rome, stained glass in windows 
and other building elements has shaped and colored 
light in inﬁ nite ways.  
Stained and leaded glass can be found throughout 
America in a dazzling variety of colors, patt erns, and 
textures (Fig. 1).  It appears in windows, doors, ceilings, 
fanlights, sidelights, light ﬁ xtures, and other glazed 
features found in historic buildings (Fig. 2).  It appears in 
all building types and architectural styles—embellishing 
the light in a great cathedral, or adding a touch of 
decoration to the smallest rowhouse or bungalow.  A 
number of notable churches, large mansions, civic 
buildings, and other prominent buildings boast 
windows or ceilings by LaFarge, Tiﬀ any, Connick, or 
one of many other, lesser-known, American masters, 
but stained or leaded glass also appears as a prominent 
feature in great numbers of modest houses built between 
the Civil War and the Great Depression.
This Brief gives a short history of stained and leaded 
glass in America.  It also surveys basic preservation 
and documentation issues facing owners of buildings 
with leaded glass.  It addresses common causes of 
deterioration and presents repair, restoration, and 
protection options.  It does not oﬀ er detailed advice 
on speciﬁ c work treatments.  Glass is one of the most 
durable, yet fragile building materials.  While stained 
glass windows can last for centuries, as the great 
cathedrals of Europe att est, they can be instantly 
destroyed by vandals or by careless workmen.  Extreme 
care must therefore be exercised, even in the most 
minor work.  For this reason, virtually all repair or 
restoration work undertaken on stained and leaded 
glass must be done by professionals, whether the 
feature is a magniﬁ cent stained glass window or a clear, 
leaded glass storefront transom.  Before undertaking 
any repair work, building owners or project managers 
should screen studios carefully, check references, inspect 
other projects, and require duplicate documentation 
of any work so that full records can be maintained.  
Consultants should be employed on major projects.
Figure 1.  This door and transom suggest the richness of 19th 
century leaded glass.  Photo:  Jack E. Boucher, HABS.

2
Historical Background
Glassblowers were among the founders of Jamestown in 
1607, and early glass manufacturing was also att empted 
in 17th-century Boston and Philadelphia.  Dutch 
colonists in the New Netherlands enjoyed painted oval 
or circular medallions that bore the family’s coat of arms 
or illustrated Dutch proverbs.  German colonists in the 
mid-Atlantic region also began early glass ventures.  
Despite the availability of good natural ingredients, 
each of these early American glassmakers eventually 
failed due to production and managerial diﬃ  culties.  
As a result, colonists imported most of their glass from 
England throughout the 17th and 18th centuries.
Social values as well as high costs also restricted the 
use of stained and other ornamental glass.  This was 
particularly true with regard to churches.  The Puritans, 
who sett led New England, rejected the religious imagery 
of the Church of England, and built simple, unadorned 
churches with clear glass windows.  Less than 1% of 
the Nation’s stained and leaded glass predates 1700.  
Considering the enormous loss of 17th-, 18th-, and early 
19th-century buildings, any window glass surviving 
from these periods is very signiﬁ cant (Fig. 3).  Every 
eﬀ ort should be made to document and preserve it.
Figure 2.  Components of a leaded glass window. 
Figure 3.  The entrance to the Morris-Jumel Mansion, New York 
City, is one of the earliest surviving installations of stained glass 
in the country.  It features a fanlight and sidelights of large clear 
roundels and small bulls-eyes of red and orange glass tinted with 
silver stains from ca. 1810.  Photo:  Ken Moss.
Anatomy of a 
Leaded Window
Despite many failed starts, the War of 1812, and 
British competition, American glass production 
increased steadily throughout the 19th century.  
Stained glass was available on a very limited basis in 
America during the ﬁ rst quarter of the 19th century, 
but American stained glass did not really emerge 
in its own right until the 1840s.  The windows at 
St. Ann and the Holy Trinity Episcopal Church in 
Brooklyn, New York, made by John and William 
Jay Bolton between 1843 and 1848, are perhaps 
the most signiﬁ cant early American stained glass 
installation (Fig. 4).  Other important early stained 
glass commissions were the glass ceilings produced 
by the J. & G. H. Gibson Company of Philadelphia for 
the House and Senate chambers of the United States 
Capitol in 1859.
America’s glass industry boomed during the second 
half of the 19th century.  (And although stained and 
leaded glass is found nationwide, the manufacturing 
was based in the Northeast and Midwest, where 
good natural ingredients for glass, and coal reserves 

3
for the kilns were available.  Moreover, nearly all of 
the nationally renowned studios were based in major 
metropolitan areas of the central and northeastern 
states--near the manufacturers that supplied their raw 
materials.)  In response to this growth, the industry 
formed self-regulating associations that established 
guidelines for business and production.  In 1879 
the Window Glass Association of America was 
established, and in 1903 The National Ornamental Glass 
Manufacturers’ Association, precursor of the Stained 
Glass Association in America, was formed.
Figure 4.  The windows at St. Ann and the Holy Trinity Episcopal 
Church, Brooklyn, New York, were made between 1843-1849 by John 
and William Jay Bolton.  Photo:  Leland A. Cook.
The 60 years from about 1870 to 1930 were the high 
point for stained glass in the U.S.  In the early years, 
American stylistic demands reﬂ ected those current 
in Europe, including various historic revivals, and 
aesthetic and geometric patt erns.  American patt erns 
prevailed thereaft er; they tended to be more vivid, 
brash, and bold (Fig. 5).
Figure 5.  Stained glass is an exterior feature as well as an interior 
one.  As part of any preservation project, stained glass should be 
photographed from the exterior as well as the interior.  
Aft er the 1893 Columbia World’s Exposition, the Art 
Nouveau Style became the rage for windows.  Sinuous 
nymphs, leggy maidens, whiplashed curves, lilies, and 
brambles became standard subjects until World War I.  
Among the leading proponents of the Art Nouveau 
Style were glassmakers John LaFarge and Louis Comfort 
Tiﬀ any.  Both men experimented independently 
throughout the 1870s to develop opalescent glass, which 
LaFarge was ﬁ rst to incorporate into his windows.  
Tiﬀ any became the bett er-known, due in part to his 
proliﬁ c output.  
He att racted world-class artists and innovative 
glassmakers to his studio.  Today, “Tiﬀ any” remains a 
household name.  His favorite and most popular scenes 
were naturalistic images of ﬂ owers, colorful peacocks 
and cockatiels, and landscapes at sunrise and sunset 
(Fig. 6).  LaFarge, while appreciated in his own day, 
gradually slid into relative obscurity, from which he has 
emerged in recent decades.  Tiﬀ any and LaFarge are the 
greatest names in American stained glass.  
In dramatic contrast to the American Art Nouveau style 
was the Neo-Gothic movement that became so popular 
for church and university architecture across the country.  
Charles J. Connick was a leading designer of medieval-
style windows characteristic of the style (Fig. 7).
Advocates of the Prairie Style, of whom Frank Lloyd 
Wright is the best known, rejected Tiﬀ any’s naturalistic 
scenes and Connick’s Gothic imitations. (Fig. 8).  
Wright’s rectilinear organic abstractions developed 
simultaneously with the similar aesthetic of the various 
European Secessionists.  The creation of this style was 
aided by the development of zinc and copper cames 
in 1893.  These cames—much stiﬀ er than lead—made 
it possible to carry out the linear designs of Prairie 
School windows with fewer support bars.  At ﬁ rst, these 
windows had only an elitist following, but they were 
soon widely accepted and proliferated during the early 
20th century.  
By 1900, stained and leaded glass was being mass-
produced and was available to almost everyone.  
Leading home journals touted leaded glass windows for 
domestic use, and a nationwide building boom created 
an unprecedented demand for stained and leaded art 
glass windows, door panels, and transoms.  Mail order 
catalogs from sash and blind companies appeared, 

some oﬀ ering over 100 low-cost, mass produced designs 
(although the same catalogs assured buy
ers that their 
leaded glass was “made to order”) (Fig. 9).  
Figure 6.  This 1907 landscape window is typical of those produced 
by Tiﬀ any Studios.  Characteristics include the use of opalescent 
glass, intricate leading and organic copper foil work, acid-etching, 
plating (i.e., several layers of glass), and a sense of perspective.  
Figure 7.  Charles J. Connick was another American master of 
stained glass.  He worked in a modernized Neo-Gothic style.  This 
window is fr
om 1921.  Photo:  Diana Kincaid.
Figure 8.  This 1902 window by Henry Webster Tomlinson 
reﬂ ects the Prairie School philosophy of providing 
ornamentation while retaining a view through the window.   
4
The fading popularity of the ornate Victorian styles, 
combined with inferior materials used for mass 
production, essentially eliminated the production 
of quality leaded glass.  The last mail order catalogs 
featuring stained glass were published in the mid-1920s, 
and tastes changed to the point that the 1926 House 
Beautiful Building Annual declared:  “the crude stained 
glass windows in many of the Mansard-roof mansions 
of the ‘eighties [1880s] prove how dreadful glass can be 
when wrongly used.”  
Some creative eﬀ orts expanded leaded glass media in new 
directions.  Lead-overlay or “silhouett e” glass was one 
novelty that climaxed in the late 1920s and early 1930s.  
Some designers sandwiched glass between layers of hand-
cut sheet lead, while others sandwiched the perforated 
sheet lead between layers of glass.  These windows 
present a playful reversal from traditional stained glass; 
in “silhouett e” glass the lead metalwork, rather than the 
glass, becomes the primary art form (Fig. 10).  However, 
such novelties failed to catch on during the Depression.  
World War II delivered the ﬁ nal blow and ornamental 
glass is seldom found in residential, commercial, and 
secular architecture aft er circa 1940.  The great age of 
American stained glass was over.  Fortunately, leaded 
glass panels survived in uncounted numbers throughout 
the country, and are now once again appreciated as 
virtually irreplaceable features of historic buildings.

Figure 9.  A typical 
mail-order catalog page 
of art glass windows 
available in 1903 
from the E. L. Roberts 
Company, Chicago.
Figure 10.  This 
lead-silhouett e 
stained glass face 
graces a 1928 coach 
house in Buﬀ alo, 
and is att ributed to 
D’Ascenzo Studios of 
Philadelphia.  
5
Dating and Documenting Historic 
Leaded Glass 
Before deciding on any treatment for historic leaded 
glass, every eﬀ ort should be made to understand—and 
to record—its history and composition.  Documentation 
is strongly encouraged for signiﬁ cant windows.  
Assigning an accurate date, maker, and style to a stained 
glass window oft en requires extensive research and 
professional help.  A documentation and recording 
project, however, is worth the eﬀ ort and expense, as 
insurance against accidents, vandalism, ﬁ re and other 
disasters.  The bett er the information available, the bett er 
the restoration can be.  The following sources oﬀ er some 
guidelines for dating leaded windows.
Building Context.  The history of the building can 
provide ready clues to the history of its leaded windows, 
doors, and other elements.  The construction date, 
and dates of major additions and alterations, should 
be ascertained.  Later building campaigns may have 
been a time for reglazing.  This is especially the case 
with churches and temples.  They were oft en built 
with openings glazed with simple or generic clear 
leaded glass.  Stained glass was added later as ﬁ nances 
allowed.  Conversely, the windows may be earlier than 
the building.  They may have been removed from one 
structure and installed in another (once again, this is 
more likely with religious structures).  Bills, inventories, 
and other writt en documents oft en give clues to the 
date and composition of leaded glass.  Religious 
congregations, fraternal lodges, historical societies and 
other preservation organizations may have writt en 
histories that can aid a researcher.
Inscriptions and Signatures.  Many studios 
and artists aﬃ  xed signature plates to their 
work—oft en at the lower right hand corner.  
In the case of Tiﬀ any windows, the signature 
evolved through several distinct phases, 
and helps date the piece within a few years:  
Tiﬀ any Glass Company (1886-1892), Tiﬀ any 
Glass & Decorating Company (with address, 
1892-1902), Tiﬀ any Studios New York or Louis 
C. Tiﬀ any (post 1902).  (Tiﬀ any Studios, like 
others, did not always sign pieces and the 
absence of an inscription cannot be used 
to rule out a particular studio or artist.)  
Windows may also feature dated plaques 
commemorating a donor.  However, these do 
not always indicate the date of the window, 
since windows were oft en installed before a 
donor was found.  Nevertheless, such marks 
help establish a reasonable date range.
Composition and Other Stylistic Elements.  
These elements are more subjective, and call 
for a fairly broad knowledge of architecture 
and art history.  Do the windows ﬁ t the 
general style of the building?  The style of the 
window may reﬂ ect a stylistic period (e.g., 
Arts & Craft s, Art Nouveau, Prairie School).  
The imagery or iconography of the windows may also 
reveal their overall historical context and establish a 
general time period.  
Framing and Surround.  Framing elements and the 
window surround can reveal information central to 
dating the window.  Do moldings match other interior 
trim?  Has the opening been altered?  Is the window set 
in an iron frame (post-1850s), a steel frame (generally 
post-World War I), a cast stone or terra cott a frame 
(seen as early as the 1880s, but popular aft er 1900)?
Reinforcement and Leading Details.  Does the 
window or other element have round bars or ﬂ at 

6
bars?  Flat bars began to appear about 1890; round 
bars, used since the Middle Ages, remained in use 
until the 1920s, when ﬂ at bars supplanted them.  
Cames can also give dating clues.  Zinc cames, 
for example, developed by Chicago Metallic 
in association with Frank Lloyd Wright, ﬁ rst 
appeared in 1893.  In general, however, dating a 
window by the came alone is diﬃ  cult unless it is 
disassembled to view the “heart” (center web) for 
millmarks.  Over one hundred varieties of lead 
came were available in the early 20th century.  
Moreover, came was sometimes produced to look 
old.  Henderson’s Antique Leading from the 1920s 
was made “to resemble the old hand wrought 
lead” and also carried “easy-ﬁ x” clip-on Georgian-
style ornaments.
Glass.  The glass itself can help in dating a window.  
Opalescent glass, for instance, was patented 
by John LaFarge in 1879.  Ti
ﬀ any patented two 
variations on LaFarge’s technique in the same year.  
(Opalescent glass is translucent, with variegated 
colors resulting from internally refracted light.  It 
features milky colored streaks.)  Pre-1880 glass is 
usually smooth translucent colored glass (painted 
or not); glass with bold, deep colors is typical of the 
1880s and 1890s, along with jewels, drapery glass 
and rippled glass.  But such ﬂ amboyance faded out 
with the rest of Victoriana by about 1910.  However, 
stained glass styles of the late 19th century 
continued to appear in ecclesiastical buildings aft er 
they passed from general fashion.  Leaded beveled 
plate glass was popular in residential architecture 
aft er 1890, and was used profusely until the 1920s.
The level of documentation warranted depends 
upon the signiﬁ cance of the window, but it is very 
important to document repair and restoration 
projects before, during, and aft er project work.  
Photographs will normally suﬃ  ce for most 
windows.  For highly signiﬁ cant windows, rubbings 
as well as writt en documentation are recommended.  
The leading patt erns in such windows are complex, 
particularly in plated windows (which have several 
layers).  Rubbings are therefore encouraged for each 
layer when restored; they are invaluable if a disaster 
occurs and reconstruction is required.  Annotated 
rubbings of the leadwork should be done with a wax 
stone on acid-free vellum.  
To document windows properly, inscriptions should 
be recorded word for word, including misspellings, 
peculiarities in type style, and other details.  Names 
and inscriptions in or on windows can indicate 
ethnic heritage, particularly in churches or civic 
structures where windows oft en reﬂ ect styles and 
themes from the congregation or community’s 
origins.  Lastly, any conjectural information should 
be clearly noted as such.
The Importance of Context
Stained glass commissioned for a particular building 
was normally designed not only to reﬂ ect the shape 
of the opening but also to coordinate with other 
aspects of the overall sett ing such as the architectural 
style, adjacent materials, and interior decoration.  The 
window opening, frame or sash colors, placement 
of the reinforcement, alignment with architectural 
elements, and orientation to natural light also establish 
the relationship between the stained glass and the 
building.  The vibrant colors of opalescent glass, 
which can oft en be read from the exterior, and the 
linear designs of Prairie School windows, which oft en 
harmonize with both the interior and the exterior, are 
two examples that readily demonstrate the importance 
of architectural context to ornamental glass.  
This important relationship between the glass and its 
sett ing, however, can  be weakened or entirely lost over 
the years due to unsympathetic decorating schemes 
or building campaigns, damage, deterioration, inept 
repairs, or the mere accumulation of dirt.  
Changes to the ornamentation and ﬁ nish of the 
structural frame can have an especially  pronounced 
eﬀ ect on the overall appearance of a stained glass 
window or dome.  In the Chicago Cultural Center 
dome the historic ﬁ nishes of the ornamental cast iron 
frame have darkened 
considerably over 
the years, muting the 
dome’s rich personality.  
In strong sunlight the 
glass is so dominant 
that the frame appears 
only as a silhouett e.  
Restoring the vibrancy 
of the historic ﬁ nish is 
necessary to recapture 
the equally important contribution of the frame to 
the original design intent of the dome.  Aft er careful 
investigation to document the historic appearance 
(right), a mock-up section of the frame was regilded 
with aluminum leaf (top).  The dramatic eﬀ ect of 
restoring the dome’s overall context is readily apparent 
aft er only this small section of the frame was reﬁ nished.  

Figure 11.  The face paint has failed substantially in the ﬁ gure at the 
left .  Ghost images of the feature are barely visible.  Window (1903) 
by Edwin P . Sperry, glass by Tiﬀ any Studios; “Old Main,” (1891-
1893) Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago.  Photo:  Rolf Achilles.
7
Deterioration of Stained and Leaded Glass 
Three elements of leaded glass units are prone to 
damage and deterioration:  the glass itself; the decorative 
elements (mostly applied paint); and the structural 
system supporting the glass.
Glass Deterioration
Glass is virtually immune to natural deterioration.   
Most American glass is quite stable—due to changes 
in glass composition made in the mid-19th century, 
particularly the increased silica content and the use of 
soda lime instead of potash as a source of alkali.  Rarely, 
however, glass impurities or poor processing can cause 
problems, such as minor discoloration or tiny internal 
fractures (particularly in opalescent glass).  And all glass 
can be darkened by dirt; this can oft en be removed.  
However, while glass does not normally deteriorate, 
it is susceptible to scratching or etching by abrasion or 
chemicals, and to breakage.
The greatest cause of breakage or fracture is physical 
impact.  Leaded glass in doors, sidelights, and low 
windows is particularly susceptible to breakage from 
accidents or vandalism.  When set in operable doors 
or windows, leaded glass can crack or w
eaken from 
excessive force, vibration, and eventually even from 
normal use.  Cracks can also result from improperly 
set nails or points that hold the window in the frame, 
or more rarely, by structural movement within the 
building.  Leaded glass that is improperly annealed 
can crack on its own from internal stress.  (Annealing is 
the process by which the heated glass is slowly cooled; 
the process is akin to tempering metal.)  Glass can also 
disintegrate from chemical instability or the intense heat 
of a ﬁ re.  Finally, windows assembled with long, narrow, 
angular pieces of glass are inherently prone to cracking.  
Oft en the cause of the cracks can be determined by the 
path they travel: cracks from impact typically radiate 
straight from the source.  Stress cracks caused by heat 
or improper annealing will travel an irregular path and 
change direction sharply.
Deterioration of Painted Glass
Painted glass, typically associated with pictorial scenes 
and ﬁ gures found in church windows, oft en presents 
serious preservation challenges.  If ﬁ red improperly, 
or if poor quality mixtures were used, painted glass is 
especially vulnerable to weathering and condensation.  
Some studios were notorious for poorly ﬁ red paints 
(particularly those working with opalescent glass), 
while others had outstanding reputations for durable 
painted glass.  Paints can be applied cold on the glass or 
fused in a kiln.  Since they are produced from ground 
glass, enamels do not “fade,” as oft en suggested, but 
rather ﬂ ake oﬀ  in particles.  Several steps in the painting 
process can produce fragile paint that is susceptible 
to ﬂ aking.  If applied too thick, the paint may not fuse 
properly to the glass, leaving small bubbles on the 
surface.  This condition, sometimes called “frying,” 
can also result from poor paint mixtures or retouching.  
Paint failure is more commonly caused by under ﬁ ring 
(i.e., baking the glass either at too low a temperature or 
for too litt le time).  Unfortunately, in American stained 
glass, the enamels used to simulate ﬂ esh tones were 
typically generated from several layers that were ﬁ red 
at too low a temperature.  This means the most diﬃ  cult 
features to replicate—faces, hands and feet—are oft en 
the ﬁ rst to ﬂ ake away (Fig. 11).
Structural Deterioration
The greatest and the most common threat to leaded 
glass is deterioration of the skeletal structure that 
holds the glass.  The structure consists of frame 
members, and lead or zinc (and occasionally brass or 
copper) came that secures individual pieces of glass.  
Frame members include wood sash and muntins that 
decay, steel t-bars and “saddle bars” that corrode, and 
terra cott a or stone tracery that can fracture and spall 
(Fig. 12).  When frames fail, leaded glass sags and 
cracks due to insuﬃ  cient bracing; it may even fall out 
from wind pressure or vibration.  
Wood sash are nearly always used for residential 
windows and are common in many institutional 
windows as well.  Left  unprotected, wood and glazing 
compounds decay over time from moisture and 
exposure to sunlight—with or without protective storm 
glazing—allowing glass to fall out.  

Figure 12.  Stained glass frames are typically wood, steel or stone; 
however, other materials, and their inherent problems, can also be found 
as seen in this photograph of cracked terra cott a frames from 1926.  
8
Steel frames and saddle bars (braces) corrode when not 
maintained, which accelerates the deterioration of the 
glazing compound and loosens the glass.  Moreover, 
operable steel ventilators and windows are designed to 
tight tolerances.  Neglect can lead to problems.  Eventually, 
they either fail to close snugly or corrode completely shut.  
The leaded glass is then frequently reinstalled in aluminum 
window units, which require wider sections for equal 
strength and typically results in an inch or more of the 
glass border being trimmed.  Instead of relocating glass in 
aluminum frames, historic steel frames should be repaired.  
Oft en the corrosion is superﬁ cial; frames in this condition 
need prepping, painting with a good zinc-enriched paint, 
and realigning in the frame.
Masonry frames typically last a long time with few 
problems, but removing leaded glass panels set in 
hardened putt y or mortar can be nearly impossible; as 
a last resort, glass borders may have to be sacriﬁ ced to 
remove the window.  
Occasionally, leaded glass was designed or fabricated 
with inadequate bracing; this results in bulging or bowing 
panels; leaded panels should generally not exceed 14 linear 
feet (4.25 m) around the perimeter without support.  More 
oft en, the placement of bracing is adequate, but the tie-wires 
that att ach the leaded panels to the primary frame may be 
broken or disconnected at the solder joints.
Lead and zinc cames are the two most common assembly 
materials used in stained and other “leaded” glass.  The 
strength and durability of the leaded panel assembly 
depends upon the type of came, the quality of the 
craft smanship, and the glazing concept or design, as well 
as on the metallic composition of the cames, their cross-
section strength, how well they are joined and soldered, 
and the leading patt ern within each panel.   Came is prone 
to natural deterioration from weathering and from thermal 
expansion and contraction, which causes metal fatigue.  
Came Types and Properties
Lead Came 
Lead is a soft  malleable metal (it can be 
scratched with a ﬁ ngernail).  It naturally 
produces a protective dark bluish-gray 
patina.  In the mid-19th century, improved 
smelting processes enabled manufacturers to 
extract valuable metal impurities from lead, 
thereby producing 100% pure lead came.  
The industry reasoned that 100% pure lead 
came was superior to the less pure variety.  
Although pure lead came is very workable 
and contributes to intricate designs, time has 
proven it to be less durable than medieval 
came, which contained trace elements of tin, 
copper, silver, and antimony.  Unfortunately, 
the misconception that pure lead had greater 
longevity continued throughout the glory 
years of leaded glass use in America.  Most 
glass conservators use a 100-year rule of 
thumb for the general life expectancy of 19th 
century came.  In the 1970s, “restoration 
lead” (ASTM B29-84) was developed based 
on metallurgic analyses of medieval cames, 
some of which have lasted for centuries.  
Restoration lead should always be used 
when releading historic windows, unless the 
original integrity will be compromised.
Zinc Came
Zinc came is more vulnerable to atmospheric 
corrosion (particularly from sulfuric acids) 
than lead, but has proven to be durable in 
America because it weighs 40% less than 
lead and its coeﬃ  cient of expansion is 7% 
lower.  Thus, it is somewhat less susceptible 
to fatigue from expansion and contraction.  
Moreover, it is ten times harder than lead, 
and has three times the tensile strength.  Zinc 
came is strong enough to be self-supporting 
and requires litt le bracing to interrupt the 
window’s design.  While zinc came is perfect 
for the geometric designs of Prairie School 
windows, it is usually too stiﬀ  to employ 
in curvilinear designs.  Zinc can also take 
several ﬁ nishes, including a copper or black 
ﬁ nish.  (As a result, zinc can be mistaken for 
copper or brass.)
Other Came
Other metals, primarily solid brass and 
copper, were also occasionally employed 
as came.  They are generally found only in 
windows between ca. 1890 and ca. 1920.  
Frank Lloyd Wright started with zinc in 1893, 
was plating the zinc with copper by the late 
1890s, and using solid copper by 1906.The inherent strength of the assembly system is also related 
to the cross-section, proﬁ le and internal construction of 

9
the came (Fig. 13).  Came can have a ﬂ at, rounded, or 
“colonial” proﬁ le, and aside from a few specialty and 
perimeter cames (U-channel), is based on a variation of 
the lett er “H” and ranges from 1/8” (3.2mm) wide to 1½” 
(38mm) wide.  The cross-section strength of came varies 
depending on the thickness of the heart and ﬂ anges.  
Occasionally, came with reinforced (double) hearts or 
a steel core was used for rigidity, usually in doors and 
sidelights.  Such came added strength at the expense of 
ﬂ exibility and was typically used for rectilinear designs, 
or for strategically placed reinforcement within a 
curvilinear design. 
How the cames are joined in a leaded panel is crucial 
to their long-term performance.  P
oor craft smanship 
leads to a weak assembly and premature failure, while 
panels fabricated with interlocking (weaving) cames 
and lapped leads add strength.  Soldered joints oft en 
reveal the skill level of the artisan who assembled the 
window, and can give evidence of past repairs.  Solder 
joints should be neat and contact the heart of the came-
-wherein lies its greatest strength.  Came joints should 
be examined closely; large globs of solder commonly 
conceal cames that do not meet.  (Lead cames typically 
crack or break along the outside edge of the solder joint; 
stronger zinc cames frequently break the solder itself 
where it bridges junctures.)      
Leading patt erns designed with inadequate support 
also contribute to structural failure.  Panels with a series 
of adjacent parallel lines tend to hinge or “accordion,” 
while lines radiating in concentric circles tend to 
telescope into a bulge.  Stronger leading techniques, 
support bars, or specialty cames are sometimes required 
to correct poor original design.  Minor sagging and 
bulging is to be expected in an old window and may 
not require immediate action.  However, when bulges 
exceed 1½” (38mm) out of plane, they cross into a 
precarious realm; at that point, glass pieces can crack 
from severe sagging and pressure.  If the bulged area 
moves when pressed gently, or if surrounding glass is 
breaking, it is time to address the problem before serious 
failure results.
Figure 13.  A wide variety of came has been used for ornamental glass 
in America:  (a) ﬂ at lead came; (b) round lead came; (c) “Colonial” 
zinc came; (d) double-heart lead came with a steel core; (e) “Prairie 
School” zinc came.
Cleaning, Repair and Protection 
The level of cleaning, repair, or protection depends on 
the condition, quality, and signiﬁ cance of the glass, and, 
as always, the available budget.  Hastily undertaken, 
overly aggressive, or poorly executed repairs can cause 
more damage than does prolonged deterioration.  
Repairs should, therefore, only be undertaken aft er 
carefully evaluating the condition of the glass—and 
only by professionals.  Minor cracks, sagging, and 
oxidation are part of the character of historic leaded 
glass, and require no treatment.  More extensive cracks, 
major bulges (generally, more than 1½” [38mm]), and 
other signs of advancing deterioration may call for 
intervention, but caution must always be exercised.  
And each window must be evaluated separately.  In 
some cases, windows have bulged up to 4” (102mm) 
out of plane without harming the pieces of glass or 
risking collapse.
Cleaning 
Perhaps the greatest virtue of stained glass is that its 
appearance is constantly transformed by the ever-
changing light.  But dirt, soot, and grime can build up 
on both sides of the glass from pollution, smoke, and 
oxidation.  In churches the traditional burning of incense 
or candles can eventually deposit carbon layers.  These 
deposits can substantially reduce the transmitt ed light 
and make an originally bright window muted and 
lifeless.  Simply cleaning glass will remove harmful 
deposits, and restore much of its original beauty, while 
providing the opportunity to inspect its condition 
closely (Fig. 14).  The type of cleaner to use depends 
on the glass.  Water alone should be tried ﬁ rst (soft  
water is preferable); deionized water should be used 
for especially signiﬁ cant glass and museum quality 
restorations.  If water alone is insuﬃ  cient, the next step 
is to use a non-ionic detergent.  Occasionally, windows 
are covered with a yellowed layer of shellac, lacquer, 
varnish, or very stubborn grime that requires alcohol, 
or solvents to remove.  Most unpainted art glass can 
be treated with acetone, ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, 
or mineral spirits to remove these coatings if gentler 
methods have failed.  All chemical residues must then be 
removed with a non-ionic detergent, and the glass rinsed 
with water.  (All workers should take normal protective 
measures when working with toxic chemicals.)
(c)
(a)
(e)
(b )
(d)
Flange
Heart

Figure 14.  The external glass plate has been removed to clean the 
interlayer of this plated Tiﬀ any Studios window.  
Painted glass must never be cleaned before the stability of 
the paint is conﬁ rmed, and only then with great caution.  
If the paint is sound, it can be cleaned with soft  sponges 
and cloth.  If the paint was improperly ﬁ red or simply 
applied cold, paint can ﬂ ake oﬀ  during cleaning and 
special measures are required such as delicate cleaning 
with cott on swabs.  Occasionally, paint is so fragile the 
owner must simply document and accept the windows 
in their current state rather than risk losing the original 
surface.  Fragile paint typically calls for an experienced 
glass conservator and more costly restoration measures.
10
Acidic, caustic, or abrasive cleaners should never be 
used.  They can damage glass.  Most common household 
glass cleaners contain ammonia and should not be used 
either.  Cleaning products should have a neutral pH.
Repair
As with all elements in older and historic buildings, 
maintenance of leaded glass units is necessary to prevent 
more serious problems.  It is essential to keep the frame 
maintained regardless of the material.  Oft en, this simply 
entails regular painting and caulking, and periodic 
replacement of the glazing compound.  Wood frames 
should be kept painted and caulked; new sections 
should be spliced into deteriorated ones, and epoxy 
repairs made where necessary.  Masonry frames must be 
kept well pointed and caulked to prevent moisture from 
corroding the steel armature and anchors within.
Windows that leak water, are draughty, or ratt le in the 
wind (or when gently tapped) may indicate that the 
waterprooﬁ ng cement (“waterprooﬁ ng”) and sealants 
have deteriorated and maintenance or restoration is 
needed.  Waterprooﬁ ng is a compound rubbed over 
the window—preferably while ﬂ at on a table—and 
pressed under the came ﬂ ange to form a watertight 
bond between the leading and the glass.  Traditionally, 
waterprooﬁ ng was made of linseed oil and whiting, 
and a coloring agent.  (Hardening agents should not be 
included in the mixture; solvent-based driers should 
be used sparingly.)  The waterprooﬁ ng allows leaded 
glass in a vertical position (e.g., in windows) to be used 
as a weatherproof barrier.  It does not provided adequate 
protection for leaded glass in a horizontal or arched 
position; leaded glass ceilings and domes must always be 
protected by a secondary skylight or diﬀ using skylight.
Glazing and sealants (e.g., putt ies, caulks) are used to seal 
the leaded panel against the sash, and to seal any open 
joints around the window frame.  Sealants improved 
dramatically in the mid-twentieth century.  But these 
sealants are not without problems.  Some release acetic acid 
as they cure.  Acetic acid can harm lead, and should never 
be used on leaded glass.  Instead, “neutral cure” sealants 
should be used.  These high-performance construction 
sealants are not sold in consumer supply stores.  
The appropriate type of sealant depends on the materials 
to be bonded and on the desired appearance and longevity.  
When windows are to be restored, the contractor should 
explain what types of waterprooﬁ ng and sealants are to 
be used, and how long they are expected to last.  On large 
projects, a lett er from the product manufacturer should 
be obtained that approves and warranties the proposed 
application of their product.  When in doubt, a traditional 
linseed-oil based glazing putt y is oft en best.
Leaded panels will generally outlast several generations 
of waterprooﬁ ng.  When the waterprooﬁ ng has failed, 
the window should be removed from the opening 
and waterproofed on a bench.  Leaded glass cannot be 
adequately waterproofed in place.  Removing the windows 
will provide an opportunity to perform maintenance on 
the window surround and to secure the reinforcement.  
This is far less expensive than totally releading the 
window, which is typically required if maintenance is 
deferred.  When waterprooﬁ ng or sealants break down, 
many building owners att empt to resolve the problem 
by installing protective glazing, when the window only 
needs maintenance.  Protective glazing is not an alternative 
to maintenance; in fact, it impedes maintenance if not 
installed properly and can accelerate the deterioration of 
the stained glass.
A very common—but extremely harmful—practice in 
the American stained glass industry is performing major 
window repairs in place.  The practice is routine among 
churches where the cost of restoring large windows can be 
prohibitive.  However, undertaking major repairs in place 
provides only a quick ﬁ x.  A window cannot be properly 
repaired or restored in place if it is bulging or sagging far 
out of plane, if over 5% of the glass is broken, or if solder 
joints are failing.  Unscrupulous glazers can introduce a 
great deal of stress into the glass by forcibly ﬂ att ening the 
window in place and soldering on additional bracing.  At a 
comfortable distance the window may look ﬁ ne, but upon 
close inspection the stress cracks in the glass and broken 
solder joints become obvious.  Windows subjected to this 
treatment will deteriorate rapidly, and complete, much 
more costly restoration will likely be necessary within 
a few years (while a proper repair can easily last two 
generations or more).

11
Major repairs to windows are sometimes 
part of a larger preservation project.  In 
such cases, the risk of damaging the 
windows can be very great if their removal 
and reinstallation have not been carefully 
planned.  When major building repairs 
are also to take place, the windows should 
be removed ﬁ rst to prevent damage 
during other work.  Windows should 
be reinstalled as the next-to-last step 
in the larger project (followed by the 
painters or others working on the ﬁ nishes 
surrounding the stained glass).
And glass should be protected whenever 
other work is undertaken on buildings-
-whether or not the windows are also 
to be repaired.  External scaﬀ olding, for 
example, erected for repointing or rooﬁ ng 
projects, may oﬀ er vandals and thieves 
easy access to windows and, through 
them, to building interiors.  Stained 
and leaded glass should always be well 
protected whenever chemical cleaners 
are used on the exterior of the building; 
some products, such as hydroﬂ uoric-acid 
cleaners, will cause irreversible damage.  
Repairs to Glass
Minor repairs, such as replacing a few 
isolated pieces of broken glass, can be 
performed in place.  This work, typically 
called a “drop-in,” “stop-in,” or “open-
lead” repair, entails cutt ing the came 
ﬂ ange around the broken piece of glass at 
the solder joints, folding it back to repair 
or replace the old glass, and resoldering 
the joints.  Repairing a zinc came window 
is not as easy.  Zinc cames are too stiﬀ  to 
open up easily, so they must be cut open 
with a small hack saw and dismantled 
until the broken area is reached.  The 
glass is then repaired or replaced and 
the window is reassembled.  New cames 
can be patinated to harmonize with 
the originals--but only with diﬃ  culty.  
Repatination should never be att empted 
in place, since it is impossible to clean oﬀ  
harmful residues trapped under the came.
Photographing Stained Glass
Historic stained glass windows, laylights 
and domes should be documented to 
help ensure the best-quality restoration 
in the event of vandalism, ﬁ re or other 
loss.  Photographic documentation 
is also important for insurance and 
investigation purposes when vandalism 
or theft  is involved.  Given the highly 
photogenic nature of stained glass, 
photographs can also serve as artwork 
for guidebooks or other interpretive or 
publicity purposes; quality photographs 
can be especially worthwhile in 
fundraising eﬀ orts.
Photographing stained glass is both 
challenging and rewarding.  Windows and domes lit by daylight can seem 
to be ever changing in visual appearance. They can appear dramatically 
diﬀ erent in any given photograph depending not only on the photographic 
equipment and sett ings used, but also on the time of day, degree of cloud 
cover, the ambient interior light, and a multitude of other factors.  Moreover, 
photographs may diﬀ er depending on the aspect to be captured.  Painted 
ﬂ esh areas and highly translucent Prairie School windows oft en “burn out” 
if photographed in bright sunlight, while faceted jewels and very dense or 
plated opalescent glass oft en look best in direct sunlight.
Generally, exposures should be bracketed to capture the full range of the 
stained glass; the variation in images can permit diﬀ erent images to serve 
diﬀ erent purposes.  Under most circumstances, interior lights should be 
turned oﬀ , and the stained glass should be photographed in both transmitt ed 
light (no ﬂ ash) and reﬂ ected light utilizing a ﬂ ash. The ﬂ ash should ideally 
be positioned away from the camera to provide a raking light and to avoid 
reﬂ ected “hot spots.” Although photographing with a ﬂ ash will neutralize 
the transmitt ed light and black out the glass, it reveals the location and 
condition of the lead cames, braces, tie-wires, and other structural elements.
A tripod should be employed for a sharp image whenever using long 
exposures and higher apertures. The subject should be shot as level as 
possible to minimize the distortion known as “parallax.”  Occasionally, 
when shooting a group of windows, it is beneﬁ cial to develop a cardboard, 
Ecuboard, Masonite or similar cutout material to mask the window being 
photographed.   Adjacent windows or windows on the opposite side of the 
room may need to be shaded or blocked to avoid “front lighting” on the 
window from competing with the transmitt ed light.  Windows should also 
be photographed from the outside if there is no protective glazing to interfere 
with the view.  This is particularly important with opalescent glass, which 
oft en was intended to be read from the exterior as well as the interior.
Some glass projects warrant a visual representation of the stained glass 
window to be in place during restoration. Aft er establishing the existing 
window dimensions, a photograph of the stained glass window can be 
enlarged to full scale and copied on adhesive-backed transparent ﬁ lm. In 
essence a decal, it can then be applied to acrylic or polycarbonate sheets 
and used as a temporary replacement to ﬁ ll the opening (above).   Such ﬁ lm 
decals are sensitive to light and will not last indeﬁ nitely.  However, they are 
reasonably convincing from a distance and can last a year or longer while the 
actual window is being restored.
Original glass should be retained 
whenever possible, even though it may be 
damaged.  Replacement glass that exactly 
or closely matches the original piece can 
be very diﬃ  cult to ﬁ nd, and costly to 
make.  An endless variety of glass colors 
and textures were produced, and given 
the delicate chemistry of glassmaking, 
even samples from the same run can 
be noticeably diﬀ erent.  The traditional 

12
secrecy that shrouds the glassmaking trade to this 
very day, as well as environmental bans of historically 
popular ingredients such as lead and cobalt for deep 
blues and greens, further hinders accurate reproductions.  
Therefore, it is nearly always bett er to use an imperfect 
original piece of glass than to replace it (Fig. 15).  If the 
paint is failing on a prominent feature of a window, a 
coverplate of thin, clear glass can be painted and placed 
over the original.  (The coverplates must be att ached 
mechanically, rather than laminated, so that they can 
be removed later if necessary.)  A reverse image of the 
fading feature should be painted on the backside of the 
coverplate in order to get the two painted images as close 
together as possible.  With repetitive designs, stencils can 
be created to produce multiple duplicates.  
Figure 15.  To permit repair of the cracked glass, the original lead 
overlay is ﬁ rst salvaged from this historic leaded panel of silhouett e 
glass to retain as much of the original work as possible.   
Sometimes replacement is the only option.  Fortunately, 
custom glass houses still exist, including the company 
that originally supplied much of the glass for Tiﬀ any 
commissions.  Stained and leaded glass has also 
experienced a resurgence in popularity, and American 
glassmakers have revived many types of historic glass.
When missing, shatt ered, or poorly matched glass from 
later repairs must be replaced, the new pieces should be 
scribed on the edge (under the came) with the date to 
prevent any confusion with original glass in the future.
Glass cracks will enlarge over time as the contacting 
edges grind against each other, whenever the window is 
subject to vibration, thermal expansion and contraction, 
and other forces such as building movement. Therefore, 
it is important to repair cracks across important features 
as soon as they are detected and while a clean break 
remains.  Years ago, cracks were typically repaired with 
a “Dutchman” or “false lead” by simply splicing in a 
cover lead ﬂ ange over a crack.  Although this conceals 
the crack, it creates an even larger visual intrusion and 
provides no bond to the glass.  Today, there are three 
primary options for repairing broken glass:  copper foil, 
epoxy edge-gluing (Fig. 16), and silicone edge-gluing.  
These techniques diﬀ er in strength, reversibility, and 
visual eﬀ ect, and the appropriate repair must be selected 
on a case-by-case basis by a restoration specialist.
Figure 16.  A valuable historic piece of original hand-painted glass is 
carefully edge-glued with epoxy. 
Copper Foiling:  Copper foil has the longest history 
and, unless the glass is unstable, is generally the best 
option when a piece of glass has only one or two cracks.  
Copper foil is a thin tape that is applied along each side 
of the break, trimmed to a minimal width on the faces, 
and soldered.  A copper wire can be soldered on where 
additional strength is required.  However, copper foil 
repairs should not be used on unstable glass, since heat 
is required that can cause further damage. Copper foil 
produces a strong repair, is totally reversible, and has a 
negligible aesthetic impact (a 1/16” [1.6mm] wide line).   
Epoxy Edge-Gluing:  This technique produces a 
nearly invisible line and is oft en used on painted glass, 
particularly focal points of a window such as a face, or 
a portion of sky intended to be one continuous piece.  
Epoxy can even be tinted to match the glass.  It is also 
used for infusing shatt ered glass or microscopic cracks 
caused by intense heat from a ﬁ re.  Epoxy produces 
a very strong repair, but will deteriorate in sunlight 
and requires secondary glazing to protect it from UV 
degradation.  Epoxy is the least reversible of the three 
techniques, and usually the most expensive.  
Silicone Edge-Gluing:  This repair method has the 
lowest strength and should be used when a ﬂ exible joint 
is desirable—if, for instance, the window will be under 
continuous stress.  Silicone repairs are easily reversible, 
and can be removed with a razor blade—when they 
are done correctly, that is.  Silicone edge-gluing is not 
the same as smearing silicone all over the glass.  This 
unfortunate practice, seen throughout the country, is 
useless as a repair technique, and usually causes more 
damage than if the glass were left  alone.  Silicone is 
almost clear, but it refracts light diﬀ erently from glass 
and is, thus, easily detectable.  Silicone is not aﬀ ected by 
temperature, humidity or UV light.  Silicone repairs are 
typically the least expensive repair option.

13
Repairs to Structural Support Systems
Windows may have detached from the saddle bars and 
begun to sag, bulge, and bow extensively.  This point 
varies from window to window.  Generally, however, a 
window sagging or bulging more than 1½” (38mm) out of 
plane has reached the point where it should be removed 
from the opening to be ﬂ att ened out.  Under these 
conditions, it is essential to note if the support system or 
leading patt ern has failed so it may be corrected before 
the window is reinstalled.  The window must be allowed 
to ﬂ att en over a few weeks in a horizontal position.  This 
will minimize stress on the solder joints and glass.  A 
moderate weight and  controlled heat will help coax the 
window back into its original plane.  The process requires 
patience.  Once the window has ﬂ att ened, the original 
support system should be reatt ached and additional 
support added as necessary.  It is crucial to consider the 
original design so the new support bars do not intrude on 
important window features.  Sometimes small thin braces 
or “ﬁ ns” can be manipulated to follow existing lead lines 
exactly.  These give support, but are almost invisible.  
Flatt ening windows also provides a good opportunity 
to apply new waterprooﬁ ng to help prevent further 
deterioration.  Today, a wide variety of traditional and 
synthetic compounds are employed.
Windows should only be removed when they need to be 
ﬂ att ened, waterproofed, reinforced, or releaded.  Allow 
plenty of time for careful, thorough work.  Large projects 
can take several months, especially if complete releading 
is necessary.  Owners, consulting professionals, and 
construction managers must therefore ensure that vacant 
openings will be weathertight for an extended period—
whether the openings are covered by plywood, acrylics, 
or polymer ﬁ lm.  If desired, images of the window can be 
printed on adhesive ﬁ lm and applied to rigid plastic and 
installed in the openings as temporary facsimiles during 
studio restoration. 
Rebuilding or releading a window is an expensive and 
involved process.  The releading process requires that a 
window be disassembled before it can be reassembled 
(Fig. 17).  The glass pieces must be removed from the 
cames, the old cement must be cleaned from each piece 
of glass, and all the pieces must be rejoined precisely.  
At every step the process involves the risk of damaging 
the glass.  Furthermore, exceptional studios had unique 
leading techniques, and thus the cames should not 
be replaced casually.  Total releading should only be 
undertaken when necessary to avoid or slow the loss 
of historic fabric.  (It is essential to request a copy of all 
window rubbings if the windows are to be completely 
releaded.)   
Figure 17.  Total releading is very time consuming and costly and 
should only be undertaken when the original lead is exhausted 
beyond repair.
Lead and zinc cames, however, are intended to be a 
sacriﬁ cial element of a glass unit assembly, as mortar 
is to brick and paint is to wood; came will break down 
long before glass and must ultimately be replaced; came 
typically lasts 75 to 200 years depending on the window’s 
quality, design and environment.  A common preservation 
conﬂ ict arises in releading historic windows:  whether to 
retain historical accuracy by using the existing proﬁ le, or 
to use came with a stronger proﬁ le for greater longevity.  
The decision must be carefully weighed depending on 
the signiﬁ cance of the window, the contribution of the 
came proﬁ le to the overall design, and the severity of 
the deterioration caused by a thin or weak came.  In 
most windows, the came proﬁ le is essentially lost in 
transmitt ed light, but occasionally shadow lines are 
important and should be reproduced.   Furthermore, 
it is important to correct technical problems that arise 
from ﬂ imsy original came.  Occasionally, a slightly 
heft ier came may be the best solution to resolve weak 
panels that have not proven the test of time.  Under 
these circumstances, the thicker lead came (even if only 
1/64” [0.4mm]) will cause a re-leaded panel to swell 
slightly, and the frame or perimeter leads may have 
to be trimmed to ﬁ t the opening.  (Trimming the glass 
should be the very last resort.)  This would not be an 
appropriate solution in a museum-quality restoration or 
for a highly signiﬁ cant window.
Protective Glazing and Screens
The use of protective glazing (also known as 
secondary or storm glazing) is controversial.  Potential 
beneﬁ ts of protective glazing are that it can shield 
windows from wind pressure; increase energy 
savings; protect against environmental pollutants and 
UV light; provide vandalism and security protection, 
and reduce window maintenance.  Potential 
drawbacks are that it can promote condensation; cause 
heat to build up in the air space and thereby increase 
the window’s expansion/contraction; eliminate natural 
ventilation; reduce access for maintenance; oﬀ er a 
poor energy payback for the cost, and signiﬁ cantly 
mar the building’s appearance.  Protective glazing is 
oft en presented as a cheaper alternative to full-scale 
restoration.  And all too oft en protective glazing is 
installed as a routine matt er when there is litt le threat 
of damage from vandalism or other causes.  Protective 
glazing, especially when improperly installed, may 
hasten deterioration of stained glass windows.  

14
Domes and Ceilings 
Stained glass domes and ceilings were very 
popular throughout the Victorian and Classical 
Revival periods.  They are oft en principal 
interior features of churches, hotels, restaurants, 
railway stations, and civic buildings.  The loss or 
unsympathetic alteration of leaded glass ceilings 
and domes is a widespread problem.  Poorly 
planned rehabilitation projects sometimes cause 
the unnecessary removal or alteration of overhead 
leaded glass in order to comply with ﬁ re codes or 
to achieve perceived energy savings; occasionally, 
they are even concealed above suspended ceilings.
Moreover, stained glass in the horizontal position 
readily collects dust and dirt over the years 
and is relatively inaccessible for cleaning.  It is 
also more likely to “creep” or slump when the 
reinforcement is inadequate.  Most importantly, 
leaded glass cannot be suﬃ  ciently weatherproofed 
in a horizontal (or arched) position.  It must always 
be protected by skylights or “diﬀ users”—rooft op 
features that diﬀ use the natural daylight into the 
att ic or light shaft , and protect the leaded glass 
ceiling or dome from the elements (a).
(a) Stained glass ceilings and domes are oft en principal interior 
features of churches, hotels, restaurants, railway stations, and 
civic buildings.  This vaulted ceiling illuminates the Cypress Lawn 
Memorial Gardens mausoleum in Colma, California.  The panel 
removed reveals the diﬀ using skylight above.
Due to the inferior quality of glazing sealants of the 
late 19th and early 20th centuries, and to deferred 
maintenance, glass ceilings have frequently been 
removed or covered with rooﬁ ng materials.  
Artiﬁ cial lighting is then required to backlight the 
ceiling or dome, which robs the stained glass of its 
life−the vibrant eﬀ ects created by ever-changing 
natural light.  All types of artiﬁ cial lighting can 
be found from ﬂ oodlamps to ﬂ uorescent tubes.  
Outside sensors are even used to modulate the 
light level in an att empt to simulate changes in 
daylight.  However, daylight is impossible to 
emulate.  Moreover, it’s free.  Artiﬁ cial lighting 
requires maintenance, introduces an additional 
ﬁ re hazard in the att ic, increases the building’s 
electrical load, and is supplied only at a ﬁ nancial 
and environmental cost.
Stained glass ceilings and domes that have been 
sealed oﬀ  from natural light should be investigated 
for restoration.  Once natural light is restored and 
the stained glass is cleaned, the lighting eﬀ ect 
on an interior can be extraordinary.  Improved 
skylight designs and major advances in glazing 
sealants since World War II (particularly silicones) 
encourage the restoration of skylights without the 
fear of inheriting a maintenance nightmare (b).
(b) Workers install a jeweled art glass oculus of a Healy & Millet 
dome.  The diﬀ using skylight was restored overhead to reintroduce 
daylight to the historic 1897 dome aft er being roofed over since the 
1940s.   

15
Various types of metal grills or screens are also used.  
They add security and vandalism protection but also 
impair the appearance of the window (inside and out) 
by creating new shadows that telegraph on the stained 
glass or diﬀ using transmitt ed light. As a general rule, 
protective layers should not be added on historic 
buildings unless the glass sett ing was designed for 
storm glazing.  In most cases the potential drawbacks 
outweigh the potential beneﬁ ts.
Under some circumstances, however, protective glazing 
or screens may be necessary.  (This applies to windows.  
Domes and ceilings present a special case.  See “Domes 
and Ceilings”).  A real vandalism or security threat 
warrants protective glazing, such as when the windows 
can be reached easily or are in an isolated location.  
Protective glazing is also warranted when employed 
historically on a particular window as original plating 
(Tiﬀ any Studios, for example, oft en used plate glass 
to keep dirt and moisture out of their multi-plated 
windows).  Unusual circumstances (such as when the 
windows are painted on the outside) may also dictate 
the use of protective glazing. Finally, protective glazing 
is warranted when a UV ﬁ lter is needed to prevent 
epoxy glass repairs from breaking down.  
A variety of protective glazing materials are available.  
They include polycarbonates, acrylics, laminated 
glass, plate glass, and tempered glass.  The plastic 
products are very strong, lightweight, and relatively 
easy to install, but will scratch, haze, and yellow over 
time, despite UV inhibitors.  They also have a high 
coeﬃ  cient of expansion and contraction, so the frames 
must be designed to accommodate change induced 
by temperature ﬂ uctuations.  Poor installations in 
restrictive frames cause distorted reﬂ ections from 
bowing panels oft en damaging the historic frame.  
Protective panels of glass are heavier and more diﬃ  cult 
to install, making them more expensive than plastic.  
However, glass will not bow, scratch, or haze and is 
usually the best option in aesthetic terms; laminated 
glass provides additional impact resistance.
A common error in installing protective glazing is to 
create a new window conﬁ guration (Fig. 18).  Insensitive 
installations that disregard the original tracery destroy the 
window’s aesthetics—and the building’s.  When protective 
glazing is added, it should be ventilated.  If a window is 
not ventilated, heat and condensation may build up in the 
air space between the ornamental glass and the protective 
glazing (creating a “greenhouse eﬀ ect”).    
Figure 18. On this pair of neo-gothic church windows, the 
aluminum frame grid used for protective glazing disregards 
the original tracery of the window on the left .  The grid mars 
the appearance of the window inside and out.  It also impairs 
the overall historic character of the building.  The plastic 
storm glazing has been removed from the adjacent window to 
restore the original window appearance. 
When absolutely necessary, protective glazing should be 
installed in an independent frame between ⅝” (16mm) 
and 1” (25mm) from the leaded glass.  This allows the 
protective panel to be removed for periodic maintenance 
of both the historic window and the new glazing.  The 
conditions of the air space between the two layers should 
be monitored on a regular basis; condensation should 
never collect on the window.  
No ideal formulas have been developed for venting the 
air space between the ornamental glass and the protective 
glazing, but it is typically vented to the outside (unless the 
building is air conditioned most of the year).  Generally, 
a gap of several inches is left  at the top and bott om when 
glass is used, or holes are drilled in the protective glazing 
at the top and bott om when polycarbonates and acrylics 
are used.  Small screens or vents should be added to keep 
out insects.  Finally, it is important to realize that most 
original plating was “rough plate” or “ribbed” and never 
had a modern polished reﬂ ection.  Some glass tinted the 
transmitt ed light intentionally, as originally designed: in 
this case any new or replacement plating should simulate 
this eﬀ ect to respect the artisan’s intention.
Conclusion
Much of the Nation’s stained glass and leaded glass has 
recently passed, or is quickly approaching, its 100th 
anniversary—yet much of this glass has not been cleaned 
or repaired since the day it was installed.  With proper 
care, the stained and leaded windows, transoms, and other 
elements that add so much to historic buildings can easily 
last another century.

16
Wooden frame of the rose window undergoing repair (exterior view). 
Selected Reading List
Duthie, Arthur Louis.  Decorative Glass Processes: Cutt ing, 
Etching, Staining, and Other Traditional Techniques.  New York:  
The Corning Museum of Glass and Dov er Publications, 1982.
Fisher, Charles E., III, ed.  The Window Handbook: Successful 
Strategies for Rehabilitating Windows in Historic Buildings.  
Washington, D.C.:  National Park Service and Georgia Institute 
of Technology.  1986. Rev. 1990.
Fisher, Charles E., III, Deborah Slaton, and Rebecca 
A. Shiﬀ er, eds.  Window Rehabilitation Guide for Historic 
Buildings. Washington, D.C.: Historic Preservation Education 
Foundation/National Park Service, 1997.  
Heinz, Thomas A.  Lloyd Wright Glass Art.  Academy Editions, 
Ernst & Sohn, 1994.
Heinz, Thomas A.  “Use & Repair of Zinc Cames in Art-
Glass Windows.”  Old House Journal, (September/October 
1989), pp. 35-38.
Lee, Lawrence, George Seddon and Francis Stephans.  Stained 
Glass.  New York:  Crown Publishers, 1976.
Lloyd, John Gilbert.  Stained Glass in America.  Jenkintown, PA:  
Foundation Books, 1963.
Stained Glass Association of America.  SGAA Reference & 
Technical Manual, Second Edition Lee’s Summit, MO:  The 
Stained Glass Association of America, 1992.
Wilson, H. Weber.  Great Glass in American Architecture:  
Decorative Windows and Doors Before 1920.  New York:  E. P . 
Dutt on, 1986.
Cover Photograph:  Tiﬀ any Studios opalescent art glass frame 
from 1914, originally installed in a dome over the Men’s Grill in 
Marshall Field’s, Chicago.
Acknowledgements
Neal A. Vogel is the Principal of Restoric, LLC, Evanston, Illinois.  Rolf Achilles is an Art Historian and Curator of the Smith Museum of 
Stained Glass Windows at Navy Pier, Chicago.  All drawings and photographs by Neal A. Vogel unless otherwise stated.
Michael J. Auer, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, served as technical editor.  Additional assistance was provided 
by Charles Fisher, Anne Grimmer,  and former staﬀ  Chad Randl, Technical Preservation Services. 
The authors would like to thank the following for sharing information and providing opportunities to review works in progress: Bott i 
Studios of Architectural Arts, Evanston, IL; Chicago Metallic Corporation, Chicago, IL; Chicago Art Glass and Jewels, Inc., Cedar 
Grove, WI; Conrad Schmitt  Studios, Inc., New Berlin, WI; Cypress Lawn Memorial Park, Colma, CA; Hollander Glass, Stanton, CA;  
Mary Clerkin Higgins, New York, NY; Venturella Studios, New York, NY; Wardell Art Glass, Aurora, IL. Special thanks for providing 
editorial assistance to Arthur J. Femenella, Femenella & Associates, Branchburg, NJ; Richard L. Hoover, Stained Glass Association of 
America, Lee’s Summit, MO; and H. Weber Wilson, Oltz-Wilson Antiques, Portsmouth, RI.
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of 
the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. Comments about this publication should be 
addressed to: Charles Fisher, Technical Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services—2255, National Park Service, 
1849 C Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20240.  This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty.  Normal 
procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park Service should be provided.  The photographs used in this publication 
may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners.  For more information about the programs of the 
National Park Service’s Technical Preservation Services, see our website at www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps.
ISSN:  978-0-16-078947-2
U.S. Government Printing Oﬃ  ce Stock Number: 024-005-01254-1           October 2007