U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Preservation Assistance 
34 PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Applied Decoration for Historic Interiors 
Preserving Composition Ornament 
Jonathan Thornton and William Adair, FAAR 
Anyone who has ever walked through historic houses and 
large public buildings, visited an art gallery, picked up a 
picture frame in an antique shop, or even ridden on an old 
carrousel has been close to composition ornament, but has 
probably not known what it was or how it was made. This is 
not surprising, since composition or "compo" was conceived 
as a substitute for more laboriously produced ornamental 
plaster and carved wood and stone, so was intended to fool 
the eye of the viewer (see Fig. 1). The confusion has been 
heightened over time by makers who claimed to be the sole 
possessors of secret recipes and by the variety of names and 
misnomers associated with the material, including plaster, 
French stucco, and Swedish putty, to name a few. 
Figure 1. An American mantelpiece in the Adam style dating from the early 19th century illustrates 
composition ornament's reputation as a first-rate imitator of wood. Only the allegorical design, flower 
baskets, floral swags or festoons, flanking fleur-de-lis ornamentation and pilaster capitals are compo; the 
panels and simple moldings are carved wood. Photo: Courtesy, Philadelphia Museum of Art: Given by 
Mrs. Thurston Mason in memory of her sister, Miss Anna P. Stevenson. 
Many natural or man-made materials can be made soft or 
"plastic" by the application of heat and are called 
"thermoplastics." Composition is a thermoplastic material 
used to create sculptural relief. It is 
soft and pliable when pressed into 
molds; becomes firm and flexible as it 
cools; and is hard and rigid when fully 
dry. Typically formulated with chalk, 
resins, glue, and linseed oil, this 
combination of materials gives compo 
its familiar light-to-dark brown color. 
It is the only one of the so-called 
thermoplastic materials to be used 
extensively in architectural decoration 
because of its low cost. 
Generally adhered to wood, historic 
composition ornament is most often 
found decorating flat surfaces such as 
interior cornice and chair rail 
moldings, door and window 
surrounds, mantelpieces, wainscot 
paneling, and staircases-indeed, 
anywhere that building designers and 
owners wanted to delight and impress 
the visitor, but stay within a budget. 
While composition was cheaper than 
carved ornament, it was still 
meticulously hand made and applied; 
thus, it was more often used in "high 
style" interiors. But the types of 
structures historically decorated with 
composition ornament were more 
democratic, encompassing residential, 
commercial, and institutional 
buildings, and even including specialty 
applications such as the social saloon of 
a steamship (see Fig. 2). 

2 
a._ b. C. 
d. e. 
f. g. 
Figure 2. Composition ornament has been used in America for over two hundred years in a variety of applications: (a) a floral festoon and basket in the 
Adam style for an 1803 mantelpiece; (b) the social saloon of an 1866 steamship, S.S. China; (c) scenery panels on a 1916 Allan Herschell carrousel; (d) 
ceiling decoration in a 1920s hotel; (e) the coffered ceiling of the National Archives library, 1938; (f) a modern reproduction of a Stanford White-designed 
frame; and (g) 1990s compo ornamentation for a re-modeled residence. (a) Courtesy, Gold Leaf Studios, Inc.; (b) Philip L. Molten; (c) Elizabeth Brick; (d) 
Courtesy, J.P. Weaver Co.; (e) Courtesy, National Archives; (f) 06.218: Self Portrait of Thomas Wilmer Dewing (1851-1938). American, 1906. Oil on wood 
panel: 50.8 x 36.8 cm. Courtesy, Freer Gallery of Art, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.; (g) Courtesy, J.P. Weaver Co. 

With proper understanding of the material, historic 
composition ornament may be successfully cleaned, 
repaired, or replaced in sections. Unfortunately, because 
composition is often misidentified as plaster, stucco, or 
carved wood, the use of inappropriate methods for 
removing paint is a major cause of its loss (see Fig. 3). The 
purpose of this Brief is to to assist historic property owners, 
managers, architects, craftsmen, and preservationists in 
identifying existing composition ornament, determining the 
extent of repair and replacement needed and, finally, 
selecting the most sensitive, non-destructive method of 
treating it. 
Fi$ure 3. When this historic composition window surround was 
mistakenly identified as plaster, then treated with a caustic paint stripper, 
a section of it was destroyed. Photo: Byran Blundell. 
De-Mystifying the Mix 
While various types of moldable composition date to the 
Italian Renaissance, architectural use of composition did 
not begin to flourish until the last quarter of the 18th 
century. During this period, many composition ornament 
makers in Europe and America supplied the 
public with complex sculptural decoration . 
Also, the overly complicated and often 
intentionally mysterious earlier recipes were 
now reported to be comprised of a few basic 
ingredients: animal glue, oil (usually linseed), 
a hard resin (pine rosin or pitch was 
cheapest), and a bulking or filling material, 
generally powdered chalk or whiting .(see also 
Sidebar, 
Compo: The Basic Ingredients). 
Compo mixes have been the subject of a good 
deal of variation and there has never been a 
set recipe, but the ornament manufacturers of 
the later 18th and early 19th centuries 
understood in general terms what their 
material was and what it could do (see Fig. 4). 
The advantages of the material were described 
by a prominent American maker, Robert 
Wellford, in his advertising broadside of 1801: 
Figure 4. Compo ornament could be applied to 
simple and complex surfaces, including cornices, 
friezes, architraves, pilasters, and chimney pieces 
and to looking glass and picture frames. 
Manufacturers' ads such as these were 
commonplace in 19th century America, 
particularly in eastern cities. Left: Zane, 
Chapman, & Co. Right: Horton & Waller. Photo 
left: Courtesy, Jonathan Thornton. Photo right: 
Courtesy, Gold Leaf Studios, Inc. 
"A cheap substitute for wood carving has long 
been desirable for some situations, 
particularly enriched mouldings, etc., and various were the 
attempts to answer the purpose, the last and most 
successful is usually termed Composition Ornaments. It is 
a cement of solid and tenacious materials, which when 
properly incorporated and pressed into moulds, receives a 
fine relievo; in drying it becomes hard as stone, strong, and 
durable, so as to answer most effectually the general 
purpose of Wood Carving, and not so liable to chip. This 
discovery was rudely conducted for some time, owing to 
Carvers declining every connection with it, till, from its low 
price, it encroached so much upon their employment, that 
several embarked in this work, and by their superior 
talents, greatly improved it." 
In brief, compo is perhaps best understood as an early 
thermoplastic that allowed the rapid reproduction of 
complicated detail for popular use. 
Making Composition Ornament: 
A Process Unchanged 
Since the craft has essentially remained the same over time, 
a description of its historic manufacture is also applicable 
today (see Fig. 5). 
In one container, chunks of amber colored pine rosin or the 
cheaper black pitch were heated in linseed oil until they 
melted together and combined completely. In another 
container (often a double-boiler), previously soaked chunks 
of animal glue derived from skins and hides were cooked 
and blended into a uniformly thick solution. The two liquid 
components were then stirred together. This "batter" was 
made into a pliable "dough" in a way familiar to any baker. 
It was poured into a cratered pile of whiting and first mixed 
with a spatula until it was thick enough to be kneaded by 
hand. Vigorous folding and kneading in of more whiting 
was done until the composition had a consistency like 
modeling clay and was completely uniform. 
To mold a decoration, the compo was first warmed in a 
steamer, and the mold prepared with a thin coating of oil 
and a dusting with talcum powder. A piece was then 
kneaded and folded to produce a smooth and wrinkle-free 
surface on one side. The good side was placed down over 
the rigid mold, and pressed in loosely with the fingers, 
3 

a. b. C. 
e. f. 
4 
leaving excess above the surface of the mold. A damp 
board was placed over this and the "sandwich" placed in a 
screw press and squeezed so as to force the compo into the 
finest detail. It was then removed from the press and 
turned over so that the mold could be lifted straight up, 
leaving the compo stuck to the board. Upon cooling to 
room temperature, the compo gelled, becoming tough and 
rubbery (the gelling property is due to the glue component 
which is chemically identical to edible gelatin). At this 
stage, it was sliced off the board with a thin-bladed knife. 
The remaining mass of composition still adhered to the 
board could also be sliced off and reused. 
Figure 
5. The steps of making composition ornament: (a) pouring compo 
"batter" into a pile of whiting on a warm granite slab; (b) an almost 
finished ball of composition; (c) warming compo in a steamer; (d) 
kneading compo; (e) pressing or squeezing compo into a mold using a 
screw press; (f) slicing ornament from a pressing board; and (g) a compo 
design made up from several "squeezes." Note its familiar brown color 
prior to painting, staining, or gilding. Photos: (a)(b) Jonathan Thornton; 
(c)(d) William Adair; (e) Jonathan Thornton; (f)(g) Lenna Tyler Kast. 
Composition ornament was often fixed to an already 
prepared wooden substrate at the factory while it was still 
fresh and flexible, but could be dried and shipped to the 
final user, who would make it flexible again by steaming on 
a cloth stretched over a container of boiling water. 
Instructions for doing this, as well as suitable brads for 
"fixing," were supplied by some manufacturers. Because of 
the glue component, steaming the backs of ornaments 
would make them soft and sticky enough to self-bond 
without additional glue. Soft ornaments were softened 
nailed through or pressed down on top of previously 
driven headless brads (also called sprigs). Strings and 

wires were often included in the mass during pressing to 
serve as internal armatures and reinforcements. These 
measures preserved the integrity of the ornaments even if 
they cracked. 
Originally meant to copy other materials such as wood, 
plaster, and stone, composition had its own unique 
properties and advantages that were soon exploited in both 
technical and artistic terms. It has distinct characteristics in 
each of its three states: pliable, rubbery, and hard. When 
warm and pliable, it can be modeled by a skilled worker 
and it is capable of receiving the finest detail when 
squeezed into a mold. After it has chilled to room 
temperature and is gelled, it is rubbery, flexible, and tough . 
The detail is essentially set and cannot be easily damaged as 
the ornaments are manipulated (see Fig. 6). 
Figure 6. This finished length of compo molding is stuck to its pressing 
board. The newly made piece will be sliced off the board, then applied. 
Photo: Jonathan Thornton. 
Gelled composition ornaments can be easily bent over 
curved surfaces without cracking, and unlike a rigid cast 
material such as plaster, they can be stretched or 
compressed somewhat to fit a design without damaging the 
detail. An egg and dart motif, for example, could be made 
to come out evenly at the comers without making a partial 
egg or dart. The sculptural vocabulary from the maker's 
mold collection could be re-arranged at will into larger 
decorative schemes. In fact, any smaller component of a 
decoration from a single mold could be sliced free and 
inserted into any location. 
Composition could be carved to heighten detail, correct 
defects, or undercut ornaments-that were, of necessity, 
straight-sided-so that they would release from the rigid 
molds. This could be done in the gelled state or, with more 
difficulty, after it had finally hardened to stone-like solidity. 
Finally, when completely hard, it could be given a polished 
marble shine with nothing but a damp cloth. It could be 
stained, coated with any sort of paint, varnish, or oil gilded 
without any further preparation (see Fig. 7). 
Figure 7. The coffered ceiling of the 1938 National Archives library in 
Washington, D.C. features egg-and-dart composition molding finished 
with a dark brown stain. While compo design is more often light and 
delicate, here, it has a bold, massive quality. Photo: Bryan Blundell. 
Molds and the Creation of Patterns 
A technical discussion of composition is not complete 
without an examination of the molds used to create the 
ornament. These were the ornament maker's largest 
investment 
in time and expense, and were the key to the 
craft (see Fig. 8). 
-·1.\ --:.~-~ 
. -·-.----------- - --~ ~~
Figure 8. Several historic and reproduction compo molds are shown to 
underscore the variety of materials used to make them: 1. applewood 
mold 2. pearwood mold 3. boxwood mold encased in beech 4. boxwood 
mold 5. sulfur mold encased in maple 6. pewter mold encased in pine 
and oak 7. positive pattern for pitch mold carved in pearwood 8. pitch 
mold encased in oak 9. composition mold encased in maple 10. epoxy 
and polyester molds reinforced with glass fabric. Photos: Jonathan 
Thornton. 
Composition molds were always made of rigid materials 
that would withstand the considerable pressure used in 
pressing the ornaments. All of these materials and 
methods have been used in sculptural crafts since the 
Renaissance. The comparative listing that follows helps 
explain their advantages and disadvantages. 
Wood was carved in reverse to create a negative matrix, 
This was highly skilled work often performed by a 
specialist carver, and required a large initial investment in 
time, but wooden molds would essentially last indefinitely 
if properly maintained. A further design advantage of 
reverse carving is that fine incised lines will show up as 
fine raised lines in the final ornament. (Fine raised lines are 
notoriously difficult to carve or model in relief.) Molds 
carved from dense and close-grained fruit woods such as 
apple and pear seem to have been common in the 18th 
century. In the 19th century, the most intricate molds were 
carved in boxwood, often encased or framed by larger and 
cheaper pieces of timber for ease of handling and to 
prevent splitting. 
Metal alloys such as brass, bronze, and pewter made 
excellent molds capable of yielding the highest level of 
detail and were virtually indestructible in use. They were 
expensive due to the intrinsic value of the metal and 
5 

' .,. 
,,.,,, •1 
' . t. 
6 
because their production involved a variety of complex and 
skilled steps performed by modelers, pattern makers, and 
founders. Few historic metal molds have survived, possibly 
as a result of wartime scrap drives. 
Sulfur melts into a clear fluid at about 115° C and could be 
poured over a positive clay model or another compo 
ornament. A sulfur mold resembles hard plastic, but is 
more fragile. Even when framed in wood and reinforced 
with iron fillings, as was common practice, it was especially 
vulnerable to breakage. A figural design, such as a frieze of 
The Three Graces, was much easier to model in relief than to 
carve in reverse, and sulfur was one of the few materials 
that could be used to make a hard mold from a clay model. 
Composition itself could be squeezed over a hard relief 
pattern (such as another manufacturer's ornament) to make 
a mold. Composition shrinks as it hardens and so the mold 
was always smaller than the original. It is also fairly brittle 
when hard and, like sulfur molds, would tend to crack in 
the press. Composition "squeeze molds" were ideal for 
pirating another maker's patterns! 
Pitch molds became popular during the late 19th and early 
20th centuries. A warm and soft mixture composed 
primarily of pine pitch was poured into a recess in a wood 
block or frame. It was then turned over and squeezed 
down onto an oiled wooden pattern. Pitch molds might 
crack with age or in the press, but as long as the carved 
pattern was retained, they could be easily re-made. 
Historical Survey 
Early History and Renaissance. Press-molded decoration 
has been used with various soft plastic materials for 
centuries. For example, it is known that medieval sculptors 
press-molded organic mixtures to decorate painted 
sculptures. But because mixtures based on organic binders 
such as glue, oil, resins, and waxes are prone to various 
sorts of degradation, actual survivors are rare. 
The direct ancestors of the composition craft are most likely 
found in the Italian Renaissance; however, composition 
mixtures were not extensively used for architectural 
decoration during this period, probably due to building 
traditions as well as relative expense. It is worth nothing 
that this was an age of experimentation with materials and 
rediscovery of Greek and Roman designs. Press molded 
mixtures called pastiglias were used to decorate wooden 
boxes and picture frames as early as the 14th century (see 
Fig. 9). Moldable compositions were discussed by various 
Renaissance writers. The recipes are extremely varied and 
include, among their more common and understandable 
ingredients, gypsum, lead carbonate, wood and marble 
dust, eggs, pigments, sheep's wool, and various oils and 
resins. 
Figure 9. A 16th century pastiglia box from Italy features battle scenes 
from ancient Rome. Pastiglia was a forerunner of composition as we know 
it today, and one of a family of press-molded and applied interior 
ornamentation materials. Photo: Pastiglia Casket. White lead pastiglia 
decoration on gilt alder, 1.29.9 cm. Italy, Venice, 1st half of 16th c.c The 
Cleveland Museum of Art, John L. Severance Fund, 81.8. 
The 18th Century. The first flowering of architectural 
composition in America took place at the end of the 18th 
century when ornaments were both imported from England 
and produced by makers in every major eastern city. All of 
the conditions were right: molding technologies were well 
established (architectural 
papier mache, which, like 
composition, was produced in molds, had gained 
widespread acceptance during the middle decades of the 
century). The raw materials were produced or imported in 
volume, so the cost of the composition ingredients came 
down as the cost and availability of highly skilled labor 
went up. Economic and social conditions favored 
centralized "manufactories" in the production of various 
arts and crafts. 
Design trends also fed into a favorable reception for 
composition. A more faithful reinterpretation of Greek and 
Roman design eventually termed "Neoclassical" had taken 
hold in Europe, championed in England by the architect, 
Robert Adam, after his return from study in Italy in 1758 (see 
Fig. 10). Although Adam played no direct role in the 
"invention" of composition ornament, as has sometimes been 
said, he patronized English craftsmen who were making it 
and was generally receptive to new and innovative materials. 
One early maker, sometimes cited as the "inventor" of 
composition by his contemporaries, was John Jaques. His 
name appears in London advertising by 1785, but he was 
probably in business before then (see Fig. 11). 
Figure 10. Shown is an elegant Robert Adam composition overdoor 
design in Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire, England. Adam had an enormous 
influence on 18th century Neoclassical design in England and America. 
Photo: Jonathan Thornton. 
As a result of Adam's influence, designers of applied 
ornament in both Europe and America began to take 
advantage of a molding process that was ideally suited to 
producing the detailed, but repetitive, motifs of classical 
decoration-acanthus leaf, egg and dart, festoons, swags, 
and paterae-as well as classical themes depicting Greek 
and Roman gods and goddesses (see Fig. 12). And as the 
Neoclassical style became more popular, composition 
ornament makers increased in number. 

Figure 11. This page of festoon designs is from a Jaques catalog published 
in England and imported to America in the first decades of the 19th 
century. Note the similarihJ of these designs to t!wse shown on the 
mantelpiece in Fig. 1. Photo: Courtesy, The Winterthur Library: 
Printed Book and Periodical Collection. 
Figure 12. The Nightingale-Brown House, in Providence, Rhod_e Island, 
was built in 1792. Original composition ornament can be seen m the fl-at 
area above the door molding; matching ornament was used in the room 
over the mantel. Photo: Courtesy, Irving Haynes and Associates. 
The 19th Century. During the early decades of the 
nineteenth century, Neoclassical--encompassed in America 
by the terms Federal, Empire, and Greek Revival-was in 
the ascendancy. Composition makers continued to increase 
and also to find new uses for their material. Composition 
picture and mirror frames became common and some 
makers advertised the suitability of composition ornaments 
for casting iron firebacks and stoves. Composition 
ornament was explicitly advertised for exterior use as well, 
although very little has survived. The interiors of houses 
and public buildings in every prosperous American city 
were decorated with composition (see Fig. 13). 
Figure 13. Top: Since rooms with firep/ace_s were centers ~f social . 
activitt; in early American houses, mantelpieces often received special 
decorative attention. This early 19th centun; mantelpiece 1n a 
Philadelphia residence features a panel depicting A Country Dance 
flanked by fl-oral swags and sculptural busts of Milton and Shakespeare. 
Bottom: Several American and English makers produced versions of a 
frieze entitled, The Triumph of Mars. This one, ca. 1800-1810, is_ in a 
modest "single" house on Joh~ Street in Ch_arleston, So_uth Caro/ma. 
Note how several layers of pamt are obscuring the detail. Photo top: 
Gold Leaf Studios, Inc. Photo bottom: Jonathan Thornton. 
When the classically derived Federal and Empire styles 
gave way to the various revival styles-Rococo, Gothic, 
Renaissance, and Italianate-composition makers simply 
made new molds to accommodate them. (Although 
Rococo and Renaissance styles were not common for 
architecture in America, they were common for furnishings 
and interior decoration and, in consequence, for 
composition ornament.) 
Along with a proliferation of styles in the mid-to-late 
decades of the century, there was a parallel growth in the 
number of moldable and castable materials that shared 
some features of the composition craft, such as carton pierre, 
gutta percha, fibrous plaster, shellac compositions and, 
eventually, celluloid and hard rubber. Composi tion 
continued to be the preferred material for detailed 
decoration on wood where the size of the ornament did not 
make its cost prohibitive. The publication of practical books 
by and for craftsmen, beginning in the 19th century, 
disseminated recipes and procedures to a broad audience 
and de-mystified the craft. Period composition ornaments 
called "imitation wood carvings" were widely advertised in 
manufacturers' catalogs (see Fig. 14). Balls of prepared 
compo became available from some art supply shops in 
large cities for use by small volume craftsmen. 
During the later years of the century, the Arts and Crafts 
Movement-as preached by William Morris and his 
associates and followers-became increasingly important in 
design and philosophy. Morris stressed honesty to the 
material in design, exalted spirituality of hand work and 
rejected manufacturing, mass production and the 
distinction between "high" art and craft. These trends were 
7 

.................. """' .. ".~ ..... -... ~--....... ' 
------------' 
-------- ·----- 1' 
I•'••••• .. ••••••• ........ 1,11>11> 
8 
to affect both technology and design in the 20th century. 
Composition ornament would have been anathema to 
Morris and his elite clients; most composition production 
during the last years of the century is best described as 
Victorian Eclectic. 
Figure 14. Shown are two pages from a current manufacturer's catalog, Ornaments for Woodwork­
Furniture featuring festoons and clusters, fabric swags, and egg-and-dart molding. The Decorators 
Supply Corporation in Chicago, Illinois, was established in 1893, and is in business today. Photos: 
Courtesy, Decorators Supply Corporation. 
The 20th Century. The Arts and Crafts and related styles, 
such as the more decorative Art Nouveau, were well rooted 
in America by the beginning of the century (see Fig. 15). 
Pitch molds made from relief-carved patterns had become 
common in America. The carving tool marks could be 
accentuated in these patterns in keeping with current 
vogue. Open-grained woods, such as mahogany, were 
often chosen so that the finished composition ornaments 
would have a wood-like grain that showed through stains 
and varnishes (see Fig. 16). A uniquely 20th century 
application of composition ornament was in the lavishly 
decorated movie palaces of the Depression era (see Fig. 17). 
Figure 15. Naturalistically 
carved lily pattern molds 
reflect the early 20th century 
Arts and Crafts movement in 
the United States. Photo: 
Jonathan Thornton. 
Figure 16. The Austin Morey 
residence, in the Indian Village 
Historic District of Detroit, 
Michigan, was designed by 
architect Louis Kamper, and built 
between 1902 and 1903. Part of 
Kamper's design included this 
grand oak staircase that was 
decorated with composition 
ornament. Note the "ghost 
marks" of missing composition in 
the close-up. Photo: Robert J. 
Rucinski. 
As interest in architectural embellishments declined, 
particularly as a result of the austere post-World War II 
styles, so did the composition trade. 
Many old firms went out of business 
and their molds were dispersed or 
destroyed. The few that remained 
concentrated on restoration projects or 
were sustained by diversification into 
other materials. By the 1950s and 60s, 
composition as a material and craft 
had been all but forgotten. 
An upsurge in hand craft production 
that started in the late 60s and has 
continued to the present-as well as 
increasing interest in historic 
preservation-has led to the renewed 
study of old methods and materials, 
including composition. The few 
manufacturers that remain have seen a 
large increase in their business, and an 
increasing number of people recognize 
composition as a unique ornamental 
material and want to conserve, restore, 
or create it (see Fig. 18). 
Compo Deterioration and 
Damage 
To some degree, the longevity of 
historic composition ornament is 
related to the ratio of ingredients in 
the original mix and to the skill of the craftsman in applying 
it. But it is far more dependent upon interior climatic 
conditions and the long-term effects of heat and dampness 
on both the compo and the wood substrate. 

Figure 17. The Ohio Theater in Columbus, Ohio, was lavishly decorated 
with gilded plaster and composition ornament. Walls, ceilings, mirror 
frames, furniture, and carpets-predominately red and gold-were 
designed by noted theater architect Thomas W. Lamb in 1928. Photo: 
Rapid Photography Inc. 
Figure 18. Shown is the contemporary studio of the J.P. Weaver 
Company, currently located in Glendale, California. The company has 
manufactured and sold architectural composition ornament continuously 
since 1917. Note the long work table and well organized mold storage 
units behind. Photo: Lenna Tyler Kast. 
Variables in mixing and application. Dried compo is 
inherently hard and somewhat brittle; its increasing 
brittleness over time is primarily due to the oxidation and 
hardening of the linseed oil component. The drying oil , in 
turn, contributes to age cracking. Thus, during initial 
manufacture, if the oil content was low and the dry filler 
content (chalk) high, shrinking and cracking over time is 
less likely to occur. Originally, the compo was probably 
attached using small, headless brads (1 / 4") that penetrated 
the hardening compo as well as the wood substrate. They 
were used to keep the compo from shifting or warping after 
it was set in place. If an insufficient number of brads was 
used by the craftsman during the application process, the 
compo simply falls off as cracks develop . 
Interior environmental conditions. Compo was conceived 
as a durable substitute for hand-carved wood or marble and 
decorative plaster; its potential for structural failure is 
generally due to substrate failure rather than to the compo 
mix itself. Theoretically, composition will move with 
atmospheric changes due to th~ moisture-sensitive glue 
component. Its breakdown typically occurs when the wood 
base expands and contracts at different rates than the 
compo during extreme temperature and humidity 
fluctuations . Especially when it is close to a source of heat, 
such as directly over a fireplace, compo develops fissures or 
shrinkage cracks. Contemporary heating systems in old 
buildings also contribute to the drying and cracking 
syndrome. 
Planning for Treatment 
Simple stabilization and repairs to existing ornamentation 
can most likely proceed based solely on an analysis of 
existing conditions (see paragraphs on 
Surface Cracking 
and Delamination, below) . 
Historical research. For more complex work, a building 
owner, curator, or conservator should research the history 
of the building to find out when it was originally designed 
and constructed; who lived in it at various times; how the 
building was used; and which features were original and 
which were added later or removed (see Fig. 19). Some of 
this information may be found in the National Register of 
Historic Places. 
Figure 19. A drawing from the 1930s 
shows original ornament on the wall 
above a Palladian window in the 1760s 
Miles-Brewton House, Charleston, South 
Carolina. When the ornament was 
subsequently removed and lost, this scale 
drawing was used as documentation to 
fabricate matching ornament. Photo: 
Jonathan Thornton. 
Questions about the building's interior spaces and their 
decorative detailing also need to be asked, particularly 
when portions of the ornamentation will be replaced. Have 
the interior spaces evolved with successive occupancies or 
uses? In addition to compo, were other decorative 
materials used and are there differences in patterns that 
help date the work? For example, plaster and compo may 
have been used in the 
same room, but applied 
at different times. 
Receipts from 
workmen's bills may 
often be used to 
establish the dates of 
decorative detailing. 
The historical research 
dealing with the original 
construction of the 
building and its use over 
time should, in turn, be 
linked to the scope of 
work that will take 
place. Stabilization, 
conservation, and repair 
are maximized within 
the treatment, 
Preservation. Generally 
speaking, restoring 
decorative ornament to a 
specific earlier period is 
not recommended 
unless its historical 
significance outweighs 
the potential loss of 
extant ornament that 
9 

10 
characterizes other historical periods. But if a significant 
interior is missing original features and physical and 
documentary evidence are conclusive, replication may be 
appropriate in order to interpret a particular time. 
Existing conditions analysis. After historical research is 
conducted, but before starting work, an analysis of the 
surface and substrate should be undertaken. These are 
some of the issues a conservator considers. First, if a 
surface is painted, the ornamentation material needs to be 
identified. Is it wood, plaster, composition ornament, or 
some other type of applied ornamental material? Usually, 
some of the ornamentation is chipped or broken. Close 
examination of the exposed material is the first step. If it is 
white through the entire thickness of the ornament, then it 
could be plaster or stucco; if it is a darker brown material, it 
is more likely to be composition. 
After having identified the presence of composition 
ornament, its overall condition can be evaluated. Layers of 
paint may obscure fine detailing as well as deterioration 
problems. Degrees of damage and deterioration should be 
recorded. These are typical questions that need to be 
answered. Is the surface merely "crazed", requiring no 
action or limited repair, or are the cracks severe enough to 
require replacement? Are pieces missing? Are the 
attachment brads rusted or missing? The condition of the 
substrate is also important. Is the wood surface intact, or is 
it in need of repair? After answering key questions, the 
conservator will make random tests to differentiate original 
compo from later repairs, some of which may well have 
been done with plaster, rather than compo (see Fig. 20). 
Figure 20. The Octagon 
House, in Washington, 
D.C., was constructed 
between 1801-1802. 
During recent project 
work, it was discovered 
that early repairs to the 
composition ornament in 
this doorway had been 
made with plaster. The 
plaster repairs were 
removed during 
restoration of the 
doorway to its original 
appearance. Photo: 
Lonnie 
J. Hovey, AJA. 
Deciding how to proceed depends upon the overall 
interpretive goals of treatment. For example, is the interior 
being restored to an earlier time? In this case, later repairs 
may be removed and the original appearance replicated. 
Or is the interior being preserved with limited replacement 
of lost or damaged historic materials? Not all conditions 
are foreseeable in conservation work and contingencies 
must be incorporated into the treatment plan to be 
considered realistic. As the project progresses, the 
conservator generally determines the work that needs to be 
done, and the order in which it should be undertaken. 
Treating the Problem with Care 
The scope of work is generally based on several factors, 
including the historical significance of the building's 
interior, the degree of damage or deterioration of the 
compo, and the overall interpretive goals of project work. 
Several examples of repair and replacement follow in order 
to suggest a typical scope of work within preservation and 
restoration projects. Treatments are listed in hierarchical 
order, from the least intervention to the greatest. 
Compo: The Basic Ingredients (clockwise from front 
center) 
Chalk: Chalk is whiting in solid form. It is a type of 
white, soft limestone. 
Glue: Before the invention of synthetic adhesives, glue 
meant animal or hide glue. This was made by boiling 
animal skins to extract a protein-collagen-in water, 
then condensing and drying the collagen until it was in 
solid form. A variety of types and grades were, and are 
still, available. Two are shown here. 
Linseed oil: This is a yellowish drying oil obtained 
from flaxseed that is used in paint, varnish, printing ink, 
and linoleum; it is a key ingredient in composition 
ornament. 
Resin: Resins are organic materials present in wood 
and exuded from various trees and shrubs. In unrefined 
form, they often consist of a mixture of solid natural 
polymers, oils, and volatile aromatic substances. 
Paint removal. Interior ornament is usually painted many 
times over during its lifetime and, as a result, the sharp 
surface detail of the original pattern is obscured. Before 
attempting to remove paint, it is always advisable to obtain 
professional advice on the ornamental material to be 
cleaned as well as the nature of the coatings that are 
covering it. And whatever the project work goal, at least 
one sample of intact, well-adhered paint layers on a feature 
should be preserved for future historical research. 
Based on the purpose of treatment, these are some of the 
questions a conservator routinely asks. How many layers 
of paint are there? Is it important to trace one layer to a 
particular occupancy of the building? 
If so, the 
stratigraphy (or layering scheme) will be determined prior 
to paint removal. After the correct layer is identified, the 
color can be matched. Or, is the building being 
rehabilitated? If this is the case, period-typical paint colors 
may be appropriate. 
For purposes of this Brief and the guidance paragraphs that 
follow, it is assumed that all layers of paint are being 
removed in order to reveal the fine detailing of the 
composition ornament (see Fig. 21). 

Figure 21. The same theme on two early mantelpieces, A Country Dance, dramatically illustrates the visual difference between cleaned and uncleaned 
composition ornament. When old paint layers are removed, the exquisite detailing is revealed. Left: George Read II House, 1801-1803, New Castle, 
Delaware; Right: First Harrison Gray Otis House, 1796, Boston, Massachusetts. Photo left: Gold Leaf Studios, Inc. Photo right: David Bohl. Courtesy, 
Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities. 
The next step is to consider various methods of removing 
paint from the ornament without damaging it, or without 
being exposed to dangerous substances in the strippers or 
in the old paint itself! It should be noted from the 
standpoint of health and safety that most Federal and 
Empire period compo was meant to imitate marble; thus, 
the highly toxic white-lead paint was by far the most 
common original coating. 
Caustic strippers based on lye should be avoided for two 
reasons. First, they will damage and dissolve compo both 
because they "chew up" the protein structure of the glue 
and, second, because they are water-based and compo 
remains soluble in water (see also Fig. 3). If a stripper will 
damage the protein of your hands, it will do the same to 
compo! 
A conservator will more often use organic solvents, such as 
methylene chloride, in conjunction with small implements 
such as a dental tool or toothbrush. (A small area is always 
tested first to establish the safety and effectiveness of any 
technique. Improper use of stripping tools can damage 
intricate surfaces beyond repair.) A solvent is applied 
according to manufacturer's recommendations, permitted 
to soak into and soften the paint, then re-applied as 
necessary, as the conservator gently removes paint from the 
intricate carved surfaces (see Fig. 22) . 
Figure 22. Careful dry 
scraping of a chimney piece 
to remove paint residue 
signaled the successful 
conclusion of a conservation 
project at the Octagon 
House, in Washington, D.C. 
Photo: Lonnie J. Hovey, 
AJA. 
It should be emphasized that any amount of exposure to 
toxic chemicals without proper precautions can cause 
severe health problems. A hooded, air-fed, personal unit is 
desirable when using methylene chloride-based strippers if 
fume hoods or paint spray booths that exhaust effectively to 
the outside are not available. Organic vapor masks may not 
be as effective in protecting against methylene chloride 
exposure because the filters quickly become exhausted; 
however, a vapor mask with properly rated organic solvent 
cartridges can provide an acceptable level of safety when 
cartridges are regularly changed (see Fig. 23). 
Figure 23. Methylene chloride fumes can be deadly, so protecting the 
worker is imperative. Left: a hooded, air-fed unit. Right: a vapor mask 
with organic solvent cartridges. Photo left: William Adair. Photo right: 
Lonnie J. Hovey, AJA. 
Some conservators have had excellent results heat-stripping 
excess paint layers using heat guns and dental tools. This is 
highly skilled work and its success depends upon the 
composition ornament being much older than the paint 
layers that lie on top, but has the capability of working as 
well or better than chemical methods in the hands of an 
expert. Precautions must be taken against lead fumes where 
removal of lead paint 
is involved. 
Cleaning mixtures based on enzymes are also used by 
conservators. This is an effective method because enzyme 
mixtures can be formulated for very specific purposes (i.e ., 
to dissolve only oil-based paints from protein-glue based 
compo). They dissolve paint without affecting the wood 
substrate. But, on the other hand, work can be very slow 
and the expense would only seem justified on small and 
rare or important museum objects. Enzymatic cleaners are 
11 

12 
Increased concern about the environment may well render 
the toxic methylene chloride strippers obsolete in the near 
future . Manufacturers have already produced "safer" 
strippers based on dimethyl esters, and further research will 
probably yield other alternatives to chlorinated solvents. 
Slower acting solvent-type strippers may well be safer to 
the underlying composition ornament, but additional 
research and use are needed before making definitive 
statements. 
In summary, most damage to compo occurs during the 
removal of layers of paint; this is a critical process and 
should not be attempted without consulting a conservator 
and should not be undertaken by painting contractors 
unless they are highly skilled and have had extensive 
experience in this very delicate procedure. 
Proper disposal of residual chemicals and debris must be 
undertaken to avoid contaminating the environment with 
solvents and lead, and such disposal is, in fact, now 
required by federal, state, and local ordinances . The 
company responsible for removing chemical waste should 
be licensed to dispose of it, otherwise the property owner 
may be held accountable 
if disposal laws are violated . 
Refinishing compo ornament usually follows stripping. 
According to historic evidence uncovered and depending 
on the existing and desired appearance of the room, compo 
can be stained, painted, gilded, marbleized, or glazed. 
Paint types may include distemper, alkyd oil, or latex. A 
thin coating is recommended so the intricate surface detail 
is not clogged. 
Surface cracking. Surface cracking indicates age and, thus, 
the history of the ornamentation itself (see Fig . 24). It does 
not necessarily mean that cracks have to be fixed. But if 
cracking interferes with the overall design pattern, then the 
conservator may elect to fill the cracks with suitable fill 
material. For example, "light weight" spackles bulked with 
microballoons are excellent because they are soft and 
compressible and will accommodate changes in the size of 
cracks due to moisture fluctuation. After stabilization, the 
surface is finished to match the existing area. 
Figure 24. Treatment would be 
optional for the age cracking that has 
occurred in the egg-like portions of 
this composition ornament. Photo: 
William Adair. 
Delamination. Delamination or separation of the compo 
from the wood substrate is the simplest repair problem to 
remedy. The conservator begins by testing cracked areas 
with slight finger pressure to determine which parts of the 
design need consolidation. Compo sections that have 
separated from the 
substrate, but are 
otherwise intact, can be 
glued back in place using 
emulsion type adhesives 
such as "white" glues or a 
clear, solvent-release 
adhesive (see Fig. 25). For 
vertical surfaces, the glue is 
painted onto the back of 
the delaminated compo as 
well as the wood base and, 
when slightly tacky, re­
attached, and held with 
clamps until dry. 
Figure 25. (a) Adhesive is being applied to this 19th century composition 
ornament that has de-laminated from its wood substrate; and (b) The 
compo fragment is held in place until the quick-setting adhesive takes 
hold. Photos: Jonathan Thornton . 
Professional conservators often formulate their own 
adhesives based on stable synthetic polymers (plastics) 
dissolved in solvent that will be more reversible, should the 
need arise, and also offer better long-term stability than 
many commercial adhesives. 
Repairs to broken or damaged compo. When some original 
compo has been lost, additional work is required to make a 
repair. One particularly easy and inexpensive method of 
repairing broken ornamentation is to use non-hardening 
clay ("plastilina") or polymer-based modeling materials as 
an impression material to make a mold. After a mold is 
made from existing ornament, missing or deteriorated 
portions of the historic design can be duplicated with a 
durable gypsum plaster (see Fig. 26) . Especially in cases 
where economic considerations dictate procedure, use of 
this substitute material may be helpful because it is 
cheaper. Alternatively, an existing studio mold may 
sometimes be used to make small replacement pieces in a 
repair project (see Fig. 27). 
In another scenario, a repetitive design on a mantelpiece 
may be damaged or portions missing. Especially if the 
compo design is complex and several portions of ornament 
need to be replaced, rigid polymer molds with traditional 
compo are recommended for the repair work. The mold is 
created using a section of the original ornament as a model. 
After replacement pieces are fabricated, they are attached 
using brads, or finish nails (see Fig. 28). The pointed end of 
the nail is clipped blunt with snips to avoid possible 
splitting of the wood substrate. The nail is first hammered 
into the surface, then countersunk, and the resulting hole 
filled with gesso putty or additional compo. 
dependent on a high level of skill, technical knowledge and 
professional training, but they are earning a solid place in 
the repertoire of professional conservators. 

C. 
Figure 26. When a small amount of ornamentation needs to be replaced, 
(a) plastilina clay is recommended as an impression material. Next (b), a 
plaster-like, liquid material is used to cast the replacement piece. Finally, 
(c) the new piece is smoothed and fixed in place. Photos: Roland White. 
Figure 27. When a compo frieze depicting The Triumph of Mars was 
found to be damaged, improperly res~ored, and its intricate design clogged 
with paint, the first step was to replace a missing wheel on the chariot. 
Because molds depicting classical themes are part of many professional 
studio collections, it was possible to fabricate a new wheel from the rubber 
mold shown here. Photo: William Adair. 
Finally, a ready-made replacement piece can be ordered 
from the catalog of a compo manufacturer, but it is unlikely 
to be a perfect match to an extant historic decoration 
Replacement of missing compo ornamentation. Once­
attractive compo may become damaged to such a degree 
that the remaining fragments are removed by an owner and 
the entire surface painted over. Thus, if there is some 
existing composition ornament in a room, such as an 
overdoor or chair railing, the conservator would most likely 
look for evidence of other ornament that is now missing. 
For example, a mantel may appear as a flat, unornamented 
surface to the untrained eye, but after many layers of paint 
are removed by the conservator, shadow images are 
revealed (see Fig. 29). These images or "ghost marks" are 
left by the hide glue component of the original mix. 
Although the glue is water soluble, it will not be completely 
removed by an organic stripper such as methylene chloride. 
(But if earlier inappropriate paint removal methods were 
used, such as water-based strippers, caustic strippers, or 
mechanical sanding, ghost marks from the glue would be 
destroyed.) 
When the paint stripper dries, a ghost mark left by 
composition ornament appears slightly darker than the 
surrounding area where no compo had been attached. In 
addition, small, square-headed, 1 / 4" brads used to 
reinforce the original compo may be embedded in the 
wood. 
In summary, detailed physical evidence, as well as written 
and pictorial documentation, can provide a valid 
framework for replacement at a particular site. With 
careful detective work, missing historic ornamentation may 
be successfully identified and replaced with matching 
ornament (see Fig. 30; see also Fig. 19) . 
Restoration of a "period" interior. When ornamentation is 
extensively deteriorated and missing, owners often want to 
re-create the historic appearance through restoration. 
Physical evidence and other documentation may be used as 
a basis for the restoration; it should be remembered, 
however, that as the amount of surviving material 
diminishes, the greater the chance for inaccuracy when 
attempting to depict the historic appearance. Choosing 
restoration as a treatment thus requires exacting 
documentation prior to work and meticulous attention to 
detail in the work itself. 
Conclusion 
Despite its popularity and widespread use as a decorative 
material, the history of composition ornament has yet to be 
thoroughly studied. Individual craftsmen have acquired 
fragmentary knowledge about some designs and historic 
methods; historians and students of interior decorative 
design have accumulated knowledge about patterns, 
artisans, and methods of manufacture and distribution; and 
curators of historic collections that include compo are 
knowledgeable about the objects under their care . The 
combined knowledge of these individuals, together with 
examples and images of compo ornament from a variety of 
sources, needs to be synthesized to address the complex 
issues involving compo repair and preservation. The future 
of the study of composition ornament, as well as many 
other facets of architectural, decorative, and fine art history, 
lies in this sort of cooperative effort. 
a. 
b. 
13 

a. 
b. 
14 
Figure 28. A conservator is replacing broken pieces of compo ornamen­
tation on a mantel during restoration of the Nightingale-Brown House in 
Providence, Rhode Island. Photo: Courtesy, Irving Haynes and 
Associates. 
Whether applied interior ornamentation such as 
composition ornament is being repaired or restored, 
treatment should always be preceded by careful 
documentation and planning. 
Figure 29. The ghost marks of compo past-floral swags or festoons­
are in clear evidence on a mantelpiece in the back bedroom of the George 
Read II House, New Castle, Delaware. This physical evidence will be 
used to assure their accurate re-creation in a restoration project. Photo: 
Courtesy, Gold Leaf Studios, Inc. 
Figure 30. Based on 
documentary and physical 
evidence, missing 
composition ornament was 
accurately re-created for the 
Miles-Brewton House, 
Charleston, South Carolina. 
First (a) the conservator 
used molds to fabricate 
ornament in small pieces 
and lengths; and (b) the new 
ornament was attached to 
thin birch plywood backing 
with glue and brads to 
create larger sections. These 
sections were then fastened 
to the original paneling with 
stainless steel screws. 
Photos: Jonathan Thornton 

Composition and Other Applied Interior Ornamentation 
As explained below, compo is a polymer-based 
material; however, several related materials used to 
create sculptural relief were sometimes referred to as 
"compositions" because they combined various 
ingredients to achieve new and hybrid properties. 
These related decorative materials can be polymer­
based, plaster-based, paper-based, or wood-based. The 
following terms and definitions are important to know 
because they provide a background for identifying 
compo and other applied interior ornamentation prior to 
treatment. 
Polymer-based Materials 
Polymers are organic, i.e., carbon-based materials 
comprised of repeated units linked together into long 
chain-like molecules. Most polymers are soft and pliable 
(plastic) or can be made so by the application of heat 
(thermoplastic). In addition to compo and modern 
synthetic plastics, defined below, polymers include 
animal glue, horn, natural resins such as shellac, latex 
rubber, and rosin. 
Compo. This thermoplastic mixture based on natural 
polymers-typically glue, linseed oil, and resin bulked 
with chalk-has been used extensively to create 
sculptural relief. 
Modern Synthetic Plastics. Starting with cellulose nitrates 
such as celluloid (1840s), a vast array of man-made 
polymers has been created. Plastics received their popular 
name because, like composition, they are generally shaped 
while soft and pliable, but, due to cost, composition is the 
only polymer material to be used extensively in 
architectural decoration until quite recently. 
Plaster and Plaster-based Materials 
Plaster: This term describes two distinct calcium-based 
mixes. First, lime plaster is made by heating calcium 
carbonate to produce cak;iurn oxide and slaking it with 
water to produce calcium hydroxide (lime putty). This 
material, mixed with fillers and aggregates and applied 
to surfaces gradually reconverts to calcium carbonate 
over a period of years. Second, gypsum plaster ("Plaster 
of Paris") is made by heating hydrated calcium sulfate to 
remove part of the chemically bound water. When 
water is added, it reconverts to fully hydrated calcium 
sulfate, setting and hardening in the process. Wet plaster 
was "run" in cornices; or made in piece-molds and 
flexible gelatin molds, then applied to interior surfaces. 
Stucco: In its earliest use in Europe and America, stucco 
was a lime putty-based mix for fine interior ornamental 
plasterwork; historically, "stucco" referred to 
ornamental (particularly sculptural) plaster work. In the 
United States by the 19th century, however, stucco was 
primarily used to describe exterior plastering, usually 
done with Portland cement-based mixtures. 
Fibrous Plaster: This is the term for molded 
architectural plasterwork which is heavily reinforced 
with coarse weave cloth as it is built up in the molds. 
Fibrous plaster is lightweight, strong, and somewhat 
flexible and was used to manufacture large architectural 
units such as balcony fronts, columns, and pilasters. 
Pate Coulante (flowing paste). This is a mixture 
mentioned in one 19th century text that consisted of 
gypsum plaster, whiting, glue, alum, and sometimes 
paper pulp. If encountered in an historic interior, it is 
likely to be indistinguishable from plaster. 
Paper-Based Materials 
Papier-mache: This material became popular for interior 
decoration during the mid-18th century in England and 
its colonies. Papier-mache was made from soaked rag 
paper layered into molds with small quantities of glue or 
starch paste as additional binders. It was usually 
covered with whiting and glue (gesso) and sometimes 
gilded. Papier-mache is always hollow and can be 
distinguished from compo or plaster by gentle tapping. 
Anaglypta: This is a trade name for a wallpaper 
embossed with relief decoration. 
Carton-Pierre: This material was based on fully pulped 
paper fiber extended and hardened with substantial 
amounts of glue, whiting, and gypsum plaster, and 
sometimes alum and flour. Carton-pierre was pressed 
into molds as a plastic mass and allowed to harden. It is 
mid-way between plaster and papier-mache in weight 
and density. 
Fibrous Slab: This was the name given to layered 
papier-mache panels heavily impregnated with linseed 
oil by inventor, 
C.F. Bielefeld, in the mid-19th century. 
The composite of paper fiber and hardened linseed oil 
made a thermoplastic panel that could be shaped and 
embossed by heating and pressing. 
Lincrusta: This material, composed of fiber and dried 
linseed oil and press molded onto paper backing, was 
introduced by the linoleum manufacturer, F. Walton, in 
1877 and is still made. Typical use is in continuous low­
relief friezes at the top of a room. 
Wood and Wood-Fiber Based Materials 
Wood: Natural wood can also be press molded to a 
limited extent after it is made plastic by either steam or 
ammonia. Pressed wood architectural elements have been 
extensively marketed, but would be difficult to mistake 
for the deeper and sharper relief of most of the other 
materials described above. 
Wood-fiber: Also called saw dust, this cheap and readily 
available product has been used as a bulking agent in 
moldable mixtures since before the Renaissance. 
Numerous recipes consisting of wood fiber and various 
binders were published in 19th century formulas, and 
some of these proprietary mixtures or patent woods were 
used to produce small architectural decorations and 
moldings. Modern particle boards are non-sculptural 
variations of the material. 
15 

16 
Further Reading 
Adair, William. "An Investigation of Composition 
Ornamentation." The Interiors Handbook for Historic 
Buildings II. Washington, D.C.: Historic Preservation 
Education Foundation, 1993, Chapter 4, pp. 1-7. 
Adair, William. The Frame in America, 1700-1900: A Survey 
of Fabrication, Techniques and Styles. Washington, D.C.: 
The American Institute of Architects Foundation, 1983. 
Budden, Sophie (ed.). Gilding and Surface Decoration. 
London: United Kingdom Institute for Conservation, 
1991. See: Judith Wetherall, "History and Techniques of 
Composition," pp. 26-29; Jonathan Thornton, "Minding 
the Gap: Filling Losses in Gilded and Decorated 
Surfaces/' pp. 12-17. 
Cotton, J. Randall. "Composition Ornament." Old-House 
Journal. Vol. XXI, No. 1 (January /February 1993), pp. 28-33. 
Green, Malcolm. "Conservation and Restoration of Gilded 
Antiques." The Conservator, 3. United Kingdom for 
Conservation, 1979. 
Hasluck, Paul N. (ed.). Cassell's Cyclopedia of Mechanics, 8 
vols. London: Cassell and Co., 1904, Chapter 4, p. 164. 
_______ . Mounting and Framing Pictures. London: 
Cassell and Co., 1899. 
Kunou, C.A. Manual of Gilding and Compo Work. Los 
Angeles, California: The Bruce Publishing Co., 1928. 
Request reprint information from the International 
Institute for Frame Study, 2126 "O" Street, NW, 
Washington, D.C. 20037. 
Loeffler, RF. 
Step by Step Compo and Mold Making. 
Oroville, California: Loeffler-Valac Industries, 1992. 
Millar, William. Plastering Plain & Decorative: A Practical 
Treatise on the Art & Craft of Plastering and Modelling. 
London: B. T. Batsford. New York: John Lane, 1899. 
Scott-Mitchell, Frederick. Practical Gilding. London: The 
Trade Papers Publishing Company, 1905. 
The Gilder's Mn1111n/. New York: Excelsior Publishing 
House, 1876. Reprinted by the Society of Gilders, 
Washington, D.C., 1990. 
The Secretary of the Interior Standards for the Treatment of 
Historic Properties. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
the Interior, National Park Service, Preservation 
Assistance Division. Washington, D.C., 1992. 
Thornton, Jonathan. "Compo: The History and Technology 
of' Plastic' Compositions." Preprints of papers presented 
at the 13th annual meeting, Washington, D.C. American 
Institute for Conservation, 1985. 
Organizations 
For information on conservators, contact the following 
organizations: 
Association for Preservation Technology 
904 Princess Anne St. 
Fredericksburg, VA 22404 
National Institute for the Conservation 
of Cultural Property 
3299 K St., NW, Ste. 403 
Washington, D.C. 20007 
American Institute for the Conservation 
of Historic & Artistic Works 
1400 16th St. 
Washington, D.C. 20036 
Cover photograph: The process of making composition ornament ha_s 
changed little over the years. In the J.P. Weaver Company, located in 
Glendale, California, freshly made compo is being kneaded prior to 
pressing it in a mold. 
Acknowledgements 
Kay Weeks, project director for this cooperatively produced Brief, is an art 
historian who serves as technical writer-editor in the Preservation Assistance 
Division. Jonathan Thornton authored the introduction and historical overview 
portion of the Brief and William Adair, FAAR, the planning and treatment 
portion. The editor and authors wish to extend their gratitude to those people 
who reviewed and commented on the Preservation Brief in draft form and those 
who provided illustrative materials. First, National Park Service staff reviewers 
included H. Ward Jandl, Blaine Cliver, Anne Grimmer, Chuck Fisher, Tim 
Buehner, Emogene Bevitt, Tom Jester, Michael Auer, and Paul Alley. Specialists 
in the field included Andrew Ladygo, David Flaharty, Phil Gottfredson, Mark 
Reinberger, and Lenna Tyler Kast. Photographs were generously donated for the 
Brief by Philip 
L. Molten, Elizabeth Brick, Robert J. Rucinski, Lenna Tyler Kast, 
Bryan Blundell, Thomas Brunk, Lonnie J. Hovey, AJA, Roland White, Irving 
Haynes & Associates, the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Freer Gallery of Art, 
Winterthur Library, Decorators Supply Corporation, and Rapid Photography, 
Inc. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interior 
to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. 
Comments on the usefulness of this publication may be directed to H. Ward 
Jandl, Deputy Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, 
P.O. Box 37127, Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. This publication is not 
copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for 
credit to the authors and the National Park Service are appreciated. 
ISSN: 0885-7017 May 1994 