PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
New Exterior Additions to Historic 
Buildings: Preservation Conc erns 
Anne E. Grimmer and Kay D. Weeks 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Technical Preservation Services 
A new exterior addition to a historic building should 
be considered in a rehabilitation project onl y after 
determining that requirements for the new or adaptiv e 
use cannot be successfully met b y altering non­
significant interior spaces . If the new use cannot be 
accommodated in this way, then an exterior addition 
may be an acceptable alternative. Rehabilitation as a 
treatment "is defined as the act or process of making 
possible a compatible use for a property through repair , 
alterations, and additions while preserving those portion s 
or features which convey its historical , cultural , or 
architectural values." 
The topic of new additions, including rooftop additions , 
to historic buildings comes up frequentl y, especially a s it 
relates to rehabilitation projects. It is often discussed and 
it is the subject of concern, consternation, considerable 
disagreement and confusion. Can, in certain instances, 
a historic building be enlarged for a new use without 
destroying its historic character? And, just what is 
significant about each particular historic building 
that should be preserved? Finally, what kind of new 
construction is appropriate to the historic building? 
The vast amount of literature on the subject of additions 
to historic buildings reflects widespread interest as well 
as divergence of opinion. New additions have been 
discussed by historians within a social and political 
framework; by architects and architectural historians 
in terms of construction technology and style; and 
by urban planners as successful or 
unsuccessful contextual design. However, 
within the historic preservation and 
rehabilitation programs of the National 
Park Service, the focus on new additions 
is to ensure that they preserve the 
character of historic buildings . 
Most historic districts or neighborhoods 
are listed in the National Register of 
Historic Places for their significance within 
a particular time frame. This period of 
significance of historic districts as well 
as individually-listed properties may 
sometimes lead to a misunderstanding 
that inclusion in the National Register may 
prohibit any physical change outside of a 
certain historical period-particularly in 
the form of exterior additions . National 
Register listing does not mean that a 
building or district is frozen in time and 
that no change can be made without 
compromising the historical significance . 
It does mean, however, that a new 
addition to a his toric building should 
preserve its historic character. 
Figure 1. The addition to the right with its connecting hyphen is compatible with the 
Collegiate Gothic-style library. The addition is set back from the front of the library and 
uses the same materials and a simplified design that references, but does not copy, the 
historic building. Photo: David Wakely Photography. 
1 

2 
Figure 2. The new section on the right is appropriately scaled and 
reflects the design of the historic Art Deco-style hotel. The apparent 
separation created by the recessed connector also enables the addition 
to be viewed as an individual building. 
Guidance on New Additions 
To meet Standard 1 of the Secretary of the Interior's 
Standards for Rehabilitation, which states that "a 
property shall be used for its historic purpose or be 
placed in a new use that requires minimal change to 
the defining characteristics of the building and its site 
and environment," it must be determined whether a 
historic building can accommodate a new addition. 
Before expanding the building's footprint, consideration 
should first be given to incorporating changes-such as 
code upgrades or spatial needs for a new use-within 
secondary areas of the historic building. However, this 
is not always possible and, after such an evaluation, 
the conclusion may be that an addition is required, 
particularly if it is needed to avoid modifications to 
character-defining interior spaces. 
An addition should 
be designed to be compatible with the historic character 
of the building and, thus, meet the Standards for 
Rehabilitation. Standards 9 and 10 apply specifically to 
new additions: 
(9) "New additions, exterior alterations, or related 
new construction shall not destroy historic 
materials that characterize the property. The new 
work shall be differentiated from the old and 
shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, 
and architectural features to protect the historic 
integrity of the property and its environment." 
(10) "New additions and adjacent or related new 
construction shall be undertaken in such a manner 
that if removed in the future, the essential form 
and integrity of the historic property and its 
environment would be unimpaired." 
The subject of new additions is important because a 
new addition to a historic building has the potential to 
change its historic character as well as to damage and 
destroy significant historic materials and features. A new 
addition also has the potential to confuse the public and 
to make it difficult or impossible to differentiate the old 
from the new or to recognize what part of the historic 
building is genuinely historic. 
The intent of this Preservation Brief is to provide 
guidance to owners, architects and developers on 
how to design a compatible new addition, including a 
rooftop addition, to a historic building. A new addition 
to a historic building should preserve the building's 
historic character. To accomplish this and meet the 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, a 
new addition should: 
• Preserve significant historic materials, 
features and form; 
• Be compatible; and 
• Be differentiated from the historic building. 
Every historic building is different and each 
rehabilitation project is unique. Therefore, the guidance 
offered here is not specific, but general, so that it can 
be applied to a wide variety of building types and 
situations. To assist in interpreting this guidance, 
illustrations of a variety of new additions are provided. 
Good examples, as well as some that do not meet the 
Standards, are included to further help explain and 
clarify what is a compatible new addition that preserves 
the character of the historic building. 
Figure 3. The red and buff-colored parking addition with a rooftop 
playground is compatible with the early-20th century school as 
well as with the neighborhood in which it also serves as infill in the 
urban setting. 

Preserve Significant Historic 
Materials, Features and Form 
Attaching a new exterior addition usually 
involves some degree of material loss to 
an external wall of a historic building, 
but it should be minimized. Damaging 
or des troying significant materials and 
craftsmanship should be avoided, as 
much as possible. 
Generally speaking, preservation of 
historic buildings inherently implies 
minimal change to primary or "public" 
elevations and, of course, interior 
features as well. Exterior features that 
distinguish one historic building or 
a row of buildings and which can be 
seen from a public right of way, such 
as a st reet or sidewalk , are most likely 
to be the most significant. These can 
include many different elements, such 
as: window patterns, window hoods 
or shutters; porticoes, entrances and 
doorways; roof shapes, cornices and 
decor ative moldings; or commercial 
storefronts with their special detailing , 
signs and glazing patterns . Beyond a 
single building, entire blocks of urban 
or residential structures are often closely 
related architecturally by their materials, 
detailing, form and alignment. Because 
significant materials and features should 
be preserved, not damaged or hidden , 
the first place to consider placing a 
new addition is in a location where 
the least amount of historic material 
and character-defining features will 
be lost. 
In most cases, this will be on a 
secondary side or rear elevation . 
One way to reduce overall material 
loss when constructing a new addition 
is simply to keep the addition smaller 
in proportion to the size of the historic 
building. Limiting the size and number of openings 
between old and new by utilizing existing doors or 
enlarging windows also helps to minimize loss. An 
often successful way to accomplish this is to link the 
addition to the historic building by means of a hyphen 
or connector. A connector provides a physical link 
while visually separating the old and new, and the 
connecting passageway penetrates and removes only a 
small portion of the historic wall. A new addition that 
will abut the historic building along an entire elevation 
or wrap around a side and rear elevation, will likely 
integrate the historic and the new interiors , and thus 
result in a high degree of loss of form and exterior walls , 
as well as significant alteration of interior spaces and 
features, and will not meet the Standards. 
Figure 4. This glass and brick structure is a harmonious addition set back and connected 
to the rear of th e Colonial Revival-style brick house. Cunnin gham/Quill Ar chitects. 
Photos:© Ma xwe ll Ma cKenzie. 
Compatible but Differentiated Design 
In accordance with the Standards, a new addition must 
preserve the building's historic character and, in order 
to do that, it must be differentiated, but compatible, 
with the historic building. A new addition must retain 
the essential form and integrity of the historic property. 
Keeping the addition smaller, limiting the removal 
of historic materials by linking the addition with a 
hyphen , and locating the new addition at the rear or on 
an inconspicuous side elevation of a historic building 
are techniques discussed previously that can help to 
accomplish this. 
Rather than differentiating between old and new, it 
might seem more in keeping with the historic character 
3 

4 
simply to repeat the historic form, material, features and 
detailing in a new addition. However, when the new 
work is highly replicative and indistinguishable from 
the old in appearance, it may no longer be possible to 
identify the "real" historic building. Conversely, the 
treatment of the addition should not be so different that 
it becomes the primary focus. The difference may be 
subtle, but it must be clear. A new addition to a historic 
building should protect those visual qualities that make 
the building eligible for listing in the National Register 
of Historic Places. 
The National Park Service policy concerning new 
additions to historic buildings, which was adopted in 
1967, is not unique. It is an outgrowth and continuation 
of a general philosophical approach to change first 
expressed by John Ruskin in England in the 1850s, 
formalized by William Morris in the founding of the 
Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings in 
1877, expanded by the Society in 1924 and, finally, 
reiterated in the 1964 Venice Charter-a document that 
continues to be followed by the national committees 
of the International Council on Monuments and 
Sites (ICOMOS). The 1967 
Administrative Policies for 
Historical Areas of the National Park System direct that 
" ... a modern addition should be readily distinguishable 
from the older work; however, the new work should be 
harmonious with the old in scale, proportion, materials, 
and color. Such additions should be as inconspicuous as 
possible from the public view." As a logical evolution 
from these Policies specifically for National Park 
Service-owned historic structures, the 1977 Secretary 
of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, which may 
be applied to all historic buildings listed in, or eligible 
for listing in the National Register, also state that "the 
new work shall be differentiated from the old and 
shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and 
architectural features to protect the historic integrity of 
the property and its environment." 
Figure 5. This addition (a) is constructed of matching brick 
and attached by a recessed connector (b) to the 1914 apartment 
building (c). The design is compatible and the addition is 
smaller and subordinate to the historic building (d). 
Preserve Historic Character 
The goal, of course, is a new addition that preserves the 
building's historic character. The historic character of 
each building may be different, but the methodology of 
establishing it remains the same. Knowing the uses and 
functions a building has served over time will assist 
in 
making what is essentially a physical evaluation. But, 
while written and pictorial documentation can provide 
a framework for establishing the building's history, 
to a large extent the historic character is embodied in 
the physical aspects of the historic building itself­
shape, materials, features, craftsmanship, window 
arrangements, colors, setting and interiors. Thus, it 
is important to identify the historic character before 
making decisions about the extent-or limitations-of 
change that can be made. 

Figure 6. A new addition (left) is connected to the garage which separates it from the main block of the c. 1910 former florist shop (right). The 
addition is traditional in style, yet sufficiently restrained in design to distinguish it from the historic building. 
Figure 7. A vacant side lot was the only place a new stair tower could be built when this 
1903 theater was rehabilitated as a performing arts center. Constructed with matching 
materials, the stair tower is set back with a recessed connector and, despite its prominent 
location, it is clearly subordinate and differentiated from the historic theater. 
A new addition should always be subordinate to the 
historic building; it should not compete in size, scale 
or des ign with the historic building. An addition that 
bears no relationship to the proportions and massing 
of the historic building-in other words, one that 
overpowers the historic form and changes the scale­
will usually compromise the historic character as 
well. The appropriate size for a new addition varies 
from building to building; it could never be stated 
in a square or cubic footage ratio, but the historic 
building's existing proportions, site and setting can 
help set some general parameters for enlargement. 
Although even a small addition that is poorly 
designed can have an adverse impact, to some extent, 
there is a predictable relationship between the size of 
the historic resource and what is an appropriate size 
for a compatible new addition. 
Generally, constructing the new 
addition on a secondary side or rear 
elevation-in addition to material 
preservation-will also preserve the 
historic character. Not only will the 
addition be less visible, but because 
a secondary elevation is usually 
simpler and less distinctive, the 
addition will have less of a physical 
and visual impact on the historic 
building. Such placement will help to 
preserve the building's historic form 
and relationship to its site and setting. 
Historic landscape features, including 
distinctive grade variations, also 
need to be respected. Any new 
landscape features, including plants 
and trees, should be kept at a scale 
and density that will not interfere with 
understanding of the historic resource 
itself. A traditionally landscaped 
property should not be covered with large paved 
areas for parking which would drastically change the 
character of the site. 
Despite the fact that in most cases it is recommended 
that the new addition be attached to a secondary 
elevation, sometimes this is not possible. There simply 
may not be a secondary elevation-some important 
freestanding buildings have significant materials and 
features on all sides. A structure or group of structures 
together with its setting (for example, a college campus) 
may be of such significance that any new addition 
would not only damage materials, but alter the 
buildings' relationship to each other and the setting. 
An addition attached to a highly-visible elevation of a 
historic building can radically alter the historic form 
or obscure features such as a decorative cornice or 
window ornamentation. Similarly, an addition that fills 
5 

6 
Figure 8. The rehabilitation of this large, early-20th century warehouse (left) into affordable artists' lofts included the addition of a compatible glass 
and brick elevator/stair tower at the back (right). 
Figure 9. A simple, brick stair tower replaced two non-historic additions 
at the rear of this 1879 school building when it was rehabilitated as a 
women's and children's shelter. The addition is set back and it is not visible 
from the front of the school. 
Figure 10. The small size and the use of matching materials ensures that 
the new addition on the left is compatible with the historic Romanesque 
Revival-style building. 
In other instances, particularly in urban areas, 
there may be no other place but adjacent to the 
primary fac;ade to locate an addition needed for 
the new use. It may be possible to design a lateral 
addition attached on the side that is compatible 
with the historic building, even though it is a 
highly-visible new element. Certain types of 
historic structures, such as government buildings, 
metropolitan museums, churches or libraries, 
may be so massive in size that a relatively large­
scale addition may not compromise the historic 
character, provided, of course, the addition is 
smaller than the historic building. Occasionally, 
the visible size of an addition can be reduced by 
placing some of the spaces or support systems in 
a part of the structure that is underground. Large 
new additions may sometimes be successful if 
they read as a separate volume, rather than as an 
extension of the historic structure, although the 
scale, massing and proportions of the addition 
still need to be compatible with the historic 
building. However, similar expansion of smaller 
buildings would be dramatically out of scale. In 
summary, where any new addition is proposed, 
correctly assessing the relationship between 
actual size and relative scale will be a key to 
preserving the character of the historic building. 
in a planned void on a highly-visible elevation 
(such as a U-shaped plan or a feature such as a 
porch) will also alter the historic form and, as a 
result, change the historic character. Under these 
circumstances, an addition would have too much 
of a negative impact on the historic building and 
it would not meet the Standards. Such situations 
may best be handled by constructing a separate 
building in a location where it will not adversely 
affect the historic structure and its setting. 

There is no formula or prescription for 
designing a new addition that meets the 
Standards. A new addition to a historic 
building that meets the Standards can be any 
architectural style-traditional, contemporary 
or a simplified version of the historic 
building. However, there must be a balance 
between differentiation and compatibility in 
order to maintain the historic character and 
the identity of the building being enlarged. 
New additions that too closely resemble the 
historic building or are in extreme contrast to 
it fall short of this balance. 
Inherent in all of the 
guidance is the concept that an addition needs to 
be subordinate to the historic building. 
A new addition must preserve significant 
historic materials, features and form, and it 
must be compatible but differentiated from 
the historic building. To achieve this, it is 
necessary to carefully consider the placement 
or location of the new addition, and its size, 
scale and massing when planning a new 
addition. To preserve a property's historic 
character, a new addition must be visually 
distinguishable from the historic building. 
This does not mean that the addition and the 
historic building should be glaringly different 
in terms of design, materials and other visual 
qualities. Instead, the new addition should 
take its design cues from, but not copy, the 
historic building. 
Figure 11. The addition to this early-20th 
century Gothic Revival-style church provides 
space for offices, a great hall for gatherings 
and an accessible entrance (left). The stucco 
finish, metal roof, narrow gables and the 
Gothic-arched entrance complement the 
architecture of the historic church. Placing the 
addition in back where the ground slopes away 
ensures that it is subordinate and minimizes 
its impact on the church (below). 
A variety of design techniques can be effective ways to 
differentiate the new construction from the old, while 
respecting the architectural qualities and vocabulary of the 
historic building, including the following: 
• Incorporate a simple, recessed, small-scale hyphen 
to physically separate the old and the new volumes 
or set the addition back from the wall plane(s) of the 
historic building. 
• Avoid designs that unify the two volumes into 
a single architectural whole. The new addition 
may include simplified architectural features that 
reflect, but do not duplicate, similar features on the 
historic building. This approach will not impair 
the existing building's historic character as long 
as the new structure is subordinate in size and 
clearly differentiated and distinguishable so that the 
identity of the historic structure is not lost in a new 
and larger composition. The historic building must 
be clearly identifiable and its physical integrity must 
not be compromised by the new addition. 
7 
Design Guidance for Compatible 
New Additions to Historic Buildings 

8 
• Use building materials in the same color range 
or value as those of the historic building. 
The materials need not be the same as those 
on the historic building, but they should be 
harmonious; they should not be so different 
that they stand out or distract from the 
historic building. (Even clear glass can be 
as prominent as a less transparent material. 
Generally, glass may be most appropriate for 
small-scale additions, such as an entrance on a 
secondary elevation or a connector between an 
addition and the historic building.) 
• Base the size, rhythm and alignment of the 
new addition's window and door openings on 
those of the historic building. 
• Respect the architectural expression of the 
historic building type. For example, an 
addition to an institutional building should 
maintain the architectural character associated 
with this building type rather than using 
details and elements typical of residential or 
other building types. 
These techniques are merely examples of ways to 
differentiate a new addition from the historic building 
while ensuring that the addition is compatible with 
it. Other ways of differentiating a new addition from 
the historic building may be used as long as they 
maintain the primacy of the historic building. Working 
within these basic principles still allows for a broad 
range of architectural expression that can range from 
stylistic similarity to contemporary distinction. The 
recommended design approach for an addition is one 
that neither copies the historic building exactly nor 
stands in stark contrast to it. 
Figure 12. This 1954 synagogue (left) is accessed through a monumental entrance to the right. The new education wing (Jar right) added to it features 
the same vertical elements and color and, even though it is quite large, its smaller scale and height ensure that it is secondary to the historic resource. 
Figure 13. A glass and metal structure was constructed in the 
courtyard as a restaurant when this 1839 building was converted 
to a hotel. Although such an addition might not be appropriate in 
a more public location, it is compatible here in the courtyard of this 
historic building. 
Figure 14. This glass addition was erected at the back of an 1895 
former brewery during rehabilitation to provide another entrance. 
The addition is compatible with the plain character of this 
secondary elevation. 

Revising an Incompatible Design for a New Addition to Meet the Standards 
·il-1---~--l-il--l-i---E 
~--===■ 1-~.:=11·-- ■--■-
Figure 15. The rehabilitation of a c. 1930 high school auditorium for a clinic and offices proposed two additions: a one-story entrance and 
reception area on this elevation (a); and a four-story elevator and stair tower on another side (b). The gabled entrance (c) first proposed was not 
compatible with the flat-roofed auditorium and the design of the proposed stair tower (d) was also incompatible and overwhelmed the historic 
building. The designs were revised (e-f) resulting in new additions that meet the Standards (g-h). 
9 

10 
Incompatible New Additions to Historic Buildings 
New Addition 
Figure 16. The proposal to add three row houses to the rear ell of this early-19th century 
residential property doubles its size a11d does not meet the Standards .. 
Figure 17. The small addition on the left is 
starkly different and it is not compatible with 
the eclectic, late-19th century house. 
Figure 18. The expansion 
of a one-and one-half story 
historic bungalow (left) 
with a large two-story rear 
addition (right) has greatly 
altered and obscured its 
distinctive shape and form. 
Figure 19. The upper two floors of this early-20th century 
office building were part of the original design, but were 
not built. During rehabilitation, the two stories were finally 
constructed. This treatment does not meet the Standards 
because the addition has given the building an appearance it 
never had historically. 
Figure 20. The height, as 
well as the design, of these 
two-story rooftop additions 
overwhelms the two-story 
and the one-story, low-rise 
historic buildings. 

New Addition 
New Additions in Densely-Built 
Environments 
In built-up urban areas, locating a new 
addition on a less visible side or rear 
elevation may not be possible simply 
because there is no available space. In this 
instance, there may be alternative ways to 
help preserve the historic character. One 
approach when connecting a new addition 
to a historic building on a primary elevation 
is to use a hyphen to separate them. A 
subtle variation in material, detailing 
and color may also provide the degree of 
differentiation necessary to avoid changing 
the essential proportions and character of 
the historic building. 
A densely-built neighborhood such as 
a downtown commercial core offers a 
particular opportunity to design an addition 
that will have a minimal impact on the 
historic building. Often the site for such 
an addition is a vacant lot where another 
building formerly stood. Treating the 
addition as a separate or infill building 
may be the best approach when designing 
an addition that will have the least impact 
on the historic building and the district. In 
these instances there may be no need for a 
direct visual link to the historic building. 
Height and setback from the street should 
generally be consistent with those of the 
historic building and other surrounding 
buildings in the district. Thus, in most 
urban commercial areas the addition 
should not be set back from the far;ade of 
the historic building. A tight urban setting 
may sometimes even accommodate a larger 
addition if the primary elevation is designed 
to give the appearance of being several 
buildings by breaking up the facade into 
elements that are consistent with the scale of 
the historic building and adjacent buildings. 
Figure 21. Both wings of this historic L-shaped building (top), which 
fronts on two city streets, adjoined vacant lots. A two-story addition was 
constructed on one lot (above, left) and a six-story addition was built on 
the other (above, right). Like the historic building, which has two different 
facades, the compatible new additions are also different and appear to be 
separate structures rather than part of the historic building. 
Figure 22. The proposed new addition is compatible with the historic buildings that remain on the block. 
Its design with multiple storefronts helps break up the mass. 
11 

12 
Rooftop Additions 
The guidance provided on designing a compatible new 
addition to a historic building applies equally to new 
rooftop additions. A rooftop addition should preserve 
the character of a historic building by preserving historic 
materials, features and form; and it should be compatible 
but differentiated from the historic building. 
However, there are several other design principles that 
apply specifically to rooftop additions. Generally, a 
rooftop addition should not be more than one story in 
height to minimize its visibility and its impact on the 
proportion and profile of the historic building. A rooftop 
addition should almost always be set back at least one full 
bay from the primary elevation of the building, as well as 
from the other elevations if the building is free-standing or 
highly visible. 
It is difficult, if not impossible, to minimize the impact 
of adding an entire new floor to relatively low buildings, 
such as small-scale residential or commercial structures, 
even if the new addition is set back from the plane of 
the fac;ade. Constructing another floor on top of a small, 
one, two or three-story building is seldom appropriate 
for buildings of this size as it would measurably alter 
the building's proportions and profile, and negatively 
impact its historic character. On the other hand, a rooftop 
addition on an eight-story building, for example, in a 
historic district consisting primarily of tall buildings 
might not affect the historic character because the new 
construction may blend in with the surrounding buildings 
and be only minimally visible within the district. A 
rooftop addition in a densely-built urban area is more 
likely to be compatible on a building that is adjacent to 
similarly-sized or taller buildings. 
A number of methods may be used to help evaluate the 
effect of a proposed rooftop addition on a historic building 
and district, including pedestrian sight lines, three­
dimensional schematics and computer-generated design. 
However, drawings generally do not provide a true 
"picture" of the appearance and visibility of a proposed 
rooftop addition. For this reason, it is often necessary to 
construct a rough, temporary, full-size or skeletal mock up 
of a portion of the proposed addition, which can then be 
photographed and evaluated from critical vantage points 
on surrounding streets. 
Figure 23. Colored flags marking the location of a proposed penthouse 
addition (a) were placed on the roof to help evaluate the impact and 
visibility of an addition planned for this historic furniture store (b). 
Based on this evaluation, the addition was constructed as proposed. 
It is minimally visible and compatible with the 1912 structure (c). 
The tall parapet wall conceals the addition from the street below (d). 

Figure 24. How to Evaluate a Proposed Rooftop Addition. 
A sight-line study (above) only factors in views from directly across the 
street, which can be very restrictive and does not illustrate the full effect 
of an addition from other public rights of way. A mock up (above, right) 
or a mock up enhanced by a computer-generated rendering (below, 
right) is essential to evaluate the impact of a proposed rooftop addition 
on the historic building. 
Figure 25. It was possible to add a compatible, three-story, 
penthouse addition to the roof of this five-story, historic bank 
building because the addition is set far back, it is surrounded 
by taller buildings and a deep parapet conceals almost all of the 
addition from below. 
Figure 26. A rooftop addition 
would have negatively 
impacted the character of the 
primary facade (right) of this 
mid-19th century,four-story 
structure and the low-rise 
historic district. However, a 
third floor was successfully 
added on the two-story rear 
portion (below) of the same 
building with little impact to 
the building or the district 
because it blends in with the 
height of the adjacent building. 
13 

14 
Figure 27. Although the new brick stair/elevator tower (left) is not visible from the front (right), it is on a prominent side elevation of this 1890 stone 
bank. The compatible addition is set back and does not compete with the historic building. Photos: Chadd Gossmann, Aurora Photography, LLC. 
Designing a New Exterior Addition to a Historic Building 
This guidance should be applied to help in designing 
a compatible new addition that that will meet the 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation: 
• A new addition should be simple and 
unobtrusive in design, and should be 
distinguished from the historic building- a 
recessed connector can help to differentiate the 
new from the old. 
• A new addition should not be highly visible from 
the public right of way; a rear or other secondary 
elevation is usually the best location for a new 
addition. 
• The construction materials and the color of the 
new addition should be harmonious with the 
historic building materials. 
• The new addition should be smaller than the 
historic building-it should be subordinate 
in 
both size and design to the historic building. 
The same guidance should be applied when 
designing a compatible rooftop addition, plus 
the following: 
• A rooftop addition is generally not appropriate 
for a one, two or three-story building-and 
often is not appropriate for taller buildings. 
• A rooftop addition should be minimally visible. 
• Generally, a rooftop addition must be set back 
at least one full bay from the primary elevation 
of the building, as well as from the other 
elevations if the building is freestanding or 
highly visible. 
• Generally, a rooftop addition should not be 
more than one story in height. 
• Generally, a rooftop addition is more likely to 
be compatible on a building that is adjacent to 
similarly-sized or taller buildings. 
Figure 28. A small addition 
(left) was constructed when 
this 1880s train station was 
converted for office use. The 
paired doors with transoms 
and arched windows on the 
compatible addition reflect, but 
do not replicate, the historic 
building (right). 

Figure 29. This simple 
glass and brick entrance 
(left) added to a secondary
elevation of a 1920s 
school building (right) 
is compatible with the 
original structure. 
Summary 
Because a new exterior addition to a historic building can damage or destroy significant materials and can change the 
building's character, an addition should be considered only after it has been determined that the new use cannot be 
met by altering non-significant, or secondary, interior spaces. If the new use cannot be met in this way, then an attached 
addition may be an acceptable alternative if carefully planned and designed. A new addition to a historic building should 
be constructed in a manner that preserves significant materials, features and form, and preserves the building's historic 
character. Finally, an addition should be differentiated from the historic building so that the new work is compatible 
with-and does not detract from -the historic building, and cannot itself be confused as historic. 
Additional Reading 
Byard, Paul Spencer. The Architecture of New Additions: Design 
and Regulation. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 1998. 
Day, Steven, AIA. "Modernism Meets History: New 
Additions to Historic Structures." Preservation Seattle [Historic 
Seattle's online monthly preservation magazine.] May 2003 . 
www.historicseattle.org/preserva ti on sea ttle/pub licpolicy/ 
defaultmay2.htm. 
lllcentives! A Guide to the Federal Historic Preservation Tax 
Incentives Program for Income-Producing Properties. "Avoiding 
Incompatible Treatments: New Additions & Rooftop 
Additions." Technical Preservation Services Branch, National 
Park Service. Online at www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps/. 
Interpreting the Standards Bulletins (ITS). Technical Preservation 
Services Branch, National Park Service. Online at 
www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps/. 
New Additions to Historic Buildings. Technical Preservation 
Services Branch, National Park Service . Online at www.nps. 
gov/history/hps/tps/. 
O'Connell, Kim A. "Making Connections." Traditional Building. 
March/April 2004. (Vol. 17, No. 2), pp. 12-15. 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and 
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, 
Preservation Assistance Division, rev . 1990. 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation & 
Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
(Authors: W. Brown Morton, III, Gary L. Hume, Kay D. Weeks, 
and H. Ward Jandl. Project Directors: Anne E. Grimmer 
and Kay D. Weeks.) Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
the Interior, National Park Service, Preservation Assistance 
Division, 1992. Online at www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps/. 
Semes, Steven W. "Dilierentiated and Compatible: The 
Secretary's Standards revisited." Traditional Building. February 
2009. (Vol. 22, No. 1), pp . 20-23. 
Semes, Steven W. The Future of the Past: A Conservation Ethic for 
Architecture, Urbanism, and Historic Preservation. (In association 
with The Institute of Classical Architecture and Classical 
America.) New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2009. 
Figure 30. The small addition on the right of this late-19th century 
commercial structure is clearly secondary and compatible in size, 
materials and design with the historic building. 
15 

16 
Figure 31. An elevator/stair tower 
was added at the back of this 
Richardsonian Romanesque-style 
theater when it was rehabilitated. 
Rough-cut stone and simple 
cut-out openings ensure that 
the addition is compatible and 
subordinate to the historic building. 
Photo: Chuck Liddy, AJA. 
Acknowledgements 
Anne E. Grimmer, Senior Architectural Historian, Technical Preservation Services Branch, National Park Service, 
revised Preservation Brief 14, written by Kay D. Weeks and first published in 1986. The revised Brief features all new 
illustrations and contains expanded and updated design guidance on the subject of new additions that has been 
developed by the Technical Preservation Services Branch since the original publication of the Brief. Several individuals 
generously contributed their time and expertise to review the revision of this Preservation Brief, including: Sharon 
C. Park, FAIA, Chief, Architectural History and Historic Preservation, Smithsonian Institution; Elizabeth Tune and 
Karen Brandt, Department of Historic Resources, Commonwealth of Virginia; and Phillip Wisley and David Ferro, 
Division of Historical Resources, Florida Department of State. The Technical Preservation Services professional staff, in 
particular Michael J . Auer, Jo Ellen Hensley, Gary Sachau and Rebecca Shiffer, also provided important guidance in the 
development of this publication. All illustrations are from National Park Service files unless otherwise credited. Front 
cover image: Detail of new addition shown in Figure 4. Photo: © Maxwell MacKenzie. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which 
directs the Secretary of the Interior to develop and make available information concerning historic properties. The 
Technical Preservation Services Branch, National Park Service, prepares standards, guidelines and other educational 
materials on responsible historic preservation treatments for a broad public audience. Additional information 
about the programs of Technical Preservation Services is available on the website at www.nps.gov/history/hps/tps. 
Comments about this publication should be addressed to: Charles E. Fisher, Technical Preservation Publications 
Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services-2255, National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Washington, DC 
20240. This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the 
author and the National Park Service are appreciated. 
ISBN: 978-0-16-085869-7 
U.S. Government Printing Office Stock Number: 024-005-01280-0 August2010 