45 
PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Preserving Historic Wood Porches
Aleca Sullivan and John Leeke 
National Park Service 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Few architectural features evoke more romantic notions 
or do more to define a building 's historic character than 
the American porch. The size, style, detailing, and 
location of a porch can tell volumes about the age and 
use of a building. Each component, from handrail or 
baluster to column or post, enhances the architectural 
character of the porch. Alter or remove the porch and 
a historic building or streetscape can lose its visual 
integrity and historic authenticity (Fig 1). 
Functionally, a porch protects an entrance from the 
weather. Yet open porches are constantly exposed 
to sun, snow, rain, and foot traffic, and thus subject 
to deterioration, perhaps more than other parts of a 
building. Wood porches are particularly vulnerable. 
Deferred maintenance and neglect account for the 
decay and loss of countless numbers of historic porches 
each year. Deterioration from moisture and resultant 
wood rot, and damage caused by wood-eating insects 
are common problems that, when left unaddressed 
too long, can lead to the loss of significant historic 
fabric. Inappropriate repairs or insensitive alterations, 
such as the enclosure of a front porch, can be equally 
destructive and negatively affect the porch's appearance. 
All these things can alter a building's historic character. 
To preserve the character of the porch, as well as the 
historic building itself, it is essential to plan carefully 
before undertaking any work on a historic porch. 
This Preservation Brief provides guidance for the 
everyday care of wood porches on older buildings. 
It focuses primarily on the maintenance and repair 
of wood porches, but acknowledges other, often 
challenging, work as well. This publication provides 
a brief history of the American porch and identifies 
its basic structural and decorative elements. 
It outlines how to assess the condition of 
a wood porch, how much work may be 
needed, and how to develop a specific scope 
of work. Detailed guidance on each level of 
work is provided, beginning with routine 
maintenance, followed by general repairs for 
various porch components, and concluding 
with replacement of parts that are beyond 
repair. Recommendations are provided for 
work that may require professional assistance. 
Although the Brief primarily addresses 
residential buildings, much of the information 
can be applied to wood porches on any 
structure. 
Evolution of the Porch 
Figure 1. Distinctive yet different, these front porches are important features along 
the street. The rhythm would be diminished if the front porch from one of the houses 
was dramatically altered or removed. Photo: Aleca Sullivan. 
In colonial America, buildings in the northern 
colonies tended to echo British precedents 
with small gable-roofed extensions to protect 
main entrances . Whether open or enclosed, 
these extensions were called 
porches (from 
1 

2 
Figure 2. Porches not only help define the architectural character of 
a building but also serve as living areas. They can be designed to 
take advantage of surrounding views. Cedar Grove, the home of the 
nineteenth-century landscape painter Thomas Cole, has an L-shaped 
veranda on the front and a two-story porch 011 the rear, providing an 
enviable view of the Catskill Mountains. Photo: Marilyn Kaplan. 
Medieval English and the French word porche, which 
stems from the Latin, porticus). Also known as porticos 
when supported by columns, these covered entrances 
were sometimes designed to respect classical order and 
details, especially on more stylish buildings. Hooded 
doors or small covered entryways flanked by benches, 
often called 
stoops (from the Dutch stoep for step) that 
served as short covered transitions to and from the 
outdoors were common features, especially in New York 
and the mid-Atlantic colonies. 
During the late 1700s and early 1800s as longer shed­
roofed porches became more common, they were 
typically called piazzas, as they were then called in 
England. This term, still popular in some areas of North 
America, is adapted from the Italian word for open 
space or plaza. An alternate term for a long open porch, 
veranda, reflects British colonial design influence from 
the Indian sub-continent. 
In French colonial areas, such as the Louisiana Territory, 
houses were often built with broad roofs extending well 
beyond the exterior walls to form surrounding porches, 
known as galleries. Porches were also important 
features of Spanish colonial buildings. In California, 
for example, many adobe ranches featured a portal 
with the roof supported by wooden posts. African 
and Caribbean influences can also be found in North 
American porch traditions. 
By the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, 
porches became more common in larger, wealthier areas 
such as Philadelphia, Boston and Charleston. In both 
the North and the South, formal colonnades with tall 
columns dressed in classical orders were sometimes 
added to help dignify public buildings, hotels, and 
mansions. This trend continued through the 1830s 
and 1840s, as the Greek Revival became the dominant 
architectural style in many areas of North America . 
The social role of porches as a transition space between 
indoors and outdoors and as a link between private and 
public realms evolved during the 1800s. By offering 
grand entrances and sheltered landings with views of 
the surroundings, prominent porches became expected 
features of inns, hotels and resort spas, where they could 
serve as promenades, social gathering spots, and refuges 
for more private retreats. Porches were also added to 
private homes to serve many of these same functions 
(Fig 2). As the country began to thrive and expand, 
porches became more than just covered enh"ances or 
ceremonial features; they became an integral part of 
domestic social life 
Some of the most significant factors that aided 
this shift were America's industrialization and 
later suburbanization. As improvements to mass 
production methods helped spur industrial growth, 
many Americans had more money to spend and more 
leisure time. Meanwhile a growing middle class was 
moving to new suburban neighborhoods. Inspired by 
the pattern books of Andrew Downing and George 
Woodward and the published designs of such architects 
as Alexander Jackson Davis and Calvert Vaux, the 
homes of these mid-1800s suburban neighborhoods 
were typically ornamented by elaborate porches dressed 
with fancy millwork. By this time, millwork catalogues 
and builders' pattern books offered a wide variety of 
designs for porch parts. With mass production, these 
fancy brackets and other ornamentation became less 
expensive, making it easier and more affordable to 
construct decorative porches (Fig 3). With mechanized 
wood turning lathes, the cost of posts, balusters and 
decorative spindle work also decreased to a level 
affordable by many. Adding a porch with wood 
ornamentation could enhance even the smallest 
and simplest of houses. Even older homes could be 
modernized with a fancy porch addition, stylized to 
the latest fashion trends. Such changes culminated in 
the large, highly decorated wrap-around porches of the 
Queen Anne style. 
The second half of the nineteenth century was the golden 
era of porches. The social role of the porch increased as 
it evolved into an outdoor parlor, a true extension of the 
house into the landscape. Often partially screened by 
shrubs, porches could provide occupants with discreet 
opportunities for social contacts that might otherwise be 
difficult to achieve in an age obsessed with manners and 
proprieties. For many, sitting on the porch became an 
important part of their daily routine. Perhaps President 
Rutherford B. Hayes best summed up the love that 
Victorian-era Americans felt towards their porches when 
he recorded in his journal in 1873: "The best part of the 
present house is the veranda. But I would enlarge it. I 
want a veranda with a house attached." 
By the early twentieth century, the hygiene movement, 
which stressed that access to fresh air could help prevent 
or remedy such diseases as tuberculosis, contributed to 
the development and proliferation of the sleeping porch. 

These porches were usually located on the second 
floor next to bedrooms. This era also saw the rise in 
use of insect screening on porches to guard against the 
discomfort of mosquitoes and the diseases they spread, 
such as yellow fever and malaria. 
While innovations fostered the proliferation of porches 
in the nineteenth century, new inventions helped lead 
to its decline in the twentieth. As the automobile 
boom of the early twentieth century made it easier for 
people to get out of the house for entertainment and 
relaxation, porches began to lose popularity, especially 
as architectural styles and social attitudes changed . With 
the telephone, neighbors and friends could chat without 
personally meeting. And housing styles popularized 
in the construction boom after World War II often 
omitted front porches all together as backyard patios 
became the focus of private outdoor activities. Finally 
in the mid-twentieth century the broad availability of 
air conditioning and television enticed many people to 
stay inside at night and brought the golden era of the 
American porch to an end. 
Figure 3. Throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries, millwork catalogues offered a wide variety of designs for 
porch parts, including columns, newels, balusters, spindles and 
brackets. As extolled in the Cedar Rapid Sash & Door Company's 
Standards Design Book, stock parts made embellishments to porches 
affordable both for new construction and "updating" existing homes. 
Courtesy of Charles Fisher. 
Understanding the History and Significance 
of a Porch 
In preserving historic buildings, it is important to 
understand the history and evolution of a particular 
structure and what features contribute to its historic 
character. This is especially applicable when working 
with historic porches since they usually are prominent 
features, significant to the character of a building. 
Answers to the following questions will help establish 
the significance of a porch. 
What has the porch looked like in the past? 
Early photographs, insurance maps, or tax records can 
provide useful information. These may be found at city 
or county offices, historical societies, libraries or even 
from former owners or neighbors. Such documents may 
indicate the footprint of the building or show long-lost 
details of the building's appearance. Physical evidence 
of historic porch footings may exist. Paint shadows of 
a former roofline or moldings can provide clues about 
details now missing . Old porch parts may have been 
"stored " under the deck during past repairs. 
What, if any, changes have taken place to the historic 
porch over the years? On many porches elements such 
as columns, balusters, and finish details correspond with 
the design and detailing on the rest of the house. With 
other porches, the style of these features may differ from 
the rest of the building, but may reflect an important 
chapter in its history. Sometimes, parts of porches 
may have been lost due to neglect or remodeling. 
Questions about what historic fabric remains, what has 
been altered over time, and whether earlier changes 
are now an integral part of the historic character 
should be resolved before planning major porch work. 
Determining the historical evolution of the house may 
require both physical and archival research and in some 
cases the professional eye of an architectural historian. 
What are the character defining features of the porch? 
The open qualities are one of the key features of most 
historic porches. Overall size, shape and design are 
obviously important components as well. There are 
numerous other contributing features which may exist, 
including the shape of the porch roof, the way a large 
porch is divided into distinct bays as with columns, the 
nature of the supporting foundation, the style and size 
of columns and balustrade, and whether the porch is 
raised or largely at grade. The simplicity of a porch or 
its richness in detail will also help define it. Materials 
are usually important as well, not just the wood features, 
but also whether other materials exist such as masonry 
columns and steps (Fig 4). 
How does the porch contribute to the building's 
overall appearance? The size and location of a porch 
and how much of the historic features survive will help 
define its significance. A highly ornate porch across 
much of the front facade may be the most distinctive 
3 

e 
Drawing courtesy of Thomson Education Direct. 
k 
4 
a - Pier, penetrates ground, supports floor structural 
system and columns 
b - Fascia covering floor framing 
c - Floor (or deck) 
d - Bed Molding covering joint between fascia and floor 
e - Column supporting entablature above 
Entablature (f, g, h) 
f - Architrave of entablature 
g - Frieze of entablature 
h - Cornice of entablature 
Roof Railing (i, j, k, 1) 
i - Newel (or Pedestal ) of roof railing 
j - Balusters of balustrade 
k - Top rail of balustrade 
1 - Bottom rail of balu strade 
Balustrade around floor (m, n, o) 
m - Top rail of balustrade 
n - Balusters of balustrade 
o - Bottom rail of balustrade 
Structural system of deck (p, q, r) 
p - Girder rests on piers and ledgers , support joists 
q - Ledger fastened to house sill, supports girder 
r - Joist fastened to girder, supports floor 
Roof Structural System (s, t, u) 
s - Beams inside the entablature span from column to 
column, support plate 
t - Plate of the entablature rests on beams, supports 
roof rafters and ceiling beams 
u - Rafter of the roof structural system 
The Anatomy of a Porch 

feature of the entire house, while a small simple 
porch on an otherwise plain cottage may be equally 
significant. The architectural style of a porch may 
relate to the building and may help define its character. 
Sometimes a later style porch may have been added to a 
building or may have replaced an earlier porch. In such 
cases, the later porch may have acquired importance in 
its own right. On the other hand, a later porch may be 
of such poor quality that it detracts from the building's 
historic character. Because porches are so diverse in 
terms of style, size, shape and detail, their significance 
should be assessed on a case-by-case basis with an 
understanding of the overall importance and evolution 
of the building. 
Assessing the Condition 
Before undertaking most repairs, it is important to 
assess the condition of the porch. The assessment 
is greatly facilitated if the porch has been regularly 
maintained and a record of past work is available. 
In most cases, however, a condition survey must 
rely almost exclusively on the physical examination 
of the porch, documenting the findings with notes, 
photographs or sketches. 
Many older porches were constructed using good 
construction practices and materials. As a result, 
porches that are over 100 years old are not uncommon. 
Most porch deterioration can be attributed to the lack 
of proper maintenance. Important questions to address 
in assessing the condition of the porch include the 
following: 
How is the porch constructed? A porch is rarely an 
independent, unattached structure. It may, however, 
have its own foundation, attached to the house only 
along the deck and the roof. Alternatively, it may be 
an included or engaged porch that is integrated with 
the actual structure of the house. The relationship 
between the porch and the house is important. If 
the outer support posts are decayed or if foundation 
piers are sinking, the roof structure may be pulling 
away from the house. Many porch decks are fastened 
to the main building on a ledger, a horizontal board 
along the house's foundation. A decaying ledger may 
compromise the structural integrity of the porch and 
can represent a major safety issue. 
Are the foundation and structural members of the 
deck sound and providing adequate support for 
the deck, posts and roof above? The porch structure 
needs to be sound at every level. Therefore, a visual 
inspection of the underside of the porch is necessary 
to determine its condition. Major cracks in structural 
members, failed joints, significant wood rot, or evidence 
of widespread insect infestations (termites, carpenter 
ants or powder post beetles, for example) are usually 
signs of serious structural damage. Such conditions 
may require consultation with a professional architect, 
Figure 4. Celebrating the 4th o!July in 1912, this gathering of 
family and friends reflects the popularity of the porch as a social 
gathering place. While not overly ornate, each detail of the porch 
from the roof balustrade to the turned columns to the simple lattice 
work facing the deck contributes to its character, creating in effect 
the dominant architectural feature of the building. Photo: © Utah 
State Historical Society 
engineer or building contractor familiar with old 
buildings. For an adequate assessment, it may be 
necessary to remove facing boards to check for potential 
decay in the structural sill behind (Fig 5). 
What is the condition of the porch? Porch foundations 
may 
be a continuous wall of masonry, a series of 
masonry or wood piers or metal pipes, or a combination 
of these. Missing sections of the foundation, crumbling 
masonry mortar joints, or areas where the sill or 
joists no longer fully rests on the foundation may 
represent serious deficiencies. What appear to be deep 
foundation footings may only be stones or cement 
blocks sitting on top of the ground. The footings must 
be stable enough to adequately support the porch 
in its current or intended use. The smell of mold or 
appearance of fungal growth on wood beneath the 
porch is an indication of deficient air circulation and 
that conditions exist for wood decay. Recent changes 
that can contribute to deterioration should be identified 
for correction, such as a clothes dryer vent dumping 
warm moist air underneath the deck. The enclosure of 
original air vents in crawl spaces or the boarding up of 
latticework between piers are other changes that will 
usually promote an unwanted moist environment. 
Are the porch posts providing adequate support? 
Posts, pillars or columns usually help support the porch 
roof or an upper deck. Establishing what the posts 
5 

6 
Figure 5. Even historic porches that appear to be in total disrepair may be repairable. While the roof needed replacement, much of this porch was 
repaired, including such features as the decorative columns, ornamental brackets, and balustrade. Photos: John Leeke. 
are made of and how they are constructed will aid in 
understanding how they function and may deteriorate 
over time (Fig.6). Although the posts on a wood porch 
are commonly made of wood, they may be of masonry 
or metal or a combination of materials. Large round 
columns usually are made of wood staves similar to the 
way barrels are constructed; smaller diameter columns 
may be solid. A sag in the deck below or a faltering 
foundation can impact the supporting role of a column 
or post above. Wood columns and posts are prone to 
water seeping into open joints, particularly in the base 
and the lower end of the shaft. It is not uncommon 
to find that older columns have had patches and 
replacement bases. 
Is the roofing and drainage system keeping the water 
away from the porch? Porches were designed to shed 
water. This means water will move away both from 
the building and the porch and not pond and saturate 
the wood. Continuously high moisture levels promote 
fungal growth that eventually causes wood to decay. 
Peeling paint on ceiling boards in a specific location 
is a sign of a possible roof leak. Clogged or missing 
downspouts and gutters can cause erosion at the 
foundation and can contribute to reverse-grade draining 
that is directing water under the porch instead of into 
the yard. Inadequately sloped porch floors can result 
in improper drainage and promote deterioration as 
exhibited, for example, by cupping floorboards. 
What is the flooring condition? The porch component 
most subject to decay is the flooring. Often decay 
starts at the exposed ends of the boards or where 
cracks, checks or open joints have occurred and are 
exposed to the weather. Flooring should be checked 
frequently for peeling paint, rotted wood, and for loose, 
cupping or splintery boards. Where water is ponding, 
there is insufficient slope away from the building, a 
condition that should be corrected. Floor deterioration 
can also start in unlikely places such as the result of 
frequent hose washing to remove dirt or the placement 
of plant stands directly on the floor without proper 
moisture barriers. Firewood stored on a porch may 
trap moisture on the floor and harbor active insect 
infestation that can be ruinous to a wood porch. Thick 
floor mats and carpeting also may trap moisture, 
leading to premature decay. 
Is there evidence of general wood decay? 
Wood deterioration may take different forms such 
as fungal decay, insect infestation or even sunlight 
degradation of exposed unfinished wood. Decay may 
be present where two wood surfaces meet and are not 
adequately protected from water, such as along open 
joints or behind moldings. Dark streaks, discoloration, 
and widespread peeling paint on a finished ceiling 
suggest excessive moisture or water leakage. 
It may be 
necessary to remove several finished boards to properly 
identify the cause of the problem and to insure damage 
has not extended to structural members behind. Trails of 
carpenter ants are another sign of potential decay since 
they will infest moist decaying wood. Where inadequate 
painting has left wood exposed for a long time, damage 
to the wood surface from light itself will occur, typically 
indicated by wood discoloration. Without sanding or 
scraping back to a sound wood surface, repainting will 
result in premature failure of the paint film. 
Figure 6. A traditional way to extend the life of porch posts was to 
place posts on metal feet, thereby providing a separation between the 
wood post and wood deck. This helped to prevent the wood post from 
rotting at the base. Early post feet were simple iron bars bent unto a 
stirrup shape. By the late nineteenth century manufactured cast-iron 
feet were common, consisting of a pair of disks separated by a short 
pipe. Post feet are still available today. Courtesy of Old-House 
Journal/Brian McNeil. 

Are there open cracks or joints in the woodwork? 
Tightly sealed connections keep water out. Where 
individual boards come together, cracks in 
woodwork 
and joints can eventually become a major problem 
(Fig.7). Cracks are primarily caused by movement and 
water penetration. Movement of structural members 
beneath the finished woodwork can shift the position 
of individual boards and trim, breaking open the 
thin coating of paint over joints. This condition is 
common on porches with shallow foundations that are 
subject either to annual winter frost heaving or where 
soil conditions undergo major seasonal changes in 
moisture content. Changes in the moisture content of 
the wood itself due to repeated wetting and drying or 
changes in seasonal humidity can also cause noticeable 
expansion and shrinkage across the width of a board. 
This provides opportunities for water to penetrate 
unprotected areas. 
Does peeling paint indicate deeper problems? 
An unbroken layer of paint covering all wood surfaces is 
the first line of defense against moisture causing decay. 
Over time, even hairline paint cracks can allow water 
to penetrate, causing paint to peel down to bare wood. 
Such peeling occurs near breaks in the film, at opened 
joints, or where the paint has been scratched or scraped. 
Peeling can also occur over large areas where there is 
high moisture and insufficient ventilation. Areas of 
particular concern include the crawl space beneath the 
porch deck, inside columns that lack ventilation, and 
in a roof structure that has a finished ceiling and lacks 
ventilation. 
If heavy paint build-up exists on columns, 
floors and trim, moisture can be trapped within the 
wood, resulting in the loss of paint adhesions and 
eventual wood decay. 
Are trees, shrubbery and flowerbeds threatening the 
porch? Shade trees can make the porch a cool oasis, 
but the branches of a nearby tree rubbing on the roof, 
gutters or wood trim often will cause damage. Tree roots 
may destabilize porch foundations or supports. Bushes 
growing against the porch and not trimmed back on a 
regular basis may block wood porch components from 
drying breezes, thereby letting moisture build up in the 
woodwork. Flowerbeds and mulch around the porch 
that are not properly sloped downward in a grade away 
from the house will promote moisture problems. 
Defining the Scope of Work 
Once the historical and physical assessments are 
complete, it is important to define the scope of work. 
How much and what kind of work will need to be 
done to make the porch structurally sound while 
preserving its historic character, or to recover its historic 
appearance 
if portions are extensively deteriorated, 
altered or missing? Any part of the porch that defines 
its historic character should be repaired or replaced 
to match. Since the porch may display varied levels 
of deterioration, the spectrum of work in one project 
Figure 7. Common problems with porches that can contribute to 
serious wood decay include cracks in woodwork and joints that have 
opened up. Both provide an easy path for water seepage. Trapped 
moisture can foster peeling paint, wood decay and insect infestation. 
Open joints and cracks should be checked for evidence of more serious 
decay and marked for caulking or repair. Photo: John Leeke. 
can include maintenance, repair, and replacement. 
When laying out the scope of work for the project, each 
individual component and decorative element of the 
porch should be identified, and linked with the work 
needed for that item. 
Undertaking the Work 
The highlighted work approaches in this section are 
based on The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the 
Treatment of Historic Properties and the Accompanying 
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. The 
Standards and Guidelines provide a sound philosophical 
and practical framework for achieving the highest 
retention of historic materials and character possible. 
Thus, the familiar hierarchy is applied: maintain, repair, 
and then replace only if necessary. Contemporary 
alterations are discussed in a separate section. 
Preservation and Maintenance 
There are a variety of tasks that can be done on a regular 
basis to extend the life of a porch. In addition, a visual 
inspection of the porch should be made every spring 
and fall to determine if more in-depth repairs 
are necessary. Fortunately, ongoing maintenance 
significantly reduces both the need and cost for later 
repair work and represents good preservation practice. 
When properly maintained, a well-constructed porch 
can last for decades. 
Routine Cleaning and Other Surface Work 
Since many porches are essentially another living space, 
7 

8 
extending housekeeping to this space makes practical 
sense. Regular maintenance includes sweeping the 
wood porch decking, and, if needed, an occasional 
damp mopping. Removing dirt and leaves by sweeping 
is preferable to frequent hosing off the deck with 
water. The latter can saturate the woodwork , thereby 
promoting decay. Frequent sweeping will reduce the 
accumulation of abrasive materials, such as dirt and 
sand. While visually pleasing to some, vines and plants 
should be kept trimmed away and not be trained to 
grow onto or allowed to grow beneath porches. Plants 
and vines unfortunately reduce ventilation, promote 
a moist environment for insects and decay, accelerate 
open wood joints and impede cyclical maintenance . As 
an alternative, traditional freestanding trellises can be 
used to support plant growth away from the porch. 
There are certain precautions that are recommended 
for wood floors. Rubber mats, rugs or indoor/outdoor 
carpeting can trap moisture and condensation on their 
underneath side and should not be used on a wooden 
porch floor. Keeping flower pots up off the wooden 
deck will help prevent moisture buildup and decayed 
spots - wood, clay or metal "trivets" that hold the 
pots an inch or more off the wooden deck are helpful, 
but the pots should be moved to different locations 
periodically . In colder climates, light snow can be swept 
off the porch. Snow shovels with a hard rubber leading 
edge or plastic shovels cause less damage to wood than 
metal, while paint in good condition helps ice to release 
more easily. Sand or clean kitty litter can be sprinkled 
on ice to prevent slipping; however, they should be later 
swept off the porch, as they are abrasive . Salt (sodium 
Figure 8. Decay can start when wood is left exposed to the weather 
or where joints open up. An inexpensive way to extend the life of the 
existing porch paint without jeopardizing the historic material is spot 
paint and caulk where needed every year or two. This cost-effective 
procedure is particularly effective in maintaining wood porches where 
the exposure to weathering is high. Photo: John Leeke. 
chloride) is not recommended for ice removal on older 
porches as it can promote corrosion and failure of nails 
and other fasteners. Magnesium chloride is an alternate 
de-icing salt that is less corrosive and less damaging to 
masonry and plants. If any de-icing salt is used, be sure 
to scrub and rinse off the porch deck in the spring. Boot 
scrapers and brush-mats at the bottom of the stairs are 
recommended for muddy areas. 
Painting 
Spot painting and resealing of open joints should be 
undertaken at least every other year (Fig. 8). Heavily 
used stair treads may require more frequent paint 
touchup . When peeling paint or bare wood is evident, 
inspect to ensure it is not signaling deeper problems, 
such as decay. With sound wood, scrape off the loose 
paint, sand, prime, and repaint the area. Where lead 
paint is present, appropriate lead hazard precautions 
and procedures apply. Only top-quality exterior primers 
and paints are recommended, selecting for the deck and 
stairs specially formulated paints. Where wood porch 
steps are exposed to moisture, grit added to the wet 
paint during application will help improve sa fety. 
Repair 
Many repairs may be successfully undertaken 
by property owners, while major projects often 
require the special knowledge and equipment of an 
experienced contractor. Repairs generally include 
patching and reinforcement of historic materials. The 
roof and foundation are particularly important to the 
preservation and the structure of a historic porch yet 
they often receive much less attention than ornamental 
features. Their neglect will usually lead to more costly 
work. Repairs to features such as a balustrade or 
flooring can encompass limited replacement in kind 
when the porch part is severely deteriorated or when 
a part of a repeated feature is missing altogether. Some 
common porch repairs are discussed in this section. 
Filling Open Cracks or Joints 
To seal open cracks or joints, start by scraping off 
the paint back a few inches from the opening and 
removing old caulk to expose bare wood. The opening 
should be examined for any signs of wood decay, 
and to determine if the joint is loose due to a loss of 
connection, such as rusted nails. After correcting any 
problems, apply a water-repellant wood preservative 
that can be painted . Such preservatives are either an 
oil-based or waterborne solution of oils or waxes with 
mildewcide, fungicide and pesticide added. Then 
apply a high quality exterior wood primer to the wood 
surfaces where a sealant or caulk is to be used. Most 
open cracks or joints then can be filled with a sealant 
or caulk, while larger ones may need the addition of a 
backer rod. In some cases, small metal flashing over the 
crack or open joint may be more effective and longer 
lasting but , when used, care should be taken with 
proper installation. The final step is painting. 

Patching with a Dutchman Repair 
This traditional technique is often 
used to repair localized cases 
of decayed wood and, when 
undertaken with skill and care, will 
serve as a permanent repair (Fig. 9). 
If the damaged area has a structural 
function, temporary bracing or other 
support will be necessary. Otherwise 
the first step after removing any 
paint around the damaged area is 
to chisel or mechanically remove 
the decayed wood. It is best to 
use the same type of wood being 
replaced and the new or recycled 
wood should be seasoned to avoid 
shrinkage. The repair procedure 
involves cutting a piece of wood, 
called a dutchman, slightly larger 
than the area of damage that has 
been cut out. The dutchrnan then 
is laid over the damaged area and 
an outline scribed into the original 
wood surface below. Next, a chisel 
or router is used to follow the 
scribed line to form an opening in 
the existing wood for the new piece. 
Figure 9. The ends of porch roof rafters are often susceptible to moisture decay. When concealed 
by a soffit or ceiling, rafters can be repaired by adding new sister boards. Where roof rafter ends 
are exposed, splicing new wood onto the old (dutchman repair) and use of epoxy consolidants and 
fillers both preserve sound historic fabric while retaining the historic appearance. 
Photo: Paul Marlowe, Marlowe Restorations. 
As a preventive measure, an appropriate fungicide 
should be applied to the surrounding old wood and 
allowed to dry. The dutchrnan is then glued into place 
with waterproof adhesive, such as an epoxy formulated 
for wood . The repair is finished by trimming or sanding 
the surface of the new wood down flush with the 
surrounding existing surfaces, priming and painting. 
Patching with Epoxy or Wood Fillers 
There are a variety of commercial wood fillers . Cellulose 
based fillers consist of wood fiber and a binder and have 
been available in stores for many years. Only those 
suitable for exterior applications should be used and 
they will require a protective finish. Epoxies are a more 
contemporary product, commonly used by experienced 
contractors and woodworkers . Epoxies are petroleum­
based resins created by mixing two components in 
accurate proportions that result in a chemical reaction . 
The result is durable, moisture-resistant consolidants 
and fillers that bonds tenaciously with wood, and can 
be sawn, nailed or sanded. Epoxies are for use only 
in areas that will be painted, as they do not take stain 
and deteriorate under sunlight. Since epoxies are more 
difficult to work with than other wood fillers, experience 
working with epoxies is needed for successful repairs. 
Repairing Railings and Balustrades 
Balustrades and railings are not only practical and safety 
features, they typically are highly visible decorative 
elements . Unfortunately, balustrades and balusters are 
frequently altered, covered, removed or completely 
replaced even though in most cases they can be repaired 
in a cost-effective manner. To preserve historic fabric, 
the repair of old balustrades and railings is always the
preferred approach. A broken baluster usually is one 
need of repair, not replacement. 
 
in 
Loose railings and balustrades present unsafe 
conditions 
and need to be repaired 
as soon as possible. 
Start by examining the points of attachment to 
determine exactly why the railing or balustrade is loose. 
Common reasons include rusted fasteners, decayed 
wood, or physical stress that has broken the fasteners 
or split the wood. Paint and decayed wood must be 
removed . Where fasteners are broken yet the wood is 
sound, the balustrade can be re-fastened using hot­
dipped galvanized or stainless steel nails or screws, 
setting the heads of the fasteners below the surface of 
the wood and using a wood filler to cover and seal. 
Next repair deteriorated wood by using a dutchrnan 
or wood-epoxy repair . The repaired joints then can be 
sealed and painted. 
Replacing Missing Balusters 
The balusters help comprise a wood balustrade and 
come in three general styles: simple rectangular shape; 
flat, pattern-sawn (usually a board with some decorative 
edge or cutout); and turned. It may be necessary to 
replace certain balusters that are beyond repair or 
missing altogether. Some are easy to replace with new 
matching balusters while others can be more challenging 
in terms of both design and costs. Finding or affording 
replacement balusters may take time since they should 
match the historic baluster as closely as possible. In 
the meantime, unsafe balustrades can be temporarily 
stabilized, introducing temporary new material that 
soon will be replaced. 
9 

10 
In replacing individual balusters, simple, rectangular 
balusters should 
not be replaced with pattern-sawn 
or turned ones unless physical or pictorial evidence 
survives which indicate they previously existed 
historically on that particular porch. Such an alteration 
can change the historic appearance of the porch or be 
incompatible with the character of the building. 
Determine the size and shape of the missing balusters 
either by examining adjacent ones or temporarily 
removing an existing baluster as a sample. Heavy 
paint buildup should be removed so that the original 
dimension can be established. Scrape and clean the joint 
locations and make repairs to any deteriorated areas. 
A new baluster is then fabricated to match the original 
in design and material, e ither on site or by taking a 
drawing or sample to a local woodworking shop. The 
new baluster should be made one-half inch longer than 
needed on both ends. Measurements are taken from the 
bottom surface of the top rail to top surface of the 
bottom rail. Joints on the new baluster can be laid 
out with a pencil, using a sliding bevel to transfer any 
angles, and the new baluster trimmed to fit with a 
handsaw . After test fitting, the ends and any exposed 
end-grain of the baluster need to be sealed with a 
high-grade primer or epoxy. Next, apply a paintable 
water-repellant coating to all exposed wood surfaces, 
and apply a primer. The baluster can then be fastened in 
place with hot-dipped galvanized or stainless steel nails, 
and the nails set. Finally, seal joints and fastener holes 
and paint the baluster. 
Repairing Column Plinths and Bases 
Columns not only enrich the historic character of the 
porch, they provide support for the roof structure above. 
Because of their detail and complex construction they 
can be costly to repair or replace, making maintenance 
and minor repairs important. Column plinths and bases 
tend to deteriorate because of their exposed location 
on the outer edge of a porch (Fig. 10). Leaking gutters 
can result in water draining into the entablature and 
down into hollow columns, while clogged or capped 
gutters can allow water to pour down and splash 
back onto the column bases. Open joints and limited 
wood decay can be repaired using methods previously 
discussed . Column repairs usually are undertaken by 
an experienced carpenter, since it may involve structural 
support of the roof above . 
Repairing Floorboards and Ceiling Boards 
Floors should slope down toward the outer porch edge 
for proper drainage. 
If drainage is inadequate, moisture 
buildup will cause deterioration of the floorboards. 
Flooring can also deteriorate due to movement in the 
supporting structure below . If a floorboard is soft or 
broken, the extent of decayed or split wood can be 
determined by probing gently with an awl. The existing 
floorboard can then be removed, cutting the length if 
needed so that the end will center on the next nearest 
joist or girder. Once the board has been removed, 
the structural framing beneath should be examined 
for deterioration and to ensure it is sound. A new 
floorboard is then cut to length, and the outer edge 
shaped to match the adjacent boards. After priming the 
replacement board, nail it in place and repaint. 
If a section of the ceiling is deteriorating, it is likely 
that there is a roof or gutter problem . To determine the 
cause of deterioration, inspect the ceiling, gutters and 
roof, including the internal roof structure. After making 
necessary repairs, the ceiling boards can be repaired in 
much the same manner as a deteriorated floorboard. 
Repairing the Porch Roof and Gutters 
With roof leaks, the entire porch is at risk. Leaks can 
promote decay in roof rafters, ceiling joists, and columns 
as well as in areas more easily to detect such as the 
ceiling and fascia. Inspect the roof covering, gutters and 
flashing for deterioration and improper performance. 
They can then be repaired or replaced, as needed, to 
keep water out of the structure. Avoid having the 
gutters and downspouts on the main roof drain onto a 
porch roof. 
Repairing the Foundation 
Unstable foundation supports can cause serious damage 
Figure 10. This nineteenth century porch column is made of wood staves, similar to the way a wood barrel is put together. After replacing the torus 
and making dutchman repairs to the apophyge along the base, the column and pedestal are ready to be reinstalled on the porch. Photos: NPS files. 

to a historic porch. There are numerous causes and 
solutions. If the posts supporting the porch deck rest on 
stones or brick set directly on the ground, there can be 
seasonal shifts due to the changing moisture content of 
the soil or freeze/thaw conditions that will require regular 
attention. Under certain conditions, it may be advisable 
to extend footings for the posts below the frost line. 
Where moisture problems exist, improved drainage may 
be necessary. It is not uncommon to find that masonry 
joints in the foundation wall or piers have deteriorated 
as a result of rising damp, where moisture from the soil 
percolates up through mortar joints. This condition may 
lead to the eventual breakdown of the mortar and even 
old brick and soft stone. In such cases, it will be necessary 
to replace the areas of damaged masonry and repoint the 
mortar joints. 
With wooden posts, insect damage or rot may necessitate 
corrective measures to strengthen the foundation. 
Techniques can include one or more of the following: 
epoxy consolidation; dutchman repair; or the addition of 
supplemental supports to the foundation posts and joists. 
In some cases damage may be extensive enough that the 
only real solution is rebuilding the foundation. 
Repairing a Porch Apron 
The apron, skirt, or latticework is a highly visible and 
functional porch feature. An apron keeps animals out 
from under the porch, while at the same time allowing 
air to circulate, preventing unwanted moisture buildup. 
Aprons typically are made up of a wood frame , 
surrounding either a simple lattice or a repetitive pattern 
of decorative sawn boards. Because the frame is so close 
to the ground, decay is common. Other causes of decay 
include plantings around the house that are growing too 
close to the latticework and improper water drainage. An 
apron may require partial or complete disassembly for 
proper repair. One or more of the apron frames should 
either be hinged or secured with turn buttons for easy 
access to under a porch for inspection and maintenance. 
Replacement 
When individual porch parts are deteriorated beyond 
the point of repair or missing altogether, replacement 
is necessary. To retain the historic character of the 
porch , the replacement parts should match the historic 
component as closely as possible in material, design, 
color, texture, and other qualities . To achieve this, 
existing evidence of the historic design, such as a baluster 
or column detail, or a tongue and groove floor design, 
should serve as a pattern for the replacement part . When 
replacing an element, it may provide a good opportunity 
to upgrade the wood to another species that is more 
decay resistant, or to one with a vertical grain that is 
more resistant to cupping or splintering . In limited 
cases, it may be appropriate to use a substitute material 
for the replacement material as long as it conveys a 
close visual match . Before replacing a deteriorated 
historic porch component, it is important to understand 
how it was constructed and installed, and what lead 
to its deterioration. If the replacement part does not 
sufficiently match the historic part, the character of the 
porch may be diminished, or even lost. If the cause of 
material failure is not addressed, the replacement will 
also fail. 
Replacing Porch Floorboards 
If a large section of the porch floorboards is deteriorated, 
the framing beneath may also be damaged and should 
be assessed. Replacing floorboards can often expand 
into repairing the structural sills, girders, and joists 
beneath. Complete floor replacement will likely require 
the removal of floorboards that are under structural posts 
or columns. This may necessitate the careful stabilizing 
in place or the removal of the posts or columns and the 
installation of temporary support for the roof structure. 
If the floor failure was caused by inferior wood, the wood 
quality can be improved at this time. However, the new 
wood flooring should match the existing in thickness, 
width, shape and texture. The slope of the floor should 
be maintained, or a slope may need to be created if none 
exists. A slope of ¼ inch per foot or greater, away from 
the house, is needed for adequate drainage. Boards are 
usually laid in the direction of the slope, sloping down to 
the outer edge of the floor. 
Replacing Steps 
Porch stairs receive heavy usage and are close to the 
ground, making them predictable candidates for 
deterioration. Stairs should be repaired or, if necessary, 
replaced by an experienced carpenter who understands 
the safety codes and is experienced in fabricating custom 
stair parts to match original detailing without depending 
only on store-bought parts. 
Replacing Column Plinths and Bases, 
or Entire Columns 
When plinths and bases are deteriorated beyond repair, 
they can be replaced without replacing the column 
shaft, which may still be in good condition or require 
only minor repairs at the bottom. Such replacement 
will involve temporary shoring for the roof. One-story 
columns and shafts are often more easily removed 
during this work, while taller columns are sometimes 
supported in place. If only a few plinths or bases are 
deteriorated, it is often economical to have new ones 
made of wood to match. If numerous plinths and bases 
are deteriorated, replacing with bases made of rot­
resistant materials can make economic sense; however, 
care must be taken to ensure that all the visual qualities 
including design, size, shape, color and texture of the 
historic part are matched (Fig. 11). 
Entire columns may need to be replaced, but an owner 
should first consider all repair alternatives. Some 
contractors routinely recommend complete replacement 
of one or all columns due to the challenge of a clean 
repair (particularly with stave-built columns), or because 
they see the potential for more profit in complete 
replacement. If a contractor recommends complete 
11 

12 
Figure 11. The lower shaft of the porch columns had decayed as 
water wicked up through the end grain (top). The column shafts were 
repaired in place by cutting out the deteriorated wood and making 
repairs using epoxy consolidants and fillers. (bottom). The column 
bases were replaced. Photos: Paul Marlowe, Marlowe Restorations. 
replacement, other opinions should be sought to ensure 
repair is truly not feasible. Preserving the historic 
appearance of old columns is not the same as preserving 
historic columns. 
Where a replacement turned or staved column is 
needed, a local millwork may be able to match the 
profile or pattern. Alternatively, the Internet is helpful 
in identifying potential sources of replacement columns 
that can match the appearance of the remaining ones. 
Replacement Materials 
Wood 
When selective replacement is necessary, the key to 
success is the selection of suitable wood. Dimensional 
stability, decay resistance and paint holding ability are 
wood characteristics that effect durability. Wood 
that 
expands and shrinks too much can cause paint to crack. 
Substances found naturally in certain kinds of wood 
repel fungi and insects that destroy wood. Selecting 
wood that is relatively stable and naturally decay 
resistant helps avoid problems. 
The wood from trees cut one and two centuries ago was 
much different than most wood available today. The 
mature trees in older forests grew very slowly and, as a 
result, the annual growth rings were very close together . 
Today, trees grown by commercial companies for their 
lumber are fast growing so they can be harvested 
sooner. As a result, commercially farmed trees have 
annual growth rings much further apart, resulting in the 
cut lumber being less strong and decay resistant than 
older timber. These differences in quality are one of the 
reasons it makes sense to save old wood when possible. 
Wood Selection: When choosing wood for repair 
and replacement work, the species, grade, grain 
and environmental impacts should be taken into 
consideration. This is especially applicable to historic 
porches because of their high exposure to the weather 
and vulnerability to decay. The best species are 
those with good natural resistance to decay, such as 
redwood, cypress, cedar or fir. A clear (knot free) 
grade of wood is best; however, if clear wood is not 
readily available or too expensive, a grade with small 
or tight knots is acceptable. Finally, the use of more 
stable vertical grain lumber is preferable to flat grain 
boards. Vertical grain lumber expands and contracts 
less with changes in moisture content, resulting in 
reduce warping and checks. Paint thus will hold better. 
The downside to using vertical grain boards is the 
cost, which tends to be as much as two to three times 
the price of flat grain lumber in the same grade and 
species. However , this expense is typically recovered 
through lower maintenance costs over the years. Thu s, 
a decay-resistant, high-grade, vertical grain lumber 
is the best choice for the replacement of deteriorated 
porch elements, particularly flooring, stairs and milled 
elements such as balusters and moldings. 
The best species to choose will vary depending on the 
region the house is located. For example, in the South, 
cypress is more available, making it the selection of 
choice in the region. Because of this wood's relative ease 
with which a carpenter can shape it, cypress is a good 
choice for replacing brackets and trim boards on a porch . 
In contrast, vertical grain Douglas fir is less workable, 
but i s a very good choice for the replacement of porch 
floorboards in most climates. Although Douglas fir is 
from the Northwest, it is generally available throughout 
the country. For most protected trim boards on porches, 
white pine is a good choice as it is easy to work and 
is moderately decay resistant, especially if the wood 
is back-primed before installation. Availability of any 
specific wood will change annually based on market 
suppl y and demand. 

Wood Characteristics 
Species 
Redwood 
Cut or Grade 
Clear, Vertical-grain, 
all-heart 
"B" Select, flat-grain 
Resistance to 
Decay 
Resistance to 
Cupping 
Paint Holding 
Ability Cost Workability 
$$$ Fair Excellent Excellent Excellent 
$$ Fair Excellent Good Good 
Cedar Clear $$ Fair Excellent Good Fair 
Cypress Clear $$ Fair Excellent Fair Good 
"C" & better, 
Vertical-grain $$ Fair to Poor Good to Fair Excellent Fair Douglas Fir 
"D" Select, flat-gra in $ Fair Fair Good Fair Southern 
Yellow Pine Vertical-grain $$$ Fair Fair Excellent Fair to Good 
Poplar Firsts and Second s $ Good Poor Good Fair 
American 
Mahogany Clear $$$ Excellent Excellent Excellent Good 
This table summarizes the characteristics of just a few of the different species available, including the workability of the wood (indicating 
a better wood for decorative porch pieces), the resistance to decay (an important feature for all porch components), resistance to cupping (a 
wood highly resistant to cupping is a better choice for floor board replacement) and paint holding ability. The Cut or Grade is also listed, as a 
low-grade wood can perform very differently than a higher grade in the same species. Cost will vary depending on region and market supply 
and demand. In general, it is best to contact two or three local lumberyards to find the available woods with the characteristics needed in the 
local market. Source: Practical Restoration Report, Exterior Woodwork Details. 
Chemically Treated Wood : Chemical wood preservative 
treatments are available to resist insect and fungal 
attack, but care should be taken to avoid using ones 
that may cause environmental or health risks. Borate 
preservatives can be applied to surfaces or injected to 
penetrate and protect the entire volume of the wood. 
Preservatives with zinc napthenate can be applied to 
the wood surface, where necessary, especially to protect 
hidden joinery and the end grains of wood. Water­
repellants can also be used to help seal out moisture. 
Finally, primers and paints should be applied to both 
protect the wood and to maintain the historic character 
of the porch. Note that these treatments are different 
than those used on most pressure-treated wood, which 
is typically a plantation-grown southern pine of lower 
quality that is impregnated with chemicals. Pressure­
treated lumber can be effective when used for hidden 
structural members like posts, joists and sills. However, 
because typical pressure-treated wood is very susceptible 
to the deterioration of checks, warping and splitting, 
especially when left unpainted, it is not a good substitute 
for the better quality wood that is needed for visible 
finish porch parts. 
Stock Components 
For over a century, prefabrica ted architec tural par ts have 
been sold through catalogues or at home im provement 
stores. Some companies still ma ke generic, s tock 
architectural componen ts in the same general sizes 
and designs as those that were first man ufactu red . 
These componen ts can be availa ble in both wood and 
substitute ma terials. Thus, it may be possi ble to replace 
a historic stock component, suc h as an archi tectural 
grade column, with a new prefa bricated col umn that 
matches the original. Unfortuna tely, these rep lacement 
parts are not designed to ma tch th e historic parts of 
any particular porch. Beca u se tradi tionally there were 
many differen t porch elemen ts, a wide range of styles 
and considera ble regional variations, stock replacement 
parts available today are no t often found to match what 
is needed in a specific porc h repair project. When faced 
with deteriora tion of a few porc h par ts, all the his toric 
material should not be removed in favor of a readi ly 
available stock design that does not ma tch the his toric 
appearance. The expressed goal may be to create a porch 
with a "consis tent look," bu t this approach diminishes 
the building's his toric character and authen ticity. 
1 'l 

14 
Plastic and Composites 
A variety of modern materials are marketed today as 
a substitute for wood. They are usually composite 
materials typically in the form of plastic resins , 
including vinyl (PVC), fiber-reinforced polymers and 
polyester resin. There are other products on the market 
as well, including medium density wood fiberboard 
and composite fiber-cement boards. The market is 
ever changing with the introduction of new synthetic 
materials and the re-formulation of existing ones. The 
more costly synthetic products tend to offer the best 
potential for matching historic features while offering 
good durability . This means that potential cost savings 
over new wood tends to be more long term than 
immediate. Such products generally are not carried in 
local home improvement stores but rather are available 
from building supply companies or direct through 
catalog sales. 
The historical significance of a particular property and 
its porch influences decisions regarding possible use 
of substitute materials. In general, greater emphasis 
is placed on authenticity and material integrity when 
maintaining and repairing individually significant 
historic properties. However, a front porch that is 
repeated on rowhouses may be one of the defining 
characteristics of the historic district and thus of 
importance to the entire streetscape. So, too, can the 
location and appearance of a porch influence material 
decisions, as with, for example, a prominent front porch 
with ornate detailing as opposed to a small porch over a 
rear door. 
Thus, when the historic porch contributes to the historic 
character of a building, the particular substitute material 
that is being considered should accurately match the 
appearance of the wooden feature being replaced. 
Composite materials that can be routed or shaped in the 
Figure 12. This old porch 
enclosure, located on the back side 
of a house, has acquired significance 
over time and is remarkable both in 
the appropriateness of its detailing 
for use by others today, as well as 
its high degree of maintenance. The 
enclosure is set behind the columns; 
the balustrade has been retained; 
and the light divisions and the size 
of the glass panes echo that of the 
windows above. Within each bay 
there are two well-crafted, inward 
swinging doors, providing for 
greater seasonal use of the porch. 
Photos: Charles Fisher. 
field to match specific pieces being replaced have greater 
potential for use in repairing a historic porch . Materials 
that cannot be shaped to match the visual appearance of 
the historic pieces being replaced usually are not suitable 
for use on historic buildings. 
Substitute materials need to be finished to match the 
appearance of the historic elements being replaced. In 
nearly all cases, this means that the material should be 
painted, or where historically appropriate, stained as 
with some porch ceilings. While there are substitute 
materials being marketed as pre-finished with either a 
plain flat surface or generic wood-grain texture, select 
those that can be painted or stained in the field. 
When a substitute material is to be used in conjunction 
with existing or new wood material, it is important to 
consider the differences in expansion and contraction 
due to temperature and moisture changes. Before 
making a decision, it is also important to understand 
how a particular substitute material will age , what its 
maintenance requirements are, and how the material 
will deteriorate. For example, sunlight can break 
down exposed surfaces of plastic resins, so painting 
the surfaces is needed just as with wood. Low and 
medium density plastic foam parts are easily damaged 
by abrasion and physical damage, exposing the interior 
foam to weathering. 
Wood porches are just that, porches made out of wood, 
just as a brick houses are made of brick and cast-iron 
porches are made of cast-iron. The type of materials 
used historically in the construction of a building helps 
define its character. Limited use of substitute materials 
that closely match missing or deteriorated features 
may not endanger this historic character, but wholesale 
replacement with substitute materials usually will. 

Considerations for Contemporary 
Alterations 
Enclosures 
Much of the character of a historic open porch is clearly 
its openness. Therefore, in most cases, a historic open 
porch should not be enclosed. If a porch enclosure is 
being considered, its significance and location-as well 
as the nature of the planned enclosure-play key roles 
in whether it can be done without changing the porch's 
and building's historic character. While it is almost never 
appropriate to enclose a front porch on a historic building 
to create interior space, enclosing a less prominent 
porch on a less visible elevation could have less impact. 
In addition, an enclosure should retain as many of the 
historic porch features as possible (Fig 12). 
Insect Screening and Awnings 
Traditionally, the seasonal use of porches was extended 
with screens and awnings . Screened porches have 
been popular since the advent of inexpensive and 
durable wire insect screening in late 1800s . Screens were 
often set unobtrusively behind railings and columns 
so the decorative components of the porch remained 
prominent and visible. Since screens can be damaged 
easily, the screening material was often set in slender, 
easy to repair, removable wood frames that could be 
installed during the warmer months, and stored in the 
winter . When screening a porch today, this historic 
precedent is recommended. Screened panels should 
have minimal wood framework painted either to match 
the porch or in a darker color to make the framing less 
visible . Decisions on whether screens should be installed 
inside the porch railings and posts, between the posts, or 
on the outside will depend on local traditions and on the 
design of the porch and trim. Screen doors on porches 
should be sized to fit proportionately with the porch, 
made of wood, and hung to swing out so insects are not 
brought inside with use. 
Awnings, drop curtains, and valances were common 
porch accessories during the nineteenth and well into 
the twentieth centuries. Both functional and decorative, 
these canvas features helped shield porches from the 
sun's direct rays, while their colorful stripes embellished 
and complemented the house's exterior. Some awnings 
were fixed in place; others were of a roller assembly that 
allowed owners to easily lower or retract the awning, 
depending on weather conditions. 
Today, modem solution-dyed acrylic fabrics-materials 
that resemble, but are more durable than canvas-are 
often used on porch awnings and drop curtains. 
When new awnings are installed on a historic porch, 
the selected awning should be appropriate in shape , 
material, size and color. Care should be used not to 
damage existing historic porch features such as columns 
or cornices . 
Temporary Enclosures 
Temporary enclosures allow a porch to be used in colder 
months while not permanently altering its appearance. 
In fact some have become historic features of buildings. 
Particularly in New England, there is a continuing 
tradition of installing relatively substantial glass and 
wood panels on porches during the winter, especially 
around an entrance door. These tended to have small 
divided lights. Sometimes porches were fully enclosed 
with a divided light glass door for entry, creating an 
enclosed vestibule that reduced the amount of cold air 
entering the house when the door was opened. Others 
consisted of simple sidewalls perpendicular to an existing 
entrance door, serving as a windbreak. Such enclosures 
were generally removed in the spring (Fig. 13). 
In recent years, some porches have been enclosed during 
the winter with plastic sheeting (polyvinyl) for perceived 
energy conservation or for creation of an enclosed space. 
Such a treatment generally diminishes a building's 
historic character and is not recommended for highly 
visible porches. 
New Permanent Enclosures 
Enclosure of a historic porch can result in significant 
changes in the appearance and character of the building. 
When considering the possible enclosure of a porch, a 
number of questions and concerns should be successfully 
addressed. 
Is the porch on a significant elevation of the building? 
A porch on a prominent elevation was there to be seen 
and its open qualities are visually important. Enclosing 
such a space should be avoided. 
Figure 13. Particularly in New England, there is a cold weather 
tradition of installing temporary glass and wood panels at entrance 
doors, thereby creating an enclosed vestibule. These enclosures with 
their small divided lights were generally removed in the spring. 
Photo: John Leeke. 
15 

16 
Figure 14. The enclosure of a prominent porch can dramatically change the historic character of a building. The L-shaped porch on this 1896 
Shingle-sti;le New England residence was later enclosed with aluminum windows and screens. Recent owners elected to reopen the historic porch. 
Among the other work, it was necessary to correct structural damage, as with this post, where beneath the wood casing carpenter ants had done 
serious damage. In reopening the porch, the historic character of the residence has been brought back and the traditional use of the porch is once again 
enjoyed. Photos: Mark Landry, Landmark Services. 
Is the enclosure necessary? An enclosure will 
undoubtedly change the porch as a historic feature 
and may result in damage or loss of historic materials. 
Depending on the significance of the porch and the 
nature of the building, a new porch enclosure may 
also change the historic character of the building. 
Consideration should be given to alternate solutions 
such as recapturing underutilized space in an attic or 
basement (Fig 14). 
Is the porch a highly distinctive feature of the 
building? Even porches on secondary and rear 
elevations can be distinctive, such as a two-story porch 
on the side ell of a farmhouse. Porches ornamented 
with decorative trim that embellishes the house can also 
be distinctive. Enclosing these features should also be 
avoided whenever possible. 
Is the porch a feature repeated on a row of buildings 
in a historic district? Open front porches on a block of 
row houses can be not only important to an individual 
building but can also make up a significant feature 
of the streetscape. Enclosing such a porch usually is 
inappropriate even if a porch on an adjacent building 
already has been enclosed. 
Will the proposed enclosure encompass the entire 
porch? History has shown that the enclosure of a 
portion of a porch on a secondary elevation does not 
always alter the character of a building. In the past 
as indoor plumbing was introduced to old buildings, 
the partial enclosure of a one or two-story porch 
on a secondary elevation was a convenient means 
of providing new bathroom space while limiting 
disruption to the building's interior. Since early 
bathrooms were traditionally small in size, most of the 
existing porch could be retained as open space. It was 
common to create new walls set either between columns 
or behind them, since the columns usually served a 
structural as well as decorative purpose. Where sleeping 
porches with full-length louver shutters were present, 
the new wall could simply be set behind and the shutters 
retained and fixed in place. In both cases the resulting 
effect minimized the impact of the partial enclosure 
on the appearance of the building. This also provides 
us with an approach that may be appropriate for a 
particular project today. 
Will the enclosure result in the loss of considerable 
historic fabric? Unless the historic porch is so 
deteriorated that it is beyond repair, any consideration 
of enclosing all or part of a porch should incorporate 
retention of historic fabric. This may mean that the 
existing structural system needs to be augmented but 
generally not replaced. Distinctive features such as 
columns, brackets and balustrades should be retained 
and the new wall set behind them. 
Is the foundation adequate for the enclosure of the 
porch and the new use of the space? Porches were often 
built on simple posts or piers, some with only minimum 
footings. Such structural supports may be inadequate 
to carry the added load of the proposed changes and 
the typical low space beneath a first floor porch may 
make installing a new porch foundation difficult and 
expensive. Such installations may result also in an 
extensive loss of historic fabric. 
How will the proposed enclosure be viewed from the 
outside once the interior space is furnished? One of 
the approaches to enclosing a porch is to utilize near 
full glazing set behind existing columns in an attempt 
to retain a feeling of transparency. Whether such a 
treatment is successful depends on how it will look 
once it is constructed and how will the appearance 
on the outside be impacted by interior lighting, 

mechanical systems and furnishings. The traditional 
use of plantings and porch awnings for shade also 
provided extended privacy. If historically appropriate, 
an existing or new awning and plantings may help to 
reduce the impact of a porch enclosure on a secondary 
but visible elevation. 
Is the design of the proposed porch enclosure in 
keeping with the historic character of the building? 
Where the enclosure of all or part of a historic porch 
is appropriate, the selection of a compatible design 
and materials is important. Windows, doors, and wall 
material selection, along with how the new infill fits 
within the existing porch, are all factors to consider. A 
traditional technique of porch enclosures still used today 
involves the insertion in each column bay of one or more 
glass enclosures set in wood frames. The enclosures 
are located between or behind the columns, depending 
upon the nature of the porch, and mimic the pattern or 
size of glass panes found in historic windows on the 
building (Fig 15). An alternate treatment involves the 
use of much larger sheets of clear, non-reflective glass 
recessed behind the porch supports, balustrade and 
railing. This more contemporary treatment may be 
appropriate, depending upon the historic character of 
the building, location of the porch, and other factors (Fig 
16). Windows, doors, and wall material selection, along 
with how the new infill fits within the existing porch, are 
all factors to consider . 
Safety and Building Codes 
There are many building codes used by states and 
municipalities across the nation, with a majority of their 
requirements being very similar and focused on new 
construction. Building codes such as the International 
Figure 15. A traditional technique of porch enclosures still used 
today involves the insertion in each column bay of one or more glass 
enclosures set in wood frames. This enclosure is properly set back an 
entire porch bay from the front of the house and utilizes traditional 
light divisions and wood frames. The balustrade, added here for 
illustration purposes, shows the importance of retaining this linear 
feature within the enclosed bays. Photo: Charles Fisher. 
Figure 16. The use of near full glazing to enclose a porch may be 
appropriate depending upon the historic character of the building, 
location of the porch, how the interior space is to be treated, and 
other factors. This enclosure of a rear porch to create a conference 
room successfully utilizes large expanses of glass and narrow metal 
framing set behind existing porch elements (a through e). Where an 
additional horizontal support was needed (J), the frame was placed at 
a location that is found in many traditional insect screen enclosures. 
Photo: Charles Fisher. 
Building Code and its companion, the International 
Existing Building Code, have been developed in recent 
years that are generally much more sensitive to existing 
and historic buildings, emphasizing the retention of 
historic fabric without jeopardizing life safety. These 
"proportional codes," as they are called, allow building 
inspectors greater flexibility to make decisions based on 
the specific circumstances of each building, and the type 
and extent of work planned. 
Successful rehabilitation work achieves a balance 
between building and safety code considerations and 
the retention of historic design and materials. The porch 
is no exception. The most common porch elements 
affected by code requirements are railing/balustrade 
height, baluster spacing, stair geometry, and structural 
system. When a historic porch is so deteriorated 
that a substantial portion must be replaced, modern 
building code requirements are usually triggered. These 
requirements are often more stringent for multi-family 
or commercial structures than single-family houses. 
17 

18 
Figure 17. The porch's structural system must be capable 
of supporting today's loads. In this case moisture led to the 
deterioration of the wood girder at the corner, creating a major 
structural deficiency (top). A new solid timber was installed to 
replace the girder (middle); alternatively a built-up girder could have 
been used since a fascia board would conceal it. The column base was 
repaired and portions replaced and the balustrade and column reset 
and secured (bottom). Photos: Paul Marlowe, Marlowe Restorations. 
It is important to ensure that the code-required work 
be done in a manner that is sympathetic to the historic 
character of the building. If building code requirements 
threaten the historic character of the porch, alternatives 
that reconcile the two should be explored. Many local 
jurisdictions issue waivers or variances for historic 
buildings, allowing for historic elements to be retained, 
when it can be demonstrated that safety will not be 
compromised. 
In the event that an alteration to a historic porch is 
required to make the porch safe to use, care should 
be taken in planning and undertaking the work. 
Fortunately, there are usually a number of options 
that are possible, although one is usually the most 
appropriate preservation solution. 
Structural Loads 
Ensuring that the structure's foundation can support 
the specified load is a primary safety issue for porches. 
Fortunately, repairs and upgrades to improve structural 
stability are generally made to the foundation at or 
below grade, and can usually be concealed under the 
porch or behind finish details. Weakened joists can often 
be strengthened with the addition of sister joists, epoxy 
structural repair, or the insertion of new concealed 
structural members (Fig. 17) . 
Stairs 
Historic stair risers are sometimes too steep and treads 
too shallow to meet contemporary building codes or 
the special needs of the occupants. 
In the latter case, 
the addition of a simple handrail that meets code may 
suffice. In instances where there is another stairway that 
meets code, for example a side stair, it may be possible to 
retain the existing non-conforming historic stairway. 
Modifications to bring porch stairs into conformance 
with code can be difficult. Where buildings are set close 
to the street, it may not be possible to rebuild the stairs 
in the same direction to meet code if they will have to 
extend onto a public sidewalk. Unless a variance is 
obtained, it may be necessary to turn the stairs to be 
parallel rather than perpendicular to a building. Where 
wood stairs need to be rebuilt, the historic finish details, 
such as moldings, cut work and edge detailing, should 
be reflected in the new construction. One common 
mistake is the replacement of wood stairs or brick steps 
with concrete, a material that may not be in keeping 
with the historic building. 
Where a porch must be used as a wheelchair accessible 
entrance, two general issues arise. If there is an elevation 
difference greater than ½- inch between the porch deck 
and the front door threshold, a simple threshold ramp 
may suffice. In cases where the elevation difference is 
larger than can be accommodated by a simple threshold 
ramp, a level platform with sufficient turning radius at 
the door for a wheelchair may be necessary. The other 
issue is devising a means for wheelchair access from 
the grade to the porch deck when the porch is the only 

Figure 18. When a porch is used as a wheelchair accessible entrance, it may be possible to retain the historic stairs by adding a ramp parallel to the 
building. Through plantings and some re-grading, the new ramp built parallel to the building (left) allows retention of the historic stairs and does 
not impact the historic character of the entrance (right). Photo: Iowa State Universih; Extension. 
entrance alternative . It may be possible to retain the 
hlstoric stairs by adding another entrance to the porch 
with the construction of a ramp parallel to the building 
(Fig. 18). 
Baluster Spacing 
Codes generally require for children's safety that new 
balusters are spaced such that a four-inch sphere cannot 
fit through. Vertical balusters on older porches are 
often spaced farther apart than thls. If modifications 
are required, inserting narrow metal rods between 
the existing balusters may be a compatible and 
inconspicuous solution, particularly if painted flat black 
or another dark color. This is generally preferable to 
moving the balusters closer together or adding more 
balusters to fill the gaps. 
Railing/Balustrade Heights 
Historic porches generally have handrails that measure 
28 to 30 inches in height from the floor. Current code 
requirements for new construction generally mandate 
that railings be 36 to 42 inches in height (often 36 inches 
for single family dwellings, and 42 inches for multi­
family dwellings and commercial buildings). Raising 
the hlstoric railing by as much as 30% or more can 
have a major impact on not just the proportions of the 
balusters, but also on the overall appearance of a hlstoric 
porch. Adding a simple rail above the hlstoric railing 
and painting it to rude its presence as much as possible 
is generally the least intrusive solution when thls safety 
requirement must be met. Similarly, an existing bottom 
rail is sometimes set too hlgh off the deck to meet 
contemporary code requirements. The addition of a 
simple wood rail or even a narrow metal pipe below the 
bottom rail will usually suffice (Fig 19). 
It is not uncommon to find historic porches with 
decks only several steps off the ground and with no 
railings. For owner-occupied residences undergoing 
rehabilitation, local codes usually will not require the
addition of railings to these existing porches, provided 
the porch 
deck is below a certain height off the 
ground-typically from 18 to 24 inches. Where greater 
safety is warranted even though no railing is required, 
alternatives such as planting an adjacent hedgerow, 
installing planter boxes between columns, or raising 
the grade are worth considering. Where not practical 
or acceptable, a railing might be added so as to not 
noticeably impact the appearance of the historic porch. 
Any solution, however, should be simple and based on 
the character of a specific porch, and its appropriateness 
considered on a case-by-case basis. 
Figure 19. Historic porches generally have railings that measure 
28 to 30 inches in height from the floor. When additional height is 
necessary for safeh;, a simple rail, added for illustration purposes 
in this photograph, can usually be installed above the historic 
railing. Not only does this treatment allow retention of the historic 
balustrade, but it also has a minimum impact to the appearance of the 
porch. Photo: Charles Fisher. 
19 

Conclusion 
Wood porches have made an enduring contribution 
to our built environment. Porches are significant 
because of the special character they impart to a historic 
building and their role in our social and cultural 
history . A porch is an open sheltered part of a building, 
providing a covered entrance and, where larger, 
serving as an outdoor activity room. It represents an 
outward ex tension of a building, a place guests can 
initially be shel tered from the weather, even welcomed 
and entertained. 
Like all historic building features, wood porches require 
routine maintenance to prevent decay. Understanding 
how a porch is put together and the factors that 
cause deterioration will help considerably in carrying 
out both maintenance and needed repairs. Regular 
maintenance pays off not only with a good appearance 
but also by reducing the need for future repairs . With 
both main tenance and repairs, emphasis should be 
placed on preserving the historic fabric and significant 
features of a porch. Where components are deteriorated 
beyond repair or missing altogether, new pieces should 
be ins talled that match the historic ones. Fortunately, 
good craftsmanship and the use of quality replacement 
mater ials as needed will be rewarded with repairs that 
last. A tten tive care will result in the historic porch 
retaining its charm both in appearance and in function . 
Acknowledgemen ts 
Bibliography 
Davis , John Michael. "Exterior-Trim Details That Last," Fine 
Homebuilding, August/September 2001. 
Fisher, Charles E. and Hugh C. Miller, eds., Caring for Your 
Historic House, New York, NY: Harry N. Abrams, Inc ., 1998. 
Kitchen, Judith L. Caring for Your Old House: A Guide for Owners 
and Residents, Somerset, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1991. 
Leeke, John C. Practical Restoration Reports Compendium, 
Portland, ME: Historic HomeWorks, 2005. 
Nash, George . "Renovating Old Porches: Common Problems 
Can Be Solved With Simple Repairs," Fine Homebuildi11g, July 
1982. 
Preservation Briefs, Washington, DC: National Park Service , 
Technical Preservation Services: 1978-present. 
Preservatio11 Tech Notes, Washington, DC: National Park Service, 
Technical Preservation Services: 1984-present. 
Reed, Douglas C. "Detailing Early Porches ," Old House Journal, 
May/June 2001 and July -August 2001. 
Visser, Thomas D . Porches, Piazzas & Verandas, forthcoming . 
Weeks, Kay D., and Anne E . Grimmer . The Secretary of the 
Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties 
with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring & 
Reconstructing Historic Buildings, Washington, DC : National 
Park Service, 1995. 
John Leeke is a Preservation Consultant in Portland, Maine; Aleca Sullivan is an Architectural Historian in Evanston, Illinois. Cover 
illustratio n: Indiana Historical Society, Jay Small Postcard Collection , Standard Cottage, 
1886, Bethany Park, Indiana, Collection No. 
P0391, digi tal image C 2003. 
Numerous individua l generously provided their time and shared their knowledge in making this Preservation Brief possible. Thomas 
D. Visser, Historic Preservation Program, University of Vermont, deserves special recognition for his insightful contributions . Also 
gratefully acknowledge for their assistance in reviewing this publication are Neal A . Vogel, Restoric LLC and Judith L. Kitchen, Ohio 
State His toric Preservation Office. Thanks go to Marilyn Kaplan , Preservation Architecture, for her contributions to the code section 
of this pu blication. Special thanks also go to the following staff of the National Park Service's Technical Preservation Services office for 
their review and assistance: Sharon Park, FAIA, Michael Auer , Anne Grimmer , and particularly to former staff Kay Weeks. Thanks also 
go to Chad Randl, Kaaren Staveteig and Liz Creveling of the National Park Service's Technical Preservation Service for their assistance 
and to Peter de Paola, Mark Landry of Landmark Services, and Paul Marlowe of Marlowe Restorations. 
This publication was under the technical and editorial direction of Charles E . Fisher of the National Park Service's Technical 
Preservation Services whose considerable contributions , including that of the section on new permanent enclosures, helped made this 
publication possible. 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, which directs the Secretary of 
the Interior to develop and make available information concerning hi storic properties. Comments about this publication should 
be addressed to: Charles Fisher, Technical Preservation Publications Program Manager, Technical Preservation Services-2255, 
National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Washington, DC 20240 . This publication is not copyrighted and can be reproduced without 
penalty . Normal procedures for credit to the authors and the National Park Service should be provided. The photographs used in 
this publication may not be used to illustrate other publications without permission of the owners. For more information about the 
programs of the National Park Service's Technical Preservation Services see our website at www.cr.nps.gov/hps/tps 
October 2006 