36 PRESERVATION 
BRIEFS 
Protecting Cultural Landscapes: 
Planning, Treatment and Management of 
Historic Landscapes 
Charles A. Birnbaum, ASLA 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
National Park Service 
Cultural Resources 
Preservation Assistance 
Cultural landscapes can range from thousands of acres of 
rural tracts of land to a small homestead with a front yard of 
less than one acre. Like historic buildings and districts, 
these special places reveal aspects of our country's origin s 
and development through their form and features and the 
ways they were used. Cultural landscapes also reveal much 
about our evolving relationship with the natural world. 
A cultural landscape is defined as "a geographic area, 
including both cultural and natural resources and the wildlife 
or domestic animals therein, associated with a historic event, 
activity, or person or exhibiting other cultural or aesthetic 
values." There are four general types of cultural landscape s, 
not mutually exclusive: historic sites, historic designed landscapes, 
historic vernacular landscapes, and ethnographic landscapes. These 
are defined on the Table on page 2.1 
Historic landscapes include residential gardens and 
community parks, scenic highways, rural communities, 
institutional grounds, cemeteries, battlefields and zoological 
gardens. They are composed of a number of character­
defining features which individually or collectively contribute 
to the landscape's physical appearance as they have evolved 
over time. In addition to vegetation and topography, cultural 
landscapes may include water features such as ponds, 
streams, and fountains; circulation features such as roads, 
paths, steps, and walls; buildings; and furnishings, including 
fences, benches, lights and sculptural objects. 
Figure 1: The New York Peace Monument atop Looko11t Mou11tain in the 8,100 acre Chickama11ga and Challanooga National Military Park, Chattanooga, 
Tennessee, commemorates the reconciliation of the Civil War betwee11 the North and 5011th. The strategic high point provides panoramic views to the City of 
Chattanooga and the Moccasin Bend. Today, it is recog11ized for its cultural and natural reso11rce value. The memorial, which was added in 1910 is part of 
this landscape's historic continuum. (courtesy Sam Abell and National Geographic). 
1 

2 
DEFINITIONS 
Historic Designed Landscape - a landsc ape that was 
consciously designed or laid out by a land scape archit ect, 
master gardener, architect , or horticulturist accordin g to 
design principles, or an amateur gardener workin g in a 
recognized style or tradition. The landscape may be 
associated with a significant person(s), trend , or event in 
landscape architecture ; or illustrate an important 
development in the theory and practice of land scap e 
architecture . Aesthetic values play a significant role in 
designed landscapes . Examples include park s, campu ses, 
and estates . 
Historic Vernacular Landscape - a land scape that 
evolved through use by the people who se activities or 
occupancy shaped that land scape . Throu gh social or 
cultural attitudes of an individual, family or a 
community, the landscape reflects the physical , 
biological, and cultural character of those everyday lives. 
Function plays a significant role in vernacular 
landscapes. They can be a single propert y such as a farm 
or a collection of properties such as a district of historic 
farms along a river valley . Examples includ e rural 
villages , industrial compl exes, and agricultur al 
landscapes. 
Historic Site - a landscape significant for its association 
with a historic event, activity, or person. Examples 
include battlefields and president' s house properti es. 
Ethnographic Landscape - a landscape containing a 
variety of natural and cultural resource s that associated 
people define as heritage resources. Examples are 
contemporary settlements, religious sacred sites and 
massive geological structures . Small plant communiti es, 
animals, subsistence and ceremonial grounds are often 
components. 
Most historic proper ties have a cultural landscape 
componen t that is integra l to the significance of the 
reso urce. Imagine a residential dis trict without sidewalk s, 
lawns and trees or a plan tation with buildings but no 
adjacent lands. A historic prope rty consists of all its 
cultur al resources - landscapes, buildings , archeo logical 
sites and collections. In some cultural landscapes, there 
may be a total absence of buildi ngs. 
This Preserva tion Brief provides preservation professionals , 
cultural resource managers, and historic property owner s a 
step-by-step process for preserv ing historic designed and 
vernacular landscapes, two types of cultural landscapes . 
While this process is idea lly applied to an entire landscape, 
it can address a single feature such as a perennial garden, 
family buri al plot, or a sen tinel oak in an open meadow . 
This Brief provi des a framewor k and guidance for 
undertaking projects to ensure a successful balance 
between historic preservation and change. 
Developing a Strategy and Seek ing 
Assistance 
Near ly all designed and vernac ular landscapes evolve 
from, or are often dependent on, natural resource s. It is 
these interconnected systems of land, air and water , 
Figures 2-4: Character-defining landscape features (top to bottom): "Boot 
Fence" nearD. H. Lawrence Ranch, Questa, New Mexico, 1991 
(courtesy Cheryl Wagner); paving detail at Ernest Hemingway House 
National Historic Site, KeyWest, Florida, 1994 (courtesy author); and, 
tree planting detail for Jefferson Memorial Park, St. Lo11is, Missouri 
(co11rtesy Office of Dan Kiley) 
vegetation and wildlife which have dynamic qualitie s that 
differentiate cultural landscapes from other cultural 
resource s, such as historic structures . Thus, their 
documentation , treatment, and ongoing management 
requir e a comprehensive, multi-disciplinary approach . 
Today, those involved in preservation planning and 
man agement for cultural landscapes repre sent a broad 
arra y of academic backgrounds, training , and related 

project experie nce. Professiona ls may have expertise in 
landscape archit ecture, histo ry, landscape archeology, 
forestry, agriculture, horticulture, pomology, pollen 
analysis, planning, archi tecture, engineering (civil, 
structura l, mechanical, traffic), cultural geography, wildlife, 
ecology, ethnography, interpretation, material and object 
conservation, landscape main tenance and management. 
Historians and historic preservation professionals can bring 
expertise in the history of the landscape, architecture, art, 
industry, agricu lture, society and other subjects. Landscape 
preservation teams, including on-site management teams 
and indepen dent consultants, are often directed by a 
landscape architect with specific expertise in landscape 
preservation. It is highly recommended that disciplines 
relevant to the landscapes' inherent features be represented 
as well. 
Additional guidance may be obtained from State Historic 
Preservation Offices, local preservation commissions, the 
National Park Service, local and state park agencies, 
national and sta te chapters of the American Society of 
Landscape Architects, the Alliance for Historic Landscape 
Preservation, the National Association of Olmsted Parks, 
and the Catalog of Landscape Records in the United States 
at Wave Hill among others. 2
A range of issues may need to be addressed when 
considering how a particular cultural landscape should be 
treated . This may include the in-kind replacement of 
declining vegetation, reproduction of furnishings, 
rehabilitation of structures, accessibility provisions for 
people with disabilities, or the treatment of industrial 
properties that are rehabilitated for new uses. 
Preservation Planning for Cultural 
Landscapes 
Careful planning prior to undertaking work can help 
prevent irrevocable damage to a cultural landscape. 
Professional techniques for identifying, documenting, 
evaluating and preserving cultural landscapes have 
advanced during the past 25 years and are continually 
being refined. Preservation planning generally involves the 
following steps: historical research; inventory and 
documentation of existing conditions; site analysis and 
evaluation of integrity and significance; development of a 
cultural landscape preservation approach and treatment 
plan; development of a cultural landscape management 
plan and management philosophy; the development of a 
strategy for ongoing maintenance; and preparation of a 
record of treatment and future research recommendations. 
The steps in this process are not independent of each other, 
nor are they always sequential. In fact, information gathered 
in one step may lead to a re-examination or refinement of 
previous steps . For example, field inventory and historical 
research are likely to occur simultaneously, and may reveal 
unnoticed cultural resources that should be protected. 
The treatment and management of cultural landscape 
should also be considered in concert with the management 
of an entire historic property. As a result, many other 
studies may be relevant. They include management plans, 
interpretive plans, exhibit design, historic structures 
reports, and other. 
CULTURAL LANDSCAPE REPORTS 
A Cultural Landscape Report (CLR) is the primary 
report that documents the history, significance and 
treatment of a cultural landscape . A CLR evaluates 
the history and integrity of the landscape including 
any changes to its geographical context , features , 
materials , and use. 
CLR's are often prepared when a change (e.g. a new 
visitor's center or parking area to a landscape) is 
proposed. In such instances, a CLR can be a useful 
tool to protect the landscape 's character-defining 
features from undue wear, alteration or loss. A CLR 
can provide managers , curators and others with 
information needed to make management decisions. 
A CLR will often yield new information about a 
landscap e's historic significance and integrity, even 
for those already listed on the National Register. 
Where appropriate, National Register files should be 
amended to reflect the new findings . 
These steps can result in several products includ ing a 
Cultural Landscape Report (also known as a Historic 
Landscape Report), stateme nts for manage ment, 
interpretive guide, maintena nce guide and mai ntenance 
records. 
Historical Research 
Research is essential before under taking any treatme nt. 
Findings will help identify a landscape's historic per iod(s) 
of ownership, occupa ncy and development, and bring 
greater understanding of the associa tions and 
charac teristics that make the landscape or his tory 
significant. Research findings provide a foundation to 
make educated decisions for work, and can also facilitate 
ongoing main tenance and management opera tions, 
interpretation and eventual comp liance requirements. 
A variety of primary and secondary sources may be 
consulted. Primary archiva l sources can include histo ric 
plans, surveys, plats, tax maps, atlases, U. S. Geologica l 
Survey maps, soil profiles, aeria l photog raphs, 
photographs, stereoscopic views, glass lantern slides, 
postcards, engravings, pain tings, newspa pers, journa ls, 
construction drawings, specifica tions, plant lists, nursery 
catalogs, house hold records, account books and perso nal 
correspondence. Secondary sou rces include monogra phs, 
published histories, theses, Natio nal Regis ter forms, survey 
data, local preservation plans, sta te contexts and scholarly 
articles. (See Figures 5-7, page 4.) 
Contemporary documentary reso urces should also be 
consulted. This may include recent stud ies, plans, surveys, 
aerial and infrared photogra phs, Soil Conserva tion Service 
soil maps, inventories, investiga tions and in terviews. Oral 
histories of residents, managers, and maintenance 
personnel wit h a long tenure or historica l association can be 
valuable sou rces of informatio n about changes to a 
landscape over many years. (Figures 8-9, page 4) For 
properties listed in the Natio nal Register, nomi nation forms 
should be consulted. 
3 

4 
Figures 8, 9: Mary Smith Nelson spent her childhood at the Zane Grey 
family compound 111 Lackawaxen, Pennsylvania. Recently, her 
recollect10ns of nearly eighty years ago helped landscape architects to 
document the evolution of this cultural landscape. These oral memoirs 
have s111ce been confmned by archeologica/ and archival findings. 
(courtesy NationalPark Service, Zane Grey House Archives and 
LANDSCAPES) 
Figures 5-7: Atlases and aerial photographs were useful for 
understandingthe evolution of b11nal grounds in Lancaster County, 
Pennsylvania. Comparing the plans from the 1864 and 1875 atlases 
(courtesy Lancaster County Historical Society) with a 1980 aerial 
photograph (courtesy Lancaster County Planning Commission) revealed 
the growth and development of Woodward Hill Cemetery and its 
geographic context for over a century. 

Figure 11: Landscape archeology is an important research tool that can 
provide locatwn, datingand detail verification for landscape features. At 
Monticello, the estate of Thomas Jefferson in Charlottesville, Virginia, 
archeolog1ca/ research has employed both excavational and non-invasive 
methods._ This has included aerial photography, soil resistivity, transect 
and
in the
stratified samplmg and photogrammetric recording. As illustrated 
the plan above, fence post spacing and alignment can be confirmed 
with a transect trenchmg tec/mique. (courtesy Thomas Jefferson 
Memorial Foundation) 
3 
Figure Traditional land uses are often the key to long term 
preservat1_011. Therefore, a knowledge of prior landscape management 
practices 1s essential as part of the research phase. Land use patterns were 
often the result of trad1twnal act1v1t1es such as agriculture, fishing or 
mining. In Hanale1, Hawaii for example, taro fields are important 
because they reflect the cont111u1ty of use of the land over time. (courtesy 
Land and Community Associates) 
10:
Preparing Period Plans 
In the case of designed landscapes, even though a historic 
design plan exists, it does not necessarily mean that it was 
realized fully, or even in part. Based on a review of the 
archival resources outlined above, and the extant landscape 
today, an as-built period plan may be delineated. For all 
successive tenures of ownership, occupancy and landscape 
change, perzod plans should be generated (see Figure 13, 
page 6). Period plans can document to the greatest extent 
possible the historic appearance during a particular period 
of ownership, occupancy, or development. Period plans 
sho uld be based on primary archival sources and should 
avoid conjecture. Features that are based on secondary or 
less accurate sources should be graphically differentiated. 
Ideally, all referenced archival sources should be annotated 
and footnoted directly on period plans. 
Where historical data is missing, period plans should reflect 
any gaps in the CLR narrative text and these limitations 
considered in future treatment decisions (See Treatments 
for Cultural Landscapes on page 13.) 
Inventorying and Documenting Existing Conditions 
Both physical evidence in the landscape and historic 
documentation guide the historic preservation plan and 
treatments. To document existing conditions, intensive 
field investigation and reconnaissance should be conducted 
at the same time that documentary research is being 
gathered. Information should be exchanged among 
preservation professionals, historians, technicians, local 
residents, managers and visitors. 
To assist in the survey process, National Register Bulletins 
have been published by the National Park Service to aid in 
identifying, nominating and evaluating designed and rural 
historic landscapes. Additionally, Bulletins are available for 
specific land _scape types such as battlefields, mining sites, 
and cemeteries.
®""'""''""' @• .... - , ... , 
@) "" ... .. 
©"""""""'"" ' 
Preparing Existing Condition Plans 
Inventory and documentation may be recorded in plans, 
sections, photographs, aenal photographs, axonometric 
perspectives, narratives, video - or any combination of 
techniques . Existing conditions should generally be 
documented to scale, drawn by hand or generated by 
computer. The scale of the drawings is often determined by 
the size and complexity of the landscape . Some landscapes 
may require documentation at more than one scale. For 
example, a large estate may be documented at a small scale 
to depict its spatial and visual relationships, while the 
discrete area around an estate mansion may require a larger 
scale to illustrate individual plant materials, pavement 
patterns and other details. The same may apply to an 
entire rural historic district and a fenced vegetable garden 
contained within. (See Figures 14-15, page 8). 
When landscapes are documented in photographs, 
registration points can be set to indicate the precise location 
and orientation of features. Registration points should 
correspond to significant forms, features and spatial 
relationships within the landscape and its surrounds (see 
5 
Although there are several ways to inventory and 
document a landscape, the goal is to create a baseline from 
a detailed record of the landscape and its features as they 
exist at the present (considering seasonal variations) Each 
landscape inventory should address issues of bound ary 
delineation, documentation methodologies and techniqu es, 
the limitations of the inventory, and the scope of inventory 
efforts. These are most often influenced by the timetable, 
budget, project scope, and the purpose of the inventory 
and, depending on the physical qualities of the property, its 
scale, detail, and the interrelationship between natural and 
cultural resources. For example, inventory objectives to 
develop a treatment plan may differ considerably compared 
to those needed to develop an ongoing maintenance plan. 
Once the criteria for a landscape inventory are developed 
and tested, the methodology should be explained. 
? 
6

/ 
6 
DEGREE OF DOCUMENTATION 
HISTORIC LANDSCAPE FEATURES SITE MANNING HISTORIC LETTERS 1955-1993 SECONDARY 
EVIDENCE PLAN PHOTOS 1914-1946 RECORDS SOURCES 
NATURAL SYSTEMS/TOPOCRAPHY • • • • • ? 
Bedrock (Quarry) • • • • Land Contour • • • • • Rockwork • • • • • 
WATER FEATURES • • • • ? 
Alignment-Cascade • • • • Alignment-Pools & Streams • • • • • Materials-Cascade • • • • Materials-Pools & Streams • • • • 
CIRCULATION ? 
Alignment-Upland Area • • • Alignment-Perimeter Paths • • • • • Alignment-Internal Paths • • • Materials-Upland Area • • • Materials-Perimeter Paths • • • • Materials-Internal Paths • • • • 
SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS ? 
Garden Site (Quarry) • • • • Viewshed (Cuyahoga Valley) • • • Vista over Garden from Terrace • • Views within Garden • • • • Views within Upland • • • Views from Croquet Lawn • • 
VEGETATION ? 
Native Forest Trees • • • • • Ornamental Shrubs in Garden • • • • Groundcovers in Garden • • • • Herbaceous Plants in Garden • • • 
SITE FURNISHINGS ? 
Lanterns • • • • Seats • • • 
STRUCTURES ? 
Torii Gate • • • Cistern • • • • Stone Wall Concealing Cistern • • • • Lagan Bridges • • • Umbrella House • • Trellis/Lattice • • 
Figure 12: This chart measures available documentation for character-defining features in the Japanese Garden at Stan Hywet Hall, Akron, Ohio designed by 
Warren Manning. Areas with little or no historic documentation are noted, thus identifying areas where future treatment options may be restricted. As 
illustrated, restoration or reconstruction are viable alternatives based on the rich research findings. (courtesy Stan Hywet Hall Foundation, lnc. and 
Doell and Doe/I) 
Figure 13: Period plans show the evolution of Aspet, the home of Augustus St. Gaudens, Cornish, New Hampshire. Plans were developed at two scales: first 
for the entire estate's development, and second for the core area around the house, studio and gardens. For both, plans were generated for five time periods: 
1885-1903, 1903-1907, 1907-1926, 1926-1965 and 1965-1992. Illustrated above are the 1885-1903, 1907-1926, and the 1926-1965 plans for the core area. 
(courtesy National Park Service, North Atlantic Region and Pressley Associates) 

READING THE LANDSCAPE 
A noted geographer stated, "The attempt to derive 
meaning from landscapes possesses overwhelming 
virtue. It keeps us constantly alert to the world around 
us, demanding that we pay attention not just to some of 
the things around us but to all of them-the whole visible 
world in all of its rich, glorious, messy, confusing, ugly, 
and beautiful complexity." 4 
Landscapes can be read on many levels-landscape as 
nature, habitat, artifact, system, problem, wealth, 
ideology, history, place and aesthetic. When developing 
a strategy to document a cultural landscape, it is 
important to attempt to read the landscape in its context 
of place and time. (See Figures 16-17, page 8) 
5 
Reading the landscape, like engaging in archival research, 
requires a knowledge of the resource and subject area as 
well as a willingness to be skeptical. As with archival 
research, it may involve serendipitous discoveries. 
Evidence gained from reading the landscape may confirm 
or contradict other findings and may encourage the 
observer and the historian to revisit both primary and 
secondary sources with a fresh outlook. Landscape 
investigation may also stimulate other forms of research 
and survey, such as oral histories or archeological 
investigations, to supplement what appeared on-site. 
There are many ways to read a landscape-whatever 
approach is taken should provide a broad overview. This 
may be achieved by combining on-the-ground 
observations with a bird's-eye perspective.To begin this 
process, aerial photographs should be reviewed to gain 
an orientation to the landscape and its setting. Aerial 
photographs come in different sizes and scales, and can 
thus portray different levels of detail in the landscape. 
Aerial photographs taken at a high altitude, for example, 
may help to reveal remnant field patterns or traces of an 
abandoned circulation system; or, portions of axial 
relationships that were part of the original design, since 
obscured by encroaching woodland areas. Low altitude 
aerial photographs can point out individual features such 
as the arrangement of shrub and herbaceous borders, and 
the exact locations of furnishings, lighting, and fence 
Figure 22, page 11 for an example.) The points may also 
correspond to historic views to illustrate the change in the 
landscape to date . These locations may also be used as a 
management tool to document the landscape's evolution, 
and to ensure that its character-defining features are 
preserved over time through informed maintenance 
operations and later treatment and management decisions . 
All features that contribute to the landscape's historic 
character should be recorded . These include the physical 
features described on page 1 (e.g. topography, circulation) , 
and the visual and spatial relationships that are character­
defining. The identification of existing plants, should be 
specific, including genus, species, common name, age (if 
known) and size . The woody, and if appropriate, 
herbaceous plant material should be accurately located on 
the existing conditions map. To ensure full representation 
of successional herbaceous plants , care should be taken to 
document the landscape in different season s, if possible. 
alignments. This knowledge can prove beneficial before 
an on-site visit. 
Aerial photographs provide clues that can help orient the 
viewer to the landscape. The next step may be to view 
the landscape from a high point such as a knoll or an 
upper floor window. Such a vantage point may provide 
an excellent transition before physically entering the 
cultural landscape . 
On ground, evidence should then be studied, including 
character-defining features, visual and spatial 
relationships. By reviewing supporting materials from 
historic research, individual features can be understood 
in a systematic fashion that show the continuum that 
exists on the ground today . By classifying these features 
and relationships, the landscape can be understood as an 
artifact, possessing evidence of evolving natural systems 
and human interventions over time. 
For example, the on-site investigation of an abandoned 
turn-of-the-century farm complex reveals the remnant of 
a native oak and pine forest which was cut and burned in 
the mid-nineteenth century. This previous use is 
confirmed by a small stand of mature oaks and the 
presence of these plants in the emerging secondary 
woodland growth that is overtaking this farm complex in 
decline. A ring count of the trees can establish a more 
accurate age. By reading other character-defining 
features-such as the traces of old roads, remnant 
hedgerows, ornamental trees along boundary roads, 
foundation plantings, the terracing of grades and 
remnant fences -the visual, spatial and contextual 
relationships of the property as it existed a century ago 
may be understood and its present condition and 
integrity evaluated. 
The findings of on-site reconnaissance, such as materials 
uncovered during archival research, may be considered 
primary data. These findings make it possible to inventory 
and evaluate the landscape's features in the context of the 
property's current condition. Character-defining features 
are located in situ, in relationship to each other and the 
greater cultural and geographic contexts. 
Treating living plant materials as a curatorial collection has 
also been undertaken at some cultural landscapes. This 
process, either done manually or by computer, can track the 
condition and maintenance operations on individual plants. 
Some sites, such as the Frederick Law Olmsted National 
Historic Site, in Brookline, Massachusetts have developed a 
field investigation numbering system to track all woody 
plants. (See Table, page 9) Due to concern for the 
preservation of genetic diversity and the need to replace 
significant plant materials, a number of properties are 
beginning to propagate historically important rare plants that 
are no longer commercially available, unique, or possess 
significant historic associations. Such herbarium collections 
become a part of a site's natural history collection . 
Once the research and the documentation of existing 
conditions have been completed, a foundation is in place to 
analyze the landscape's continuity and change, determine 
its significance, assess its integrity, and place it within the 
historic context of similar landscapes. 
7 

8 
XII 
XI 
.. 
0 
0 
t 
X 
III 
II 
XIV 
• 
0 
IX 
1)W)UOM 
M.miCM.N 
D,C, flWl9IOIITAT'IOft 
• 
MCWID­
IOUNO,to,lllll , 
"""'"9 , 
™-'N "'-NI 
Figures 16 and 17: Landscapes cannot be inventoried in a vacuum. 
Therefore, an understanding of its geographic context or setting should be 
part of inventory process. At Rancho Los Alamitos, Long Beach, 
California (middle and bottom opposite), a comparison between the 1936 
aerial view with a present day aerial photograph illustrates the 
encroachments and adjacent developments that will affect the future 
treatment of visual and spatial relationships. (courtesy Rancho Los 
Alamitos Foundation) 
ACCESS ROAD 
Figures 14 and 15: Existing conditions plans for large corridor 
landscapes can employ a variety of documentation methodologies. For the 
2 -1/2 mile Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway, Washington, D.C., the 
Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) used aerial photo­
grammetric photographs as the basis for digitized mapping and delineated 
drawings. Overall documentation was done at a scale of 1" = 40' with a 
100' either side geographic context. Contours were shown at 2' intervals, 
tree canopy with trunk placement for specimen species, bridges (also 
drawn in detail), roads, and the creek itself. In all, there are 36 drawings 
measuring 34" x 44" for the project. These two sample drawings include 
the index to plans (above) and an area of existing conditions 
documentation (opposite top). (courtesy Historic American Buildings 
Survey) 

HISTORIC PLANT INVENTORY 
Within cultural landscapes, plants may have historical or 
botanical significance. A plant may have been associated 
with a historic figure or event or be part of a notable 
landscape design. A plant may be an uncommon 
cultivar, exceptional in size, age, rare and commercially/ 
unavailable. If such plants are lost, there would be a loss 
of historic integrity and biological diversity of the cultural 
landscape.To ensure that significant plants are preserved , 
an inventory of historic plants is being conducted at the 
North Atlantic Region of the National Park Service .
Historical landscape architects work with landscape 
managers and historians to gather oral and documented 
history on the plant's origin and potential significance. 
Each plant is then examined in the field by an expert 
horticulturist who records its name, condition, age, size, 
distribution, and, any notable botanic characteristics. 
8 
1. The Arnold Arboretum's preservation technician, lilac specialist, and 
horticulturist compare lilacs from the Vanderbilt Mansion National 
Historic Site in Hyde Park, New York with lilac specimens in the 
Arboretum's living collection. (courtesy Olmsted Center) 
3. The Arnold Arboretum's horticulturist, landscape historian, 
and preservation technician examine shrubs at the Longfellow 
National Historic Site in Cambridge, MA. (courtesy Olmsted 
Center) 
Plants that are difficult to identify or are of potential 
historical significance are further examined in the 
laboratory by a plant taxonomist who compares leaf, 
fruit, and flower characteristics with herbarium 
specimens for named species, cultivars and varieties. 
For plants species with many cultivars, such as apples, 
roses, and grapes, specimens may be sent to specialists 
for identification. 
If a plant cannot be identified, is dying or in decline, 
and unavailable from commercial nurseries, it may be 
propagated. Propagation ensures that when rare and 
significant plants decline, they can be replaced with 
genetically-identical plants. Cuttings are propagated 
and grown to replacement size in a North Atlantic 
Region Historic Plant Nursery. 
2. The Arnold Arboretum's horticulturist and preservation technician 
examine an enormous black locust tree at the Home of F.D. Roosevelt 
National Historic Site in Hyde Park, NY. (courtesy Olmsted Center) 
9 

10 
Site Analysis: Evaluating Integrity and Significance 
By analyzing the landscape, its change over time can be 
understood. This may be accomplished by overlaying the 
various period plans with the existing conditions plan. Based 
on these findings, individual features may be attributed to the 
particular period when they were introduced, and the various 
periods when they were present. 
It is during this step that the historic significance of the 
landscape component of a historic property and its integrity 
are determined. Historic significance is the recognized 
importance a property displays when it has been evaluated, 
includinf when it has been found to meet National Register 
Criteria. A landscape may have several areas of historical 
significance. An understanding of the landscape as a 
continuum through history is critical in assessing its 
cultural and historic value. In order for the landscape to 
have integrity, these character-defining features or qualities 
that contribute to its significance must be present. 
 
While National Register nominations document the 
significance and integrity of historic properties, in general, 
they may not acknowledge the significance of the 
landscape's design or historic land uses, and may not 
contain an inventory of landscape features or 
characteristics. Additional research is often necessary to 
provide the detailed information about a landscape's 
evolution and significance useful in making decision for the 
treatment and maintenance of a historic landscape . Existing 
National Register forms may be amended to recognize 
additional areas of significance and to include more 
complete descriptions of historic properties that have 
significant land areas and landscape features . 
Integrity is a property's historic identity evidenced by the 
survival of physical characteristics from the property's 
historic or prehistoric period. The seven qualities of integrity 
are location, setting, feeling, association, design, workman­
ship and materials . ' When evaluating these qualities, care 
should be taken to consider change itself. For example, when 
a second-generation woodland overtakes an open pasture in a 
battlefield landscape, or a woodland edge encloses a scenic 
vista. For situations such as these, the reversibility and/ or 
compatibility of those features should be considered, both 
individually, and in the context of the overall landscape . 
Together, evaluations of significance and integrity, when 
combined with historic research, documentation of existing 
conditions, and analysis findings, influence later treatment 
and interpretation decisions . (See Figure 21-23) 
0 
Developing a Historic Preservation Approach 
and Treatment Plan 
Treatment may be defined as work carried out to achieve a 
historic preservation goal-it cannot be considered in a 
vacuum. There are many practical and philosophical 
factors that may influence the selection of a treatment for a 
landscape. These include the relative historic value of the 
property, the level of historic documentation, existing 
physical conditions, its historic significance and integrity, 
historic and proposed use (e.g. educational, interpretive, 
passive, active public, institutional or private), long- and 
shor t-term objectives, operational and code requirements 
(e.g. accessibility, fire, security) and costs for anticipated 
capital improvement, staffing and maintenance. The value 
of any significant archeological and natural resources 
Figure 19: The landscape of Lyndhurst, Tarrytown, New York is 
significant in American culture and meets Criterion C of the National 
Register because it embodies the distinctive character of a type and period 
in American landscape architecture, known as early Picturesque; it 
possesses high artistic value; and it is the work of a recognized master 
gardener, Ferdinand Mangold. (courtesy National Trust for Historic 
Preservation) 
Figure 18: At Lawnfteld, the home of President James A. Garfield near 
Cleveland, Ohio, the Sugar Maple that shadowed the porch during Garfield's 
1880 "Front Porch Campaign" is in decline. Cuttings were taken from the 
historically significant tree by the Holden Arboretum and the National Park 
Service for eventual in-kind replacement. (courtesy NPS, Midwest Region) 
9
10

Figure 20: Cultural landscapes often contain plant communities such as 
orchards or meadows-both of which may or may not require a 
management intervention. When analyzing a landscape, it is important 
to recognize the present-day biodiversity of these resources-for example 
at the Fruita Rural Historic District in Capitol Reef National Park in 
Utah, the landscape contains 2,500 fruit trees associated with settlement 
and agriculture on the Colorado Plateau (courtesy D. White). 
' ' ' I 
. 
' ' 
.... 
' 
♦ 
C::::j --- -------- ----------------" 
I 
I ■ 
I 
I 
. . 
: ! 
· 
1 
I . :.3" 
. 
0 
I 
f r i 
I 0 
1 
f:} 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
· 0 0 
0 0 
•••L-------------------------------- -------------- __________ .J 
-------------
11 
Figures 22 and 23: The plan for the Keh/beck Farmstead, located in Cass 
County in Southeastern Nebraska, illustrates a well-planned, and 
aesthetically arranged general farm complex of the twentieth century. 
The farmstead is composed of 23 contributing and 5 non-contributing 
resources. IntegrihJ was judged uniformly high because many character­
defining resources were present and the visual and spatial relationships 
mtact. Note the varied graphic techniques used to document a variety of 
fence types, and, the key to photographs illustrating the various 
landscape features and spatial relationships. The photograph above, 
labeled #3 on the farmstead, is looking north along the farm lane allee. 
(courtesy National Register Files) 
Figure 21: integrity can involve both continuity and change. This can be 
eviden_ced by a detailed review of materials. Although the surface 
materialhas changed on some roads through the Port O11eida (near 
Empire, Michigan) community, the character-defining alignment, width 
and rows of Sugar Maple trees remain intact. (courtesy NPS, Midwest 
Region). 

12 
LANDSCAPE INTERPRETATION 
Figures A and B: Archeology and restoration of the Privy Garden at Hampton Court Palace gardens, England. The project is being 
interpreted to the public in the garden, an indoor exhibition and a multimedia show. The outdoor interpretive display, (above left) includes 
period plans, aerial photographs and historic images that detail the history of the garden and curre11/ work, 1994. (courtesy 
the author) 
Landscape interpretation is the process of providing 
the visitor with tools to experience the landscape as it 
existed during its period of significance, or as it 
evolved to its present state. These tools may vary 
widely, from a focus on existing features to the 
addition of interpretive elements. These could 
include exhibits, self-guided brochures, or a new 
representation of a lost feature. The nature of the 
cultural landscape, especially its level of significance, 
integrity, and the type of visitation anticipated may 
frame the interpretive approach. Landscape 
interpretation may be closely linked to the integrity 
and condition of the landscape, and therefore, its 
ability to convey the historic character and character-
should also be considered in the decision-making process. 
Therefore, a cultural landscape's preservation plan and the 
treatment selected will consider a broad array of dynamic 
and interrelated considerations. It will often take the form 
of a plan with detailed guidelines or specifications. 
Adopting such a plan, in concert with a preservation 
maintenance plan (page 18-19), acknowledges a cultural 
landscape's ever-changing existence and the 
interrelationship of treatment and ongoing maintenance. 
Performance standards, scheduling and record keeping of 
maintenance activities on a day-to-day or month-to-month 
basis, may then be planned for. Treatment, management, 
and maintenance proposals can be developed by a broad 
range of professionals and with expertise in such fields as 
landscape preservation, horticulture, ecology, and 
landscape maintenance. 
The selection of a primary treatment for the landscape, 
utilizing the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the 
Treatment of Historic Properties, establishes an overall 
historic preservation approach, as well as a philosophical 
framework from which to operate. Selecting a treatment is 
based on many factors. They include management and 
interpretation objectives for the property as a whole, the 
period(s) of significance, integrity, and condition of 
individual landscape features. 
defining features of the past. If a landscape has high 
integrity, the interpretive approach may be to direct 
visitors to surviving historic features without 
introducing obtrusive interpretive devices such as 
free-standing signs. For landscapes with a 
diminished integrity, where limited or no fabric 
remains, the interpretive emphasis may be on using 
extant features and visual aids (e.g. markers, 
photographs, etc.) to help visitors visualize the 
resource as it existed in the past. The primary goal in 
these situations is to educate the visitor about the 
landscape's historic themes, associations and lost 
character-defining features or broader historical, 
social and physical landscape contexts. 
For all treatments, the landscape's existing conditions and 
its ability to convey historic significance should be carefully 
considered. For example, the life work, design philosophy 
and extant legacy of an individual designer should all be 
understood for a designed landscape such as an estate, 
prior to treatment selection. For a vernacular landscape, 
such as a battlefield containing a largely intact mid­
nineteenth century family farm, the uniqueness of that 
agrarian complex within a local, regional, state, and 
national context should be considered in selecting a 
treatment. 
The overall historic preservation approach and treatment 
approach can ensure the proper retention, care, and repair 
of landscapes and their inherent features. In short, the 
Standards act as a preservation and management tool for 
cultural landscapes. The four potential treatments are 
described in the box opposite. 
11 
Landscape treatments can range from simple, inexpensive 
preservation actions, to complex major restoration or 
reconstruction projects. The progressive framework is 
inverse in proportion to the retention of historic features 
and materials. Generally, preservation involves the least 
change, and is the most respectful of historic materials. It 
maintains the form and material of the existing landscape. 
Rehabilitation usually accommodates contemporary 

Figure 24: On some occasions, especially larger landscapes, it is possible 
to have a primary treatment, with discrete, or secondary areas of another 
treatment. This is most common for an individual feature in a larger 
landscape. At the Eugene and Carlotta O'Neill Historic Site, Danville, 
California the primary treatment selected for the courtyard was 
restoration. When accommodating universal accessibility requirements, 
the introduction of a grass paver walk was installed which warranted the 
removal of a few historic shrubs. This discrete project would be considered 
a rehabilitation treatment. (courtesy Patricia M. O'Donnell) 
TREATMENTS FOR CULTURAL 
LANDSCAPES 
Prior to undertaking work on a landscape, a treatment plan 
or similar document should be developed. The four primary 
treatments identified in the Secretary of the Interior's 
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties , are: 12
Preservation is defined as the act or process of applying 
measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity, 
and materials of an historic property. Work, including 
preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property, 
generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair 
of historic materials and features rather than extensive 
replacement and new construction. New additions are not 
within the scope of this treatment; however, the limited and 
sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical and plumbing 
systems and other code-required work to make properties 
functional is appropriate within a preservation project. 
Rehabilitation is defined as the act or process of making 
possible a compatible use for a property through repair, 
alterations, and additions while preserving those portions or 
features which convey its historical or cultural values. 
Restoration is defined as the act or process of accurately 
depicting the form, features, and character of a property as it 
appeared at a particular period of time by means of the 
removal of features from other periods in its history and 
reconstruction of missing features from the restoration 
period. The limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, 
electrical and plumbing systems and other code-required 
work to make properties functional is appropriate within a 
restoration project. 
Reconstruction is defined as the act or process of depicting, 
by means of new construction, the form, features, and 
detailing of a non-surviving site, landscape, building, 
structure, or object for the purpose of replicating its 
appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic 
location. 
Figures 25 and 26: When 
the American Elm 
(Ulmus americana) was 
plagued with Dutch Elm 
Disease many historic 
properties relied on the 
Japanese Zelkova 
(Zelkova serrata) as a 
substitute plant. As 
illustrated, the overall 
form and scale of these 
trees is really quite 
different, and would 
therefore not be an 
appropriate substitute 
plant material under a 
restoration or 
reconstruction 
treatment. 
alterations or additions without altering significant historic 
features or materials, with successful projects involving 
minor to major change. Restoration or reconstruction 
attempts to recapture the appearance of a property, or an 
individual feature at a particular point in time, as confirmed 
by detailed historic documentation. These last two 
treatments most often require the greatest degree of 
intervention and thus, the highest level of documentation. 
In all cases, treatment should be executed at the appropriate 
level reflecting the condition of the landscape, with repair 
work identifiable upon close inspection and/ or indicated in 
supplemental interpretative information. When repairing 
or replacing a feature, every effort should be made to 
achieve visual and physical compatibility. Historic 
materials should be matched in design, scale, color and 
texture . 
A landscape with a high level of integrity and authenticity 
may suggest preservation as the primary treatment. Such a 
treatment may emphasize prot ection, stabilization, cyclical 
maintenance, and repair of character-defining landscape 
features. Changes over time that are part of the landscape's 
continuum and are significant in their own right may be 
13 

14 
Figure 27: The historic birch al/ee at Stan Hywet Hall, Akron, Ohio was 
suffermg from borer infestation and leaf miner. Dying trees were topped 
and basal sprout growth encouraged. Next, trees were selectively 
thinned, and ultimately, when the new growth matured, older trunks
were removed. Original rootstock and genetic material were preserved. 
As illustrated, this preservation treatment took fifteen years to realize. 
(courtesy Child Associates) 
Figure 28: Patterns on the land have been preserved through the 
continuation of traditional uses such as the grape fields at the Sterling 
Vineyards in Calistoga, California. (courtesy author) 
Fig11res 29: Rehabilitation was selected as the primary treatment for 
Columbus Park, Chicago, 11/inois. Originally designed and executed 
between 1917 and 1920 by Jens Jensen, the waterfall, cascades, rocky 
brook and associated landscape, are well documented and possesses a high 
level of integrity. (courtesy author) 
Figure 30, 31: A 75-mile portion of Skyline Drive at Shenandoah 
National Park overlooking the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia req11ired 
the rehabilitation of a 22" -high, dry-laid stone wall. The new wall was 
built to a height of 27" - code normally requires a height of 36". The wall 
was constructedof percast concrete, clad with split stone and mortar 
joints. To achieve visual co111patibilihJ recessed mortar joints were 
arranged in a random pattern (courtesy Robert R. Page) 

e:,-,......, retained, while changes that are not significant, yet do not 
encroach upon or erode character may also be maintained. 
Preservation entails the essential operations to safeguard 
existing resources. (Figures 27-28) 
Rehabilitation is often selected in response to a 
contemporary use or need-ideally such an approach is 
compatible with the landscape's historic character and 
historic use . Rehabilitation may preserve existing fabric 
along with introducing some compatible changes, new 
additions and alterations. Rehabilitation may be desirable 
at a private residence in a historic district where the 
homeowner's goal is to develop an appropriate landscape 
treatment for a front yard, or in a public park where a 
support area is needed for its maintenance operations. 
(Figures 29-31) 
When the most important goal is to portray a landscape and 
its character-defining features at an exact period of time, 
restoration is selected as the primary treatment. Unlike 
preservation and rehabilitation, interpreting the landscape's 
continuum or evolution is not the objective. Restoration 
may include the removal of features from other periods 
and/or the construction of missing or lost features and 
materials from the reconstruction period. In all cases, 
treatment should be substantiated by the historic research 
findings and existing conditions documentation. 
Restoration and reconstruction treatment work should 
avoid the creation of a landscape whose features did not 
exist historically. For example, if features from an earlier 
period did not co-exist with extant features from a later 
period that are being retained, their restoration would not 
be appropriate. (Figures 32-34) 
In rare cases, when evidence is sufficient to avoid 
conjecture, and no other property exists that can adequately 
explain a certain period of history, reconstruction may be 
utilized to depict a vanished landscape. The accuracy of 
this work is critical. In cases where topography and the 
subsurface of soil have not been disturbed, research and 
existing conditions findings may be confirmed by thorough 
archeological investigations. Here too, those features that 
are intact should be repaired as necessary, retaining the 
original historic features to the greatest extent possible. The 
greatest danger in reconstruction is creating a false picture 
of history . 
False historicism in every treatment should be avoided . 
This applies to individual features as well as the entire 
landscape. Examples of inappropriate work include the 
introduction of historic-looking benches that are actually a 
new design, a fanciful gazebo placed in what was once an 
open meadow, executing an unrealized historic design, or 
designing a historic-looking landscape for a relocated 
historic structure within "restoration." 
Figure 32-34: Tower Grove Park in St. Louis, Missouri, is a National 
Historic Landmark. The music pavilion, just north of the main drive is a 
circular lawn area with radiating walks, white marble busts of eminent 
composers, walks, and curb. The area was in general decline, especially 
the marble b11sts which were suffering from acid rain damage. Based on 
the excellent documentationin nineteenth century annual reports, 
postcards and photographic images, this area was recently restored. 
Jllustrated above are a sample historic view, work in progress and the 
co111pleted restoration project. (courtesy Tower Grove Park) 
15 

16 
Figure 35-37: Central Park has developed a11 in-house historic 
preservation crew to undertake small projects. A specialized crew has 
been trained to specifically repair and rebuild rustic fumi shi11gs. A s 
illustrated, the restoration of the Dene rustic shelter was achieved by 
constructing it in the Ramble compound, moving in-place opposite 67th 
street and completed. (courtesy Central Park Conservancy) 
Developing a Preservation Maintenance Plan 
and Implementation Strategy 
Throughout the preservation planning process , it is 
important to ensure that existing landscape features are 
retained. Preservation maintenance is the practice of 
monitoring and controlling change in the landscape to 
ensure that its historic integrity is not altered and features 
are not lost. This is particularly important during the 
research and long-term treatment planning process. To be 
effective, the maintenance program must have a guiding 
philosophy, approach or strategy; an understanding of 
preservation maintenance techniques; and a system for 
documenting changes in the landscape. 
The philosophical approach to maintenance should 
coincide with the landscape's current stage in the 
preservation planning process. A Cultural Landscape 
Report and Treatment Plan can take several years to 
complete, yet during this time managers and property 
owners will likely need to address immediate issues related 
to the decline, wear, decay, or damage of landscape 
features . Therefore , initial maintenance operations may 
focus on the stabilization and protection of all landscape 
features to provide temporary, often emergency measures 
to prevent deterioration, failure, or loss, without altering 
the site's existing character. 
After a Treatment Plan is implemented, the approach to 
preservation maintenance may be modified to reflect the 
objectives defined by this plan . The detailed specifications 
prepared in the Treatment Plan relating to the retention, 
repair, removal, or replacement of features in the landscape 
should guide and inform a comprehensive preservation 
maintenance program. This would include schedules for 
monitoring and routine maintenance, appropriate preserva­
tion maintenance procedures, as well as ongoing record 
keeping of work performed. For vegetation, the preserva­
tion maintenance program would also include thresholds 
for growth or change in character, appropriate pruning 
methods, propagation and replacement procedures. 
To facilitate operations, a property may be divided into 
discrete management zones (Figure 41). These zones are 
sometimes defined during the Cultural Landscape Report 
process and are typically based on historically defined areas. 
Alternatively, zones created for maintenance practices and 
priorities could be used. Examples of maintenance zones 
would include woodlands , lawns, meadow, specimen trees, 
and hedges. 
Training of maintenance staff in preservation maintenance 
skills is essential. Preservation maintenance practices differ 
from standard maintenance practices because of the focus on 
perpetuating the historic character or use of the landscape 
rather than beautification. For example, introducing new 
varieties of turf, roses or trees is likely to be inappropriate. 
Substantial earth moving (or movement of soil) may be 
inappropriate where there are potential archeological 
resources. An old hedge or shrub should be rejuvenated, or 
propagated, rather than removed and replaced. A mature 
specimen tree may require cabling and careful monitoring to 
ensure that it is not a threat to visitor safety. Through 
training programs and with the assistance of preservation 
maintenance specialists, each property could develop 
maintenance specifications for the care of landscape features . 

Figure41 (below): A small property of under an acre may only have a few 
management zones including lawn, trees over lawn, shrub and herbaceous 
borders. Larger, more complex landscapes such as Jamaica Pond Park, 
Boston and Brookline, Massachusetts, contains a broader range of 
management zones including: forests, trees over grass-broad areas, trees 
over grass-narrow areas, meadows, and mown grass for active recreation 
amenities or passive use. (courtesy Walmsley/Pressley Joint Venture) 
Figure 40: A management decision was made to place a fence arounda 
sentinel tree in Balboa Park, San Diego, California. The fence protects the 
specimen from root damage-impact from excessive pedestrian compaction 
or lawn mower damage. (courtesy author). 
UI 
UD 
p 0 
. 
17 
Figure 38 and 39 (above, left a11d right): The importance of landscape 
analysis and its ability to inform treatment and maintenance decisions is 
reflected in these two plans for Downing Park, Newburgh, New York. 
The plan, rendered in black, top left, illustrates all extant historic plants, 
while the plan, top right, depicts plantings which are non-historic or 
invasive for removal or relocation outside of the historic park. (courtesy 
LANDSCAPES) 

statue of Liberty NationalMonument
FIELD INVENTORY. INSPECTION, AND WORK NEEDED 
London PLaneTree4-0-25
"'Ith rf'". 
P 
"?: 
• 
2 
I 1• 2 · l 
I 2 I -1 11 
11 
bnnch'5 no • 
I 00 • 
-
I 
2 -l • 
- Jn 
• p 
18 
DEVELOPING A PRESERVATION MAINTENANCE GUID E 
In the past, there was rarely adequate record-keeping to 
fully understand the ways a landscape was maintained. 
This creates gaps in our research findings. Today, we 
recognize that planning for ongoing maintenance and on­
site applications should be documented-both routinely 
and comprehensively . An annual work program or 
calendar records the frequency of maintenance work on 
built or natural landscape features. It can also monitor 
the age, health and vigor of vegetation . For example, on­
site assessments may document the presence of weeds, 
pests, dead leaves, pale color, wilting, soil compaction­
all of which signal particular maintenance needs. For 
built elements, the deterioration of paving or drainage 
systems may be noted and the need for repair or 
replacement indica ted before hazards develop. An 
overa ll maintenance program can assist in routine and 
cyclic maintenance of the landscape and can also guide 
long term treatment projects. 
To help structure a comprehensive maintenance 
opera tion that is responsive to staff, budget, and 
maintenance priorities, the National Park Service has 
developed two computer-driven programs for its own 
landscape resources . A Maintenance Management 
Program (MM) is designed to assist maintenance 
managers in their efforts to plan, organize, and direct the 
park maintenance system . An Inventory and Condition 
Assessment Program (ICAP) is designed to complement 
MM by providing a system for inventorying, assessing 
conditions, and for providing corrective work 
recommendations for all site features. 
Another approach to documenting maintenance and 
recording changes over time is to develop a manual or 
computerized graphic information system. Such a system 
should have the capability to include plans and 
photographs that would record a site's living collection of 
plant materials . (Also see discussion of the use of 
photography under Preparing Existing Conditions Plans, 
page 5.) This may be achieved using a computer-aided 
drafting program along with an integrated database 
management system. 
To guide immediate and ongoing maintenance, a 
systematic and flexible approach has been developed by 
the Olmsted Center for Landscape Preservation . 
Working with National Park Service landscape managers 
and maintenance specialists, staff assemble information 
and make recommendations for the care of individual 
landscape features . 
Each landscape feature is inspected in the field to 
document existing conditions and identify field work 
needed. Recommendations include maintenance 
procedures that are sensitive to the integrity of the 
landscape . 
Figure A- Existing Conditions: A map of the existing trees at the Statue of Liberty 
National Monument is used to indicate necessary preservation maintenance work 
(Drawn by Margaret Coffin, 1992) 
Figure B - Field InventonJ, Inspection, and 
work needed: Withi11 areas of the landscape, 
each feature is assigned a field identification 
number. An inspection is conducted to assess 
the condition, potential problems, such as 
deadwood or integral decay, and specify work 
needed. A map (above) is used to locate features 
that require attention) 

Statue of 
FEATURE DATA LONDON PLANE TREE 
CATEGORY: 
NAM.E: 
SOURCE OF 
CHARACTERISTICS: 
Al STU Horticulturist, 
of is of 
frui1 of and 
London in Plan by 
1937 (Newton, N. T. Harvard 1971, p. S43). 
PRES VA TION PRACTICES AND WORK 
out and 
damage. or dlle&SC. 
10 of 
Tnin all 
periods of moist, damp 
intttaK time• to 
inch or JO days To 
Ngs or at the end of the day. 
in Do 
and 
CULTURAL PROBLEMS: 
- Sycamore Aphids, 
-
SOURCE OF in-kind 
in 
PROPAGATION Take in or 
ADDITIONAL OF INFORMATION: 
Shigo, L. A NII: Shigo 
U. 1981. 
of National 
CALENDAR SPRING 
the 
l11efall 
in Spring, 
If the 
the 
LONDON 
10 or 
all 
and of will 
control at 
De­
lawn 3/4 or 
Wilh I do 
of 
on 
Cllcd..Jnil.... for of pll. 
and to the 
or an wlth an of or 
a of 1000 
lawn and 
Figure E - Record Keeping: A record sheet is 
created for each type of feature. Maintenance 
staff may record information relating to changes 
in condition, major work performed, removal, 
replacement, propagation and any other events. 
As records are added too through the years, they 
become a valuable source of documentation of the 
landscape's history. 
Figure C - Feature Data: For each feature that 
requires special care, a detailed sheet is 
developed. This contains notes on when to 
monitor and carry out work, specific procedures, 
cite potential problems, and perform repair or 
replacement. 
Figure D - Calendar for Monitoring and for 
Work: All feature-specific monitoring and work 
recommendations are combined into one seasonal 
calendar for all areas of the landscape to ensure 
that important work activities are not 
overlooked. 
Because landscapes change through the seasons, specifications 
for ongoing preservation maintenance should be organized in 
a calendar format. During each season or month, the calendar 
can be referenced to determine when, where, and how 
preservation maintenance is needed. For example, for some 
trees structural pruning is best done in the late winter while 
other trees are best pruned in the late summer. Serious pests 
are monitored at specific times of the year, in certain stages of 
their life cycle. This detailed calendar will in turn -identify 
staff needs and work priorities. 
Depending on the level of sophistication desired, one 
approach to documenting maintenance data and recording 
change over time is to use a computerized geographical or 
visual information system.1 Such a system would have the 
capabili ty to include plans and photographs that would focus 
on a site's landscape features. 
3 
If a computer is not available, a manual or notebook can be 
developed to organize and store important information. This 
approach allows managers to start at any level of detail and to 
begin to collect and organize information about landscape 
features (see Box opposite and above). The value of these 
maintenance records cannot be overstated. These records will 
be used in the future by historians to understand how the 
landscape has evolved with the ongoing care of the 
maintenance staff. 
Recording Treatment Work and Future 
Research Recommendations
The last and ongoing step in the preservation planning 
process records the treatment work as carried out. It may 
include a series of as-built drawings, supporting photographic 
materials, specifications and a summary assessment. New 
technologies that have been successfully used should be 
highlighted. Ideally, this information should be shared with 
interested national organizations for further dissemination 
and evaluation. 
The need for further research or additional activities should 
also be documented. This may include site-specific or 
contextual historical research, archeological investigations, 
pollen analysis, search for rare or unusual plant materials, 
or, material testing for future applications. 
Finally, in consultation with a conservator or archivist-to 
maximize the benefit of project work and to minimize the 
potential of data loss-all primary documents should be 
organized and preserved as archival materials. This may 
include field notes, maps, drawings, photographs, materia l 
sam ples, oral histories and other relative information. 
Summary 
The planning, treatment, and maintenance of cultural 
landscapes requires a multi-disciplinary approach. In 
landscapes, such as parks and playgrounds, battlefields, 
cemeteries, village greens, and agricultural land preserves­
more than any other type of historic resource-communities 
rightly presume a sense of stewardship. It is often this grass 
roots commitment that has been a catalyst for current research 
and planning initiatives. Individual residential properties 
often do not require the same level of public outreach, yet a 
systematic planning process will assist in making educated 
treatment, management and maintenance decisions. 
Wise stewardship protects the character, and or spirit of a 
place by recognizing history as change over time. Often, 
this also involves our own respectful changes through 
treatment. The potential benefits from the preservation of 
cultural landscapes are enormous. Landscapes provide 
19 
13

20 
scenic, economic, ecological, social, recreational and 
educational opportunities that help us understand ourselves 
as individuals, communities and as a nation. Their ongoing 
preservation can yield an improved quality of life for all, 
and, above all, a sense of place or identity for future 
generations. 
Selected Reading 
Birnbaum, Charles A, guest editor. Preservation Forum. 
"Focus on Landscape Preservation". Washington, D.C.: 
National Trust for Historic Preservation, Volume 7, No. 3, 
May/June 1992. 
Buggey Susan, guest editor. APT Bulletin. Special Issue: 
Conserving Historic Landscapes. Fredericksburg, VA: 
Association for Preservation Technology International, 
Volume XXIV, No. 3-4, 1992. 
Burns, John A, and the Staff of HABS/HAER. Recording 
Historic Structures. American Institute of Architects Press, 
1989. (Includes chapter on the documentation of Meridian 
Hill Park, pp. 206-219.) 
Diehl, Janet and Thomas S. Barrett, et al. The Conservation 
Easement Handbook. Managing Land Conservation and Historic 
Preservation Easement Programs, The Land Trust Exchange 
(now Alliance) and the Trust for Public Land, 1988. 
International Committee of Historic Gardens and Sites, 
ICOMOS-IFLA. Jardins et Sites Historiques, Scientific Journal. 
ICOMOS 1993. Compilation of papers on the subject, in 
both english and french . 
Kelso, William M., and Rachel Most. Earth Patterns: Essays 
in Landscape Archaeology. Charlottesville, VA: University 
Press of Virginia, 1990. 
Stokes, Samuel, N., et al. Saving America's Countryside: A 
Guide to Rural Conservation. Baltimore and London: John 
Hopkins University Press, 1989. 
Tishler, William, editor. American Landscape Architecture, 
Designers and Places. Washington, DC: The Preservation 
Press, 1989. 
Several publications available from the National Park 
Service deal directly with the preservation of historic 
landscapes. These include: 
America's Landscape Legacy, Brochure, Preservation 
Assistance Division, 1992. 
Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic Landscapes, 
Preservation Assistance Division, 1992 (Draft). 
Case Studies in Landscape Preservation, Preservation 
Assistance Division in cooperation with the Alliance for 
Landscape Preservation, 1995. 
Cultural Landscapes Bibliography: An Annotated 
Bibliography of Resources in the National Park System, Park 
Historic Architecture Division, 1992. 
Historic Landscape Directory; A Source Book of Agencies, 
Organizations, and Institutions Providing Information 
on Historic Landscape Preservation, Preservation 
Assistance Division, 1991. 
CRM, Cultural Resource Management, Thematic Issues : 
The Preservation of Cultural Landscapes, Volume 14, No.6, 
Acknowledgements 
This publication has been prepared pursuant to the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, which directs the Secretary of the Interi or 
to develop and make information concern ing historic properties. Comments on 
the usefulness of this publication may be directed to H. Ward Jandl , Deputy 
Chief, Preservation Assistance Division, National Park Service, P. 0. Box 37127, 
Washington, D.C. 20013-7127. This publication is not copyrighted and can be 
reproduced without penalty. Normal procedures for credit to the author and the 
National Park Service are appreciated. 
The author, Charles A. Birnbaum, Coordinator , Historic Landscape Initiative , 
Preservation Assistance Division , National Park Service would like to 
acknowledge the assistance of H. Ward Jandl and Kay Weeks. The Olmsted 
1991; A Reality Check for Our Nation's Parks, Volume 16, 
No. 4, 1993; Historic Transportation Corridors, Volume 16, 
No. 11, 1993; and, The Interpretation of Cultural 
Landscapes, Volume 17, No. 8, 1994. 
Pioneers of American Landscape Design: An Annotated 
Bibliography, Preservation Assistance Division, 1993 
(ISBN:0-16-041974-3). 
Making Educated Decisions: A Landscape Preservation 
Bibliography, Preservation Assistance Division, 1994 
(ISBN:0-16-045145-0) 
National Register Bulletin 18: How to Evaluate and Nominate 
Designed Historic Landscapes; National Register Bulletin 30: 
Guidelines for Evaluating and Documenting Rural Historic 
Landscapes; National Register Bulletin 40: Guidelines for 
Evaluating and Registering Battlefields; and, National 
Register Bulletin 41: Guidelines for Evaluating and 
Registering Cemeteries, Interagency Resources Division. 
Endnotes 
1 The cultural landscape definitions are rontained in NPS-28, Cu/tum/ Resource 
Management Guideline, Release No. 4, 1994, National Park Service. 
2 For an expanded list of offices to contact,see America'sLandscapeLegacy 
brochure. Free from the National Park Service PReservationAssistance
Division. 
4·Lewis, Pierce, "Common Landscapes as Historic Documents," Lubar, Steven 
and Kingery, W. David (eds.), Essayson Material Culture, Smithsonian Institution 
Press, Washington, DC,1993, p.138. 
3 From Kelso, William, A Reporton the Archeological Excavationat Monticello, 
CHarlottesville,VA, 1979-1981, Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, 1982. 
5 Meinig, D. W. 'The Beholding Eye: Ten Versions of the Same Scene," The 
Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes, Oxford University Press, New York, 
1979, pp. 33-48. 
6 See National Park Service National Register Bulletins under Selected Reading 
(opposite). 
7 The Historic American Buildings Survey, HABS, has generated standards for 
landscape documentation that they now utilize on a number of projects. 
Specifically, a case study on recording historic landscapes is included in 
Recording Historic Structures,pp. 206-219. See Selected Reading (opposite). 
8 This is being undertaken with technical assistance from the Olmsted Center 
for Landscape Preservation a partnership between the National Park Service 
and the Arnold Arboretum ofHarvard University that provides Cultural
landscape technical assistance, technology development and training. 
9 See National Register Bulletin 16A: How to Complete the National Register 
Registration Fann. Washington, D.C.: US Department of the Interior, National 
Park Service,Interagency Resources Division, 1991. 
10 Ibid.
11 The standards are general principles for the treatment of buildings, structures, 
sites, objects, districts and landscapes. The treatment standards are one set of 
standards included in the broader group known as the Secretary of the Interior's 
Standards for Archaelogy and Historic Preservation.
12 The Secretary of the Interior is responsible for establishing professional 
standards and providing advice on the preservation and protection of all 
Culturalresources listed on or eligible for the National Register of Historic 
Places. For a cop of the brochure, the Secretan; of the Interior's Standards for the 
Treatment of Historic Properties,1992 contactthe National Park Service 
Preservation Assistance Division (424) Box 37127 Washington, DC20013-7127. 
13 A visual information system, a romputer-aided mapping program with a 
linked database, has been developed for the historic landscape at the Frederick 
Olmsted National Historic Site. Data can be accessed directly from a digitized 
map such as informationon each plant including identification, age, location, 
size, rondition, and maintenance history. 
Center for Landscape Preservation at the Frederick Law Olmsted National 
Historic Site including Margie Coffin, Lauren Meier, Nora MitchelJ, and Charlie 
Pepper provided invaluable suppo rt. In particular, the proposed rewri te on 
preservation maintenance and historic plant materials was written by Margie 
Coffin. Significant contributions were also made by Patricia M. O'Donnell, Linda 
McClelland, Ellen Lipsey, Christine Capella Peters , Robert Page, Ian Firth and 
Robert Melnick. Useful comme nts and technical assistance were provided by 
regional NPS staff (Mary Hughes , Lucy Lawliss, Jill Cowley, Sherda Williams, 
Michael Crowe, Robbyn Jackson) and staff at the Preservation Assistance 
Division (Cheryl Wagner, Michael Auer and Anne Grimmer). 
Septembe r 1994 